FORGETFULNESS OF GOD THE GREAT PLAGUE OF MAN'S HEART, AND Consideration One of
the Principal Means to Cure it.

By W. D. Master of Arts, and once Fellow of King's College Cambridge.

Contra salutem propriam cogites nihil; minus dixi Contra, Praeter dixisse
debueram.

(...): Periand. dict. Meditation is all.

London: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street.
1683.

To the Worthy JOHN LUPTON, Esquire Head of the Family of LUPTON, Eternal
Happiness.
THough my Personal Obligations to you are very many and considerable, and may
very well screw me up to a very high strain of gratitude; (and methinks I find
my self very ready in this particular to do you right, and to acknowledge my
self very much bound to you and your Family; yet) I must say, I honor you more
for the Latitude you take in doing good to all, and promoting every good Design
that comes within your reach, without the least Hesitancy: Orphans, and Minors,
and such as are destitute of help, to whom you have begrudg'd neither pains nor
cost, will plead for you, I hope, better than my Tongue or Pen can. There are
none that know you, but must confess, how close a Friend you are to Religion
and Learning, and at what rates you would promote them. Surely it had been a
Crime in me, having so good occasion, to have concealed your Worth and Merits
toward me, whom you have entrusted with your best Treasure, and given me all
encouragement and help to their good Education, not regarding the Slanders of
some that would make themselves seem wiser in such Affairs, wherein they have
been little versed, than others of far greater experience. I know you need not
such an Orator as I, whose Virtues will more commend you, than the best Pen and
Ink can do. However, I will ease my self a little of the burden under which I
lie and make some public acknowledgment of my Obligations to you, wishing this
Practical Treatise may come so near your heart, as that it may do you
everlasting good; and that God would continue to bless your Family, as he has
hitherto done, that your Posterity may not degenerate from the exemplary
practices of their Ancestors. So prays,

Sir, Your most obliged, thankful Servant, W. D.

To the Practical Reader, for whom this Treatise is intended.
It Is a knowing Age in which we live, or at least pretends very much to
Knowledge, or it could not be so wicked: yea, the Atheist himself (that is
drowned in the depth of Ignorance) and is so blind a Fool, that he says there
is no God, when his own Being and Tongue wherewith he speaks will give him the
Lie; yet will pretend to Knowledge, and think he has a greater share than
others, because he can talk at a more desperate rate, and is priviledg'd by his
wickedness to laugh at that, at which a sober man would tremble. One would
wonder to think how Knowledge (at least such as is real, and not pretended
only) should be so mischievous, and produce such woeful effects as it has done,
abroad in the world, when it is in part the Excellency of Man; and the Wise Man
tells us, without it the Soul cannot be good, Prove. 19.2. And God complains by
the Prophet, that his People are destroyed for want of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. But
the Solution is easy; It is either an impertinent, or crude and indigested
knowledge, that brings forth such Monstrous Births. The Lord Bacon tells us,
that a superficial knowledge of Nature makes an Atheist, but a deep search into
things produces a sound assent to the Being and Providence of God.

It is indeed a slight and overly Knowledge of God, and other things related to
him, that is the Disease of this Age, and has brought forth such pernicious
effects; and the proper cure of this Distemper would be frequent, sober,
impartial Consideration; than which nothing tends more to ripen and concoct our
Knowledge, and to diffuse its happy Influence to the Heart and Life: I have
therefore chosen this Subject, that I might show how easy it is for Knowing
Men to sink into Forgetfulness of God, and so run loose to all wickedness in
the same degree, that they forget God: And that they can never prevent this
mischief, nor recover out of it, but by frequent retirement, and impartial
Meditation. Never any man was wise that was not Considerate, (whatever frisking
Wit he might have) much less was ever any man soundly Religious, and understood
the Worth and Excellency of Religion, and how much it does befriend his truest
satisfaction in this world, that did not get out of the noise of worldly
affairs and business, and think of God, his Word and Works, his Son and Spirit,
and his own Immortal Soul, and greatest Concerns, with true and frequent
seriousness.

Fickleness, and volability of confused thoughts, is the shame and disgrace of
Humane Nature, since it is become degenerate; and a carnal mind, which every
one is born with into the world, takes it for its greatest pleasure, to turn
about like a Weathercock to all variety of thoughts, and can endure to stay
upon nothing, nor be confined, though to the best Objects. It Is the greatest
part of the misery of a Man yet estranged from God, that he cannot endure to be
staked to any serious thoughts, though for a small portion of time; whereby it
becomes impossible for him (in the ordinary course of Providence) to return to
his right mind: You must think, and think again, of the sad and woeful
consequences of a Flesh-pleasing life, before ever you will escape the tempting
Baits of sensuality and worldly pleasures.

The Reason of Man is so much captivated to his Senses, whilst he is in the
present condition, and a Sojourner in the world, that till serious thoughts
recover him, he is like to die and perish in this miserable Bondage. Frequent
Meditation, and fervent Prayer, would retrieve his Liberty, and save him from
the Precipice of Vice and Sin, on which an inconsiderate Man will adventure to
stand without fear, till he feel himself tumbling down, and little or no power
to stop, till he comes to the bottom of it. Men will make a shift to decline
the most cutting Truths, and such as have the sharpest point, and find out an
Evasion for the omission of the plainest Duties, by some witty Repartees they
can return to these matters, till serious, deep, and impartial Recognition of
them charge them home, and make them prick to the Heart. Till then, what wonder
if the inconsiderate Man go with the Ox to the Slaughter, and with the Fool to
the Correction of the Stocks? Till this Dart of Meditation strike thorough his
Liver, he will hasten as a Bird to the Snare, not knowing that it is for life,
Prove. 7.22, 23.

Reader, if thou would not hazard the Favor of God, nor lose Eternal
Happiness, and ruin thine Immortal Soul, nor run desperately upon Everlasting
Misery, think on these things often and impartially, bind them continually upon
thy Heart, and tie them about thy Neck, Prove. 6.21. otherwise thou will mourn
at the last, when Soul and Body (which thou did so much pamper) are lost, and
say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart (thorough inconsideracy)
despised Reproof; nor obeyed the voice of mine own Reason, nor inclined mine
Ear, when from the Word and Works of God she would have instructed me, Pro.
5.12, 13. There is a Spiritual as well as an Earthly Husbandry, which is the
ground of all holy thriving and fruitfulness; and Consideration (if any thing)
would Till the Heart, and Manure the Affections, and root Grace in the inward,
and make it put forth and flourish in the outward man; and God would second it
with his Heavenly Showers, and bless the springing thereof, Psalm. 65.10. And
(as Solomon says) He that Tilleth his Land shall be satisfied with bread,
Prove. 12.11. so much more he that Tilleth his Heart by daily Meditation, and
exercise of Grace, shall find increase: And I may truly say in Allusion to that
in Prove. 13.23. Much spiritual increase is in the Tillage of the Heart, but
there is that which is destroyed for want of Consideration and Judgment. I
shall detain the Reader no longer from the Treatise it self, if he has any
time to spare for such a Subject; but only recommend him, and the Matters here
mentioned, to the blessing of God, that they may succeed to his greater Glory,
and their Eternal Felicity that may read it; which is the unfeigned Prayer of
him that is,

Your true Servant in the Lord, and well-wisher, W. D.

Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces
and there be none to deliver.
(...)
L. xxii. (...).
It Is not much material whether David or Asaph were the Author of this Psalm:
some ascribe it to one, some to the other: The reason of the Doubt seems to be
the Inscription or the Title of the Psalm (...): which may signify either to
Asaph, or for Asaph: It is most likely that David composed the Psalm and
directed it to Asaph or his successors, that had the charge of the Music of
the Temple, to compose and prick it to some Tune: But however the Scope and
Drift of the Psalm is to reprove the Jews who had transformed the Worship of
God into mere Pomp and Ceremony, and were come up to that degree of Blindness
and Absurdity, that they thought their Sacrifices and Oblations, and the
constant performances of all that was visible to the Eye, was highly accepted
of God, though their hearts were full of the filth of Lust and Concupiscence,
and all manner of odious Impiety; hence one of their great Rabbis sticks not
to expound (that in the 66. Psalm. 18. v. If I regaerd iniquity in my heart, God
will not hear my prayers) interogatively: viz. Though I regard iniquity, etc.
will not God hear my Prayers? Yes surely he will: Hence they are charged by the
Prophet, for this very Crime, and God protests against such service with great
Indignation: as if he had never instituted and appointed it: Who has required
this at your hands? Isa. 1.12. And he upbraids them with their outward
oblations, as if they had bin merely their own Invention, and wholly beside his
order: Isai. 66.3. He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man, he that
sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck: and yet its notorious enough
that God commanded these Sacrifices: why then does he not approve the Execution
of his own commands? The truth is, God appointed these External Rites, and
visible Symbols of his worship: But it was in Conjunction with the inward and
more principal worship; and whilst they came in Company with that they were
accepted; But when they began to Divorce what God had tied together by such a
flat necessity: And when they made no Conscience of the Moral and Spiritual
part of Gods worship, but all their care was for the Ceremonial part; It was
high time for God to show how he was distasted, with such a bodily service as
this, that had neither life nor spirit, and therefore nothing that suited with
his Nature, who is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth, as
well as in form and show: And therefore the Psalmist the better to awake them,
summons them before the Tribunal of God, as ready to proceed to a fearful
sentence against them. This manner of speech by Parables, Types and
Representations of things that were not, (but supposed to be) were schemes of
Rhetoric familiar to that People for the more powerful working on the
Affections. But here God by a Prolepsis being about to judge, is introduced
with circumstances of Majesty and Terror, v. 3. Our God shall come, and shall
not keep silence, a Fire shall devour before him, and shall be very Tempestuous
round about him: with some allusion to the dreadful appearance of God at Mount
Sinai, when he gave the Law, and now comes to require an account of it, with as
terrible an appearance, v. 4. He shall call to the Heavens above, (that is the
Angels) to cite and gather these guilty Sinners before Him, that were like to
speed so much the worse, because they were in league with God, Sanctified by an
external Covenant made with him, but yet treacherously and perfidiously broken:
therefore called Saints; Gather my Saints together those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice, v. 5. Then comes in the charge, ver. 7. Hear O
my people, which is amplyfied to the end of the Psalm: and the folly and
unbecomingness of such a worship, detected and set forth to the life, which
that stupid people presented him with instead of Service worthy so glorious a
Majesty: Do you think that Bullocks, and He Goats are things that I Regard: If
I had such a delight in these as you take me to have, I have no need to come to
you; for every Beast of the Forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand
Hills, I know all the Fowls of the Mountains, v. 10, 11. If I were hungry I
would not tell thee. See what gross conceits they had of God as if he had an
appetite after the flesh of Bulls and the blood of Goats v. 12, 13. whether
they were so sottish as to think that God did feed upon such Diet as this, and
did take pleasure in it, by a plain and direct apprehension; it matters not
much; be sure, they were guilty of such a Sin by consequence, and
interpretation, whilst they could go on with so much confidence in the oblation
of such Sacrifices, when their hearts were perfectly destitute of any Love and
Reverence of God, and their hands were full of Rapine and Blood, and used no
attention of Mind to consider what these outward Sacrifices did signify to
them: And then in the 14. ver. he shows them the true and acceptable worship,
after he had confuted their blasphemous apprehensions; which consists of two
principal parts in which all the rest is included. First, Hearty Thanksgiving,
for what they have and do receive. Secondly, And fervent prayer for what they
want, by which a better Testimony is given to God, than by their richest
oblations. And this the very Heathen could discern by their Candle, Immunis
aram, says Horace, etc. They confessed that a Soul breathing forth its self in
holy Hymns is more acceptable to God, than the richest Gums or sweetest Wood
that can sum upon the Altar: But these Jews were so Intoxicated, that they
thought they did a high favor to God, whilst they took his name into their
mouths, and declared his Statutes, though they perfectly hated to be reformed;
though they consented to these, and were guilty of Adultery, and gave their
Mouth to ill, and their Tongue to frame deceit: yea they made nothing of
casting Slanders and Reproaches upon their dearest Friends, ver. 17, 18, 19,
20. Yea, and to complete their wickedness to the full, they interpreted the
patience of God toward them all this while as an approbation of their
abominable Wickedness, ver. before the Text. These things have thou done, and I
kept silence, that is, I patiently forbore thee a long time, and thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self. Then follows the
Sentence; But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes; and
make thee feel what it is to mock God, and be guilty of such Wickedness.

The words are the Application of this that has been taught in the former part
of the Psalm, That since God will upon no terms be reconciled to Iniquity, nor
hold his peace always at those practices which his Soul hates, though the
persons being guilty, set them off with the Paint and Varnish of the most
specious outward Observances, and make a most boasting mention of his Name, and
cry, the Temple of the Lord. Since this is Gods peremptory Resolution, be wise,
Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver.

Where you have:

1. The Use that they and we are to make of the righteous and impartial
Sentence that God will pass upon Wickedness, dress it how we will; or an
Exhortation to a weighty Duty, NOW CONSIDER THIS.

2. The persons that are to make this use of it, or to whom the Exhortation is
directed, that is such as forget God, YE THAT FORGET GOD.

3. The Reasons to enforce this Duty upon these forgetful Ones is: (...)

1. From the Extremity; LEST I TEAR YOU IN PIECES, as the Lion teareth in
pieces the Prey it lights upon.

2. From the unavoidableness of Gods Wrath, and the impossibility of Escape;
AND THERE BE NONE TO DELIVER, or snatch out of my hands. The foregoing Metaphor
from the Lion being continued; see Hosea 5.14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a
Lion, and as a young Lion to the House of Judah; I, even I, will tear and go
away, I will take away, and none shall rescue him. And

Micah 5.8. And the Remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people, as a
Lion among the Beasts of the Forest, as a young Lion among the flecks of
sheep; who if he goes through, both treads down, and teareth in pieces, and
none can deliver.

The Points that enwrap the whole substance of the words are THESE TWO:

First, That Forgetfulness of God, is a fearful and dangerous sin; and will
expose such as are guilty of it to the unavoidable wrath of God.

Secondly, That Consideration is one of the principal means on our part to
bring us to the Remembrance of God at the first, and to prevent ^^^getfulness
afterward; or to recover us out of that degree of forgetfulness into which we
may possibly fall.

The method that I shall take to infuse the first Doctrine, and to get it into
our hearts and Lives, shall be; 1. To begin with the Understanding, by which
Door every Truth must enter, that can make any solid operation upon the other
Faculties, to prepare them for practice; and to show,

1. What it is to forget God in the General.

2. More particularly, who they are that are guilty of this sin.

And 3. I shall show you the heinousness and danger of this sin, in the
Inferences; and then on

4. To a closer Application.

First, What it is to forget God in the General? To which I answer,

To forget God, is

Not to have that impress of his Existence, Perfections and Relations to us,
upon our several Faculties; nor those frequent, reverential, and affectionate
thoughts of him, that do enable us to a Sovereign Love and Obedience to him.

1. In which Description, Note; First, That forgetfulness is not the act of the
Memory only in this place, but there is some of this poison in all the
Faculties: for the Rule is solid, and worth the observation; That no Act is
complete that is not the act of the whole Man: Understanding, Will, and
Executive Power; because they are united in one Frame; and there is no action,
that is virtuous and vicious (for that I mean by moral) to which every one of
these Wheels of the Soul do not contribute something; and therefore if the hand
of a Clock or Watch move regularly, every one of the inward Wheels is moved
rightly, and is free from fault o^ blame; but if the hand go false, all the
inward parts of the Fabric move amiss, though perchance the fault ^ye
principally in one peculiar part, but yet the error is propagated to the
whole. So if any action of man be faulty, the whole man is culpable, and the
fault is either originally, or by derivation in every power and faculty of the
Man; so Love to God supposes. 1. A Knowledge worthy of him in the
Understanding, Complacency in the Will; endeavors of Conformity to, and union
with him in the powers that are to execute, or else the act of Love is not
rational and complete. To have some motion in the will or affections, that is
not caused by a foregoing notice or consideration, that is weighty of him, is a
Fanatical Love; a flash that will be as soon out as in, and never set his hand
and his feet a work in his service: so we are said to know God, when we have
not only a notion of him in the understanding, but suitable motion in the will
and affections: This is Life Eternal to know Thee, John 17.3. This is the
manner of Scripture, yea and common discourse when we speak of moral Acts (that
is) such as persons endued with understanding and free will, do perform.

And though the denomination or name be taken sometime from one faculty,
sometime from another, yet the rest are usually employed, or supposed
subservient actions are in common speech, silently employed in the principal:
and hence that Rule that Divines so frequently inculcate; That words of
knowledge and sense, imply affections and actions; The Lord knows the way of
the Righteous, that is, so as to approve and justify it, Psalm. 1. last. Thou
did not lay these things to heart; neither did thou remember thy latter
end, says the Prophet Esaias to Babylon, Isa. 47.7. that is, thou did not take
it into thy thoughts so as to work upon thy heart, and to get thy self in a
readiness for that hour. For where there is, or should be a Connection Train,
or Series of Actions, to name one, is to imply all the rest; but most usually,
where we are provoked to any duty that will require several distinct acts; the
whole duty is named from the leading Act, as here in the Text, Consider this,
etc. An Object must first be taken into the thoughts, and then be judged
weighty, and concerning, before it can have any influence up^^n the affections
and life: and so in the following words, ye that forget God. As not remembering
God is the first Act to neglect of Duty and Disobedience: but yet sometime the
very ultimate and completive Act is named, and all the rest employed and
presupposed, as in all those Scriptures, where, salvation is promised to
obedience: there all the foregoing acts are understood, without which it would
not be true obedience. Since therefore the end of this consideration, and
thoughtfulness to which wicked men, and such as forget God are exhorted, is
that they may clearly discern his excellency above all things; and by this
discovery kindle the highest love to him in the heart; and by that prepare for
the readiest obedience. Therefore I define forgetfulness to be, the want of
such knowledge and consideration of Gods essence and perfections, as is
necessary to produce the highest Love and Obedience.

2. Note Secondly, That every degree of Remembering God, and thinking on him,
yea though it be with some degrees of Love and Pleasure, Praise and
Thankfulne^s, will not acquit a man from the Dreadful Sin of Forgetfulness; If
the thoughts be not so frequent, so magnificent, as to produce a love suitable
to his Nature, (that is) Transcending all other Love, whereby the soul is then
prepared for the highest obebience: otherwise he that is defective in this high
and sovereign degree is still condemned among those that are here said to
forget God. So much in Answer to the first question; What it is to forget God
in general? and for explicat^^ to the answer.

Secondly, who they are more particularly, that forget God?

To which I answer, though I might reckon up as many as their are distinct and
particular Sins that prevail in distinct and particular men: As the Proud, the
Envious, the Adulterous, the Blasphemous: And so multiply particulars to a vast
number. For every one of these may be properly said to forget God; Yet I will
confine my self to these three sorts;

1. Those that remember not the great attributes of God, and the Relations
wherein they stand to him.

2. Those that think not on his sacred and venerable word.

3. Those that overlook his most observable works.

Its some great defect in one or all these that does both breed and feed all
other Forgetfulness of God, specified in any prevailing sins whatsover, because
the forgetting of any these three grand points of remembrance, betrays to all
impiety toward God, all unrighteousness toward men, and all ill usage and
government of a man's self, which three Capital Sins, imply all mortal
wickedness whatsoever.

I shall begin with the first;

First, Those may be said notoriously to forget God, that remember not the
great Attributes that are so essential to him; we are not able to see his naked
essence: It Is therefore by his Attributes that we come to know him, at least in
this Life. And he that wants a competent understanding of these, and that in
such a measure as to Empower his understanding and will to acts, that become
such glorious perfections, lies open unto every sensible object, to be drawn
away and enticed to any practice, though never so wicked, whereby he may come
to enjoy, what he does thus Idolize, for want of a better object.

But I will more particularly insist upon two or three of those Relations,
which every wicked man either (1.) wants a right knowledge of, or (2.) does not
consider; and every one that does not consider must needs be a wicked man.

1. First, they consider not that God is their Creator, and gave them that
Being and Perfections which they so ungratefully abuse to his dishonor: They
think not what an obligation this is to the highest Love, Gratitude, and
Obedience; What a wicked blindness is this to live and go about the world, and
to use the very Soul and Body that God has given thee and yet, to look no
higher than thy Father that begot thee, and thy Mother that brought thee forth:
Woe unto him that says to a Srock, thou art my Father, and to a Stone thou
have brought me forth, Jer. 2.27. Can thou think that those eyes were made to
look no higher, or do think that thou art solely or princiaplly indebted unto
them for that Being, and Wisdom that advances thee so far above other
Creatures? Such a thought, yea the want of a quite contrary thought, will
debase thee as much below, as now thou art exalted above other Creatures. But
yet be it never so absurd: This is the woeful case and condition of the far
greatest part of men. One would think that if the Remembrance of so plain and
Confessed a Truth as this is, would acquit a man of this horrid Sin of
forgetting God, that none would be Guilty. But alas! there are few that would
escape, notwithstanding, I say again few woult escape. They are not many in
comparison that think so frequently and so seasonably of this truth, as to get
a full sight of it into the understanding till it fall down before it, and
after it has recovered it self out of ecstasy and amazement, does use its
authority to the utmost to awaken the other powers to perceive it, that so
nothing might hinder the love and service that such a Mercy calls for, nor be
able to wipe off so high an obligation: if men were not so prone to forget that
they are Creatures, and stand in so near relation unto God that gave them their
breath and being, and does support them every hour: why is this knowledge so
often inculcated in the word of God? for this the Prophet Daniel reproves
Belshazzar, and his Wives and Concubines, that they praised the Gods of Silver
and Gold, and Brass which see not, nor hear, nor know, and the God in whose
hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified, Dan.
5.23.

But what do I speak of a single person, and some few others with him: you may
see whole Nations sadly charged with it in Scripture. The Ox knows his Owner,
and the Ass his Masters Crib; but Israel does not my people does not consider,
Isa. 1.3, 4. and if Gods own people were thus shamefully guilty, what judgment
may be passed upon other Nations; if this great Relation every Soul stands in
to God were well thought upon; and all things that have a power to inchant the
mind, and control the mighty power of this truth upon the soul, were in a good
measure disgraced and turned out of the heart: It could not be that heart and
mouth, and life should be so intollerably backward to any serious service of
God, as they are in the most.

2. Secondly, They forget God that overlook his Sovereignty, and forget that he
is the holy, just, and righteous Governor of Mankind. 1. That he is the
absolute and universal Sovereign that has the most unquestionable authority to
command and govern the Creatures he has made. 2. The greatest wisdom to
contrive the most perfect Laws for the good of all his Subjects. 3. And the
most irresistible power to see them executed. 4. And the highest justice to
see, that neither Law, nor Subject shall receive any detriment or damage. And
if this were believed and considered, would men either desire, or dare to cast
off such a Yoke, and transgress such a Law, and provoke such impartial justice?
What a monstrous pride must it needs be, that makes a man unwilling to submit
to such a Government? And what a presumptuous, befooled, lying heart must that
be, that can promise it self indemnity, and think to speed well in a state of
disobedience? Let the deceived heart that has turned thee aside from such an
honorable, gainful service, tell thee whom thou can serve to better purpose,
and under whose command thine own welfare would be better promoted. I know thou
would abhor the thought of being his servant, who is the firstborn of all
pride, insolence, and cruelty; and yet there is no possible way of escape, if
the Yoke of thy rightful Sovereign be too heavy for thee. May be thou may be
so void of understanding, as to think if thou had none to control thine
actions, but were thine own Lord, and accountable to none other but thy self;
and that thou might let out thy heart with a full Rein to all that it
desires; it were a condition to be desired above any other; but have thou wit
enough to manage all thy affairs; strength enough to protect thy self;
soresight enough to keep out of a thousand evils, that thy own blindness and
nakedness would expose thee to! Thy Lusts and thy Passions would make worse
work with thee than all thy other enemies, when they were under no restraint,
and thou could not long keep out of the forementioned Tyrants hands, the
mention of whose dominion over thee made thee so much to start before.

But it may be thou meanest, that this State were the most desirable, if thou
had wisdom enough to direct thee, and power enough to protect thy self; and
fullness enough to supply all thine own wants: and art thou not now ashamed of
such a prodigious pride, as would sit down in the Throne of God, and aspire to
the divine perfections?

Thou see whither this inclination leads, and what a symtom of destruction
it must needs be; and yet be thy case never so bad and desperate, they that
will habitually overlook that divine right and sovereignty, and their
necesssity of subjection, and both from the wisdom and justice of the Laws, and
power of the Lawgiver; and that there is no wisdom nor happiness like theirs
that cheerfully obey, must needs entangle themselves in these woeful
consequences, fall into the absurdest sins, that will but humor and gratify
this proud inclination.

3. They forget God, that are not prevailingly under the power of this thought;
that God is their happiness: and that if all the world were theirs, and God
should deny the light and beatifical presence of himself they could never find
rest or satisfaction: Let the honor and Majesty of a King, and the Glory of a
Kingdom be given unto David; and let him have all the assistance that such a
power can afford; to compass the pleasures that the heart of man can wish for,
yet this will not do. In the midst of this fullness and sufficiency he is in
streights, Job 20.22. If God withdraw; When thou hidest thy face I am troubled,
Psalm. 30.7. And when this was wanting, his moisture was turned into the draught
of Summer, and his bones were broken; hence he prays to God to restore the
joy of his salvation, and uphold him with his free spirit; and to make him to
hear of joy and gladness, that the bones that he had broken might rejoice,
Psalm. 51.8, 12. Who that has any experience in the world, can be fool enough
to believe, that his soul will be quieted with such a Weathercock and Rattle as
the world is; and popt off with noise instead of substance; and listen with
full contentment to the Sounding Brass and Tinkling Cymbal? Alas! The Bias of a
Man's Soul is after something that the world has not, something like it self;
and cannot be truly satisfied with these things, because they have no
proportion with it self; They are flesh, and that is spirit; nor thoroughly
comforted with these shows, because the time is at hand, when it shall be truly
said, as Rachel said of her Children, they are not. Give the Child that cries
for the Breast what you will, and it gives not over, because this is the only
thing it wants. The Soul will never be still, nor give over its muttering and
complaints, till it has the very thing that fully supplies its want; and that
only is God: and they that live not under the power of this persuasion, will
run after every shadow, and be ticed into mortal sin; and yet at last lose
their labor and hope; and all this because they forget that God is their Rest,
and that their Happiness is bound up in him. Jog thy self a little, and
consider what it is to be God, but to have All Sufficiency? and to have all
Satisfying, Ravishing Excellency, in the greatest Transcendency, without any
Bounds or Ends? what it is to be God but to have all imaginable Perfection? And
therefore to think we remember God, when we forget those Perfections which are
his very Being, is a lie with a witness, and will prove one with a vengeance,
if thou do not pray to God, and prevail with him to have thy Memory restored,
and to heal this defect thereof.

4. They forget God that live not under a daily sense of his Omniscience, and
forget that his Eye pierces the thickest darkness, and that nothing is hid
from his distinct Observation: For he that denies this, denies God, and he
that forgets this, forgets that, without which God cannot be God. Tell me,
thou that abhorest Atheism with thy Tongue; why art thou so notoriously guilty
of it in thy practice? Why do thou withdraw from the Eyes of Men, when thou
have some filthiness to commit which thou art ashamed they should see or know?
Why do thou shut thy self up in thy Closet, that there thou may hide thy
Vanity and Folly, and dare not publish thy Levity, Shame, or Wickedness, unto
holy and discerning Men? Nay, it may be not to Men as wicked as thy self? Such
a reproach is folly, vanity, and wickedness unto any man. Yea, Why do thou
retire into thy own heart (as if thou would lock all up, and make all sure)
and there exercise thy self in Pride, Envy, Self-conceit, Uncleanness; and act
these sins with confidence and security, in the darkness of thy heart, which if
another like thy self did but see, thou would not know where to hide thy self
for shame? And yet because all has been transacted with so much silence and
secrecy, thou have no disposition to blush or be ashamed; but like the Whore in
the Prove. Thou eatest and wipest thy mouth, and say, What shame have I done?
And do thou think there is no witness of thy shameful wicked acts? No Eye to
take notice? Better all the World had seen thee than he that stands but for a
cipher to thy deluded forgetful Heart. I might here run over all the Attributes
of God, both Essential, Subsistential, and Relative, and oppress your Memory
with particulars: But having given these instances, I leave the rest to your
Meditations. Yet before I leave this head and proceed to the second, I shall
add thus much of the Attributes of God in general.

5. They may be said to forget them all at once, that forget themselves, and
live not under a sense of their great necessities, nor think considerately, and
persuade themselves day by day, that they are poor and miserable, and blind and
naked; Rev. 3.17. They that are rich in their own apprehensions, and increased
in Goods and have need of nothing, must needs be stout and insolent, and cannot
escape this sin of Forgetfulness. Jesurun, that is Israel, waxed fat and kicked
against God, Deuteronomy. 32.15. and they never remembered him to the purpose, till
they themselves by consideration, or God by his Judgments, did enforce a sense
of their necessities on them. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned and inquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their
Rock, and the high God their Redeemer, which before they forgot, Psa. 78.34,
35. And yet so soon as ever they were out of streights and warm in Prosperity,
and thought they had no need, they forgot God again. They remembered not his
hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the Enemy, ver. 42.

That man must needs send up cold and careless Prayers to God day by day, that
feels none, or but little need of God. How can be confess with a broken heart,
the sins that never come near his heart, nor were a burden to him? How can
that man magnify or seek the Grace of God every day, that does not verily
think he needs it every day? How can he worthily admire his Redeemer, who has
loved him, and washed his Soul in his Blood, that feels not his own Guilt, and
does not frequently renew loathing and abhorring thoughts of it? How can he
lift up his Heart to the Father of Lights, for the Spirit of Illumination, that
does not sufficiently apprehend and bewail his own Ignorance, and the darkness
of his uncertain mind? How can he rejoice in the hopes of the Glory of God,
that foolishly adores, and cheat himself with the Glory of this World? The day
of Deliverance and full Redemption will never be a pleasant Meditation unto
him, that feels not himself oppressed with his sins, and is as heartily weary
of that Burden, as he is of Sickness, when it afflicts his Body. Never think
to meditate on Gods Justice, with any Savor or Delight, unless you bend your
thoughts to consider the mischiefs of Injustice; and how particular Families
and Nations, yea, and the whole World, are perverted and disturbed with
Iniquity. Thou will never apply thy Heart to God for Wisdom to live well,
unless thou remember thy latter end; and what have the comforts of this World
make to get away from thee. Can he live above in his thoughts with any content
and satisfaction, that does not die daily, and not often think with some
seriousness that he may daily die. It Is wisdom therefore to give entertainment
to such thoughts. How many have shut their Eyes in a healthful Sleep, who have
waked in another World? We give too large scope to our account, while we reckon
seven years for a Life, when we see so many dispatched within the Circle and
Revolution of half that time; and though we are such a blast our selves, yet
our comforts are oftentimes dead and buried before us, and leave us the
surviving Executors of our own misery. When God has put all things here below
into the Bill of Mortality, what a foolish thought is it to think that this or
that shall escape, which we have set our hearts upon? and how sinful to take
the Bill and write down this or that, or the other, when God has condemned no
less than all? If thou forget these things, God would be forgotten; and one or
two slight thoughts of these things will never excuse from forgetfulness.

These are the first sort of Men that forget God.

2. Secondly, They forget God, that either forget or think but little on his
sacred and most venerable Word, when they have it continually before them. I
will not go about now to describe the woeful state and condition of that Man,
that has the Word so much in his Eyes, yea, in his Ears, and not in his Heart,
(and therefore cannot remember it in any saving degree or measure) nor torment
such a one before his time; neither can I tell him the nature and danger of his
Sin so well as Death or Judgment will be sure to tell him. It must needs be a
staring, affrighting Sin, when Conscience shall come to see it thoroughly, that
God has written to us the Great things of his Law, and we have counted them as
a common thing; Hosea 8.12. It Is in the Original (...) (i.) Amplitudines, or
Honorabilia legis, and they counted them (...) as a strange thing (i.) They
made themselves strange to them; or these things were strange to them and
seldom in their Thoughts. This is a wicked requital of such a strange and
wonderful Love. More particularly,

They forget the Word of God,

1. That have not a high and transcendent Reverence of the Authority thereof.

2. They that are not in any considerable measure affected with the important
matters, which it sets before them.

3. That are not awakened by any serious thoughts of the most certain and near
accomplishment, of all that is either threatened or promised therein.

I say again,

They that are not awed by its Authority, nor moved with its Importance, nor
rouzed by its certainty, (1.) To yield hearty Subjection unto Christ, (2.) To
his Laws, (3.) And by a deliberate Resolution to renounce either self, or
whatsoever does oppose them, will never escape this guilt, but be numbered
amongst the Forgetters of Gods Word. For Faith or Subjection to the Person of
Christ, and Obedience to his Laws, and abrenunciation of all that would hinder
this Subjection of our Hearts and Obedience of our Lives, are Three great ends
for which the Word of God was ordained and appointed, and a high Reverence of
its Authority, and deep Sense of its Importance, and firm persuasion of its
certainty would most undoubtedly bring to pass: For it is most unquestionable,
that God would not fail these his own means.

1. First, They must read or hear these Instructions slightly and unworthily,
that are not deeply wrought upon, by the consideration of their Author, and the
Divinity that is instamp'd upon them. It Is not enough that you believe and
acknowledge this, but that you be frequently under the thought of it. And it is
a weighty truth, worthy your remembrance, That the Soul is never wrought upon
to any purpose, either in its Understanding, Will or Affections, but by
frequent, serious, and repeated Acts. The main difficulty therefore in the work
of Conversion, and a saving change, on our part, lies here, in bringing our
thoughts to a devout and frequent meditation of these Objects, which God has
resolved shall do the work if ever it be done. And though he can change the
Heart by a word and in a moment, if he please, yet he has told us flatly he
will not do it ordinarily, without these means. And therefore he awakens every
Soul to such Meditations, whom he will show mercy to. A Man's Thoughts are the
means that God makes most use of in renewing his Heart. Do thou not presume,
whoever thou art, that God will infuse Sanctification into thy Heart by a
miracle, when thou art thinking all the day, yea, all the week long, upon mere
vanity, if not doing worse. But this by the way. He that does not strike his
heart into superlative Reverence of this Word, by thinking often of that Holy
Spirit by whom it was word for word inspired, will never be made fit to take it
into his heart, and chew upon it when he lies down and rises up; to curb every
base Inclination of his Soul by it, and to resolve they shall bend to this Word
or have no quiet. The Heart is so prone to Earth and Vanity, and the Flesh with
its Affections and Lusts, are so strong and masterless, that they will never
obey unless such Authority be produced. Yea, there is none that are well versed
in their own Hearts, but will find how they will slight such Authority, and
sometime venture to contemn it. But as he that does wisely govern a Family, or
other Society, much more a Kingdom, will not suffer his Authority to be
trampled on, nor his Laws to stand for Ciphers, but will vindicate them with
the greatest Power and Majesty that he can put on; much more will the Lord of
Heaven and Earth stand up in the behalf of his own Authority, and vindicate the
best Laws that ever were made from contempt. And if any sinner be so sottish as
to think, that his Wit, or Pedigree, or Riches, or Esteem in the World, will
bear him out in such irreverence, let me say to such a one as once Samuel said
to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.16. Stay and I will tell thee what the Lord has said of
such a one. Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall
lightly be esteemed; 1 Samuel 2.30. Be as wise and as great as thou will, the
Lord will shame thee sooner or later, and kick thee down into Scorn and
Disgrace.

2. Secondly, They are forgetful of the Word of God, that are not considerably
moved with the most important matters which it sets before them. If thou
read it not frequently, thou forgetest it in the grossest sense, and thine
own Conscience will fall upon and condemn thee. And if thou do read it, yet
if thy very Heart be not affected with those matters in the Word, which more
concern thee than all the World, so as to show it in thy Life, I would not for
all the World hear that Judgment that thou shall shortly hear. Does it so much
concern thee what thou shall Eat, and what thou shall Drink, and wherewithal
thou shall be clothed, and how thou shall Sleep, or enjoy thy Health, much
more how thou shall visit this or that Friend, do this or that petty business,
as how thou shall save thy Soul? how thou may get thy Heart affected with its
Sin and Misery, and set a value upon Christ as he deserves? (this is not
easily done;) how thou may break off thine Affections from these things that
will abuse them, and certainly blast every good work in thy Heart, and turn thy
Religion into mere Hypocrisy? For it is impossible that the Love of God should
be in that Heart, where the love of any worldly thing does prevail. Hearken
therefore and listen attentively, what necessity the Word of God lays upon
Self-denial (...) mortification of the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts. He
that will be my Disciple must deny himself, take up his Cross and follow me;
Luke 9.23. And if ye live after the Flesh ye shall die; Romans 8.13. If thine
Estate, Life, or Credit, only were here concerned, thy neglect would not prove
thee so perfectly mad and distracted as now it does, when the Eternal Life and
Welfare of thy Soul is so much concerned.

3. Thirdly, They that live not under any serious thoughts of the certain
accomplishment of all that is threatened, or promised in the Word, cannot but
forget the Word. The things that are contained in the Scripture, if they were
liable to some doubt, yet were worthy to be thought on, because they concern so
much, if they should prove true. And this is an Argument that will stop their
Mouths, that choose a Romance or vain Ballad, before the Word of God, to be the
matters of their thoughts. But when God will certainly make good every Judgment
he has threatened to the impenitent sinner; and when every wicked person that
dies in his sin, shall as certainly feel those dreadful Woes, as now he hears
or may hear them pronounced; O what an advantage is here, to beget a Resolution
to withstand every Temptation that would draw us to those things that are thus
threatened? Though it were a pleasing and profitable Lust, it is stark madness to
fulfill it. O if we had (...) or felt the wrath of God in another World, it
would be Armor of Proof against all wilful presumptuous sin, for ever
afterward; and would awaken the Soul to any pains or diligence to escape it:
And is it not as certain as if we had seen or felt it? Has the Lord said that
he will laugh at the destruction of a sinner, and mock when his fear comes?
Prove. 1.26. Has he said, that he will shortly come with his Fan in his hand,
and thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat into the Garner, but that he
will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire; and will this not surely be
brought to pass? Mat. 3.12. Heaven and Earth may sooner pass away, than one jot
or tittle of his Word shall pass, Mat. 5.16. Things that will certainly come to
pass, if they concern us in this life only; though they be not near, yet they
are not slighted by us: But if they are near and certain, and highly
concerning, the thoughts thereof will rush in upon us, and prevail against the
greatest necessity of nature; they will disturb our Rest, and make us forget to
eat our Bread.

Could a Man that were to be tried for his Life to morrow, or a day or two
hence, eat his Meat quietly, or lie down upon his Bed in peace, and take his
Rest? Psalm. 4.8. And can thou read the Threats or Promises in the Word of
God, that concern thee so unspeakably, and may be made good within one day or
hour, for all thou know, and yet be no more overwhelmed with Joy or Terror?
They that are not awakened with the serious affecting thoughts of the most
certain and near accomplishment of all that is threatened or promised in the
Word of God, will certainly be condemned in the number of those that do forget
it.

These are the second sort of those that forget God.

Those that think not upon his sacred, venerable Word.

3. Thirdly, They forget God indeed, that overlook his most observable Works,
and regard not his remarkable Providence. The Works of the Lord are great,
both of Creation and Provivence, sought out of all them that have pleasure in
them; Psalm. 3.2. And those that have no pleasure in them will be sure to forget
them.

There be several ways by which the Works and Providence of God is overlooked,
or several persons guilty of this sin.

1. First, They are signally guilty, that deny Gods Providence in the Rule and
Dispose of all Affairs, either directly or by plain consequence. There are none
that deny it in the first sense (that is) directly and expressly, but plain
Atheists, of which I would there were none in this Nation, that believe in
their Hearts that all things come to pass by Fate or Chance. But they deny
Providence by Consequence and Interpretation, that are so intent upon Means and
Instruments, whereby any effect is brought to pass, or rather upon the Effect
it self, that they do not at all look up any higher; Psalm. 10.4. The Wicked
through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after God; God is not in all
his thoughts; thy Judgments are far above out of his sight.

These lie under a deep guilt of this sin.

2. Secondly, They are guilty of this Wickedness also, that can find out
nothing among all the works of Creation and Providence, so worthy their
Observation, as to captivate their Souls to the highest Reverence of their
Author: Highest I mean, not in respect of the degrees of Reverence, but of the
kinds; that is, though he has a Reverence for this Object, and another for
that, another for a third; yet he has Highest and most principal veneration
for him who does so incomparably manage all things. And who has impudence
enough to plead for that man that has an understanding and considering
Faculty, and such Wonders to behold both in Heaven and Earth, such Providence
toward the World in general, and such toward the Church in special, and yer
God no higher in his Judgment and Affections, in his Thoughts and Heart, than a
full Chest, and a little painted Skin, and an adored Lust? What, have thou
heard the Voice of the Lord so often in Thunder and Lightning, and seen the
dreadful effects of them? Have thou not heard of a little of his Breath shut up
in the caverns of the Earth, that has made this stable Body of the Earth to
shake and tremble, and rent and torn the very bowels thereof, and overturned
whole Cities at once? Have thou heard of the Division of Jordan and the Red
Sea, how the Waters parted and left a pathway in the midst of them, whilst the
People passed over, of whom God had taken on him the Care and Conduct? And how
Pharaoh and his mighty Host were afterward overwhelmed by the same Waters, who
were their professed Enemies? Have thou read and believed what he did for
Hezekiah, when the proud King of Assyria threatened to swallow him up? How he
accepted his Tears, heard his Prayers, and an Army of Two hundred thousand men
almost all struck dead in one night? What he did for wicked Manasseh, though he
had filled Jerusalem with Idols and Blood; yet how mercifully he heard him when
he cried to him in Chains? Look into the sacred History, or read over any
profane History, or consult thine own Eyes and Ears, what thou have seen or
heard; what he has done to and for his Enemies, and what he has done for his
Church, or any parts or members of it; and if thou can be a Sot or Block
under all, and have Men's Persons in admiration, because of advantage to thee,
Jude 16. rather than reverence and adore the Lord and mighty Worker of all,
take that thine is, and go thy way, thou art one that does overlook the Works
of God.

3. Thirdly, They overlook the Works and Providence of God, whose lives are
ordered in a course of crossness and contradiction to them. As History reports
of Sardanapalus, that he lay in Bed all day and rose at night, when others went
to Bed; and so turned the day into night and the night into day. So when God
calls by his Providence, I mean by some formidable signs of his displeasure
to Fasting and Weeping and Mourning, and to girding with Sackcloth, and
Baldness; and behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating
Flesh and drinking Wine; Esaias 22.12, 13. that will not see when the hand of God
is lifted up, 26.11. When God is ^utting up and throwing down, and disgracing
all worldly Pride, They are seeking great things for themselves, and feeding
themselves with proud thoughts of what they have, or what they hope to have;
Jer. 45.4, 5. When God is pulling down the proud, they are delighting
themselves in Pride, and Oppression of those that cannot defend themselves.
When God is searching for Sin, they are hiding of it; and when he is showing
his dislike of it, and would stop the poison that it should spread no further;
it is sweet in their Mouths, they hide it under their Tongue, they spare it and
forsake it not; Job 20.12, 13. What a proud contempt of his Providence is it to
sit still and shut our Eyes, and not consider them? Psalm. 111.4. He has made
his wonderful work^ to be remembered. But what a Pride is that, that when God is
debasing Men we will exalt them; when God is visiting Sin and Transgression,
they are encouraging it in themselves or others, and will not be searched; but
instead of starving their Lusts and Corruptions, are making Provision for them?
When God is telling Men plainly of their Sabbath-breaking; careless performance
of his Service and Worship, Selfishness, Inordinate love of, and Adulterous
Affections to any Creature; and hiding Pride from Man, and turning our Eyes
from a fond Admiration of Creatures, and laying them in the dust; They will not
endure it, but fret and murmur in their hearts; and are ready to say as the
Rebellious Followers of Korah did to Moses, Will thou put out these Eyes of
ours? We will not come down; we will not deny our selves, nor be crossed in our
wills, nor leave our shame. When God is putting the Bridle into their Mouths,
and laying a Curb and Restraint upon their Intemperance, Pride and Luxury, and
bringing into contempt their Gallantry and swaggering Bravery; they will not
endure the Curb, but rage and foam and grow mad, and bite the Bridle that holds
them in; and reply as the remnant Jews did after the Captivity, when they sent
Jeremiah to inquire of the Lord for their Direction, and liked not the Answer
that he brought, Jer. 44.16, 17. We will not hearken to thee, but will
certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our own Mouth; we will let our
Hearts with a full rein to any thing they desire; for when we have done thus we
were well and saw no evil; when we leave off to show favor and courtesy to
our selves, who shall befriend us? when we begin to cry shame on our selves,
all men will cry shame on us; and if once we come down and lie in the dust, all
men will trample upon us. Those are some of the shifts that carnal Wisdom and
Reason alleges, whereby it would frustrate the Invitations of Mercy. When God
is calling for the Plumb Line, and meting out a Nation for Destruction, Amos
7.7. when he is drawing the lines of confusion in a place, 1 Samuel 2.8. and
marking it for Judgment, they cry as the Inhabitants of Ephraim once did, The
Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn Stones; the Sycamores are
cut down, but we will change them into Cedars, Esaias 9.10.

And though we may not be gotten up to such a degree of wickedness as this is,
it will concern us to make search and inquiry, whether there be no seed of this
wicked nature in us. I am too much out of doubt, that there is much of
crossness and contradiction to the will of God in the best heart; and too loath
are the best to veil and stoop to the will of God, when it crosses ours; but
it will be fitter to help on this search in the Application.

4. Lastly, They overlook both his Attributes, Word and Works, all at once,
that put him off with shadows instead of substance; that give him a few
flattering words and shows for the inward worship and purity of their hearts.
This is the very instance of the Psalm, a part of which we have now before us.
What an affront is this, to remember him with the Mouth, that he may be cast
out of the Heart, where he will have more to do than all the World, or else
abhor that person and his service, whose heart it is? To wash the outside with
the paint of an external profession, and to have a Heart full of Pride and
unmortified Lusts, full of putrid noisome Filth, is not to play the Christian
but the Pharisee. To profess God at Home and at Church, in our Houses, and his
House, and to join with his Servants in the Externals of his Worship; to read
his Word and sing his Praises with our Lips, and in Heart and Life to subvert
the Christian Faith, is not to be a Disciple but a Judas. To give God the most
glorious Attributes and Titles, and call him thy Creator, Lord and Governor,
and to acknowledge thou have all from his Bounty, and yet to deny him the
Service and Obedience due to his Laws; this is not to remember but to forget
him. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? If I be a Master, where is my
fear? says God, Mal. 1.6. Is not the Lord a Spirit, and will he be put off
with a mere bodily service only? I know he will have the service of the body
also; he will have the Tongue and the Knee, and an External Reverence, that may
be of good Example to others. But thou art guilty of Hypocrisy and Folly both;
if this be all that thou can spare, if thou go not further, thou may be a
very devil in thy heart; when thou ha^st Oil and Butter in thy Mouth, and when
thou speak the smoothest words to God, thou may have war and enmity to him
in thy heart; thou may fetch a sigh or a groan for sin at a pretty easy
rate; but God will not take this instead of Self-denial and mortification of
thy Lusts, but will abhor their shows and complements, that cover hatred with
lying Lips. When God calls to the proud Person to come down and sit in the dust
and humble himself, will it be an acceptable service if he would offer him
something else? or will he take the fruit of the Body for the sin of the Soul,
Mich. 6.7. I mean a show of humility, in going softly, speaking faintly,
looking sadly, instead of true lowliness and poverty of Spirit; I speak not
against the outward signs, they are good, when accompanied with the thing
signified; but when we deceive our selves with these, and think to deceive God
also. True humility consists in a universal submission to the Will of God, and
ready obedience to all his Laws, when they cross our interest in the world, as
when they do promote it. And he that has not this in a prevailing measure and
degree, God will look upon him afar off, let him come as near as he will with
his Tongue or Knee, Psalm. 138.6. and he will plentifully reward as a proud
doer, Psalm. 40.4.31.23. When God calls to search our hearts and try our ways,
and remember our doings. It will not serve turn to remember the doings of
others, and to se^^ch and censure them, to lay heavy burdens upon the City or
Country, and not to touch them with one of our Fingers; not but we may and
must confess the sins of the whole Nation, when Gods hand is upon a whole
Nation and calls it to repentance; but if we remember not our own sins with a
weeping heavy heart also, and do not loath our selves for all our own
abominations, Ezekiel. 36.31. and feellingly confess with shame and detestation,
the sins that lie nearest our hearts, and take it for a mercy to have the
scourge of a just and smarting rod, as well as the charge of a holy convincing
word, that we have not only threatening (which we have made a shift to slight so
often) but some execution to make sin odious to us, and to recover us to a due
sense and apprehension of it. If we have brought our selves to such a death in
sin, that we cannot understand what it is until we feel it; it is a mercy to
feel that we may understand: But let us remember, that if feeling do not
recover our understanding, God will forsake us as a desperate cure, and say,
why should they be stricken any more, they will revolt more and more? Esaias 1.5.
When once it comes to that, farewell Rod, it will come to that farewell God for
ever; and then forgetfulness will be our punishment, as now it is our sin.

To conclude therefore with some little touch of Application, though it be out
of its due place, since the day of the Lord is come upon us, and he is visiting
for our Transgressions, and we have so loud a call to Repentance. Let us not
think though we have mercifully escaped the Judgment that we may escape the
Duty also. It deserves a double acknowledgment if God do awaken us by the
doleful noise of others complaints; and if he do cleanse our. Hearts by the
Judgments that sweeps so many away; but let us see that it be a true and
substantial sorrow, that begins at the right place, even at the very heart, and
will not evaporate and spend its self in a few tears and sighs, but does
mortify our sin, and work a sincere renovation in our life. And if we do take
upon us also to lament the sins of the City and Nation, let us prove our sorrow
to be of the right stamp, by helping forward their Repentance and Reformation,
first by our Prayers, then by other our best endeavors.

It Is a poor matter to forbear a meal or twain, and yet to harbor such a Guest
as pulls the meat from our Mouths, and calls for the Pillow under our Heads,
and snatches away the desire of our Eyes, and divorces our Friends and
Companions from us; yea, which is the sum and abridgement of all our misery,
parts between God and us. It Is a poor business to spread Sackcloth over us, (I
mean to deny our Bodies their usual Ornaments) and to strew Ashes under our
Feet, and to let a few tears drop from us for sin, and yet to carry in our
Breasts an Heart unrent, unbroken, unsoftened by a true sense of sin and a work
of Grace. To what purpose is it to bow the Body to God, and yet to make ones
Heart like an Iron Sinew, too stiff and stout to bend in obedience to Gods
Command. The Prophet Hosea lays it upon them as a heavy charge, Hos. 7.14. They
have not cried unto me with their Hearts when they howled upon their Beds. And
you know with what indignation God puts the question, Esaias lviii. 5. Is this
the Fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow
down his Head as a Bull-rush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him?
Will thou call this a Fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? But oh what a
Fast is that, when we will not go thus far, when we will not afflict our selves
so far, as to want our Food and Ornaments. I am confident it is a great
provocation when we will not show forth to one another these and the like
outward signs of humiliation. Ahab went thus sar, and the stubborn Jews never
stuck at this. And though the same signs of mourning and humiliation be not in
fashion with us that were with them, yet I am sure gaudery is no sign external
of inward humiliation. If I had time, or were indeed upon the Application, it
would be seasonable to help forward the true Repentance that God expects from
us. By setting some of our sins before our face in some of their aggravations;
but that I may have opportunity to do hereafter.

So much in answer to the Second Question, who they are that forget God.

I come now to the Application.
1. First, Then we may hence discover, by what has been spoken in answer to
the Two foregoing Questions, What a sin it is to forget God; and by Connection,
how Guilty they make themselves that wipe God out of their Remembrance, and
reserve their hearts for other things.

If to forget God be not barely to cast him out of thy memory (which yet were
sinful enough) since all thy faculties are indebted to him) but to throw him
out of thy Heart and Affections, as the case is plain enough that it is. If to
forget God, imply a disregard of his most glorious Attributes, Word and Works,
to which such a high Veneration and Reverence is due from every understanding
Creature: Then what a Sin art thou Guilty of, That do not remember him? Will thou Annihilate (as much as in thee lies) the Sun that shines, the Air that
thou suckest in, the Heavens that hang over thy head, and the Earth under thy
feet, and all the Glory both of Heaven and Earth? will thou make nothing of the
light of thy Eyes, and the breath of thy Nostrils? If thou forget God, thou
do upon the matter annihilate all these as to the end and intent of them; as
to their moral use, though not as to their Physical nature. Dare thou be
guilty of the contempt of that mighty power that made thee and all the World
out of Nothing? of the highest Sovereignty and Jurisdiction, to which every
rational Creature owes subjection; there is one only Law giver that is able to
save or to destroy, and dare thou contemn him? James 4.12. Art thou mad to
despise the Royal Law, James 2.8, the Law of Heaven, and the highest Wisdom
that has composed it, and the highest Authority that has imposed it. Art thou
so void of Reason as to contemn thine own happiness, and to despise thine own
welfare? And to slight that Eye that always sees thee? In a word, Art thou so
bold to affront infinite and inflexible Justice, Purity and Holiness? If God be
forgotten by thee, yea, if he have not the chiefest Room in thy Remembrance,
thou will be judged one day to be guilty of such contempt.

What a sin must it needs be, to despise the written Word of God, indicted by
such a Spirit, confirmed by such Miracles and mighty Works, given us in so much
love and mercy; that contains such important matters of the biggest
concernment, whose accomplishment is so near and certain? and to slight what
the God of Heaven has there either threatened or promised? And if God be
forgotten by thee, thou will fall under this damnable guilt.

Art thou so stupid as to overlook and despise the Works of God, whether of
Creation, Providence, or Redemption, and to forget God, whilst thou have such
helps for thy memory? Dare thou cross the Acts of Gods Providence, and say
thou would have it thus when God would have it otherwise: This thou will do
if thou have a Temptation, if God be forgotten. In a word, this will betray
thee to that Formality and Hypocrisy in his Service, and to such a carnal
Worship of him, that has so little likeness to him, or acceptance from him,
which he does so much detest; And which he does so bitterly upbraid the
confident, impudent Jews, which in this whole 50 Psalm.

I know the best have too much of this sin, and forget their endeared Lord too
much, not only in the works of their civil and common Employment, but also in
their acts of Worship and immediate Service of him, and have not adoring,
prising thoughts of his Greatness and Goodness, as they should have; and this
is some degree of forgetfulness, and therefore they will be ready to condemn
themselves, and take some share in this Reproof; but the sharpest part of the
Reproof belongs most to them that are least disposed to take it, and most ready
to quarrel with and fight against it. And this is the most doleful aggravation
of their misery. O what a misery is it to need a bitter Cup, a smarting Rod,
sharp and cutting reproof, and yet not to endure the remedy and the proper
means of their recovery! to be desperately sick and not to abide the Physician.
This is the condition of those that have most of Guilt, and therefore the sorer
they are, the less they care to be searched and dressed.

If it be any dangerous Distemper in the Body, it is sad when the case is thus;
but if the Wound be Spiritual, and the Soul be the subject to be handled and
will not abide it; the condition of that Man or Woman is much more to be
lamented.

O how sad is their case that need Humiliation and Repentance, and the sense of
their sins and misery, that make them so forgetful of God, and yet are
impatient of the means that the Wisdom of God has appointed, and that they
must use to bring this to pass! O what a fearful state is it, and deeply to be
lamented, to have the greatest necessities on them, accompanied with the
greatest stupidity and insensibility.

To have need to cry aloud for mercy, mercy, and a heart fit to receive it, and
yet to have no mind to lift up an earnest Prayer unto God, and to stir up the
remembrance of him, nor to be awakened thereto by any way that is like to speed!
How dreadful is the condition of a senseless, hard hearted sinner! that must
die Eternally without Repentance, and be broken by the vengeance of God for
ever, if his heart do not break now; and yet does eonsent, yea, and set this
Seal to his own Destruction, and yet does reject all the humbling, softning
means, that Christ the greatest friend that ever he had, or shall have in the
World, has taught him and beseeched him to use: say not that a man may forget
God, and yet need no such reproof, nor be in any such danger. I have told you
what forgetfulness of God implies, and who they are that are chargeable
therewith, and who can easily speak worse of any; unless it be those that have
more of this sin, and are guilty of it in a higher degree. Those that the Text
speaks to, are such as God threatens to tear in pieces, unless they be
recovered by consideration. And the Scripture does not use to speak with so
much heat and indignation, where the sin is not so provoking. I come therefore
now to show you, 1. The guiltiness this sin. 2. The danger of this sin.


And what a madness as well as wickedness it is to forget God; that if it be
possible, this double sight of the sin and danger, may the better prepare them
for the means that must recover them and bring them to speedy use of them. And
this will appear 1. From the heinous nature of this sin. 2. From the fearful
effects thereof.


The odious nature of this sin is manifest, in that this forgetfulness of God
is a sin against the highest Obligations.

1. On Gods part. 2. On Our part.
1. On Gods part.
1. First, In that he has given us our Faculties on purpose to remember him,
and has fitted them for this very use and service. And what a sin must it
needs be to frustrate so great a design of God in the very Make and Fabric of
the best of his Creatures here on Earth. This end and use is legible enough in
his uppermost Faculties, which the rest were made to serve and obey: For if all
were made to minister unto one, and that on purposel^y to do Homage unto God;
then all are made ultimatly for God; but that he had his noblest Perfections
for this very end, it is easy to see with half an Eye. What should he do with
an Immortal Soul, endued with the powers of Reason and free Choice? But that by
the one he might discern the greatest Good, and by the other make it his
Choice. There are certain Relations, that intercede between all Creatures,
amongst which, those of Cause and Effect, Means and End, are the most
principal; which the understanding of Man was given him intentionally to argue
and find out, that by these he might step up to the highest Cause, and the
supreme and last end; and do the highest acts of Homage and Reverence to them,
that his understanding and will are able to give, in appretiation and love,
which are their two most essential Acts. Not a Creature but would lead the
Reason of Man to the Creator of all things, if he will use his Reason and
follow this Guide. The most contemptible thing had a Father that begot it (that
I may use Job's expression, Job 38.28, etc. Has the Rain a Father? or who
begot the drops of the Dew?) Every thing has a cause that brought it into
being, and that was produced by a former, and that by something that was before
that, till you come to the foremost and highest cause. And so for the other
Relation of Means and End; there is nothing but is subservient to some end, and
that to a higher, till you come to the highest (e.g.) The Showers moisten and
supple the Earth, and make it bring forth Grass: This Grass is to serve a
higher end (viz.) to feed and no^rish the Beasts, that they might be fit for
the use and service of Man his Food, and other employments, either serious or
recreative: And can we think that here is a full stop, and man was made for no
higher end, but to domineer over the other Creatures, and take a^ay their lives
when it pleases him for his uses? Certainly there was a further and higher
end, that God intended Man for, and that is to have him in perpetual
Remembrance. It Is certain there is no Creature here on Earth but Man, has any
capacity to know God, or to bear his Image in Holiness, or to worship him,
which two last imply the first (1.) A knowledge of him. 1. What he is in
himself in some measure. 2. What he is to them, Their Creator, Preserver, and
bountiful Provider. Neither has any of them a Faculty to express and utter
thus much to another Creature, being all deprived of Speech and Eloquution,
which is man's Glory only.

Obj. And if you object the 19 Psalm. 1. The Heavens declare the Glory of God,
and the Firmament, etc. and therefore not man only.

Ans. The Declaration there spoken of is improper and objective. As a Dial
tells what a Clock it is (1.) You may gather what time of day it is if you look
on it, by the help of our Reason, not any Tongue it has to express thus much.
Neither has any Creature an expli^^^ desire of an Eternal Happiness, that
shall never fail or be interrupted. And Lactantius, one of the Latin Fathers,
that lived in the said Century, places the Characteristical Difference and
Specificial Distinction, between Man and Beast, not in Rationality, but in
Religion; because some Creatures seem to do Acts that are Rational, as the
Elephant, Hare, Fox, Dog; but none that have any appearance of Religion or
Piety.

Now it is a very great truth, That God never made any Power or Capacity in any
Creature in vain; He has given the Sun an Active Capacity to revive and
exhilerate the lower World, and it were unnatural if he should not put forth
that virtue to that end. He has given Earthly Creatures a pasfive Capacity, or
Receptive Power, to suck in this influence; and they do and are covered over
with Corn, and laugh and sing, Psalm. 65.13. And it is universally true,
wheresoever there is a power that can put forth any Act, that should not act
according to the Power, were a Monster and not a Creature. God has given the
Fire a power to burn and consume, when fit matter is offered, and if it should
spare the Wood that is laid on it, we should not count it a merciful but a
monstrous act. God has made the Water to wet and moisten, and if it should not
do so, what were it good for? You would not commend this Property in Horse or
Beast if they should fly in the Air, or dive under Water; the Fish that should
shun the Water, would be a monstrous and degenerate Breed. And is it not as
absurd and monstrous for a man, that has a Faculty on purpose to remember God,
yet to forget him? To have a Capacity to be like God, and yet not to employ and
exercise it; for this also is implied in our remembrance of him. There were no
sadder Spectacle in the World than Man, were it not for these Acts, and what is
or will be consequent on them. A Toad were not half so bad, nor the most hated
Creature, no, nor those that are continually hunted and pursued, and live
always in danger of the snare, or some crafty device, or other, that may make
them a prey to their cruel pursuers. These brutish Creatures apprehend not the
snare till they are caught in it, nor foresee a mischief till it is upon them,
nor vex themselves with the memory of what is past. But Reason, which is Man's
proper Vtensil (were it not for the service that it may do to God and his Soul)
make him but the more capable subject of Misery and Torment. It helps him to
prevent a mischief before it comes, and to think on it after it is past and
gone, and to enjoy a calamity (I may say) and to chew upon an evil that is
swallowed down and past. Alas! alas! If God gave not Man these Faculties to
remember and aspire to him. ^t would be far more desirable to be a Beast than a
Man, since then it is past all doubt, that God has made Man for himself, and
given him such a high Capacity on purpose to remember him; it is monstrous and
unnatural to forget him.

2. Secondly, And as he has given him his Faculties on purpose to remember
him, so he has displayed himself in the Firmament of Heaven, as purposely to
be remembered, Psalm. 111.4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.
And (1.) That God may be remembered by them, that is the very end of them. And
verse 2. The works are great and magnificent, sought out of all (as we render
it) but in the Original it is (...) that is, exposed and laid open before all to
take notice of. And the Italian Translation renders it, as it were wickedness
in a man upon whom God has bestowed Eyes, to shut them perpetually, and to
refuse to make any use of so noble a Faculty. So it is a wickedness much of the
same kind, when God has set so many visible Objects before this Faculty, to
put him in mind of him that has made both Faculty and Object, and he makes no
such use of them; he has Eyes and sees not, he has Objects and does not
understand them. Judge what a wicked perverseness this is. We are prone to think
it no great wickedness to commit such a sin as this is, and to cross the very
end of making our selves and other things, whilst we do it not purposely, and
have no thought of contradiction to God in this sin. But let us not deceive our
selves, when we have so high an obligation upon us to any Duty and are
commanded to remember and think upon it, and we do not; though we do not
purposely forget, because God bids us to remember, yet we are morally and
reputatively guilty of thwarting and crossing the Will of God, though not in
quite so high a degree, yet enough to undo us everlastingly, unless we repent
of what is past, and do otherwise for the time to come. This will be but a
pitiful, shameful answer, when God shall come to examine man by man, what
proficiency we have made, amongst the Creatures that were made to instruct us,
and shall find a dunce instead of a knowing well informed Scholar. Do the
Heavens declare the Glory of God to the Moles, that w^nt outward Eyes (as it is
usually said) or to the Brutes that want the inward Eye (that is understanding)
or to Man that is instructed with both these helps; and will it be a venial sin
(think ye) to wink with both these? He that by all the Glory of Heaven and
Earth is not so far enlightened, so as to adore the wonderful Perfection of him
that made them, and to prostrate his very heart in love and reverence to him,
is wilfully blind, and one that shall be dealt with as if he shut his Eyes
against all. What is there no Workmanship either in Heaven above, or Earth
beneath, or Water under the Earth? Is there nothing in the Air, or bowels of
the Earth, that is worth thine Observation, or that can erect our blockish
Heart, and bring up our Affections to the glorious Artificer and Workman!

It Is a profound Sleep indeed into which that man is fallen, and is a certain
forerunner of Death, when none of all these excellent Creatures, that strike
his sense, can awaken him to any understanding, reverence, or love of his
Excellency, that has bid all things come forth and stand in their several
ranks, and even gird themselves to the service of man

This sin has the higher aggravation, in that there be so many various ways,
whereby the several Creatures would recover man to a due remembrance of God. I
might insist upon those four ways mentioned in the 2 Timothy 3.16. and show how by
Doctrine Reproof, Correction and Instruction in Righteousness, all the visible
Creatures would help on this Remembrance of God, and therefore forgetfulness of
God has the greater sin, by how much it prevails against the greater means,
vouchsafed by God for its cure: But least that way should not seem so
intelligible and convincing, I shall choose rather to nominate four other ways,
whereby the several Creatures do provoke man to have God highest in their
Remembrance. 1. They all offer themselves to his sight, and by that to his
understanding, to inform him in the glorious Perfections of God, which they
palpably discover, and therefore are very serviceable in the work of
Contemplation. No one so sottish as to imagine they could make themselves, then
they must be made by another, that is God, but such infinite variety, and such
rare and excellent works; must suppose; and therefore put any one that thinks
on them in mind of infinite Wisdom and Skill, infinite Goodness and Power in
the creating of them. 2. They serve for his Food and Raiment, and are the means
to keep him alive, that could not live a day without them. Let him that thinks
he is least of all beholding to the Creatures, consider whether he could live
an hour without the Air he sucks in; or how many days he could live without
Food, which one Creature or another serves in every day, and then let him think
who has made and does supply every Creature to him, and forget God if he can.
3. They serve for his other necessary uses, in great delightful variety: The
Horse to fetch in and carry out both himself and other things, and to remove
his Luggage from place to place. The Wood and Stones to build his Habitation,
and the Art and Workmanship of Man to adorn it, the Dog to keep it; and all
things conspire together to make him as happy as he can be in the absence of
God; even a Lord on Earth, because God has appointed him so to be; and has he
not yet enough to advance his great Benefactor in his Heart? 4. They serve also
for his Recreation, and sober Pleasure and Refreshment, when he has been tired
by his more serious Employments; and yet to forget God, whose Praise and
Service these Creatures do so constantly bespeak, by their so beneficial
service to us* All these steps lead up the sin to a higher guilt. In a word, to
have all the Senses assaulted by the several Objects, that God has furnished
to them. The Eye to be fed with so many delightful sights of several things.
The Ear with such various Harmony and Sound. The Taste with so many distinct
and grateful Relishes, of things which the wisdom of the Creator has provided
and offered to that Sense. And the Objects of the other Senses are multiplied
to as great a variety: And is it not monstrous for the mind of man to have so
many Monitors, and yet to forget God in despite of all.

3. Thirdly, He has moreover given us his Son, that we might not want an
Argument of the greatest force to provoke a remembrance of him. When we were
like to withstand all other Arguments, and to lose the sense of all his other
mercies toward us, and to perish in a wicked oblivion and forgetfulness of God
for ever. He has taken such a course, that one would think should create a
memory of him where there was none at all of him before; and should recover
those that are the most desperately gone in forgetfulness, and force them to
say, that the love of Christ constrains them, 2 Cor. 5.14. Would not a
Malefactor that is sentenced and condemned to die, take it for a favor indeed,
and place that man high in his Remembrance, that should step between him and
death, and release him with the loss of his own life, especially if he were a
Person of Honor and Degree? And does it not deserve a Remembrance not a
Customary, but a substantial Remembrance, when the highest and most honorable
Person that ever lived in the World, has laid down his life in the room of
ours? Sure we think we are not so beholding to him as we are, when such an
obligation as this will prevail no more to exalt God in our Hearts. If this be
not an obligation that does enforce a gracious Remembrance now; I am sure it is
such a one that will enforce a tormenting Remembrance hereafter. When the
thought of such a mercy so wickedly slighted, shall be a raging fire in their
Bowels, and then they shall not be able to forget it. What Is the matter that
such a motive is put off and not regarded by too many? I am sure there is
nothing but flat downright wickedness, can make a man so sleepy and forgetful.
If such a Breath as this will not kindle the love of God in our Hearts, if such
a spur will not prick us forward to the duty of Remembrance. It Is not because
we want Arguments, but because we want Grace, and how we should want Grace if
we were apprehensive of the mercy, would be very difficult to resolve; and how
we should not be apprehensive, if we did but think frequently of it, would be
as impossible to determine: So that you see the wickedness of this sin is
ultimatly resolved into not thinking or bending our selves to think what we
have received. Well we are left to take our choice; the death of Christ will
either oblige us to the duty of Remembrance, or aggravate the sin of
forgetfulness.

Lastly, We have the Spirit, Word, and all the Ordinances of God to beget and
cherish this Remembrance of God. I join all these together, because I would not
multiply particulars too much.

Obj. But you may say, Though the Death of Christ and the Gift of the Spirit,
are Arguments of great strength, and may do good service to quicken up a
Believer, that is backward to this work; yet how can they compel a wicked man,
or one that forgets God, since Christ died for none but the Elect, and none can
know themselves to be such, but such as have true Faith, and know they have it;
and so also for the Spirit; and therefore these Arguments are cogent to none
but such as these.

Answer, That Christ gave himself intentionally for all men, and that God
accepted his Sacrifice to that universal end, is so plain in Scripture, that
scarce any truth is plainer, 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a ransom for all; 1
John 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
for the sins of the whole World. But because some evade those places by
distinguishing of All and World, that All is sometimes taken for some, and
World for part of the World. As if the Apostle foresaw such Quirks, and meant
to stop every Mouth; his words are not liable to evasion, Heb. 2.9. That he by
the Grace of God should taste of Death for every Man.

And to make mention of no other Argument (though I could produce several) if
he died for such as deny him and crucify him to themselves afresh, and finally
perish; then he died, no question, for the rest, but that he tasted Death for
such is plain, Heb. 10.29. Having in the verse before showed, the miserable end
of those that despised Moses's Law; he infers by way of interrogation. Of how
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy of, that has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he
was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace;
and yet plainer, 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false Teachers (as the Apostle
gives them warning, that shall bring in damnable Heresy, denying the Lord that
bought them. So that hence it is evident, that Christ laid down his Blood as a
price, to redeem them that ungratefully deny him. And if Christ had not died
for all, it could not be the duty of every man to believe in him. But there is
nothing more unquestionable than that every one is bound to believe, and such
as refuse, are threatened with a more fearful destruction, because they wickedly
frustrate (as much as in them lies) such a wonderful Grace of God, and
withstand the highest motive to Repentance and a new life, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify him in your Body and in your Spirit,
which are his. The Apostle speaks to the Corinthians in general, among whom
there were many unbelievers. And what is the Argument he uses to persuade them
to Faith and newness of Life; but because Christ has showed such love to them
as to die for them; Since he has offered up his Body upon the Cross for you,
do you offer up your Souls and Bodies unto him, to be instruments of
Righteousness to do him service, is the force of the Apostles Argument.

We see then, that the Death of Christ and the Gift of the Spirit, are
obligations upon all (that hear the Gospel at least) to a thankful
Commemoration of the love of God, and a Remembrance of him. There are none that
live under the sound and influence of the Gospel, but have the love of Christ
expressed in his Incarnation, Life and Death, for them to move them externally,
by way of Argument, and the powerful Spirit inwardly to check their
Corruptions, and prompt them to obedience in some degree and measure; and if
they will not think upon the one nor submit to the other, but slightly regard
the one, and stubbornly resist the other, and stiffle every good motion, which
they feel, and keep off from any serious thoughts of the death of Christ, and
will not be persuaded to consider, the Blood that was shed for them, nor suffer
his love to be shed abroad into their hearts by the Holy Spirit. Let such know
that their forgetfulness of God is the more heinous, because it has so fast an
obligation as this, to the most necessary duty of remembrance, the Word also as
well as the Spirit. What are all the passages of Scripture, but such as prepare
for, or directly stir up to such a Remembrance. You may observe some parts of
Scripture more remotely conduce to this grand duty of remembering God; other
parts do more immediately serve to produce it where it is wanting, others to
reduce and recover it when it is lost. So that one of these three ways, either
by conducing to it or producing, or reducing of it, all the parts of Gods Word
conspire io this principal duty. The main division of the Scripture is into the
Old and New Testament. But what is the design and drift of both these, but to
rescue or preserve a Memory of God in the World? Our Savior sums up the Old
Testament in these two heads, the Law and the Prophets. Now what does the Law
serve for, if not to mind us of the great Lawgiver, and to beget an awe of his
Sovereignty upon the World? And the main end of the Prophets and their
Prophesies, was to reproduce this Remembrance of God when the ungrateful People
had forgot him. And what can be the end of that Light that has shined to us in
the Gospel, but to teach us to deny all ungodliness. ((...) Forgetfulness of
God) and to live soberly and righteously, and godly in this present evil World,
which we can never do without frequent and effectual Remembrance of God and our
Lord Jesus Christ.

I might more particularly insist here, and show how all the Precepts,
Promises, and Threatenings, which are the three essential parts of Gods Word,
are intended to this end, and will leave the Soul inexcusable that forgets him;
or how the several Books of the Old and New Testament, which are the integral
parts of God's Word, oblige to this Remembrance. But I think the case is so
plain and clear, that none of these ways of demonstration is needful to
convince us. That the whole Word of God is no little impulsive, but presses
earnestly to this Remembrance, and is therefore another great Aggravation of
the sin of Forgetfulness.

I shall only choose to set some of those Texts of Scripture before you, that
are fullest of Affection and most Pathetical; and that show how unwilling God
is to forget poor sinners, or that they should perish (as they must needs do in
their Forgetfulness of him, Esaias 48.18; 19.) With what passion does the Lord
mourn over the poor forgetful Israelites, that had even now brought utter ruin
upon themselves. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy
Peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea. Thy Seed
also had been as the Sand, and the offspring of thy Bowels as the Gravel
thereof; and Hos. 11.8. When the ten Tribes were got to such a degree of
wickedness, that God was not remembered by them any longer, but they had
divorced him from them, by their Idolatries, and could bear no longer without
disparagement to the Truth and Justice of God; with what unwillingness does he
throw them off? How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My
Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together. What heart that
is not desperately sick of stupidity, can hear this sound and not return, and
recover the remembrance of him, whom before he had forgot; O that my People had
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have subdued
their Enemies, and turned my Hand against their Adversaries. The haters of the
Lord should have submitted themselves unto him; but their time should have
endured for ever. He should have fed them also with the finest of the Wheat,
and with Honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee, Ps. 81.13, 14, 15.
Thus you see how these and such like Scriptures Numbers, of which might be
gathered together, and as the parts of Gods Word, etc. so the whole do provoke
to a Remembrance of God. If the Heathens that want this written Word of God,
are notwithstanding bound to keep up a Memory of their Maker, worthy of his
Majesty; what an obligation then is the written Word of God to us that have
(...) to get the knowledge of God, and to feed our thoughts with a delightful
remembrance of him? And as the Word of God, so all the Ordinances of God are
strong inforcements to this duty. How fit a means is Prayer and Meditation, and
singing of Psalms, and participation of the Supper of the Lord, and the
Conference of Holy Persons together, to cure the Atheism of our hearts, and to
keep us from being unmindful of him, if we mind and attend what we do? As often
as we receive the Sacrament, we are bid to do it in remembrance of him, 1 Cor.
11.24, 25.

And what shall we forget him, whilst we have such execellent means to get a
sight of his Glory and to draw near to him, and acquaint our Souls with him?
What a sin must it needs be to forget God, whilst we are calling to him by
Prayer, or when he is calling to us, and proclaiming his Sovereignty over us;
his right in us, his readiness to receive us? Judge what impudence it is to
confer and talk of him, to eat and drink in his prefence, to celebrate his
Sabbaths, which were appointed as special helps to this Remembrance, and yet to
forget him! To pray and hear, and receive the symbols of his Grace, and yet to
have a heart void of true Remembrance, is such an aggravation of this sin, as
will strike home sooner or later.

Thus you see the aggravations of the sin of Forgetfulness, that arise from the
Obligations we have on God's part to remember him.

And as they that forget God, sin against high Obligations on God's part, so

Secondly, They sin against great Obligations.

2. On their own part, Against 1. Promise and Covenant. 2. Oath. 3. Profession.


And therefore they that forget God, in despite of all these Obligations, are,

1. First, False and perfidious in a high degree, to break Word and Promise
with Man, and to be false to one like our self, is enough to imprint a mark of
infamy and disgrace, that will stick by as long as life lasts, and to blast
such a man's reputation to all that know him: And how hard a matter is it to
wipe off such a reproach, especially if it were a deliberate act in a matter of
concernment. And who will repose any trust in such a man, that has deceived
the just expectation of another in any momentous affair, by the breach of his
Faith, that has any acquaintance with him? When a Man has so behaved himself
that none can lay any hold on what he says, and no trust and confidence can be
placed in him; he is unfit for Humane Society. But to be false and perfidious
with God, is far more ignominious, and exposes to worser shame and fouler
consequences; for Man has incomparably greater obligations to truth and
sincerity toward God than toward Men. His hatred of such injustice and
unfaithfulness is greater than the most upright Man upon Earth can have, and he
can far better discover, and will more exemplary punish it, than any Man has
power or authority to do; and none has or can have that ju^isdiction over us
that God has. If falseness, lying, and perfidiousness, be so hateful to some,
even because they have the Image of God, but imperfectly renewed on themselves,
we may be sure that God abhors it.

By thy Precepts I get understanding, says David, and therefore I hate every
false way, Psalm. 119.104, etc. Psalm. 101.7, etc. He that works deceit shall
not dwell within my House; he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight.
But the breach of Promise and Covenant is a high degree of Falsehood and
Perfidiousness. A Promise, when it is made to God, is called by a special name,
a Vow. Now what it is to break a Vow, Solomon will inform us, Eccl. 5.4, 5.
When thou vowest a Vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in
fools; pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is thou should not vow, than
that thou should vow and not pay. The reason is, because he that has made a
Vow or Promise to God, if it be in a case where he was free before, his Promise
is now under a Bond, and if he does not perform, he is ensnared by the words of
his own mouth, and therefore is a fool; but if it be in a case where he was
bound before, he is now bound faster, and has a streighter Obligation, and in
case of Nonperformance, he is guilty of greater sin and folly: And the more
frequently any Vow or Promise has been made, the more guilty and perfidious is
he that has failed in the performance; and the Justice to which he has made
himself liable, is the more exacting. And the breach of a solemn Covenant or
Contract, is sinful in a higher degree, than the bare breach of Promise;
because in a Covenant there is a further motive to Truth and faithful
performance, than in a mere Promise; for the advantage and emolument that he
expects from the party with whom he has contracted. So that he is perfidious
and injust in a higher measure. What a sin must it needs be to thrust God out
of thy Heart and forget him, to whom thou have so often promised and vowed
Remembrance; for besides thy Baptismal Vow and Promise, every time thou
presentest thy self before him in Public, Private, or Secret, thou renewest
thy Covenant and Promise, to have him for thy All in All; and can thou indeed
make him thy All in All, and not remember him? Can thou pray by thy self or
join with others, and not lay any further Obligations upon thy self? Does that
man confess his sin indeed, or mock God that does not desire the help of God's
Grace, and promise in the strength thereof to forsake and renounce it? And can
a man promise to let go his sin, and yet not engage himself to the Remembrance
of God, which must be the chief means to separate and remove it? Can any man
pray for mercy and yet not oblige himself by that Prayer to Remember his
Benefactor? Can any man be said to thank God for any benefit he has received,
and not promise to order his Conversation aright, that is to his Glory, that
has done so much for him? These are the three general parts of Prayer, and
every one of them implies a new Promise and Obligation to this Remembrance. But
besides these vertual and implicit Engagements, how often have thou expressly
promised to be his faithful Servant, to live to thy Redeemer, to be his
Disciple, to take his Yoke on thee? How often have thou consented and said, Amen,
when from the Word of God thou have been told thus much, when the Preacher has
convinced thee, when Conscience has stirred thee, when Sickness has awakened
thee, when thou have seen the fruits of a heart unacquainted with God, and
seldom conversant with him, have thou not promised and engaged to become more
heavenly? This thou have done many and many a time, or thou have withstood the
Light, and shut thine Eyes wilfully against all the Calls of God by his Word or
Rod; and wilful ignorance will be as high an aggravation of thy sin, as
misimproved and abused knowledge, and since it was thy duty every time thou
did approach to God, to reinforce thy vow and promise; if thou have
obstinately refused, thou art virtually guilty of so frequent a breach of
promise as it was thy duty to have promised.

And this is the first aggravation of the sin of forgetting God, on their part
that do forget, taken from their breach of Vow and Covenant with him.

Secondly, They that cherish not a worthy Remembrance of God, are as highly
guilty of Perjury as they are of perfidiousness: Now an Oath is a faster
obligation than either Promise or Covenant. He that tieth himself by Oath to
any performance, does (ipso facto) devote himself to all those Judgments that
God shall think meet to bring upon him, in case he swear falsely, though it be
in any little matter. And God himself, when he would give the highest security
to Abraham for the confirmation of his Faith, he takes an Oath, Heb. 6.13, 14.
when God made Promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he
swore by himself, saying, Surely in blessing, I will bless thee, and in
multiplying, etc. and it is said, Verse 17, 18. God being willing more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath, That by two immutable things (that is Covenant and
Oath) in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold of the Hope set before us;
and therefore as a Promissory Oath is here supposed to be a firm ground of
confident expectation of the thing promised, and to be the end of all distrust;
so an Assertory Oath, is said, verse. 16. to be the end of all strife; and the
breach of this Bond is intolerable in all Societies. And it is one of those
sins, which God charge upon the Ten Tribes, when Hosea is sent to tell them
the lamentable Tidings of their divorce from God in the Terms, (...) R^^^ama,
and Lo-Ammi. (...) they shall be no more his People, and God will show no more
mercy to them, Hos. 10.4. They have spoken words swearing falsely, in making a
Covenant, and this sin had perverted Judgment, and turned it into Hemlock. And
the flying roll, that is, the terrible Curse of God, was to enter into the
House of the Thief, and into the House of him that swareth falsely, and to
remain in the midst of it, and consume it with the Timber thereof, and the
Stones thereof, Zach. 5.4. And Jerusalem could stand no longer, but must spue
out the Inhabitants, after Zedekiah had broke the Oath of the Lord made to the
King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 17.16. As I live, says the Lord God, surely in the
place where the King dwells, that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and
whose Covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon shall he die;
and Verse 18, 19, 20. seeing he despised the Oath, by breaking the Covenant
(when lo he had given his hand) he shall not escape; Therefore, thus says the
Lord, As I live, surely mine Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant that
he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head. And I will spread
my Net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to
Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that he has trespassed
against me. And you know it cost Saul seven of his Sons that were hung up, to
revenge the Oath he had broken to the Gibonites, 2 Samuel 21.6. And it is noted by
Plutarch, as one chief cause why Philip King of Macedon, with all his posterity
were so quickly destroyed because he made no Account of keeping his Oaths, but
swore and unswore as might stand with his interest. And the story of Vladiflaus
King of Hungary, who had made a league with Amurath the Great Turk, and bound
himself to it by an Oath, is notorious. When the Turk began to be worsted,
Amurath drew the League out of his Bosom, and lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and
said, O thou Crucified Christ, behold this is the Covenant thy Christians in
thy name have made with me, which they have violated. If thou be God, as they
say thou art, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name and Me, and show thy
Power upon thy Perjured People, who in their Deeds deny thee their God.
Immediately after the King was slain, and all his Army routed, as may be seen
in the Turkish History. What a sin is it then to violate an Oath, not made to
Man but God himself, and that in a matter of the highest moment in the World?
(1.) Fealty and Allegiance to him from those that are indebted to him, no less
than all they have or hope for. And he that forgets God, breaks this Oath of
Fealty and Allegiance, due to God for the mere benefits of his production and
maintenance; but signally renewed and expressed in Baptism, for the mercy of
Redemption by Christ, under whose Command we did then list our selves, and to
whom we did swear Love and Obedience. The word Sacramentum signifies such an
Oath; and this Sacrament is an allusion to the custom of War, where every
Soldier was to bind himself by a Military Oath, to be true to his General. To
this Custom Christ the more fitly alludeth it in that Christianity is a
Spiritual Warfare. What a high Provocation must it needs be then to forget the
Lord, to whose Service and Remembrance we have so tied our selves? Whoever
thou art, that live under the sound of the Gospel, and that have been
sprinkled with the Water of Baptism. Thou have avouched the Lord to be thy
God, thou art under Vow, Covenant and Oath, to exalt God in thine Heart, and
throw out all other things to manage a daily Warfare against all his Enemies,
and to subdue every Lust that would wipe out the Memory of God, thy Redeemer
and Savior out of thy Heart. This Oath has been renewed also so often as thou
have taken the other Sacrament. So that thou have all this weight to stand
under in the day of the Lord, if thou be found amongst those that forget the
Lord.

Thirdly, Beside the Bonds of Vow, Covenant and Oath, thou have the higher
Obligations of a constant open Profession, to shame thee for thine
unmindfulness of God, which must needs be a greater aggravation of this sin,
because it implies all the other and superadds pretended reallity in all these,
when it is nothing else but Hypocrisy, and deep Dissimulation. It Is the worst
sort of Enmity that looks like Friendship; and he is an Adversary to be abhorred
that is dressed up like a Friend, and does insinuate into the Heart and Bosom of
him, whom he intends to betray by pretended Love and Friendship; and therefore
David lays this sort of injury more to heart than any that he received from
open professed Enemies, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. For it was not an Enemy that
reproached me, than I could have born it; neither was it he that hated me, that
did magnify himself against me, than I would have hid my self from him: But it
was thou O Man, mine Equal, my Guide and mine Acquaintance; we took sweet
Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God in company. And mark what a
Character he gives of such a Person; Psalm. 55.20, 21. He has put forth his
hands against such as be at peace with him; he has broken his Covenant. The
words of his Mouth were smoother than Butter, but War was in his Heart. His
words were softer than Oil, yet were they drawn Swords. There Is none have done
more mischief in the Church of God, than such as have professed Love and seemed
Friends. Judas gets into the nearest outward Relation that could be, and acts
the greatest wickedness under the disguise of a kiss; and did that effectually,
which the Herodians attempted with smooth words and pretensions of friendship;
but it is said, Jesus perceived their wickedness and disappointed them, Mat.
22.18. And who have done the work of the Devil more effectually than those that
have professed themselves Christians, that is devoted by Vow, Covenant and Oath
to Christ, and yet by Heresy have perverted the Christian Faith, and by Schism
have rent and torn his Church, and by Pride and Contention have set it all in a
flame? And who were more bitter Enemies to Christ, in his Birth and Infancy,
than the Jews, who pretended to be the only People in Covenant with God, yet
it is manifest from the most authentic Records and impartial History, that they
were the most bloody opposers and persecutors of the Gospel; and their fury was
the hotter, because it came under a mask of Zeal? And so industrious and
implacable was their enmity to the Christian Faith; and so great an impediment
was the Jewish Persecution to the plantation and propagation of the Gospel,
that Christianity could not spread and grow to any purpose till this Enemy was
taken away by a universal Devastation; their Temple and City destroyed, and
their Memorial perished from the Earth. Was it not a horrid aggravation of
their Irreverence, Contempt, and wicked forgetfulness of God, that they were
accompanied with such a zealous Profession of Love and Fidelity to him? The
Character that Josephus, their own Countreyman, and a most impartial Writer,
gives of these men, that boasted they were Abraham's Seed, and the Children of
the Promise is this, That their wickedness was grown to such a height, that if
they had not been swept away by the Romans, and destroyed in such numbers, till
none almost were left, the very Earth would have opened and swallowed them up.

It is a fearful sin to oppose and fight against God, but to do it in the Garb
and Habit of a Friend and Confederate (especially if it be done with design) is
such a sin, that will sink the committers of it into deeper condemnation, than
the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah will them. And professed Enemies are like to
escape better than these seeming Friends; and the more intimate and near the
Friendship is that is professed, the Treachery that does accompany it is the
more to be abhorred, and deserves the blacker Character. What then can thou
expect that God will say to thee, or how do thou think he will proceed
against thee, that call thy self a Christian, and restest in thy Profession,
and make thy boast of God, and know his Will, and approvest the things
that are most excellent, being instructed out of the Gospel, Romans 2.17, 18. And
yet the love of Christ constrains thee not to Repentance, Humility, and the
Practice of those Holy Precepts that he has given thee; the warm Remembrance
of his Compassion toward thee, does not teach to order thy Conversation to the
credit of the Gospel. What a Salutation do thou expect, when thou come
before the presence of his Glory, and stand among his Friends; if he call
thee, as thou call thy self, and say, Friend how came thou in hither? thou will but tremble the more at such a word, that will have such a dreadful
sentence at the heels, and be accompanied with such a terrible doom, as shall
make thee to abhor a friend to all eternity, that deals so like an Enemy. O
consider this thou that forgetest God, and yet have bound thy self so fast by
Vow, Covenant, Oath and Profession, to remember him. If those that take pains
to imprint him upon their hearts day by day, by a fresh Remembrance of his
amazing Goodness, shall scarce be saved, where shall such a false, perfidious,
perjured Hypocrite as thou appear? Or how will thou be able to stand in
Judgment? Psalm. 1.5. God will not be mocked, neither can he be deceived; he
expects thy service, and it is due to him, whether he have or have not thy
consent. But when thou do acknowledge what thou art indebted to him, and have
vowed hearty Subjection and Obedience to him, and bound thy self by all the
forementioned Bonds, thou can not but see thy sin in forgetting him so well,
and rise higher, and bring a more heinous guilt upon thee.

I have done with the aggravation of this sins, and showed the heinousness of
it, in that it is a sin against The highest Obligations 1. On God's part. 2. On
Ours.


I come now to show the danger of this sin.

Which will appear in the woeful effects that tread upon it and follow after
it. In that, This Sin is apt to produce 1. The worst of Sins 2. The worst of
Judgments
On us.

1. First, This sin is apt to lead the way to all ungodliness; and to multiply
into all sin and absurdity whatsoever. There Is no Practice so monstrous and
unnatural, none so base and sordid, none so filthy and disgraceful, but he that
forgets God is in the road way to, and may commit; nay, if the VVind serve, and
Tide run that way, I mean if the Temptations to it be strong, and God do not
restrain him, he will certainly commit; For where God is not uppermost, as he
cannot be there where he is not remembered: These, The Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, will get the upper hand, and animate
that wretched Heart wherein they dwell, to all filthy, sordid, and monstrous
practices, you can imagine or think upon. I do not say that they do all (de
facto) actually prevail, where God is forgotten, much less do I say that these
three sins multiply into all that litter of other depending sins, as have their
life and maintenance from these. But only this I say, that where God is not
worthily Remembered, there one or more of these sins have dominion, and all may
take their turns, and so turn that Man into a very Devil in Humane Shape. For
what is there to stop the raging power of Lust and Concupisence, and control
the fury of inordinate Passions, if you take away this bridle, and there be
none or very little awe and reverence of God upon the Heart. If you say that
Reason may curb and keep in a Carnal Fleshly Heart from all notable ^ccess and
Inordinancy? I answer, That since the Fall, Reason is not able to stand against
the Flesh, having lost its strength by the loss of Gods Image, unless it be
where it is assisted by the common Grace of God. For Man's end being here below
and not above, Flesh, with its affections, must needs be the leading part, and
Reason must needs lie still and sleep, whilst Sense is domineering, or else
strike in with the Flesh, and become a servant to its Lusts. For a Man can rise
no higher than his end, no more than the Water can above the Spring Head: God
being cast off, something must supply his room. Man will not be at rest till he
has a happiness seeming or real; and therefore since he has renounced God
which is real, he must needs choose Creatures which are but so in appearance;
since he has forsaken the Fountain, he must have recourse to the Cistern;
since he will not build upon the Rock he must build upon the Sand, and have his
Hope and Foundation in the Dust; and having once made Flesh his Confidence, he
will rather fight against God, and all that opposes him than be driven from
his hold. What a Man takes for his happiness he will hold it as his very Life
and Being, and as soon part with the one as with the other. What sin will a
Man stick at to wind himself into a faster possession of what he thinks to be
his happiness? and having thrown God out of his Memory, he will quickly decay
in his Heart and Affections. And when there is little or no fear or love of
him, what should persuade a man to refuse the tempting pleasures of sin?
Neither will he take that for a sin in which he is practically persuaded his
happiness does consist. Hence it is that the vilest and most shameful sinners;
when once they have wiped out the Memory of Godout of their Hearts, which at
last they attain to, through frequent and customary delight in those brutish
Pleasures, they verily think at last that they are no sins, and will plead for
the worst of them. I know that many do not, neither can they arrive to such a
height of wickedness, because God will not permit them* neither can they get
all awe and sear of him out of their Hearts; but this is no thanks to them
neither does it disprove what I said before (1.) That forgetfulness of God, is
apt in its own nature, unless it be curbed by Providence, to lead into all
wickedness whatsoever, even the highest degree of it. Balaam will attempt for
the love of Honor and Riches, to serve the King of the Moabites wicked
purpose, and to curse the People of God, if an Angel with a drawn Sword in his
hand, do not stand in his way, and hinder the execution of his wicked intent.
So wicked Persons, that have no true Remembrance of God, will commit any
wickedness, that seems necessary to compass what they have set their hearts
upon, and will not give over till Providence crosses them, and will not let
them bring their Device to pass. If Honor be the end of any Person that
forgets God, he will not stick at any sin that will but promote his end and
serve this Lust. If Rule and Power be the thing that a Man has set up for his
Idol, he will take any way rather than miss that which will be ever in his
thought and remembrance, either actually or virtually, because it has gotten
into his heart. As we cannot remember those things that we do not love and
reverence, so we cannot but remember what we do reverence and love. You see
then how dangerous it is to forget God; such a one will remember something
else, that will betray him to all base and wicked Practices, that will bring
him under the power of the Devil, who rules in the Children of Disobedience,
and bring upon him the wrath of God, which comes upon the Children of
Disobedience.

I might here show you how this Sin is the breach of the great and most
fundamental Commandment, as our Savior calls it, Mark 12.30. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Strength. This is the first Commandment; for he that does not remember him
cannot do this; and where there is no true subjection of the Soul to God,
implied in this Commandment, there can be no true Obedience implied in any of
the other Commands. And therefore he that is guilty of breaking this, is
prepared for the breach of all the other, because they are animated by this,
and have their obliging power and authority from it. You see then the danger of
this sin, if then thou dare let God slip out of thy mind, thou know not
what will succeed and enter in his room, nor what wickedness thou may commit;
for thou art tumbling down hill and can never stop, by any inward power of
thine own, unless Providence lay an impediment before thee, and hinder thee
coming to the bottom (that is, I mean, to the top of all impiety.)

2. Secondly, If thou forget God he will cast thee out of his Remembrance, and
make thee to know the sin which thou have committed by the Punishment that is
inflicted, Psalm. 9.16. Then the Lord will be known by the Judgment that he
executes. As thou shutest thine Eyes against him now, and will not remember
him in the Pride of thy Heart, so he will not remember thee in thy distress,
and in the day of the anguish of thy heart; yea, though thou criest to him with
importunity, he will shut his Ears, God has spoken and he will make it good.
When you spread forth your hands I will bide mine Eyes from you; yea, when you
make many Prayers I will not hear, Esaias 1.15. And can thou be content to be
forgotten of God, when Reproach has broken thy heart, and thou art full of
heaviness; and when thou look about thee for some to take pity, and there is
none; and for Comforters and thou can find none? Psalm. 69.20. When thy Flesh
fails thee, and thy Heart also, can thou be content that God should also
fail thee? Psalm. 73.26. When thy Mirth and Pleasure are fled away from thee,
and thou have nothing but Gall to eat, when thou shall thirst and have nothing
but Vinegar for thy drink, Psalm. 69.21. Can thou be content to have this dreg
put into thy Cup, and to have no God to remember thee? When thy Friends fail
thee, and thy nearest Comforts deal deceitfully with thee, as a Brook deceives
the thirsty Traveller (in those hot Countries where Water was scarce) that
repairs to it for Refreshment, and when he came behold it is dried up, Job
6.15. What a cutting thought will it be to thee, if God forget thee also? Nay,
to come a little nearer to thee, what will thou do when thou walk through
the valley of the shadow of death? Psalm. 23.4. When the pains of Hell take hold
on thee, and the sorrows of the Grave compass thee about? How will thou be
comforted if the Lord fly from thee, and thy cry will not be suffered to come
into his Ears? Psalm. 18.4, 5, 6. Can thou be content to be forgotten for
ever, when the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance? Psalm. 112.6.
Surely thy Spirit will be overwhelmed within thee, and thy Heart within thee
will be filled with Desolation and Astonishment, Psalm. 143.4. Alas! alas! thou
can scarce bear it: If a Father, a Husband, or Brother, or one of these thy
dearest Friends, look strangely on thee. We may very well think that it went
near Job, when he complained that his Kinsfolk failed him, and his familiar
Friends forgot him, Job 19.14. yea, that his Breath was strange to his Wife,
though he entreated her for the Childrens sake of his own Body, ver. 17. And
can thou endure to be forgotten of him that is ten thousand times a better
Friend? Will it not break thy Heart when he that can only help thee, shall say,
Verily he knows thee not? Mat. 25.12. Behold I cry out of wrong, says Job, but
I am not heard, I cry a loud but there is no Judgment, Job 19, 7. Whither will thou go for help, when this shall be thy case, and it shall be truly said,
there is no help for him in his God; when he who is the God of Salvation shall
not hear thee, Psalm. 68.20. Thou shall surely speed as the forgetters of God
have always done; they cried but there was none to save them, even unto the
Lord, but he answered them not, Psalm. 18.41. Not unlikely, but thou can hold
up thy Heart, and keep thy Heart who^e, and abate nothing of thy confidence,
when God hides himself, whilst thou art warm in outward Prosperity, and there
is no want of these outward Comforts; as with a Sword in thy Bones it wounds
thee not, though it be said unto thee, where is now thy God, Psalm. 42 10. Thou
can pray unto God, it may be (if thy forgetfulness of God has not put thee
past that duty) or rather put up a few lifeless words instead of Prayer, and
never look as David did, Psalm. 5.3. nor care whether he send down any Prayers,
yea, or not, whilst thy Breasts are full of Milk, and thy Bones are moistened
with Marrow, Job 21.24. And thou have full measure of temporal Comforts. Thou
can lay thee down in Peace and rest, and sleep quietly; if the Lord make thee
to dwell safely and plentifully in this World, though thou know not whether
he remember or forget thy Soul, Psalm 4.8. But when the fire of thy Hearth is
gone out, and sin has kindled a fire in thy Heart and Conscience, then thou will cry out bitterly to God, whom thou can so easily forget, Wherefore
hidest thou thy Face, and countest me for thine Enemy, Job 13.24. It may be
whilst thou art surrounded with outward mercies, and have a spring tide of
these present comforts, and the stream run full, and waters of a full cup are
wrung to thee, Psalm. 73.10. When our Gar^ners are full of all manner of store,
Psalm. 144. ver. 13. and we have the privilege of outward cummunion with God
also, we are content with the want and absence of God, and the sense of his
sweetest Love, and with a negligent heartless service of him, if not a total
neglect: And the World has had our Hearts, when we have put off God with words
and wishes, and a few confessions that come not from the Heart, nor tend to any
considerable Reformation. But when the things that our Souls lust after shall
be snatched away, and all our dear enjoyments which we have sinfully prefered
before God are gone; when Creatures shall refuse to give out their Comforts any
longer, and our darling Delights, which lie in our Bosoms (and are to us as
Children are to doting Parents) are gone, and we shall want also the outward
Ordinances, which serve to keep us in a deluding peace; when Hophni and Phineas
are slain, I mean our sweetest Comforts, and the Ark of God also is removed,
and the Glory departed from us, 1 Samuel 4.11, 21. Our Hearts that are so
backward to feel now, will then break and be overwhelmed; then we shall better
understand what it is both to forget and to be forgotten of God. It Is the
comfort of one that remembereth God above his chief joy, Psalm. 137.6. and worth
a World, that though the public Calamities be never so dreadful, and a
thousand fall at his Side, yea, ten thousand at his right Hand, yet God
remembereth him; and though personal miseries multiply upon him, and he has
neither comfort nor taste to relish it through want of health; if he can say
unto men I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me; and unto God, Thou
art my help and deliverer, make no long tarrying, O my God, Psalm. ^^.17. If he
has true ground to say, As for me thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and
wilt set me before thy Face for ever, Psalm. 41.12. But it is the heart-break of
one that has forgotten God, that distress is come upon him, and God remembers
him not. Such a case was Saul in when he went to a Witch to raise up Samuel,
that he might consult a little with him; and when she had brought up Samuel to
him, Samuel said to Saul, Why have thou disquieted me to bring me up? It would
make a man's heart ache to hear his doleful reply; And Saul answered, I am sore
distressed, for the Philistines make War against me, and God is departed from
me, and answers me no more, 1 Samuel 28.15. This is another woeful effect and
consequent of this sin; those that cast God out of their Remembrance, God will
forget them.

But stay, this is not all, for,

3. Thirdly, As he will forget their Persons, so he will remember their sins;
Amos 8.7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will never
forget any of their works; speaking of the forgetful Israelites. If God would
forget them wholly, and neither remember their Persons nor Actions, their
misery would not be so fearful as now it is. But this will be an intolerable
thought to them, that as God, when he is marking out his Servants for
Deliverance and Salvation, he will pass them by; so when he is bringing the
most horrible Calamity upon the World, I mean at Death and Judgment (if not
before, he will be sure not to pass them by) It Is sad tidings to them that they
must be forgotten in the day of their distress, but worse in their account and
esteem, that when the Lord makes inquisition for sin, he will certainly
remember them, Psalm. 9.12. Then they shall pay dear for all their former
forgetfulness of God, and their damnable inadvertency to his Word and Works. As
it is a fearful thing to fall out of the rewarding hands of God, and to be
forsaken and forgotten, so it is more dreadful to fall into the revenging hand
of God, and to be so remembered. For as God is the best and most desirable
Friend, so he is the worst and most formidable Enemy, and both these ways thou
shall rue thy contempt and forgetfulness of him. Thou shall want him as thy
friend when thou have the greatest need, and have him as thine Enemy when thou
art most afraid. Then thou will say in vain, as Balak said to Balaam, Number.
23.25. Neither curse us at all, nor bless us at all. But as he will withold
his Blessing from them, when those that are mindful of him here shall have it
to the full. So he will pronounce a Curse upon them, which they shall never
claw off, Mat. 25.41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. As there is none that has a Heart like him, when he is
showing pity and compassion to his penitent humble servants, that are ever
mindful of him; so there is none that has a Hand like him, when he will render
vengeance to those that do forget him, and plague those that hate him. He has
yet left it to thy choice, whether thou will seek him in good earnest as one
that prizeth his Love, and valueth his Spirit above all things; or whether thou will more highly respect and value any thing else (for what has thine highest
respect, will be remembered by thee when all other things are forgotten.) But he
has not left it to thy choice whether he shall abhor thee, yea, or not, or
whether he shall recompense thy wickedness upon thine own head or not, if thou
be found guilty; but will certainly lead thee forth with the workers of
iniquity, and make thee know what it is to use thy memory for no higher matters
than the World, and to put God to remember thee by forgetting him; and this
will cure the wicked Lethargy and Stupidity of thy Soul, and make thee to
remember him against thy will, even to all eternity; forget him then if thon
can, as an angry and revenging Judge, when thou will not remember him now as
a most gracious and compassionate Redeemer.

And thus I have given some imperfect sight of the heinousness and danger of
this sin.

Whereby it is evident what a madness, as well as wickedness it is to be guilty
of this sin; and herein I might more convincingly show the danger of this sin,
and by consequence the folly and madness of those that do not remember him
above their chief joy, by giving them a fuller description, Of the 1.
Fearfulness of Gods Anger that will break out against the forgetters of him;
and so, 2. Unavoidableness of Gods Anger that will break out against the
forgetters of him; and so,


They that undervalue and therefore forget God;

They forget themselves, and undervalue their own welfare and security.

But I pass this for present and proceed to the next Use.

2. Use. Examination.
Which may serve for trial to discover whether we have had, or still have any
fellowship in this provoking sin. And here I shall trouble you with marks and
discoveries merely probable, but give you such as are inseparable from the sin
we are searching for, or rather reciprocal with it. Reciprocal signs I call
those that are conversible with the thing they are the signs of. (1.)
Wheresoever there is this Symtom, there is this Disease; and where there is
this Disease, there is this Symtom. Wheresoever there are these marks there is
forgetfulness of God, and wheresoever there is forgetfulness of God, it is
accompanied with these marks. If I should mention no more than what are
contained in the Answer to the second Question. viz. Who they are that forget
God, it were enough they that have not a competent knowledge of the Remembrance
of the great Perfections of God, and the Relations that he stands in to them. I
mean, that he is 1. Their Creator. 2. Their absolute Lord and Governor, whom
they have the highest motives to obey. 3. That he is their Judge that must pass
the Sentence of everlasting Happiness or Misery on them ere long. 4. That he
that is thus related to them is Omniscient, and nothing they can think or do
can escape his Eye. 5. That he is their Happiness, without whose Favor and
inward Grace they can never be at rest.

2. They that have not a competent knowledge of their own frequent and great
necessities.

3. They that have not a competent knowledge and Remembrance of his Word. 1. As
it is his Word. (1.) Of Divine Authority, and therefore worthy of the greatest
Reverence and Study. 2. As it contains in it matters of deepest importance to
them. 3. And of certain and near accomplishment.

4. They that do not competently understand and consider his works.

By competent I mean such a degree and measure of knowledge and consideration
of these, as does 1. Turn their hearts from all Creatures to God, and enable
them deliberately and resolvedly to choose him for their happiness, which they
can never do without a sufficient or competent knowledge of these; and which
they will do if they have a sufficient knowledge and remembrance of these. 2.
And turn their hearts to Christ, as the principal means to bring them to this
happiness, by his Laws directively, and by his Spirit effectively. This I mean
by competent, that which is sufficient to these ends.

Now what degree and measure of knowledge and consideration it is that is thus
competent, it is not possible to define, because it is not in all alike; with
some a lower degree and measure of this knowledge and consideration will make
this charge, others need a higher measure, having stiffer Corruptions to
overcome. And as the same proportion of strength will not ^evate a stone of an
hundred pounds weight from the Earth, which will one of twenty or forty. So the
same Grace will not turn a Heart that has stronger Affections to the Earth,
which will effectually convert one that has weaker, and has not so strong a
bias, weight and inclination to fasten it to the World.

He that has one of these marks has all, and he that is guilty of these is
forgetful of God. So that by these you may acquit or condemn your selves.

These marks alone, I say, were sufficient to detect the sin, if I should
mention no other; but yet I shall add two other, which will discover the sin
both negatively and affirmatively, that is, prove us guilty or not guilty of
this sin, according as we are, or are not guilty of them.

First, They that have not a higher and greater love to God than to any other
thing else, are guilty and forgetters of him. The reason is, because what we
love we remember, and what we love best we remember most. And on the contrary,
what we do not love and care for we forget; and the less we care for it the
more we do forget it. Art thou one therefore that love God above all, than he
will have the highest place in thy Remembrance. I do not say he will be thought
on as often as any thing else, because God has laid such duty upon most of us
that requires more frequent Thoughts of other things than of him; but yet our
thoughts of him will be frequent, and though they be fewer than our thoughts of
other things, yet whatsoever their number be, they will more command the
Affections and Actions than all other thoughts whatsoever, or else we shall
come under the dreadful guilt of forgetfulness of God.

Secondly, Thou art a forgetter of God, if any one sin do habitually prevail in
thee, and do lead thee captive for the most part, because this will extinguish
the love of God in thee, and consequently all worthy Remembrance of him. Art
thou one therefore that allowest thy self in any one sin? then thou art a
forgetter of God; or if thou do not trouble thy self with such thoughts, nor
do much matter what prevails, rather any thing than puzzle thy self with
reflections on thy self; thou forgettest thy self, and therefore must needs
forget God. For the knowledge of thy own necessities, of which sin is the
greatest, is one necessary requisite to the due Remembrance of God.

But I intend not to insist on these.

Lastly, As I implied before, if thou have a worthy Remembrance of God, thou
do competently understand and consider the ordinary works of God. So I say
now, Thou will much more reverence and observe the extraordinary works of his
Hand, and applaud his Justice when his Judgments are more signal. The reason
is, because these are more apt to provoke consideration, which is ready to
sleep when things run on in a constant course and order. And therefore who is
it that makes any matter of a River that runs on a constant stream or course?
But if it stop without any visible cause, all the Town and Country comes to
behold it. Who regards the Sun, Moon and Stars, that are obvious to our daily
Eye? Or the orderly site and motion of them? They are but few; but if there
appear two Suns or two Moons, or a Star extraordinary, never seen before, what
running and gazing every where; and they that will scarce step out of doors to
behold an ordinary Star, will break their Sleep and lose their Rest, and
venture their Health to see a dreadful Comet or Blazing star. The like may be
said for the motion of them who minds the daily rising and setting of the Sun?
But if it should stand stand still a day, or go backward ten degrees, as it did
in the days of Joshua and Hezekiah, Joshua 10.13. 2 Kings 20.11. Who would not
take notice? God will not be slighted in his ordinary daily works; but when he
does a Miracle, or a strange and unusual Work, he calls for a more special
attention and reverent observation. It Is sinful not to go on and not to lift up
an Eye and acknowledge God and observe his Wisdom and Power in his common
Providence; but it is wicked stupidity not to stop and consider Providence
that rarely come to pass and seldom fall out. Does not every extraordinary act
of Justice call out and say? Come behold and see what Desolations he has
wrought in the Earth, Psalm. 46.8. When he is shaking a Nation by War, and
overturning the Glory of it; or when scourging a Nation with Pestilence or
Famine, he does in effect say, Be still and know that I am God, I will be
exalted amongst them, I will be glorified in them, or on them, Psalm. 46.10.
Justice is one of his essential Perfections, and when that is cleared and sin
made odious, by remarkable penalty, and the devouring evils that it ushers in,
then God is acknowledged and glorified.

And when this is done by the voluntary act of those that feel the hand, it is
an act of terrible affrighting Justice in the beginning, but glorious,
wonderful, and most endearing mercy in the end. The Lord is now throwing us by
heaps into the place of forgetfulness, because we have so remarkably forgotten
him; Who has fed us with the finest of the Wheat and Honey out of the Rock,
Psalm. 81.14. I mean with the blessings of Heaven and Earth, and does he not
expect that we should be silent and meditate terror; Esaias 33.18. And applaud
his Justice and Holiness, and that our Bowels should more yearn over the
distressed cause and interest of Holiness, which our sin has injured, than the
Carcases of our dearest Friends, that fall like Dung upon the Earth. It is most
certainly true, that every honest faithful heart, that is sincerely dedicated
unto God, and which God will own hereafter, that he is more heartily troubled
in his deliberate thoughts, for the wrong sin has done to God, than for the
saddest calamity it brings upon men. What man that has the love of God and
Holiness predominant in his Heart, that can particularly think of the sins of
this Nation and the City, which is the chief Theater of this present Judgment,
the Atheism, gross and open Profaneness, perfidious Hypocrisy, shameful
Ingratitude, beastly Filthiness, Contempt both of Mercy and Judgment, Pride of
both sorts, Spirit and Flesh, Luxury, Injustice and Oppression; and with what a
public impudent Face they are committed, and that after such Obligations so
fresh before our Eyes. What true Child of God can consider this and not cry
out in some true sense of Gods dishonor? My Bowels, my Bowels, I am pained at
the very Heart, my Heart makes a noise within me, Jer. 4.19. And though he
does compassionate the suffering Nation, and those in particular that feel this
severity, yet consideration forces him to say from his Soul, Thy way and thy
doings have procured these things unto thee, for thy wickedness is bitter, it
reaches to the very Heart, Jer. 4.18. We have lived under excellent light and
means in a Nation, where our dearest Savior has been made known this 1600
years (1.) Almost from his very Passion, and we have lived under a profession
of Faith, and have acknowledged our high engagement to love and obedience of
our Redeemer. How frequent have the obliging names of Savior and Redeemer been
in our Mouths? and our Lips have droped free Grace and Mercy, like the
Honeycomb, and our words to him have been smoother than Oil; and yet what
could we have done more wickedly than we have done, if we had no Faith at all?
If we had been mere Heathens, and looked for no other Life? and if we had no
fear of Judgment? Nay, have we stuck at those sins that Turks and Heathens do
abhor? It Is a true, though a shameful confession. And now shall we pity a
suffering, and not abhor a sinful People? Has the Lord broke in upon us before
many a fair warning; we have had ubera many times, before we have felt verbera;
we have had lightning before thunder. Are not all these Examples that he has
set before us, both in sacred and profane Writ, so many Warning-pieces shot
off to prevent the approaching Enemy? Does he not say to us, by his Word, as he
did to the Rebellious Jews, Jer. 7.12. Go ye now unto Shiloe, where I set my
Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my People
Israel. Go ye to the City and Temple of Jerusalem, and see what I have done for
the wickedness thereof. Go ye to Sodom, to the old World, see how their sins
have found them out. Consult the several Nations, to which the Prophets
pronounced their several burdens, and see how they have sped for their
Iniquities. Cast thine Eye upon Greece, and other parts of Christendom, upon
whom the Lord has let in the overflowing Scourge; the barbarous Turk for their
kicking at his Sacrificies, and negligence in his Worship. Look upon Germany,
where the Lord made such fearful Desolation; time not yet out of mind. Remember
the late unnatural War and Bloodshed in our own Nation; how it emptied the
Nation, plagued the Inhabitants; for wickededness burns as the fire; it shall
devour the Briars and Thorns, Esaias 9.18. How long has the Lord waited on us,
expecting fruit, looking for Reformation. Think not that the Lord deals
hardly; charge him not foolishly if he call for the Sicle, for the Harvest is
ripe, the Presses are full, the Fats overflow, for our Iniquities are risen
high, Joel 3.13. What could the Lord have done more for us in a way of mercy
than he has done, and therefore no wonder that Judgment follow us! Thus if
thou have a worthy Remembrance of God, thou will consider his more remarkable
Providence, and plead the cause of his Justice, in the present sad condition
into which sin has brought us.

Use. Exhortation.
If then it be such a sin to forget God, as there has been proof enough it is,
then let this stir us up to more frequent thoughts of God, and to a more worthy
Remembrance of him. What such a Remembrance does import I think I need not
waste time to show, since it is opposed to forgetfulness; and contraries do
discover each other; by these two known and obvious Rules, 1. Contraries in or
about the same Subject, and the subject of the one is neither larger nor
scanter than the other (e. g.) Sight and Blindness are about the Eye. The same
Air is the Subject both of Light and Darkness, and Virtue and Vice are
subjected in the same Soul, though not at the same time. 2. Though Contraries
are about the same Subject, yet they have contrary Affections (e. g.) If Virtue
be lovely, Vice is Odious. If Light discovers all things, than Darkness covers
all things. Since therefore, 1. As I said, Forgetfulness is not an act of the
Memory only, so neither is Remembrance. And 2. As every degree of Remembrance
does not acquit a Man from the odious guilt of Forgetfulness, so neither is
every degree of Forgetfulness inconsistent with this Remembrance. If God have
the Sovereignty and Pre-eminence in thy Heart, he will accept it, otherwise it
is not a Remembrance worthy of him. I need say no more, for if we know what it
is to forget God, we cannot but know what is to Remember him. If we know who
they are that forget God, we must needs know who they are that Remember him.
But least what has been spoken should not be so Remembered and set together, I
shall only give a short draught of the Duty, or rather bring it fresh to your
Remembrance, that you may know whether the Exhortation tends, and not be
excited to you know not what.

In a word therefore,

This Remembrance of God, implies such frequent and worthy thoughts of God, as
command the Affections of our Hearts, and the Actions of our Lives, more than
any thing else besides.

And is it not pity that the Heart of Man should be so backward to this duty,
and so hardly prompted to such a sightly and becoming work; and that all that
can be spoke to recommend this duty, and to spur up to this Remembrance, unless
God set it home, is like to be at best, but like the beating or cutting the
Air, which seems to receive a wound, but it presently closes again, and no
abiding impression is left behind. Alas! alas! that we should stuff our Hearts
with Feathers, and think upon vanity and never tire; and that the bias of our
Souls should be quite another way than toward God! That he that should be our
sweetest Meditation is so great a stranger to us! How seldom do we erect a
thought to him, or think on him with pleasure and delight! We can even lose our
selves in vain and earthly thoughts, and think on nothing else almost from
morning to night! But he that is our support all the day long, is ever about
our Paths and about our Bed, for our defense and safety, has a poor little
share in our Thoughts and Affections. Art thou not fully satisfied that he is
to be loved with all thy Heart and Soul, and Strength, and that he is worthy of
Love and Obedience, and a thousand fold more than thou art able to give? The
excellency of his Nature and Goodness unto thee must needs ex^ort this
confession. How can we better employ our Thoughts, than upon him that gave us
our Thinking Faculty? To what better purpose can thou use thy Reason, than to
fetch something from every Object that is presented to thee, to put thee in
mind of God? Every thing is big with Instruction, and proffers its help to
bring thee nearer unto God, if thou will be taught. Thou can take no better
course to advance thy self than to advance him in thy thoughts. Thou can make
no better use of Creatures, than to make them a means to bring God and thy
Heart together. To the Heavens and to the Earth, and to all that is in them,
and if they teach thee not this Lesson, it is because they are Traitors and not
Creatures; but the fault is thine and not theirs. Thou can not make a better
use of Scripture than to imprint God deeper in thy Remembrance. To the Laws and
to the Testimonies, if they teach thee not thus much, it is because thou will
not learn, and there is no light in thee, Esaias 8.20. As thou love thy self
and thine own welfare, make thine advantage of every thing, to promote him
higher in thy Mind and Heart. Since thou have so much Instruction round about
thee to bring God to thy Remembrance, and such a light both in Nature and in
Scripture to discover it, and such Assistance to fetch it in by Meditation into
thine Understanding and Affections, and such opportunities to learn what is
thus suggested, and when there is such sweetness in the very act of Learning,
and the benefits that directly flow from thence are so incomparable, the final
reward so unspeakable; refuse not to apply thy Heart to the highest Wisdom! All
other thoughts that are not subordinate to this Remembrance, have a greater or
lesser tendency to discontent and vexation; but these are the only comforting
and reviving Meditations. If thou do not forget thy self thou will remember
him. If thou do not forget thy later end, thou will remember him. If thou will but remember the days of Anguish and Trouble that are coming on thee, thou will remember him. Thou will then say, be not far from me when trouble is near
and there is none to help. O let him not be far from thee now, keep him in the
midst of thy Heart, renew thy thoughts of him as thou sit in thy House, as
thou walk by the way, as thou lie down, and as thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6.8.
Imagine thou see him in his Word. Suppose that thou beholdest him in his
Works; think thou have a taste of him, whilst thou art feeding thy self, and
refreshing thy Body with its daily Food and Sustenance. For thou live not by
Bread alone, nor by such dead things as these, but by the Word and Blessing of
God, that only can give thee life, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Matthew. 4.3. Oh how much does man
undervalue himself, whilst he remembers not whose Coin he is, and whose Stamp
he bears! He turns the fairest Gold into a Counter, and uncoins himself, and
can never understand his own worth if he leave God out of his thoughts. If thou
would think of thy own reasonable nature, and put that question to thy self,
which was maliciously put to our Savior by the Pharise^s and some of Herod's
Disciples, Mark 12.16. Whose is this Image and Superscription. And this would
bring God to thy Remembrance, that has fearfully made thee, Psalm. 139.14. Thou
art Brass indeed, if thou can impute such a stamp as this to any other cause,
and give away this Divine Royalty as thou do, if thou forget the Mint out of
which thou came, and where thou wast stamped; if thou remembrest any thing,
or have any kindness or respect for thy own Soul, acquaint thy self with God,
remember him and be at peace, Job 22 21.

To provoke to this Duty, besides what has been already hinted, I shall only
suggest thus much further by way of Interrogation.

First, Does God remember thee every hour, and can thou make shift for all
that not to remember him? If thou did not need the Heavens that hang over thy
Head, nor the Earth that hangs under thy Feet, nor any of those Creatures
that stand round about thee. If thou would spare the light and influence of
the Sun, and want the Air that is turned in and out at thy Nostrils, and keep in
the little spark of Life, without the Meat and Drink that feeds it every Day,
and the hot Embers that cover it every Night, I mean the warm Bed and Sleep
wherewith it is cherished and refreshed, or if thou could bid all Creatures
to go and come at thy pleasure, then it were a more excusable sin not to
remember God; but when it is so great a certainty that these are all the means
and instruments that he has made, and does use to conveigh his Blessings to
us, and that we cannot live a moment without one or other of them, thou art an
Atheist in Judgment or Practice if thou forget him. Thou may as well stand
without a Foundation, or see without Eyes, or hear without the hearing Faculty,
as live without one or other of his Mercies every moment. If thou had nothing
else to endear the thoughts of God to thee, and to make the Remembrance sweet,
even the mercies of a mere private nature, have a mighty force to one that does
but consider them. If we do but acknowledge what we have deserved, it is no
contemptible mercy, nor to be slighted, to be freed from those evils which are
so many ways incident to us, and which we have so well deserved, not to be
stricken with Blindness or Deafness, not to be smitten with Distraction or
Madness, not forsaken of Health and Friends, all outward Comforts; not driven
to pinching necessities of Hunger, Thirst, Cold, and Nakedness, as many are.
These privative mercies should amplify the goodness of our Redeemer to us, and
make the thoughts of God more welcome. Not to want any Member of thy Body, nor
Faculty of thy Soul, nor a very good portion of Food, Health and Friends
especially, if they be Friends indeed, nor other Provision for a comfortable
Life; and yet to want an Eye to look to the Fountain, nor to remember the Giver
that deals with us so contrary to our deservings, is a fearful case and
condition. The Church in her Captivity, when she was in the hands of cruel
Tyrants and Oppressors, yet even in that condition, could find out a Not that
did not a little affect his Heart with thankfulness. It is of the Lords mercies
that we are not consumed, Lam. 3.22. As if she had said, we are in distress,
but we might have been in Hell; we are cast down, but we might have been
utterly cast off. A Soul truly convinced of his sin and humbled, knows the
value of such mercies as these. Not tormented with those acute Diseases that
gives us no rest day nor night; not afflicted with the Stone or Gout, or Iliack
Passion; not seized on with a hand of Judgment from Heaven; not visited with
the Plague, or any other dreadful Sickness. What an Indictment made up of such
Mercies, might be drawn up against one that blots God out of his Remembrance?
And if mercies of this kind are such an obligation to this duty, what are the
positive mercies of a whole life, yea, of a year, month, or but a day. It Is
hard to reckon up the kinds and sorts, unless we should insist upon mere
generals, that comprehend numbers under them. Such as are Temporal, Spiritual,
Personal or Relative, it is not very easy to reckon them up. The comforts of
Life, Health to those that have it, Estate, Name, mercies of Food and Raiment,
Friends, House, Recreation, Protection; but the particulars under these who can
recite? Our relative mercies how various? Never a one relation but would puzzle
our thoughts to muster up the mercies thereof, and give in the particulars; the
good we do them, the good we receive of them, every sight of them, every
enjoyment of their company, discourse, love to us, our love to them. In a word,
All our comforts are theirs, and theirs reciprocally ours, and so each have the
mercies twice over. See now whether we have brought the matter, and in what a
wood we have lost our selves in. Thus it is if we count but for a day, but if
we go further and reckon for the month or year, we shall find no end. Who can
count the Dust of Jacob? Number. 23.10. or sum up the mercies he does receive,
which are like the Dust of the Earth; not for smalness, but for multitude.
David observes them to come by whole loads, Psalm. 68.19. Blessed be the Lord
who daily loadeth us with his Benefits. But our Spiritual Miseries are yet
more, because they contain all our Temporals, so far as they refer to a
Spiritual end, and how many more who can tell? How many mercies concur in our
Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification? How many considerations
may be fetched from the Author, from the meritorious cause, from the persons
that do receive, from the instruments that do convey them, from the frequency
and reiteration of the particulars; and from other circumstances of time and
place, which would swell our Accounts beyond all possibility of Numeration?
This is the first motive, the infinite mercies we receive should prompt us to,
this Rememembrance.

Secondly, Would thou have God remember thee with compassion in thy greatest
necessities, then remember him with affection now? It may be there are fearful
days coming upon some of us, before our final departure and solemn appearance,
before the Judge of all the World. What though the Cloud that hangs over this
Nation be but the bigness of a man's hand, it may quickly grow bigger and
blacker till it cover the face of the whole Heaven, and bring down a storm of
heavier misery upon those that have escaped Judgment hitherto. There is nothing
can fense a man from all possible Fears and Terrors if God forget us. Would
thou not be afraid of evil tidings, nor faint when the iniquities of thy heels
compass thee about? Would thou not be confounded in the day of adversity,
when the Heaven frowns, the Sea roars, Esaias 24.20. And the Earth shall reel to
and fro and stagger like a drunken man, when the world shall be overturned, and
the transgression thereof shall be heavy on it, and the hearts of wicked men
shall fail them for fear. Then keep alive such remembrance of him, as has been
hitherto commended. Then come what will, nothing shall drive thee to
desperation, for the Lord God shall be thy confidence and withold thine heart
from sinking, Prove. 3.26. as well as thy foot from being taken. This a great
Cardinal in this Nation, understood when it was too late; and therefore when a
Messenger from Henry 8. brought him the tidings of his doom, and was sent to
bring him away to Execution, he pitifully complained, That if he had served God
as faithfully as he had endeavored to serve his Master, he had never met with
such a reward. As it is the top stone, and the perfection of misery to be
blotted out of Gods Remembrance, so it is a happiness worth a World to be
Remembered by him. This supported David many a time, when he was in miserable
distress, and brought to the greatest streights, when Friends forsook him,
Enemies threatened him; Saul hunted him like a Patridge about the Mountains, and
he was forced to flee from before his Face, and to take Shelter amongst the
Philistines, whose Champion he had slain, and from whom he had little reason to
expect any succor; and whilst he lived in banishment at Ziglag, even that was
suddenly surprised by the Amalekites, and burnt with Fire, and his Wives and
Friends were taken away Captives; and the People that were his only Guard,
being provoked, spoke of stoning him. But though all this had been enough to
have broken the heart of another man, not acquainted with David's refuge, yet
see how David bore up and supported himself, 1 Samuel 30.6. And David was greatly
distressed, for the People spoke of stoning him, because the Soul of all the
People was grieved, every Man for his Sons and for his Daughters. But David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. This helped Hezekiah to digest the
proud message of the King of Assyria, and to spread the railing Letter before
him, who he knew could put a Hook into Sennacherib's Nose, and turn him back,
or else defend him against that Army that were grown so insolent by their
Victories, 2 Chronicles. 32. And God remembered him, verse 21, 22. Yea, when Esaiah
was sent to him to bid him put his House in order and prepare for death, it was
Armor of Proof to him against the terror of death, that he could say, Remember
now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight; which he could
never have done if God had not been highest in his Remembrance, Esaias 38.3. If
thou be one that can drive out the thoughts of God in thy youthful,
healthful, and more comfortable days, expect not that he should remember thee
in distress. If whilst thou art surrounded with his mercies, thou will forget
that he is gracious to thee; when thou art be set with misery and affliction,
he will forget to be gracious to thee. Be wise now therefore, and take in these
thoughts, as thou take in the Air every day, and other comforts which he
sends thee, and lay them up as thy greatest treasure. These will sweeten the
sowrest Cup, and gild over the bitterest Pill, and God will certainly remember
thee, if not to take away the evil, yet take out the sting. Ahasuerus may
forget Mordecai, and the Butler may be unmindful of Joseph, and the preserved
City may not remember the poor man that saved it; but God will not forget those
that remember him. He will be thy refuge and strength, and a very present help
in the time of trouble; Psalm. 46.1. And then thou needst not fear, though the
Earth be removed, and the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea;
though the Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with
the swelling thereof, ver. 2, 3. Then though thy Flesh begins to fail thee, yet
thy heart will not; or if thy Flesh should fail thee and thy Heart also, yet
God would remember thee and be the strength of thy hope and thy portion for
ever. Thou may easily foresee the day when Sickness will break thy Body, and
earthly Delights will forsake thee, and Death will be inexorable and take no
nay: then if thou have cherished this Remembrance of God, thou will dare to lay
down thy Body in the Dust, and as certainly foresee the joyful reunion of thy
Soul and Body, as now thou do their uncomfortable dissolution. Would thou
not then be forgotten of God, when thy Friends and all the World will forget
thee? Then Remember him now. Yea, would thou be content to go into the place
of Forgetfulness, and to be forgotten, as a dead man out of sight? Why, all
this will not discourage thee, if thou have this remedy at hand. But on the
contrary, How unprepared is the Man that forgets God, for his eternal state?
How loath to leave the Twig and fall into the Ocean? With what regret and
reluctance, with what an aching, trembling Heart, does he look upon Death; who
can blame such a Man if he hang back, and dare not launch forth into Eternity?
And therefore it is said in the Proverbs, The wicked is driven hence. How
unwilling does he bid farewell to his dear enjoyments? How loath to part with
the Wife out of his Bosom, the Children out of his Arms? He cannot bear such a
loss. Nothing is more dreadful to such an impudent man, than to look down from
the mast of this Life into the ocean of Eternity. O what cold and clammy
Sweats, what sa^ and dismal Representations, does the thought of Death creat in
him! As ever thou would hold up thy Head in Sickness, or any other
Affliction, and die with comfort and keep thy Heart whole, come what will; then
keep alive this Remembrance of God.

This is the second Motive.

Thirdly, Remember God, for nothing else is worthy thy Remembrance. (1.) Such a
one as I am now speaking of, there is nothing here below that is worth an act of
our Understanding or Will, that is worth a Thought or an Embrace, but as they
lead to a more perfect Knowledge and Union, and are a means suited to our
necessity, that cannot have any Knowledge worthy of God, without his Works; nor
see him without this Glass, whereby he has represented himself to our weak
capacity. All Knowledge begins first in sense, and we should never come to
understand the things that are not seen, but by those which are seen. God
therefore has made the World as a School for us, where we must be trained up,
and made fit for the higher instructions of his Word; and the several Creatures
are the Alphabet, whereby we are to spell out the Nature and Perfections of
God. What a shame is it then to let sense go before and no Understanding follow
after. To pore upon the Letters, and not to mind the sense and meaning of them.
To exercise an act upon the visible Creatures, without a following Act by way
of inference and deduction to the invisible God? What folly, to dote upon the
Letters, and not to regard the meaning of them, and to lose our understanding
in a maze of insignificant things that stand for nothing, if they teach not the
knowledge of him that animates all things, and is the end and signification of
them. What is there in Man or any other Creature, that thou should make an
Idol of it, and that thou should set it up in thine Heart, and prostrate
thine Affections to it? Is there any thing that deserves the reputation of a
being every way full and perfect, in which thou may acquiesce, but God? Yet
if he have not the Remembrance I am pressing to, something else will strike in
and supply his absence, and usurp thine Affections. And be it what it will
besides, it is but a Reed or an Arm of Flesh that is got so high in thine
esteem; and then thus says the Lord, Cursed be the Man that trusts in Man,
and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the Lord. For he shall
be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see when good comes, Jer. 17.5,
6. All Sufficiency, Immutability, and indefectible Fidelity, are proper to God
alone. It Is no wonder for the Sun to set and be eclipsed, as glorious a body as
it is. It Is no marvel if all Creatures prove Liars, Psalm. 116.11. and show
themselves untrusty and deceitful. As it is their nature to deceive, so it is
our sin and folly to lean hard on them, and be deceived by them. Thou may as
wisely expect that the Wind should always blow from the same quarter, and sit
in the same corner, as that any created Being should afford thee constant help,
and never shame thee. But the portion of Jacob is not like these changeable
things. Our Fathers trusted in thee (says the Prophet David) and were
delivered. They hoped in thee and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.4, 5. Let him
that is void of understanding run to something else, and remember it with
greatest pleasure, and repose his trust in a lie, and adore a silly Man that
can but promote him to Riches and Honor. Mark what will be the issue, may be,
when thou art just expecting the fruit of sinful trust, his Breath goes forth,
here turns to his Earth, in that very day his thoughts perish. May I not well
say therefore, Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, that
remembers the Lord his God. He that is fond of any thing here below, and
sets his Heart upon it, and suf^ereth his Affections to brood over it, is
like the Patridge that sets upon Eggs and hatcheth them not, and in the end
he shall certainly prove himself a fool, Jer. 17.11. His warm thoughts that sit
upon vanity all the day long, shall never hatch and produce the thing he
expected, nor any thing that will look like happiness, when his Judgment shall
come to more maturity. Why then is God so seldom in thy thoughts, why art thou
no more delighted in the Remembrance of him? Why does he dwell no more in thy
Meditations? Art thou willing to be deceived and labor in vain, and to lie
down in frustration and disappointments? If thou could name any thing under
Heaven that were not chargeable with a thousand Imperfections, and were not
liable to the Moth and Rust. If thou could assure thy self that thy Friend
will never prove perfidious, that thy Lovers will always bear thee the same
Affection, which thou imaginest now they do. If Youth and Health, and Life,
would last ten times longer than they are like to do, yet when the competition
lies between God and them, it is folly and madness to prefer anything in thy
Remembrance before him.

I might here single out the things that are most attractive of Men's
Affections, and have indeed the highest esteem and love in a Carnal Heart, and
then produce the several disparagements they are liable to, when they are
compared with an immutable Independent, and All-sufficient Being. But then I
should too much digress. And so much by way of Question, to shame us and to
stir us up to so excellent and necessary Duty.

But you will say, What is the best course to get and cherish such a worthy
Remembrance of God, and to feed it up to a greater degree of Strength and
Perfection?

To which I answer, That there are means.

1. Proper. To beget this Remembrance where it never was.

2. To recover it where it is sensibly lost.

3. To quicken it to a greater Energy and Life where it is but weak and faint.

2. Common to them all, and have an influence upon every one of these. I shall
rather choose to insist upon the more general and common Helps and Directions,
and wave the more distinct handling of the Question, lest I should be too
tedious.

The Common Directions which I shall propose are, By way of 1 Consideration. 2.
Exercise.
Consider therefore 1. What a fearful and dangerous sin it is to forget God. 2
What a shame it is to be unmindful of him 3. What are the benefits of
preferinging God in our Remembrance before all other things.


For the First, I have already showed what a heinous and dangerous sin it is to
forget God, from whence it may be fetched for our Consideration. I shall give a
brief Recapitulation.

Consider then, what Obligations thou sin'st against, if thou shut God out of
thy Remembrance.

1. On God's part.

1. He gave thee thy Faculties to this very end.

2. And has purposely set Heaven and Earth before thee to exercise these
Faculties, and to put thee in Remembrance of him.

3. He has sent his Son to put thee in mind of him.

4. He has given thee his Spirit, Word, and all his Ordinances, to awake thee
to remember him. Think then what Gilt, the breach of all these Obligations on
Gods part will bring upon thee, if yet thou shall forget him.

Consider what Obligations also thou sinnest against. 2. On thy own part. Thou
sinnest against 1. Thy solomn Vow. 2. Covenant. 3. Oath 4. Profession. If these
particulars be taken into thy consideration, thou will not sure count it a
venial sin to forget God, and consequently it will be a means to bring thee to
the Remembrance I am directing to. Consider also, the danger as well as the
guiltiness of this sin.

1. It may betray thee to all other sin and absurdity.

2. It will provoke God to forget thee in a way of mercy.

3. It will cause him to Remember thee in a way of Judgment. If thon art one
that do believe and wilt consider thus much, it will prepare thee for the
duty we are now upon, and be a help to a worthy Remembrance of him. For every
thing that has the nature of a motive to a practical Duty, has the nature of
a means or help to the performance of the Duty. The Reason is, because cause it
is a necessary means to any Duty, to bring the Will to a thorough Resolution.
Now all motives are the most proper means to bring the Will to such a
Determination.

So much for the first thing that we are to consider.

Secondly, Consider also what a shame it is to forget God, and to be unmindful
of him. Have thou no ingenuity?

1. Can thou forget him that remembers thee every hour?

2. Can thou forget him in prosperity whom thou will remember in thy
necessity?

3. Do thou not blush to prefer empty, unsatisfactory and transitory things
in thy Remembrance before God.

But these things I have already insisted on, and therefore do but now name
them as matter of our consideration, as a second sort of motives, and therefore
fit means to help on this Remembrance.

Thirdly, If thou would be in the number of those that exalt God above all
things in their Remembrance, then consider what advantage will accrue to thee
by such a Remembrance. I know these may be also called motives, as all means by
way of consideration are. But yet they are all distinct and different kinds of
motives, and have their effect upon three several passions.

1. The first sort, taken from the consideration of the greatness and danger of
the sin of not Remembering God, are rather to fright us from the sin of
forgetfulness, than to draw us to the duty of Remembrance.

2. The second sort are intended to work upon Ingenuity, where there is any,
and to excite shame in those that neglect such a becoming duty

3. And the third sort, taken from the benefits and advantage of this
Remembrance, are directly to excite Love and Desire, and hereby to attract the
Heart to the performance of a work so beneficial.

I come now therefore to propose the Benefits that will follow such a worthy
Remembrance of God, as a means to this duty.

First Consider, If thou art one that Remembrest God with the most prizing,
valuing thoughts; thou art translated from Death to Life. If St. John make the
predominant love of the Brethren to be so sure an evidence of this Translation,
1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. Then much more does the sincere love of God give us full security,
that we are thus advanced. But the predominant love of God is implied in this
Remembrance as the essential part of it, according to the known Rule, words of
Sense and Understanding in Morallity, essentially involve Affections and
Actions. (If they go alone) all moral Acts are incomplete) unless they be both
in the understanding and will in the Mind and Heart. If therefore thou art one
that thus remembrest God, thou have this grand privilege, whose name is
Legion, and contains such a number under it. Death is a name of terror, and
sounds dreadful to all, whose Ears it has not stopped, and is the sum and
abridgment of all that is either hateful or fearful. And therefore all the
penalty that God threatens for the breach of such a perfect Righteous Law, as
he gave to Man, was comprised in the word Death. And if it be not enough to
vindicate the Law from contempt of such as do but hear it, yet it will teach
them (at least) not to despise it that feel it. And as Death is a Name pregnant
with Dread and Horror; so Life is the most comfortable Sound, and carries all
that is desirable in the Bowels of it. And it is put in Scripture to signify,
1. All Happiness, 2. Perpetuity. And therefore it was the only Sanction that
God added to his Law, by way of Remuneration, Do this and Live. Where Life is
opposed to the Death that is threatened to the Transgressors. As Death therefore
is comprehensive of all Misery, so Life is a complication of all Happiness. And
as it is put for all Felicity, so for Perpetuity, Psalm. 56.7. In his favor is
Life* (1.) Perpetuity, as appears by the oppose^^^ in the former part of the
verse. His Anger endures but a moment, that is, it is short, but in his Favor
is Life (1.) It Is lasting and perpetual. Now Death is of three sorts, opposed
to a three fold Life, 1. Natural. 2. Moral. 3. Metaphorical. Natural Death is
the privation of all sense. Death Moral is the privation of all Love in the
Will to Virtue, and propension to Goodness, for want of which Love it is dead
to all virtuous Life and Action, and feels no sweetness in them, because the
principle of that Life is wanting. For Love is the Principium Vitae in
morallibus. Love is the principle of Life in the Moral, Spiritual, or gracious
Life. And as Natural Death does not only deprive the Body of all Sense and
Motion, but renders it unfit for the Soul to dwell in and be united to, and so
dissolves the union between these two. So Morally Death does not deprive the
Soul of all gracious and virtuous Sense and Motion, but renders it unfit for
the Spirit of true Virtue, Grace and Holiness to dwell in; and so there must
needs follow a Devorce and Separation between them. And as in the Natural Life
there is a Union between the Soul and Body, so in the Moral there is a Union
between the Soul and God. Death Metaphorical is the privation of all the
comfortable effects of Life, whether it be Natural or Moral, whilst bear Life
does still remain, and the presence of all those evils that may afflict or
imbitter it.

And all these are either 1. Temporal. 2. Eternal.


From what has been spoken for the explication of these two terms, Life and
Death, you may perceive what a privilege and unspeakable favor it is to be
translated from Death to Life.

1. If thou Remembrest God, The sting of a Natural Death is pulled out, and
though thou art not (...) from the part of the penalty of sin, whereby the Body
is deprived of all sense, and separated from the Soul, yet thou art delivered
from that which is most terrible in Death. (...) the misery or Death that will
follow after, and it is a comfortable passage for them that Remember God, to
endless Joy and Happiness; and sometimes a welcome Messenger to them. They may
truly say as Agag, 1 Samuel 15.32. The bitterness of Death is past.

2. They are translated from the Death of Sin to the Life of Grace and
Holiness, and are united unto God, and are disposed by Faith and Love to that
Holiness, which is the Divine Perfection, and the way to the highest Happiness
and Honor that the Heart of Man can wish or desire. Though this Life will be
imperfect whilst we stay here. And if there be such pleasure in the Union
between the Soul and Body, then there is much more in the Union between the
Soul and God.

3. As Death is put for Misery and the bitter and uncomfortable effects of the
endless Life to come, so they are passed from Death to Life. The Sentence of
Death that God has passed against sin, is so far reversed. And as for the
Miseries and Evils of this Life though materially, they may have more than
other Men, yet as to the formal and most essential part of them, they feel them
not so much as other Men, because they are allayed and sweetened. 1. By the
inward Peace and Comfort that God gives to those that Remember him. 2. By the
benefit and advantage they get by those outward Sufferings. For as their
outward Man is afflicted, so their inward man is renewed, strengthened and
confirmed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. For their light Affliction, which is but for
a moment, works for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory,
even in the beginnings of it here, ver. 17.3. It lessens their short and
momentary sufferings, that by them they escape so much Temptation, and all the
^ai^s of sin are become the less taking.

If thou art one in whose Remembrance God is advanced above all other things,
thou shall not die, but live and declare the works of the Lord, Psalm. 118.17.
And though the Lord may chasten and correct thee, yet he will not give thee
over unto Death, ver. 18. For God is the Fountain of Life, and in his Light
thou shall see Life, Psalm. 36.9. O what a Mercy is it to be delivered from the
power of Death and Darkness, and to be translated into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, where thou shall grow up from one degree of Life to another, till thou
come to everlasting Life, Col. 1.13. At thy first entrance into this Kingdom,
Death is sentenced, and some execution is done upon every sort of Death, which
will be perfected, as this remembrance of God grows up to perfection in thee. O
Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13.14.
Which as it was verified of Christ personally understood, so it is of Christ
mystically understood. (1.) As Christ overcame Death in his Person, so every
true Believer (such are all and only they that have God in their Remembrance)
has gotten some conquest over Death, which shall grow up to a full Victory;
and therefore Paul in the Name of the whole Church, does acknowledge this
mercy; Thanks be to God that gives us the victory, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15 5, 7. Whilst the wicked forgetters of God are dead in
trespasses and sins, and dead to all soul and solid Joy and Comfort, and
designed to an eternal death. Thou that think upon God, and remembrest his
Love in Christ, art entered into a state of Life, and have such a Promise, that
contains more in it than all the rich Indian Mines. Because ^e has set his
Love upon me, With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation,
Psalm. 91.16. If thou did but know what a treasure is hid in th^^ Remembrance,
thou would throw out every thing of thy Memory and Heart, that hinders this
Remembrance of God.

This one privilege of being translated from Death to Life, is big with a
number more.

1. It implies that thou art reconciled to God, and he is at peace with thee,
and thou need no more to fear him as thine Enemy. All his Attributes of
Power, Justice, Holiness, Vengeance, Majesty, that sound so terrible to the
forgetters of God, do but the better secure thee of thine Happiness.

2. It implies also thy present Justification, in title of Law. God has
acquitted thee by the law of Grace and Act of the Gospel, from the guilt of
sin, and dissolved the Obligation to condemnation. Who can lay any thing to thy
charge if God absolve thee? Who can do thee any hurt when Christ is become thy
Advocate? Romans 8.33.

3. With this mercy does concur the mercy of Adoption and Sonship. It Is no
small Honor to be one of his menial Servants, but to be a Son, yea, a Heir, is
a privilege not easily valued and understood.

4. The gift of the Spirit to dwell within thee, is here also implied, to
mortify all sin, and to work all gracious habits that may fit thee for a state
of Glory. In a word,

5. All real and relative Grace, so far as is necessary to Salvation, is thine,
either in Title. Possession.


1. The Righteousness of Imputation is thine, whereby thou art made fit for
Pardon; and the Righteousness of Implantation is thine, whereby thou art made
fit for his Love and Complacency, and sweetest Communion with him.

Secondly, If thou art one that Remembrest God, all things shall cooperate and
conspire for thy good. Every Age, every state and condition of Life, every
Place and Company, every Change and Alteration in the World, Prosperity and
Adversity, Friends and Enemies, Health and Sickness, Honor and Dishonor;
every Relation thou art placed in, shall help forward thy Joy and Felicity; and
some Foundation God is laying in every one of these, whereupon to superstruct
this Happiness and build that Joy upon it that shall never end. O how great are
the Privileges of one that Remembereth God, whom he does visit and continually
comfort and rejoice with refreshig Consolations! To whom he opens when they
come to him with desire, and does embrace when they cast themselves on him;
whom he is teaching and showing the pleasure that strangers intermeddle not
with. But were this all, they would be miserable, in comparison of what they
now are. How sweet are his very Delays, Frowns. and the Chastisements of his
Rod! His Estrangements, Threatenings, and the signs of his Displeasure, dreadful
to the Wicked, but sweet to them that have his special Grace, to make their
advantage of them, are in the mean while supported under them. I know they are
sad to them, and cause great thoughts of Heart; but having the root of the
matter in them, Job 19.28. And being forewarned by the Word of God, that thus
it will sometime be with his dearest Children, and directed what to do in such
times of Mourning; and knowing that they shall not be tempted above their
strength. These considerations recommend Sufferings and Afflictions to them,
and make them far more desirable to them than the most splendid Pomp and
Prosperity of those that forget God. As all the Mirth and Pleasures of wicked
men, are preparing them for Misery, and would be dreadful to their thoughts, if
they did but see what they all contribute to their eternal shame. So all is
contrary in an honest and pure hearted Believer; not only the smiles, but the
angry looks of God are sweet to his Apprehensions, not as they are signs of his
displeasure, but as they help him forward in the hatred of sin, and mortify
his Affections to the Pleasures here below. I know the Anger of God is not
directly desirable to any Person, but the sanctified fruits of it are
desirable. And some little of it, when sin (that would otherwise undo us) makes
it necessary, and it is mingled with a greater proportion of Love, and the Soul
is disposed by Grace to tremble under it, and to be rid of it upon any terms.

Consider therefore thou that Remembrest God, Is it not an unvaluable comfort
to foreknow, that all thy Trouble and Sorrows shall befriend thee, and that
the leanest pasture thou can be put in, shall feed thee up to everlasting
Joys; when on the other side, those that forget God, though they fare
deliciously every day, and are gotten into the richest pastures, and have the
desire of their carnal hearts, yet they are but fatting themselves for the
slaughter; and who would envy a fat Sheep or Hog that fares a little better,
and is preparing for the Shambles? Nay, who would envy a Lobworm in a fat
Dunghill? They seed on wicked men (...) makes them so fat and merry; it is but
Dung and Filth in comparison of that which a Soul mindful of Good feeds upon.
Methinks that place should sound dreadful to one that prospers in the World,
and does not remember God, Psalm. 92.7. The two verses that go before it ushers
it in, and that follows after in fearful pomp and state. O Lord, how great are
thy Works! and thy Thoughts very deep. A brutish man knows not, neither does
a fool understand this. When the wicked spring as the Grass, and all the
workers of Iniquity do flonrish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.
And we may say as well on the other side, that God is as wonderful in his
thoughts toward such as are mindful of him, though a Fool understand not. That
when the humble Believer, in whose thoughts God in Christ dwells uppermost,
withers as the Grass, and fades like the green Herb; it is that he may flourish
for ever. If thou art trod upon thou shall grow the better. Thy necessities
shall cause thee to make more haste, and get nearer to the Fountain that is
opened, to the eternal praise of Gods Mercy, for such needy ones. All thy
miseries shall but the more illustrate the Glory of his Compassion toward thee,
when refuge fails thee, and none cares for thy Soul. Many a one had lived
and died in perpetual obsourlty, whose names are a rich persume in the Church
of God, thorough their Sufferings and Afflictions, which have made them the
more famous, and embalmed their Memory.

When the ways of a Man please the Lord, he can and will, in one sense or
other, make his very Enemies to be his Friends; (1.) Their hatred shall be
turned into love; or if it do continue still, God shall turn their very hatred
and enmity to the greater advantage of those that are mindful of him. This made
Paul to boast in his Infirmities, Necessities and Tribulation, 2 Cor. 11.30.
What if thou art poor and necessitous; if the Lord remember thee? What if thou
have no Friends on Earth, if thou have one in Heaven? What if thou art
destitute of Health it self, the greatest Earthly Blessing? if thou art one
that remembrest God, it shall turn to thine advantage. If thou have God in thy
Remembrance thou have all; for he will make every state and condition serve thy
turn. What if thou art a Servant, if God be thy Master? If thou have nothing to
recommend thee unto Men, if thou have this Grace I am pressing to, to recommend
thee unto God, thou shall be more a gainer than if thou had had Dominion in
the World, and all the Paint and Varnish that would set thee off to the Eye of
Men. Thy Temptations, Reproach, Sufferings of every kind, and thy very
Prosperity and Wordly Happiness, which for the most part is such a preparative
to Destruction, shall be like the Dew and Sunshine to thee, and make thee more
fruitful and ripen thy Graces, if thou art one that have God always in thy
Remembrance.

Thirdly, If thou art one that remembrest God, as I have expressed, thou have
the Key to unlock all the Mercies of God, and to open the rich and most rarest
Treasures of Divine Grace, and to get the very desire of thy Heart; I mean,
thou may come with Faith and Confidence to the Throne of Mercy, and open thy
very Heart to him, who has an Ear for all thy Requests. The secrets of the
Lord are with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm.
25.14. and Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the
desires of thy heart. and Jam. 5. later clause 16. v. The effectual fervent
Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much. Now to fear the Lord, to remember him,
to delight in him, are but several Descriptions of a Righteous Man and
Believer. Thou can not have God in thy Mind and Heart, but thou will fear
him, love him, delight in him in some degree, think on him, trust in him in the
way that he has directed, and then thou art a Believer, and a Righteous Person
in the Gospel sense, though not in the sense of the Law, that requires perfect
Obedience. It was said of Luther, that he could do what he would with God by
Prayer. If God be promoted in thy Heart, as high as he was in Luth. thou shall
prevail with him as much as ever Luth. did. I know thou have no ground from the
word to expect that God should satisfy thy desires in temporal things, when
they will not consist with the welfare of thy Soul. But every desire that is
honorable to God to grant, and profitable to thy Soul to receive, thou shall
have. And when he denies thee what thou do express, he will give what thou
do imply and mean. When he grants not thy particular Request, he will give
thee thy general Request, whatsoever thou ask, it is happiness that thou
meanest, that is the general intent and meaning; and this he will fulfill, though
not always in the same method, it may be, that thine own Wisdom suggesteth; he
will give thee money or money worth. Thou shall have thy desire in kind or
value, yea, a frequent Remembrance of God will teach thee to pray so as thou
shall prevail; and the knowledge of his Attributes and Perfections, which the
Remembrance of God does imply, will make thee so ingenious as to ask nothing
that shall cross the Wisdom, Justice, or Holiness of God, or be the least
prejudicial to the merciful design of thy Salvation.

O what a privilege is it to have such an open free access to him, that can
strangely turn things about when it pleases him, and is wonderful in Counsel
and mighty in Working, Esaias. 28.29. with a promise to be heard; to plead with
God and get the Blessing for thy Self, for thy Relations, and for the Land of
thy Nativity; and by this means to be one of the Props and Pillars of the
Nation, of which thou art a Member. This is an Honor indeed, and an unvaluable
Mercy, which yet thou shall partake of, in that degree and measure as thou do
Remember him.

Fourthly, To Remember God is the ready way to entail the Blessing of Heaven
and Earth upon thy Seed and Posterity. Children speed ordinarily according to
their Parents interest, or want of interest in God. Those that die in Infancy,
it is more than probable that they speed according as their Parents, or those
that have the nearest interest in them, are in Covenant with God or out of
Covenant. And those that live beyond an Infants state, have cause to count
amongst the greatest of their early Blessings, that they have either one or
both Parents that are true Believers, especially where the Faith of their
Parents is gotten up to some degree of Eminency. I would not intimate that the
Lord does never show special love and mercy to the Posterity of the Wicked, nor
that he does always impart saving Grace to the Children of the godly. But I
believe it will prove a rare case, if one instance can be produced, that all
the Children of Believers (if they have several) are finally forsaken of God,
and denied his saving Grace; yea, many times they are all remembered. It is the
Argument that Peter uses to persuade Faith and Repentance to his hearers; in
the first Sermon which he preached after Christ's Assention, and the Descension
of the Holy Ghost, that by this means Parents would bring their Children to
participate in Gospelmercy with themselves, Acts 2.39, Repent and be Baptized
every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the Promise is to you and your
Children. And it has the most general testimony of the soundest Writers, that
the Faith of the Parents is the condition of the Childrens right to Baptism.
The Profession of it in the Court of Men; the Possession of it in the Court of
Heaven. See the Reverend Mr. Baxters Dispu. of right to Sacrament.
But be it how it will, I am sure it is a doleful condition to be the Child of
wicked Parents, that forget God; and a mercy better than the biggest Portion
can be left them to be the Seed of Parents that Remember him. Thus says the
Lord, etc. Fear not, O Jacob, my Servant, for I will pour my Spirit upon thy
Seed, and my. Blessing upon thine offspring, Esa. 44.3. And as the special
Promise was made to Isaac, so even Ishmael fared the better for being Abraham's
Seed. And as it is threatened in one of the Prophets, that the Seed of evil
doers shall never he Renowned; so the Posterity of those that Remember God, are
the most likely to be Remembered, even in this Life, and to be famous in their
Congregation, Men of Renown, Number. 16.2. I do not mean for their worldly Pomp
and Splendour, but for their Grace, Wisdom, and Usefulness to the World. To
which sometime, such a measure of these outward Blessings are added; as may
make their Grace more resplendent, and them more serviceable to him, that will
most eminently reward it. If therefore your own Bowels are dear to you, and you
desire that your Posterity should be blessed here, and had in Eternal
Remembrance hereafter; advance God in your Remembrance.

Lastly, This Exercise of thy Thoughts and Affections in the Remembrance of
God, is thy greatest Happiness, as well as thy greatest interest; I mean, it
will yield thee the highest Pleasure as well as the highest Profit. I know to
the ignorant, that have no competent knowledge of God, and such as are unwonted
to these thoughts, and have their Affections buried in the World, and are
laden with diverse Lusts; no work is more unpleasant, nothing that they will
more decline; Light it self is unpleasant to a sore and distempered Eye; but
those that are pretty well acquainted with the amiable Nature and Perfections
of God, and with such Thoughts and Meditations of him, as will amount to a
worthy Remembrance of him, would not be untaught this Art for all the Pleasures
which the World can supply to them. These are the most reviving, these are the
most comforting, these are the most satisfying Thoughts. These are the most
illuminating, instructing, perfecting Thoughts. These are the Thoughts that
best improve our present Comfort and our future Hopes. From all these Heads, I
might particularly and distinctly show, how the sincere Remembrance of God does
make way for the greatest Pleasure, viz. In that it does, 1. Clear and perfect
the Understanding. 2. Purify and rejoice the Heart. 3. Revive the Spirit, and
actuate it to greater Life, and Life is sweet. 4. In that it does quiet and
satisfy the very Soul. 5. Multiply and improve our present Comforts. 6. And
our future Happiness. All these ways and many other, does this Remembrance of
God contribute to our immediate Pleasure and Happiness. That Soul must needs
abound most with Life and Joy, and Pleasure, that has most frequent access to
the Fountain of all Life and Pleasure, who enjoy themselves more than they (if
other things concur) that are most under the power and command of such
thoughts? Such as these have their Hearts frequently filled with Laughter, and
their Tongues with Rejoicing, Psalm. 126.2. Hence those unimitable strains of
David, so frequent in the Psalms I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I
will sing praise unto my God, whilst I have my being. My Meditation of him
shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104.33, 34. The more bright
and glorious the Object is upon which the thoughts do dwell, the more it does
exhilerate and refresh. In a word, The more God is in thy Remembrance, the more
of Content and substantial Joy thou shall feel in thy Heart. So much for the
means by way of consideration to help forward in this duty.

I now come to the means by way of Exercise, or the more practical Directions.

And these are either more positive, and such as directly concern the Duty, or
else negative, and such as comprize the hindrances which are to be carefully
avoided. And as these are first in practice so they shall be first in the
directions.

First, If you would get the pleasure of these Thoughts into your Heart, you
must not allow your selves to live in any known sin whatsoever. because such
sin is of an oblivious nature, and will extinguish the Memory of God. The love
and voluntary entertainment of an Enemy and Traitor, will not consist with the
Love and Loyalty we owe to God, and which a worthy Remembrance does imply. Even
Men will question your Love and Friendship, and take you for a double dealer,
and a false hearted dissembler, if you take an utter Enemy of theirs into your
Fellowship, and use him as your Intimate and Companion. And though it may
consist with Friendship to fall into the company of one that is an Enemy to
your Friend, now and then, when it is not your choice and seeking, but
surprise, or some other reason, drew you into his company, not any special love
to, or complacency in his Person; and you are glad when you have an opportunity
to be rid of such a Guest; yet you plainly violate such Love and Friendship,
and are like to lose all interest in your Friend, if you chose his known
Adversary for your allowed ordinary Companion. And as Love will not consist
with such allowance and tolleration of that which is destructive of the thing
or person which you love; so much less is Loyalty and true Subjection
consistent with wilful and allowed Contradiction to the command of him that
has just Rule and Authority over us. A discret Master will not take him for a
Servant but for a Rebel, that will ordinarily oppose and cross his Just and
Righteous Command. Neither will a Parent that does not dote, take that for an
obedient Child that lives in the constant violation of a reasonable Command.
And thus it is in all Government here on Earth; and there can be no true
Subjection where there is such perpetual Contradiction in any one particular
that falls within Bond and Obligation; and is plain Duty. Though the case is
otherwise, if the point be disputable, and it is no Rebellion, if any one case
there be, 1. No Command. 2. No right to Command, if a Servant does that to
which he believes he has no contrary Command, or humbly refuses that which
his Master has no right to command him; his Credit is still good
notwithstanding, in any man's account that judges Righteous Judgment. I know it
argues a Rebellious Inclination, and some degree of Disloyalty, to question
that Command where it is plain and evident; yet where it is certain we have no
Command from God, it is as certain that we are under no Obligation. But there is
a deeper taint of Rebellion in the Heart, and more of enmity to God, that lives
in the constant breach and violation of a known Duty; and allows himself in the
practice of that which he knows God is displeased with. This will not suffer
him to live in the Remembrance of God, whom he does daily provoke. If you are
therefore such as can live constantly in known sin, you will thrust all
thoughts of God out of your mind, as those which will but create fear and
terror in you. But if you have a sincere (though not a perfect respect) to all
Gods Commands, you may take Comfort and Pleasure in the Thoughts and
Remembrance of God, though you do fail if you allow it not, but oppose your sin
and confess it, and pray and strive against it; this will consist with the Love
of God, which must be in the Heart that will worthily Remember him.

Secondly, As you must in the General resist all known Sin, so in Particular.
Ignorance, or want of the knowledge of God, is an utter Enemy to this
Remembrance, and therefore must be carefully avoided. Can a Man think that
which he has no knowledge of, and love where he sees no Beauty? and obey he
knows not whom? nor why? He that knows not the Holy Nature of God, and what a
Perfection and Happiness it is to be like him; yea, what an absolute necessity
there lies upon every man to be like him, if he will be happy, must make haste
and get a cure for such Ignorance, or else he can never perform the Duty we are
upon. If you know not that you are indebted to God for all that you have; that
he gave you your Being and Reason, and expects Obedience, and will judge you
according to your present Life and Conversation; and that he does spy out the
thoughts of the Heart, and knows all your Imaginations. If you know not what
bowels of Compassion are in him, and how much he takes pleasure in your
welfare, and what course he has taken to bring it to pass. If you know not
what Christ has suffered for Sin and Sinners, that God might pardon it,
without any Dishonor to his Justice and Holiness, if the Sinner do repent and
beg mercy, you can never Remember God aright, and therefore Ignorance is
fearfully threatened in Scripture, as the Mother of all Ungodliness. And the
Prophet Esaias complains of this sin in the Jews, and pronounces a heavy Sentence
on them for it, Esaias. 27.11: It is a People of no understanding (says he) what
then? therefore he that made them will not have mercy, and he that formed them
will show them no favor. If you love your selves, and have any compassion for
your own Souls, or do believe a Life to come, take heed of this sin, for
without knowledge the Soul cannot be good, Prove. 19.2. There are so many and
excellent Books that are fitted to the cure of this Distemper, that will shame
this sin one day, and leave it without all excuse. The truths that are
necessary to Salvation, are so few and so plain, and so agreeable to the very
light of Reason, and are pressed so much in the writings of so many, that he or
she that can but read, cannot miss instruction, yea, they that cannot read)
though their case be sad) yet they cannot want instruction if they will go for
it, to almost every Church about them, or to their knowing Neighbors, and
desire to be instructed. It Is one of these two or both that undoes all the
World, uncatechised Head and an unmortified Heart. He that has an honest Heart
and a willing Mind, cannot want the knowledge that is necessary to Salvation;
and woe to them that want this knowledge, for the Lord Jesus shall shortly be
revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on all that know not
God. Shun Ignorance therefore, for he that knows not God cannot Remember him.

Thirdly, Flee Inconsideracy, for next to Ignorance this is the great
impediment to this Remembrance and your own Happiness: Wherefore has God given
thee a Faculty to consider, and bestowed Reason on thee? Wherefore has he set
his Word and Works before thee? Does he not mean to draw forth thy thoughts
thereby, that thou may consider and reap the benefit, and give God the Glory?
The most concerning weighty truth will do no good, and never affect thy Heart
unless they be considered. Though you know and believe that God is the
Springhead from whence all your Mercies come, and that he has redeemed you by
his Son, and offers to save you by his Spirit and Word, if you will but come
unto Christ by Faith; yet if you consider not these things, no wonder if you
make light of Christ, no wonder if you trample his Blood under your Feet and go
your ^way, one to his Farm another to his Merchandise, and take the happiness
the World will afford you, though it be at the Plow and Cart, in rising early
and sitting up late; and in the hardest Toil and Labor, rather than believe in
the Son of God, or spend an hour in Prayer or reading the Word of God, that you
may Remember him that has made all things, and to whom all the World is but a
shadow. Though you believe that the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all
that forget God; and that all that die in impenitency shall be sentenced to the
Eternal Flames; yet if you shut these thoughts out of your minds and will not
consider them, what wonder if you live as if there were no such things. What
though you believe that the hour is coming in which all that are in the Grave
shall hear the Voice of the Son of God and come forth, they that have done good
to the Resurrection of Life, John 5.28, 29. yet if you consider not what God
has prepared for them that love him, no wonder if you be weary and faint in
the way. Consideration opens the Eye and softneth the Heart, and makes you
feel the force and power of truth. If you shut your Eyes by inconsideration,
the most taking Objects will never move you, and the most fearful sight will
never fright you. Though it is impossible to persuade a Man whose Eyes are open
to run into the Fire or Water, or throw himself down a Precipice, yet going on
and shuts his Eyes, will not long escape one mischief or another; you will go
with the Ox to the slaughter, and with the Fool to the correction of the
Stocks, if you consider not that it is for your Life. O how many are now
roaring in the unquenchable Fire, that would never have come there if they had
but considered! O how many forget God and their own Souls day after day, that
would not, that could not do so if they did but seriously consider. What
madness has filled the Heart of Man that he should be backward to nothing more
than to consider whilst it may do him good, and when every thought will cut his
Heart he will follow the work close and do nothing else, but reflect upon and
bewail his misery. As consideration if it be timely followed and wisely
managed, is the best and usual instrument on man's part, to bring a foolish,
careless, senseless sinner to his wits again. So Consideration when it is too
late, is the greatest instrument to put him quite out of his Wits, and to fill
his Heart with raging downright madness for ever. You will not be persuaded to
consider now what you are doing, and whither you are going, and why God has
made you, and given you life and time; but mark what a Prophet tells you, that
cannot be deceived (...). In the latter days you shall consider it perfectly;
and no tongue shall be able to persuade you to the contrary. As corrupt Nature
is backward to nothing more than consideration whilst the day of mercy lasts;
so he is prone to nothing more after this day is past and gone; and as he will
not consider now, so he shall not then avoid it; Lord when thy hand is lifted
up they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed, (...). If you would
therefore Remember God to your comfort and not to your terror, shun
Inconsideracy, and fill your Hearts with matter from the daily observation of
Gods Word and Works to feed your consideration. I might insist more largely
upon the hindrances, and show you what impediments, 1. Pride, 2. Discontent, 3.
and Worldliness, are to this Remembrance; but I wave them and proceed to the
positive Directions.

First, If you would get a comforting, worthy Remembrance of God into your
Heart, then get your Heart deeply affected with the mischief that sin has done
you, and the love and compassion that Christ has showed to you. If you
understand not what God made you at the first, and for what an honorable, high
and noble end; and how much your Nature is distorted (and though you could not
help it that you took such a perverse Nature from your Parents, yet you have
too much given your Actual Consent in that you have not bewailed and lamented
your case in any considerable measure to this day) If you know not what ever
sin deserves, nor see so much evil in it as that it should deserve the penalty
that God has threatened, nor consider what number of sins you have been guilty
of, and to what a degree of guilt they have been aggravated by you, and what a
necessity there was that you should perish everlastingly, unless God should
deny himself, which the Apostle tells us he cannot do, ^ Tim. 2.13. and suffer
his Justice, Wisdom and Holiness, to lie under disgrace and reproach, if Christ
had not undergone the wrath of God, and so stopped the mouth of Justice;
vindicated the Law of God, made Transgression odious, and engaged to bring the
sinners to Repentance, that should partake of the Fruits of his Death, and to
humble them in the sense of their former wickedness, and to restore the Image
of God in them again, and to bring them to the love of his service again, which
before their Repentance and Conversion they do naturally hate and abhor. If you
do not understand what Christ has done for you already, and what he will do by
his Spirit to the changing of your Hearts. If you will but consent and take him
for your Lord and Savior, you can never know that the love of Christ is so
wonderful and obliging; and if you leave Christ out of your Remembrance, you
can have no thoughts of God, that will yield you solid comfort.

Secondly, If you would Remember God aright, endeavor to bring on others to
this Remembrance, and to set the motives before them, that may well move the
most backward Heart, and recover the most forgetful to this duty; whilst you
are putting others in mind, you will revive and strengthen the like disposition
in your self, and perform an acceptable service to God, whereby you will
increase his love to you, and consequently the Remembrance of him will be more
sweet to you. Restore to me, says David, the joy of thy Salvation, and uphold
me by thy free Spirit; then will I teach Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners
shall be converted to thee, Psalm. 51.12, 13. The more any Grace is exercised,
the more it will gather fervor and intention. To persuade others to this
Remembrance, is to reduce thine own Remembrance of him into practice; whilst
thou art teaching others thou can not but learn thy self. Whilst thou art
bending others to Remember the Fountain of all Perfection and Goodness, thou will feel thine own Heart and Affections more biased toward him. Who can
infuse Life and Spirit into another, and not grow vigorous himself? David knew
that he could not but thrive himself if others were gainers by him; and
therefore he invites others, Psalm. 3^.11. Come my Children hearken unto me, and
I will teach you the fear of the Lord. There are certain opportunities and
seasons, if they be wisely observed, when either Affection or Affliction has
made way, in which two or three words fetched from the Heart; may work upon the
Heart of one that has shamefully forgot God all his days, and recover him to
this Remembrance. And if God show thee so much mercy, and make thee such an
instrument, the thoughts and memory of God that has showed thee so much
favor, will be dearer to thee.

3. If thou would remember God with pleasure remember those that are in
misery, whither of Soul or Body with compassion. For this will make you like to
God, who comfort the sorrowful, and binds up the broken in Heart, and
raises up those that are bowed down, Psalm. 146.8. And the more there is of
likeness, the more there will be of Love and Remembrance. A hard and unmerciful
Heart is so unlike to God, that it will strive to forget him, lest the tender
Boweis of God should upbraid his cruel and unrelenting Heart. It Is a
disposition highly pleasing to God, and a blessed imitation of him, to comport
with those that lie under any distress or misery, especially those that are
ready to faint and sink under their burdens; and it is Justice as well as Mercy
so to do. Is it not just that thou should cast an Eye of compassion and pity
upon those on whom the Hand of God is fallen heavy, either in Soul or Body?
especially when thou art as obnoxious as they, and God has spared you on
purpose, and set their miseries before you to move your Bowels? Should thou
not have compassion on thy fellow Servant, as God has showed pity unto thee,
Mat. 18.33. And kindness with tender heartedness is one part of the new Nature
which Christ came to restore, and therefore the Apostle does endeavor to stir
up the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.32. and also the Collosians, Col. 3.12. Put on
therefore as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Bowels of Mercy and Kindness.

And as the miserable state and condition of Men's Souls, does most eminently
bespeak this Affection, so it is Cruelty to overlook their other Miseries, and
not to take them into our consideration. 1. To get our Hearts affected, that we
may truly pity them. 2. And earnestly pray for them. And 3. Contribute what
other help we are able, to make them as happy as our selves. There is a
selfishness too natural to every one of us, that will not let us hear on this
Ear, and therefore we are so carless in this public Calamity, what others
suffer so we are free. How senseless are we under such a hand as is fallen upon
many parts of this Nation? And therefore we are so unthankful for our Health
and Preservation, when God has required the Lives of so many of our Brethren
from them? What a fearful, woeful Scourge, do the City feel and heavily groan
under? How do the Inhabitants of that one proud and glorious City, reply to one
another in Sighs and Groans, and bitter Out cries and Lamentations, where whole
Families are smitten and blasted, and Children and Parents pledge one another
in Tears, and drink the Wine of Astonishment; where dearest Friends are made
the Executors of the Calamities of their departed Friends; and it is taken and
accounted for a mercy to die first, lest the miserable Calamities of Wife and
Children, and their successive departure, should be more than one single Death.
Their Eyes affect their Heart, Lam. 3.51. But we as we see not their Miseries,
so neither do we feel them as we ought, as thorough the goodness of God we are
more safe than they, so we are more secure, and too void of any Christian sense
of this common Calamity. Alas! alas! they have the dreadful sound and noise of
this Judgment in their Ears, and see Death continually before their Eyes; but
we hear but at a distance, and therefore are not stricken with the terror
thereof. The report of this Murdering-piece that God has shot off in many
places of this Nation, is faint and dead before it comes to our sense. But the
less we see this Misery and hear these Cries, the more we should supply this
merciful defect by consideration. If we saw or heard, it may be we should not
need many thoughts to fetch tears from our Eyes, and Sighs from our Hearts.
Desolenci^^ and want of this compassion, shows a fat and brawny Heart. Though
we are not to indulge this Affection so far as to make it guilty of siding
against God, as it will be apt to do, if it proceed no farther and do not serve
a higher end. The end of this Affection is to make way for Compassion toward
their Souls, and to bewail and beg pardon for their Sins, that have brought
this misery on them.

1. Objection.
I have done with the First Observable, which the Texts suggesteth to us,
(viz.) That forgetfulness of God is a fearful and dangerous sin, and exposes
such as are guilty of it to the unavoidable Wrath of God.

2. Objection.
I come now to the Second Observation, (viz.) That Consideration is one of the
principal instruments on our part, to bring us to the Remembrance of God at
first, and to prevent forgetfulness afterward; or to recover us out of that
degree of Forgetfulness, into which we may possibly fall. Two Suppositions. 1.
Here it is supposed, 1. That we ^re all born into the World in a state of
Forgetfulness; and that Naturally God is not minded by us; he is not in all our
thoughts. (1.) By a usually Hebraism in never a one of them, so worthily
regarded as he ought, Psalm. 10.4. Oblivion goes before Remembrance in every
Child of Adam. I know Forgetfulness does suppose that we either had or should
have had, the habit of which this is the privavation: We cannot be said in any
propriety of Speech, to forget that which we never did, or never ought to have
Remembered. As a thing can never be said to be blind which never saw nor ought
to have seen: But it is our miserable and unhappy case and condition, that we
were made to Remember God, and to give him the highest of our Praises, and had
a Nature fit for so high and noble Service, and yet are born into the World in
a gross ignorance of God, with a Nature that continually disposes us to forget
him, and to entertain the most contemptible Vanities into our Thoughts and
Affections before him. This is the Disease that Christ came to Cure, with the
greatest pity and compassion to Mankind; which it is the inten^ of his Word and
Cross and Spirit, and all his Ordinances to remove; and which is cured in a
sincere and prevailing measure, in all that shall see his Face to their comfort
hereafter. And although Infants are not actually guilty of this sin (as neither
they are of any other sin) because they are not come to the use of their
Reason, and therefore cannot perform any act properly virtuous or sinful, yet
they have an oblivious Disposition, a Seed in them that will bring forth this
cursed Fruit, when they are capable: But for those that have passed an Infants
state, and are grown up to the use of Reason, there is nothing that they
remember and think on less than God.

Secondly, It Is here supposed, that after any are recovered by Christ, and
awakened by his Word and Spirit to a due Remembrance of God, they may fall back
into such a degree of Forgetfulness again, as that they may question whether
ever they had a heart truly mindful of him; though I believe they shall never
totally and finally fall into Forgetfulness, nor be forgotten of Christ, if
they be in the number of the Elect. And therefore, though Christ commends the
Church of Ephesus for her Faith and Patience, yet he is said to have somewhat
against her, because she had left her Love, Rev. 2.4. And she is warned to
remember whence she is fallen, and to repent and do her first works, ver. 5.

These two particulars are evidently supposed in this last Proposition, which I
am now to prosecute; and that Consideration of God, his Word and Works, is a
necessary Remedy on our part, to cure our hereditary Forgetfulness, and bring
us to the Remembrance I have been pleading for, and to recover us after any
Relapse:

And that for these Reasons,

First, Because a Man can never come to the Remembrance of God till his Heart
be sincerely affected with those truths that such a Remembrance does
pre-suppose; but this can never be done without consideration. There Is nothing
that is absent or Spiritual, that can affect the Heart, and get that Fort,
unless it be led in by Consideration, that is the Eye of the Soul; and it is the
Eye only that can affect the Heart. There Is nothing that can affect the Body,
or move the Bodily Passions, that is not first apprehended by some Bodily
Sense, that is, not seen or heard, or perceived, by some other sense. Now
Consideration supplies that to the Soul, which the five Senses do to the Body;
it is the Eye, Ear and Taster of the Soul, whereby it discerns what is good or
evil to it, and accordingly the Soul does either embrace or abhor; yea, it m^st
discover not only good and evil, but the degree in which any thing is good or
evil, before the Soul can be suitably affected therewith, which can never be
done with any consideration. If this Eye be shut, set the greatest Danger
before a Man and he will not fear; set the greatest Delights before him and he
will not be moved to desire them. What Is the reason that a wicked Man goes on
in sin and will not forsake it, when you display Hell before his Eyes, but
because he considers it not? It appears to him not to be so terrible, because
this Eye is shut. If you run a Sword at a Man whose Eyes are shut, and sees it
not, he will not endeavor to avoid the thrust; but he that has his Eyes open,
and sees what is coming toward him, will quickly start back and decline that
instrument of Death. A careless Man that never considered well what a fearful
thing it is to fall into the Hands of God, Heb. 10.31. no^ how intolerable his
Displeasure is when it shall break forth in good earnest, and burn like a
consuming fire, will venture on it for a little deluding pleasure. A Man that
considers not the worth of his Soul will neglect it, and not think it worth so
many Prayers and Tears, and such diligence as must be used to procure the
Salvation thereof; for till his Heart be touched with a lively feeling and
sense of these truths, he will not neglect them and live after the Flesh; and
if he does not weigh and consider them, his Heart will never be made to feel
them. What Is the reason that Men hug and embrace a little dirt and filth, and
suffer their Affections to cleave so fast to their Carnal Contentments? It can
be resolved into nothing better than that they do not consider what Sin and
Folly they are guilty of, and what an impediment they are, being embraced to
the true content and happiness of their Souls, otherwise they would not, nor
could not, be so mad as embrace the present World and to prefer it before the
World to come. Well then, is it Consideration that must bring a Man to a worthy
Remembrance of God, because it opens the Eye and affects the Heart, and puts an
edge upon every Truth that does bias and dispose the Soul to this Remembrance,
that it is felt and entertained with some sincere measure of submission. The
Soul is such a Subject, that cannot be wrought upon without its own consent,
and that is not easily gained to any thing that is of a reforming saving
tendency, unless frequent and serious Consideration make way. The Soul will
never consent to any purpose, that the Flesh should be afflicted and humbled,
that it is Affections and Lusts should be mortified and subdued, till
Consideration show the necessity thereof, and the Death that will follow, if
this Death do not go before. There are some truths that are preparative to this
Remembrance, which though they are easy to be known, yet they will never be
drunk in or digested, till Consideration show their excellency and plead their
great necessity and importance to us, and give no rest till it has enforced
consent and resolution to obey. These Truths are of two sorts, 1. Some are
Physic and merely purgative. 2. Others are Cordial, and such as are
restorative and comforting.


And although there is reluctance enough in the distempered Soul of Man to both
these, yet he nauseats these of the first rank most, and has the greatest
enmity to them. He does not relish the second sort, but he perfectly hates the
first sort; the reason is, because these Truths which I call Medicinal, work
directly upon the disturbing Humor and filthy Matter, that must be evacuated
and east out, before we can find any Gust or Savor in those other Truths that
are Nutritive and Cordial. What aversness is there in the corrupt Nature of
Man, to admit those Truths into the Heart, that cross either, 1. The Interest,
or, 2. The Inclination of the Flesh, and that strike all the Heart and Root of
the Old Man; and that teach Self-denial, that is, the mortification of inward
Lusts, and the contempt of all outward Objects, so far as they feed and nourish
them? And will a Man ever pull out his right Eye, and cut off his right Hand
(for his Pride and his Passion, and his Intemperance, and his Petulary and
Lasciviousness, or any other Lust to which his Nature prompts him, are as dear
to him as his most beloved Members) and will a Man ever digest such truths as
these, or take them into any place of strength, that are such bloody enemies to
his raging prevailing Lusts; and arm and mortify them against so dear and near
a part of him? This can never be done till Consideration make it appear, that
the Man is undone for ever, and had better he had never been born, be he never
so rich and honorable in the World, in whom there is any reigning Lust or
Corruption; till frequent thoughts convince him thoroughly, that he that saves
such a Life as this shall lose it, and a better. But on the other side, he that
kills his Corruptions, and suffers no sin to prevail, but mortifieth every
one of these Members, that make up the Body and the Life of the Old Man; he
that loses such a Life as this shall find it, and prove an unspeakable gainer,
Mark 8.35.

Let me instance more particularly in some truths, that must go before a worthy
Remembrance of God, which can never get into the Heart and work to any purpose,
till they be fermented by Consideration.

1. It Is an easy Truth, and very obvious to Man's understanding, That God is
the chief Good, and our true happiness consists in his Love and Goodness.
This is the master Principle and Foundation of all Religion, and inspires all
practical Truths, and the duty depends upon them with Breath and Life; and were
it well thought upon, it would make a mighty change and alteration in the
World; you may see by what it does upon some that do consider it, what it would
do upon others if they were not inconsiderate. In that proportion that Men
consider this Truth and believe it, they will study to please God, and resemble
him in all his imitable Perfections; and their Love and Hatred will imitate
his: They will follow after Peace and Holiness, without which daily
Consideration assures them they can never see God, Heb. 12.14. And they will
have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, because God hates
them, Ephesians. 5.11. None in sensu morali, though not in sensu physico. Where that
that falls short of a ruling mastering degree in Morality, is said not to be.
And the Scripture frequently speaks after the same rate. But he that lives
after the Flesh, and minds earthly things, and blesses himself in all worldly
happiness, cannot consider the forementioned Truth, and therefore is guilty of
this Folly because he does not consider.

It Is another weighty truth, That we are fallen from God and Happiness, into a
state of Sin and Misery, and shall never know what true Happiness means till we
return. We were made after his Likeness at the first, and whilst we kept the
stamp of his Image on us, were happy in his Favor and Love; and all Creatures
were ready at our beck and service; and Sorrow and Misery stood afar off and
came not near us; but having now provoked God and lost his Image, we are now
unspeakably miserable, and in the pathway to Eternal Misery. And what is the
reason that there are so few that are affected at the Heart with their
condition, that loath themselves, that cry out of this bondage, and would be
set at liberty and restored into favor again, but because there are but few
that consider it. The rest of their minds are taken up with other things, and
with worldly vanities; and such disturbing thoughts as these are at the first,
are not permitted to enter, which if they be not frequent and serious till the
Soul has got a full sight of the evil of Gods displeasure, and sin that has
provoked it, and the necessity and blessedness of his Favor. These Truths,
though they should be taken in or assented to, they will lie crude and raw upon
the Stomach, and never digest into good nourishment, and be distributed into
Life and Practice. Consideration must awaken the Soul out of its Stupidity and
Insensibleness, which is Natural to all, or else it will sleep into everlasting
Death.

3. A third plain, but necessary and important Truth is, That we are undone for
ever unless we feel our Sin and Misery so as to confess it with inward shame,
and be humbled under it, into that degree of Brokenness and Contrition; that
Salvation by Christ is the most welcome news that ever we heard or can hear,
insomuch that we embrace him with the highest love and respect, and do heartily
consent to be governed by him, till he has subdued our Corruptions, sanctified
us by his Spirit, and made us meet for love and favor of God again. But none
can ever feel the worth and necessity of Christ and renewing Grace, who have
not set this matter by Consideration, frequently before your Eyes. It Is true of
the Intellectual as well as the Corporal Eye, out of sight out of mind; what we
see not by Consideration, we shall never mind nor care for. You will slight the
greatest Truths, and lie still in any state in the World, though never so
uneasy, rather than part with sin and come to Christ, if you do not consider
that your sin will be bitterness in the end, and Christ will make amends for
all that do or suffer for him. There be many other Truths in which I might
instance, What Is the reason that matters of such a consequence and weight, and
so certain and out of doubt as Death and the Resurrection, and the Glory of
Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, should work no more, and make Men solicitous
about them? Why do Men die before they were aware, and in such a careless and
unprepared state? Why do they run upon the vengeance of Eternal Fire, and take
no care to get the Crown that fades not away? 1 Pet. 5.14. They are
inconsiderate, and will not suffer their Hearts to muse on these things. O if
these things were considered to any purpose, your worldly business, which you
now pretend so much against these things, would seem light and trivial, and
mere Childs-play, in comparison or that work which is of Ten thousand times
higher concernment. You would not on the one h^nd neglect the opportunities of
your Souls, and of getting Grace and Peace with God, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ, and making your felt for ever. If these thoughts did but dwell in your
Minds, and if Consideration did but open your Eye, and show you the worth and
excellency, the force and necessity, of these big and most concerning Truths.
Neither would you on the other hand, attend the means of Grace with such
sleepy, inattentive wandering Hearts. Is not that Man a sot indeed, that can
sleep upon a Scaffold when he is going to Execution? Is not that Man a
careless, stupid wretch indeed, that will give no attention or heed what the
Judge says when he is passing Sentence either of Life or Death upon him? And
yet it is the case of many a sinner, that is careless and inconsiderate, when he
is dying and going into another World; and therefore he makes none, or but
foolish preparation. Consideration, if it were followed, would bring home these
Truths, and give them a power to pierce and become sensible, and make the Man
that does consider them to live answerably to them. Physic works not in the
Prescription or Doctors Bill, no nor in the Apothecaries Shop, where it is
prepared, till it be taken and let down into the Stomach, or some way taken
into the Body; for it nourishes not in the Dish or on the Table, no nor though
it be taken into the Mouth, if it be not transmitted into the Stomach and there
concocted. Neither will the greatest Truths cure the Distempers of a sinful and
perverted Heart, or nourish up the Soul to any Spiritual Life and vigor in the
Book; nor in the Mouth of the Teacher, nor yet if they be taken into the Brain,
till Meditation bring them to the Heart, and the Soul by Consideration look
frequently upon the worth and weight of them, and enforce Subjection and
Obedience thereto. For want of this Consideration of these few, plain and
important Truths it is, that Men forget God, and never attain to a due
Remembrance of him; and for want of this they relapse and lose their first Love
and Memory of him. And therefore Consideration is the best way to beget this
Remembrance at first, and to restore it afterward.

Secondly, Such Consideration is very sovereign and powerful, to bring a Man at
first to Remember God, or to recover his Thoughts and Affections again after a
decay and relapse; because in both these cases the Word of God calls to
Consideration, and insists perpetually upon this Duty. When the Prophets of God
are sent to call Men to their first or after Repentance, they usually deliver
their Message in terms that express or imply Consideration. After the return of
the Jews from the Babilonish Captivity, from the which the Lord had brought
them by such a mighty hand, they forgot the Lord, and grew presently careless
and negligent of his House and Worship; and the Prophet Haggai is sent, 1. To
censure and reprove the sin; and 2. To prescribe the Remedy and Means to cure
their sin and bring them to Repentance. Their sin is taxed pretty sharply, and
is charged on them by a cutting Interrogation, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O
ye, to dwell in your cieled Houses, and Gods House lie waste? and consequently
his Service neglected, which was then so much confined to the Temple. In the
next verse he proposes the Remedy, ver. 5. Now therefure, thus says the Lord
of Hosts, consider your ways. Nay to show the virtue and necessity of it, he
urges it the second time ver. 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your
ways. And the Prophet Isaiah implies the excellency of this Remedy, in that he
does lay the blame of Isreal's Rebellion and Ingratitude upon the want of this.
They were grown to a strange pass of monstrous Wickedness and Ingratitude,
which the Prophet knew not how to express, and therefore calls upon Heaven and
Earth to take notice, that God had nourished and brought up Children, and yet
they rebelled against him, Esa. 1.2. and fetches his proof from the Brutes and
irrational Creatures, to convince them of their sin. The Ox knows his Owner,
and the Ass his Masters Crib, (1.) says Vatablus the Master of his Crib. But
Israel does not know; and what is the reason of such shameful miscarriage? My
People does not consider. And Moses intimates, that Death and Judgment, which
are the most powerful means to awaken Men to Repentance; and the Remembrance of
God will do no good without Consideration; but if he could bring them to this
Duty, to consider of these things, he did not doubt their Welfare and
Happiness, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that my People were wise, that they understood this,
that they would consider their latter end. This act of Consideration applied to
this Object, is a most excellent means to bring Men to Wisdom and
Understanding, which are insolent with an Impenitency and Forgetfulness of God.
And without this leading act of the Soul. there can be no beseeming
Apprehensions of him, nor Service rightly performed to him. And where there is
least of this, there is most of Formality and slightness in his Worship, and
most of Irreligion and Athiesm in the Life. And therefore Moses when he is
Exhorting the Children of Israel to a due Remembrance of God and Veneration of
him, he gives them this Advice, Know therefore this day, and consider it in
thine Heart, that the Lord he is God, in Heaven above, and upon the Earth
beneath; and there is none else, Deuteronomy. 4.39. When Men flee off from this, and
will not set themselves to consider and understand, neither Correction nor
Instruction, nor Mercies will succeed; but all will lose their designed end,
and leave a Man under Impenitency and Forgetfulness. And therefore Moses
advises Israel thus to consider, Deuteronomy. 8.5. Thou shall not consider it in
thine Heart, that as a Man chasteneth his Son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth
thee. The same word in the Hebrew signifies to Consider and Understand,
because the one so much depends upon the other.

And as, 1 Correction will not prosper without it, so neither will,

2. Instruction, which is another means to to produce this worthy Remembrance
of God. Hence it is that the Apostle urges to consider what he had taught
them, or else the Instructions he had given them were like to be as Water spilt
upon the ground, (...) Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding
in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. It Is the Lord that gives understanding, but it is
to such as consider, and no other. And as neither of the former will speed
without the frequent repeated act of Consideration; not Correction, not
Instruction, so neither,

3. Will his Favor and Mercies, properly so called (for I know both the former
may be called Mercies and Favors in a larger sense) These, I say, that are
Mercies to present sense and feeling, will do no good, or else a great deal of
hurt without Consideration; God will lose our acknowledgment of them, and we
the blessed comfortable fruits of them. What the Prophet says of a wicked Man,
I may well say of an Inconsiderate Man, Esaias 26.10. Let Favor be showed to
such a one, yet will he not remember whence it is, nor learn Righteousness. And
therefore Samuel presses this Duty as the fittest to bring the stupid
Israelites to the Remembrance of God, implied in the terms, Fear and Service;
Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth, for consider how great things he
has done for you, 1 Samuel 12.24. And as Consideration is the likeliest means to
bring a Man home to the Remembrance of God in Christ at first, and to improve
Correction, Instruction and Mercy to the end; so it is as successful to recover
a Man after a Relapse into Forgetfulness. To this Remedy David was beholding
(though never a whit the less to God, who put him upon the use of it) I thought
on my wars, says he, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59.
And Peter was thus recovered after his shameful Forgetting of Christ and Denial
of him; and Peter remembered, (1.) Thought upon and considered the words which
Jesus said unto him, Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice; and he
went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75. And Elihu proposes this to Job as a
proper Remedy to abase and humble him that so much insisted upon his own
vindication, and remembered not his infinite distance from God, as he should
have done, and therefore brought him to the Bar of his own perverted Judgment.
Hearken unto this, O Job, stand still and consider the wondrous works of God,
Job 37.14. And this course cured him. I have heard of thee, says he, with the
hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eyes sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in Dust and Ashes, Job 42.5, 6. He did before stretch his own
Righteousness so far, and confine the Sovereignty of God, as if he had done
unjustly or cruelly in afflicting one so innocent as he was: But when he had
more attentively considered the Majesty and Glory of God, and his wonderful
Power, according to the scheme and draught that Elihu had set before him. Then
the Bladder was pricked, and he was humbled in his own thoughts, and saw that
for his very Integrity, which he held so fast and justified so much, he was
beholding to God for.

And as Consideration is a means to bring the Heart to God at first, and to
recover the Heart to him, when it begins to depart by unbelief, so it is an
excellent help to increase and strengthen this Remembrance, to strain it to a
higher peg, and make it more intense and vigorous. My Heart was hot within me,
while I was musing the Fire burned, then spoke I with my Tongue, Psalm. 39.3.
The Consideration of Gods immutable Goodness and everlasting Favor, and the
brevity and vanity of all other things, stirred the Fire and awakened his Heart
to a more savoury Remembrance of God; when he had considered how many disgraces
Riches did lie open to, and what a blast Man's Life is, he subjoyns: And now, O
Lord, what wait I for, my hope is even in thee, Psalm. 39.7. And while the
thoughts of Believers are inditing good matters, their Tongue is as the Pen of
a ready Writer; quick to express the praises of God, Psalm. 45.1. And David's
desires after God grew more strong and impetuous, when he thinks on the
Pleasure and Privilege of Communion with God, from which he was banished in
the Wilderness. When I think on or remember these things, I pour out my Soul in
me, for I had gone with the multitude, with the voice nf Joy and Praise. He
means to the public and solemn Worship of God. And now the Consideration of
his want of these Privileges cut this gash in his Heart, and made this gaping
of his desires after God.

Caution.

I know there are other means to be used besides Consideration; but this is, 1.
The leading act to bring on all the other that have any subserviency to this
Remembrance of God. And, 2. The act that inspires Life and Soul into all other
means, whither they be such as are near to the end (such as are near
Repentance, Mortification, Faith, and all internal Grace, Holiness) or such as
are more remote from the end; As Reading, Hearing, Prayer, Holy Conference,
whose success does usually depend upon Consideration; and as it is the leading
act. 3. So it is the act in which most are defective, and for want of which so
many do miscarry and lose themselves for ever, and therefore I call it a
principle means to beget and cherish the Remembrance of God, as I have proved.

And so much for the Reasons.

I come now to the Application.

1. Reproof.
FIrst, If Consideration be a means so necessary to the Remembrance of God,
then here is sad tidings to the Inconsiderate. Such Men must needs Forget God,
unless he were to be seen with Corporal Eyes, and his glorious Perfections did
lie open unto sense. But alas! what a poor superficial Beauty can that
discover; it can pierce no farther than the surface of a bodily Object, and the
external Accidents; it is a mere stranger to the inward make and composition of
such gross beings as these are, and discerns not that which is most essential
to them. Much less can sense discern the Nature of Spirits, and find out the
infinite depths of the Divine Nature, and search out the Dimensions of his
Glory. It Is usually such persons as these that make use of no other fool than
sense to build themselves up in knowledge, that have so much Atheism in their
thoughts. But it is another Eye that must inform us of the Being and Perfections
of God, and make known to us both his Immensity and Eternity, whereby all his
other Attributes and Perfections become bottomless and unsearchable.

This Eye is two fold, according to the double light that is afforded to us for
discovery. The Eye of, 1. Reason. 2. Faith. According to the double light of,
1. Nature, 2. Scripture, which does discover the Object to these two Eyes.

There are but three ways by which we can come to gain any knowledge of God, or
any other thing, either,

1. By sense; so we come to know that the Snow is white, or that Grass is
green. Or,

2. By way of Deduction or Inference, or Ratiocination; so we come to know the
Sun is up, though we see it not, because we see it is day. Our quick
understanding does fetch and conclude the one from the other, because the Sun
and the Day are necessarily connected together.

3. We come to the knowledge of some things upon the mere credit and report of
others. Thus we come to know that there is such a City as Constantinople or
Paris, though we never saw them, or any matters that are related to us; and we
have no other knowledge of these than what is grounded upon the testimony of
others. The first Knowledge we call Sense, the second Reason, the third Faith.

Now Faith is twofold, for either it is grounded upon the credit of Man or
God. The first is fallible, because there is no Man but may deceive or be
deceived, and is defective both in Knowledge and Goodness. The one makes it
possible for him to deceive, the other to be deceived. And from hence it is
that his Credit is cracked, and his Testimony, where it is not accompanied with
some other evidence insufficient. But a Divine Testimony (where we are sure of
it) is infallible; for it is Blasphemy to imagine that God is so weak as to be
deceived, or so bad as to deceive. Hence it is that whatsoever we have such a
Testimony for, we may be as certain of, as if we saw it with our Eyes, or had
the greatest evidence of Reason for it. Such a Faith as this and Reason, are
the two Eyes by which we do discover what it is to be known of God in his Word
and Works.

But Consideration is that which fixes both these Eye^, and helps them to
understand more distinctly, and be affected with the glorious Perfections of
God, as they are discovered in the Scripture, or may be gathered from the works
of Creation and Providence. A cast of either of these Eyes, of Faith or Reason,
but especially the first, may discover God to the Soul in some degree, enough
to leave it without excus^, if it seek no further; but it is Consideration only
that can give us such a sight of the Object, as shall command the highest
esteem and love of him, which must go before and make way for a worthy
Remembrance of him. Though we should suppose a Person (that is guilty of
Inconsideration, and does not meditate on God, his Word and Works, in any
degree suited to the Object) to have so much Faith and Reason as to profess
Godliness, and to become a formal Christian, yet he will never be a Saint and
Christian at the Heart and Root, till his Reason and Faith be radicated and
confirmed by Consideration. Neither is it any Consideration, the want whereof
does make a Man so miserable. Wicked Men spend thoughts enough upon their Corn
and Wine, and Oil, upon their Profits and Pleasures, and tickle themselves with
such Meditations, and fix their Eye too much upon worldly Glory, and pre-injoy
their happiness before it comes, and comfort themselves by an after Remembrance
of it. I would they were in these things more inconsiderate, or at least
consider them after another manner, what reference they have to the Life to
come, to the pleasing of God and saving of their Souls, or consider inwhat a
bitterness their sweetest pleasures will conclude, or think on them according
to the description that God has given of them in his Word. I know
Consideration, if it be rational, serious and impartial, will digrace and shame
the best of their sensual, brutish Pleasures; and the most sober Comforts here
on Earth, that are joined with the neglect of God and Men's Souls. And therefore
such Thoughts as tie Men's Affections faster to these things, are not worthy the
name of Consideration; besides, such thoughts as these stand in the greatest
enmity to that Consideration, which the Text calls to, and the neglect whereof
is so pernicious and destructive. It Is impossible for those that employ their
thoughts with eagerness and delight upon earthly things, to command them to any
exercise that deserves to be called Consideration. And if they be forced at any
time to think on these matters that are out of sight, and to meditate on God
and the Life to come, and the slipperiness of present things, it will be with
so much weariness, confusion and partiality, that will quite intercept the
fruit and comfort thereof. I know the thoughts of the best move heavily and
disorderly to this work, partly thorough want of matter and skill to use it to
their further edification; and partly thorough want of use and more frequent
exercise in this kind, as also because they are still earthly in part, as well
as others, but yet they do frequently consider these things, and are affected
with them, and provoked hereby to labor after them, more than any thing that
the World can propose; but woe be to those that consider not these things till
they are thus affected and resolved. It Is not some cursory thoughts that will
affect a Man with the excellency of God and his Ways, and the love of Christ,
so as to turn the course and bent of his Life toward them, and to fix his
Resolution to cleave fast to them, whatsoever difficulty or discouragement he
meet with; and yet if this be not done, profess what thou will, thou art not a
true Christian; yea, if thou art inconsiderate in any notorious degree, thou
art undoubtedly a perfect enemy to the Cross of Christ, and a persecutor of his
Servants; David gives no better description of such Men, Psalm. 10.4. The wicked
through the Pride of his Countenance will not seek after God, God is not in all
his thoughts. And then mark what follows, 1. He is an enemy to the Cross of
Christ, His ways are always grievous, thy Judgments are far above out of his
sight. His Mouth is full of cursing and deceit, and fraud; under his tongue is
mischief and vanity. And, 2. He is also a Persecutor of his Servants. He
sits in the lurking places of the Villages, in the secret places does he
murder the innocent, ver. 8. I dare confidently say, that an Inconsiderate Man
cannot remember God; nor believe in Christ, to say the best that can be said of
him. But he may do worse than be a base unbeliever, and run into all Excess,
Riot and Ungodliness, when a fair opportunity is offered, if Consideration do
not hold the Bridle and and keep him in.

There are these two or three comprehensive Mischiefs, that do always follow
upon the neglect of this duty.
First, Inconsideracy leads Men to Hypocrisy and mere Formality in the service
of God. There Is none so over slight and superficious in the Service of God, as
those that considers not with whom they have to do. Custom and Education, and
the common Example of others, with whom we live; and the Reputation that
Christianity has got among us, may draw us to the external Worship of God; and
compose the Body to do some seeming homage to our Redeemer, both in Public and
Private; but it is the Consideration, of the Excellency of that God whom we
serve, and his Service, that can make the Heart to draw near and busily attend,
with Affections answerable to the Service it is employed in. And what acceptance
such inconsiderate Service is like to find by him, that will consider and weigh
all our Services, and judge Righteously, you may see, Esaias 29.13. For as much
as this People, he means the Jewish Hypocrites, draw near me with their Mouth,
and with their Lips do honor me, but have removed their Heart far from me.
Therefore he threatens to bring heavy Judgments on them. Their Hearts must
needs be far from God that considers it not, for that is the first and leading
Act of the Soul that brings it on, and makes way for the following Acts of
Judgment. Complacency and Affection, without which there can be no reasonable
Service; and how well God will receive any other Service from a reasonable
Creature, it is a thing of easy understanding. What an high presumption and
affront is it to stand before God with the face and confidence of his People,
and to bow our selves with an external Reverence before him, when the Soul is
idle, or otherwise employed; and there is nothing of Reverence or Worship in the
Heart! What a provocation, to deal with God as your Cheats and Impostors deal
with us, that make a show to our Eye of things that are nothing so, and have no
reality, but cheat and delude our Sense! To use Legerdedemain and slight in the
Service of God; and to conveigh a Prayer in the presence of God, as if it came
warm from the Heart, when it was never born any deeper than the Mouth. Be not
deceived, God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. Think not to serve the All-seeing
God as the Gibeonites served Israel; nor to come and make a Covenant with God
by Prayer, as if your Services came from a far Country, even from the depths
and bottom of your Hearts, when they come no farther than the Throat, and are a
mess of mere wind and words; and these words are also nigh thee, even at thy
Mouth; as the Apostle in another case, Romans 10.8. You may laugh at an Ape when
he bows to you and kisseth his hand, as if he meant you some high respect, but
you will not take your self to be honored thereby, much less will God take the
gestures of your Body and your outward Presence, and the sound of your Lips,
and such ridiculous Actions, for a substantial and rational Service; that Heart
is dangerously mistaken that thinks so. There Is no Harmony in Gods Ear, unless
Understanding, Judgment and Affections, together with the outward Worship and
reverend Deportment of the Body; all come together to make up the Quire;
otherwise 'twill be the Sacrifice of a Fool, and such as are foolish cannot
stand in his sight, Psalm. 5.5. (1.) Either with approbation or without shame,
and where there is no Consideration nor inward Intention of Mind and Heart,
there can be no other Sacrifice than this, nothing but mere cheating
Formalities. Keep thy Foot therefore, says Solomon, (that is) thy Heart) when
thou entrest upon the Service of God, and be more ready to hear than to give
the Sacrifice of Fools; and why is it the Sacrifice of Fools? mark, the reason
follows, For they consider not that they do evil, Eccl. 5.1. This it is that
betrays them and marrs all. If Consideration stay at home, better thou had
never gone to Church, for God will be sure to miss that and hate such Worship,
where the most essential, vital part is wanting, and count thee a greater
sinner in some respect, than if thou had kept away the Carcass also, since
the Soul was wanting. Who is blind but my Servant, or deaf as my Messenger? Who
is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords Servant, Esaias 42.19.
Here God accuses his Servants of a greater ignorance and deafness than other
Men, that worship him not at all. What Is the reason? The next verse will tell
you, ver. 20. Seeing many things but thou observest or considerest not. Seneca
jears the Jews for casting a seventh part of their time upon a Weekly Sabbath;
and jear he might well enough, if this poor shadow of mere outward Worship were
all that that People could spare him. Though I do not excuse the Blasphemy of
that Heathen Moralist; Mr. Weemes in his Christian Synagogue, tells us of a
Jewish distinction. They it seems distinguished between the Internal and
External Rest of the Sabbath. The Internal Rest they styled (...) (1.) The
Secret Sabbath; the External Rest is when Men rest from bodily Labor, but give
not themselves to the Worship of God in the Spirit. This they called the
Sabbath of the Ox and the Ass. If thine External Presence (...) bodily Worship,
be all that thou can offer up to God; the Dog that follows thee to Church, or
thy Beast, might be taught to serve God as well as thou. O what contemptible
and undervaluing thoughts have such Men of their Maker, and the Object of their
Worship, o^ rather none at all. Who can sit or kneel before God with an
irreverend or roving Heart, and quietly suffer this intolerable dishonor to be
done to him, that care not for the manner how it is performed, so they be but
locally present, and makes the common stailty to^ much their refuge, because it
is the common Complaint of the best, that their Hearts are quickly lost in Gods
Service, therefore they are well enough, though they take no effectual course
to heal it. Well, it is want of Consideration, not only in the time of Service,
but at other times, that puts them upon this absurdity in their approaches to
God; to give him the Eye and Mouth, and any thing but the Heart. The very
Heathens themselves, had more judicious manly thoughts of God than such
Christians have. Their Books are stuffed with such sayings, as imply inward
Love and Reverence, to be more acceptable than the fatest Sacrifice. I could
multiply Sentences enough to such a purpose, if I thought it were worth the
while. Thus you see one sad effect of Inconsideration.

Secondly, As the want of Consideration does multilate the Service of God, and
cut out the very heart of it, so it makes it altogether tasteless and insipid.
It Is impossible that God should be served in a due manner, and his Servants not
feel the difference between his and all other Service, Mic. 2.7. Do not my
words do good to him that walks uprightly? Who can say he has cleansed his
Heart in vain? Psalm. 73.13. And that there is no profit in the sincere Worship
of God; and that in keeping his Commandments there is no reward? Psalm. 19.11.
Who can say there is no sweetness in the Hearts approaching to God? That it is
a dry and empty Employment, though performed with the greatest solemnity and
sincerity. Where is the Man that can step forth and say, that it is labor and
loss, and is not accompanied with the greatest Honor, Pleasure, Profit, unless
it be the Hypocrites and formal Professors, that slight it over; and whose
Hearts are not engaged in the Work? Mic. 2.7. Do not my words do good to him
that walks uprightly? Verily there is a reward for the Righteous, Psalm.
58.11. I mean such a one that comes not behind his Duty, but keeps company with
it. You may safely and confidently aver, to him that sows Righteousness there
is a sure reward, as well as shall be, Prove. 11.28. Many a refreshing, joyful
Song he has whilst he is scattering this Seed; what then will the joy of the
Harvest be, if Plowing and Sowing be such a pleasing Work? I confess in all
other Service that does not refer to this, the question may be truly put, What
does it profit? Where is any pleasure that my Heart and Soul can taste and
find? I have many a time come home by Weeping Cross, when I have traveled
hardest in the affairs and matters of this Life. But he that says his Heart
has found no sweetness nor reward in his approximation unto God, and in the
exercise of his Worship, if he understands himself, he does but proclaim his
Hypocrisy, and tell the World that his Heart is defective in the Work: That he
does not Worship his Maker and Redeemer in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.24. That
he does not consider to whom he does repair, nor what he may expect; nor who is
ready to intercede for him, if he does but look to him with a believing Heart;
otherwise, if these things come under any due Consideration, he could not find
no taste nor sweetness in such a Service, nor return with such a dry and empty
Heart, from the Fountain of infinite Joy and Fullness. Could a Man come to the
Sun and not be enlightened, and stand under it is warm refreshing Beams and not
be revived? Could a Man touch the Hem and Border of Christ's Garment, and feel
no Virtue come forth for his Refreshment? much less can a Man stand in the
presence of his Glory, and have no reflections of Light and Comfort from him?
You may as well say that a Man may feed upon the most nourishing Sustenance,
and concoct what he eats, and yet not thrive at all. As that a Man may
thoroughly and seriously consider the great sanctifying Truths, and live under
the power of such Thoughts, and find nothing of Gust and Relish in them. Peace
and Comfort in some Degree, are as inseparable from Grace, if Consideration
bring it into Exercise, as Light is from the Sun. And as Consideration does
gather strength, and is more lively and vigorous, so will the Exercise of Grace
be more fervent, and when Grace is upon the Wing, and in a hasty flight
Heavenwards, the Virgins that are her Companions, Peace and Joy, and Comfort, I
mean, will not be dead and unactive, but will, like the shadow, keep company
and resemblance with the Body to which they do belong. And they that are most
frequent and strong in the Exercise of their Grace, Faith, Love and Hope, will
have the stronger and more frequent Consolations and Refreshments. And
therefore David, whose Faith and Love, and Thankfulness to God, were
continually working, had the the greater sense and experience of this inward
Joy and Comfort. And such was the degree thereof oftentimes, that he could not
contain himself, but he must needs break forth into Songs and Triumph. How
sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth, Psalm.
119.103. O how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation all the day, ver. 97. Thy
Statutes have been my Songs in the House of my Pilgrimage, ver. 54. The service
of God must needs be tedious and irksome to them that have their minds on
something else, and think not what a courtesy they do themselves whilst they
draw near to God with the Heart. What a favor it is to approach such a
presence? What an Honor it reflects upon them? and what advantage there comes
in every way to him, that offers a Sacrifice fit for God to accept.

2. Exhortation.
SEcondly, Having showed you what an Obstruction Inconsideracy is to the
Remembrance of God, and instanced in two woeful inconveniences, that necessarily
flow from an incogitant heedless Service of God. By this time I hope our Eyes
may be a little opened to see what a sin it is to be defective in so great a
Duty as Consideration is; and therefore it is the more seasonable to warn and
beseech you that you would not at one dash blot out all true Worship of God,
and solid Peace and Comfort out of your own Hearts, by a sin so inconsistent
with the Rational Spiritual Nature that God has bestowed upon Man. Must not he
that has made both Soul and Body, be worshipped with both, and served with
their united strength? As the Eye guides the Body, so does Consideration first
stir up, and then steer and govern the Soul in all its operations; and
therefore if you leave out that, the Soul cannot stir or move suitably to its
Nature. If then Forgetfulness of God be a sin, that you would not for all the
World be found guilty of, at the great trying day, then be sure not lay the
Foundation of such a guilt by the neglect of Consideration. Use that Faculty in
all things, if you would they should be wisely pone, but fail not to use it in
the service of God, and in the matters of highest importance. And as you have
to do with God in all things, either mediately or immediately, in a nearer or
remoter manner; so it behooves you to consider, if you will discharge the Duty
and rightly perform your Work.

There are but two sorts of Actions that a Man has a capacity to produce, and
in both we have to do with God.

1. There are some Actions that have God for their Object (or something
immediately subservient to him) and their end also. Such are all Actions of
Religious Worship, whether External, as Prayer, Praises, solemn Invocation of
his Name, in an assertory or promissory Oath; hearing of the Word,
participation of the Sacraments; or Internal, as Faith, Love, Reverence,
Dependence, Trust, Submission.

2. There are other Actions that have not God, but something else for their
Object, yet they should have God for their Principal and Vltimate End. Such are
all the Actions where we have to do with Creatures, whether They be Acts of
Labor: Refreshment.


In Study, the Object about which our Action is conversant, is that which our
thoughts are exercised about, whither it be Names or Things. In Trafique the
Object of our Action is that with or for which we Trafique. In Eating and
Drinking the Object is our Meat and Drink. But the end in all these should be
the pleasing of God and the promoting his Glory, which is done when we ask
Counsel of him, and humbly beg his Direction in all these, and heartily devote
the Knowledge, the Strength, the Gain; which comes in by these Actions to the
befriending of his Interest. Now in both these sorts of Action (as I have
already hinted) we have chiefly to do with God, who is principally concerned;
and therefore both of them must be guided by the Law of God, for the matters
and manner of them, that they may attain their end; but do this, if you can,
without Consideration. The Heart is deceitful above all things, and desparatly
wicked; who can know it? Jer. 17.9. It will make you believe that your
intentions are upright, and that God's Honor is aimed at, when there is
nothing else. If therefore you would not be deceived, believe not your own
Hearts, much less the Tongues of others, that would flatter you into a good
opinion of your selves. Judge not according to an outward sudden appearance of
things, but judge Righteous Judgments. But this you can never do, if you
Consider not. There are depths in the Heart of Man, depths in all his Actions,
depths in the Word of God, which is the rule of them. The Devil has a deep
reach in his Temptations, whereby he sets upon us, and manageth his Work with
the greatest Art and Cunning. The baits that he uses are not easily discerned.
Vice and Wickedness is specious oftentimes; Truth and Honesty appears in a
disguise, and seem on a sudden like him that was the perfection of Beauty, to
have no Form nor Comeliness in them, Esaias 53.2. Without Consideration you can
never search these Mysteries, nor wade thorough these Depths. The careless and
inconsiderate Man will be taken and ensnared; he will catch at a show instead
of a Substance. He will embrace an Appearance instead of Death, and the way
will seem right in his Eyes; the end whereof is the way of Truth. It Is a
fearful charge which the Prophet Esaias fastens upon the careless Jews, Esaias
59.8. There is no Judgment in their goings, they discern not where is safety
nor where is danger. Such Persons he knew could not escape Destruction. If you
Consider not there can be no judgment in your goings; you will be in danger
every step you tread; you will never find out your duty, nor be able to perform
it; neither Faith nor Reason will bear any sway in the course of your Life (for
Consideration puts these into power and authority) but Sense will rule you, and
you will live after the Flesh, and so must take what follows. The Apostle tells
you what that is, Romans 8.13. If you live after the Flesh ye shall die; and Gal.
6.8. He that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. (1.)
Perdition. If then you would not bring such a shameful reproach upon Humane
Nature, and live like a Brute in the shape of a Man, nor like an Infidel under
the disguise of a Christian, nor reap the fruit of a Sensual Fleshly Life, use
Consideration; I say again, live under the power of Consideration.

The Consideration which I commend to thee is two sold, viz. Of the End. Means.


It is the work and business of every Man both good and bad, 1. To design an
End; and, 2. To pursue that End, and compass his designed intent, by the surest
means he can possible. The End of a worldling is to thrive and grow rich, and
therefore it is his daily Study and Practice to compass his End; his Thoughts,
Affections and Actions, are all busied in contriving and endeavoring to grow
rich.

The End of a Christian is to grow rich also, but not in worldly Riches, but in
the Grace of God; not to add House to House, and Field to Field, Esaias 5.8. But
to add to Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.5. And to grow up to the
full assurance of Understanding, Col. 2.2. What makes the one so Wise,
Provident and Judicious, and the other so Weak and Shallow, and so defective in
his very Reason and Choice? It Is this only that makes the difference; the one
has weighed and considered these things, and set the one against the other,
and tried them in an even balance; the other takes that comes first, and
prefers a present Pleasure, that he tastes and feels, though it be for a short
and uncertain time, before an everlasting Felicity, that he has no sight of,
but he must take upon the mere credit of God's Word. Does that Man that looks
no higher than how to fare deliciously every day, and to get a little better
Wool upon his Back than others, and to rustle in Silk and gaudy Attire, and to
domineer over others, and to have his Commands fulfilled, though they be never
so absurd and unreasonable. Indeed, Consider that his Life will not always
last, that his Dream will quickly end. Does he that is got into the Saddle, and
makes a greater bustle and stir than his poorer Brethren, and tramples under
his Feet that does oppose him, and that will not bow down that he may go over
them, or make a stirrup of them, to climb up into a higher degree of Pride and
Ambition; Does such a one consider that he must come down at last? If he had
considered this he would never have made such a foolish Choice as this, and
neglected God and his Soul, for such a flying Sensual Happiness as this is.
Does that Man that wanders after the World, and lets out his Heart to any
present Enjoyments, and feeds upon Air, and the Breath of a few lying deceived
Men, whilst he seeks not the Approbation of God, by an Humble, Holy and
Heavenly Life, know and consider what Dung and Dross he has prefered before an
Eternal Crown of Glory? Let the event prove who was the wisest and most
considering Man, she that has chosen Heaven, or he that has chosen Earth; he
that has renounced God, or he that has renounced the World; and who is the
most weak and cracked Brained Person, he that studies to please God, or he that
studies to humor the Flesh, and to satisfy the Lusts thereof. I do not intend
by what has been spoken, to disparage any of these lower Comforts, that are
used with Consideration, Thankfulness and Sobriety, and that do not lift up
Men's Hearts with Pride and Insolency, and make them the more Impious,
Oppressive and Intolerable, the more they have of them; nor negligent in their
study to please God, and care to promote that which is right in his sight. But
my design is to show the Virtue of Consideration, that makes such a vast
difference between Man and Man; and makes the one to dig so deep and lay his
Foundation so sure, that his Happiness shall last for ever; and the other to
choose the Happiness that shall last but two or three score years at longest; it
may be not the tenth part so long. And as Consideration makes so vast a
difference in the Ends, that Men design and intend, and makes one choose Heaven,
and an Eternal Life with God, for his Portion and Treasure; and to set his
Heart upon it, and to make it his ultimate End. And another for want of it, to
set his Heart on a little fading Beauty, Lying Honor, Perishing Riches, or
unsatisfying Pleasure, or Carnal Wisdom, to be guilty of the greatest Folly,
that he may swagger a little while. So it makes as wide difference in the
Means, and prevails with some to humble them, that God may in his due time
exalt them, to emyloy their thoughts how to mortify their Affections to the
World, how to strengthen the Love of God, to root their Faith more deeply, by a
more frequent Exercise of it, and how to get their Hearts more affected with
the wonderful love of Christ. This makes them so frequent in Prayer, so
attentive upon the Word, so intent upon all Christ's appointed Means, that they
may increase in Spiritual Understanding and Love; when the Inconsiderate can
dispense with these for a little worldly Gain or Ease, and prefer Earthly Toil
and Labor, before a little pains to get the true Wisdom, and to save their
Souls.

In the Name of God therefore, I beseech you, to consider, if you would not be
guilty of the greatest dotage, and miscarry in the choice of your End; and
consequently of all the means. If you would not take a Dream for Happiness, and
spend your Strength for naught, and be forced to confess your Folly when you
come to die. Force your selves to Consider, especially when you have the best
advantages to promote Consideration; when you have Time, Leisure, Health,
seasonable Instruction from the Word and Providence of God; and you feel more
sensible Conviction of the worth of God's Favor, and the vanity of all things;
then consider and set it home, and drive on to a Resolution to forget God no
longer. Consideration will help you to do this if you will follow it, and
encourage your selves to it, and not check your Minds when they are thus
employed. Plead not your Ignorance and Unskilfulness, do it as well as you can,
and use will make you more expert; much less plead your Impotency, and pretend
that you are utterly unable.

If a little Worldly Trouble come upon you, you can consider how to get out or
shake off the Trouble. If you are under a Reproach, and a little Contempt of
Men, you can Consult and Consider how you may wipe it off, and vindicate your
Name and Credit. But oh what thoughts of Heart, and wise and deep Consideration
to secure Life it self, and the Comforts that are nearest and dearest to it?
These are Signs that we have the Faculty, and can Consider about those things
that we value, or have any love to. That Men are therefore so Inconsiderate in
the Concernments of their Souls, and about the matters of another Life. It Is an
evident Sign they value them not, they care not for them; to awaken such
therefore, and put them upon this great and necessary Work, I shall suggest
these following Proposals:

Incentives to Consideration.
FIrst, You have matters of the greatest importance and necessity to Consider.
If it were only to live happily here, and to escape the miseries of this Life,
it is worth Consideration to bring this about; but it is an Everlasting Life and
Happiness that we are to provide for, which if we do not compass, it is not the
loss of this that will be our only Misery, though it be an unspeakable,
unvaluable Loss. But you must bear also the Wrath of God, that will kindle on
you like a devouring Fire, and the Fury of a guilty awakened Conscience, that
will fall upon you like a Tempest, and fright your Soul into Everlasting Dread
and Horror. And does it not mightily concern us to Consider how to escape all
this? If thou have any love to thy own Soul, when the Qustion is whether thou
shall live or die for ever, thou will Consider and thoroughly resolve thy self.

If thou had lost a dear and powerful Friend, on whose Favor all thy Worldly
Hopes did depend, thou would not refuse to let thy Thoughts run upon such a
Subject as this is, neither would it be tedious to thee to Consider how thou
might obtain thy Pardon and regain his Favor. The case is Ten thousand
times worse, incomparably more sad. You have lost the Favor of God, and are
fallen under his Displeasure, and you are like to perish for ever, unless
Consideration bring you to bewail your loss, and sin, which is the cause of it,
and bring you to Repentance, and so prepare you to believe in Christ. If you
had some great business to dispatch, intricate and doubtful, you would endanger
your Estate or Life, if it were either neglected or imprudently managed; who
would not summon up all the Reason that he has, and consider well how he may
dispatch it as successfully as he can? And do you not perceive how absurd it is
to be careless, how your present Life is ordered, that must decide the Case and
Detriment how you shall live for ever; and not to Consider, and that to
purpose, how you may get Christ for your Friend to procure your Acceptance with
God; how to get the Holy Spirit of Promise to dwell in you, to turn the stream
of your Affections from Earth to Heaven, and to subdue your Corruptions, and to
fortify and encourage you against Temptations, to put you upon your Duty, and
to enable you to a right Performance? You will lay by such works as this, or do
it in a mad and careless fashion; if you do not Consider why and how it must be
done. It Is Consideration that must show you the truth and certainty of the Life
to come, the Glory of Heaven, and what an intolerable loss it is to fall short
of it: It Is that must show you what a Debtor you are to God and to your
Redeemer, and the worth and excellency of your Soul, and the necessity of a
renewed Holy Nature, and of an Humble and Self-denial Life. Consideration, I
say, must needs show these things and affect your Heart with them, and make you
sensible how much they do import, and how nearly they do concern you, or you
will never do them; you will rather take the brutish Enjoyments that
Inconsideracy will make you relish, and choose the Pleasures of Delirancy and
Madness, rather than pay so dear for true Wisdom as you must, if you are a
stranger to the forementioned Consideration, I say (pay dear) in respect of
the Flesh and it is sinful Contentments, which must lose their Lives in the
Service of God and your own Souls, though it will be unspeakably cheap, when
you have paid the most in this kind. O how does it import us to know God as our
Maker, Lord and Governor, in such a manner as does affect and captivate our
Hearts to a voluntary and wilful subjection to him, as our only Felicity? How
much does it concern us to get such a clear sight of his amiable, lovely
Nature, and most transcendent Persections, as may possess our Souls with the
highest Reverence of him, and kindle the strongest love to him! that the
Remembrance of him may be our sweetest daily Exercise and Employment. But
without Consideration you cannot approach him, nor get any transforming
reviving sight of him. His Ways are in the Seas, and his Paths are in the deep
Waters, and Footsteps cannot be known, nor track'd without frequent Exercise
of your Considering Faculty, Psalm. 77.19.

Secondly, As we have the matters of greatest importance and necessity to
Consider, so we have many special advantages to excite and awaken
Consideration. One would think the worth and weightiness of the Object, should
be spur enough to quicken us to this Work, and command our thoughts, if there
were no other motive to prick us forward; but we have many current helps, many
a loud call from the Word of God, set on by his appointed Servants, that are
sent forth on purpose upon this Errand. Many providential help, both sweet and
terrible, and something besides the common course, strange and unusual, and
therefore more fit to set the Mind a thinking, from what cause they come, and
what they drive at. The veryest Atheist is sometime blank'd, at some strange
and unheard of events, and knows not what interpretation to make of them, nor
whether to refer them; for having denied the true Author of them (...). They
become vain in their imanations, (...) And their foolish Heart is darkened, Romans
1.21. Yea, that arch Opposer of Providence, Epicurus himself, had not made such
a progress in Forgetfulness of God, and the denial of a Deity, governing and
overruling the Affairs of the Earth, but that he was so startled by some
effects that he observed, that he could not utterly wipe the notion of a
Providence out of his Mind. When a Blasphemer is struck dead in the very Act of
his Blasphemy, and Vengeance lights upon another, with a fearful imprecation in
his Mouth; and some effects are so anomalous, and besides the course of Nature,
that it is no thanks to the most Atheistical to bring in their Witness, and to
confess the Wisdom and Power, and Justice of God. Let a Man that truly
worshippeth and fears God, in such a time of dreadful and public Calamity as
this is, applaud the Justice of God, and freely confess his handy work, and
assign the notorious, public, allowed, and encouraged sins of the City and
Nation, for the meritorious and provoking Cause. It may be a purblind thick
sighted Beast, whose God is his Belly, and whose Glory is his Shame, that is
drunk with Sensual Pleasure, Phil. 9.13. will tell you that such a mortality
comes about in the revolution and circle of so many years; and will rake the
Kennel for the Cause, and ascribe the effects to the naughtiness of the
Streets, rather than to the naughtiness of their Hearts; or look up to the true
efficient, to whom these causes they usually fasten upon are but subservient,
and all, that they might hide their shame, and that they might persuade
themselves and others that their sin has no hand in bringing such a scourge
upon us; but yet for all that, when the Judgment comes a little nearer to them,
and begins to find them out and awaken them to Consideration, which they had no
time for, when they were running from one brutish pleasure to another, then
they begin to see, and to be confounded with shame. They cannot now laugh out
of their Hearts all serious thoughts of a Life to come, nor make a jest of a
Holy Life, as they did in the day of their delusion; but would give a World, if
they had it, to die the death of the Righteous. No wonder that strange and
extraordinary Providence, whether they be of Mercy or Judgment, jostle the
most sottish and inconsiderate Mind, and awaken it to think other thoughts of
all things than they did before, and enforce an Heathenish, Earthly Mind, that
spent all its thoughts upon vanity before; to say that all is but vanity, and
God's Favor is the only ground for true Contentment, if this good fit would
last which Consideration has brought him to: But alas, ^o sooner is the
Providence over, that brought him to Consider, but he grows careless again, and
sleeps into Atheism; and whilst things run in a constant Channel, and keep a
constant course, God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. Now they think
that Repentance and Faith, and Self-denial, are the work of Cowards, yes, and
such as believe, that God has as great hand in the orderly course and motion
of things, as when they go out of order; and Water that is a fluid body and
should run, stands still; and Fire that should burn, does not. Let but a Man
consider, and it is as easy to believe, that its as great a power must enable
the Sun to run it is race, as to stand still or go backward; to preserve the
Societies of Men, as destroy and waste them with a devouring Plague. All the
difference is, Men now consider, that would not before, and conclude at least,
that it is the safest course to live the Life of the Righteous, though there
were no God; and oh that all would so conclude, and hold fast such a
conclusion, and live accordingly; then they would quickly see more and more
evidence of God in the Word, and the necessity of his Service, and the
excellency of his ways, and rise up to a higher conclusion. That when, as
before, they could say it was the safest way to renounce worldly Pleasure, and
to mortify their Lusts, and to addict themselves to the Love and Service o^
God; now they would be able to say, that it is perfect madness not to take this
course. It Is a Wisdom to be laughed at, to be wise for this Life, and neglect
the Life to come. A little Consideration would show the nakedness of such
pretended Wisdom; and among other helps, this of Public Calamity, where Plague
or Famine, or any extraordinary Judgment, sweeps away thousands, calls the rest
to come and behold the works of the Lord, what Desolations he has wrought
among us, Psalm. 46.10. Be still and know that I am God, I will be exalted among
the People, I will be acknowledged by these careless and Atheistical Sinners,
ver. 11. And if the Lethargy of Men's Minds be not great, they will consider,
those that were even lost before for want of attention to the Word and Works of
God, will awaken now, or it is too much to be feared never; shall I call it
therefore a Judgment or a Mercy, which the compassionate God has sent upon
this Nation, that gives us so much advantage to come to sober thoughts? Does it
not give some check whether we will or not, to the external acts of Pride,
Luxury and Uncleanness, whereby the inward Acts are weakened; and we have time
to reason with our selves, and are better disposed to consider, when freed from
the clog of worldly cares, and from the fumes of a surfeited Body, overcharged
with Meat and Drink, and from the flattering Friend that make us believe we are
well, when our case is too much to be lamented; and God has not left this Town
altogether without this Mercy. If Consideration be so preparative to the
highest Wisdom, and so necessary to the Knowledge and Love of God, and all
solid Content and Peace; then all the means whereby it is promoted, should be
welcome to us: And our Deafness to these Providence and Inconsideracy,
notwithstanding we have so many advantages to bring us to Consideration of
their miserable, woeful condition, that forget God, has the greater sin. This
is the second help to Consideration, that should humble us for the neglect of
it, viz. because we have so many advantages to awaken us to this duty.

Thirdly, As Consideration is a work of absolute necessity (where there is time
and Capacity) in regard of the worth and greatness of the matters, which so
much concern us; and in regard of the help and assistance that God gives us to
this duty: so the Fruit and Benefits of Consideration are unspeakably great: I
shall name two:

1. It is Wisdom to consider, yea, it is both a sign and a cause of it: where
Consideration is, it argues there is Wisdom already, and the frequent exercise
thereof will make the Person wiser; and both are intimated, Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever
is wise will observe these things. There Consideration is a sign of Wisdom; and
they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Here it is the cause, it
produces Understanding and Wisdom in a higher measure; so that Wisdom is both
the antecedent and consequent of Consideration, and does both go before and
follow after it. Sin in Scripture is frequently branded with the name of Folly,
because it proceeds from Folly, and makes a Man more and more foolish that
commits it, Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he
will speak peace unto his People, and to his Saints; but let them not turn
again to folly (i. e.) Sin, Job 4.18. He charged his Angels with Folly, that is
with Sin, and so threw them down to Hell. And they that are guilty of it are
called Fools and Foolish, Psalm. 5.5. The Foolish cannot stand in thy sight. Who
are they? the later clause tells us, Thou hate all the workers of Iniquity.
And that it proceeds from Folly from whence it is denominated, we have
evidence enough in Scripture. The Fool has said in his Heart there is no God,
Psalm. 14.1. Where Atheism^s ascribed to Folly, as the Fruit of it. First a Fool
and then an Atheist, where by (Fool) is meant, not a Natural, or one that is
born with a Crack or Defect in his Intellectuals, but one that is weak thorough
wilful Inconsideracy, and by works of Darkness has clouded and sotted his
Understanding; as those in Romans 1.21. Whose foolish Heart was darkened by their
vam Imaginations. So Jer. 4.22. My People is foolish, they have not known me.
The sense whereof may be so as to make Folly either the cause, or the effect of
not knowing God (viz.) Because my People are Foolish, therefore they know not
me; or else because they are ignorant of me, therefore they are Foolish. Now
then, as nothing does more promote Folly than Inconsideracy; so nothing does
more befriend Wisdom than Consideration: It digs deep and finds out the bottom,
and discovers the highest Cause of all things, which is the true Description of
Wisdom contemplative; or as it is in the Understanding, for so the Schools
define it. Sapientia vera est, radicare de omnibus secundum altissimam Causam.
Altissima autem Causa est Voluntas divina, sive lex quae voluntatem Dei,
Hominibus manifestat. When the careless inconsiderate Person, whom God has
blessed with Health, and Content, and Success, looks no higher than the Air he
breaths in, to which he ascribes his Health, or the Estate he has, to which he
attributes his Content; or his own Prudence, to which he imputes his Success.
On the other side, when the Inconsiderate Person, whom God has afflicted, is
pur-blind, and can see no farther than an unwholesome Air, a bad Diet, an
envious, troublesome Neighbor, or the general Contagion now among us, by the
which he thinks he is afflicted in his Estate, Name or Health (I say) when the
Inconsiderate Person, either in Prosperity or Adversity, stops here, and goes
no further; the considerate Person is wise indeed, and looks above and beyond
all these, and sees the Spring that sets all the Wheels a going, the
primitive and overruling cause, that commands all the other.

1. Suitably to their own Nature.

2. And according to the counsel of his own will. In the one appears his
admirable Wisdom, in the other his Almighty Power. And according to this
judgment of things, he is both affected and instructed, and therefore his Heart
is not lifted up with Pride; but thankfulness unto God when he is enriched with
his Mercies, and the Streams wherewith he is refreshed, set his Heart a longing
for the Fountain. This effect upon David had all his temporal Mercies; they
made him cry out for the Living God, Psalm. 84.2. My Soul thirsts for God, for
the Living God; when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 42.2. And this
influence they will have in a sincere degree and measure upon all true
Believers; neither will they make any sinful haste to get away from the Rod,
when God sends it; they know nothing can come without his special
appointment. And therefore though Troubles flow in upon him, and come toward
him like a swelling Tide, and threaten to swallow him up; though Enemies come
upon him with Rage and Fury; and the Devil and his own Corruption come upon him
like a Tempest, as if they would bear down and utterly overwhelm him, yet in
this he is confident, he cannot utterly sink if he be a Believer. Though a
sinner does evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know
that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him; but it
shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are
as a shadow, because he fears not God, Eccles. 8.12, 13. So Esaias 3.10. Say ye
to the Righteous, it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of
their doings. And as Consideration is the direct way to Wisdom, which is in the
Understanding; so it is a ready way to that other Wisdom, which is in the
practical Faculties. This Wisdom the Schools define to be, Habitus discretivus
optimi Finis, and Electivus optimorum mediorum. Such a habit as disposes a Man
to discern and intend the best end, and to elect the best means. The highest
end that an inconsiderate Man does intend, is no higher than the World; it is
at best but some Sensual Comfort, some Carnal Satisfaction, that is fitted to
his baser part, and does no better service than accommodate his Flesh. I
confess, his Soul also may seem to be content, whilst he has a fullness of
Earthly Prosperity; but that is but a mere negative, and no positive Act,
whereas true Contentment is something positive. And that Soul that has it,
does not only hold its peace, and say nothing to the contrary, but with
deliberation speaks Peace to a Man, upon the surest and most infallible
grounds. The plain truth is, the Soul of an ambitious and voluptuous Worldling,
may seem to be satisfied and acquiesce, if he has what the World can afford
him, because he does not believe or consider, The end of all things is at hand,
1 Pet. 4.7. But sense has a full mastery over him, being gratified to the
full, and does make the Mind drunk, that it cannot make an impartial enquiry
into the worth of what the Man for the present is so much pleased with. O if
such a one did consider and believe, he would like his condition worse than
that of the vilest Beggar. He could not look into the Word of God and see such
dreadful passages against those that have their Affections set upon the World
and Pleasures thereof, nor read the terrible Description of those Men that have
the Riches of this World, and are not rich toward God, Luke 12.21. and not
tremble, and even throw away such Earthly Luggage, that is such an impediment
in the way to Salvation, if he could not be otherwise rid of it.

And as the inconsiderate Man's great and principal End is no higher, so he is
as foolish and void of Understanding in his choice of the means whereby he
would attain his End. Alas, that ever Men that have such excellent parts and
means for their Improvement, that are bred up to more Understanding than other
Men, should so disparage their very Reason and Judgmen^, as to think that
Hawking and Hunting, and Carding and Dicing, and Courting and Feasting, and
such like Courses, should bring a Man to Content and Happiness. If they did but
consider, they could not possibly judge this, unless their Reason were
besotted, and there were some considerable flaw in their understanding Faculty.
I deny not, but in reference to their intended End, they have made a wise and
prudent choice, and hit upon the fittest means. Their end being the pleasing of
the Flesh, what can they do more wisely than to make provision for it, to
fulfill the Lusts and Desires thereof, Romans 13.14. and to live at Ease? And so
the Children of this World, as our Savior has affirmed, are wiser in their
Generation than the Children of Light, Luke 16.8. Their end (though by
accident) being to lose the Life which is to come, what can they do more
shrewdly than to save this present Life? Since their end is to destroy their
Souls, can they take a more prudent course than to love the World and the
things of the World, and keep all thoughts of a future state out of their
Minds, as much as may be, lest they should be converted and saved? This their
way is their folly, Psalm. 49.13.

But the Man that Considers will look higher, and be sure to project for all
Eternity, and make nothing his chief End but what will never fail; and
therefore has a wiser reach than the most applauded admired Wit that is
Earthly Minded. And he is as wise in the choice of the means whereby he makes
toward his End; they being no other than what God himself has prescribed, and
therefore can never miscarry; his End is to save his Life for ever; and
therefore he will venture to lose it here, Matthew. 10.39. His end is to get him
Everlasting Honor, and to embalm his Name to all Eternity, and therefore he
does rejoice when Men revile him and speak all evil of him falsely for Christ's
sake. Thus you see, that Consideration makes a Man truly and solidly wise.
This is the first benefit of Consideration.

2. Consideration is a work accompanied with the sweetest Pleasure and
Contentment. The mere agitation and exercise of the Intellectual is sweet to
one that knows how to employ them. But when moreover the Objects of the Mind
are such as do enlighten, purify, and rejoice the Heart, such a Man, if he
know how to manage the work, must needs advance himself to a high degree of
pleasure. The reason why some Christians grow weary and faint in the Service of
God, and walk heavily in the bitterness of their Souls, a great part of their
Life, if not all, is because they do not more frequently approach the Fountain
of Joy and Gladness in their Meditations of him, and do not so well consider
the evil of Sin to forsake it more heartily, nor clear up their interest in
Christ, and Evidences for Heaven by daily Consideration. Were these things
better considered, they would be better known, and what a pleasure would it be,
to think upon God and Heaven, and Christ, if we had but (...) ^^^erest in them?
Thus you see some of the fruits of Consideration.

Fourthly, As the benefits of Consideration are unspeakably great, so the
mischiefs of Inconsideracy are as sad.

1. God threatens it heavily, Psalm. 28.5. Because they consider (or guard) not
the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his Hands, he will destroy them and
not build them up. (...) Because they did not understand in the Original, for
Consideration and Understanding are so near a kin, that they are both expressed
by the same word; and Esaias 5.12, 13. And the Harp, and the Viol, and the
Tabret, are in their Feasts, but they regard not the Work of the Lord, nor
consider the operation of his Hands. So Hos. 7.2. They consider not in their
Hearts that I remember all their Wickedness; now their own doings have beset
them about, they are before my Face. Neither does he barely threaten, some
Execution is done; Job 34.26, 27. He strikes them as wicked Men, in the open
sight of others; and the Reason follows, because they turned back from him, and
would not consider any of his ways.

2. It Is an Argument of Brutishness and Folly, Psalm. 92.5, 6. O Lord, how great
are thy Works, and thy Thoughts very deep! (...) A Man that is led by Lust and
not by Reason (we render it a Brutish Man) knows not, neither does a Fool
understand or consider this. As it is Reason and Understanding that makes a Man
differ from a Bruit, and become more excellent than a Beast; so Consideration
is nothing else but the use of his Reason, without which he must needs live
like a Beast. To speak plainly, he that will not use his Reason and consider,
and so live like a Man that should be guided by this higher Principle; he will
be guided by a lower Principle, and be led by Sense and Feeling, as a Beast is.
And a little that is present and felt, shall weigh more with such a one, than
one that is to come, though ten times greater. Hence it is, that though God
threaten a wicked Man, and one that lives by sense, with Hell and Damnation, it
has no force nor power with him to restrain his Corruption, because he feels
it not, though he might as certainly foresee it, as that which he now feels.
And he will do more to be rid of the Toothache, or some present Affliction,
than to prevent one that is a thousand times greater. Is he guided by Reason or
Sense, and does he live like a Man that has Understanding, or like a Bruit
that has none, that will take more care and pains, and be at more cost, to be
freed from present Pain and Sickness, and to get out of Poverty or Hardship,
when it pincheth him, and to throw off any present Burden that he feels
himself oppressed with, than to escape the Damnation of Hell, though he must
otherwise most certainly feel it ere long? Judge impartially, whether this be
not, to be like the Horse and Mule, and other mere sensitive Creatures, that
have no Understanding. Let them have what they have at present, and feel no
present Pain, and you please them well enough, though you feed them for the
Slaughter. You cannot Shoe an Ox, unless you bind and cast him down and force
him, though it be to keep his Feet from hurt. Your Horse is not pleased when
you let him Blood, though it save his Life, because you hurt them for the
present.

The Man that considers not, will be too like these Brutish Creatures, and run
into Eternal Misery, to avoid a little present Affliction. Moreover,

3. It Is an Argument of Pride not to Consider, Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through
the pride of his Countenance, will not seek after God, God is not in all his
thoughts; thy Judgments are far above out of his sight. God has set Heaven and
Earth before him, and set such variety of things on purpose to be Considered.
And the Inconsiderate Man shuts his Eyes, and will not behold the Glory of the
Lord, nor give him the Honor due to his Name. If it be foolish Pride to
undervalue any Creature, what Arrogance is it to despise and overlook the most
absolute and perfect Being, things of the highest value, and most worthy our
Observation?

Fifthly, It Is easy to Consider; your Thoughts will run some way, whether you
will or not. The Soul of Man is a busy active thing, and will not be idle, it
will rather be impertinently employed, than not at all; and the bare work of
thinking is no hard matter. It Is rather a work of difficulty to restrain them,
especially from the things that we have the highest Love and Respect for. If
God and thy Soul were valued and loved by thee above all other things, as they
must be if thou art a Christian at the Heart, thou could not but think, and
think again, how to please the one and save the other. If things that are more
worth than the whole Frame of Heaven and Earth, and all that is visible to the
Eyes, are not worthy thy most prizing, pleasing Thoughts, they are worth
nothing; and if thou think so, thou art either an ignorant Sot or an
Atheist. It Is a cheap purchase to gain the highest Wisdom and the Love of God,
and to save thy Soul for ever, at the expense of a few sober, serious thoughts.
If you stick at Consideration, which it must cost you if ever you be saved; you
judge your selves unworthy of Eternal Life. It Is easy enough to you to turn
your Thoughts to an Object of Gain or Pleasure; and is there any greater Gain
than to save your Souls? What will it profit you to win the whole World and
lose your Souls? Mat. 16.26. It Is a rational question that the greedy Heart of
Man shall never be able to answer, without Self-condemnation, if he run his
Soul upon destruction; though he should get to be the happiest man upon Earth.
O unhappy Soul, that could consider and Judge no better! Wast thou master of
no more Brains and Wit, than what could inform thee how to Feed and Trick up
thy Carcass, and commend it to the Eyes of a few dying men? And to live in a
little Credit, whilst thou art above ground, though thy Name stink for ever
afterward? Was this the upshot of all thy Thoughts? Could thou think to
better for thy poor Soul! that might be Eternally Happy; if you would not fly
consideration, but turn your Thoughts to those things for which God gave to you
your faculty to Think. O remember, that it is easy and very natural to consider
how you may save your Soul, if you were not become unnatural and cruel to your
selves. And it will shame you unto the deepest silence; when God shall ask you:
Why you did not Consider of those things, when the matters were so great, and
the work so easy.

Sixthly, You will consider when it is too late, and wish that you had made
more have, when it would have done you good. It would not be such a perfect
degree of madness, in us not to consider, how wonderfully God has made us, how
deeply we stand Indebted to him, for no less than all that we have, or hope
for; and how wickedly we have departed from him, and what our sin has
deserved, and what our Savior has done, save us from the woeful consequents
thereof; it would not be so absurd to put these Thoughts out of our Minds now,
if we could always keep them out. But in the latter end we shall consider, Jer.
23.20. It would not be so great a sin to be inconsiderate now, if we could be
ever so: But alas! stupidity, and insensibleness of such things as these, is
the disease only of this present Life; and will last no longer than the day of
Grace: And woe to us a thousand times if it last so long: But when the day of
Mercy is past, be stupid if thou can, and harden thy heart against such
Thoughts if thou art able. Consideration is now our duty, and the fittest
instrument to show us the evil of Sin and the worth of Grace; but if it be here
neglected, it shall be our punishment hereafter, and the most cruel instrument
to torment us. Believe it then, we shall passionately wish that we had
considered a little sooner, and had let these things sink into our hearts: O
that we had pondered them whilst we had the day! But now the fearful night is
come upon us, and we are Sentenced everlastingly to such dismal Thoughts! If we
had spent a few serious Thoughts what this misery is to which we are now
condemned, we had escaped these Torments. If we had considered what it is to be
punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from
the Glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9. and to be forsaken of all comfort for
ever; we had not been now pouring forth these bitter cries and complaints: But
alas! what are they now worth, who regards them, or is moved to any the least
compassion toward: Yea the righteous God will laugh at your calamity, Prove.
1.26. and the Saints will praise him; and say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, in
the Sentence which thou have passed, in the Judgment which thou have executed,
Psalm. 119.137. Thou have poured forth thy wrath and indignation on them, and
given them gall and bitterness to drink, for they are worthy. You shall then
wish that your faculty to consider were gone; it will follow you so close, and
be such a perpetual honor to you; or rather that you had never had reason and
understanding to consider, then you might have both lived and died like a
beast: Whereas now, though you have lived like a beast, that you must die like
a man that has Memory, Reason, Foresight, Judgment and Affections, that will
all conspire together to overwhelm you with eternal shame. Why had I reason,
will the Soul say then, but to prevent this misery? Why had I will to choose,
when Life and Death were set before me, and could choose no better? Had it not
been a wiser course to have troubled my self a little while with some few
Thoughts of it, then now to feel it for ever? Why did God threaten Hell and
destruction in his Word, and set it forth with so much Terror to mine
apprehensions, but that I might consider and escape it? Why did he appoint the
Ministerial Office; but that knowing the Terrors of the Lord, they might
persuade men? 2 Cor. 5.11. What could nothing prevail with one, but what I now
feel, and must forever undergo? Think not to say then, I had not time to
consider, neither had I skill to follow such a work as this: It Is not so much a
knowing Head, as an honest Heart that is required to this work. The Truths are
but few and plain that thy Heart is to dwell upon, and the certainty of them is
beyond all doubt and question: Whatever difference of Opinion there may be in
other things, yet here is no controversy; all are agreed, that man has an
Immortal Soul; that there is a Life to come: That the Happiness of man lies in
these two things. 1. In being like to God. 2. In loving him, and being loved by
him; that sin has made us unlike to him, and therefore must be repented of:
That Christ will purge away their guilt and sin, and renew them by his Spirit,
that love him, and consent to be ruled by him, and will take him for their
Physician: That there is a day in which God will summon all the World before
him, and Judge them Impartially, according as they have believed, or not
believed in Christ, to everlasting joy or (...). These things are certain in
the highest (...) and there is none that doubts (...) but either an Atheist,
or an (...) are the Truths, that God has (...) in great mercy and compassion
(...) commanded every one, (...) Poer and Rich, (...) think upon when they are
(...) when they are walk(...), when they lie down, and (...) they rise up; and
to teach them diligently to their Children, and to live as those that do
believe and consider them.

Woe to the man or woman that considers not these things, good it had been for
him or her if they had never been born: Will thou not think of those things? It
is because thou art void of understanding, and have chose the way of
destruction: If thou will not be persuaded now to consider, thou will forget
thy latter end, thou will forget thine Immortal Soul, and God will be
forgotten, and a little sensual pleasure will weigh more with thee, than
Eternal Life and Happiness: And when the day of thy dishress is come upon thee,
thou will wish that thou had rather forgot to eat thy Bread, than these
things should have been forgotten; and to fill up thy measure, and make thee
perfectly miserable, God will forget thee forever.

Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tare you in pieces,
and there be none to aeliver.
I Have set some of the Motives before you that should stir you up to
Consideration, and showed you in part what a mischief it is for this faculty to
lie dead, which is given us by God to quicken those that are dead, to the Life
of Grace and Holiness, and to make them strong and lively, and vigorous
Christians that are quickened by the spirit of Christ, and have set their
affections upon things above, and not upon things here on Earth. This is the
way that God has prescribed for Rational Creatures to get home to God, that
are revolted from him; and to recover their affections to the right owner, that
are entangled in the love of Earth and vanity: If they would but consider,
would feed upon Swinish pleasures no longer; nor suffer their Souls to be
charmed with more delusion, nor prefer the imaginary dream of a sluggard,
before the happiness of a man that is awake, and whose eyes are open:
Consideration would show such a man the difference between Earth and Heaven,
rectify his judgment in this great point, (viz.) where man's happiness lies: And
tell him roundly how the world has cheated him with more shows and fantastic
pleasures, and put a picture into his hand instead of real felicity: It would
clear his Eyesight, and make him quite of another mind, than once he was, when
Inconsideracy had blinded him, and the world had befooled him; and he would see
much more reason to live in the love of God, looking for the mercies of his
Redeemer unto eternal Life, Jude the 21. than ever he did to live in carnal
love and delights: Consideration would bring the world and all its pleasures as
much into disgrace, as ever Inconsideracy brough^ them into credit: And men
that snatched at the riches and vain glory of the world before, as a sweet bit
to be purchased upon any terms, would after they are enlightened by
Consideration, suspect all its soberest pleasures, and those that come in upon
the fairest terms: What a Confession should you have from such a man of the
foolishness and madness of his former Conversation, when he lived upon Air and
Trash, as other Inconsiderate men still do? Such a one as Paul's, Tit. 3.3. For
we our selves (says he, describing his state before Consideration undeceived
him) were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures; Then you should hear him bitterly accuse and condemn the soberest
course he formerly took, when the World had the Supremacy in his mind and
heart: Strange it would be to see a man so much altered for the better, and
advanced to such an improvement in knowledge and virtue, as by impartial, sober
and considerate Thoughts might be done: He was, it may be, before a covetous,
busy worldling, that scraped and dig'd his happiness out of the dirt, and said
it up on Earth; Whose God was his belly, whose glory was his shame, that minded
Earthly things, Phil. 3.19. But now his conversation is in Heaven, and there he
has laid up his Treasure; And digs for Wisdom as for Silver, and searches for
it as for hid Treasure, Prove. 2.4. And his delight is among the Saints, and
such as excel in wisdom, Psalm. 16.3. O what a blessing has God bestowed upon
the man or woman to whom he has given a considering mind: How quickly is such
a man promoted, and brought to unspeakable honor; yea to find approbation with
God! Such a man is quickly higher by head and shoulders (as its said of Saul)
than the rest of the inconsiderate doting World: I have more understanding
(says David) than all my teachers, for thy Testimonies are my meditation,
Psalm. 119.99. You that are yet captivated to the love of any thing here on
Earth, and like to perish in that state. If you will but attentively consider
what you dote upon, and what you venture for it, you would perceive your
danger, and certainly make your escape, and feel the virtue of this excellent
duty of Consideration: And your present content, would make you sick of your
former delight: And the Honourablest men on earth, that had not feasted on this
food, would seem to you but vile and contemptible persons: Methinks I see the
man recovered by Consideration, t^king up his parable like Balaam, and saying,
Thus says the man whose eyes consideration has opened, He says, who has
heard the words of God, and seen the Vision of the Almighty: How goodly are the
Tents in which God dwells, and the tabernacles of their hearts where God has
his habitation: As the Valleys are they spread forth, as Gardens by the Rivers
side; as the Trees of Ligh-Alo^s which the Lord has planted, and as Cedar
Trees besides the waters, Numb. 24.3, 4, 5 6.

And as Consideration would recover the dead, and bring them out of the Grave
of ^gnorance and Corruption, and show them the excellency of Divine wisdom and
purity; so that it would keep them in breath that are already translated from
death to life, and inspire fresh vigor and cheerfulness into all their
services; it would fill their hearts with a burning love to God, and make their
lives as a shining light before men: It would strengthen their faith and
fortify their hopes, and put a fresh complexion upon their must withering and
consumptive Graces; and make their heart to abound and run over with joy and
gladness. By this time, no doubt you see something of the worth and excellency
of Consideration, and what a gainful trade it is: Will you therefore bend your
minds to consider, and spend more of your time in this work? I know the
corrupted heart of man is backward to this exercise, though it be of such flat
necessity, and of such eternal advantage; yea, though it breed so much delight
and pleasure, after we have gotten some skill, and made some progress in the
work, and have gotten some power over our own affections, and can bespeak them
in the most suitable moving way: For cure therefore of this backwardness, I
have given you some quickening Considerations, to stir you up to this duty; and
to gain the consent of your wills to this necessary duty.

In hopes therefore that you are convinced of the necessity of the duty, and
fully resolved on the performance; and that you will not neglect such a duty
any longer, nor stand in the way of your own light and comfort. I come next to
give you some Help and Assistance for the more comfortable and successful
management and performance of the work. And,

First, Endeavor to your power, to shun all Impediments, but especially those
that are most likely to stupify and unfit your minds for Consideration, they
are obvious, I need only to put you in remembrance.

First, Take heed that you sin not maliciously, (1.) with Wilfulness and
Presumption: For Divines usually distinguish of Three sorts of Sins. 1. Sins of
Ignorance, when through want of knowledge, we transgress the Law of God, and do
that unwittingly, which if we had known to be a violation of the Law of God, we
would not have done. 2. Sins of Infirmity, such as are committed through the
unavoidableness, unruliness of our Sense, Phantasy or Passion, which are not
wholly under the power and command of Reason, no not when it is truly
enlightened and sanctified. 3. Such as are committed with Knowledge and
Deliberation, when it is in our power to avoid them, and will not; what these
are, I need not inform you, every one may be his own judge: These last sort are
called by some, Sins of Malice; and how much such sins as these will hinder all
duty, as well as Consideration, there is no Christian of any experience, but
knows too well: And therefore David prays especially against such sins as
these, Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy servant from Presumptuous Sins, let them not
have dominion over me; then shall I be upright and innocent from the great
transgression: If thou have any good affection to this duty, and art convinced,
that thy Soul will certainly perish without frequent serious consideration;
thou have need to take heed of such sins as these: Believe it, these will wound
thy Conscience, break thy inward peace, mightily provoke the Lord, and draw
away the Spirit from thee, and fill thee with disturbing fears, and besot thy
mind, that it shall not be fit for Consideration; or if not, such sins as these
will dispose thee to hide thy self, and get into thee dark and sly
consideration, as that which will discover thy shame, and make thee odious to
thy self: Never think to bend thy mind to an impartial consideration of God and
his Attributes, and the Equity of Laws, nor to think of thy latter end, and the
life to come, to any purpose, or to hear a right answer from thy Soul, when
thou put the question whether it be sanctified or unsanctified, whilst thou
give thy consent, and allowest thy self to live in any known sin. I may say
of Consideration, as Mr. Bolton said of Prayer, That it will make thee leave
such presumptuous sinning; Or else such sins will make thee to cast off
Consideration; you may as well hope to reconcile light and darkness, as to
bring these to any agreement. Where Consideration is in any strength, there
will be no wilful sin, or else Hell it self: Art thou one that allowest thy
self in the habitual neglect of any known duty? Can thou freely indulge thy
self in any unjust or ungodly practice? Are thy Thoughts at liberty to think
vainly and wickedly without curb or control? Is thy Tongue at liberty to utter
falsehood and deceit, to call evil good, or good evil, to plead any unrighteous
causes, or to disgrace any way that thou know in thy Conscience God
approves of? Art thou wilfully proud, or uncharitable; and art thou
intemperate in thy Appetite, or Passions, or commonly guilty of any such sin,
that thy own Conscience does condemn? No wonder then if Consideration be an
unpleasant work to thee, and if thy Thoughts turn away from him that abhors
all iniquity, but that especially which is wilful and allowed: It is no marvel
that Meditation is seldom or never, in the word of the Lord that condemns
such practices, as you can allow and approve, and sets a black mark upon all
those in whom there is any reigning sin: Take heed sin committed with
deliberation and allowance is not far from it, for one such sin mightily
disposes to another; and where once such sins are ordinary and habitual, it
shows that sin has gotten the dominion: But the mind will not be so averse to
thy duty, that has a respect to all the Commandments, and that does not give
toleration to any one sin, that it knows to be such, but does confess shame
himself for, strive and Pray against every corruption that he is conscious to
himself of: I know some difficulty there will be after all, but yet such as
will easily yield, and be overcome, when once this grand impediment is removed:
And no sin has your allowance and consent, but is seriously rejected and
opposed.

2dly. The next great enemy to this necessary duty of Consideration, is a fond
and inordinate delight in any thing here on earth: For where there is such a
doting love, your Thought will be continually at the command of that beloved
object, and all the other Affections will be still employed under the command
of that doting love: If it be something in present possession, your heart will
be daily with it; or if it be off a little while, it is not at rest; or else
it is doing something that may root this inordinate love, and make it faster and
stronger; its main care is to keep fast hold, and its only fear is lest it
should be deprived of it. And Consideration there will be little or none,
unless it be to keep out the light of those Truths that would spoil the
pleasure of such an Idolized comfort. Possibly there may be in such a heart
some Thoughts of God and the Life to come, especially in those that are
frequently told, and in part convinced of the necessity of such Thoughts; but
whilst such a foolish love prevails, such Thoughts will come to nothing, and
be made of none effect; or if the heart be thus inordinatly set upon a thing,
that is not yet in its possession; thy defires will be so eager and impatient
after it, that there will be neither time nor room for such Consideration as I
am now persuading thee to, whilst thy mind is disturbed and vexed with such
insolent Passions as these; you may easily imagine, with what Tergversation and
backwardness it will come to such a work as this, as does discover that
sinfulness and folly of them: Every thing naturally seeks its own
preservation; and so we must expect that lust will do also, it will keep
possession so long as it is able; its hard to pursue any worldly pleasure with
heat and passion, and at the same time to enter upon any serious Consideration
of the vanity of it; it is not casie to let the affections loose upon any sinful
and unlawful delights, and with all to consider impartially at the same time,
the fearfulness of Gods displeasure against such practices: There Is nothing can
be well done, where Love does not lead the way; and how can Spiritual love
prevail, where Carnal Farthly love has got dominion: I know God can bring such
a man to Consideration, that has captivated his heart to some Earthly delight,
otherwise it were hard to think how he could be brought to Repentance; but then
usually the strength and vehemence of the affection is abated, either by the
power of God's Word, or some affliction or other, before the mind will be
brought to any sober Consideration: But yet I say, whilst such inordinate love
is in exercise and strength, it will keep out Consideration, and set the hear^
against it. So that if such a one would have his mind at liberty to Consider,
he must draw the Fuel that feeds Affection, and weaken it by a resolved
Abstinence from that which is its nourishment, and submit to any afflictions
that God sends for his help, and be glad of such a blessed advantage to bring
him to his right mind again, otherwise that work of Consideration will go but
heavily on; especially when the things to be considered are so much of another
nature, and so opposite to all Carnal, Fleshly love and delights whatsoever.

Thirdly, Another great hindrance to Consideration, will be the Company and
Talk of more worldly men: You shall be sure to meet with nothing from such
Fellowship as this that will animate and quicken you to such Thoughts as these;
if your mind be never so little disposed to meditate in the Law of God, and
think of a future reckoning and account, and to examine what preparation is
made toward it; you shall find enough in their Frothy, Idle, Impertinent, or
Sinful discourse to quench such Thoughts, and to bend your mind quite another
way; but nothing to promote or set forwards any good inclination or desire:
Alas, the the heart of man is naturally too backward to Sober and Impartial
Consideration of the most concerning matters, that we have need of all the help
we can get to put the mind in such Heavenly frame and temper, and need not any
thing to pull back and discourage: It Is necessary to retire from the company
and converse of those that are good, when we would attend this work to any
purpose, much more from the Society of men whose Tongues are continually
employed about vanity and sin: But if thou would be fit for the Consideration
that I am pressing on thee, avoid such Company as this, not only when thou art
more solemnly addressing thy self to this work, but also at other times also:
For such Companions will be storing thy mind with such empty notions and
impressions as will pervert it, and keep out such matter that should furnish
and supply it for the successful peformance of this duty: O how does the Chatt
and foolish Talk of Idle Lightheaded men damp any good Seed in thee, and
weaken all good affections! and therefore must needs be a deadly enemy to the
Consideration which should be promoted thereby: I appeal to those that have
their Ears continually filled with discourse about the matters of this Life,
about their Flocks and their Herds, and their Lands and their Trades, where the
Fair is to day, and where the Market is to Morrow, and what News is stirring
(to say no worse) how hard is it to get any Reverential Thoughts of God, or any
affecting apprchensions of the Life to come: It is no easy matter to get thy
heart affected with thy sin, and the mischief it has done thee, and that woeful
state and condition of those that die in it, when thy discourse is altogether
of another nature. But if the discourse be Wanton, Obscene, Profane, and much
more if it be ^theistical, and intended to the scorn and derision of Holiness,
or any of the means God has appointed to promote it; what impression this is
like to make upon the Hearers, I wish you nover know by experience: Woe to the
persons that use the Talents God has given them to such a wicked purpose, and
serve the Devil so openly in the world; and that are employed as his Agents,
not only to destroy themselves, but to pervert and destroy the Souls of others
with whom they have any fellowship; I would not be in the condition of those
that go down to the Grave with the guilt of such a sin on them for all the
World: If as the Apostle tells us, He that converte^h a sinner from the evil of
his wa^, shall save his Soul from death, and hide (...) of sins, James 5.23.
What reward shall be given unto thee thou false tongue, Psalm. 120.3. that
studiest to convert a sinner to the error of thy ways, and to bring his soul
to death? what shall be done unto thee, that do in plain terms, or else by
cunning Fetches endeavor to discourage thy brother from prayer, meditation in
the word of God, and consideration of the life to come? If you have any belief
of the life to come and compassion for your souls, avoid the company of such
persons as much as you can, and stopped your ears to such discourses, or rather
openly declaim against them and rebuke the persons roundly, that are such
enemies to the salvation of men's souls, and consequently to all the means that
should promote and bring it to pass, amongst which Consideration is none of the
least.

Fourthly, see that you carefully shun too much occupation in worldly affairs:
If your thoughts be much entangled with the matters of the world, they will be
very unfit for the consideration of such weighty serious things which you must
think upon, till you are affected with them more than all other matters that
merely concern this life, or else wish that God had never given you a thinking
faculty. Be still and know that I am God, so we render it, Psalm. 46.10. But in
the Hebrew it is (...) (1.) Desist from, and remit your other employments and
consider that I am God: For the Verb (...) in Hiph, signifies, Desistere,
Absistere, Remittere. (1.) To desist, to leave off or remit: If worldly matters
be too busy in your heads, spiritual and eternal things cannot be considered,
nor thought upon as they ought. You may as well walk upright with a Mountain on
your backs, as erect your thoughts Heavenward, whilst they are encumbered with
the world. Though slight and trivial business may be transacted in a Crowd, yet
when we have matters of weight and moment, we then choose silence and
ret^^^ment. Let me tell you there is nothing of such consequence as those things
that are to fall under our consideration: And do you think a mind distract with
worldly cares is fit for such a work as this? It is not easy to be affected
with the eye of God that is ever on us, and to stand always in awe of him,
unless frequent, serious consideration make way. And who can do that, that has
one worldly business or another perpetually in his mind? And is even burdened
and oppressed with such thoughts. As the eye of the body is disturbed by the
violent motion of the Wind or Air; so the eye of the understanding is more
perturbed, by busy, confused and tumultuous thoughts: And although they that
have their heads continually exercised and employed in worldly business are
very subject to such confusion and disorder, yet even those also that have not
their hands very much employed, may have their hearts in continual disturbance,
and agitation, and may have as little vacancy and leisure for such
consideration, as those that are over head and ears in the World, and are as
busy all the day long as if they were laboring for a Crown or Kingdom. It is
an unvaluable mercy to have a free composed and undisturbed mind, and to have
vacancy and leisure to ask a man's self what he is doing? and whether it will
yield him comfort when he is passing out of the World? Many have bitterly
repented them that they have had so many Irons in the Fire, and that with
Martha, they have been careful and solicitous for many things, whilst they have
neglected the one thing necessary, Luke 10.41. Let their Repentance be a
warning unto us that the oppressing cares of the world do not either prevent or
else smother and choke better thoughts.

Fifthly, Another grand obstruction to the work of necessary consideration, is
pride, in all the kinds thereof: As God deals with pride, so pride deals with
him; He looks upon the proud, and the proud look upon him afar off; or rather
he regards them not at all, nor they him: The wicked through the pride of his
countenance will not consider and seek after God; God is not in all his
thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. His ways are always grievous to him. They are far above
out of his sight, Verse. 5. Though the proud man looks too high, yet not high
enough (you see) to take God into his consideration, who should be the
principal object of it. There is none that stands at a greater distance from
God, both Actively and Passively by way of sin and punishment, than the proud
person. Though the heart that is lifted up with pride bears it self so high,
yet not high enough for such a work as consideration is, that is to be
exercised in the highest matters: It Is true both pride and consideration are of
an aspiring nature, and yet you can scarce name two things that are more
inconsistent. The one seeks the vanishing breath and applause of men; The other
is ambitious of God's approbation: The one reaches after the pomp and glory of
the Earth, and the other foares after the riches and glory of Heaven: And as
pride lifts up the flesh; so consideration does enable and advance the
Spirit. Now he that is gotten up to the Top of wordly pride and greatness, is
far more indisposed to consider the high Attributes of God and his glorious
perfections; and the life to come, and the joys of Heaven; than he that is cast
down and humbled by worldly poverty and shame; he has a better prospect into
the Heavenly Kingdom and Glory; and sees more of the Majesty of God, and the
splendor and dignity of his, Servants, that is placed low in the world, than
he that is got upon a Pinnacle, or stands upon the Mountain of worldly honor
and felicity. There is no man that is the least acquainted with the (...) of
God, but will easily confess, that an (...) lowly spirit has more clear,
distinct, affecting apprehensions of the highest things, than the proudest and
most (...) spirit. Men think to advance themselves to honor by such a spirit
as this; but it is certainly true, that nothing does more debase them, so true
is it, th^^ Solomon ^ffi^^meth, that the wicke wor^^^th a deceifed, work R^o^^,
11.18. As pride is an en^my to all grace whatsoever, so it is a deadly enemy to
consideration; for there is nothing would more effectually stame and disgrace it
th^n consideration would; and ^^erefore it says (...) it as Ahab of Mical^^ I
hate it, for it never prophesies good concerning m^, bu^ evil, 1 King 22.8.

A little sober, serious consideration would quickly tell a man, what a worm he
is, as David says and no man, Psalm, 22.6. and what little cause he has to
swell and be lifted up; and therefore while he has a mind to be great in his
own eyes, and in the eyes of others he will not conside^: It Is not possible for
a proud man whilst he continues to be such, to let his mind loose to impartial
consideration and meditation in the Word and Works of God: He will quickly
stumble at this Rock of Offense, and dash his foot against the Cross of Christ,
and despise the humility and poverty of spirit that is such an essential
property to all his true Disciples, and Followers, Isa, 8.14. and Romans 9.32. As
ever you would have your minds free for consideration, without which it is not
possible to be wise to salvation; take heed of an insolent, haughty mind, for
such a one is always an unteachable mind. It Is the humble that God has
promised to dwell with, and teach; The rest will not be taught, but say to the
Almighty, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job, 21.14.
It Is a deep sense of emptiness and thirst after happiness that makes way for
consideration: but they that ae full and happy in their own account, have no
need of it, nor will be brought to consider that they are poor and miserable,
and blind and naked, Rev. 3.17. And yet without consideration they are lost for
ever; for there is no surer way than inconsideracy to the greatest poverty and
shame.

Sixthly, If you would taste the pleasure, and partake of the great profit that
consideration would be sure to bring along with it, set your self in good
earnest against a fickle, slothful spirit; I put these both together, because I
would not multiply particulars too far. It is the natural disease of man's Soul
since it has forsaken God, either to sit still and pine away in sloth and
negligence, or else to wander up and down from one variety to another; both
these extremes are too incident to the perverted nature of man, and stand in
very great opposition to the duty of Consideration: our corrupted minds are
very prone, either to sleep securely, or else to dream and wander about; either
to be altogether idle, or busy to no purpose. They are both Feverish
Distempers of the Soul, only one is the hot, and the other is the cold Fit; but
they are both far enough from that sound and even Constitution, wherein the
health of the Soul does consist. The great difficulty of consideration lies in
the aversness of our hearts to any fixed, serious thoughts of any thing, much
more of God and the life to come, and matiers of that nature: The mind is of a
wandering nature, and quickly weary of continued, pertinent, orderly thoughts of
any thing: but yet those that have overcome that fickleness of a roving mind as
to other things, yet are backward enough to think with pertinency, life and
affections upon spiritual and eternal things; It Is easy to let the mind wander
from one object to another, and very suitable to the fickle, mutable nature of
man, that having left God, is become most unlike him. This is the temper of the
greatest part of the world; whose minds are become like a queazy or wanton
stomach, that must taste of this and that, and the other dish and cannot keep
to any one, so their minds and affections are now after this thing, presently
after another; and are more alterable than the wind or weather. First, They are
sick for this or that beloved Object, and then by and by they are sick of it,
just now they are sick for the thought and desire of such a thing; and
presently they are as sick of the enjoyment of it, and quickly forget it. Hence
it is that the Psalmist tells us, That man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain, Psalm. 39.6. How can that man consider any thing as
he ought, or look beyond the Face and Appearance of any thing, that distracts
himself with such variety of thoughts, such multiplicity of Objects that have
not any any affinity with each other? The Eyes of a Fool, says Solomon, are in
the ends of the earth, Prove. 17.24. (that is) upon every impertinent, idle
object that concerns him not. It would very much dispose our minds to that
consideration, I am speaking of, to make the mind attend and keep close to the
duties that concern us, and the work that we are about: The more we give it a
liberty to fly about every where, and to think of matters that concern it not;
the more unfit will it be to be confined to any serious consideration of
Heavenly things And as a roving, wandering mind is very unmeet for
consideration, so is a slothful, lazy spirit that will not be at any pains in
thinking, though of the greatest matters in the world: That, when you would
bring it on to consideration, draws back, and cries there is a Lion in the way,
Prove. 26.13. and is discouraged at every difficulty. That will not undergo any
labor, first to clear the truth to the understanding and then to bring it to
the heart. The sothful man hides his hand in his bosom, and will not so much
as bring it to his mouth again, says the wiseman, Pro. 19.24. No wonder if
such a mind famish for want of knowledge that will not bend it self to consider
of the things that concern its everlasting peace; no wonder if the Vineyard of
the slothful be overgrown with thorns, and if nettles cover the face thereof,
and the stone Wall thereof be broken down, Prove. 24.30. He must needs be
Ignorant that will not search, and hunt after knowledge; and he must needs have
a crude, raw, and undigested knowledge that will not Roast what he took in
hunting, and will not take the pains to work the truth upon his heart which he
has gotten into his mind, Prove. 12.27. If you desire heartily to be rid of
those distempers, you must use force and violence with your thoughts, and
confine them when they would wander, and spur them up when they would lie Idle.
Under God man has the greatest command over his own mind, and ought to use the
authority God has given him to compel it to the frequent exercise of this
duty; as you would deal with your beast that is skittish or jadish, so you must
deal with your mind; if your horse be skittish and unruly, you will use the
curb and bridle to tame and bring him into order; you must use the same
prudence with a skittish, unrul^^ mind, that would not be under command, but
wander after its own imagination: On the other side if your Hearse be dull and
jadish, you will make him feel the spur and whip till he mends his pace; so
must you do also by a sleepy, stupid mind, wake it out of its security; and use
your Sovereignty over it, till you have made it yield, and it begins to feel
the sweetness of those thoughts, that before it would not endure, nor give any
way to. He that can prevail thus with his own heart shall prevail with God. So
much for the First Direction to the duty of Consideration, viz. Shun all
impediments.

Secondly, As you must avoid all that will either hinder or discourage the work
of consideration; so you must do all that will promote and further it: As

First, It will much conduce to the successful performance of this duty, to be
skilful in it. Now this skilfulness lies in these two things. (1) That your
mind be truly convinced that God is the summum bonum. (1.) The chiefest good,
and that your happiness consists in likeness to, and communion with him; and
that you have arguments at hand to increase this conviction, and to advance it
to a higher degree by a quiet daily consideration of them. (2.) That you know
how to move upon your own affections, that they may be answerable to this
conviction; I mean that you be skilled to excite love to God, desire after him,
joy and delight in him, hope toward him, and the rest of the mixed and more
compounded affections of thankfulnefs to him, repentance for sins committed
against him; and that by such Rhetoric and Persuasions that most prevail with
him: and to this end it is necessary, that your memory, if not your heart, be
stored with matter fit to work upon mind and heart, collected out of the Word
and Providence of God, and from the daily observation of your own temper and
inclinations; and that you can cloth it with expressions that work best upon
your own Genius and Disposition. That matter and way of pressing it upon your
mind and affections is best to you which prevails most with them; and which
will vary according to men's different complexions, education, society, studies
and other circumstances, which make a man lie open to this or that way of
arguing more than any other; and more easy it may be to be wrought upon by a
more probable argument, than others by a plain demonstration. Such a Scheme of
Rhetoric will stir this man's affection, that will not move another: and the
phrase and manner of expression will set one man on fire, that will not warm
another; so that it is no small step to the success of your meditations, to be
well versed in your own temper and constitution, and to handle your self
accordingly when you come to treat by way of Soliloquy with your own Soul.
Moreover, the main stick to some men's proficiency lies more in their
understandings, than in their affections: In others the obstruction is most in
their affections; for some are more easily conquered by rational arguments that
convince and satisfy the understanding; others by such as work more upon the
affections.

The more you have of this skill to discern the most suitable method to deal
with your self, and what are the fittest applications; the more you are like to
profit in, and by consideration. Your reproofs, admonitions, and encouragements
are the more likely to do their work when they are suitably applied, and hit
you in the right Vein.

Thirdly, Another help to consideration will be to charge it upon your self as
a duty of flat necessity: why is it that men that make conscience of prayer,
yet make none at all of this duty of consideration, though this be of as
absolute necessity as the other? And prayer is like to turn into a mere form,
and prove ineffectual without Meditation: For what can you imagine can be the
reason, but that they take the one to be their duty, and not the other, when as
God has enjoined the one as peremptorily as the other? And some set time
should be set apart daily for the one as well as for the other. It Is Meditation
that inspires life into Prayer, hearing the Word, and all other duties. And
consideration, as well as prayer, must help you to profit by the providence of
God toward you. For God will have man to have a subordinate hand in his own
proficiency and salvation; and consideration is the leading Act whereby man is
instrumental to his own happiness. It could not be, that this duty should be so
generally neglected and performed by so few, excepting by the By, unless it
were generally thought to be no duty: men that have any Conscience dare not
live in the constant neglect of a known duty but they will be worried by their
Conscience, which will frequently twit them with their neglect. And they will
perform it in a dead and customary manner rather than not at all, and so be
feared to undergo the lashes of their own guilty minds that will frequently
scourge them; well, whether you will charge it upon your selves as a duty of
absolute and indispensible necessity or no; so it is, duty will be duty, think
how you will; and your slight and careless thoughts, will not make the Law of
God of none effect. You have no small obligation upon you to this duty, whether
you will take notice of it, yea or not. If you neglect this duty; and have any
Spark of true grace in your souls, any sincere love to God and faith in his
Son, you will quickly perceive the want of this duty in the languishing
condition of your soul; your grace will quickly wither, and look with a
famished, pined complexion, and prayer and all other duty will starve into a
mere form, want those holy affections, which are the very life and soul of
them; and if you have no grace in sincerity, none you are like to have, till
you are brought to impartial, serious consideration. Is it not better therefore
to know your duty, and the great necessity of it, and bless God, that you are
not kept in the dark, as many others are, that know of what moment it is, and
perish for want of it? If it were not a duty so necessary to salvation, then
perhaps, the ignorance and neglect of it were not to be so much lamented; but
when the want of it will so apparently destroy your souls, it is time to look
about you, and to lay a further obligation on your selves by your own vow and
promise, to be frequent in the practice of it. The duty is bound upon you
already by a double necessity. (1.) By the necessity of a precept. (2.) By the
necessity of a means. God has commanded it, and therefore if there were no
other obligation, this were sufficient to engage us to the performance. But if
there were no command of God to enforce the duty, yet since it is a means
without which salvation is so impossible, and has such a mighty influence upon
faith and all other grace, now it becomes doubly necessary to us. Let us then
add a third necessity and lay a faster obligation upon our selves, by charging
it upon our own souls, and obliging our selves by deliberate vow and resolution
to as Consciscientious performance of it, as we do of Prayer, or any other duty
that we dare not neglect; lest we should not be able to rise or go to Bed
without fear and the disturbance of a guilty mind.

Thirdly, It will be a singular advantage to the work of Consideration, (though
more remote) to be temperate. Now Temperance is taken in the widest compass,
for Moderation in the use of all Earthly Comforts; And in this larger extent
it is taken, when Epictetus comprehends all Virtue in those two words;
Temperance and Patience, or Abstinence and Sustinence, (...): Or else it is
taken in its narrower compass, for Moderation in those more gross and bodyty
pleasures, such as Meat and Drinks; and (...) or Essentinacy; it is Temperance
in this more restrained sense that I here recommend to you. Though I know, as
it is taken in its widest acception, it must needs farther it more (...),
because it includes the other, and much more, but then it would be co-incident
with the second impediment, which was to shun all ^^ordi^a^e delights in any
thing here on Earth.

The mind that is oppressed with Meat and (...), and dispirited with Venery,
and made (...) with Da^^ance and Effeminacy, is not fit for Contemplation
(either Solemn or Occasional) unless it be of Carnal or Corpo^eal Beaut^^ it is
altogether ^^meer for the pure and spiritual Contemplation of the Divine
Excellencies, and the ravishing Beauty of Holiness; that are not enjoyed but by
one that is clear in understanding and pure in heart, which they can never be,
which sot and pollute themselves with such muddy and impure delights.

The duty of Set and Solemn Contemplation requires an illuminated, attentive
mind, and a cheerful heart, if it be performed with any considerable Success:
But now, Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart, Hos. 4.11. They
defraud this duty of that sprightfulness, vigor and affection that it
requires; and the Understanding that is perpetually smoked with the Fumes that
rise from an overcharged Stomach, has few Lucida intervalla, and is never
perspicacious, and sit for such contemplation. I deny not, but some degrees of
this intemperance may consist with this duty, and there may be some vacancy for
a little dull exercise of this work: But if this disease be grown to any height
or prevalency, the mind will be so listless, and the affections will be so
earthly, that you may as well move a Block, as such a surfeited soul to these
Sublime and Raised Meditations. It will be like Anselm's Bird with a heavy
weight tied to the Leg of it, when it begins to fly and lift up it self, or
rather, it will have no disposition to fly at all. O that all Gluttons and
Drunkards, and Persons addicted to Filthiness and Wantonness were well sensible
of this, that are like to perish for ever for want of that Consideration that
should save them from destruction. Little do they think how they starve in the
midst of such Plenty, and how lean and famished their Souls are, whilst Their
eyes stick out with fatness, Psalm. 73.7. Hence it is that your Gluttons and
Wine-bibers, and the rest of our Belly-Gods are so little acquainted with the
life to come, and that they so little relish any discourse with themselves or
others about Heavenly things; and that the Lord is not the Portion of their
Cup, Psalm. 16.5. Hence it is that those that are so familiar at the Cookes-Shop
or Tavern, are so strange to the place of Gods Residence, and inter-meddle not
with the Heavenly Joys.

But although it be this gross Intemperance and Sensuality that is so Point
Blank an enemy to Consideration; yet I must say also that every degree of
Intemperance does much hinder the duty, and interrupt the joy and pleasure
thereof. For as it is a Sin against God, and much provokes him to withdraw and
conceal himself, so it is a very malignant Enemy to the health and vivacity of
Mind, that this duty calls for; for it weakens the Brain, and spoils the
Memory, which should supply matter to Meditation, and which is worse, it
brutifyes the heart. When the Storehouse of the Body is full, the Storehouse
of the Mind must needs be empty of every thing, but Fumes and Vapors, with
which it is like enough to abound, and such Notions as these minister to: No
wonder if God be seldom in such Men's Memories or Hearts. Therefore the Prophet
complains of the full-fed Israelites, that they were estranged from the Lord,
According to their Pasture so were they filled, they were filled, and their
heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me says the Lord, Hos. 13.6.
And why so; but because such Fullness and Intemperance will not let Men
consider, and without this God must needs be forgotten, because he lies not
open to the bodily eye or sense; it is the pure mind and heart that must see
him both here and hereafter; and if these that are pure in heart are the
blessed men, Mat. 5.8. Then they are cursed that are impure in mind and heart
through Intemperance and other Lusts, because they neither do now by
consideration, nor shall hereafter see God in the Beatifical Vision; but
Temperance disposes unto both.

Fourthly, If you have any good Evidence that Christ is yours, and you are his,
it will very much promote and sweeten the work of Consideration: I know that
Consideration is a necessary means to bring a man to Christ, and to turn the
course of his affections and conversation; but yet so soon as a man feels this
work done, that the world is resolutely forsaken, and God is heartily chosen,
the Soul will be then better disposed to contemplate the glory of God and
Heaven, to turn its thoughts upon the promises of the Gospel, when it has some
interest and propriety in them; yea, and to think with pleasure upon the
threatenings of Gods Word, the nearness of death, the Worm of Conscience that
shall torment the wicked for ever and ever, after it has made some good
escape, and the bitterness of death is past, and the Sting pulled out.

It Is no absurdity nor contradiction that Consideration should bring a man to
Christ, and that the knowledge of a man's interest in Christ should prompt him
to, and further him in the work of Consideration; that Consideration should
beget Grace, and that Grace again should beget Consideration. This (...) is
frequent both in Nature and Grace: What more proper to bring a man to
Repentance, than to consider the folly of his ways, the filthiness and danger
of his Sin, and the terror and unavoidableness of Gods wrath? Who more like to
be burdened with his transgressions, and feel the load of his iniquities, than
he that frequently considers what misery it brings upon him both here and
hereafter; and how impossible it is to escape without Repentance? Who more
likely to abhor himself, to be humbled and broken in heart, to confess his Sin
with Shame, and to resolve against it (which are but the several parts of
Repentance) than he that considers how he has affronted God, perverted his
Order, seduced his Brethren, and wronged his own Soul, and disparaged the very
Reason that God has given him, and laid the Foundation of Gods Eternal
displeasure, and his own everlasting ruin? You see Consideration, when it is
of such particulars, is the ready way to bring a Sinner to Repentance. And on
the other side, who so like to find joy and pleasure in the Contemplation of
Heaven, and the joys thereof, in the possession it self, and the promise that
gives Right and Title to it, than he that has some good hope through Grace
that he shall enjoy it: So that you see of what use Consideration is both
before and after Conversion; but yet as before Regeneration there may be in the
heart of a Sinner that love which works by desire, though not that which
works by complacency to Heaven and heavenly things; so before Conversion
there may be that Consideration that is forced and constrained, but after
Conversion it is like to be more sweet and pleasant, and to bring in greater
profit and advantage. O could you but look upon God as your reconciled Father
in Christ, and one that is at peace with you, how would this help up your
thoughts Heavenward, and sweeten your Meditations of the life and happiness to
come? you would not need then so much to force and spur up your mind to such
comfortable thoughts; at least sometimes it will be getting up of its own
voluntary accord upon Mount Nebo, to view the promised Land; he that hopes to
be one of the Inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, will at least sometimes
walk about Sion, and go round her, and tell the Towers thereof: And mark well
her Bulwarks, and view and consider her stately Mansions and Palaces, Psa.
48.12, 13. what an encouragement will you have to look up and behold the glory
and perfection of the Divine Nature, when you can say, This is my Father, and
these Attributes I have an Interest in? But yet I must needs confess, that even
after Conversion there will be oft-times much backwardness and reluctance to
this spiritual and heavenly Duty; and you will need to quicken up your selves,
and chide your backward hearts, that they should be so strange to the place
where their Treasure is laid up: But yet it will not be so hard to bring your
heart to such Meditations as it was, when you were without hope, and without
God in the world.

Fifthly, It will further the work of consideration, to lay Temporal things in
the balance with Eternal things, and to make advantage of every Object that is
presented to our Senses, to make the consideration of the highest and greatest
things more warm and piercing: You may very well and rationaily conclude, that
if the glory of Earth be so great as to dazzle the eyes of some beholders, and
strongly to enamour their affections, that the glory of Heaven does far
outshine it. He has reserved joy and gladness indeed for that place and
state, if there be so much to be found in this sinning imperfect state here on
Earth; for all Earthly things serve but to the example and shadow of Heavenly
things, Heb. 8.5. If the beauty of the body be so taking, that men and women
oftentimes dote upon it, what is the beauty of the Soul do you think? and if it
were to be seen with bodily eyes, how much would it ravish and amaze the
beholders? If the pleasure of the Senses be so sweet and delicious that men
will buy them at the dearest rate; how sweet must the pleasures of the Soul
needs be, when there is so vast a difference between the Soul and Body that are
the subjects of these pleasures.

As there is an unspeakable disproportion between a Spirit and a Body, so there
must needs be as wide a disproportion between the delights of the one, and the
delights of the other. For I suppose none can be so absurd as to think, that
the state to come shall be no better than this present state, and that men's
Bodies are as much worth as their Souls; and the Heaven, which is the place of
his glorious Habitation and Palace, is no more adorned than the Earth: None can
be so void of reason to think, that God bestows as much upon his Rational
Creatures, whilst they are in a state of Trial and Probation, as when they are
come to Perfection, and are actually chosen to be Citizens of the Heavenly
Corporation, where they shall live for ever: How can the joy of Seed-time be
comparable to the joy of Harvest? And how can this visible Sun rejoice the
Creatures that it shines upon, so much as the Face of God will rejoice those
that behold it? You may well therefore rise up in your Meditations from any
perfection that you behold on Earth, to admire those perfections that are
unseen: They are the greatest that lie not open to the bodily eye, nor can be
enjoyed by any Corporeal Faculty or Organ: so that when you walk abroad, and
look upon the glory of the visible Heaven and Earth, you may much more admire
the splendor and excellency of the invisible Heavens, and consequently of all
those things that lead thither: God that made all things, made those visible
things, that they might be some advantage to the Understanding of things
invisible; and that they might lead up our apprehensions and affections to him
that cannot be immediately seen without the help of such a Glass. God is
infinitely exalted above our understanding, neither are we capable of having
any direct and proper Conceptions of the state and life to come; and therefore
the glory of Heaven is set forth to us in the Word of God, by such things as
seem glorious to our Senses: The Streets of the New Jerusalem, or Heaven, are
said to be paved with Gold, and the Gates to consist of Pearl and precious
Stones; and the pleasures of that state are set forth by a Feast, because these
are so pleasing to our Senses. Now though we must not understand these things
in a proper litteral sense, yet we are hence instructed, that the happiness is
exceeding great, and such as cannot be well understood by us, but by such helps
as these: So that we may well argue from any pleasures or excellency here on
Earth, to the excellency and pleasure of that state, and make this advantage of
all sensible comforts, to make our apprehensions of things spiritual more
lively and affecting. As therefore you may collect the unspeakable torment and
misery of the Damned, by the pressures and calamities that we feel here on
Earth; and Hell is usually set forth by Fire and Darkness, and a Worm
continually feeding upon the Conscience, which are things obvious to our
Senses: so likewise is the splendor and dignity of the Saints set forth by a
Crown, and Scepter, and Kings, things most glorious here on Earth: And this use
we should wisely make of these things to put life into our Meditations, which
otherwise would little affect us.

Sixthly, Lastly you must diligently read and hear the Word of God, peruse the
labors of those that are most skilful in the exposition and application
thereof. If you ask me who they are; I answer, use your best endeavors to
know, and make the most impartial enquiry. The frequent casting your eye upon,
and opening your ear to such matters, is the way to get good furniture into
your memory and heart, which will ever and anon creep into your thoughts, and
even invite and constrain you to dwell with more intentness and affection on
them: But you when you are reading, and hearing these things that must be the
Subject of your Meditations, and sowing the Seed of future consideration, you
must drive away the Birds of Prey that would devour the Seed that you have
sown, I mean all disturbing worldly thoughts, and keep your mind as much
retired from all other things as you are able, that it may be free and open to
the impressions of the Word and Spirit; those especially that are unfurnished
for Meditation must take this course, for it is most like to prosper, since it
has not only Precept, but Reason to enforce it. They must never expect to have
their Souls biased to, and fitted for this Duty, that neglect these means
which the Wisdom of God has appointed, and let their thoughts scamble about,
and employ their eyes and ears about any petty matters, rather than in the
reading and hearing of Gods Word, and such explications of it as are likeliest
to bring it to the mind and heart; especially read and hear those passages of
truth (that Life and Salvation most depends on) most frequently, and get them
as fast into your mind as you are able, and a right understanding of the very
tenor and chief scope of the Gospel, which is to bring men to the sight of
their sins, and by that to come to Christ as his tractable Disciples, and by
Faith in Christ to Salvation; which design that it might bring to pass, it sets
the highest motives and encouragement before us, and gives us the greatest
helps: But above all parts of Scripture, the Psalms of David frequently read,
will promote you in the work of consideration, and teach you h^^ to stir up
such affections as you see Davi^ expresses almost in every Psalm. There you
may see how he sets upon God sometimes, sometimes stirs up his own Soul,
confers with God, communes with his own heart, that he might kindle the Fire of
Gods Love in his heart, which is the principal design of consideration; for
whether he express sorrow and contrition for his sin, it is but that he may
stir up hatred in his Soul against it, which is the great impediment to the
Love of God: Or if he express and utter his complaints of the vanity of the
World, and the miseries of this life, all is to quicken up his desires after
the true happiness of his Soul; and you know love is intrinsecal and essential
to desire; if he enlarge, as he does frequently in the praises of the Lord, and
display his glory, and muster up his perfections, and call Heaven, and Earth,
and Sea, and all the Inhabitants of them, and all the Islands and Continents of
the World, and bring in their testimony to him; and to make his Name glorious,
if he summon every living thing that has breath to praise the Lord, it is that
he may advance the esteem and increase the love of God in his own heart, and
the hearts of others; and therefore from this Book you may fetch matter enough,
and argument for consideration to make use of for the kindling of this and all
other holy and devout affections; yea the very outside, I mean the phrase and
expression of the Psalms is such, as has a powerful Rhetoric with it to set
the heart on fire with the love of God; no contemplative and devout Christian
but has had very familiar acquaintance with this Book. I have told you the
flat necessity of consideration, if ever a man be brought to his right mind,
yea and how necessary it is to preserve you in the love and fear of God after
you have believed; if therefore you are convinced that is your duty, without
which you can never get the cure of your deadly distempers, then you will make
Conscience of the means whereby you may be brought to consideration: The heart
is not easily brought to delight in God, and love him above all, and to use the
world as if he used it not, its consideration that must change it; the heart is
naturally dead to spiritual things, it is Consideration that must enliven it,
and make it stir; the heart is prone to wander from God, it is Consideration
that must bring it home; the heart is full of blindness and obduracy, it is
Consideration that must enlighten and soften it: If therefore you would not
perish in blindness and obduracy, and wander from God without hopes of
recovery, and lose the Pearl of infinite price (which who so is wise will sell
all that he has to buy and purchase) then use the means that must bring you to
Consideration.

Having given you some general Directions toward the promoting of the work and
duty of Consideration, I come in the next place to give you some more
Particular Directions. 1. As to the matter 2. As to the manner 3. As to the end
How this Duty is to be performed.

Concerning the matter of your Contemplation.
First, The first great Object of your Consideration should be God, and the
Relation you stand in to him, and his glorious Perfections: It Is worth thy
while to consider daily that he made thee out of nothing; and when there are
four distinct Ranks of Creatures (viz.) Things that have mere being without
life: 2. Things that have being and life, such as are all Vegetables, Trees,
and Flowers: 3. Such as have being, life, and sense, such as are Brutes, and
other sensitive Creatures: 4. Such as have being, life, sense, and reason; when
there are these four Species and Orders of Creatures, he has placed thee in
the highest form, and has made the other three Ranks for thy use and service;
and as he has made thee such a Creature, so thou have thy supportation and
maintenance wholly from him, and he is training thee up in the world for his
immediate presence, and for those ravishing delights that are to be enjoyed in
the Beatifical Vision. Can thou possibly consider the perfection of his
Nature, thy relation to him as his Creature, from whom all that thou have or
do expect must be fetched, thine hourly dependence on him, his Authority
over thee, his right and property in thee, his bounty toward thee, and not
fall down before him, and lift up thy heart to him with reverence; nor feel the
fire kindle in thy heart, and thy self willing to be offered up as a whole
Burnt-offering in that fire? To offer up Body and Soul, with all their several
faculties and actions, as a living Sacrifice to him, is but thy reasonable
service, Romans 12.1. As it is his end why he made thee, so it should be thy end
to have his works continually in thine eye, his Word ever in thine heart, and
his praises everlastingly in thy mouth: This was the resolution of David, and
should be thine; I will sing unto the Lord, says he, as long as I live, I will
sing praises to my God whilst I have my being: My meditation of him shall be
sweet, I will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104.33, 34. Consider that he has
infinite wisdom, and therefore is fit to rule thee, and all the world; he has
infinite power, and therefore its stark madness for such a Worm to resist him;
one word of his mouth will undo the Body and Soul for ever, one angry frown of
his Countenance will make thee wither, and turn that moving body of thine into
a dead and lifeless Clod, yea and send thy Soul into eternal misery. Did thou
but consider the holiness of his Nature, and how much he abhors all sin and
wickedness, would thou dare to commit it with so much boldness? Did thou
but consider what a piercing eye he has, to whom the darkness and the light
are both alike, Psalm. 139.12. would thou think to cover and conceal thy Sins
from him, or use craft and subtilty to blind his eyes? Thou do not consider
what he is whilst thou usest such silly shifts as these are; they do but
provoke a wise man that has but a Beam of Gods infinite wisdom, how much more
are they like to provoke him? There Is nothing like ingenuity and plain dealing,
and humble confessing of thy Sin when thou have to do with him; Consideration
of the Divine Purity and Justice would be a very effectual defense against all
unjust and unrighteous practices: If thou do but consider what antipathy
there is in Sin to the Divine Nature, and what an affront it is to the Majesty
of Heaven and Earth, it would not go down so easily, nor be such a sweet morsel
to thee: When men begin to take off the eye of their Consideration from God,
then they begin to walk in darkness, and know not at what they stumble. What
makes men so vain and wicked in their imaginations and practices, but because
God is not in all their thoughts by Consideration? What makes the ungodly to
prefer the pleasures of Sin, which are but for a season, but because they do
not eye and consider the recompense of reward? What makes men either to neglect
to come to God by prayer, or to put up faint and cold supplications to him, but
that they consider not that he is, and that he is a rewarder of all them that
diligently seek him: Thou would not murmur and repine at any of Gods
Providence toward thee, if thou did but consider what Equity, Wisdom and
Mercy there is in all his dealings toward thee, thou would endure the Cross,
and despise the shame, if thou did but seriously consider the joys that are
set before thee; thou would be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, if thou did but consider thy labor cannot be in vain
in the Lord. I advise thee therefore to consider and think more frequently what
an impartial righteous Judge thou have to do with in thy actions, and how dear
thou shall pay for thy Sin one of these days if thou will commit it, and this
would spur thee forward to thy duty when thou would neglect it, and keep thee
backward from Sinful practice when thou would commit it. Let my counsel
therefore be acceptable to thee, have God more frequently in thy Meditations,
consider that he sees and knows thy ways, that he abhors all wickedness
both of heart and life, that he is the Governor of the World, to whom all
these things are as nothing, that commands the Beings of Heaven and Earth,
that has the Winds and the Sea, and Men and Devils in the Chain of his
Providence, that was from all Eternity, and is the same for ever and ever; but
thou art of yesterday, and know nothing, Job 8.9. Thou may resist the will
of his Command and Precept, because it is to try thee, but thou can not
withstand the will of his purpose, what he does will peremptorily shall come to
pass; The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to
all Generations, Psa. 33.11. If thou love thy own Soul, let God be
continually before thy eyes; it is because thou know him not that thou art
so unlike him; it is because thou art not acquainted with him, that thy heart
is so void of love to him, it is because thou understandest him not, that thou
do so little fear and reverence him: And why have thou so little knowledge
and understanding of him, but because thou considerest him not? Did thou but
well consider his Omnipotency, thou would fear him more than all the world
beside? Did thou but consider his Veracity, thou would take his word for
the greatest security, and give more credit to it, than if thou had the word
and Oath of the most trusty and sufficient men; thou would certainly believe
the threatenings thereof, and foresee the accomplishment of the promises
thereof, as if they were already made good, and steer thy life according to the
most wise and excellent precepts thereof. Consider but his faithfulness, and
thou will see no reason to distrust him: They that know thy Name (says the
Prophet David) will trust in thee, for thou Lord have never forsaken those that
trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. Thou would venture thy life and all thy comforts
upon his Word; come what will thou would trust in the Lord, and do good,
Psalm. 37.3. And whilst thou art intent upon thy duty would not fear, though
men and Devils should combine against thee; and the more experience thou have,
the more thou would be confident, and say, It Is better to trust in the Lord,
than to put confidence in man; It Is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118.8, 9. Do but consider that he is a Spirit, and
thou will abhor a mere bodily service, and tremble to let thy lips go when thy
heart imagines deceit, and is not employed in his worship, and thou would
worship him in spirit and in truth, John 4.23, 24. Therefore men worship him
they know not how, nor care not in what manner, because they worship they know
not what, Ver. 22. Men would not dare to offer up to him the Sacrifice of
fools, if they did but consider with whom they have to do, Eccles. 5.1. Neither
would they come with dead hearts before the living God. This is the first thing
that I recommend to your Consideration, as being most worthy of it, viz. The
Nature and Attributes of God, with application to your Affection and Practice.

Secondly, The next thing that is worthy of your serious thoughts, and daily
consideration, is wherefore you were born into the world. Can any man that has
not laid his reasoning Faculty quite asleep, think that he was made to live
forty or threescore years in the world, and then to die like a Brute, and
there is an end of the Story: He that will take the pains to consider and make
use of the light that is offered to him, both in Nature and Scripture, shall
find that Man was made for something else, and that he is worse than a Brute
that looks no higher. I take it for granted, that no man can think that such a
Noble Creature as Man is, was made by chance by a happy conjuncture of a few
fortuitous Atoms that jostled together, and met at last into such an orderly
shape, as if all had been contrived with the greatest wisdom imaginable: Nor do
I think that any one that has not quite lost his understanding, can imagine
that he grew out of the Earth as Grass or Trees, much less will he say that
there was no first Man, but that there has been a Succession of Reasonable
Creatures from Eternal Ages: If therefore he could not possibly come into the
world any of these ways, then he must be made by a Wisdom far higher than his
own, and that can be none but God. These things being supposed, can any man in
his wits think that God made the highest and best of his Creatures here on
Earth with such Faculties, and endued him with understanding, and put such
desires into him, that nothing in this world can satisfy; to live a little
while below, and torment himself, and to rule and domineer over the other
Creatures, and devour them, and live as he list; and then after he is dead, to
be had no more in remembrance? Surely he might have played at such a Game as
this without Reason, he might have satisfied his lusts, and took his ease, and
never have missed this Faculty that does but chastise him for his brutishness,
and help to make him more miserable than those that want it. It is most certain
that God has designed him for a higher end, even for the service of himself,
and an Eternal life with him hereafter. It Is most worthy of your serious
consideration, that you may be fully satisfied, and know whether you have done
this work: If indeed you can think after you have well considered that its no
matter how a man lives, so he can but enjoy a little mirth and laughter in the
world, then you may cast off all other care if you will, and study how to live
merrily, and Crown your selves with Rose-buds before they be withered: If any
man can consider, and reason impartially, and think it is the wisest way to
enjoy the pleasures of Meat and Drink, and Lust and Ease, he shall have my
consent to take his course. Who would envy a man that was made to live above
the Stars, and to outshine the Sun in all its glory, that will choose rather to
go to Grass, and to feed with his Cattle? All the difference is, that he has a
little more Wit than a Cow or a Horse, and therefore can do more mischief than
one of them; but his pleasure is but brutish, and of no higher a stamp than
theirs. O consider, that though you may stifle your Reason, and smother the
Light that teaches you to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
evil world, you shall not always prevail against it; if you will not let it
speak now, it will speak whether you will or no, and cry out bitterly against
you hereafter: Consideration would roundly and quickly tell you, that you were
made to know, love and obey God that made you for a while in this world, and
then be removed to the sight and enjoyment of himself; other things sublunary
were made for the service of Man, but Man for Gods immediate service; his very
Constitution, and the make and frame of all his faculties proclaim thus much:
What should he do with an Immortal Soul to walk up and down the world with, if
he were not to live in another world? Why should he be put to School among the
visible Creatures, and be under the discipline and instructions of his Maker
day and night, which other Creatures are not partakers of, if he were not
training him up for a higher State? Alas God delights not in cruelty, nor in
making this life a burden to us, it is that he might prove us, and try us, and
wean us from things temporary, and awaken us to seek out for that happiness
that indeed we were made for: Job therefore takes it for a high favor to be
thus severely educated; What is Man that thou should magnify him, (says
he) or the Son of Man that thou should set thy heart upon him; and that thou
should visit him every morning, and try him every moment? If this were not
in order to a future good, why should he not complain rather that God has made
him in a worse condition than the Beasts? they enjoy pleasure without any
remorse, and lay them down in their Dens, and are secure; but Man vexes
himself with a thousand cares, and frighteth himself with as many fears, and
sees evil before it comes, and feels it after its past and gone, which
Brutes cannot do: But as Earthly Parents, if they are wise, will train up their
Children with more severity than they will their servants, and others that they
bear not such a respect to: so the most wise and gracious God uses a more
severe Discipline toward Man, whom he intends to a greater honor, than
toward the rest of his Creatures; he lets them take their course whilst he
ties Fetters and Bands upon men, and tyeth them by his Laws to Noble and Worthy
actions, and scourges them with his Rod when they deviate and wander from the
way of life and happiness, as if he would even constrain them to be happy. O
why do we no more pursue our own happiness, when God does even entreat us, and
spur us on by so many encouragements, and has made us for this very work and
business! Shall God be more solicitous for our welfare than we are for our own?
O poor deluded sinner! thou mistakest thy work and business, and where thy
happiness lies, when thou art pleasing thy flesh, and greedily hunting after
the pleasures thereof: Thou think that fleshly pleasure, or worldly gain is
godliness, but it will prove quite contrary in the end; and thou will then
know, when it is too late, that godliness is the greatest pleasure and gain: I
know it is natural to thee to thirst after happiness; seek it then in the way
that God has prescribed, or thou shall never purchase thy desire, though thou
pine away thy self from day to day with earnest desires and endeavors after
it: Thou were made for God, and thy Soul will be restless till it return to
him; Consideration would convince thee that thus it is; think then more
frequently what is that work thou were made for.

Thirdly, The next thing worth your most serious Consideration is, how well you
have answered the end of your Creation. You see what a wise, just, holy and
impartial God you have to do with, and that you are his Creatures and wherefore
he has made you, and endued you with such Faculties, and given you such
various helps and encouragements: Now consider how well you have used them, how
you have improved your several Talents, and served your Maker, and kept the
Statutes and Judgments he has given you: Have you had your heart in Heaven, or
in Earth, ever since you came hither? Have you lived to God, or without God in
the world? Have you lived in the love and praises of your Maker, and in perfect
obedience to his Laws? or have you not rather extinguished all love of God in
your hearts, and violated all his righteous Laws, and preferred the wisdom of
the Flesh before the wisdom of the Spirit, and set your selves to oppose his
Government? Though it may be you have not sinned against him on set purpose,
and directly opposed him, yet have you not neglected to consult his will, and
when you have known your duty in many particulars, have you not refused to
obey? Let your own Consciences be the Judge: Have you kept the fear of God
always before your eyes? Has no corrupt communication proceeded out of your
mouth? Have no idle, blasphemous, wicked thoughts crept into your hearts? Have
you been just and righteous in all your dealings toward God and Men? Have you
stood up for the honor of God against all his Enemies, and faithfully reproved
Sin, and done all your works with respect to Gods glory? or have you not
overlooked that, and minded your own worldly interest, and cherished
revengeful, proud, ambitious thoughts in your own hearts, and countenanced Sin
in others? at least, have you not been silent when Gods Name has been lightly
used in every trivial matter, and his Sabbaths profaned, and his Word derided?
There Is none of us but must confess we have neglected this great work too much
at the best; how much more at the worst? Our Hereditary Corruption was enough
to make us odious in the pure Eyes of God for ever; what then shall we plead
for our Actual Sins, which are multiplied to such a number, that we cannot
reckon them up? So that there is no man that is not liable to the Wrath of God,
and the Condemning Sentence of his Law. Consider whether you have not been
treasuring up Wrath all your days, and destroying your selves, and preferring
Dung and Dross before him. Did he make thee to affront and dishonor him, and
prefer a trifle before him? Did he make thee to scrape after the world, to make
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof? Bethink thy self, and
consider whether thou have discharged thy Duty, and answered the Ends of thy
Creation, and done all to the glory of God, and you will see Cause enough to
abhor your self.

Fourthly, Being thus obnoxious to Gods displeasure, and liable to Death and
Condemnation, consider in the fourth place, whether you are sensible of your
Sin and Misery, and whether you have accepted the grace which the Gospel offers
to you? There Is no remedy but you must perish for ever, and have the Judgment
of Everlasting Condemnation, if Consideration do not bring you to Repentance,
and wound your hearts with the bitter sense and feeling of your Sin.

O consider that it was the mere mercy of God that any such terms were offered
to you! he might have left you as he did the fallen Angels, and therefore if
now you shall slight a pardon, and refuse to lay your sin to heart, and to be
humbled and broken for it, and to come to Christ with a loving and thankful
heart, that he would cleanse and purify you by his Word and Spirit; your case
and condition will be the more doleful, and your Judgment at the Great Day will
be more Intolerable: I know you have verbally Renounced the World, the Devil
and the Flesh, in your Baptismal promise, but have you Really and Unfeignedly
Renounced them in heart and life? Are you Convinced that nothing can wash away
the stain of any the least of your Sins, but the Blood of Christ, much less
wipe away the Sins of your whole Life? Have you thoroughly considered the
necessity of his Blood to procure your Pardon? the necessity of his Spirit to
Sanctify you? And that there is no Name under Heaven by which you can be saved
but his? but if you be such that loath your selves for all former Sins, and are
weary of a corrupt and sinful Nature, and Christ be the chiefest among ten
Thousand to your Soul; then though you have so much crossed the end of your
Creation, and committed so much Sin, it shall not be charged on you, the Blood
of Christ will certainly cleanse you from all your Sin; If this faith be not
yet wrought in you, consideration must open and soften your Heart, and make way
for it. If you did but frequently consider, what privileges they are forthwith
admitted to, that do believe; and what a fearful looking for of Judgment, there
remains for unbelievers, you would hasten to make your escape, from the
Stormy Wind and Tempest. Suppose that some Mortal distemper had seized on you,
(and this will certainly be your case ere long) do but a little consider what
the privileges of a believer will be worth to you then; how sweet the promise
of forgiveness by Christ will be to your taste? Yea sweeter than the Honey to
your throat. Psalm. 119.103. Do but let your thoughts run upon this Subject, and
tell you, How happy you would count your self if you were united to Christ and
a true member of his body, reconciled to God, and pardoned, adopted into his
family, and received into his especial protection: what would you give then to
be acquitted from all your former sins, to have the sting of Death pulled out;
to land safe at your desired Harbor, to dye in the Lord, and to have a Convoy
of blessed Angels to carry your soul to endless Joy? say what you would give
then to be secured from the sensible sears of Hell, and Death, and to lie down
in the Grave in Peace and Safety; and to have nothing then to make you afraid?
Why if you are a Penitent Believer, and belong to Christ, there will be comfort
for you in the Hour, when all the World shall signify nothing to you. Whosoever
hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.
Prove. 1.33. When natural strength will be sure to fail you, and your Soul is
going out from your Body, where it has so long dwelt, and worldly friends
cannot help you, it will be worth a world to be numbered among the Saints, and
to have your portion with the Most-High; consideration will help you to know
all this, and whether you are weary of your sin, and have fled to Christ as
your only Sanctuary, and are heartily desirous that he should save you from the
Power of it; yea it would help you to all this, and make you sensible, if yet
you are not, and break your heart for all former unkindness to God, and Cruelty
to your own Soul, and make Christ precious to you indeed, The full Soul (says
Solomon) loatheth the Honeycomb, but to the Hungry Soul every bitter thing is
Sweet: The Nature of man prompteh him in every straight to cast about with
himself how he may get out: Did you feel to what unspeakable danger, sin has
brought you; I dare say you would not slight the remedy, nor despise the
Salvation that Christ offers to you; did you feel your soul in a sinking
condition by reason of your sin, you would lay hold on Christ as naturally as a
drowning man catch at a stick, or any thing that he thinks may save him: Thus
it would be if sin were a burden to you. And how could you choose but feel it a
burden to you, if you did but apprehend the evil and danger of it? Now
consideration would clear this to your apprehensions. How could you consider in
the midst of such helps, and not discern that by your Sin, you rebel against
the highest Authority, transgress the most righteous Law, debauch and corrupt
the best of his Creatures here on earth, and make him utterly unserviceable to
the uses for which God made him; And trample Reason under your feet, and
pervert Gods Established order, trouble the world, and cruelly wound, vex and
disquiet your own soul; And even dare and provoke God to bring upon you all the
calamities and miseries, both of this and the other life. And would not these
particulars alone discover to you the evil and odiousness of your Sin, and even
compel you to hate it? And then when you are gotten thus far, and discern Sin
to be your greatest enemy, you would not stick at any terms to be rid of it. If
you were once fully satisfied, that Sin is the foulest disgrace and shame of a
reasonable Creature, and a certain preparative to it is Eternal reproach, you
would not live in peace with it; not lie down and rise up quietly with such a
noisome disease upon you, that does make God loath his own Creature, and will
make you abhor and loath your selves, if ever you come to right and sober use
of your Reason; Ezekiel. 6.9, and Ezekiel. 20.43. and Ezekiel. 36.31. Make as light of
it now as you please, whilst reason is laid to sleep, and Scripture is not
regarded, and Conscience is quite out faced; it shall not be always so: It is
but the night time of this life at farthest, that your dream will last; and
then Reason and Scripture and Conscience will all set against you: Though you
wink now and will not see, yet then you shall see and be ashamed, says the
Prophet, Isa. 26.11. you may certainly foresee without the Spirit of Prophesy,
that thus it will be, if you believe the word of God, And as a truly penitent
believer may say with David, I shall be satisfied when I awake after thy
likeness. Psalm. 17.15. So the deluded Sinner that dreams so merrily now, that
Sin is but a matter of nothing whilst he is commiting of it, shall be
confounded, when he awakes after the Devils likeness, O if these things were
soundly believed, you would delay no longer, but forsake your Sin, and come to
Christ as your only Savior; and if any thing under God would bring you to such
a certain and undoubted belief, Consideration would do the work: Consider
therefore whether it be thus with you, that Sin is your only burden, and
Christ is your only ease; and if it be not so, consider that it may be so.

Fifthly, Another thing which you should set before your eye, and frequently
consider, is the vanity of all these things, which stand in competition with
God for your affections; Do you not see what hasty and unsatisfying Pleasures
they are? I call them Pleasures, because Custom has prevailed; the World calls
them so, and the Flesh calls them so, whose Pleasures they are; for the Soul of
Man, were it out of the Body, would not relish them. But though this be the
style of the World, it is pity that a man should call any thing Pleasure, that
does not last for ever: But call it what you will, I am sure it is a grand
mistake, to count that a Pleasure that does not gratify the better part of a
man, and a Sin to bestow the least measure of our love upon any thing that does
not promote the happiness of our Souls. God has put an aptitude into all
things to further man's felicity, and has commanded him to take them by the
right Handle, and make that use of them; and when they are used ultimately for
the pleasure that is in them, and are not subordinate to a higher end, even the
better serving of God, and saving of our Souls, they are made our End, which
should be but Means, and set up instead of God, to supply his room, and to be
to us what he alone should be; and then no wonder if they prove to us mere
vanity, that is, if they lie to us, and frustrate our expectations. All
Creatures tell us a mere lie, when they make us any promise of happiness and
full contentment in the enjoyment of them; but the truth is, there is no
Creature can be so impudent as to make us such a promise; it is we that are too
credulous and sinfully prone to take every Shadow for our happiness, and to
place our affections upon any thing here on Earth, rather than God. But where
is the man that can boast that he has found the desire of his heart in any
pleasure here on Earth? The very fear of doing it, is disparagement enough to
any worldly felicity. And since it may be truly said of any thing that here we
do possess, except it be the peace of a good Conscience, and the special grace
of God in Christ, it may be gone to morrow, and leave us; it is enough to set
the heart of a considering man against all created comforts, and make him seek
after something that will never fail: Where is the man, or what is his name,
that has found the Treasure of his Soul here on Earth? If they could help thee
in all thy streights, and stick to thee for ever, and never forsake thee, then
something might be plausibly pretended why thou should set thine affections
on them. But if thou will suffer thy self to consider, thou will perceive
Vanity to be written upon the back of every Creature (that is) as it is going
from thee, though thou may possibly think that thou see Pleasure written
upon the face of it, that is, as it is coming toward thee: If thou will not
believe this now, thine experience shall shortly make it good, and condemn thee
for a stark fool, in that thou have so much teaching, and yet would not
learn; that thou had eyes, and could not see; and that thou wast so often
forewarned of the vanity and deceitfulness of these Earthly pleasures, and yet
would be deceived: And yet I will confess, if the fault could then be
mended, after Experience has taught thee the vanity of them, and thou art
going out of the world as a miserable wretch, ready to be forsaken of the
comforts which thou have inordinately loved; if then thou could recover
thine affections, and bequeath thine heart to God, which the world did possess
all thy life time, then it would be some diminution of thy Sin and Folly. But
as sure as thou live God will not take that heart at thy Death, which thou
would not give him in thy Life, nor be put off with a Legacy when thou art
dying and going out of the world, to whom thou would give nothing all thy
lifetime. But yet if the Lord would accept such an Offering from thee, that
heart that has been so commanded all thy life long by such pleasures as the
world affords, will not be now at thine own command and dispose: It will be
hankering after the world when it is departing and leaving of it, and would
still live among these pleasures if it could, and prefer them before Eternal
Life with God. But I beseech thee to consider, whether it be not perfect
madness, to suffer thine affections to be thus captivated, and bewitched with
fading momentary delights. They are little to be envied, whose whole lives are
but a Diversion from one pleasure to another: But if any men on Earth are like
to perish for ever, and lose those satisfying pleasures at Gods right Hand for
evermore, these are the men. It is not one of a thousand that recovers of their
Surfeit, when they come to be old, that have lived their younger years wholly
addicted to their carnal brutish delights; and not a man that dies amidst such
pleasures, before his heart be weaned from them, but is like to feel more
bitter torment, than such as have lived all their lifetime in poverty and
little ease. Surely they that let out their hearts too freely to the things of
this world, forget that there is such a Text in the Word of God; Love not the
world, nor the things of the world; if any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him, 1 John 2.19. But that which makes some men that know this
well enough to be mistaken is, because they read of several rich men in
Scripture that have their hands full of these Earthly comforts, and see and
hear of others that go to Heaven in the midst of great Possessions; therefore
they confidently conclude that they may enjoy them as well as others, and yet
be in a safe condition; as if there were no difference between having and
enjoying of them. Their hearts were far enough from their Possessions, as you
might easily have seen, if you had lived and conversed with them: Though they
had a large portion of their comforts, a good measure of this Dung and Dross,
as the Apostle calls it, yet they spread it to the good increase of Religion
and Piety where they had to do; they took little pleasure in this Dunghill,
neither did they spend their precious thoughts, and time to increase it. But
thy heart it may be is Wedded to these Carnal contentments and buried in this
Dunghill: and thy sweetest pleasures come in this way, and when riches increase
thy heart is set upon them, Psalm. 62.10. Let me tell thee, that if ever
Consideration open thine eyes, thou will be as mad against these pleasures, as
ever thou were mad for them: And thou that do so industriously seek them
with such careful study and endeavor, wilt then be sick of them, nulla major
voluptas quam voluptatis fastidium. No pleasure like that of contemning such
transitory unmanly pleasures as these are; if (as Tully says) he is not worthy
the name of a man, that would live a whole day in such pleasures; I am sure he
is not worthy the name of a Christian that can live his whole lifetime, and
prefer the pleasures of his body before the feasting of his Soul. It Is the want
of serious Consideration, in this particular, that makes so many lose the Joys
of Heaven, whilst they feast themselves with the Pleasures of the World.

Sixthly, Another thing that should be the matter of your frequent serious
Consideration, is your latter end and the nearness of your dissolution. This
would make you wise indeed, not to lay up riches and diet, much less to
treasure up sin and wrath against the day of wrath, but to lay up in store a
good foundation against the appointed time, 1 Timothy 6.19. Romans 2.5. It was the
want of such heedful and attentive consideration, that made Moses complain of
the Israelites, that they were a nation void of Counsel, neither was there any
understanding in them; this made him wish so passionately, O that they were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end,
Deuteronomy. 32.28, 29. This made the same Moses to pray so to teach us to number our
days that we may apply our hearts to true wisdom, Psalm. 90.121. Who can think
what a vapor his life is, James 4.14. and make it shorter by neglecting the
work it was given him for? A man never begins to live, till he lives to God,
and he that survives the most years, after he has begun this work, may be
truly said to live the longest, although he reach not the age of many a Carnal
minded man: For a man's life is not to be computed by gray hairs, or the number
of years, but by the work that he has done: If therefore thy work be undone,
when death is approaching to thee, what shall I say that thou have lived but a
little while; nay, rather that thou have not lived at all. I must conclude
therefore, that to consider the shortness of thy life is the way to lengthen
it, and to put thee into such a happy condition, that death shall be sure never
to surprise thee. O what a madness it is for men that are to live but a few
years (it may be days in the world) never seriously to consider it, till their
days are at an end; when they have but a few turns more to fetch in this World,
not to consider it, and turn unfeignedly to God, before they are turned out of
the World; where is that man's Wits that buries his thoughts alive, in the
impertinencies of this life and scarce thinks from one end of the year to the
other that he must die: and in that very day his thoughts must perish? What
does that man do that Fidles away his precious time, and never thinks to any
purpose, that his day is coming, and what a sad tune he will be then in? If
men's thoughts were but frequently, and seriously employed about this subject,
men would not live, and walk about the World for nothing as they do: They would
not fish all their life time, and catch nothing, but a little worldly pleasure
and honor; which was but a bait that Satan used to bring them to this misery,
that now they are departing into. Woe! woe be to the man that thinks not of
Death, till it is even at his door; That sees it not till his eyes are ready to
close up: That never dreams of it till he is ready to awake in another World! O
Sirs, your Souls are here to day, and gone to morrow, and you know not what one
day or night may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. Though you may think it is the way to
a merry, comfortable life, to put the serious sober thoughts of your later end
out of your mind; yet I am sure it is not the way to a comfortable joyful
death; and is it not a thousand times more desirable to die comfortably than
to live comfortably, if you will needs part these two one from the other? But I
must plainly tell you that you are mistaken, and that it is not the way to a
comfortable cheerful life, to forget a man's latter end; and to decline such a
provident Foresight, and Meditation: unless you take a licentious sensual and
foolish life, for a comfortable life. And then there is no doubt, but the
frequent Consideration of a man's latter end, will disturb and interrupt such
sinful, foolish mirth. But there are no men in the World, that live a more
comfortable, joyful life, and taste so full and true content and pleasure, as
those that have frequently thought upon death, and the consequent of it, and
made it familiar to their thoughts, and have quite overcome the fear of death
by a wise foresight of it, and preparation for it. He may well rejoice oven at
the heart that has overcome his great enemy, and is got over the Rub, that the
rest of the World must meet with sooner or later, that shall put an end to
their foolish mirth and laughter. The considerate man has trampled this King
of Terrors under his feet, and through fear of death is no longer subject unto
bondage, as inconsiderate men are: whereas on the contrary, men that are not
accustomed to these thoughts, nor have brought forth the fruit of them,
whenever such thoughts accidentaly rush into their mind, they cannot bear
them; how terrible and affrighting are the apparitions of death, when they get
into their imaginations and fancy? and let them do what they can to shift these
imaginations out of their hearts, sometime or other they will surprise them,
and break in though they shut the door never so fast, and bolt them out; and
then they pay something for their former inconsideracy: If a Fit of Sickness
come upon them that threatens them with death, fearfulness and trembling takes
hold on them, and a fit of horror is ready to overwhelm them, Psalm. 55.5. What
now? Will you call that a merry comfortable life that is so easily disturbed
with one sad dismal thought that may arise? Will you say that man lives a
pleasant life, whom a Handwriting upon the Wall can damp, and strike into a
Fit of Trembling? Will you say that that man lives as happily and comfortably,
that by some sad accident (a thousand of which he is subject to) may have his
Countenance changed, his Thoughts trouble him, and the Joints of his Loins
loosed, and his Knees smite one against another, as Belshazzar had in the midst
of his mirth and jollity? Dan. 5.6. Will you call this a comfortable life that
will so soon perish, and come to a fearful end, or that rather that grows more
lightsome and cheerful when Death it self approaches, and is drawing near? Let
a man that is forsaken of Reason and Understanding forget his latter end, as the
fittest Expedient to his distracted foolish mirth; but if thou art Master of
any Wit or Reason, thou will entertain and cherish such thoughts as these, as
the beginning of true Wisdom: O remember that die thou must, and leave the
world behind thee; and woe be to thee if thou have not made some good
preparation for a more lasting life? The night of thy life is even almost
spent, see how much the Taper of thy present life is already wasted. If thou
know any thing, thou can not but know that it is appointed for all men to
die, yea, and that but once, and after Death comes the Judgment; there is no
calling back thy time and life when once they are spent, no turning up thy
glass again when once it is run out, no after-game to play after the first is
lost, no dying a second time when once thy breath is gone; I mean in this
world, though there be a second Death a thousand times more terrible than the
first in the world to come. Well, if thou would live comfortably indeed, yea
and die comfortably also, consider thy latter end, be not afraid of such
thoughts that will make thee wise to Salvation.

Seventhly, Another Object worthy thy frequent consideration, is the Judgment
of the Great Day: O what pity is it, that a man that is made for another world,
and that must be solemnly cited before the Tribunal of the Righteous and
Impartial Judge, and be responsible for his whole Life, how he has spent it,
should drive such thoughts out of his mind, as Gallio drove Paul's Accusers from
the Judgment Seat, Acts 18.16. and care for none of these things! What is it
better to stand trembling before thy Judge in that day, than to hold up thy
Head with confidence? If thou art one that do not consider the Solemnity of
that day, nor the Concernments of thine own Soul in that general Assembly and
appearance, thou art more like to be confounded in that day, than to rejoice.
Would a proud vainglorious Worldling so passionately rejoice in the day of his
prosperity, and let his heart cheer him in the midst of his foolish pleasures,
and walk in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, if he did but
consider, that for all these things God will bring him to Judgment? Would any
man cast off all duty to God, or perform it with a negligent slightness and
indifferency, to gratify his lazy flesh, or a busy Lust, if he did but
remember and consider, that for these things he must be judged, and for these
(without Repentance before Death) he must die for ever? O my Brethren! it is no
such contemptible trivial day, nor the business that must then be transacted of
such small and petty concernment, that you should not think them worth your
frequent and considerate thoughts: Think you must whether you will or no upon
trifles, if you refuse to think on such matters as these, and to take this day
into your sober consideration: Though you should think on the greatest worldly
matters, and your thoughts be employed in the management of the Affairs of a
Kingdom, yet if you think not upon the Affairs of this great and wonderful day,
you do but trifle and dream away your precious life. They that have but a Cause
to be tried before a Judge of Nisi Prius that very much concerns their Estates,
cannot but remember it, and consider how they may come off with success; but
those that are to be tried for their Lives cannot sleep, nor talk it out of
their mind; by Night the terrible Apparitions of it in their fancies interrupts
their repose and sleep; and the horrible thoughts of it in the day time strikes
them mute, and damps all their discourse; And shall not a day far more
remarkable, where you must undergo a Trial for your Eternal Estate and Life, be
considered? And it is the more worth your consideration, because the Judge
before whom this Trial must be made, is He that made thy self, and all the
World, clothed with his Robes of Majesty and Justice: He that delivered into
thy hands thy Reason, Memory, Judgment, Freewill, Senses, Honors, Estates, as
Talents to be now accounted for; Did not all the Privileges of thy Birth and
Education? Did not all the Mercies of thy Infancy, Youth, and Riper Age, come
from above? Deny it now if thou can: And were not all thy choicest dearest
comforts, as Pearls begotten by the Dew of Heaven? His Circuit is not confined
to one Nation, or piece of a Nation; but the Circuit that he will ride in that
great day shall be the Heaven of Heavens, with a glorious Train and Retinue of
Saints and Angels; and the people that shall be gathered before him, are are
the whole Creation of Angels and Men; the matters that must then be brought to
Examination and Trial, are the secret and more public actions of our whole
lives; the Witnesses that shall be produced, shall be such as are beyond all
Exception, viz. men's own Consciences; the Devil and his Angels that are
continually watching our miscarriages, and the Judge himself that can tell the
time, the place, the persons with whom, or the things about which the
wickedness has been committed; and the Question that shall be then decided in
the face of all the world, shall be, whether the persons thus tried, shall live
or die for ever: These are no fidling trifling matters to be slighted, nor
unworthy your serious forethought and consideration; besides the Judge is
inflexible, and cannot be bended by force, bribery, or entreaty. If you look
into Psalm. 50.4, 5, 6. you shall see with what circumstances of Majesty and
Terror this Judg's Process is described and set forth; a fire shall devour
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him; he shall call to
the Heavens from above, and to the Earth that he may judge his people; and the
Heavens shall declare his Righteousness, for God is Judge himself. Were this
day well believed and considered, men would not live in any fashion, nor think
and speak any thing that comes next, nor do actions that they dare not call
themselves to account for: They would fear their own Consciences more than a
thousand Witnesses, which in despite of them will be privy to all their
actions. I warn thee to take heed of this Witness, for it will betray thee: If
thou art wise, when thou have any wickedness to commit, see that neither God,
nor the Devil, nor thine own Conscience have any eye upon thee; and then thou
can find no place nor time in which thou can be secure. As it is the great
policy of Satan to hide this day from thine eyes, and to keep it out of thy
thoughts if he can, that he may take thee Captive at his will; so it should be
thy chief care to have it continually before thine eyes, that thou may escape
his temptations. The lively frequent thoughts of this day made Paul so
unwearied in the work of the Lord, and so importunate with his hearers; Knowing
the terrors of the Lord (says he) we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11. And it was
the great Argument he used with Tim. to spur him up to the like diligence, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the Quick and the Dead at his appearing and Kingdom, Preach the Word, be
instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and Doctrine. And when he did but cast a flash of this day into
the eyes of Felix, you know what effect it had on him, Acts (...) 24.25. Though
Paul was but a Prisoner at the Bar, and Felix his Judge upon the Bench, yet
when Paul reasoned with him of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come,
the Text says Felix trembled. It Is madness to put this day out of thy mind
which God has put into his Word, as the most powerful Curb to all Sin, and the
most irresistible motive to a sober, righteous, and a godly life. Be not afraid
to entertain this day into thy Meditations; the consideration and forethought
of this day does not make it, but make thee ready for it; whether thou think
of it or not, it comes on apace, and thine eyes shall shortly behold the
Solemnity of it, either to thy terror, or to thy unspeakable joy. S. Hierom
thought he heard the very Trumpet sound continually that must call all the
world together, whatsoever he was doing, the Voice was never out of his ears.
All the Music of Worldly Delights and Pleasures would be but as sounding
Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, to one that has this Trumpet frequently in his
hearing; think but believingly of the terrible Pomp and glorious Solemnity of
that day, and then think of vanity and folly with delight if thou can? These
thoughts would drown the petty thoughts of worldly matters, as the Report of a
Cannon does a Whisper, or as the Sun obscureth the smallest Glowworm: And if
any thing would stop thee in a course of sinning, these thoughts would do it.
Thou would think it a poor shift to fly to the dark to cover thee, when thou
committest any iniquity, if thou did but consider, that what is done in
secret, shall then be proclaimed upon the housetop; and God will find Evidence
enough to convince thee, that thus and thus thou did when he kept silence^
yea, thou shall betray thy self by thy own confession. This is another Object
of thy thoughts, and very worthy thine often Consideration.

Eighthly, Another thing that you should frequently steep your thoughts in, is
the joys of Heaven, and unexpressible happiness of the Saints in Light; there
the Fountain of all Bliss and pleasure shall stand open, and the Face of
glorious Majesty shall be revealed. Here we behold him but in a glass, and see
but a glimpse of his back-parts, but then we shall see him face to face, by a
satisfying ravishing sight and intuition. Were the Soul it self loosned from
this bodily Prison, it would be a Spectacle worth your beholding, and a most
delectable glorious sight; and your curiosity to behold such a sight as this,
would be far more excusable than theirs whom our Savior taxed in that
question; What went you out for to see, a Reed shaken with the wind? But what
went you out for to see, a man clothed in Purple, and soft raiment? such are
in Kings houses, Mat. 11.8. And if then the Soul of man be such a beautiful
taking sight, what a blessed sight will that be, when God shall display the
fullness of his glory? If a Spirit be so bright and glorious, what is the Father
of Spirits, to whom all created beauty is but a drop? What a goodly sight will
that be to behold the company of Prophets, Martyrs and Apostles, clothed in
shining raiment, with Crowns on their Heads, and Palms in their hands? And what
a ravishing pleasure must it needs be to see Sun and Stars under our feet, and
to behold the order and beauty of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to join in that
Heavenly Consort? to be admitted into his presence that has made the Soul and
Body out of nothing, that has fullness of joy at his right hand, and pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Happy are the persons indeed, that after a few
miserable days here on Earth, shall be translated thither into that Heavenly
Palace; with long life will he satisfy them, and show them his Salvation,
Psalm. ^.16. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, O ye Sons of men, of your
worldly Dignity and Honor; what a Dream and mere Imagination is all Earthly
felicity, to this of the Saints in Heaven? Your riches, if they were worthy to
be named, when we are discoursing of the riches of the Inheritance of the
Saints, Ephesians. 1.12.18. yet they may be corrupted, and your garments may be
Moth-eaten, James 5.1. But the glory of the Saints endures for ever, for the
Lord himself has prepared a City for them, Heb. 11.16. Though they were
contemned here on Earth, yet they shall have glory enough in Heaven: Then shall
that great Sovereign of the World command the best Robe to be brought forth,
and put it on them, and call for the fatted Calf to entertain them; and they
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in his Eternal Kingdom; and they
shall have an Everlasting Feast of joy and gladness, Luke 15.22, 23. Here they
have but a Taste, and do but sip now and then, but there they shall have ^uch a
draught that shall satisfy their Souls with Eternal pleasure, a Cup that shall
be ever going down. O the joys of that state, that no tongue can utter, no
mortal man did ever comprehend! But yet mistake me not, I do not intend by
these borrowed expressions to intimate a Turkish Paradise to you of carnal
delights and pleasures, neither would I pervert your judgment by that which is
meant for the Excitation and advancement of your affections: It Is very material
that your apprehensions of that glory be as right as we can attain to in such a
place of darkness and distance from it where we live; if you should mistake a
Fleshly for a Spiritual felicity to be enjoyed hereafter, it is very possible
that even a voluptuous Epicure may think himself in the Suburbs of that Kingdom
already, and that his Heaven is already begun here on Earth. These forms of
Speech therefore taken from eating, and drinking, and feasting, whereby the
Scripture represents to you the transcending pleasures of the other life, are
but Spectacles for weak eyes, and a help for humane infirmity. We are incapable
in this life of true and proper Conceptions of the happiness of that state,
only in general, that it will be spiritual, and not like these fleshly
pleasures that here we taste of: whilst we are in this Prison of the Body, we
are not able to understand the liberty that there we shall enjoy; whilst we are
here below in this Dungeon of the body, we are not capable of beholding the
light and brightness of that glory: But you may safely use these Spectacles to
help the dullness of your sight when Heaven is proposed to you, and take the
benefit of these gross expressions, if they will but help to attract your
desires, and to raise your hopes and expectations more Heavenwards; whilst you
do but remember, that the pleasures of that state are incomparably greater than
all the pleasures here on Earth, and quite of another kind, that here we want a
faculty to express, because we want a faculty to taste. You know a Horse or a
Cow would take little pleasure in that food that is most delicious to us; yea,
and many a man has pleasure unintelligible to another man, because he wants
his taste and experience: And it is very hard to describe pleasure that depends
upon a taste and experience that we our selves have not. The sweetness of Honey
would never be understood by all the definitions in the world, if we had never
tasted it: Marvel not therefore if I tell you, that the joys of that state are
not to be properly understood here on Earth, because we have now neither the
taste, nor the Meat that then we shall feed on, I mean, neither the faculty, nor
the object. And certain it is, that all pleasure is founded in the suitableness
of the Faculty to the Object: Since therefore neither Faculty nor Object shall
be then the same that here we have, the glorious pleasures of the perfected
Saints must needs be beyond our Comprehensions. But if you shall reply and say,
that Grace and Glory differ only gradually, and not specifically, and that they
are the same in kind, though not in the height of degree; and therefore that
the Regenerate, and such as are truly enlightened, and partakers of the Holy
Ghost, may taste the Heavenly gift, and the Powers of the world to come, Heb.
6.4, 5. I answer, they may better understand than others can that want their
imperfect grace; but yet there is so vast a difference between Faith and Sight,
perfect and imperfect Knowledge, the Mustard Seed, and the Tree that grows up
from it; that you may well say it is at the best far beyond their complete and
adequate comprehension: And will not such a happiness as this be worthy thy
frequent consideration? Thou do not soundly believe it (says Drexelius) if
thou do but seldom and slightly think on it: It cannot be that such as
penetrate and search into this blessedness, with lively, active and piercing
thoughts, should venture the loss of it upon any terms. Thou would have
little list to part with thy hopes of future happiness for the gain of all
Earthly delights, if Consideration had once taught thee what Heaven is; or if
the Devil or the world should surprise thee before thou have well considered
what it is, and befool thee, to let go the hopes of Eternal Life, for what the
World will give thee instead of it; thou shall consider when it is too late,
and say with that unhappy King that sold away his Kingdom for a draught of
water; Alas! must I for so short a pleasure lose so great a Kingdom?

Ninthly, Another thing that it concerns thee much to roll about and consider
with thy deepest thoughts, is the horror and confusion of those that must be
banished for ever from the face of God, and sentenced to everlasting misery:
There Is none that escape that place but those that frequently think on it; and
believe it, its well worth thy serious Consideration to preserve thy soul from
such a fearful destruction. Many a man whom God has awakened to believe those
terrible endless torments, have retired themselves from all worldly noise and
disturbance, that they might live under the power of these thoughts, as the
best preservative against these torments. And is not thy Soul as dear and
precious to thee as their's to them, and deserve as much compassion from thee?
Surely though it is not thy duty to think actually of the woeful and miserable
estate of unbelievers, all the day long; Yet it is of absolute necessity, that
some serious thoughts should be spent on that subject till the fear thereof
make void and prevail over all Carnal worldly fears whatsoever: And make thee
more industrious to prevent that misery, than thou art to escape the scorn and
and reproach, and all the sufferings and miseries of this life: otherwise thou
art never like to escape it. And methinks, thou should easily believe, that
Hell is more to be feared than all the Calamities of this Life, and the loss of
this Life it self: But thus it will never be, if thou art not one that do
often represent it to thy thoughts. A danger though it be never so great, yet
if it be both out of sight and mind also, will fright no body nor have any the
least influence upon our endeavors to escape it. The evil must be before the
eye of our sense or understanding, that works upon us to take the best course
for our security and defense: And the nearer we apprehend it to be, the more
have we make to get away from it: And whether a wicked man has no reason to
think his woeful misery near, even at the door, I leave any man to Judge that
has any competent use of his understanding: what can you name almost that is
more uncertain then this Life? and so soon as ever it ends, then begins his
distress that shall never end. But yet let him not be too confident that it
shall not begin before: Many a man has felt the torments of Hell on this side
the grave, and this Judgment has commenced before his life has been
concluded, some men's sins go before them to Judgment, says the Apostle, and
some men's follow after, 1 Timothy 5.24. There is some men feel the Vengeance of a
righteous Judge even in this Life; Spira professed that he felt the consuming
fire of Gods wrath in his heart and Conscience whilst he was alive and openly
blasphemed his Maker, wishing that he was above him, for he knew (as he said)
that he would have no mercy on him: O Sirs, the intolerable pains that every
impenitent Sinner must speedily undergo, are well worth the pains of a few
hours Consideration to prevent, and if you think it not so, you may spare your
pains a little longer, till your lamentable experience shall put you quite out
of all doubt. If indeed the diversion of your thoughts from so sad an object
were the way to secure your Souls, and to keep out of that devouring and
unquenchable fire, then you might well excuse your selves from troubling your
minds with such thoughts as these: But though you may quench the spirit of God
that moves you to Consider of this and to let it sink into your heart, that
you may seek for mercy whilst it may be had; yet you cannot quench the flames
of Hell, nor extinguish that fire that must feed upon your soul and body for
ever. O how much better is it cooly to Consider the intolerableness of Gods
wrath; then to feel the burning heat and extremity of his indignation, when
there is no remedy! If it were indeed but a flea bite, you might slight it, and
keep your thoughts for something of more weight and moment: Or if it were
unavoidable perhaps, you might do wisely not to torment your selves before the
time; nor invite such a guest till it comes of his own accord. It Is to no
purpose to think of such sufferings, which thinking will not prevent; But
believe it, it is no flea-bite, nor a matter to be slighted: Fire, and Sword,
and Rack, and all the inventions of Cruelty that were ever found out, are but
Sport and Recreation to the Judgment and Condemnation of the Life to come: And
because the loss of God and Heaven seems such a tolerable punishment to these
Vessels of wrath; Let me tell them that there is no part or member either in
their Soul or Body, that shall not be racked with perpetual and eternal pain:
And can thine heart endure or thine hands be strong when he shall come to deal
with thee, Ezekiel. 22.14. Thou would eat thy bread with trembling, and drink
thy drink with terror and astonishment, if he should pour out on thee some few
bitter drops of his displeasure now in this life, Thou even thou (says the
Psalmist to Almighty God, whose Judgments thou despisest) art greatly to be
feared, and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry, Psalm. 76.7.
what trembling eyes and what a failing heart have they whom God does a little
terrify with some frowns of his anger here on earth; you may hear them cry out
in the morning would God it were evening, and in the evening would God it were
morning, for the fear of thine heart, wherewith thou shall fear, and for the
fear of thine eyes which thou shall see, Deuteronomy. 28.6, 51, 67. How dolefully does
Job complain under his outward sufferings (though he had Integrity to support
him, and the root of Comfort was within him) Job. 19.28. Death it self (it
seems) would have been welcome to him under the heavy pressures which he felt,
as we may see in Job 3.20, 21. etc. Wherefore is light given to him that is in
misery, and life to the bitter in Soul; which long for death, but it comes
not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures; which rejoice exceedingly, and
are glad when they can find the grave? Why is life given to a man whose way is
hid, and whom God has hedged in; for my sighing comes before I eat, and my
roarings are poured out like water? And how David was ready to faint away many
a time under the apprehensions of Gods displeasure; it is the design of many a
passage in the Psalms to tell you, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear of joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. So Psa. 22.14, 15.
what a sad Lamentation have you? I am poured out like water, and all my bones
are out of joint; my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels;
my strength is dried up like a Potsheard, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws,
and thou have brought me into the dust of death. So Psa. 31.9, 10. Have mercy
on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; mine eye is consumed with grief, yea my
Soul and my Belly; for my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing,
my strength fails because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. But if
you look into the 88 Psalm. the case of Heman seems there to be far more sad,
because it was more constant and uninterrupted than David's was, verse. 14, 15,
16. etc. Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?
I am afflicted, and ready to die from my youth up, whilst I suffer thy terrors
I am distracted: Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cast me off,
they came round about me daily like water, they compassed me about together;
Lover and Friend have thou put far from me, and mine Acquaintance into
darkness. And how pitifully does the Church complain under the effects of Gods
sharp displeasure, as you may see in the Book of the Lamentations? So that you
may perceive by these few instances, that the wrath of God even on this side
Hell is not to be slighted; and if a drop or two light so heavy upon men that
had such grace, courage, and fortitude to bear up under it, how heavy must it
needs be, when it falls with its whole weight upon men in the state of
torments? Woe be to them on whom it falls, it will grind them to powder. If a
little sickness be so sharp and terrible sometime, that it makes a stout heart
to speak trembling, and turns a fresh colored face into paleness, and makes
the beauty thereof to consume away, like a Garment fretted by a Moth; How will
men speak and look under the pains of the second death? How restless are men
under some Acute Distempers? they toss up and down, and tell the hours, and
watch for the Morning Light, in hope the Sun should rise upon them with healing
in its wings; And if men roar under a Fit of the Gout or Colic, what then
shall they do in Hell?

And as the torments of Hell are no Flea bite, nor to be slighted by any the
stoutest heart, so neither are they unavoidable; for then I should not
recommend them to your Consideration. But when the misery of that place cannot
find a tongue to utter and express it, nor set forth the greatness of it, and
Consideration is such a certain way to escape it, who but a Madman, or one that
does not believe it, will refuse at least some time to think seriously on it
till he has some well grounded hope to escape it? I will take it for granted
that that man is resolved to try his strength and see how well he can bear it,
that will not endure the sober deliberate thoughts of it in his mind. O Sirs,
if when an Angel of light descended from heaven and came and rolled back the
stone from the mouth of the Sepulcher, where our Savior was buried, and sat
upon it, the guilty Keepers for fear of him did shake, and became as dead men,
Mat. 28.2, 4. How will such as are condemned to Hell shake and tremble, when
Angels of Darkness shall continually appear before them? That horrible sight,
together with the inward terrors of their own despairing Consciences, will
fright them into everlasting trembling and fearfulness: If thou have a mind to
escape that place of perpetual darkness and despair, consider it well now, and
let it sink into thy serious thoughts.

Lastly, Consider the infallible truth and certianty of all this. I confess
there is something that is dubious and uncertain in every one of these
particulars; but yet there is something also that is of the highest certainty;
something that you may well make a question of, but yet something that is past
all controversy and question among Christians.

Let me give you a brief Recapitulation.

1. There Is nothing more certain than that there is a God, and that he is
Infinite in all perfections; that he has made all Creatures, and that he is
the absolute Lord and Governor of Mankind, and his principal Benefactor.

Thus much is unquestionable.

But it is a very great question, whether thou do acknowledge him sincerely
for thy Owner, Sovereign, and one that has every way obliged thee, and art
truly devoted to him in heart and life.

2. It Is most certain, that he has made thee for no lower Ends than his
service; and that he has given thee a Law to teach thee how he will be served;
and that he expects thou should be heartily subject to him, and obedient
to his Laws; and that thou should believe and patiently wait for his rewards
in so doing.

But it is a matter of Enquiry and Self-examination, whether thou have answered
this Intention of God in thy Creation, and obeyed his Laws in a confident
expectation of his Rewards.

3. It is past doubt, that thou have broken the Law of thy Creation, corrupted
thy Nature, lived in Disobedience, and cast off the Yoke of thy Creator; that
thou have by Original and Actual Transgressions forfeited thy life, and all thy
other mercies, and deserves to be dealt with as a Rebel and a Traitor to thy
Sovereign Lord and Ruler.

But it is a matter of doubt, and therefore should be seriously enquired by
thee, whether thou do acknowledge from thy heart, and art sensible of thy sin
and misery thereby. All the world are miserable, but they are but few that are
affected with their misery.

4. It is certain, that Christ has shed his Blood to redeem all Mankind, and
that Pardon and Remission is offered to all that do heartily repent and
believe; That God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3.16. That none are excepted in this Act of Oblivion and Free Grace, but such
as refuse the Mercy offered, and continue in wilful impenitency and unbelief.
You will not come unto me that you may have life, John 5.40.

But it is a matter of very great doubt and question, whether thou have any
sincere Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; whether
thou have sufficiently bewailed thy corrupt Nature that was born with thee into
the world, and thy Rebellion against thy Maker in the course of thy life, and
wilful transgression of his Laws; and whether thou art so deeply wounded with
the bitter sense of thy sin, as to submit to the Yoke and Government of Christ,
that he may deliver thee from the bondage of thy sins: For though Christ be
offered to all, and did intentionally lay down his life for all, yet none shall
reap the fruit and benefit of his sufferings and satisfaction, but such as are
broken in heart for their iniquities, and come believingly unto him to bind
them up again, and heal them.

5. What more certain than the vanity of all things here below, and their utter
insufficiency to satisfy the Soul of Man, and make it happy? Every one that is
not wilfully blind may see how ridiculous the Competition is between God and
them. The greatest Epicures, and those that dote most upon the world, and
admire its glory, will confess thus much when they come to die; and their eyes
are then opened, for the most part, whose very Reason and Understanding, as
well as their affections, were wholly captivated to its deluding pleasures all
their life-long. Ask them now which is better, the Favor of God, or the
Pleasures of the World, and they will not then stick to tell you, there is no
comparison between them; you shall have a free and a full confession from them.

But yet though the World be such an empty thing, and not worthy to be laid in
the balance with the Favor of God, and an Interest in Christ; yet it is a
great question whether it is so indeed in thy Estimation and Affections: Let
thy practice, and the course and tenor of thy life decide the case; Which
do thou study and endeavor to serve and please most? Which do thou
labor most after, the Food that perishes, or the Food that endures? Which
do thou make the most careful provision for, this life, or the life to come?
It concerns thee as much as the Salvation of thy Soul comes to, to put this as
much out of doubt, as it is past doubt that the World is altogether vanity.

6. How sure is it that Death will shortly come and part thy Soul and Body, and
give thee thy mortal wound, and turn thy flesh into corruption? Not a man but
must shortly make his Bed in the Grave, and be forgotten as a dead man out of
sight, and leave his substance to those that come after. This is a clear truth,
and has a sound confession from all the world; the experience of all our
Forefathers is a clear proof.

But yet though this truth is so fully attested by the confession of all the
living, and the experience of all the Dead; yet it is a very great doubt
whether thou do remember and consider thy latter end, and improve thy life,
as that which will not always last. Woe to thee if this be not as certain as the
other!

7. Nothing more sure, than that there is a Public Audit, at which all men
must give up their Accounts; a general day of Oyer and Terminer, where every
one must undergo an impartial Trial and Examination.

But it is uncertain whether thou do sincerely believe such a day, and do
make answerable preparations; and whether thou do live as in the sight of thy
Judge, it behooves thee to consider.

8. It Is matter of greatest certainty, that there is a State of unspeakable
happiness for Believers, and that there is a State of endless and unsufferable
misery to which Unbelievers shall he condemned; and when men are arrived
thither, their condition is unalterable; there is no possibility that they
should lose the one, or ever be released from the other These are all matters
of the highest certainty; all the doubt is, whether thou have lived under the
power of these Truths by frequent Consideration; and whether they had such
influence on thee, as things of such certainty, weight and worth should have.

You see what is certain, and what is doubtful and uncertain in all these
particulars; and in both respects they will deserve thy attentive, heedful
thoughts, and thy most impartial Consideration. The things that are certain
will never make their due impression upon thy heart, nor operate according to
their worth, nor put thee upon answerable practice till they be again and again
considered. The things that are uncertain, will never be resolved till they be
frequently considered: Men regard not the Judgment to come, because they will
not be brought to consider the certainty of it, and how much it does concern
them. Men slight the Torments of Hell, and Joys of Heaven, because they will
not consider the certainty of them. Would any one fall in love with the world,
if he did but consider how certainly it will deceive him? Would men live so
improvidently, and spend their strength and time so impertinently, if they did
but seriously consider that they must certainly die, and speed Eternally as
they have lived? Would men set up their own will for a Law, and live to
themselves, and put the fear of God out of their hearts, if they did but
consider that God is certainly their Maker and Sovereign, and that they owe
perfect subjection to his Person, and obedience to his Laws? Would men live so
absurdly, and forget their main Errand in the world, and the principal business
of their lives, if they did but consider that God certainly sent them into the
world for this very end and purpose to serve him, and live in love and
obedience to him? In a word, would men wipe their mouths after so much
Rebellion and Disobedience to God, as if they were Innocent, and be so
impenitent and unaffected with their sins, if they did but consider how certain
it is, that without Repentance there is no hope of pardon; and that they must
smart for their sin here by Repentance, or else hereafter in Eternal misery and
desperation; and that Christ will be a Savior to none but those that thus
smart for their sin, and feel its intolerable burden, and fly unto him by
Faith as their only refuge. O if we did enough consider the great certainty of
these things, they would have another effect and operation on us, than usually
they have upon the best of us; much less would they suffer us to live in such
Atheism, and contempt of Christ and Salvation, as the most of men live. As sure
as thou sinnest now thou shall be judged for it, and that to Everlasting
Condemnation, if thy serious Repentance step not in between; as sure as thou
live now, thou shall shortly die; and as sure as thou treadest upon the
Earth, so sure shall thou lie down in it e're long, and be trodden under foot.
Look up and behold the Heavens above thee, that glister with so many Stars of
light; as sure as they now hang over thy head, so certainly shall they be under
thy feet e're a few years more be past: If thou have laid up thy Treasure in
Heaven, I mean, if thy chief joy and delight be there; if there be any trust in
the Lord, any truth and certainty in his Word, these things which I have
recommended to thy frequent Consideration, are Truths of the highest certainty
and importance; the flattering World may deceive thee, thy false dissembling
heart may deceive thee; health, and strength, and friends may prove treacherous
and unfaithful; all thy worldly hopes may become like a Spiders Web, Job 8.14.
The Heavens over thy head may turn into darkness, and the Sun and Stars may
refuse to give their light, the Earth may fail under thy feet, and reel to and
fro, and stagger like a Drunken Man, and the Inhabitants thereof may be at
their wits end, but the Word of God will never fail thee; it shall be
accomplished in despite of all opposing power, and the threatenings and
promises thereof shall stand, when all other things shall fall to the ground,
and be like water that is spilt on it, that cannot be gathered up again; Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot nor tittle of the Word of God shall
pass, till all be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. And Mat. 24.35. God that has
established the Earth so firmly (though it hang upon nothing) and it abides,
and shall abide till the great Earthquake shall come; he that has fixed the
Ordinances of Heaven and Earth, and settled the appointed times and seasons of
Spring and Summer, Winter and Harvest, Day and Night, and they continue to this
da^ (without variation) according to his Decree, for all are his servants,
Psalm. 119.90, 91. and Genesis 8.22. will make good the word that is gone out of
his mouth, and it shall not return till it has accomplished that which he has
spoken, Isa. 55.11. And therefore David acknowledges that he had magnified his
Word above all his Name. So much for the matter of our Consideration, or the
things that we should frequently consider; I conclude with that in Psalm.
107.43. Who so is wise, will consider these things, and they shall understand
the loving kindness of the Lord.

I come in the next place to speak to the manner, or to show how Consideration
should be exercised. First, after you have lift up your heart to God for the
heavenly Light and Assistance, set your self seriously to the duty as in his
sight and presence. Trifling with all matters of moment is inconsistent with
the nature of such things, and betrays our folly. But it is the bane and poison
of all Religion, and a wicked disparagement both to that and our selves: if
whatsoever our hand finds to do, we should do it with our might, ( Eccles.
9.10.) then much more should we rouse up our selves, and put to all our
strength when we have works of the greatest consequence in our hands, we must
not be slothful in such business as this is especially, but fervent in spirit
serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain, is a precept that extends it self to all Religious Acts and strictly
forbids a slight and customary performance of them. Thou art guilty of
Irreverence and contempt of such sacred things, and consequently of God himself
to whom they are nearly related, when thou medlest in them, with a careless and
wandering spirit, and may expect that the anger of the Lord should wax hot
against thee, when thou art so cold in his service. If God threatened to spew
the Church of Laodicea out of his mouth, because she was but lukewarm in his
service, Rev. 3.16. He will certainly deal worse with them that are stonecold
in their approaches to him. The heart and soul of Consideration, and all other
Religious Acts are wanting, when the heart, and soul, and strength are not
employed in them: For when earnestness and serious intention of the mind and
heart are deficient, it not only turns Religious Acts into mere form, but makes
them utterly unsuccessful: You will miss of your intended purpose, when you
come to God and seek for mercy in a careless and customary manner: you will
never obtain wisdom at the hands of God if you know not how to be importunate
for it: when you are shut up in affliction and misery and cannot get out, if
you cannot cry aloud and knock at the door of grace it will never be opened to
you. The Lord will give you a praying spirit fervent in supplication, if ever
he intend to give you the thing prayed for: He will give you a heart seriously
to Consider if ever he work the saving truths into your heart: if you are not
serious in the service of God you cannot be sincere, and how well God will
accept that service in which sincerity is wanting, look into the word of God
and Judge. The Consideration I am pressing you to, is a principal part of Gods
Worship, (I speak not of that which is occasional and ordinary, for such
Consideration must accompany all your Actions both toward God and men; if ever
they be prudently managed) but of that Consideration, which is set and solemn,
and that requires some time to be set apart for it, as well as Prayer and other
Duty; during which time we must no more intermix our thoughts with worldly
matters, then we must in Prayer, and Hearing, and Reading the Word of God: But
our Meditations must be tied to the most weighty saving truths till we begin to
feel the power of them upon our hearts; that so they may command our Lives.
It Is such serious Consideration as this, about the greatest and uncontroverted
truths for some set time together, till suitable affections and resolutions be
kindled in us, which is such an excellent part of Gods Worship: because it
inspires the Soul with Life and Fitness for all other Worship and Service, and
if you do not awaken, and call up the powers of your Soul and seriously employ
them in this work of Consideration, you are never like to see the beauty and
excellency of these saving truths, nor to feel the mighty power of them.
Ignorance and prejudice have so fast closed the eyes of your understanding,
that unless you rub hard they will never be opened; and the affections are so
backward to the most weighty things, that unless they be set upon in good
earnest, and enforced by the evidence and mighty power of these truths they
will not stir to any purpose, nor ripen your Soul for Practice.

Secondly, You must narrowly watch over your heart, and keep it close to the
work; and when it refuses, you must use the Authority God has given you over
it to compel it. Though the Soul has not that absolute command over its own
thoughts and affections which once it had before it rebelled against God, yet
it has not quite lost its Sovereignty and power. Experience does sufficiently
assure us, that we can command our thoughts to this or that subject, and keep
them on it, if we will take pains with them; even those that want the special
Grace of God, and are unsanctified in heart, can yet bend their thoughts to
think on God, his Attributes, and his Word and Works, the Life to come, the
vanity of Creatures, and make very pertinent moving discourses on them: else
none can Preach but such as are endued with saving Light and Knowledge, much
more may they command their Meditations to these heavenly Subjects, that have
some prevailing love to them which every Carnal man is deprived of. I know the
affections are not so easily compelled as the thoughts: It must be the
clearness, and importunity of the understanding that must excite and quicken
the affections: But yet serious Meditation on such weighty moving objects as
these are (on which your Meditations should be exercised) will do much to stir
the fire, and make the heart feel what the mind does so clearly understand; It
is the way that God has prescribed for a man to prevail with his own heart, to
take it off from vanity, and enamour it with those things that are Divine and
Heavenly. Objects and moving reasons kept much upon the mind by serious
thoughts, are the great Engine appointed both by Nature and by Grace to turn
about the Soul of Man; and they are to the Soul as Meat and Drink, and taking
in the Air to the Body. Objects, well considered, do turn the Soul into their
Nature (says a Reverend and a most skilful Divine) when therefore your mind
begins to be weary of these thoughts, and to rove and wander, fetch it in
again, and lay your charge and command upon it; and if that will not do, urge
the Command and Authority of God, and be sure not to let it bafle thee:
Quicquid imperavit Animas obtinuit, says that Excellent Heathen, Sen. de ira.
You are like to profit no further in the heavenly duty of Consideration at
first, than you force and compel your self: Tantum proficies quantum tibi vim
intuleris: Claud, Clem. Bib. But the success will make amends for all. Think it
not a tedious unpleasant task to attend the Affairs of your own Soul, and to do
a work so pleasing unto God. What have thou thy time and faculties for, if not
to employ them in his service that gave thee both time and faculties? Do
thou grudge to set them a work to thine own unspeakable advantage? Had thou
rather live like a Beast, than like a Man in the best use and exercise of thy
Reason? Check thy self after this manner when thy Mind begins to be unruly, and
thy fleshly brutish part would call thee off from the most rational improvement
of thy time in such wise and provident thoughts for thine Eternal happiness:
sometimes thy mind will loiter, and then it will be thy duty to spur it up by
the most persuasive quickening Arguments thou can suggest to it; (and such
thou should have ready at hand to serve for that use) sometimes it will
divert, and then thou should Rein it in with as much resolution, as thou
would an unruly Beast that would carry thee out of thy way; and when thy
heart is ready to frustrate all these helps, intermix some short Ejaculations
to God with thy Meditations, and appeal to him for strength to Master thy own
thoughts and affections: If thou gainest the Victory, thou have done more than
if thou had conquered a Kingdom, Prove. 16.32.

Thirdly, Address thy self to this Duty with the confident expectations of a
blessing: Think there is more to be gained this way, than by any other exercise
of thy mind; the stronger thy hopes are of a blessing that will answer all thy
pains, the more cheerfully will the work go on. If thou expectest nothing in
this way of obedience to God, and exercise of thy thoughts, but art dragged to
it merely by the threats of thine own Conscience, that tells thee roundly it
is thy duty, it will be done with little pleasure, and as little profit: But if
thou would make a Virtue of Necessity, and perform that willingly that must
be done however, then sweeten thy labor by the Harvest that will come in, and
take as much pains to gratify thy Soul for ever, and to sow in it the Seed of
endless felicity, as thou would to sow thy Land, that thou may enjoy the
Crop that it promises to bring thee forth. Thou do thy self wrong to leave
out such thoughts as these when thou art setting about the work of
Consideration; they will infuse life into thy Meditations, to think that they
shall not be in vain in the Lord. The harder the Duty is that is enjoined, the
greater is the gain after it is conscientiously performed. It Is sinful despair
and unbelief that weakneth our hands to Prayer and Meditation, and cutteth the
Nerves and Sinews of all Duty. This brings a damp upon us, and discourageth
all our endeavors: As ever therefore thou would perform this Duty with any
life, perform it in hope. If thou had no other hope but to please God in the
performance of a Duty so highly acceptable to him, even this alone were well
worth thy pains: But when thou may be sure that this Duty of Consideration
therefore pleases God, because it is so fit a means to advance thy self in
saving knowledge and virtue, and to make the best improvement of thine
intellectuals and affections, and to lay the true and solid grounds of endless
pleasure and felicity, thou have a Spur indeed to quicken thee: But this is not
all, thou may also hope oft-times to find the sweetest content and pleasure
in such exercise of thy thoughts. So that whereas there are but three sorts of
that which we call good, or three Capitals, to which all that is desirable may
be referred, viz. Bonum honestum, utile, and jucundum: For all that is good is
either (1.) Honest. (2.) Profitable. (3.) Pleasant: Thou have ground sure
enough to hope, that they will all concur in the Conscientious performance of
this Duty. To expect indeed to grow wise in any other way than God has
authorized and appointed, would be a foolish confidence and presumption, and
such as would certainly end in disappointment and shame; But to expect a
blessing in such an unquestionable way of duty, (as Consideration is) which
both nature and Scripture do so plainly teach thee, this is no rash but a well
grounded hope: Address your self to the duty of Consideration with such hopes
as these; and you shall find (if other necessaries also do concur) that the
work will prosper in your hand, and you also will prosper by it: Then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.5.
Yea, thou shall understand Righteousness, and Judgment, and Equity, and every
good Path, verse. 9. Try this course, and throw out all disturbing hindering
thoughts out of thy mind, and do but consider some of these weighty Truths
which I have recommended to thee, and assault thine own affections with the
moving power of them, and see whether thy time be miss-spent, or thy labor
lost. Assuredly Wisdom will enter into thine heart, and Knowledge will be
pleasant unto thy Soul; Discretion shall preserve thee, and Understanding shall
keep thee, and deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that
speaks and thinks froward things, who leaves the paths of uprightness, to
walk in the ways of darkness, Prove. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. If the hope of a little
worldly gain, will put the Merchant upon such difficult, tedious, yea and
dangerous Voyages, and to expose himself to the raging boystrous Seas and
Winds, and to go visit the Savage and Barbarous Nations, that he may bring back
a little fading Treasure; would not the hope of far better and greater gain put
Sails to thine endeavors, and quicken thee to Consideration? It Is certain,
that if thou do account Wisdom and Grace better than Gold and Silver, it
would do so. In this spiritual Trade of Commerce with God by Meditation, there
is less of danger, and more of profit and advantage: Though I confess the
profit is quite of another kind, but yet such as will yield thee more pleasure
and content than any worldly gain and Emolument can do; yea, may thou not
expect a Harvest, far more desirable to a man that is not brutish in his
affections, after one Months exercise of this Duty, though but one half hour in
a day, than the poor industrious Plowman can after ten times as much spent in
a dirty and unpleasant labor: And yet how cheerfully does he rise to the Plow
and Cart before the day break, and despise his rest and ease for a small Crop
which he expects; and it may be when all is done, his hopes are drowned by
unseasonable Showers, and too great a glut of moist and rainy weather; or else
they wither through too great an excess of heat and drought? But God will not
fail to water thine endeavors, if thou will bend thy mind daily to
Consideration, and Crown thine endeavors with a blessing. How indefatigably
will a poor man thresh and toil all the day and year long for a poor
contemptible Livelihood? And would thou not take an hours pains every day to
live a glorious happy life for ever, if thou did but hope for such a Reward?
Certainly they expect no such Reward, or else value it at a lower rate than
their worldly ease and pleasure, that will not consider upon such terms as
these; and they are like to neglect or faint in the work of Consideration, that
do not address themselves to it with such hopes as these. I have done with the
Directions that concern both the matter and manner of this Duty of
Consideration; and now come

In the last place to tell you, what End you should propose to your self in the
exercise of this Duty.

The Ends that you should propose are these two;

First, That you might get, and grow in the love of God, joy and delight in
him, praise and admiration of him, gratitude and thankfulness to him; and so
God may be more highly advanced in your heart and affections.

Secondly, And that you may grow up to a more habitual, firm and settled
resolution of obedience to his Laws, and submission to his Providence, and so
God may be more highly exalted in your life and practice.

First, The first great End that you should aim at in the exercise of
Consideration, is that you may provoke and strengthen those good affections of
love to God, delight in him, admiration of him, thankfulness to him; and so to
raise his Authority in your heart: Not that I exclude any other holy
affections, either of the Irascible or Concupiscible Faculty, whereby the
Sovereignty of God over Soul and Body is made more glorious and sensible:
Neither do I except any Acts of the Understanding, such as are esteem and
admiration of him, assent to his Word and Truth, both in Nature, but especially
in Scripture, whereby way is made for these higher and more Noble affections of
Love, Joy, and Praise. But you must see that all the other affections be guided
to, and end in these, especially Love: For this is the Leading Act or Affection
of the Soul (that vertually contains, yea and commands all the rest) and does
enthrone the Object to which it is mainly devoted in the heart, and sets the
Crown upon its head, and offers up the whole train of affections that come
after it to its devoir and service. S. Austin seems to maintain that love is
the only passion that does agitate us, and has its operation in us; for all
the passions that molest our Souls, are but so many disguized Loves; our fears
and desires, our hopes and despairs, our delights and sorrows, are Countenances
which Love puts on according to the Events of good or bad success. And as the
Sea carries different Names, according to the diverse parts of the Earth which
it washes, so does Love change her Name, according to the different state
wherein she finds her self: His words are, Amor inhians habere quod amatur
Cupiditas est, Idem habens eoque fruens Laetitia est: Fugiens quod ei
Adversatur, Timor est. Idque cum Acciderit sentiens Tristitia est. The truth is
(as most now grant) there are no Passions or Affections of the Soul that are
distinguished from it self, but the Soul it self is thus variously denominated,
according to the various Objects about which it is exercised; yea, the
Understanding and Will are no otherwise distinguished than by their Objects,
and are not Faculties really distinct: But the same Soul, as it sees,
apprehends, and discerns either truth or falsehood, it is called Understanding;
and as it chooses or refuses good and evil, it is called Will. But (though you
suppose this) yet there are two Primitive and most Essential Acts or Affections
of the Will, and those are Volition and Nolition, commonly called Love and
Hatred, of which all the other Affections have a Spice, and from whence they
are derived. All the Passions which are usually ascribed to the Concupiscible
Faculty, flow from Volition or Love; and all that are commonly reckoned as
Retainers to the Irascible Faculty, flow from Nolition or Hatred. These be the
two Acts whereby the Soul cleaves to its most endeared Object, (wherein it
places its rest and happiness) and whereby it fights against all Adversaries
that would take it out of its arms, or hinder it from fruition.

These are therefore the main Affections that you should endeavor more and
more to root and fortify by your Meditations, (even love to God, and hatred of
all that stands in any competition with, or contradiction to him.) Now since
the World with its Pleasures, Profits and Honors, is the cursed Trinity in
Unity that most opposes God, and that is most likely to draw your Soul first
to slight, and then to rebel against the Blessed Trinity in Unity: your great
intention in the work of Consideration, must be to fortify and strengthen your
love to the last, and your hatred to the first, to hold to the one, and despise
the other, Mat. 6.24. For you cannot serve God and the World, because their
Commands are quite contrary; and whilst you do fulfill the will of the one, you
do ipso facto slight the other. Indeed where two Masters stand in subordination
one to the other, there we may serve and please them both; but then they are
not two, but one Master; so long as the Commands of one do not cross, but
promote and further the Commands of the other. In this case God and the World
may both be loved. So long as our love to the world does not exceed those
bounds which God has set, and we love them no farther than as they further us
in his service. For instance, friends may help us forward toward Heaven, and
quicken us to our duty; and friends may incumber, discourage and hinder us in
our obedience to God: The first sort one may and must love for that very end;
the second sort, we ought to slight and despise, so far as they are such a
snare to us. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I
count them mine Enemies, says David, though it may be some of them might be
his friends by birth and Alliance, or pretense, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Not but that
we own some kind and degree of love, even to such as these; but not a love of
Complacency, which is the most proper sort of love, and the highest degree: we
may look upon them with a love of Benevolence and Compassion, desiring their
Repentance and Reformation, if they are such Enemies of God as are curable: And
the reason is, because there is some mixture of good with all their wickedness,
and this we must love them for. So we should examine all other worldly
comforts, and see how far they kindle, and how far they extinguish the love of
God in you; and so far you must love or hate them. Well, in the exercise of
Consideration, you must still have one eye to this affection of love, and see
that it grow stronger and stronger, and another upon every thing that you seem
to love too much, whether it be meat, or drink, or apparel, or friends, or
credit, or health, or life it self, to disparage them, and lessen your esteem
of, and affections to them; and think what a vast difference there is between
any worldly comfort here on Earth, and God the Author of that and all other
comforts: I mean no other disparagement than such a one as makes them know
their place, and keep their rank, and lays them at the feet of him that ought
to be a thousand times dearer to us: And so the Apostle counted all things dung
and dross in comparison with Christ, but not otherwise, Phil. 3.8. Now the more
distinct and certain knowledge you have of God, the more you are like to love
him; for he is such an Object, that if he be once thoroughly known, he cannot
but be loved. Nature and Reason it self will sufficiently assure you, that his
Word is the highest Demonstration of the truth of any thing he affirms, and
cannot possibly be false: The more therefore you are persuaded that the
Scripture or Bible is his Word, wherein he has made the plainest Discoveries
of himself, the more clear and certain apprehensions of God you are like to
have. It will be therefore very subservient to the love of God to confirm and
strengthen your assent to the Truth or Divine Authority of Scripture, and to
make that sometimes the immediate design and business of your Meditations; to
which end you must have Arguments at hand to prove Scripture to be the Word of
God, and to enforce your assent: Hereby also you will have some considerable
advantage to the exercise of all those other affections, that must help to
kindle and increase the love of God in you, such as are Repentance and Faith in
Christ; for there you have the fullest discoveries of the odiousness of Sin,
and the necessity of Repentance, and the Excellency of Christ and Faith in him,
who took our Flesh, and died for this very end, that he might reconcile God to
us, and us to God, and recover our affections to him, that the world had abused
and drawn away; and as the exercise of Repentance will promote the love of God
in you, by mortifying that which is contrary to it; so Faith in Christ much
more; for the more we love and subject our selves to him, who is the Wisdom of
the Father, and the highest pledge of his love to sinful man, the more we are
like to love the Father himself that both sent him, and accepted the
satisfaction that he offered to him in our behalf. And then lastly, the more we
are exercised in the praises of God, the more we are exercised in love it self;
for this is an immediate effect of love.

So that it should be one end of Consideration to exercise and quicken those
affections: viz. (1.) Assent to the truth of Scripture. (2.) Contempt of the
world, and all its pleasures, as it fights against God. (3.) Repentance for all
former sins, and present unfitness to the love and service of God. (4.) Faith
in Christ. (5.) Love to God directly. (6.) Praise and thankfulness to him: Not
that I exclude other simple or mixed affections, but because I intend anon to
give you some help for the better exercise of these particularly, which I
intended at first for my own private use.

Secondly, As it must be the end of Consideration, so to actuate and strengthen
these or some other holy affections toward God, and so to advance him in your
heart; so it must be your last end to strengthen your resolution of obedience
to him, both active and passive, and so to advance him in your life and
practice. This should and would be the last end of your daily Consideration, if
it be right: As it is Gods end when he requires the Heart that he might have
the Life also, for he knows that the life and practice will be suitable to the
heart, which is the great Principle of them; so it must be our end also, in the
exercise of our Meditations, to promote the Kingdom of God in our heart, that
we may the better honor him in our life. Remember therefore in the daily
exercise of this Duty, that you grow more resolved for Obedience: For as love
to God will be the fruit of your Meditations, if they be serious; so Obedience
will be the fruit of your love, if it be sincere: And as you are never like to
do or suffer the Will of God with cheerfulness, and to grow in Obedience,
unless you grow stronger in deliberate purpose and resolution; so you are never
like to grow in resolution, if you do not grow in the love of God.

I am next to give you some assistance toward the daily exercise of the Six
forementioned Affections; one whereof belongs to the Understanding, the other
to the Will.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Jacob Sampson, next Door to the Wonder Tavern
in Ludgate Street.
POlitical and Military Observations of the Court and Camp of France, during
the late Wars in Flanders, Germany, etc.

Sacramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces, when they draw nigh to God, in that most awful, solemn Ordinance of
the Lords Supper: By John Flavel, Minister of Christ in Devon, Duodecimo, price
1 s. 6 d.

A peaceable resolution of Conscience touching our present Impositions, wherein
Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and settled upon their true Foundation in
Scripture, Reason, and Constitution of this Kingdom, against all resistance of
the present Powers, and with compliance with the Laws, so far as may be in
order to Union; with a Draught or Specimen for a Bill for Accommodation,
Octavo, price 2 s.

A Memento for English Protestants, etc. with an Answer to that part of the
Compendium which reflects on the Bishop of Lincolns late Book, Quarto, price 1
s. 6 d.

Naked Truth, the first Part; being the true state of the Primitive Church, by
an humble Moderator: price stitcht 1 s,

Causa Dei, or an Apology for God; wherein the perpetuity of Infernal Torments
is evinced, and Divine Goodness and Justice (that notwithstanding) descended,
etc. By Richard Burthogge, M.D.

The Narrative of Robert Bolron of Shippon Hall, Gent. concerning the late
horrid Popish Plot.

The Narrative of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds in the County of York, Gent.
concerning the late horrid Popish Plot.

Tully's Select Orations.

All Mr. Gouges Works, Octavo.

Horrid Popish Plot in a Pack of Cards.

A second Pack, continuing a Representation of their Villainous Design, from the
publication of the first Pack to the last Sessions of Parliament, begun October.
21. 1680.

A third Defense of the Cause of Peace, proving 1. The need of our Concord. 2.
The impossibility of it, on the terms of the present Impositions, against the
Accusations and Storms of viz. Mr. John Hinckley, a nameless Impleader, a
nameless Reflecter or Speculum, etc. Mr. John Cheney's second Accusation; Mr.
Roger L'Estrange Justice, etc. The Dialogue between the Pope, and a Phanatick.
J. Varney's Phanatick Prophecy.

Sacra Unio, or an Holy Union, chiefly proposed to the Divided Protestants in
England, and extensively to all other Christians abroad in the world according
in Fundamentals, and disowning the Popes Supremacy, and Image Worship: Whereto
is added this needful advice, that they all bear one with another, in things
which they cannot yet in their Conscience agree upon, as Rites, Ceremonies, and
Discipline; together with the Protestants Religion's Fundamental Doctrine, and
four Tables, containing the Popish Religion at large, and Grecian, and Abasine,
and Muscovian; written at this time of need in English and Latin, for the good
and Conservation of all true Protestants in Europe, and all other good
Christians in other parts of the world, where the Latin is understood: By
Christopher Jelinger, M. A.

Some Arguments to assure and persuade the Infallible Truth and Divine
Authority of Scripture, for the Exercise of that part of Faith that consists in
the Intellects Assent.
Argument I.
THose Writings whose Penmen were Authorized and approved by God, must needs
be of Divine Authority.

But the Writings of the Old and New Testament had such Penmen. Therefore, etc.

The Major Proposition is beyond all doubt, and past dispute.

The Minor Proposition, (viz.) That the Penmen of the Old and New Testament,
were Men Authorized and approved by God in that very Work, is evident in that
these Writers did attest and prove the Inspiration they did pretend to by
frequent, Real, and uncontrouled Miracles, which none but God could enable
them to do. For,

First, They were unquestionably above the power of mere Man.

Secondly, These Writers thereof must derive their power from some invisible
Author, either Good or Bad: But from the Devil or any bad Spirit they could
not. For,

First, Some [at least] of those Miracles which were wrought by the Penmen of
the Old and New Testament were without the Spehre of all natural Causation, and
were such as no created Cause, or mere natural Agent can possibly produce, by
the mere stock of their own strength. [Now the bad Spirits are no better than
Creatures, and can work no other ways but by natural Efficiency and Causation,
and therefore could not do some of these works.]

Such was the Raising of the Dead to Life, and the giving sight to those which
were born perfectly blind. Not to instance in any other: [Though perchance to
cure all sorts of Diseases, with a word, and in a moment, is more than the
Devil can seemingly imitate, or any one can do, that has not assistance from
God.] Now the Rule is certain, A privatione ad habitum non datur Regressus
naturaliter: [if the privation be Total:] Nam productio totius entis, and entis
ex materia prorsus inepta, are the Specialties of God alone, and Prerogatives
Royal annexed to his Crown, who has ordained the constant course of Causes and
Effects, which we call Nature, or the Course of Nature, and has made all those
Agents that work in that orderly Course [which we call Natural Causes.]

Secondly, If the evil Spirits could do such works as these [which yet they
cannot, as has been proved] yet it would be inconsistent with the infinite
Wisdom, Truth and Goodness, and the nature and being of that Government, which
as supreme Rector of Mankind, he does exercise, to suffer his Creatures to be
thus deluded, and to leave Man under an Impossibility of ever attaining to the
knowledge of his Will in a rational way, and by such objective Evidence as may
work conviction upon his own Faculties, and the Faculties of others with whom
he shall discourse.

Thirdly, And yet if the Devil could do such works, and God should permit him
[neither of) which can be as has been made appear] yet it would not consist
with his own interest, to countenance and credit such Writers as these were,
and to Confirm Such a Doctrine, that is so destructive to his nature, and that
tends so visibly to the overthrow of his Kingdom: For if Satan were thus
divided and should fight after this desperate Manner against himself, his
Kingdom could not stand, Mat. 12.25. Which is the very strength of our Saviors
Argument when he was calumniated by the Jews to have wrought those mighty works
which he did by the Power of Beelzebub: Undoubtedly either the Devil himself
must want that that is Essential to an Intelligent Being, etc. Spirit and void
utterly of all understanding; or else the man must, that can think the Devil
would so effectually promote his own Downfall, and strike such a blow at the
very Root of his own kingdom. For we see by Experience where this Doctrine is
once received, the worship of Devils and all Magic Arts, and impious Practices
do forthwith vanish: And the one true God is served with detestation of Devils.
And the Doctrine of Christ, for Confirmation whereof these works were done,
forbids us to worship Devils, and draws us away from all pollutions wherewith
the evil Spirits are delighted: Whose power and Force was broken by Christ's
coming as Porphyry himself acknowledges; And therefore Origin, Arnob.
Tertulian, Justin Martyr, Athanasius, Clemens Alexandrinus Athenagoras,
Lactantius, with the rest that dealt with the Heathens, do make the pure
Excellency of Christ's Doctrine above all other Doctrine, whereby it promoteth
Holiness, and Justice, and order in the World, and strongly opposes all
impious and unrighteous Practices in which the Devils are delighted, whereby
their Kingdom is very much weakened, and in some places utterly ruined, one of
the main Arguments for the Christian Faith: Would the Devil ever set any seal,
or give any confirming Testimony to such Precepts as command that which he
hates, to such Promises as encourage Men every where to hate and oppose him,
to such threatening, as tend exceedingly to discourage and bring to repentance
all his Confederates? Would he helpon such a Doctrine, that teaches Men, What
a filthy malicious Spirit he is, and from what a Happiness he fell, and what a
design he drives on against God, and whatsoever has the Face of Goodness, and
how he hates Mankind, and would bring all Men into the same cursed condition
with himself? Would he have Men know his devices least he should come upon them
unawares? And would he have them abhor, and tremble at the mention of his very
Name; These are the effects that this Doctrine is like to have upon Men's Minds:
And therefore, it is past doubt, that if the Devil could work Miracles, he would
never do it in the present case, nor give the least Countenance to such
writings.

But if he were Master of such a Seal, and had that Faculty, he would rather
lend it to the Sects that seek to disparage, undermine, and cry down these
Writings in the World: He perfectly hates that parity that runs in every
vein of the Christian Doctrine, which made Aeneas Sylv. say ut Plat. p. 328.

Christiana Fides si Miraculis nonesset approbata, Honestate sua recipi debuit.
And therefore it would be a wonder indeed, if he should do a Miracle to confirm
it: The Miracles therefore that were wrought in Attestation of this Doctrine,
never came from him: He had no more hand in the Miracles, than he had in the
Doctrine they bore witness to, or than he would have in the overthrow of his
own Kingdom: And therefore Mr. Stillingfleet Orig. Sac. l. 2.10. well makes it
a Test, or Criterium of Miracles wrought by a Divine Power, where they tend to
the overthrow of Satan's Power in the World.

And this Argument taken from Miracles conjunct with the Holy Doctrine which
they ratify and attest, is such a demonstration of the Truth of the Mosaical
Religion before Christ, and to the Christian Religion since, that to attribute
these Miracles to the Devil, which could not possibly be wrought by any other
Power than the Finger of the Holy Ghost, is now commonly thought by the most
learned and judicious Divines, to be, The Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
etc. The unpardonable Sin: Thus Athanasius, Episcopus, and Dr. Hammond thought,
and Mr. Baxter has demonstratively showed in his Treat. of Infidelity.

The only Exception that can have any show of Pretense to invalidate this
Argument, is, that the matters of fact seem to be Questionable, (1) Some may
possibly question, whether ever such Miracles were wrought to confirm the
Scriptures? or whether ever there were such a person as Christ that did such
Mighty works, that dyed and rose again from the Dead, and poured forth a Holy
and Miraculous Spirit upon his Followers, for the Conviction of Infidels.

Answer, The matter of Fact can be questioned with no more Reason, than whether
there be such a City as Rome or Constantinople, by the Persons that never saw
them: or whether there ever lived such a Person as Julius or Augustus Caesar:
For there is the same, or greater Evidence for THOSE, than these is for These:
But there is none that will question these.

And the Reason is, because this their Assent is grounded upon Two Principles
that will not suffer any dissent.

The first is, It Is impossible that so many Men in so many Ages should meet or
combine in a Lie, when they get nothing by their Lie, Nulla ratam testis debet
habere, Ovid -- ubi premia falsi ibidem.

The second is, It Is not possible the senses of so many Men should fail them,
and that they should all mistake and be deluded, that were eye and Earwitnesses
of the matter of Fact, and both saw and heard the Authors of those Writings,
and the Miracles which they wrought to confirm them: See, Pet. Heart. de Mendoza
Phys. disp. 8. de Anima. Sect. 3. and Sect. 23.4, 5. page 570.

And the same Author to This Question, what sort of Evidence is that by which I
believe that there is such a place as Rome upon the witness of so many Men
asserting it? Answers, It is Physical: For it is impossible even in a
Physical sense, that so many Men in so many Ages should [so] lie: so that I
have no less Evidence that there is a City called Rome, than that all Fire is
heating: Thus he, See Mr. Baxter's Spirits witness to the Truth of
Christianity, page 68.

The same or as infallible Physical Evidence have we of the Truth of the
Miracles, by which the Holy Ghost did witness to the Truth of the Christian
Faith: For,

First, It Is naturally impossible that so many Churches, in so many Countries
of the World, at such a distance, should combine to lie, in telling the world
that the Holy Ghost was given, and Tongues spoken, and Miracles done amongst
them, for so many Years, if it had not been so.

Secondly, Man has a Nature as well as a Freewill, and the understanding
naturally enclines to Truth, and the will has naturally, and of Necessity Good
(as Good) for its object; And man as well as Brutes has a Nature, that cannot
but love it self; and desire its own welfare, and abhor death and Misery,
Temporral and Eternal; And therefore tho here and there a Man in some desperate
Passion may make away himself, yet we are Physically certain, that it must be a
thing which they do indeed believe, that must persuade Cities, and Countries of
People in their wits, to cast their Estates and Lives into the Hands of Bloody
Tyrants, and utterly ruin their worldly hopes: And especially when they do all
this in hope of a Blessedness in the Life to come: Where it is impossible that
so many Men of Reason should expect to be blessed, for conspiring in a Lie; but
rather to be everlastingly cursed and miserable, by the justice of that God
from whom they expect their Reward.

I conclude, therefore that the Case being resolved into Man's Natural
Principles, and inclinations so clearly as it is, There is natural Evidence of
the Truth of these Miracles:

This infallible Certainty that we have (or may have) is grounded upon
Universal Tradition whereby [Vniversal] is not meant the Consent of all Men, in
the World [no more than all the world is meant by Universal Church) but that
which is opposed to the Private Tradition of the Romanists, and has a certain
Moral Universality, and is built as to the Certainty upon Common, natural, and
rational Grounds, and not on the Romish pretended Authority, or Infallibility,
See Mr. Baxter Pref. to his Book of Infidelity.

Argument the II.
2. THat Doctrine or those Writings that have been allways owned and
countenanced by God, ever since they were written, must needs be Divine, at
least, if they pretend so to be.

But the Doctrine contained in the Old and New Testament, or the writings
commonly called the Scriptures by way of Excellency are such: therefore as God
did own them in their very Conception and Birth, by the many Miracles that did
attest them, so he has owned them ever since they were conceived, and brought
forth, in making them instrumental to so great a Change and Reformation in the
world.

The hand of God does appear most signally. 1. In the Plantation 2. In the
Propagation
of this Doctrine

The power and special Providence of God is observable.

First, In the Plantation of this Doctrine, if it be seriously considered.

1. What instruments he made use of. 2. What course they took to plant it. 3.
The Quality of the Doctrine they were to infuse and plant. 4. The Mighty
Enemies it had, and yet 5. It took Root and prospered in despite of all.
And for the First, (viz.) The instruments that God made use of, that the
effect might be acknowledged from him alone; It was two or three poor
despicable Fishermen, and Mechanics, that first broached and planted this
Doctrine, which God so wonderfully watered, and prepared room before it, and
did cause it to take deep root, and it quickly filled the Earth: The Hills were
covered with the Shadow of it, and the Boughs thereof were like the Goodly
Cedars: So that this Plant sent out her Boughs unto the Sea, and her Branches
unto the River, [ Psalm. 80.9, 10, 11.] Who can but ascribe the wonderful effect
to God, when the Planters of this Doctrine had neither first, Learning, 2ly,
Nor parts to carry on such a work; 3ly, Neither had they any worldly Interest
or Authority?

Si fuerunt Homines rudes, and imperiti rerum, quorum opera deus est usus in
tradendo verbo, si non fuerunt summo loco nati, si nullis humanis instructi
praesidiis hanc rem aggressi sunt, profecto oportet doctrinam ab ijs profectam
esse plane divinam, says Camero. Praelect. de verb. dei. p. 455.

And for the 2d. (1) The course that they took, It was the certain way to ruin
themselves and all their hopes in this world: Before they undertook this work,
they were told by Christ their Master, that they must be his Martyrs, and bear
witness to the Doctrine they were to preach by the Loss of their Credit,
Liberty and Lives: And is it likely they would ever venture upon such a design,
if they had not good Security, that they should be no losers in the End, and
that the Cause they managed was Gods, who would infallibly succeed and reward
them?

And for the 3d. (1) The Doctrine they were to infuse and plant) It was
perfectly contrary to the Nature and Inclination of those, that were to receive
it; and would certainly expose them to sufferings in the world, and make them
the scorn and reproach of all Unbelievers [which at this time was all the
world, except a few inconsiderable Idiots.

The very First Elements of this Doctrine, were so cross and displeasing to
flesh and Blood (which before this Doctrine was received, ruled all the world,)
that without the concurring mighty power of God, It was plainly impossible,
that it should be entertained: For Men to deny themselves, and to take up their
Cross and follow Christ, and boldly to profess themselves his disciples and
glory in his Name, who was so despised and hated of all Men: To renounce the
flesh with its Affections and Lusts: To love their enemies, and heartily to
seek the welfare of those that seek their hurt, and rejoice in their Calamity:
To live as strangers and Pilgrims in the world, having their only delight and
treasure above; And to despise the world, and all its glory as it draws away
the Heart from God: To prefer reproach and affliction with the people of God,
before the pleasures of sin which are but for a season; And to choose heartily
to be a doorkeeper in the House of God, and to have the meanest Office in his
Service, before the most stately Palaces of vanity and wickedness, and the
highest Honor in any other Service: To lay all down at the Feet of his Maker
and Redeemer, with the most humble submission, being ready to part with the
dearest and nearest Comforts, when the Lord would have it so: In a word, to be
wholly at his beck, in an Active and Passive Obedience: These are Doctrins
plain and easy to be understood, but hard of digestion, that grate hard upon
the Flesh. And yet these were the very Essentials of Christianity, which they
were to proclaim and command Men in the Name of God with all Authority to
receive: And to threaten destruction from the Lord to all Refusers. How
unlikely was this Doctrine to take with Flesh and Blood, unless it were
accompanied with power from above.

And for the fourth, (viz.) The mighty opposition that it met with, even all
the Potentates on Earth, the Kings and great Men, the wise Men and Philophers,
the Statists and Politicians, counted this wisdom of God mere foolishness: And
therefore it was the great objection, that the Infidels and Heathens assaulted
the Doctrine of Christ with, that none but the rude Multitude became his
Disciples and Followers (though afterward Dionysius the Areopagite, Polycarp,
Justin, Irenaeus, and learned Origin, quite spoiled the Heathenish Hopes, and
undid this foolish Objection; For they saw that it was not want of Learning
that made them Christians: For Origin had so much, that the most learned
Plotinus, seeing him amongst his Auditors blushed, and after a few words
abruptly brake off his Lecture;) And you know it was the Pharisaical Objection
against Christ, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? But these People that
know not the Law, (meaning those that embraced Christ's Doctrine) are accused:
John 7.48, 49. Yea the Jews themselves, whom God had so much obliged to
himself, by so many remarkable Favors, were filled with bitter Indignation and
Malice, and did fiercely persecute all that entertained this Doctrine, and
wanted neither Spite, nor Zeal, nor Opportunity, to crush all that went this
way, and to bring heavy sufferings upon them: Moreover [which was the grand
Impediment of all to the Christian Faith,] there were then such swarms of
Heretics, (1.) Such as professed Christianity, but hated it in their hearts,
and did their utmost to root it up: And yet it prospered before their Faces,
whilst they stood and looked on, gnashing their Teeth, and fretting. That
naked, simple, and illiterate Men should prevail against all manner of weapons
that were in their hands to ruin and destroy it.

All which laid together is no less than a demonstration of a Divine and
Almighty Power in succeeding such an unlikely Work.

Secondly. And as it was at first planted by no less than a Divine Power, so
the same mighty Assistance was necessary, and therefore observable in its
Propagation: It was impossible that such a Doctrine should spread and subdue the
World to its obedience, (as it quickly did) unless infinite wisdom and power
had made way, and blessed it: How could it have got so much ground, and have
run so swiftly thorough the World, if he that rides upon a Cherub, and flies
upon the wings of the wind ( Psalm. 18.10.) had not carried it? In the space of
Thirty Years, or thereabouts (as appears by uncontrouled History) it spread it
self far and near, not only in Judea, and all Asia, yea thorough the whole
Roman Empire, but beyond it also; It sounded in the Ears of Parthians and
Indians: It shot it self like Lightning thorough the places where it made its
progress, and melted Men's Hearts, whilst their Bodies were untouched. Though it
was such an Enemy to the Pride, Pomp and Glory of the World, which it was
purposely intended to disparage, that it might make way for a despised,
crucified Christ, to reign in the Earth, yet it soon got into the Courts of
Princes, and into the Consistories of Sage and Wise Counselors, and into the
Academies of Learning, and prevailed over all opposing power: yea, the more it
was cut and wounded, the more it grew up and shot forth: (...), says Nazianz.
Orat.

Duris ut Ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque ferro.
Object. And though bare Success be no Argument of Truth or a good Cause,
because we see that Lies and Falsehood have succeeded, and perverted very
considerable Numbers of Men. Thus Mahumetism does prevail over a great part of
the World to this day.

Answer. Yet in the Case of the Christian Religion, (a Doctrine so contrary to
the World) which has been propagated not by Fire and Sword, but by Argument
and Persuasion, by Sufferings and Persecution, here Success is both a
demonstration of Truth and of the Power of God: when, like Lightning, as I said
before, it shall melt Men's Hearts, and not touch their Bodies with any force.
As for the Religion of Mahomet, it is no wonder that such a carnal
Flesh-pleasing Doctrine, that does so highly gratify the Lusts of Men, should
so take with them, and quickly spread it self, especially when it had so many
Advantages of Power and Policy to diffuse it.

Fire and Sword were the Arguments that Mahomet used to support his Cause and
to increase his Followers: But Christ took a quite contrary course and very
unlikely to succeed, but that it had the Countenance and Approbation of Him who
knew well enough how to prosper it with a mighty success: With which since the
Christian Cause has been so miraculously blessed, it is a Proof beyond
exception, that God has owned it, and consequently the Scriptures that contain
this Doctrine, were inspired by God, because they lay claim to such inspiration,
and pretend to be the Word of Almighty God: This is more than sufficient to
prove in the General God's Approbation of the whole Scripture.

But yet more particularly: Consider how exactly the Promises and Threatenings
of this Word have been fulfilled and made good in all Ages and Successions of
the Church: And this will manifest that God has owned this Doctrine ex
superabundanti: After his Predictions concerning his own Death and Suffering,
and the Manner, together with the Means and Instruments of it were
accomplished, and that he was Crucified by his own Countrymen, and mocked and
spit upon, and numbered amongst Transgressors, his Garments parted, his side
pierced, and such like circumstances punctually fulfilled, according as he had
foretold; and that he was risen the Third Day, and had showed himself openly to
his Disciples, for their encouragement and the strengthening of their Faith, and
that he had ascended to Heaven in their sight; He promised, that he would send
the Holy Ghost, and endue them with power from above, to work Miracles, and to
speak with Tongues: which Promise was accordingly fulfilled; For on the day of
Pentecost, when they were assembled at Jerusalem, which other Histories, as
well as the Sacred, affirm, and none contradict: He promised also his
extraordinary Power and Presence with them, and wonderful success; and all came
to pass in like manner: He threatens the hardening of the Jews, and the
conversion of the Gentiles; And were they not accordingly affected? Moreover,
he promised Blessing and Peace to the diligent observers of his Statutes: And
have not many remarkable Providence made good this Word of Promise? With what
joy and inward comfort unutterable have the faithful Servants of Christ
triumphed in their very sufferings: Many of the Martyrs that have sealed the
Truth of Christ with their very Blood have sung at the Stake, and have
professed an inward ravishment of Spirit, I, and that Men of a grave and
discreet and no Fanatical credulous Spirit! Instances might be produced in
great number.

Let Mahomet now, or any other Religion whatsoever, produce as good Testimony
for the Truth of their Religion if they can, as what is here produced, to
declare the Approbation, Countenance and Favor of God to this Religion, which
Christ taught, and his Followers embraced, and maintained to the death: And
although God does not daily show forth these confirming Signs and Tokens of
Christianity, or that Religion which Christ in the New Testament has taught,
both by his Mouth, and Example, yet sometimes he is pleased to give such clear
and convincing Testimonies and Tokens of his Approbation, not liable to any
exception, that they might be for standing Monuments to others ever after: And
such as will not acknowledge them, but either take them for Fables, or ascribe
them to Chance or Fortune, and act their wickedness in defiance of such
Examples, such Persons God meets with now and then even still, to vindicate the
Credit of those former Stories, and to reinforce their Authority.

I could run over the Decalogue, which is the sum and substance of the Divine
Laws contained in the Scripture, and show you how God has remarkably punished
the more notable and famous Transgressors of all these Laws, and the contempt
of the Book in which these Laws are contained, and the derision of his
Messengers, which he has ordained, to proclaim and expound these Laws; and to
provoke and persuade Men to the hearty observance of them: It would be an
endless labor to produce all the Instances that are to be found in credible
Authors of this kind.

So much in Confirmation of the Second Argument.

Argument III.
3. THose Writings that contain peremptory Predictions of Future Things purely
contingent [which no eye but God's could possibly foresee] and which afterward
fell out punctually as they were foretold, must needs be the Word of God: But
the Writings of the Old and New Testament contain such Prophecies and
Predictions.

Therefore,

The Major Proposition needs no proof:

Si est divinatio, tum sunt dii, was Cicero's Argument.

The Minor is this: That there are many Future Events that depend merely upon
the Arbitrary Will of Man, and pure Casualty punctually foretold in the
Scripture, and as punctually fulfilled, may be demonstrated by Induction of
Instances out of the Old and New Testament.

Instance the First.
IT was foretold to Abraham, that he should have an Issue, and that his
Posterity out of his own Loins should be as the Sand of the Sea, when as yet he
had no Child, nor was ever like to have, he and Sarah being old and past such
hopes, Romans 4.19. And that he and his Seed should inherit the Land of Canaan
and the like 400 years before it came to pass: Genesis 15.13, 14, 15. contains the
Prophecy: Know for a certain that thy Seed shall be a stranger in a Land that
is not theirs 400 years, and shall serve them, and be evil entreated of them;
Notwithstanding the Nations which they serve will I judge, and afterward they
shall come out with great Substance. Thus much was foretold 400 years before it
came to pass, when no likelihood of the things did yet appear.

And how exactly was this Prophecy fulfilled, by the ruin of the Egyptians,
and the deliverance of the Israelites, even at the very time foretold not only
the Book of Exodus does declare, but even the Consent of Heathen Writers,
Porphyr. Lib. 4. Cont. Xnos. And Jewish Histories do put it beyond all doubt,
Josephus and others. And it is especially to be remarked, that This Prophecy
was so notorious and common amongst the Jews, from Abraham's time down to
Moses, which is computed to be 300 years, [that is from Abraham's Death to
Moses Birth] and so delivered by Tradition from Fathers to Children, that it
was their only Support in the time of their Sojourning amongst the Egyptians,
and that which gave courage to Moses when he led them thorough the wilderness.

Another Prediction
IS contained in Genesis 49. ver. 8, 9, 10. There Jacob in his last Testament to
his Son Judah tells him, Thy Brethren shall praise thee, and the Children of
thy Father shall bow down unto thee: The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shiloh come: This all the Jews
expound of the Messiah. The Hebrew word (...) The Septuag. render (...): Aquila
(...): Symmachus (...): Onkelos [the Author of the Babylonish Targum] (...) all
which denote the Sovereignty or Highest Power Political.

This was accomplished 2000 years after, at the Coming of Christ. For at that
time King Herod, a Stranger, put out quite the Line of Judah from the
Government of Jury: when this Prophecy was first spoken. 1. The Sons of Jacob
were few in Number, and never like to be a distinct Nation of themselves, or to
depart out of Egypt. 2. And if they should thrive into a Nation, and have a
Scepter of their own, yet was it unlikely that Judah and his Posterity should
ever come to sway the Scepter, for that he had three elder Brothers, Reuben,
Simeon, and Levi, who in all likelihood were to be preferred before him. And 3.
when Moses recorded this Prophecy, which was diverse hundred years after Jacob
had spoken it, it was yet more unlikely: For that Moses then present in
Government was of the Tribe of Levi, and Joshua, designed by God to succeed
him, was of the Tribe of Ephraim: And yet 4. Consider farther, that after him
the Judges succeeded, which ruled almost 400 years, and yet no appearance of
the Accomplishment of this Prophecy: At length they come to have Kings to rule,
but yet Judah seems to be forgotten, and Saul, a person of the Tribe of
Benjamin, was chosen, and he endued with diverse Children to succeed him: And
who would then have thought that this Prophecy would ever have been fulfilled?
But the Counsel of the Lord must stand: And therefore when none dreamed of such
a thing, A poor Shepherd is chosen out of the Tribe of Judah, to be a King, and
the Government so established in his Posterity, that it held out for more than
1200 years together, till Herod's time, which is more than any one Family in
the whole World beside can show for its Nobility and Continuance in Government.

Another Prophecy
IS Mentioned in the 1 Kings, 13.1, 2, 3. And behold there came a Man of God
out of Judah, by the command of the Lord unto Bethel, and Jeroboam stood by the
Altar to offer Incense: And he cried against the Altar in the Word of the Lord,
and said, O Altar! Altar! thus says the Lord, Behold a Child shall be born of
the House of David, Josiah by Name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of
the High Places, that burn Incense upon thee, and Men's bones shall be burnt on
thee. This was more than 300 years before Josiah was born; And this was
registered presently according to the Manner of those Times, and the Miracles
that happened about the Fact: As that the Altar cleft in twain: And that
Jeroboam stretching forth his hand to apprehend him, had his hand withered,
until it was restored by the Man of God's Prayers.

There passed 300 years and Josiah was born, and came to reign in Judah, and
one day coming to Bethel, to overthrow the Altar, and to destroy the Sepulchers
of those Idolatrous Priests, lit upon the Tomb where the Man of God was buried,
with the Superscription upon it, which he left untouched, as is declared 2
Kings 23.15, 16, 17. Never was there any Nation upon the Earth, that can
produce such Prophesies as these: so certain, so particular, so long foretold
before the time, and so exactly fulfilled. But the Holy Scriptures are full of
these.

The next Prophecy
IS recorded of Cyrus, Esaiah 44.28. foretold 200 years before Cyrus was born,
when there was not the least probability of such a thing: He says to Cyrus,
thou art my Shepherd, and he shall perform all my desire; saying also to
Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be
surely laid, all which was punctually fulfilled by Cyrus, Ezra 1. etc.

And that there might be no possible suspicion of Forgery in this Matter. This
Book of Esaiah was pronounced openly to the People, as other Prophesies were,
and published into many thousand hands before the Captivity of Babylon fell
out; and then carried also with the People, and dispersed in Chaldea, and other
parts of the World.

A vast number of these Prophesies may be mustered up in the Old and New
Testament, though the Instances already produced are all out of the Old
Testament. These Instances, with many other better improved, you may find in
Parsons Resolut. Part 2.

Yet, to conclude this Argument, Let it be considered how punctually Christ
foretold what should befall himself from his own Contrymen, and some of his
Disciples; How he should be denied, betrayed, and put to death, yea the death
of the Cross, and that he should rise again the third day: That the Holy Ghost
should be poured forth on his Disciples at the Day of Pentecost; and often told
those that discoursed with him the Thoughts of their Hearts, and what they
would do, and did exactly predict the Destruction of the Jews, their City and
Temple, which accordingly fell out. And then let it be considered, what God
says in 41 Esai. 22. wherein God provokes the Idols of the Gentiles to make
proof of their Divinity, saying, Let them show unto us, what shall happen; Let
them show the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know
the latter end of them, or declare us things for to come; show the things that
are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods: Intimating that it is
a sufficient proof of a Deity, to foreshew what is to come when the thing is
merely contingent.

Other Proofs of the Divine Authority of Scripture may be drawn
FIrst, From the Antiquity of these Books; Josephus tells us in his Second Book
against Appion, That their Lawgiver (he means Moses) was more Ancient than all
the Lawgivers that are mentioned in Antiquity: And that Lycurgus, and all
those that Greece wonders at, are but Novices, and of much later standing,
compared unto him: and St. Austin, De Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 37. In the days of
some of our Prophets, the Gentile Philosophers were not in being: yea, the
Seven wise Men of Greece; and those Secretists of Nature that were of a higher
date, Anaximander, Anaximenes, and Anaxagoras; neither were they so ancient as
some of our Prophets. They were far more ancient than the oldest
Historiographers among the Heathen, (viz.) Helanicus, Herodotus, Pherecydes,
Thucydides, Xenophon: And albeit the Gentiles had some Poets before, as
Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod, yet the eldest of these arrived no higher, than the
days of King Solomon, who was 500 years after Moses, the first Penman of the
Bible.

Along time after this most of the Heathen Gods were unborn, as the Gentiles
themselves in their Genealogies of them do confess. And as for Abraham he was
Elder than Jupiter, Neptune, and Plato; And yet before Abraham, do the
Scriptures contain the History of 2000 years.

The oldest Histories extant, beside the Histories of the Bible, are about the
Theban Wars, and the Funerals of Troy, as Lucretius intimates in these Verses;
Cur supra bellum Thebanum and Funera Troiae.
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae.
But these are of far later Date than the History of the Creation and Flood.

Another Argument may be drawn from the particular Men that wrote them, who
were such as in no reason can be suspected of Deceit or Falsehood: They were
plain, simple, honest Men, and such as had the Approbation of their Enemies,
for their innocent Life and Conversation: They were never accused of any Fault,
charged with any Crime, except that they taught a Doctrine quite contrary to the
Manners and Practices, both of Jews and Gentiles: And this stirred up their
Rage and Malice against them; and being so provoked, you may be sure they spoke
the worst they could of them: And if they could have found any thing to allege
against them, you should have heard it again and again: They had Enemies enough
that lay at watch to discredit their Testimony, if they had been able; that so
they might have hindered the further growth of that Religion that so much
crossed their worldly ends: They could not hope to compass any worldly
Interest, or get any temporal Advantage, by such a Course as this; Nay rather,
they were sure to bring all the World about their Ears, and to undo themselves
thereby: And they expected no less, but were ready to venture their Lives upon
the Credit of this Word which they proclaimed openly to the World, and preached
boldly to the Faces of their Enemies, that threatened them with the greatest
Cruelties: The Testimony they gave to our Savior's Divinity, and miraculous
Acts, they stood to, and boldly defended, to the very Face of the bloody
Sanedrim, that murdered him, whilst they had spite enough in their hearts,
and power in their hands to put them to death, and gnashed upon them with their
Teeth: Had they intended by Forgery to advance themselves in the World, they
would have taken a more likely Course, and curried Favor with the great Ones
of the World, that had it in their power to gratify their desires, and they
would have invented a lie more to their own advantage. It Is the manner of
Impostors and those that love lying, to contrive nothing sooner, than that
which they think will be most grateful to their Hearers. True, some of them
were Fishermen, and if indeed they had fished for themselves, they would have
baited their Hooks with such things as they knew the Fishes liked, and not with
such things as would drive the Fish away: They would have accommodated their
Words to the tickling of their Ears, and the satisfying of their Lusts. But
they knew it was not their own Word which they preached, but the Word of God,
and therefore it must not be falsified for any Men's pleasure: And therefore
they despised Pleasures, and contemned both the Hatred and Kindness of Men, and
exposed themselves to the bitterest Sufferings, rather than conceal it from the
World: What place is here for the least suspicion of untruth? Now in Matter of
Fact, as Grotius tells us, we ought verily to stand to unsuspected Testimonies:
And if as Ovid affirms, -- Vbi praemia Falsi
Nulla ratam Testis debet habere fidem.
How much more authentic is the Testimony, when it has no Reward, but the
bitterest usage that enraged Malice can bring about?

Another Argument may be taken from the Harmony, Consent, and perpetual unison
Agreement of all the Writers of these Sacred Doctrins: The witness of Liars
would vary, and never come up to a perfect unison and Agreement. But now there
is one even Thread runs thorough all the Parts of Scripture, not at all
divided, or entangled, or rather one and the same Spirit animates the whole,
and quickens every the least part thereof: Though to unstudied Men that have
not made exact and diligent search into them, there may seem to be some
Contradiction, yet Men that have dived into them, and have made the deepest
search, have fairly reconciled all these seeming Repugnancies, and have put to
silence all Gainsayers: and it is no more than all Writings are liable to,
though they be never so conform and agreeable to themselves, yet they may seem
to clash to an injudicious Reader.

Another Argument may be taken from the Duration and Continuance of these
Writings in despite of all that have endeavored to suppress them: They had
certainly perished in the Flames long before now, if God had not walked in the
midst of Fire with them. How did the Jews on the one hand, and the Heathen
Emperors on the other, conspire both to root out the Men, and the Doctrine,
which they published and taught? You know what General Persecutions there have
been at once of all the Christians throughout the World, and how many Thousands
have been slaughtered by the Roman Emperors Commands. I need not tell you that
there were Ten of these General Persecutions, and yet all would not do. Julian
strictly prohibited all Christian Schools, thinking by that Means to root
Christianity out of the World: and yet the Success was not answerable to his
Malice. Antiochus Epiphanes commanded all the Holy Writings should be burnt, as
the History of the Maccabees will inform you, 1 Macc. 1.59. yet God preserved
them. And Dioclesian, Author of the Tenth Persecution, commanded by
Proclamation, the Holy Scriptures to be burnt where ever they were found
throughout the Roman Empire; as Eusebius. relates, l. 8. c. 3. If the Scriptures
had not been the Word of God, they had never survived so much Malice and the
vigilant Endeavors of so many subtle and potent Enemies to destroy them out of
the World; nor escaped the combined furious Attempts both of Jews and Gentiles
to blot them out of the Memory of Mankind.

Moreover, If all that were hitherto produced, were not enough to demonstrate
the Divine Authority of Scripture, and to satisfy and confirm the Mind in this
weighty Truth, I might add by way of Accumulation, other Proofs from the
Majesty, Purity, and Efficacy of this Word, which so far excels all Humane
Writings in these particulars: And also from the Profession of Men and Martyrs,
that did and were ready to dye for it; Men of great Parts and Integrity, that
would not have parted with their Lives without a sufficient Cause: As also from
the destruction of the Grand Opposers of it: And the Consent of so many Men in
all Ages, and those that had the greatest Advantages thoroughly to scan and know
the Truth, and the Assent of very Adversaries.

All which do prove ex super abundanti, that the Scriptures are the most

Sacred Word of God,

and Written by

Divine Inspiration.

To conclude therefore with some little Exhortation, in a Point of such Weight
and Moment; Remember in your Meditations, to strengthen this Intellectual
Grace, which lies in the Firm and Active Belief of the Divine Authority of
Scripture; Get and keep such Clear Evidence and Demonstration of its Divinity,
that may satisfy your Soul, and enforce the most practical Assent: That you
may read the Threatenings with Reverence and a suitable Fear, as those that God
will certainly make good and execute upon those that fall under them: That you
may read the Promises with full persuasion of their Accomplishment to those
that have their part and interest in them, and so feel the forcible power of
them to quicken you to your Duty: That you may read the Precepts, not as idle
Storys, but as the Commands of God: Look that you evidently see the Name of God
upon the Doctrine and History thereof, and it will have another Effect, than a
bare opinionative or implicit belief, grounded upon the bare word of Man, could
produce. Your Assent will be suitable to your Evidence; and the Effect and
Influence it has upon your Heart and Life, will be suitable to your Assent.
It Is time well spent, to read over and consider those Treatises that convince
the Divine Authority of Scripture. The better the Groundwork is laid, the more
firm will the Superstructure be. When once thou art solidly and thoroughly
persuaded, that God is the Author of the Scriptures, thou will expect a
Treasure there, that is not to be found in any Humane Writings, any farther
than they contain this Doctrine in them. If you delight in Falsehood and Lies,
and love Darkness rather than Light, search not here, nor expect that Scripture
should gratify you: But if thou art a Lover of Truth, a Lover of Wisdom, then
come hither, and dig into these Mines, and God that was the Author will open
thine Eyes, if thou truly desire to be informed.

Some Considerations to help on the daily Exercise of Faith in Christ or
Subjection to the Sovereignty of our Redeemer.
Scriptures that require Faith in Christ, and show us its Nature.
1 John 12. As many as received him to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his Name. John 3.16. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting Life. Verse 18. He that believes on him is not
condemned, but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. Verse 36. He that
believes on the Son has Everlasting life, (that is, quo ad jus, or
Inchoative) And he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him. John 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might
have life. Luke 19.27. Those mine Enemies that would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. Heb. 5.9. And being made
perfect, he became the Author of Eternal Life and Salvation to all them that
obey him. Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls. John 5.22, 23, 24.
For the Father judges no Man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son:
That all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father; He that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father which sent him. Verily, verily,
I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me,
has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
Death to Life.
BEfore I come to the Motives that should animate us to the frequent and
delightful Exercise of Faith, which must be daily kept in the Mind and
Thoughts, (or some of the like Nature) it is necessary that we well understand
the Nature of that Faith which is of such daily Use and unspeakable Advantage
in the whole Christian Life.

For the better and more distinct Understanding whereof, we must take notice,
that in the Word of God we are informed of a Twofold Kingdom of God. 1. The
First, as Creator. 2. The Second, as Redeemer; And both these have their
different Constitution and Administration. Whilst Man stood in his Integrity,
he was under the Laws and Government of his Creator, and then Faith in God as
his Creator and Sovereign, was the Radical and Fundamental Virtue, which
whilst it did continue firm and inviolate, he was happy in the Favor of God;
and never began to fail in his Obedience, till first his Faith and Heart
subjection to God was shaken: But when his Heart began secretly to revolt from
God, and to haesitate about the perfect Veracity, Justice and Goodness of God,
and to believe the Tempter before him, (who is (...)) then he began to
transgress and violate his Command.

And having made Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience toward God his
Sovereign, that Law or Covenant which he had broken, threatens him with Eternal
Death* But God being moved with pity toward lapsed Mankind, did not execute
the deserved Penalty; but contrived a way in his Infinite Wisdom, in which he
might show Mercy to his miserable Creature Man, upon honorable Terms, and
vindicate the Honor of his Law, and the Authority of the Lawgiver, and make
Transgression as odious, as if the whole Species of Mankind had suffered, the
Penalty of the Law: And that was by the Incarnation of God the Son, taking our
Flesh upon him, and uniting it to his Godhead, and so both Humane and Divine
Nature being united in one Person, he might by the one be made capable of
suffering, and by the other, of satisfying, offended Justice. Thus God the Son,
and our dearest Savior, undertook the Work, lived in an exact Conformity to
the Law, fulfilled all Righteousness, and suffered what was due for our
Transgressions, and having finished the Work, God the Father was so well
pleased therewith, that he alters the state of things, and commits all into the
hands of his Son, and now the Second Kingdom commenceth, which is the Kingdom
of God as Redeemer, as the other was of God as Creator.

And here the Constitution and Government is quite different from the former:
The former required Faith in God, and Perfect Obedience, upon the Penalty of
Eternal Death, if there was the least Violation.

The latter requires Repentance and Faith in Christ as Sovereign Redeemer, and
sincere Obedience, continued to the End, or else threatens a heavier
Condemnation than the former: Here Faith in God the Redeemer constitutes us
Subjects of this Second Kingdom, which is nothing else but Heart-Subjection to
our Sovereign Redeemer, as Faith in God was our Heart-Subjection to our
Sovereign Creator; or else the deliberate Consent of the Soul to come under
the Yoke and Government of Christ. So that the Faith which puts the Christian
into a Justified State is a Political Act, such a one as he performs to a
Prince that first consents to be his Subject; (1.) to do the Duties of a
Subject, if he may but enjoy the Privileges and Immunities of such a Subject.
So that Faith is no one Physical Act of the Understanding or Will, but is made
up of diverse Acts of both.

It supposes our knowledge of God the Second Person in the Trinity, suffering
and satisfying in our Nature, and God's acceptance, and a full pardon granted
to all that repenting them of their Sin and Rebellion against God their
Creator, consent heartily to come under the Sovereignty of God Redeemer, and
to obey him in sincerity all the days of their Life; It supposes that we
believe thus much, and that he is able to subdue our Corruptions, and to bring
us into favor with God again, and thereupon give ear, hearty consent,
resigning up our selves in a deliberate Covenant unto him: This is the Faith
which in the Gospel is said to justify. By which description of Faith, you may
see that Faith Negatively is not

1. A Persuasion, that we are justified; for that would infer that a Man is
justified, before he is justified, which Doctrine is so notoriously absurd, that
now I think Few or None own it: You may see it solidly confuted by several
Arguments in Mr. Baxter's Answer to Sergeant Shephard.

2. Nor is it a bare Belief that Christ died for Sinners, and has satisfied
the Divine Justice. The Devil may have such a Faith as this.

3. Nor is it an Affyance to Recumbency upon Christ for pardon: The middlemost
is an Act antecedent to justifying Faith, and the other Two are consequent upon
it, though not immediately it may be; at least the first: For that sometimes
comes a long time after, when the Believer is grown up to a state of strength
and stability in his Faith, and sometimes it never follows at all in many weak
Believers. But Positively it is

The weary Sinner's acceptance of Christ, as his Sovereign, to Rule, Sanctify,
and Save him, and the Souls deliberate subjecting it self to him as his most
endeared Lord and Governor, the absolute Priest and Prophet, and one every way
able to save those that are his true Subjects and Disciples. This is the
Universal, Radical and Fundamental Grace of the Gospel, that diffuseth its
Virtue into all parts of the Christian Life, and its weakness or strength will
be seen and felt in all our Christian Duties.

For the deeper radification and confirmation of this Grace therefore, it is
necessary that we keep those Reasons continually upon our Minds, that are apt
to produce or strengthen it, and frequently ponder them with our most serious
Thoughts, that they may put us upon the Practice and Exercise of this universal
Grace, till it grow up to the highest Perfection we are able. Those that I
shall suggest are such as these:

1. First, You will never prize nor exercise that Life of Faith, till you have
well considered the Miseries of an Unbeliever. It Is impossible now to conceive,
much more to express, their intolerable greatness; None can thoroughly
understand what they are, but those that feel them: Woe to the Person that comes
thus to understand them! But such assuredly will all those be that die in
unbelief.

Let me make a Brief Enumeration of the Particulars.

1. First, They continue in flat Rebellion against God, and how such are like
to speed, I leave you to judge: We are all born with a rebellious Nature
against God, and practice nothing but Emnity and Contradiction to him, till
this Nature be changed: shall God proclaim Pardon, Mercy, and Grace, to Conquer
the Violence of Corruption and Temptation, to those that will lay down their
Weapons of Rebellion, and give over their stubborn opposition against God, and
come under the Command and Government of his Son? And shall you and I reject
such a gracious Offer, and say with those Rebels, We will not have this Man to
reign over us: (i. e.) We will not believe in him, Luke 19.14. Nay has Christ
done so much to endear his Person and Government to us, treading the Wine Press
of his Father's wrath for us, Isa. 63.3. shedding his warmest Blood to purchase
our Peace with God? And shall we refuse to submit our selves to him? Is it he,
or we, that are the gainers? Should he glory in such poor contemptible
Subjects, or we in such an Almighty Sovereign and Savior? We mistake
infinitely, and apprehend not the Matter aright, if we do not take it for a
high Privilege and Favor, to be under the Conduct of such a one that has
unsearchable Wisdom to Rule us, infinite Power both to protect us, and break
our Enemies in pieces, and is not profited by our Service, Job 22.2. Can a Man
be profitable to God, as he that is wise may be profitable to himself? Thou
owe thy hearty Subjection unto God, He made thee, and is thy rightful and
absolute Sovereign, and when thou had turned Traitor to him, He has not set
thee up as a Monument of his terrible Wrath and Vengeance: But has laid the
Government upon his Son, so nearly allied to us, by the Assumption of our
Nature, and relaxed the Rigor of his Law; promising to accept sincere Service
and Love, though perfect Obedience be due: O what a^ Aggravation will this be
of our Sin, if we still continue it after the Grace of God has so much
abounded toward us, Romans 6.1. and persist in our Rebellion: we know too well
what it is to be Rebels against God our Redeemer; but we little imagine what it
is to be sentenced and condemned for Rebels at the great and terrible Day.

2. Secondly, Every Unbeliever has the Guilt of all his former Sins fast bound
upon him: not one of them is pardoned; every Commission, yea and every
Omission, every idle Thought, and Word and Action, with all their several
Aggravations, stand still upon Record uncancell'd; God has passed an Act of
Indemnity and Oblivion, and proclaimed wonderful Grace and Mercy to penitent
Sinners; but the Unbeliever, whilst such, has no share nor portion in it. The
Blood of Christ has infinite virtue to cleanse sinners from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. but it is only such as do believe: The Law of God
the Creator, or Covenant of Works, which threatens Death to every Sin, is
still in Force to such as are not the sincere Subjects of Christ by Faith: the
wrath of God abides upon such. John 3.36. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Every violation of the Law makes it due to the
sinner, and Faith in Christ is the only means to remove it; but where that is
wanting, there it continues and abides. If one sin unpardoned, will sink the
Soul of the transgressour into everlasting condemnation, into what unspeakable
misery and horror will that vast Number that he has committed force the
sinner, who will not come unto Christ, nor submit himself to his Redeemer? Look
to thy self, and answer it as thou can, that wilt not come unto Christ to be
thy Advocate and answer for thee: stand upon thy own Legs as well as thou art
able, that wilt not bottom thy self by Faith on Christ: endure the storm of
God's wrath as well as thou can, that wilt not anchor thy Soul upon the
Redeemer of the World. Thou see the worst of it, if thou can make light of
it, it is but bearing all the Sins thou have committed upon thy own Body and
Soul, and the Wrath of God due to them; And if thou take this to be a
tolerable and a light Burden, continue still in thy unbelief.

3. Thirdly, If thou art no true Subject of Christ by Faith in him, thou art a
Slave of Satan, and a Vassal to thine own Corruption: There are but two
principal Masters; Christ is one, whose Right it is; And Satan is the other,
though an Usurper; If thou will not devote thy self to him, who is thy lawful
Lord and Master, thou will be under the Commands of a Cruel Tyrant. There are
but two Generals, Christ the Captain of our Salvation, Heb. 2.10. and Satan the
Ringleader to destruction; and one thou must fight under. There are but two
sorts of Servants; either thou art the Servant of Righteousness, or else thou
art the Servant of Sin, Romans 6.16. If Christ do not dwell in thy Heart by
Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Satan has got possession, and thou art a Member of that
wicked Spirit, (...), (1.) that efficaciously works in the Children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. He forms thy Conceptions, frames thy Discourses,
animateth all thy Actions, steereth thy whole Conversation, and when there is
need, instigateth thee to any Wickedness: though thou art secure and little
suspectest, it is he that prompteth thee in all thou go about. If thou had
an eye to see what influence he has upon all thy Actions, it would make thee
to abhor all thou do. Indeed there are wicked Habits and Dispositions that
strongly move and hurry thee into the same wickedness which the Devil would
have thee to commit; for if thou were merely passive, it would be thy Misery,
but not thy Sin: But now having no part in Christ, thou art at once led by thy
own Corruption, and the Enemy of all Goodness, into all Sin and Mischief. No
Turkish slavery comparable to this, wherein the sinner is wounding and tearing,
and wracking himself every day, and yet though he feels the smart, sometime
perceives the mischief he does himself, he cannot, nor will forbear. You would
look with pity upon a Madman, gnashing and cutting himself, and bless God that
you are sober, when you see the pernicious Effects of Madness: And yet if you
are impenitent unbelievers, you are guilty of far worse Cruelty to your Souls.

4. Fourthly, If thou art a Unbeliever, thou art not sure to be one Day longer
out of Hell, and Eternal Misery: thou hangst over the Pit of Destruction, by
the single Thread of thy Life; and if the Twine break, (as it is a Miracle it
does not every hour) all the World cannot save thee: Let not a deceived Heart
turn thee aside, that thou can not by Faith in Christ deliver thy own Soul,
nor say, is there not a Lie in my Right Hand? Esa. 44.2. Thy Riches and thy
Honors cannot prevent thy Death, much less can they procure a Release from it,
least of all can they Ransom thee from Destruction; thou art hasting to it
every Moment, and thou know not what one Day or Hour may bring forth, Prove.
27.1. As sure as thou live, so surely thou shall dye for ever, (if thou go
forward in unbelief) when once thy Breath is departed from thy Body, and how
many ways that may be stopped, who knows? And will thou yet stand out against
the gracious Offers of thy Redeemer, and linger in Infidelity, and run the
hazard of Eternal Destruction? Nay, its no hazard, but as undoubtedly certain,
as the Word of God is true. O that unbelievers would ponder this, that they
would but consider their latter End, what a few Breaths more they have to fetch
before they are turned into Everlasting Despair: How dare you lie down to
sleep, lest you should awake in Hell? How dare you rise, lest it should be to
Judgment and Condemnation? How can you enjoy your Life one Moment, that know
not but that the next Moment you must exchange it for Endless Torment and
Misery; And how will you do to give up the Ghost, that have not given up your
Names to Christ? Your foolish Friends may flatter you, and your own fraudulent
Heart may cheat you, but the Word of God tells you plainly what will be your
doom, if by Faith in Christ you do not escape it: How can you do to read such a
Text as that in Luke 12.20. (...): This Night shall they require thy Soul of
thee; (1) (by a usual Hebraism) shall thy Soul be required of thee; for when
there is no Nominative Case go before the Verb, it is taken impersonally.

5. Lastly, God is thine Enemy; and that contains all the Misery that can be
thought or spoken: Who can do a worse turn to himself, than to make God his
Enemy? Who can befriend that Man that has God for his Adversary, or plead his
Cause for him? When Saul in distress comes to Samuel (as he thought) for
counsel, what a sad Answer does he return him? Wherefore do thou ask of me,
seeing the Lord is departed from thee, and is become thine Enemy? 1 Samuel 28.16.
And it was the bitterest part of Job's suffering, that he thought God was his
Enemy. Wherefore hidest thou thy Face, and countest me for thine Enemy? Job
13.24. Thou, even thou art greatly to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight
when once thou art angry? faith the Psalmist, Psalm 76.7. We may bear the
Frowns of a Mortal Man, though he were never so great, yea, though all the
World should frown, there is some Refuge against that: If all Men and Devils
should storm and rage against us, it is possible for a Soul to comfort it self
against this, and find out a shelter. But whither will thou fly when God
pursues? What will you do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which
shall come from far? To whom will you fly for help? says the Prophet to the
wicked Israelites that had provoked God to be their Enemy, Isaiah 10.3. There Is
no flying from him: Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee
from thy Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; If I make my Bed
in Hell, behold thou art there; If I take the wings of the Morning, and dwell
in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, etc.
Psalm. 130.7, 8, 9, 10. There Is no escaping his hand; If he come to tare in
pieces, there can be none to deliver, Psalm 50.22.

Stay a little, thou that art an impenitent unbeliever, and consider a while
what this imports, (viz.) To have God for thine Adversary.

I Will tell thee in brief, It implys these three Things.

1. First, All the Attributes of God are against thee, and feel it thou shall,
either sooner or later.

2. Secondly, All the Creatures will set against thee first or last.

3. Thirdly, Thine own Conscience shall side with God against thee, and to make
thee perfectly miserable, shall fall upon thee with the greatest Fury and
Madness.

1. If thou reject the gracious Offers of Mercy by the Gospel, and refuse to
have Christ reign over thee, all the Attributes of God are engaged against
thee. The inflexible Justice, and Wisdom, and Holiness, his infinite Power, and
never failing Truth and Veracity, will all combine to make thee everlastingly
miserable. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do righteously? Genesis 18.25.
Will Infinite Power let such Contempt of his Grace (which has stooped so low)
go unrevenged? Will he suffer the proud Sinner to Spit in the Face of his Son
(for unbelief and rejecting him is no better) and not wipe off that aspersion,
by the eternal ruin and perdition of the sinner? Will it consist with the
perfect Wisdom of God, to look down upon the unbeliever, and see him trample
such amazing Love and Mercy under his feet, not once nor twice, but so many
Years together, as make up the Number of his Life, and not recompense such base
Ingratitude and wicked Presumption, according to its desert? If there be Truth
and Faithfulness in God, thou can not escape: He cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy
2.13. Do thou believe it? If thou believe not, yet he abides faithful; and
let me tell thee again, (...), he cannot deny himself: He has spoken, and will
not alter the thing that is gone out of his Mouth. He that believes not the
Son, shall not see Life, John 3.36. Nay, he that believes not (...) already,
because he has not (...) the Name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3.18.
I know he delights not in the misery or ruin of any of his Creatures, and
therefore is slow to Anger, and proceeds leasurely to Judgment, and strikes not
till there is no Remedy, after he has used all the Methods of Mercy and Pity
to reclaim the sinner, and has invited him time after time, year after year,
to have compassion upon his own Soul, and accept of Christ and pardon with him;
yet when no Means will succeed, and the case of the sinner is quite desperate,
neither will he be drawn to believe, however he speed; Judge now what a
disparagement this would be to the Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, and Veracity of
God, not to pass Sentence upon such a sinner: and then what a one it must be,
you may easily understand: If they that despised Moses Law, died without Mercy,
of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, etc. Heb. 10.28, 29. etc. If God strike, he has a hand
like himself.

2. Secondly, All Creatures will set against thee, for they are his Armies, and
he is the (...), the Lord of Hosts: All thy Friends and Acquaintance will come
in and bring their Witness and Accusations against thee, even thy bosom
Confederates shall cry shame on thee, and add Affliction to thy Misery; O what
a killing Consideration will it be then (and I would it were so now, if
possibly it might prevent that woeful day) to be overwhelmed with Misery and
Desperation, and when thou shall cry out with Job, Job 19.21. Have pity upon
me, have pity upon me, O my Friends, for the hand of God has touched me, and
he shall find none near him, to speak one word of ease to him, but all his
bitter Enemies; This will cut him to the quick, and bring down his stomach,
when it is too late: Then, if it were possible to believe in hope, how
earnestly would he wish to see one of the days of the Son of Man, Luke 17.22.

3. Thirdly, To complete his Misery, his own Conscience shall fall upon him,
with the greatest violence: It will upbraid him with wilful stupid unbelief,
and the most monstrous ingratitude; It will bring to his remembrance, the
kindness of his Savior, such a one as was never heard of; It will tell him of
his Blood and Sufferings, and how fain he would have washed him, and embraced
him with Mercy, and he flew away, and scorned Deliverance, and slighted all the
Proffers of his Love: Oh with what an a king Heart will the Infidel then say,
Why did he dye for me, since I was resolved to dye for my self; If he had not
died for me, this Death had never been so terrible, as now I feel it: O that
any one would bring an Argument, and convince me now, that Christ died not for
me! then should I escape the greatest part of my Torment. I would not torment
thee with such thoughts as these now, if it were not in hope to prevent such
tormenting thoughts, when time is past: Let me earnestly entreat thee, whoever
thou art, that art in this doleful condition, either speedily to believe in
Christ, or believe it, thine own Conscience will one day prove thy most
terrible Executioner.

So much for the First Motive, that should Teach us to prize and exercise
Faith, (viz.) Consider the Miseries of an Unbeliever.

But it is not my design to fright the Sinner unto Christ, neither is it
possible that Fear only should work true Belief, and produce a justifying
Faith. All that I have said hitherto, is to deter the Sinner from such a
damning Sin as Unbelief, but these be Arguments of another Nature to attract
the Sinner unto Christ; Consider therefore,

2. Secondly, What Christ has done to draw the Heart of Sinners to him, and to
engage them to believe. He has given his Soul an Offering to the death, and
stood in the very flames of his Father's wrath, that he might keep away the
burning intolerable heat thereof from us, and bore the grievous burden of our
sins; He stripped himself even to the greatest Poverty and Nakedness, that he
might Cloth us; and emptied himself, that we might be filled, 2 Cor. 8.9. Ye
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that tho he was rich, yet for your
sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. When we were
fallen into the deepest reproach and shame; he made himself of no Reputation,
and took upon him the Form of a Servant, that he might advance us to the
highest dignity and honor, 2 Phill. 6.7. He humbled himself to the death, that
he might procure our life, he made a low stoop, that he might lift us up when
sin had cast us down; He took upon him the humane Nature, that he might make us
partakers of the Divine Nature, Heb. 2.14. compared with 2 Pet. 1.4. Forasmuch
as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took
part with them, that through Death he might destroy him that had the power of
Death, that is the Devil, and purchase for us exceeding rich and precious
Promises, that by them we might be made partakers of the Divine Nature; It was
no small Endearment of himself to us to pass by the Angels and put forth his
hand to help us: For verily he took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the
Seed of Abraham, 2 Heb. 16. He rejoiced in the habitable parts of the Earth,
and his delight was among the Children of Men, Prove. 8.3. It Is his earnest
desire that thou should have the benefits of his Death, and enjoy what he
has so dearly purchased, and therefore he invites thee to believe in him,
because otherwise thou can have no advantage by his Death; If thou have any
understanding or ingenuity, lay the Love of Christ to Heart, and consider how
unspeakably great it is; it is past words to express it, it is so much beyond
example, let thy thoughts dwell upon it, and never give over the serious
consideration of his Sufferings and Death for such as thou art, till thy Heart
melt and yield, and till thou can with Love and Thankfulness, resign thy self
to him, as one that does deliberately resolve to be his Loyal Subject and
Disciple: Methinks, after thou have heard what he has done for thee, thou
should be ready to do any thing, and stick at nothing that he bids thee do,
that thou might show the most grateful resentment of his love; But when he
commands thee nothing, but for thy greatest advantage, that is to leave thy
deadly Enemies, and forsake thy self-destroying Courses, and come unto him thy
greatest Friend, and live under his Government, to refuse such a gracious
Offer, shows that thou art void of all true understanding, ingenuity, and sense
of thy own Benefit and Advantage: Had thou rather live under the cruel Laws
of a deadly, malicious Enemy, and one that neither can nor will protect thee,
when the most dreadful storms are coming on thee, Than under the Government of
one that bears the greatest love and compassion to thee, and has the
greatest Wisdom to direct thee, the greatest Power to protect thee, and whose
Laws are the most perfect Rule of Life, and the greatest Tendency to the Peace,
Welfare and Perfection of Christ's loyal, faithful Subjects? Had thou rather
serve a Tyrant, and professed Enemy, in Chains and Slavery, than a rightful,
just and gracious Sovereign, that has given such Demonstrations of the most
wonderful and ^^^pendious love to such as thou art, whose Service is perfect
Freedom, who has contrived all his Laws for the benefit of his true Subjects
and sincere Disciples? If the Love of Christ, testified by such exquisite
Sufferings and Death, and thy own Welfare and Felicity, will not prevail with
thee, to throw off the Yoke of Satan, and the World and Flesh, and to become a
Believer, and cause thee to say from thy Heart, with those in the Prophet
Isaiah 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over
us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name.

3. Thirdly, Remember that Faith is the first Grace that brings thee into a
justified state Condition: All that thou have or can do, before thou do
believe in Christ, is of no avail to thy Justification and Salvation: It Is
Faith that unites the Soul to Christ, and till it be united to him, it can
receive no saving benefit from him: when first the sinner does heartily consent
that, Christ shall be his King and Teacher, and he will be his Subject and
Disciple, he is morally joined and united unto Christ; as the Sovereign and
Subject make one Body Politic, (of which every Subject is a Member, and the
King is the Head) and as the Master and the Scholars are morally united; then
begins our union with Christ and our participation of the benefits which he
has purchased, when we first enter our selves into his School, and list our
selves under his Government and Protection: God has peremptorily resolved,
that none shall have the special Benefits of his Death, but those that submit
themselves to him. Amongst which Justification is the first, and then the (...)
follow in their due place and order: (...) by Faith, we have Peace (...). (...)
^^pt (...) the (...) of Eternal Salvation (...) ^se that actually obey him; so
neither (...) the Means of their Justification, to any (...) as by Faith and
Cordial Subjection resolve to obey him when their obedience is required: so
that the subjection of the Heart to Christ, and a deliberate purpose to serve
him sincerely and constantly all our days, is the first Foundation of our Union
with Christ and spec^^ Relation to him, from whence Justification does
immediately flow. And what a Mercy and Privilege that is, none but such as
reap the Fruit of Justification perfectly in the other life, can thoroughly
tell: Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, and whose (...) is
covered; yea, again, Blessed is the Man, (...) David, unto whom the Lord
imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no Guile, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
But as the Man is miserable and wretched for the present, that is not
justified, so woe to him, if he die in an unjustified state. And this, if he
want true Faith, he will certainly do: Justification is the Act of the Supreme
Rector; none has Authority to do it, but he only, and none can effectually
remit or renounce the Penalty, but he only, who alone is both the Kingdom and
the Power; And this we have the Testimony of his certain and infallible Word,
that he will not do, but upon the Condition of Faith, and an unfeigned
subjection to his Son; which alone is the effectual Means to bring them off
from their Sins, and to reduce them to their Obedience to God: Never hope to be
justified, till from the sense of your vile Nature and corrupt Inclinations and
proneness to rebel against God, and obnoxiousness to his just displeasure, you
do thankfully fly to Christ as your only Remedy, and take his Person for your
Ruler, and his Laws and Example for your Rule, and his Spirit for your
Sanctifier: For these are the only Terms on which a Sinner is made a true
Member of Christ's Church, and consequently justified and pardoned.

4. Fourthly, There Is no way whereby we can bring more honor to our Redeemer,
than by Believing: For hereby we give him the Glory.

1. Of his Love and Mercy, and all the ways whereby he has demonstrated his
Bowels and Compassions toward us, in his wonderful Condescension, to be made
like to us in the Assumption of our Nature, in subjecting himself to the Law,
yea, and to the Miseries of his Life, Poverty, Reproach, and Shame, and that in
such a degree, as never any one of us endured, or could endure, in suffering
the most pitiful Usage, the most sarcastical Taunts, the most bitter Agonies,
and the most ignominious cursed Death, and all to bring us into a salveable
condition, if we will believe; Now as there can be no greater Affront nor
Provocation given to him, than to slight and make void his Grace and Mercy, so
unspeakably great, so we can do him no greater honor, than to close with it,
and accept it, and be saved by it, and so stand as the Eternal Monument of his
Love.

2. We hereby give him also the Glory of his Sovereignty, that by his own Merit
and Conquests, as well as the Free Donation of God, is advanced to the right
hand of God, and has the Supreme Sovereignty and Lordship over all things,
both in Heaven and Earth: And therefore he tells us, Matthew. 28.18. All Power is
given unto me in Heaven and Earth. And Paul tells us, that to this End Christ
both died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of Dead and
Living, Romans 14.9. And Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. Because Christ was obedient even to
the Death of the Cross, Therefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a
Name, which is above every Name, That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should
bow of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth,
Matthew. 11.27. All things are delivered to me of my Father: and so Luke 10.22.
Now to believe on him, is practically to acknowledge his Sovereignty, that he
is Lord of all, Acts 10.36. That he is gone into Heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels, and Authorities and Powers being made subject to him, 1
Pet. 3.22. When we subject our selves to him, by Faith we own him, whom God
has made a little lower than the Angels, and crowned him with Glory and
Honor, and did set him over the Works of his hands, and has put all things in
subjection under his feet, 2 Heb. 7.8, 9. Did we know what a Blessing and
Privilege it is to come under his Protection, and live in subjection to him,
we should need no other Argument to persuade us to believe: As we honor him,
so we ease our selves, and rid our selves of those Fears, that we are otherwise
exposed to, and therefore our Savior, that he might comfort his Disciples,
exhorts them, John 14.1. Let not your Hearts be troubled, ye believe in God,
believe also in me: When we believe, we do in effect say, He has satisfied the
Justice of God, and he has given Sinners into his hands, and laid the
Government upon his shoulders, and that he can save to the utmost, all that
come unto God by and through him, since he ever lives as an immutable and
everlasting Priest, to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

3. Hereby we give him also the Glory of his Skill; when by Faith we bring our
diseased Souls to him, with confidence of a Cure: For that is one of the Chief
Ends of Faith, that we may be purified from all our Corruptions, and perfect
Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. As it was one of Christ's great Ends in
dying, so it should be ours in believing, that we might be saved from our sins,
Matthew. 1.21. It must be a skilful Physician indeed, that knows how to free the
Soul of Man from such a Mass of Corruption, from such a Chronical and
Inveterate Disease that is made up of such a complication of Distempers, It must
be no less than a Divine Skill indeed, that must raise such an Earthly Mind,
that must Cure a Heart so full of Contradiction to the Will of God, and that
must tame the Affections to God that are grown so carnal; It must be one that
knows all the windings and turnings of the Heart; and is thoroughly acquainted
with its Pulse, and all its secret Motions, that can Cure its Selsishness, and
take it off from its inordinate pursuit of Earthly Things, and make it
submissive to the Will of God; that can dispel the darkness of Man's Mind, and
heal the Confusion of his Thoughts, and awaken him to an impartial
Consideration of Things, and fortify Reason against the Flesh, and rectify
his Judgment, both as to present and future things, and recover him out of
Delirancy and Madness: O how much do holy Souls admire his skill whom he has
perfectly recovered! and how much will they that are now languishing in
Selfishness and Pride, and the doting Love of this World, and under all that
Litter of Corruptions wherewith their Souls are daily disquieted; when he shall
have restored them to Integrity again, and to their right Mind! Come unto him
by Faith, and you need not doubt, be your sickness never so mortal; you honor
him exceedingly, when you see your manifold and deadly Distempers, and cast
your selves upon his Skill.

5. Fifthly, By Faith thou art made Partaker of all the Benefits of Christ's
Incarnation, Life, and Death: Those that were thine but conditionally before,
are now made absolutely thine: If thou art heartily Christ's Subject, thou
shall have thy share in all the Privileges and Immunities of his most wise,
powerful, and happy Government, and find that his Yoke is most desirable,
Matthew. 11.28.29. If thou do consent deliberately, and sincerely, to be his
Disciple, thou shall have the unspeakable Advantages of such a skilful and
effectual Teacher; (And what Tongue is able to express how many and great they
are?) If thou art heartily willing to be his Patient, he can and will cure all
thy Maladies and Distempers in his due time, and restore thy Soul to its
Primitive health and soundness again; he will enlighten thy Mind, and purify
thy Heart, and bend thy Will to a cheerful Compliance with the Will of God, and
put such a Relish into thy Soul of Divine and Heavenly Things, that shall make
thee long after God, and the Wisdom, Grace and Holiness, that make thee like to
him: And then it will be no hard matter to have thy Heart in Heaven, thy
Discourse of Heavenly Things, and thy Delight in Heavenly Company: Then the
Biass of thy Soul will constantly incline thee to rejoice in the Lord and live
continually in his love and praise, and in the love of all Men, specially the
Servants of God and the Heirs of Glory: When thou have once sworn Fealty to
Christ, with thy Heart, (For every baptized Christian does it with his Mouth,
or by the Mouth of his Parents) and art gotten under his Shelter and
Protection, The Lord shall be thy Keeper, the Lord shall be thy Shade upon thy
Right Hand; The Sun shall not smite thee by Day, nor the Moon by Night; The
Lord shall preserve thee from all Evil, he shall preserve thy soul, Psalm.
121.6, 7, 8. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by Night, nor for the
Arrow that flies by Day, Psalm. 91.6. Then shall he fill thy Mouth with
laughter, and thy Lips with rejoicing, Job 8.21. Mistake me not, as if I
intimated, that every true Believer has actually this Joy and Peace, but he
has the Foundation of it, and he would rejoice if he saw this Grace in
himself: But it is the Malice of Satan to keep some sincere Christians in the
dark, and to keep them from discerning their interest in Christ and the grace
of God in them, that he might defraud them of their Comfort, and keep them
continually under Trouble: But though he take away their Comfort from them, yet
he shall not take away God's Favor from them. They shall still be kept by his
mighty Power through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. All the Benefits that
are necessary to Salvation, they shall actually have, and the rest as they are
fit for them.

6. And lastly, Be their Portion here what it will, they shall have the
Blessing of God with it; Which will make all things to work together for Good
to them, Romans 8.28. He shall be like the Tree planted by the Rivers of Water,
which brings forth his Fruit in due season, his Leaf also shall not wither,
and look whatsoever he does, it shall prosper, Psalm 1.3. Blessed shall be thy
Basket, and thy Store, Deuteronomy. 28.5. God shall bless thy Poverty, and thy Riches;
Thy more plentiful, or more mean Estate; Whether thou have Health or Sickness,
it shall turn to thy Advantage in the End. Thy Friends shall be a Blessing to
thee, yea, and so shall thine Enemies be also: As there is a secret blast of
God's displeasure upon the wicked and all that he has, so the breath and
inspiration of the Almighty teaches Believers wisdom how to order all their
steps. The steps of a good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in
his way: Though he fall, yet shall he not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand, Ps. 37.23. When the Curse of the Lord is in the
House of the ^^icked, he will be sure to bless the Habitation of ^^^evers,
Prove. 3.

Considerations to provoke and stir up the Superlative Love of God in the Heart.
John. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.

Psalm. 91.41. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver
him, I will set him on high, because he has known my Name.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early, shall find
me.

Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind: This is the first and greatest
Commandment. And Deuteronomy. 6.5. and Luke 10.27. to the same purpose.

Matthew. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother, more than me, is not worthy of
me. And Luke 14.26.

1 John 4.8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. And Verse
16. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Psalm. 31.23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints.

Psalm. 145.20. The Lord preserves them that love him.

Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for good, to them that love God.

Romans 10.13. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the
Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit, is Love, Joy, and Peace.

AS there is no surer proof of a Child of God, than the predominant Love of
him, because Love is the principal and commanding Affection, which includes and
governs all the rest, and the whole life, with a subserviency to the Object to
which it is mainly devoted, so there is no better Exercise, than for a rational
Creature to study seriously, and to give diligence to thrive in this Grace.

To which blos^ed end, it is wisdom to treasure up Matter, which either Reason
or Faith can suggest out of the Word or Providence of God in the Heart, and to
digest and draw it forth by daily Meditation, whereby this sovereign Affection
may be fed and excited. Some help hereto, the few following Considerations will
administer, if they be impartially weighed, by a Heart, fully at leisure, and
not immersed in worldly Affairs, nor entangled with any other impertinent
Matters: The which every soul may amplify as it is able, and to which many
more may be superadded.

First, There is nothing more highly congruous, nor does better become a
Creature, that has reason and understanding, than to love God above all, and
daily to grow in this Grace.

Secondly, And it is the highest Dignity and Honor that an intelligent
discursive Nature is capable of.

Thirdly, And it brings in the greatest Profit and Advantage. To these three
general Heads I shall confine all that I have to say to kindle and stir up this
Affection.

First, It is most highly congruous, and does very much beseem a reasonable
Creature:

And that for these following Reasons:

Reason 1.

First, Because God is the most excellent and lovely Object: And as in reason
the greatest Beauty, (caeteris paribus) should attract the strongest Love, so
the contrary implies absurdity and contradiction, which Reason does abhor: For
what can it be less than a Contradiction, for one that has understanding, to
prefer a less good, before a greater, there being equality and likeness in all
other Circumstances? The same rational Appetite that prompts us to love
Goodness, does also incline us to love the greatest Good, with the greatest
heat and fervor of Affection: But especially when the difference is so vast as
it is between God and all competitory Good whatsoever: They are but like a Drop
to the whole Ocean, or a small Dust compared to the whole Globe of Earth: A
single Beam of Light may as well stand up and vye Glory, as with the Sun: And a
little Sword of Grass, may better compare with the Spirit of Life and
Vegetation, and all the Flowers of the Field: as any Created Good may hold up
its head against God: Shall I say? As far as the East is from the West, or as
far as the Heaven is above the Earth, so great is the distance between God and
all Creatures put together! Or rather, the distance is a thousand times
greater, even infinite and incomprehensible, and far beyond any created
Capacity to conceive.

His Excellency is most apparent above all other Things.

1. In that all the kinds and degrees of Excellency and Perfection are united
in him, which are but scattered and divided amongst the Creatures, and that
which they have but some faint degree of dwells in him, in the highest
measure of fullness and exuperancy: So that if there be any Beauty or Glory in
the Frame of Heaven and Earth, or any Creatures in them contained, that can
stir up desire, and attract our Love, the same Motive with infinite Advantage
may be fetched from the most lovely Nature of God; And though the things with
which Mortal Men are commonly moved, are not formally in God, because they
imply imperfection: such as are Worldly Riches, Corporeal Beauty, Sensual
Pleasures, and all those Accommodations which suit that part of us which is
Flesh and Blood, yet they are in him these several ways, 1. Per viam
Eminentiae, by way of Excellency, as the rational Soul does eminently contain
the sensitive, though not formally: And as the understanding of Man, that
invents Watches and Clocks, and other Utensils, is far better than they, and
does eminently contain them. 2. Per viam Causalitatis, by way of Efficiency, in
that he is able to produce and create any of these things with the least Word
of his Mouth: He is therefore eminently able to furnish out all good to the
Soul that loves him: And so he has promised, To give them the desires of
their Heart, that delight in him, Psalm. 37.4. And therefore the Apostle had
ground enough to tell us, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has
it entered into the Heart of Man, (in this life to understand) the things which
God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. And David had cause
enough for such a passionate Invitation, O taste, and see that the Lord is good;
blessed is the Man that trusts in him. (Which Trust supposes, and implies
Love.)

2. He is the productive Cause of all that is desirable, and truly Good, (as I
just intimated before;) He is the Womb from whence all other Good has its
birth and original: For he has made Heaven and Earth, and all that in them is,
Psalm 95.5. The Sea is his, and he made it, and his hands prepared the dry
Land. And Psalm. 104. per totum. There Is no Virtue, Comeliness or Perfection in
any Creature, but he is the Author of it. The Influences of the Heaven, and the
Fertility of the Earth, and all the Verdure and Glory of the Grass and Flowers
of the Field, do but declare and set forth his infinite Perfection; Who
waters the Hills from his Chambers, and the Earth is satisfied with the Fruit
of his Works; And causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, and Herb for the
Service of Man, that he may bring forth Food out of the Earth; And Wine, that
makes glad the Heart of Man, and Oil to make his Face to shine, and Bread
which strengthens (...) 15. And has (...) beauty and (...) all his (...)
Matthew. 6.29.

It Is true, he is no way the (...), (though he be the Cau^^ of all that is
desirable) any other ways, (...) as he made Man, to whom that Monster, and
Abortion, is wholly to be ascribed, though it be so greedily desired and
committed.

But yet though it be actually so much desired by Man, through his Ignorance
and Mistake, and the Corruption of his blinded and distempered Faculties, yet
is not desirable indeed, nor truly good, any otherwise than Chalk and Coals and
Ashes are to one that has the Pica, and is distempered in the Stomach. I am
forced to confess, though with grief of Heart, and to the shame and reproach of
Mankind, that Man is come to that pass, that he may drink Iniquity like Water,
( Job 15.16.) And call Evil, Good, and Good, Evil; and put Darkness, for Light,
and Light, for Darkness; Bitter, for Sweet, and Sweet, for Bitter, ( Isaiah
5.20.) But then it is because the Foundations of his Soul are all out of
course, and Sense has got the upper hand, and Reason is under Feet, and his
Head stands where his Feet should do: Alas! It is a sad Consideration, that the
best of God's Creatures here on Earth, is become the worst of Monsters: But
this is no derogation from God's infinite Fullness and Perfection, that he is
not the Productive Cause of such a Poison as this, and the Father of such a
deformed loathsome Birth.

Reason 2d.

Secondly, It does most highly beseem a Reasonable Creature to love God above
all, because God has most obliged us: His Love to us, bids highest, for the
highest Return of Love again. If there were any thing in Heaven or Earth that
had more obliged us than God, it had not been than a Fault, neither could
Reason have risen up and accused us, if we had loved that thing more than God:
But now that all Creatures both in Heaven and Earth are silent, and have
nothing to say, and the love of God has so loud a Tongue, and his infinite
transcendent Favors do bespeak our Hearts so strongly, what an unpardonable
sin is it to love any thing more than him? The Good we receive from others, is
by his Special Command and Appointment, what we receive therefore from them, we
are indebted unto God for: He is the first Mover; they are but his Instruments,
to bring his Favors to us: Now though his Personal Excellency and Perfection,
may justly challenge our greatest Love and Esteem, yet the unparallel Good he
has done us, does call for much more. Nimii durus est Animas (says Seneca)
qui and si Amorem non velit impendere, nolit rependere: It Is a base Nature
indeed and highly unreasonable, that will not pay Love with Love. Can we be
content to receive all from God, and to repay nothing back again? He that gives
him not the prime and choice of his Affections, gives him nothing in the
Scripture Account, yea, he is reputed a Hater of him, Luke 14.26. If any Man
come to me, and hate not, (that is, love them not less) his Father and Mother,
and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple: Let but some of those Numberless Favors which thou have
received from him, be but a while considered, and it will utterly shame and put
to silence this odious sin: And the unthankful, hard-hearted sinner that is not
melted by such love as this, must needs be confounded in the serious thoughts
thereof, either here or hereafter. Here in Repentance, or hereafter in Torment.

1. Thou have thy very Being from him, without which thou were incapable of any
Love or Kindness from God or any Creature: He gave thee that very Heart which
thou deniest him, and whereby thou slightest him; He gave thee thy Memory to
remember him, Thy Mind to think upon him: He gave thee that Faculty of Love,
that it might burn continually toward him: Ungrateful Soul, to set any thing
above him in thy Love and Esteem! That had been a Brute and no Man, if it had
pleased him! and might then have wanted such a gift to bestow on him, or any
other thing.

2. The same Hand that gave thee thy Being at the first, does yet continue it,
and preserve thee every Day and Night, every Hour and Moment: If he should but
subtract his Hand, thou would soon dye and return to thy Dust again: Thou
have forfeited Life, and deserved Death over and over. How often have thou run
upon destruction, and he has saved thee, and reversed the Sentence of Death,
when the Law has condemned thee? And lengthned out this Life to thee, that
thou might repent, and live for ever? And do thou live by his mere grace
and favor every day, and yet love him not above all other things? This is
highly absurd and unreasonable.

3. Thy Life and all other Comforts, are not only the Fruit of his Bounty, but
of his mere Grace and Mercy: They have been all forfeited a thousand times
over: Every Sin calls for Sentence and Execution upon the sinner, and condemns
him to universal want and misery: But the Blood of God has purchased them back
again to thee, and the hand of God has restored them, and recovered so base a
Wretch into a state of favor, and condition of hope: And under each of these
comprehensive Mercies, infinite particulars might be reckoned up: And now what
can thou set up in Competition with Him? Thy Wit? Thine Understanding? Thy
Health? Strength? Beauty? Friends? Riches? Honor? Life? Or any Provision
that is made for it? These all belong to him, They are his Talents: Art thou a
Debtor to all, or any one of these, that thou should serve, love, or esteem
them, more than him who is so incomparably thy Benefactor?

Reason 3d.

Thirdly, God deserves our greatest love, because he is to us, The most
suitable Good.

Now that is the most suitable good, that does most fitly and fully supply all
our Necessities and satisfy our most rational Desires; Now who, or what can
pretend to compare with him in this respect, or stand in a competition with him?

There are Two great Necessities which every Soul lies under, 1. The one is in
respect of Sin: The 2d. in respect of Suffering and Misery, which Two comprize
all the Wants and Necessities of Man: Both which none is capable of removing,
but Christ our Redeemer, who is God-Man, blessed for evermore.

And for the first Sin, It exposes every sinner to two great Wants: The One of
Pardon; The Other of Sanctification: In the want of either of which, it is
plainly impossible, that any Man should be happy.

And this needs no other Proof, that the bare Explication of what Pardon and
Sanctification are.

1. Pardon is but the Removal of Guilt, which every Sinner does contract. Now
Guilt being an Obligation unto Punishment, Pardon must needs be the dissolving
or nulling of that Obligation; which if it should continue, and not be removed,
the guilty sinner must needs be terrified and affrighted with the sense of his
obnoxiousness to God's displeasure, who perfectly hates Sin, and loves Justice
and Righteousness, more than all his Creatures, and therefore must needs resent
any Affront done to them, as it were to the Apple of his Eye, where such Guilt
lies upon any Creature: which sense cannot but arise in every Sinner, when
Conscience is awake, [which will be sooner or later;] And then he that knows
God is his Enemy cannot sure be happy, since he has infinite power and wisdom
against him: And this is the very Case of every one that lies under Guilt
unremoved, he has Almighty God for his Enemy.

And as the want of Pardon cannot consist with Happiness, so neither can the
want of

2. Sanctification. For as he that has God for his Enemy cannot be happy, so
neither can he that is an Enemy unto God: And such a one is every unsanctified
and unrenewed Soul, who being unlike to God, cannot take pleasure in him, nor
have any complacency in those things which are suited to his blessed Nature:
But loves them just as the Bird does the Snare, from whence he will fly and
escape, with all the speed he can: But he that cannot love God above all, and
delight chiefly in his Ways, can never be happy: because these are the only
Ways that can perfect his Nature and make him happy.

Pardon and Sanctification being thus explained, it evidently follows by clear
consequence, that without these two, the sinner cannot be happy, but such a one
is every Man, and therefore without these two Supplies, no Soul can be happy:
Thus much being evident and demonstrable, it is as plain that none can remove
the Guilt and Filth that sin implies, but God who alone can remit sin, and
sanctify the sinner and dispose him by Holiness to the Love of God and all
Righteousness, wherein his chief happiness does consist.

The Second grand Necessity which Man lies under [which indeed comprehends all
Necessities whatsoever] is Misery or Suffering, which comprizeth all that Evil
in Effect, which sin does in the Cause; All that Sickness and Sorrow, and
Trouble and Fear, and Discontent and Death, and those sad Expectations after
it, are the Fruit and Effect of Sin, by Resultancy oftentimes, and always by
way of a Righteous Punishment and Compensation: Yea, Sin is such a Monster,
that it not only deserves, but also inflicts Evil upon the Mansion where it
dwells, and like that cruel Emperor, rips up the Womb that bare it, and is
both the Malefactor and Executioner, yea, and the very Death also that is
inflicted. I mean, (that I may avoid Metaphors, and speak properly,) That Sin
is both the meritorious, efficient, I, and formal Cause of a great part of our
Sufferings and Calamity; though not in its formal, yet in its material
Consideration. And as a Beast that being confined within its right Pasture, by
some Pale, or Fence, does by the same violence, break the Fence and hurt it
self, and get into more Feeding: so does every sinner, by the same
Transgression, violate God's Law and his own Welfare, and is both Active and
Passive in the same inordinate Action: For it is one great End of God's Law, to
tie Men's hands, that they should not hurt themselves: So that God's Honor and
Man's Safety do enter the very definition of all his Laws; so great is the
Wisdom of our Supreme Lawgiver: But the foregoing Similitude is but lame and
does not fully express the formal Effect of Sin, (as I may call it.) Tradition
to Sin, is threatened as the most fearful Judgment in Scripture.

Now God alone that can remove the Cause, can also free the Sinner from the sad
and woeful Consequents, and then Happiness will be the Result: For he that is
freed from all Evil whatsoever, and yet has an immortal duration, must needs
be happy. For without the blessed Fruition of God, such a reasonable Soul as
Man has, that can see backwards, and forwards, and has the Passions of Hope,
Fear, Love, Joy, cannot possibly be at rest, and cease from self-tormenting
Thoughts and Actions.

Since therefore it is God only that can supply all the Necessities of a
rational Creature, it follows, that he only is the most suitable and proper
good to such a Creature, and therefore is principally, and as far as is
possible to be desired and loved.

This is the Third Reason why it is so highly congruous and does so well beseem
a reasonable Creature, to love God above all.

Secondly, As it is most highly Congruous and Reasonable, so it is the Highest
Dignity and Honor that a Rational Creature is capable of.

If Honor be truly to be estimated, either by the Nobleness of the Act, for
which any one is honored, or the Persons in whose Esteem we are advanced; both
these ways be united to God above all things in Love, is the highest honor
that a Creature can ever arrive to, unless it be to exchange sincerity of Love,
for Perfection, or to add further degrees to this Love, till it comes to its
ultimum quod sic, or vertical Point.

1. There Is no Act that can put a greater Luster upon the Agent, than that
which is directly exercised upon God, especially in the way of Love. For the
Object as it gives Specification, so it gives Worth and Nobleness to the Act,
and that reflects it upon the Faculty first, and then upon the Agent, whose
Faculty it is: For as the Act is more glorious, that is exercised about a
Kingdom, than that which is exercised upon lower and baser things; so that
Faculty is more noble, that is capable of doing such an Act, than that which is
capable only of doing the other Acts: And by consequence, he that steereth or
governs a Ship, is more honorable, than he that rows it: Or rather, a Prince
is more honorable than a Plowman, because his Acts are conversant about a
nobler object.

This being past dispute, it follows, that the Servant of God is far more
highly dignified, than any other Servant whatsoever: Now Love being the
principal Part of his Service, because it is the Service of the Heart, which he
chiefly requires; It Is therefore the highest Honor to Love him with the whole
Heart.

2. And God esteems that Person most highly, that thus loves him: because All
the Promises of the Gospel are made to such, which are the highest Expressions
of God's Bounty and Love; And those whom he does most richly endow and favor,
them he does most highly honor: Particularly, 1. God dwells in them here. 2.
And they shall dwell with God hereafter. Now what greater Honor can there be,
than Familiarity and Co-habitation with the Fountain of all Honor?

And as to love God superlatively and above all, is 1. Most Reasonable: 2. Most
Honorable. So,

Thirdly, It brings in the greatest Profit and Advantage. For hereby,

First, If this Love prevail over all other Love, it ascertains to us,

1. That Relative Grace which consists in Pardon of all Sin; Justification of
our Persons; Peace and Favor with God or Friendship with him; and Sonship to
him; and Right to Heaven.

2. And also to all Real Grace, whereby every Christian is shaped and fashioned
to the Divine Nature and Similitude: And therefore may confidently expect, that
in the use of Means the Holy Spirit should enable him to thrive and bring forth
the Fruit of a sounder Knowledge in Spiritual Things, of Patience, Humility,
Meekness, Selfdenial, Temperance, Brotherly Love, and Charity, every one of
which is a Jewel of inestimable worth: In a word, He has a sound Title, by the
Free Charter of the Gospel, to all that Christ has purchased and procured by
the Merit of his Blood.

And as his Love increases in the Degree and Measure, and grows toward
Perfection, so it does increase the Measure of every Grace; And then Assurance,
which is the Consequent of an higher Measure of Grace than ordinary Christians
aspire to, usually flows in: And then such a Measure of Boldness and Confidence
in our Addresses to God, as does usually fill the Heart with daily Comfort.

Secondly, And as this prevailing Love does gather strength, so Peace at Home,
and inward Calmness and Tranquillity does increase: And this is a continual
Feast, sweeter than all the troublesome, disturbing Pleasures of the World: The
more any Soul is conscious to it self of a prevailing Love to God, and that he
has the Supremacy in his Heart, the more all his Faculties do unite and
conspire to Quietness, Rest, and Peace: For there is nothing that puts a Man
into Tumult and Disorder, but the greedy desire after something that looks like
Happiness, but when it is gotten, proves no such thing, and vexes the Soul with
Frustration and continual Disappointment: Now the more the Soul is in love with
God, the more it is acquainted with the true happiness, and is the less in
danger to be diverted by false and lying Promises: And when once the Soul has
got this Harbor, it will stir no more out so as to forsake it, but silently
feeds on continual pleasure, and dwells at ease, as the Psalmist expresses it,
Psalm. 25.13. And knows that all farther labor is vain, unless it be to grow
more deeply rooted in love: And this Peace and inward Joy, is always the
Companion of Assurance, in some sensible degree; however it may perchance be
wanting to those, and altogether imperceptible, that have the weakest and
lowest measure of true, or prevailing love to God.

Thirdly, And as this Love increases all troublesome, slavish Fear, and sad
Expectations do scatter and fly away: Who that has the interest in God, that
such a love does entitle to, need to fear Sickness, or Poverty, or Crosses, or
Death it self considerably, if he knows he is united to one so firmly that has
Life and Death in his hands, and has the Command of all Creatures in Heaven,
and Earth and Hell? The Sleep of such a Man must needs be sweet; His Food,
though never so course, cannot but refresh and comfort him; And all his
Comforts, are Comforts indeed; because none of them are disturbed with those,
Raving, Mad, and disturbing Passions, that every Man void of this love of God
cannot be free from more or less: How quietly does such a Man lie down and rise
up, because the Lord, when he thus loves, makes him to dwell continually in
safety? Psalm. 4.8.

Fourthly, As this Love increases, Temptation will lose its force, and grow
weaker and weaker: How little will Riches and Honor and worldly Pleasures draw
that Man to commit sin, and displease God, that feels the love of God and the
sweet Consequences of it in his Soul? and also knows, that he has or may have
enough in him: They may tempt a Fool and one that has little or no experience
of the love of God, and that wants something to set his heart at rest and
quiet: But he that is rich already, and truly happy, will not easily catch at
shadows, but study to keep what he is possessed of, and which he knows to be
Treasure indeed: He may in a short fit of inconsideracy, perhaps, forget God
and his Soul, and give some ease to Temptation in such an hour, but he will
quickly return again: And then when he remembers God again, he will be
troubled, Psalm. 77.3. And his folly will cost him dear; And his Soul will
cleave the faster afterward to God, when he has been better taught by so bad
experience.

Fifthly, As this love increases, all base and sordid love will slink away and
depart with confusion and shame: Who will love a Harlot that is deformed, when
he may honestly enjoy sweeter and better love? Sure none but a perverted,
distempered Mind. Who will feed upon Husks, when he may have the most pleasant,
wholesome and delicious Fare? None but one that has lost his Reason: And who
will dote upon a Trifle, when he may have a Crown and Kingdom to be delighted
with? Certainly so far as a Man feels he loves God, he disdains the love of
other things, that will not consist with him: And he will abhor the Motion
that is backed with the greatest worldly Preferment, that would draw away his
heart from God: Had he not tasted how good and gracious the Lord is, and how
happy a thing it is to live in Unity with him; He might perchance hearken to
every deluding Pleasure that courts his Affections: But after he has received
the love of God into his heart, and felt what a reviving Cordial it is, the
Pleasures and Honors of the World come too late, and seem but Dung and Dross
when they are laid in the Scales with that. No Man, (says our Savior) having
drunk old Wine, straightway desires new: for he says, The old is better, Luke
5.39. You know that famous Marquess ( Galeoc. Carac.) was moved with
indignation at such an offer as that: Cursed are they (says he) that think all
the Gold and Silver in the World, worth one day's Communion with Christ. And
thrice wicked are they, that would wed Men's Affections to the World and divorce
them from Christ: When there is a plain Competition or Contradiction between
God and any worldly happiness, the presentment of such a happiness to a
gracious heart, and one that truly loves God, looks like a motion from the
Devil, and provokes him to fly in the face of him that makes it, and to abhor
such a Solicitor. Let me live, says such a one, in Poverty and Rags, rather
than forgo what I now enjoy: Let those that never felt the love of God in their
hearts, feed upon Trash, (if they please) I have a better Diet. Better is a
little with the fear of the Lord (and his favor) than the greatest treasure
without it, Prove. 15.16. Better is a dinner of Herbs, where this love is, than
a stalled Ox, and hatred therewith, verse. 17. It Is but a ridiculous, foolish
thought, to think to draw an experienced Saint away from the love of God, by
Silver and Gold, and a little gaudy Apparel, and delicious Fare, and two or
three fair Words, and some few more slight Courtesies the World can do for him,
when he sees the vast difference between an immovable Rock, and a Reed shaken
with every wind; And that there is none in Heaven but God, and none upon the
Earth that his soul can desire in comparison of him, Ps. 73.25. The Law of thy
Mouth (says David) is dearer to me than thousands of Gold and Silver: more to
be desired than Gold, Psalm. 119.14.
yea than the most solid refined Gold; sweeter also than the Honey, and the
dropping of the Honeycomb, Psalm 19.10. And i^ the Law was so lovely and
excellent in his esteem, much more the Lawgiver.

I conclude therefore, that the Love of God is the best Antidote against all
base and poisonous love whatsoever, and will not permit the World with any of
its Pleasures to prevail where it is: It will cast this Bondwoman with her
Sons, and not suffer them to be Coheirs with God and his Son, Gal. 4.30.

Since therefore (O my Soul!) it is so highly consonant to that Reason that is
in thee, and conduces so much to the highest Honor and Perfection, and brings
in such incomparable Advantage, Why art thou so backward and averse to this
sweetest Employment? which is so sweet, 1. In the very Exercise. 2. And sweeter
the more it is exercised. 3. And makes all other Duty, sweet, easy, and
pleasant; which for want of this Quickuer, goes on but dully sometimes, and is
quickly tired: And so much as this warm Affection is wanting, all thy Services
will wax more and more chill and cold, till at last, if that spark go quite
out, (I mean as to the exercise) there will be a stop in all Duty, and all will
be frozen up. And if the Pulse of this Affection cease to beat toward God, all
Devotion and Exercise of Piety toward him, will suffer a Deliquium, and be in
a fainting Fit and Swone.

Why then is thy heart no more transported with this Love? David felt so much
pleasure and sweetness in this Work, that he could not forbear to provoke
others to partake with him, in this noblest delight, by a most Patherical
Invitation, O Love the Lord, all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the
Faithful, Psalm 31.23. Thou can love other things too sensibly, that have not
half the force and strength that this Object has to draw and invite this
Affection; And have moreover, disappointed thee too often of the Pleasure and
Felicity that from them thou have expected: yea, and which is far worse, have
entangled thee in many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which have afterward
betrayed thee to sad and bitter complaints. But here is an Object worthy thy
strongest love, that will not debase and destroy, but advance thy Soul to the
highest Perfection: The Love of him, as it is sweet in the exercise, so it will
end at last in unspeakable sweetness; and will not upbraid thee with Folly
afterward, as all other Love will be sure to do: Thou may love other things
too much, and here is the Source and Spring of all Sin and Impiety, and of all
absurd and unreasonable Practices: For as Divine Love is the sum of Duty, and
all worthy and becoming Actions; so Carnal Love, or the Love of Creatures, is
the Sum of all Wickedness, and all incongruous and unseemly Practice: But God
can never be exalted too high in thine Estimation and Affections: Here thou
may safely vent and pour out all the store of thy Love with the greatest
delight and security; and expatiate thy Soul to the widest extent in the Ocean
of his infinite and most lovely Perfections: To him thou may safely offer up
thy Soul in sacrifice, as a whole-Burnt-Offering in the Fire of Love for ever;
Will thou permit thy Thoughts any more to fly abroad into Trifles and
impertinent Matters, when thou have the immense Ocean of Divine Goodness to
lanch forth into, and may lose thy self, with the greatest pleasure and
advantage, in the depths of his infinite Perfections: Here to be even drowned
and swallowed up, is not Death, but the sweetest and most ravishing Life: Have
thou not pined long enough, and melted away in the Cares and Love of the World,
the Martyrdom which corrupt Nature prompts thee fast enough to choose? Is it not
now more than Time to be wiser, and to bare an Honorable Testimony to him that
has redeemed thee? And to subscribe that Witness to the Truth, which thou have
borne too much hitherto to Lies and Falsehood? Let them be taken by thee for
Fools and Madmen, that torture themselves with the Love and Care of this World,
and take Hell by that violence, that the Kingdom of Heaven should be taken by:
But let the main stream and current of thine Affections be ever after him, in
whom are all the dimensions of Perfection: Some little Twilight and Glimmerings
of his Ravishing Beauty thou have seen in his Words and Works; But oh how
short! how exceeding short have they been, through thy wilful Blindness and
Inadvertency! But these express not the thousandth part of his wonderful,
astonishing Splendor and Glory: Something it may be thou have tasted of; his
sweetest, reviving Love: But oh how little, in respect of what thou might
have had, had it not been for thy own wilful neglect and refusal! Had thou
gazed as much upon his Glory, as thou have done upon the fading, transitory
Glory of the World, and studied his Perfections, according to the Opportunities
and Advantages he has given thee, and not loved dismal, affrighting Darkness,
rather than the quickening, trransforming Light, and neglected the best use of
thine Understanding and Affections in holy Meditations on God; Thou might
confidently have expected the Blessing of God in a Work so well pleasing to
him, and found the Treasure that would have made thee contemn all other things
in Comparison: Then thou might have had joy in the darkest Night of
Affliction, and such an Allay to the bitterest Cup, that would have made any
Condition welcome to thee: Then thou would have forgotten all the Miseries
of thy life past, and remembered them as Waters that pass away, Job 11.16. Then
thou might have lain down with the sense of the pardon of former sins, yea,
thou might have lain down, and thy sleep would have been sweet to thee. Then
the Remembrance of thy latter End would not have been such an unpleasant Theme
to thy Meditations, as now it is: yea, the Lord would have satisfied thy Soul
in Drought, and made thee like a watered Garden, and like a Spring whose Waters
fail not, Isaiah 58.11. And then with what vivacity and cheerfulness should
thou have performed all Duty, and borne all Sufferings, when God had once
answered thee in the joy of thy Heart!

Considerations to provoke to the Contempt of the World.
Psalm 119 96. I have seen an End of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.

1 John 2.15, 16. Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world; if
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: For all that is
in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. Verse. 17. And the world
passes away, and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God abides
for ever.

Isa. 40.6, 7. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is like the
flower of the field. The grass withers, and the flower fades, because the
Spirit of the Lord blows upon it.

1 Cor. 7.9. The fashion of this world passes away.

Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness
delivers from death.

Eccles. 1.2. and 2.11. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, says the Preacher.

Eccles. 1.8. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it: the eye is
not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.

Prove. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain.

AS the Object of all rational, saving Love, is God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and all that stands in subserviency to him, so far as they conduce to
this Noble End and Happiness of the Soul; So the Object of all irrational,
sinful, damning Love, is the World, and whatsoever serves to promote its
interest in the Heart, so far as it is Competitory with, or Contradictory to
the Interest of God; and conduces to the inordinate pleasing of the Flesh: And
thus much I intend here by the World, (that is) any thing in the whole
Creation, that does not refer to, and is not subordinate unto God, is to be the
Object of this Contempt and Disdain.

First, Because the World is unsatisfactory and cannot content the Mind of Man;
There is something still that the Soul misseth, when it has all here that it
can desire: It silently imagines an Aliquid ultra, when it has gone its
farthest in the Happiness and Prosperity here on Earth: And it is so far from
Rest, after all, that it grows more hot and impatient in its desires: And
finding nothing to pursue after, that can give content, begins to fret, and
grow peevish: when the ambitious Soul is gotten to the top of Honor, he finds
not the thing he expected, he calls it by all the slight and contemptible Names
he can invent, or imagine: you may as well satisfy the Appetite of an hungry
Man with Grace and Virtue, or something that is purely Spiritual, as fill the
Soul and Spirit of a Man, with Earth, and Earthly Things, or any thing of a
gross or corporeal Nature, because there is so little Likeness and Proportion
between the Appetite and the Food: Prove. 27.20. Hell and Destruction are never
full, so the Eyes of Man are never satisfied. Eccles. 1.8. As the Horse-leach
has two Daughters that cry, Give, give, ( Prove. 30.15.) which some understand
of its forked Tongue, that has two Suckers at the end of it) so there is in
Man by Nature, first an eager desire after these worldly things, and secondly
an unquietness or want of content, when he has gotten them, and a more burning
desire after them; which is worse than the former: As that Thirst is always
worse which proceeds from too much drinking, than that which proceeds from a
total want of drink.

These shows what unsatisfactory things they are, in that they do not quiet and
content, but rather more enrage our desires, and vex and discompose the Heart:
Eccles. 5.10. He that loves Silver, etc.

Secondly, Because they are so short and limited in their virtue and operation:
It Is commonly but one or two Necessities, that one Creature can supply, and
those but very imperfectly; But all together, cannot supply the one half of the
Wants and Necessities that Man is subject to: Fire may relieve one that is
cold, but cannot fill the Belly of an hungry Man; Company may a little refresh
him that is weary of Solitude, but real Sickness and Pain it cannot remove: And
all other Creatures have their stint and measure: Let but a Man be distressed
in Conscience, and frighted with the Thoughts of Death, and terrified with sad
Expectations of Judgment afterward, and even confounded with the Thoughts of
Hell, and the Torments thereof. And all the World cannot help him in such a
straight: Nay,

Thirdly, They are such winged, transitory things, that they are worthy to be
contemned; What speed do they make to get away, when we have the fastest hold
of them? They make as much have as a Ship that saileth with the advantage of
Wind and Tide. Who can name the Comfort he has had on Earth, that has lasted
to the small Measure and Extent of an Hundred Years? Nay, I may confidently say
to half a hundred, It Is not one in Twenty that lives to Fifty Years; And when
Life's gone, all is gone: Who is there that enjoys Health twenty Years
together, without some interruption? Scarce one in a Kingdom: But for the most
part, Men are like their Ley-fields, (as they are called) that it may be rest
one year, and are ploughed another: Let the mad and distracted World prize and
prefer such a fading Flower, as is the Glory of this World, before Heaven, and
an Eternal Life with God; Let the World take the World, and they that are dead
in Trespasses, and Sins, take these dead, momentary and insipid Pleasures: It Is
Life and Substance that a wise and sober Man will thirst after, and something
that will last beyond the Term of this present: He that believes to purpose the
Life to come, would not be condemned to a brutish, sensual, and voluptuous
Life, nor the Pleasures that distracted Men are mad after, who then laugh most,
when God is farthest from their thoughts, and then have the sweetest Dreams
when Faith and Reason are in the deepest sleep.

Fourthly, As all the Comforts here on Earth are fugitive and passant, so they
are most uncertain: They lie open to so many Accidents and Casualties, that no
one has security enough, that he shall keep them one hour.

Quod cuiquam accidere, cuivis potest. They are liable to a double uncertainty;

1. The one is from their own fluid perishing Nature and Inconstancy.

2. The other from the fickle and corruptible Nature of the Owner.

First, Their inconstancy and mutable Nature does appear in that they may and
do change 1. Their Nature even whilst the Owner lives. 2. Their Master even
whilst the Owner lives.


1. They may change their Nature; Land may change its Fertility, and become
barren and good for nothing, while the Owner stands by and looks on; or else if
his Fruit grow up and raise his expectation, there is a thousand Accidents may
intercept it, before it come into his Storehouse, and be laid up for his
immediate use; it may be suddenly smitten with a blast from Heaven; it may be
parched with excessive heats, or nipp'd with cold, and drowned with intemperate
showers: Or if it scapes all these, the Lord may command his Armies, the
Locusts and Caterpillars, or some Vermin to devour it: There are Ways enough
past finding out, which the Wit of Man cannot foresee, or if it could, cannot
prevent, by which the Hopes of the present Master, or Incumbent, may be
blasted; The place where a Man lives, that was once commodious, and a
comfortable Residence, may suddenly become inhospitable, by reason of the
corrupted Air, or Persons amongst whom we live: The House that shelters us may
be soon turned into Ashes, by a devouring Fire. Or,

2. They may change their Master; They may be taken away by Fraud, or Violence:
Every one that has but Mind enough to what we have, and Wit enough to contrive
how to get it into his possession, and Wickedness enough to execute what he
has contrived, and Grace too little to restrain him, may quickly alter the
Property of what we have, and be Master of our best Enjoyments: And it is sad to
think, what a great part of Mankind they be that have all these Hellish
Properties.

Or if all this will not load the fickle things of this World with disgrace
enough, and they may escape all the forementioned Casualties, yet,

Secondly, The Owner may be taken from them? Who can say that his Pulse shall
certainly beat an hour longer? Such a vapor is the Life of Man, that there
scarce can be any more uncertain Tenure: When his Mountain stands strongest,
yet he is in the hands of him that set fast the Mountains, who is girded with
power enough to overturn them with one Word or Beck: My Times are in thy hands,
says David, Psalm 31.15.

Yea, to superadd one more Disparagement.

Thirdly, Whilst the Enjoyment and Enjoyer both continue together, a Man may
want an Appetite, and so relish nothing that he has, Eccles. 8.1, 2 There is
an Evil: And then no wonder if he starve in the midst of Plenty; and pine away
from day to day, whilst he has the most nourishing restorative Food that Earth
can set before him: It will then be no marvel, if Leanness enter into his Soul,
though God has given him all that his Flesh can desire, ( Psalm. 106.15.) If
the Rich Man's Palate be but a little feverish, through the Distempers of his
Body or Mind, his great Revenues, his stately House, his beautiful Wife, his
numerous Offspring, all his Flatterers, and the rest of his Accommodations,
signify nothing to him: yea, a little Pet or Discontent, will turn all into
Gall and Bitterness, and make him most angry with those that study to please
him most.

Fifthly, To show yet further how worthy they are to be contemned, Consider,
They are gotten with much difficulty; Kept with much care and trouble; Lost
with much sorrow: 1. It Is not one of many that gets the Riches of this World;
some indeed are born to them, but how many are defeated of their hopes, before
they grow up: And what does their Birthright serve for, but to make them the
more miserable? This is all the Privilege they have, by being born of Rich and
Noble Parents, that perchance fall into Poverty or Disgrace, before their
Children are ripe: And for the rest, how many Difficulties do they pass, before
they get them into their Possession? It may be Twenty or Thirty Years they are
subject to the Will and Humor of those that give them: And when they have done
all, it may be, they are disinherited, and put to hard shifts. But of those
that are not born to them, they are more hardly gotten; It costs them many a
weary day, and many a restless, watchful Night, much Sweat and Pain, to get a
poor, little Portion! And yet the greatest part of the Price by which they are
usually purchased, is yet behind; Whilst they are venturing after Riches, they
too frequently lose God and their Souls, if not by a plain and open, yet by a
secret and virtual renouncing of them: though not by gross and manifest
wickedness, yet by a sinful and dangerous neglect of God and their Souls: And
yet of those that thus labor for them, the greatest part do not succeed.

2. But yet after they are once gotten; Are they not too often wrecked with
Cares and Thoughts how to preserve and keep them? They are fain to bear the
Blows of them that are above them; Eccles. 5.12.
And the Envy and Discontents of those that are under them, and the Cheats and
Circumvention of those that have more Wit. And,

3. Which is the most ponderous Aggravation of their Vanity, As Men are sick
for them, so are they sick of them, and yet they count it death to part with
them: First they are sick of desire, before they get them, and then they are by
and by sick of Fruition; But it cuts them to the heart, to have the morbifick
matter removed: And yet whether they consent or not, when all is done, and the
utmost diligence is used to defend them, they must part at last, and the owner
must leave them, or they will leave the owner.

Sixthly, They are the great Snares and Temptations of Men's Souls: What is it
that draws any Man to sin against God, and destroy his own Soul, but the sweet
Bit of worldly Pleasure or Profit? No Man would swear or lie, or deal
deceitfully, or live idly, or drink and whore, but for the pleasure and
advantage that he expects in so doing. Who would covet and care for the World,
and labor so painfully to get it into his Possession, if he did not dream of
Happiness from it? And yet it is but a Dream; And every Promise that the World
makes of true Content and Felicity, is but a Lie: And he that is over credulous
in such a Case as this, is worse than mad: True it is, the World has something
in it that is fitted to the pleasure and delight of Flesh and Blood, in an
ordinary Course of Providence: And we being so prone to please, yea, and
over-please this Part, we are in great and contirual danger from the World? And
will thou so much esteem and seek after that, that will destroy thee, if thou
learn not to slight and contemn it? Have thou sped so well already, (O my
Soul!) that thou should be still tampering with it? Have thou so well quit
thy self already, and escaped the Thrusts it has made at thee? Has it made no
breach in the Conscience? No Wounds in thy Heart? Has it begot no strangeness
nor Jealousy between God and thy Soul? Has it not sadly wounded thee in thine
Intellectuals, and much perverted thine Understanding? Has it done no Mischief
to thy Will and Affections, but helped them Heavenwards to the only Place of
their Rest? I would it had thus dealt with thee; But such a Friend it never
was, nor will be whilst it is loved for its self.

Seventhly, The World is God's great (if not only Competitor) and therefore in
so much deserves to be contemned: Though the Devil and the Flesh, fight against
God both of them, and use the World as their chief Weapon, yet by way of object
to Man's Soul, there is nothing but God and the World, openly pretend to be
Man's Happiness: The Devil does but set this Bait before us, when he tempts us
unto sin; He dare not appear himself, to draw any by his own proper and innate
beauty, who is almost known of all, to be so monstrous and deformed; and whom
every one [that is not himself become a Monster] has a natural instinct to
hate and abhor.

Indeed there be some few such that he has gotten so wholly into his power,
[through the just and fearful permission of God; for their wicked Rejection and
Contempt of him] that they take him for their Ruler and Guide to Happiness, for
want of a better, and swear Fealty to him; But I believe it is with some secret
Reluctance and Regret: But however, I here understand World in so large a
sense, as to involve all Creatures in its Latitude: And what, does it not seem
a ridiculous thing and odious Competition, for the World or Devil to stand
against God, and compare their Worth and Excellency with his? Let them show
their own, if they will vye with him: Or let them bring something that is
lasting and satisfactory? Let them show something that will answer all the
hopes and expectations of Man? Something that will help him in every straight
and necessity: Nay, that will free him from all such streights and necessities,
if they would have the honor of rational love and esteem: What shall Dung and
Dross lie in the Scales, with an Eternal weight of Glory? Shall it put any one,
but a Fool, to debate which he shall choose, when there is such an unspeakable
difference? Art thou so void of Understanding, and so much forsaken of common
Reason, that any thing shall seem desirable to thee, that is laid in the
Balance with the Fountain of all Goodness? O let thine Heart abhor its former
Guiltiness in this kind, and henceforth boil up with Hatred and Contempt
against such an Usurper that would be preferred before God; Resolve, and that
fixedly, never to hearken to such an impious and absurd Motion.

Eighthly, The Love of the World is but mere Flattery and Deceit: It is not to
be trusted when it makes the most fair and faithful Promises, and gives the
strongest security to Performance: Job, Haman, Manasseh, Zedekiah, and
Jehoiakim, are proof enough of this, to go no further than the Bible: Look not
on the Vine, (says Solomon) when it is red, when it gives its color in the
Cup, when it moves it self aright, At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23.31, 32. When the World smiles most, and looks
the most pleasingly, it usually gives the most mortal stab: Let the Experience
of all Ages speak out, and tell us plainly, how the World has used its
greatest Followers and Admirers: some it has taken from the Top of all their
worldly Dignity and Glory, and made the very Scorn and Contempt of all. Thus it
served the famous Bellisarius, that great and worthy Commander under the
Emperor Justinian: Thus also it served Seianus, the great Favorite of
Tiberius, and Pillippa the Catanian, that was so famous in the Court of Naples:
Thus it used the great Darius, Cyrus, Craesus, and the proud Bajazet, with
infinite others, that were gotten to the height of worldly Prosperity: But
those that it has used best, it has left them at last to grapple with Death
and Judgment. It saves none from the devouring stroke of Death: It accompanies
none beyond the Grave; Thither if it chance to bring any of its Paramours,
there to be sure it leaves them: Their Glory shall not depart after them, Psalm
49.17. The Happiness and Felicity of the World will be sure to leave us in our
greatest need: These Goards will be sure to wither before the Morning of the
Resurrection, when we shall need most Protection from the scorching heat of
God's wrath: But if we go to the Sanctuary, there we may more certainly learn,
how it has, and will befriend those that have doted most upon it, and have
ventured the Favor of God, and their Everlasting Hopes, for the World: Psalm
92.7. When the wicked spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do
flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. And how does the World
then stand up in their behalf, when they are betrayed thereby to such a fearful
Destruction? It leaves them to the stroke of Justice, to shift for themselves:
Job 20.5, 6, 7. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment; Though his excellency mount up to the heavens,
and his head reach unto the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever, as his own
dung: All they which have seen him, shall say, Where is he? This is the Portion
of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God, Job
20.29. Thus the World gives up its Lovers to the Wrath of God, and shall come
in as a Witness also to their Everlasting Confusion.

Ninthly, The prevailing Love of any thing here on Earth, is a Sin not fit to
be pardoned, if a Man dye in it: And it is an infallible Mark of one, that
shall perish without Mercy, yea, and of one whom God hates: 1 John 2.15. Love
not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love the world, (in this
predominant measure) the love of the Father is not in him. And James 4.4. Ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world, is
emnity with God? He therefore that will be a friend of the world, is an enemy
unto God. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not [that is, love them
not less] his Father, and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, and his own Life, much more all other things, he cannot be my
Disciple. These are the plain Passages of God's Word, that show manifestly, how
every one shall be sure to speed, that loves any thing here below, more than
Christ: No Apology can be made for such a one, neither is such a one a Subject
capable of Mercy, if he live and dye in that state, that sets so light by it,
and God the Author of it, as to prefer such a short lived Trifle before him:
That say unto God Directly, or by Consequence, by Word, or Practice, stand thou
here at my Footstool, when the World is exalted and set up in Honor and
Esteem: In a word, to love any Thing more than God, is a Sin that the Gospel
has no pardon for, if it be final, because it argues an ungodly Heart, and he
that is ungodly, cannot be a Believer or a Christian: Because the Means,
presuppose the End, and Christianity, which is the way to God, presupposes
Godliness, or some Love to God, [who is the End intended or desired,] And
without Faith the Gospel Grant gives no Remission of Sin.

Tenthly, Till a Man can contemn the World, (in the sense before stated) he is
no better than a Brute: so far is he from the Life and Spirit of a Christian:
Christianity does not depose, but always suppose Reason: It does refine and not
subvert, and undermine it: And where a Man is not got so high, as the sober use
of his Reason, he is not fit to be a Disciple of Christ: He that follows not
the Light and Guidance of his Natural Reason for the main, when Sense and
Passion do oppose, and make head against it, though he has the distinctive
Faculty of a Man, yet is not a Man, in Use and Exercise, but a Brute: And he
that is no Man, be sure is no Christian: But he that prefers his Body before his
Soul, in the main Course of his Conversation, lives not so as the Light of
Nature can direct him: The clearest Reason does suggest, that the better part
is to be principally looked after: And that a Man has a Soul, as well as a
Body, we need not go to Scripture for an Argument, as if there were no Light
elsewhere to inform us: There be other Topics common to us with Infidels and
Heathen: Now the World is but the Accommodation of the Sensual Part, And he
that cannot slight and contemn this, when it thwarts the Interest of his Better
Part; He is so far from learning that which is supernatural in the Doctrine of
Christ, and Salvation, that he has not learned that which is but Natural, and
the Object of a lower Faculty: He is so far from the higher Acts of Faith, that
he wants the lower Acts of Reason, and has not the presupposed Matter that is
required to the Christian Faith.

Eleventhly, The Contempt of Earth and Earthly Things, lays an excellent
Foundation for a clear and piercing Understanding: For nothing does so much
dull and sot the Intellect, as Earthly Pleasure, and Sensual Delight, which
makes the Flesh insolent, the Passions masterless and untractable, the Mind
listless and unfit to search after wisdom: And whilst the Soul is daily
offended with the streams of a Body drunk with Earthly Pleasures, the vigor and
sprightfulness of it is quite extinguished: And the understanding is quite
perverted, and knows not how to discern and judge aright, when it is upon any
search: For nothing will enter such a perverted Mind, or seem Credible, that
does any ways thwart this Carnal, Brutish Pleasure: It Is difficult, if not
impossible, to see clearly in the Dust of Riches, and Smoke of Honors:
Besides, Earthly Love betrays to Ease, Softness, and Intemperance, which are
very inconsistent with an acute understanding: But the Contempt of such sensual
Pleasures, inspires the Mind with true Accuracy, and gives it a piercing Eye:
For having now no hankering thoughts or desires after these things, it is always
fit to consider, and fix seriously upon any proposed Object, and to see things
in their proper Evidence; because there is nothing to bribe the Understanding,
and so it becomes impartial in its search and examination.

Twelfthly, This forementioned disdain of the World and its Pleasures, makes a
most ready way to inward Peace and Quietness: For these Sensual Baits are the
Inciters of our Passions, and when they are up, there is no Rest, nor Quiet:
That Man is like to be sedate, calm and undisturbed, that does not much care
for any of these changeable Comforts: There will be a pleasant silence in the
heart, when it is not provoked by the insolences of the Flesh, which then will
domineer, whilst it has there sensual Accommodations, but grows tame and
tractable, when it is pretty well weaned, and weakened through the want of
them, if other Necessaries do concur: Why art thou so patient, O my Soul! under
the Rage and domineering Power of the Flesh, and its headstrong Lusts? Why
do thou so frequently Consent to the Love and Pursuit of such poor, short,
and uncertain Felicity, that fills thee with so must disturbance, and alienates
thee from God, and does so much destroy all thy future Hopes?

Lastly, It may help forward this Contempt of the World, to consider seriously
the vanity of Man, who is the Noblest Part of it: Verily, every Man (says
David) at his best Estate, is (...). All manner of Vanity: as it is in the
Original. Psalm 39.6. A Helpless Friend, and a Toothless Enemy: And therefore
he that trusts Man, makes a broken Reed his Confidence: And he that has an
inordinate Fear of Man, fears a shadow: Isa 51.12. and v. 7, 8. Isa. 2.22.
Who art thou, says the Prophet, that art a fraid of a Man, that shall die,
and of the Son of Man, that shall be made as Grass? There Is no sadder Spectacle
in the World than Man, if this were his best condition, and he had all he were
to look for in this life: A Toad, or the most hated Creature, no nor those that
are continually hunted and pursued, and live always in danger of the Snare, or
some cruel Device to take away their Lives, are not half so sad a Spectacle as
Man is, I mean without the Grace of God. These Brutish Creatures neither
apprehend, nor fear the Snare, till they are caught in it; nor foresee a
Michief, till it is at hand; nor vex themselves with the Memory of what is
past: But Reason which is Man's proper Vtensil, makes him but the more capable
Subject of Misery and Torment, and helps him to suffer a Mischief before it
comes, and to feel it a long while after; This is such a Faculty, as teaches
him to improve his Sufferings and Calamities, (which no other Creature that
wants it can do) and to chew upon an Evil when it is swallowed down and past.
Should a Believer fear the Frowns of such a silly Creature, or regard his
Favor? when he would threaten or tice him from his Duty! I conclude therefore,
It Is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man; yea, it is
much better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm.
118.8, 9.

Consider then, O my Soul! what a mere Juggle and Delusion is the Pleasure of
this World, with which thou have so often suffered thy self to be couzened, and
deceived? What Luggage is the Riches? And what a Blast is the Honor thereof?
Yea, what a Dream and mere imagination is all that here Men dote upon? Is it
for this that Men swear and deceive, cousen and lie, sweat and run about with
foolish heat and diligence? Is this the Reward of all the busle and stir they
make? Is this all the Recompense of their bold Adventures against God and their
own Souls? Have they no more for all their restless Nights and Days, for all
the Cares and Fears, with which they have so often pierced themselves? Have
they no more for Their Salvation, for A Life of Immortality, for God, and for
Their Souls, which they have thrown away for a little slippery uncertain
pleasure, which stings even whilst it is tasted, and wounds so deep afterward?

Wonderful! that ever Men that have an Eye of Reason to discern thus much,
should yet suffer themselves to be so besooled! And should prefer the pleasure
of Delirancy and madness, before that of Sobriety! That ever Reasonable
Creatures should suffer themselves to be entangled in Vanities, which are more
brittle than Glass, more light than Smoke, and more swift than the Wind! That
they should feed so greedily, and fat themselves with these poisonous,
destroying Pleasures, and go with the foolish Ox to the slaughter, and with the
Fool to the Correction of the Stocks! Till a Dart strike through their Liver,
not considering that it is for their Life! O what madness to nourish this
Carrion and Dunghill of thy Body, and to neglect, forget, and despise thy
Soul! Is it possible that thou should so Adore a Prison, or Fetters, as to
balance them with the Love of thy dearest Savior? Who can shed Tears enough,
or Weep sufficiently for such a Sin as this? (viz.) The forsaking of God, and
the choosing of Lies instead of him? O what horrid Phantasms will appear one
Day, and present themselves to their sight, that proceed on, and dye in such a
sin as this! When the Pleasures which they have chosen shall stand in Array
before them, and upbraid them into the deepest shame and silence: And the
objects with which they have committed Folly so often, shall stand forth and
say, I am the Pleasure which thou have loved more than God; I am the Ambition
to which thou wast a slave: I am the Wealth that was the Aim of all thy
Actions: I am the Dung and Dross to which thou did espouse and wed thine
Affections: Behold the Sins thou have begotten on me; Behold thy deformed,
loathsome Iniquities, which thou did not only love, but prefer before the
Life which thy Savior did both live and teach: With such dreadful Complaints
[able to rend Rocks and Marbles] shall they that have loved any thing here on
Earth, more than God and their Souls, lament over their sins that will come
upon them like an Armed Man, and fight them with its ghastly Looks.

If thou Love any thing, then, O my Soul! see that thou love it for God, and
for the reference that it has to the Life Eternal: The Joys of Heaven are
without their Parallel and Example: And as they are here above our Experience,
so they pass beyond our Imagination; Fancy what thou will, and Majesty, Pomp,
and Beauty can present thee with, it is all but a poor faint Resemblance of the
Glorious Life to come: It Is easier for a Pencil to draw the Picture of Sound
and Taste, than for the Tongue to utter, or the Heart to imagine The Joys of
Heaven. All that a curious Artist can do, to describe the Content of a Soul at
Rest with God, and perfectly Happy, is so far from what he would but cannot
say, as Heaven is from Earth; We know, There Is nothing of all this, that we
see, hear, or taste, or imagine, in the Heavenly Paradise; But thou may be
sure there is more than all this.

Considerations to excite Shame and hearty Sorrow for all former Departure from
God, and present Strangeness to him.
THough God delights not in Sorrow and Contrition, merely as it is the Misery
and Affliction of his Creature; but rather is afflicted with them in all their
Sorrows, Isaiah 63.9. yet as it is an expression of any sincere hatred of
former sin, and willingness to forsake it, and comes from any true Love to God
who is dishonored by it, and Men's own Souls, of which it is the death and
destruction; and leads directly to their future Reformation and Happiness, so
the Lord is delighted therewith: And a sinner, one that is yet under the guilt
of his sins, cannot present him with a better Sacrifice; For, The Sacrifices of
God are a broken Spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O Lord, thou will not
despise, Psalm 51.17. (1.) Thou will take pleasure in by a usual Figure, called
Litote or Mecoses: And in the former Clause of the Verse, The Sacrifices; (that
is) The Sacrifice of Sacrifices: as the Heaven of Heavens is put for the
Highest Heaven: In which Forms of Speech, it is customary with the Hebrew
Language to leave out the first Substantive. * Hence (...) is put for the
Elephant, because she is the chief Says Grot. of Beasts (...): And (...) is
put for God himself, because he is (...): So (...) is put for (...) the most
excellent wisdom, Psalm. 49.3. So the Canticles is put for the Canticle of
Canticles, or the most excellent Song: Instances there are many of this kind,
to show that the Plural Number is sometime instead of the Comparative Degree:
Thus you see in what sense God is delighted in our Sorrow, and takes pleasure
in a sighing and broken Heart, even in the same sense that Paul was glad at the
sadness of the Corinthians, even as it was a sign of, and step to their future
Amendment and Happiness: 2 Cor. 2.2. For if I make you sorry, (says he) who is
he then that makes me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me? And indeed
it is no wonder that the merciful God that delights so much in the welfare
and felicity of his Creatures, should yet be so well pleased in the bitter
Repentance and heartbreaking Sorrow of sinful Creatures, since it is such a
preparative to your future Joy, and that so many excellent Texts of Scripture
are dropped from the Holy Spirit, to encourage Sinners to labor after such a
wounding, piercing Sorrow as this is. So Isaiah 57.15. Thus says the high and
lofty One, that inhabiteth Eternity, (whose Name is Holy) I dwell in the High
and Holy Place with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive
the Spirit of the Humble, and the Heart of the Contrite one. So Isaiah 66.2.
There he seems to despise and slight the most magnificent, stately Structure
which they could build him, and to prefer the humble, contrite Heart far before
all that the Hands of Men could possibly make: Thus says the Lord, The Heaven
is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, where is the House that ye build
unto me? And where is the place of my rest? For all these things has my Hand
made -- But to this Man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my Word. And how frequently is he said to comfort
those that Mourn, and to bind up the broken in Heart, to regard their Sighs,
and bottle up their Tears; as if there were no Temper that God more delights
in.

There are some (though very few) that need to be warned and admonished, that
they do not place the Principal Part of God's Worship and Service, in Sighs,
and Tears, and pricking Sorrow, and shameful Confessions of their Sin: (Not
that I dissuade any from giving due Time and Measure to these humbling,
self-abasing Acts; For it is the design and business of this present Labor, to
promote this Sorrow in the Heart, so far as it is a fit Instrument to promote
Reformation in the Heart and Life.) But yet some, I say, have need of this
Caution, that they lay not too much stress upon this part of our Duty we owe
unto God; much less that they confine the whole work and business of Religion,
to Acts of Contrition and Mortification: For though the Lord delights in the
penitent, broken Heart, that mourns over all its former Sin and Folly, and is
ashamed of his odious, heinous Transgressions, and does loath himself for his
Iniquities, and does particularly search into his Sores, and uncover them
before God, with the most distinct, clear, and open Confession; yet this is but
a lower and preparatory step, to that Love of God, constant delight in him,
praises of him, cheerful obedience to him in the which he is far more
delighted: so that Tears, and Sorrow, and heart-melting Repentance, and
afflicting our Souls, are not absolutely pleasing to God, and a part of the
immutable, unchangeable Worship we owe to him, but only acceptable to him,

1. Upon supposition of former Miscarriages.

2. In preparation to future Obedience.

Had we never sinned, Sorrow and Repentance had been no acceptable Service to
God at all, neither would it have pleased him to see us go heavily as those
that mourn.

But now, supposing that every one of us is born into the World with hereditary
Corruption, and a depraved Nature, quite contrary to that which God gave Man at
the first, the very first acceptable Service that we can perform to God, is to
be sensible of and to bewail this perverse Disposition, according to its
desert, and to weigh, and consider all the sad and woeful Consequences of such a
poisoned, corrupted Nature, how hateful it is to God, how disgraceful to our
selves here, and how destructive to our souls hereafter, and how dangerous and
infectious it is to others, that we are firmly resolved to take any Course to
recover our former Freedom and Privilege we had in the state of Innocence,
that God shall suggest to us: It is as preposterous to offer up any Service to
God, till this be done, as it is to ^earn to Read, before we are acquainted
with the Letters, of which every Word we read is composed: or as it is to give
restorative Food to a distempered Body, before the peccant Matter be purged out
that is the cause of the Distemper: But then though it be the first step in
Religion, and the first acceptable Service we can perforn^^^ God: It is not
there that we must rest; we are not there to sit down and advance no further,
as if we were gotten to Hercules Pilla^s, and there were no higher Perfection
to be attained in Religion: And to mistake the subordinate and subservient part
of God's Service, for that which is more perfect and principal, for hereby Sin
and the Devil will get these

Two great Advantages: 1. God will be misrepresented both to our selves and
others, and he that is so full of Compassion, and Mercy, and all amicable and
lovely Perfections, will be thought by the Religion which he preser^bes, to be
cruel and unmerciful, and to delight in the Torment and Affliction of his
Creatures: For Men will be drawing his Image by such a false Pencil. And then,

2. They that make it their whole endeavor to weep and mourn and afflict
themselves for their sins, will thereby disable both Body and Soul for any
Service of God at all, and both destroy their Bodily Health, and overthrow
their Reason: And so whilst they are bewailing their Sin, and as they think are
conquering of it, they do but entangle themselves the more, and utterly waste
that strength that should mortify and subdue it.

And the reason why God does speak so much in his Word, in approbation of the
sorrowful, broken and contrite Heart, which I doubt is the Reason of these Men's
mistake, is because such Persons have need of such Encouragement, and might
otherwise faint under the Anguish and Burden of their Spirits, and therefore
because he would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, till
he has brought forth Judgment unto Victory, He gives these Cordials to such as
are under the Pangs of the New Birth: But he had much rather that Men would
leave the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and not stick always at the
Foundation of Repentance from Dead Works, and of Faith toward God: Not that we
are to shake hands with Repentance and sorrow for Sin, after we are once
heartily converted, unless we could be sure to commit no more sin: But then sin
will need a more short and transient sorrow, when we presently bewail it so
soon as ever it is committed, But our first Repentance and Sorrow will cost us
hotter Water, and put us to ^^^e trouble.

If a Man that has a long Journey to go, should set out a quite contrary way
to the place whither he is to go, and so travel on, till he has spent half or
more of the time that is allotted for his Journey, you must needs think that
will cost him more vexation and trouble to get into his right way, than after
he is gotten in, if he should chance to step out a Mile or two: A small Error
is more speedily corrected than a great one of long continuance: But yet it is
always true, That it is better to prevent sin, and keep out of it at the first,
than to get out of it by Repentance: Though by Accident, and through the Mercy
of God, it may sometimes prove better to the sinner, that he did fall into sin,
if he does afterward heartily rerepent of it: But absolutely, and in it self,
it is not better: And he that should presume to let loose the Reigns to Sin
upon that account, I believe would find it much worse.

But before I produce those Considerations, which, through the Blessing of God,
may stir up and strengthen this Affection, which must prepare the way for Faith
in Christ, which lays the Foundation for all Joy and Peace, I will first show
what this Godly Sorrow does imply, or what Acts are included in it, if it be
such as will work Repentance never to be repented of. And here let me Note,
That Repentance is sometimes taken by a Synechdoche, for the whole Work of
Conversion, and then it includes Faith in it: so it is taken Luke 15.7. -- There
shall be joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety
and nine just persons that need no repentance. So Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish: where Faith also is implied. So Acts
11.18. -- Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life:
where Repentance is named as the only condition of Life, which without Faith
also in Christ cannot be had, and therefore it is included.

Sometime Repentance is taken only for Contrition, and then usually Faith is
joined with it. So Acts 20.21. Testifying to the Jews and also to the Greeks
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And in this
latter sense, I here take the word Repentance when I make use of it: And so
Repentance, or Godly Sorrow, is a deliberate Act of the Soul, performed upon
the Motions or by the Assistance of the good Spirit of God, whereby a Man being
touched with unfeigned Sorrow and Remorse, for all that he has sinned, whither
in his Parents, or in himself, either inwardly, and in secret, or else openly,
and in the sight of Men, is now resolved to close with Christ, as his only
Remedy against the Guilt and Power of it. So that you may perceive by this
Description, that sincere Repentance, and Sorrow for Sin, must imply these
following Acts, or otherwise it can never be an advised and deliberate Act, nor
conclude in a firm resolution and purpose to take Christ as his only sufficient
Savior.

First, It implys a deep Conviction of the Holiness of God and his sin-hating
Nature: And that you may as soon reconcile Light and Darkness, as God and the
least Sin, whether you take it in its Material or Formal Consideration: In its
Material Consideration, it is nothing but Deformity, and Absurdity, and
Contradiction, to all Right and Reason: And in its Formal Respect, it is a
thwarting God's Will, (that is supreme, and governed with infinite wisdom) and a
breach of his righteous Law: And in both these Respects, it must needs be the
Object of Divine Hatred and Abhorrence: surely he must needs abhor to see a
Creature cross his own Will, and oppose his own Government; and when he has
endued him with reason, to see him act so absurdly: Hence the Psalmist tells
us, That such as are foolish, cannot stand in his sight, he hates all the
workers of iniquity, Psalm 5.5. And if an imperfect Saint, such a one as David,
has such an aversation to such Works, and the doers of them, that he can say,
depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity, much more does he that is of
spotless purity, hate all Filthiness and Pollution, which every sinner has
some degree of: If the Lord were not an utter Enemy to all Iniquity, he had
never turned so many Angels out of Heaven for their sin, nor prepared such a
place of endless and unsufferable Torment, for such as are found guilty of it
in the General Account: He had never brought such a Deluge upon the old World,
and swept away all of them, save Eight Persons; Nor dropped down such a consuming
Fire upon those Four Citys, and the Inhabitants thereof, Man, Woman and Child,
if he had not been a bitter Enemy to sin: If you should see a Father that
tenderly loves his Children, and bears a most dear Affection to them, to
persecute them to the Death, and express the greatest Cruelty toward them: you
would surely say, that it must be some high Provocation that can thus prevail
to extinguish such inbred natural Affection to them: And if you could be
consident that he were a just and righteous Person, that would not do such a
cruel Act without a great and weighty Cause; you must then say, That they must
be guilty of some horrid Act, that can thus turn the Bowels of such a tender
Father, and exasperate them into such a rage. The Case is the same here, only
with this difference, that God has infinitely more love and tender bowels to
us his Creatures and the Workmanship of his Hands, than the tenderest Father or
Mother here upon Earth: Isaiah 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking chila,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may
forget, but I will not forget: And yet what terrible and remarkable Judgments
does he execute upon some of them, both here and hereafter? Not only single
Persons, but whole Nations: yea, how dreadful, and heavy is his hand upon those
that are his Children, not only by Creation, but Regeneration also, insomuch
that they often complain, that the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in them,
and drink up their Spirits, Job 6.4. Thus Job, David, Heman, and many others of
God's dearest Servants have complained: Can any Man of reason ever think, that
ever God thus deals with them, without some great and weighty Cause? especially
when it is so certain, that Fury dwells not in him, Isaiah 27.4. And he
cannot be moved by any of those wild, irrational, and ungoverned Passions as
Man is: He that believes not this, either believes that there is no God, or
else knows not what such a Being does essentially involve: But yet though we
have a fall, certainly that God is more tender and affectionate to Men, than
any Father or Mother in the World, yet it is as certain, that he loves
Righteousness, and Equity, and Truth, more than all the Creatures in the World;
because these are a part of his own Essence, but Creatures are not: And
therefore he stands obliged to vindicate these though it be with the Ruin of
all Mankind: And thus he would certainly do, even destroy all the Works of his
Hands, if his righteous Law (which is but the Transcript of his Nature, could
not be otherwise righted: He can make another World, with a Word of his Mouth:
But he cannot make, as I may say, with reverence, another God: Every sin
strikes at the very Being of God, and touches the very Apple of his Eye; And
therefore the Word of God tells us plainly, That Sin is the only Makebate
between God and his Creatures, that has pulled down all those heavy
Calamities, and Judgments, upon the World, that ever we read or heard of. But
the Death of his only Natural Son, for the Sins of the World, which he took
upon him to expiate and satisfy for, is such a demonstration of God's deadly
and implacable Hatred against all Sin and Ungodliness, that no Man in reason
should ever after doubt of it. Every Man that is truly penitent, and sorry for
his sin, is apprehensive of this in some good Measure. And this is the First
Act that Godly Sorrow and Repentance does imply.

Secondly, He that unfeignedly grieveth for his sin, must be very sensible how
dishonorable it is to God: I know it is beyond the reach of any Creature to do
him any real Dishonor; But yet does he not lose his Reputation amongst Men, by
every sin that is committed? Are not some or other animated thereby to do the
like; or else if it be secretly committed, is not the sinner himself more
hardened thereby, and disposed to more perverse, unworthy Apprehensions of God?
It is certain he is. He cannot think him so holy, just, and righteous as he is,
because Judgment is not speedily executed on him: And how does the Devil
triumph, and all those malicious Spirits that attend him, to see a Child so
unnatural to his Father, as every sinner is to God? How does it feed his Malice
and Pride, to see him make a Creature that cares so little for him, as every
sinner does? He that is affected with his sin to purpose, knows and is cut to
the heart, for the dishonor done to him by his sin, and that he has so much
stained his holy Attributes and Perfections, and misrepresented him to the
World.

Thirdly, He that is truly penitent for his sin, is deeply sensible of those
great Obligations he lies under, to perform a perfect obedience to God: He is
his Creature, I, and the chief of his Creatures in this lower World, made on
purpose for his service, shaped in his own likeness, fitted for it, encouraged
to it: That can never be happy, but in his Favor, and therefore was
sufficiently concerned to seek and prize it above all things: And to shun and
avoid sin, whereby he must needs lose it. All Creatures upon Earth were placed
at his Feet, and put into his Hands, to give him their best Assistance and
Encouragement for this Service. The good and welfare of the whole inferior
World depended upon his Obedience to God, and the observance of that Law he had
written upon his very Nature: And therefore so soon as ever he sinned, he
involved all the Creatures that were made subject to him in the same Curse and
Condemnation: so that the whole Creation is now in Bondage, and groans to be
delivered into the glorious Liberty of God's Children: And the earnest
expectation of the Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God,
Romans 8.19, 21, 22. Never was any Child so much obliged to observe the Will of
his Father, Nor any Subject to Obey his rightful Prince and Sovereign, Nor any
Slave and Vassal to fulfill the Command of his Lord, as we are to do the Will of
our Creator: But what do I make such a Comparison as this? There Is a thousand
fold more obligation upon us to tender a perfect Obedience to God, than there
can be upon any Subject, or Child, or Servant, to obey the strictest Laws of
the best Father, Lord or Sovereign here on Earth: And yet what Man so mad, as
to incur their displeasure, if they can help it? Or who would not wash away
such an Offense with many Tears, if there were any hope to find Mercy and
Favor with them in such a Case: How much more would a sinner bewail his
Offenses committed against him that is his Creator, and Sovereign, and has
absolute dominion over him, and the power of Eternal Life and Death in his
hands; Thou can not endure his displeasure, if he does but frown: Nor live
without his favor, if he should totally withdraw it but an hour: As he
commands the Sun to shed his light and influence upon thee, so he clotheth
the Heaven with blackness, and makes Sackcloth their covering when he
pleases, Isaiah 50.3. If thou did but know and consider the one half of the
infinite Mercies he does bestow upon thee, and the worth of them, it would make
thee sure to break into bitter complaints, for all thy odious Transgressions,
especially when thou know beforehand, That the Penitent are so sure to
speed, and find Mercy with him.

This is a Third Act, That Godly Sorrow, if it be sincere, does imply, even a
deep sense of all the Obligations every one of us lies under to abstain from
all Appearance of Evil.

Fourthly, He that would bewail his sin aright, must be sensible how shameful
it is and destructive to his own Soul and Body: It prevents his Reason, and
makes him far more vile than a Creature that wants that Faculty; It animates
his Senses to all insolency; it makes his Passions masterless and unruly; it
destroys the Health of the Body, the Peace and Composure of the Mind; it fills
the Conscience with perpetual Remorse and Unquietness; And all these Effects do
as naturally flow from it, as Poison does from a Toad or Serpent; And thus it
would punish it self, although God should inflict no other punishment than what
will inevitably follow such sinful, inordinate Acts, and such abuse of the
Reason and Faculties that Man is possessed of. It procures the hatred of God,
and the shame of Men, and breeds a continual Worm at home, that will gnaw in
twain the Thread of this Life, and will then feed upon Soul and Body, to their
everlasting pain and torment hereafter.

Fifthly, He that is truly penitent, and does lament his sin, as he ought, does
know and consider the Merit of his sin, and what Wages it deserves: He is
sensible that the least sin committed against such a Majesty, by a Creature so
much obliged and enabled to the contrary, deserves damnation, and that he can
make God no recompense for the wrong and injury it does him. And he understands
in some good measure, what Eternal Damnation does imply: And then when he calls
to mind the infinite Number he has committed, and how often he has deserved
such a dreadful Reward, and that yet he is invited to Repentance, and knows
that he shall find Mercy, if he repent from the bottom of his Heart; This melts
him into Tears, and dissolveth his rocky Heart, and makes it to feel, what
heretofore he made light matter of.

Sixthly, As the penitent sinner is sensible of all the foregoing Particulars,
so he is acquainted with his own personal Transgressions; not only that he is a
sinner in general, but what actual wickedness he is every day guilty of. How
little his Thoughts, Words or Actions come up to the Rule at the best, and how
often they utterly thwart and contradict the Rule, and what are his
Master-Corruptions, and where the strength of his sin lies; He is also deeply
sensible of his sinful Nature, that he brought with him into the World; and how
cross it is to the Will of God expressed in his Word and Law, and altogether
unlike the Nature that God gave Man at the first.

Seventhly, He does hereupon judge himself exceeding vile, and even loath
himself for his Abominations, Ezekiel. 36.31. When he thinks upon his odious
ways, he is heartily ashamed, and counts himself unworthy of any outward
Mercy, and wondreth at the Mercies that God does bestow so contrary to his
deserts. He seriously judges himself more wretched and miserable, by reason of
his sin, and an Object of greater shame and contempt, than if he had lived in
the greatest poverty and want without sin; as knowing that one makes him
contemptible only to such as judge according to outward appearance, but the
other to those that judge righteous judgment. He knows, that sin makes him a
Beast or a Devil in Humane shape, and is a Disgrace and Reproach to all his
Faculties, and quite perverts the very frame and design of them. For what is
sin, but an absurd and unreasonable Act? (Actus debito ordine privatus,) as the
Schoolmen define it, and supposes the Senses and their Objects to be in chief
power and command, and the nobler Part, (I mean his Rational and Immortal
Spirit) to be chained up, and lie by as a Prisoner in Fetters, or which is
worse, to be a voluntary Servant and Drudge, to the stinking corruptible part
of Man: What Lord, that has the Spirit of a Man, would endure to be a drudge
to his Servant? It Is a sad sight to see a Prince a Captive to his Subjects, or
a Lord to be in the hand and power of his Slaves, led up and down in Chains at
the will and pleasure of him, that is but of a base and degenerate Breed,
compared with himself. It was a great aggravation of Job's pitiful Condition,
that contemptible persons had him in derision, whose Fathers he would have
disdained to have set with the Dogs of his Flock, Job 30.1. That Children of
Fools and Base Men, that were viler than the Earth, made him their Song, and
Byword, and that they did abhor him, and flee far from him, and not spare to
spit in his Face, verse. 8, 9, 10. It was a very doleful, pitiful sight, to see
Edward the Second, so barbarously entreated by Gourney, and made to sit upon a
Molehill, whilst the Barber shaved him, and to take cold Water out of a Ditch,
to wash him with; which the patient King seeing, told them, that in despite of
them, he would have warm Water at his Barbing, and therewithal poured down
Tears in abundance: It Is a much sadder Spectacle, to see Sense trample upon
Reason, and the Flesh that is of so base a descent, to domineer over the Soul,
that is born of God, and is of the Blood Royal, made to rule and govern, as the
very Heathen could tell: Animi imperio, Corporis servitio, utimur, says
Salast. And what is the Fruit of such a Monstrous Disorder, when Flesh and Sense
do exercise such an oppressive usurping Power, and that Faculty that makes a
Man is perfectly cowed? Why, This unspeakable Mischief is the Fruit thereof;
Earth is preferred before Heaven; The Creature before the Creator; The
momentary pleasures of Sin, before the durable and everlasting Felicity; And
Men choose rather to be Termers in these decaying Comforts, that expire with
their Lives, than to have the Propriety of an Eternal Inheritance hereafter,
that shall never be out-dated: These and the like Considerations make the
sinner to judge himself a vile Person, a Reproach to Humane Nature, a shameful
Spectacle to God, Angels and Men; Better he judges it a thousand times, that
God had made him a Beast, rather than that he should have made himself a Beast:
If you judge not Sin to be the greatest evil to you, and a greater
disparagement than Poverty and Rags, and all the reproach and scorn of Men
barely considered in themselves without sin, you cannot have that sorrow for
sin which is sincere; For it is absolutely necessary that sorrow for sin,
committed against God, be greater than all other sorrow for worldly Calamities
whatsoever, (as to the rational part of it, which is in the Intellect and Will,
though perchance not as to that part of sorrow which is in the sensitive part,
and is it may be expressed in Tears, or those sensible Perturbations of the
Body which we usually call by the Name of Passions:) And how is it possible
that there should bean intellectual sorrow greater than all other sorrow,
unless it be first truly judged to be the greatest disgrace and shame to us of
any thing that can befall us, and does necessarily draw after it more evil and
mischief to Body and Soul, than the World can inflict on us? It Is possible for
a Man to have great inward Peace and Content, and an excellent Spirit, that is
the object of the World's contempt and scorn: Our Savior had no Form nor
Comeliness in him, says the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 53.2. And yet he was speciosus
prae Filiis hominum; Fairer than the Children of Men: (1.) for internal, but
not external Endowments, says the Prophet David, Psalm. 45.2. And as the sinner
that is wounded with hearty sorrow for his sin, does thus judge of himself and
does say, He is a Worm and no Man, a Reproach of Men, and worthily despised by
the People, Psalm 22.6. So he does adjudge himself to the greatest sufferings,
and counts it an unspeakable Favor to be admitted to Repentance, and that he
may be received into Favor with God again upon any Terms: This is Another Act
that Godly Sorrow does contain and is made up of.

Eighthly, The Soul that is truly penitent, is deeply displeased with himself,
and wishes heartily he had never been guilty of such Folly: And if it were to
do again, would venture upon any suffering or shame, rather than give his
Consent thereto; He is fallen out with himself so far as he is tainted with
Corruption, and upbraids himself with all his Rebellion and Ingratitude against
God, and his unrighteous and unbrotherly Practices toward Men, and ill
Government of himself; He is heartily willing to grieve for his Sin, and to
express that grief by all significant signs that either Nature or Scripture
does suggest to him, and to use all Means whereby this Grief may be procured,
as by Fasting, and hard Usage of his Body, when it may be a probable Means to
promote this Repentance of his Heart. Whatever is like to make his Heart more
Tender and Sensible of his Sin he is willing to submit to. He is willing to
take a frequent view of his loathsome sin, that he might more deeply abhor
himself. He is willing that God should afflict him in that measure that his
Wisdom sees most fit, if he will but kill his Corruptions thereby. And that Men
think of him as he has deserved; And when he cannot weep in reality, he
weepeth in desire.

Ninthly, And as the Understanding and Will do thus far conquer to produce this
Repentance and Sorrow; so there will be some degree and measure of the
Passions, properly so called, stirring in such a true Penitent. There will be
Grief, and Shame for the Offense, and Fear of him whom thou have offended, and
longing desire to be reconciled.

And then Tenthly, He that has a truly penitent Heart, and the Sorrow of the
right stamp, will express it by all outward Signs for the Honor of God and the
Good of others; He will accuse and speak evil of himself, and humble himself by
Confession before God, his shameful Iniquities; Neither will he spare to lay
open the shame of his particular sins, so far as he knows them: Nay, his
pride is so far taken down, that he will not stick to make Confession of them
before Men, if it be such sins whereby they have wronged their Souls, and
hardened them in any sinful course; They will endeavor to undo what they have
done, by their penitent Confessions; and remove the scandal, as much as lies
in their power, though it cost them shame: It Is a good sign that their sorrow
for sin is sincere, when it puts them upon such outward Acts, as have a strong
tendency to condemn and disgrace their former sinful Courses: And they may well
suspect themselves and their Repentance, that stick at such disgraceful Acts as
Confession is: And are content that God should want the Honor that is given to
him, by an humble acknowledgment of our vileness and particular sins; And that
Men should want, such an Argument, against the like sinful Courses for the time
to come, than that themselves should undergo a little disgrace and shame: I
say, not that sins of a fouler nature, that would tend to the disparagement of
the Gospel, that were committed in secret, should be publicly made known at
all: It may suffice, that such are confessed before God, and the Persons that
are already privy to them: And that we do protest to them our unfeigned Grief
for such foul Transgressions, and our readiness to give them all satisfaction
for any Wrong or Injury done them. But the wrong that we have done to our
Associates and Companions, by profanation of the Sabbath, Oaths, Ribbaldry, or
any other infectious Courses we are to beg pardon for, of them whom we have
thus wronged, by our Miscarriages; And to confess the sinfulness of such
Courses, to the Glory of God, and to the preventing of such Evil for the
future: And as the penitent, humble Person, will not stick at Confession, both
to God, and Men, when need requires; so he will with patience and silence
submit himself to any Afflictions that the righteous God, whom he has
provoked, does think meet to inflict upon him: He does not mutter in his Heart,
as knowing, that he has deserved the most calamitous afflicted Life in this
World, and the unsupportable Miseries of the other Life: Should a Malefactor,
that has forfeited his Life, murmur at the Judge that punishes him with a few
stripes, and so remits the other part of his punishment? I will patiently bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, says the
Church, Micah 7.9. A truly penitent Heart will not complain for the punishment
of his sin, Lam. 3.39. What do I say, he will not complain? Nay, he will
justify God in all that he brings upon him: And as he does express his Sorrow
by humble Confession of his Sins, and Justification of his Judge, so he will do
it by penitential Tears, if the Temper and Constitution of his Body will yield
them. I do not say, that Tears are always an inseparable Concomitant of
Repentance; But unfeigned sorrow for sin, if it be in that degree, that our sin
requires, will for the most part produce Tears: What a Flood did St. Austin
pour forth at his first Conversion? The story is very remarkable, you may find
it in his Confessions: After he had strugled with himself a good while, and had
met with stiff opposition from the World and the Flesh, with the Lusts thereof,
that he was given to, which were still tugging and drawing to keep their hold
of him; But the good Man knowing that they would prove his utter destruction,
if they were not forsaken, prayed earnestly to God, to deliver him from their
Bondage; And hearing by Pontition, a Christian Courtier, of the virtuous Life
of St. Anthony, a Man of little Learning, but of strict and exemplary Piety,
began to be more enflamed with a desire after Conversion: And walking in a
Garden, with his Friend Alipius, he cries out to him, Quid hoc est? Quid
patimur? Sargunt indocti, etc. (1.) What Is the Matter? What unhappy Men are we?
Poor, simple, illiterate Men, Rise up, and get the Kingdom of Heaven by force,
and we with all our Learning, wallow in the Mire of Lust and Corruption.
Afterward, going forth into an Orchard, all his former pleasures mustered up,
and seemed to present themselves before his Eyes; and thus to set upon him,
Dimittesne nos, and a momento isto, etc. What will thou leave us quite, And
must we never after this time see thee any more? What filth, says he, and
shameful pleasures did they lay before mine Eyes, which he entreated God to
pardon: At length, after a tedious difficult Conflict, a mavelous Tempest of
Tears came upon him, and Rivers of Water ran down his Eyes, as he lay under a
Fig Tree, and there he poured forth his Soul to God, and prevailed, and threw
off his beloved Lusts and Corruptions, and never returned to them any more:

All these Acts must concur, where there is true sorrow for sin, such as the
Gospel does require as a condition, without which there can be no forgiveness:
though perchance every one of these distinct Acts may not be taken notice of by
him that is sincerely penitent, yet he feels the force and power of them in
his afflicted broken Heart. But yet some of the forgoing Acts that are in the
understanding, it may be, stick closer than the others, and prevail more to
bring on the after Acts that are in the Will and Affections, and are expressed
in the outward Actions: But though some degrees of this forementioned Sorrow
may and do always go before Faith in Christ, yet your Repentance is never
completed and perfected, till Christ be heartily closed with, and received
with loving subjection of the Soul; for then the Soul is enabled by the Spirit,
that he bestows to bring forth that Repentance which it had brought but to
the Birth before: There must be some sense of the evil of sin, and fear of
God's displeasure, and the miseries that it already has and will moreover
bring upon us, and some loathing of a Man's self, before ever Christ will be
welcome to you, and before you will consent that he shall be your Sovereign
Lord and Savior; and take his Yoke on you: You must feel the intolerableness
of the other Yoke of Sin and Satan, before you will change it for Christ's, and
come to him for ease and Relief. So that you see some Acts of Repentance are
preparatory to Faith, (viz.) Such as Self-love and the Fear of Hell and
Damnation can produce: But it is the Love of God in Christ that must kindly
melt the Heart for sin, and antidote it against the poison thereof for the
future, and settle the Resolution to forsake it, and follow after holiness,
whereby the soul is made like to God.

So much for the Nature of Repentance, or what Acts it is made up of. I come
next to the Considerations that should provoke and stir up this Holy Affection.

First then; Consider the flat necessity of Repentance, without which there is
no Pardon, nor Peace with God to be expected: whatever he dispense withal, this
he will not dispense with: He has indeed dispensed with the Law of Works that
required perfect sinless Obedience, or threatened Damnation: And has promised
thee, that thou shall not dye, nor the threatening be executed on thee, if thou will submit to the Gospel, or the New Law of Christ thy Redeemer: That is, in
other words, if thou will from thy Heart acknowledge thy sins and repent of
them, and come to Christ for strength and resolution to forsake them: But he
will never dispense with thee here, in case thou will not submit to this
gracious offer: Thy sins must be felt, and that more than all worldly
sufferings, otherwise Christ will be no Physician to thee, nor shall thou ever
feel the admirable power of his Blood: Thy sin must be felt either here by
Repentance, or else hereafter in eternal Desparation: Now the stain and
filthiness of thy most heinous sins, may be washed out by the Blood of Christ,
if thou come with a penitent Heart to that sovereign, healing Fountain: But
then the stain can never be got out, nor thy reproach be ever wiped away,
though thou should pour forth Rivers of Tears: Behold, I have foretold thee,
Let not thy Heart deceive thee, nor think that after thou have displeased God
so often by thy sin, that thou may escape and find Mercy, though thou art
never heartily displeased with thy self for thy foolish, shameful ways: Never
any person found favor with God, nor obtained Mercy, that did not drink of
this bitter Potion of Repentance, and was not more afflicted in Heart and Soul
for Disobedience to God, than for any worldly Misery that ever befell him: It is
an unpleasant work to a Man yet in his sins, and a narrow passage unto life,
but he that will enter into the Heavenly Kingdom, must pass through this
straight Gate; The bitterness of this Repentance will quickly be over, but the
unspeakable comfort thereof (if it be sound, and enable thee to forsake thy
sins) will abide with thee for ever: Who would not submit to hard Terms, to
save his Estate, (though it were never so little) or his Life, though it were
unhealthy and uncomfortable? But who would not consent to harder Terms, to
procure a more plentiful Estate, and a more healthful, comfortable Life? And is
there any thing more necessary, or does half so much concern thee, as to have
God thy reconciled Friend, and to save thy Soul from Eternal Death, an^ thy
self from utter destruction of Body and Soul for ever and ever? And to get the
possession of Eternal Life and Joy? Consider, I beseech, O my Soul! And do not
reject the offer of Repentance, lest the refusal cost thee a Repentance a
thousand times more sharp and bitter: The pangs of the New Birth will quickly
end, and then thou will begin to rejoice, that a Soul is born into the
Spiritual World: And then thou will forget all thy former Sighs and Groans and
Fears, and the bitter Agonies of thy Soul, becaufe God has now answered thee
in the joy of thy Heart; And taken thee into his special care, and pardoned all
thy sin, Eccles. 5.20. Or if thou be one that has passed the New Birth
already, thy speedy repentance after sin committed, will be like a Shower in
Summer, after the Ground is parched with heat and drought. The Winter-Rain,
though the Ground be well soaked therewith, may indeed prepare the Earth to
bring forth its Increase, which Men expect from it in Summer and Harvest; But
if there fall not some Showers now and then, especially after violent hot
Seasons, all the hopes of a good Harvest, may come to naught: So it is in the
Case of sin; your first Repentance and Tears, are like the Winter-Rain, that is
of long continuance, and does thoroughly soak into the Heart, and make it soft
and fertile: But your after-Repentance is like the Summer-Showers, and the more
the heat is parched with sin, and hardened through the Sunshine of Prosperity,
the more it must be watered, with fresh Showers of Holy Repentance and Sorrow,
or else you will lose your hopes of Future Joy and Happiness: Seeing then the
Necessity of a first and after Repentance, refuse not the Mercy that is offered
to thee upon such fair Terms: For shame disown that Faculty of Sorrow and
Weeping, if it will not serve thee, and stand thee in stead in this greatest
Necessity: Shall thine Eyes trickle, and run down with Tears, if thou have but
lost a dear Friend and Acquaintance? Yea, if thou have but parted with him for
a time, and have not quite lost him, or her? And shall not thy Heart melt, and
thine Eyes pour down, when God is departed from thee, though it should be but
for a certain time. Alas! thou want him every Moment, more than thou can
do the most useful, helpful Friend, that ever thou had in the World: And if
thou know not thus much; the greater is thy need of repentance and sorrow,
for such a wicked, deadly ignorance, as this will prove, if the Tears of
Repentance do not clear thine Eyes, and cause thee better to see and understand
what need thou have of the Divine Grace and Comfort every hour: And then thou will be as ready to say as David, I am poor and needy, make have unto me, O
God; Thou art my help, and my deliverer: make no long tarrying, O my God, Psalm
70.5. And when thou have well considered, and had a little more experience,
thou will say as he did, Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had long
since dwelt in silence, (1) death, Psalm 94.17. It Is easy to see if thou
regardest either Scripture or Experience; That in the multitude of thy
troublesome thoughts within, he only can comfort and rejoice thy soul, Psalm
94.19. If thou can not therefore weep in the want and absence of him, better
thou had had no Eyes, nor a Faculty to sigh or weep: Yea, the very Children
of the Bride-chamber, though they have no need to weep whilst the Bridegroom
is with them, (that is) whilst they seel the effects of God's gracious Presence
and Favor: yet when the Bridegroom is gone from them, and driven away by some
sinful, unkind usage, in these days they must mourn, or the Comforter will not
return again. How much more must they weep, that are none of the Children of
the Bride-chamber, that never yet repented in all their life? Well, there is no
Remedy, Except you repent, you will certainly perish, Luke 13.3, 5. This is the
First Consideration, to provoke Repentance and to stir up this Affection.

Secondly, Consider how foolishly thou have done, and then refrain thy deepest
Sorrow and Tears, if thou art able: This Consideration stirred up David's
repentance, after that carnal confidence and distrust of God, he had been
guilty of, in numbering the People: 2 Samuel 24.10. And David 's heart smote him,
after he had numbered the People; And David said unto the Lord, I have sinned
greatly in that I have done: And now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the
iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly. Is it not a
ridiculous, foolish Act, to set our strength and wit against him that made us?
For the Stubble to quarrel with the Fire? And the Dust to fight against the
Wind, that scatters it on the Face of the Earth? It Is just such a piece of
wisdom, to provoke God wilfully, And when he calls, to give him no answer: And
when he has given us a Law to direct us how to live; Never seriously to
enquire what it is, nor to trouble our selves with such Thoughts: If an Earthly
Master should command his Servant, to do any thing that were just and
reasonable, and he should peremptorily refuse to do it; you would call that
plain Rebellion, and say that Servant deserves to be used accordingly: And is
it much better, do you think, if he should send him Instructions written in
black and white, what he would have him do; And he should let them lie by, and
never read them? Wilful ignorance, of what we may, and are bound to know, lives
at next door, to direct and open Contradiction and Rebellion: Now judge whether
that Man be not void of understanding, or stark mad, That dare stand up and
contradict, and say he will not obey, when God commands him: I know there is not
a Man believes there is a God, and knows what he is, that dares say plainly, as
Pharaoh did, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? Exodus 5.2. But are there
not many thousands that will go their ways, and never consider or regard what
God commands them? I would it were not a very common Case: And Men's ordinary
course in the World: And what is the reason that Men are so exceeding bold and
adventurous? The plain reason is, becaufe they are foolish Children and have no
knowledge; they are sottish, and have no understanding, Jer. 4.22. And yet it
follows, They are wise enough to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge: What can thou say for thy self, that art yet an impenitent wretch?
If thou art one that do believe thou have a Soul to save, and a God to
serve, and that the Day is coming when thou must account for these things, and
yet regardest them not, will not thy Tongue be forced to say, thou have done
very foolishly? Is he not a Fool that neglects his greatest Concernments, and
spends all his Time without any Thoughts of them? Suppose a Merchant should
send a Factour into a far Country, to negotiate his Affairs, and transact his
Business there, and to carry on his Trade with the Inhabitants of that
Country; and there should live gallantly upon the Cost and Expenses of his
Master that sent him: and when he should return home, should bring in his
Accounts, So much spent in Meat and Drink, so much in Apparel, so much in
Entertainments, and other Recreations; and when he came to the main point in
hand, the Business on which he was purposely sent, could give none, or but a
slight and careless Account thereof, would you not account him a foolish
Factour, and that Merchant a worse Fool, that should employ such a one again,
without any Signs of Repentance, and hopes of his Amendment? Shall I liken
their Folly to this, (yea, it is incomparably greater) that come hither into
the World on purpose to serve their Maker, and live in obedience to his Laws,
and yet do nothing less: Should God call thee now to an account, Is it not the
plain truth, that thy Thoughts have been upon this Vanity and that Vanity; And
thine Affections have run after every Shadow; And thy time has been spent in
the drudgery of the Flesh, in providing for thy Carcass; And the main Design
upon which thou art sent into the World, shamefully neglected? I know it is
duty to think upon, and labor after Temporal things, and in the sweat of thy
face, to eat thy bread, Genesis 3.19. But is it not damnable Folly, to labor
after the Food that perishes, more than that which endures? To spend thy days
in sinful, foolish Merriment, and then to go down to the place of Eternal
Misery? Can that Man go for any other than a Fool, in thine account, that will
not be persuaded to consider, that for his good now, which he must unavoidably
consider to his hurt and mischief hereafter? It Is one known difference between
a Wiseman and a Fool, that the one provideth for a Mischief while time serves;
and the other would do it when it is too late: And it is another undoubted
Character of a Fool, to prefer the chacing of a Feather, before the lading of
himself with the richest Treasure: such a Fool is every sinner that wilfully
displeases God, to satisfy a vain and inordinate desire: And therefore what
more common in the Scripture, than to find Folly put for Sin, and the Sinner
for a Fool? It Is needless to cite places in a Case so known and obvious: Now
consider, how often have thou thus played the Fool? And is it not time to return
to thy Wits again? How much has sin befooled their understandings, that refuse
a little pains, and self-denial, to get the Everlasting Crown and Kingdom? Much
more that take so much pains to get into the place of Torment and Misery, as
some will undergo? Will not the Toil that some Worldlings will dispense with,
to get a little Worldly Treasure, convince the one of Folly? And the shifts
that Men will use to escape a Temporal Misery, rise up and condemn the other of
stark Madness? We see Men rip up the Bowels of the Earth, and dig into the
Entrails of craggy Rocks, and take incredible pains, to get a little Silver,
and Gold: They will break their sweetest sleep, to accomplish an ambitious
desire; They will spend their Patrimony, their Credit, their Bodies, and their
very Souls, for a drop of Swinish Pleasure, and Carnal Delight. What Is the
matter, that we cannot be content to spend a few earnest Thoughts, to use a
little serious Diligence, for the purchase of so great a Glory as Christ does
promise to his Servants, for the Riches of Heaven, For the Promises of this
Life, and that which is to come, for a Dignity not inferior to Angels; for a
Sea of Delights and Pleasures, that ravish the Heart of God himself? Alas! we
are surely ignorant of the Pleasures which our Lord calls us to, or else we
are Fools indeed to stop our Ears: Our carnal besotted Hearts imagine that
there is nothing better, than to eat and to drink, and to satiate the Body with
that which tickleth the Senses: Certainly if Men did believe, that the Joys of
Heaven, are as far beyond all the Happiness of this Life, as Heaven is beyond
Earth, they could not, they would not forsake the Service of Christ, for some
little discouragements as sometimes they must meet with: Let such faint-hearted
Cowards as these, remember what Sufferings Christ himself underwent, and
Contradiction of Sinners he endured, that they may not be weary, and faint in
their minds, Heb. 12.3. And let me say to such, as Christ said of himself, in
another Case, to his yet ignorant Disciples, O Fools and slow of Heart to
(understand) and believe, ought not you (cheerfully) to suffer these things,
and to enter into glory, Luke 24.24, 25. And for the other sort, that take so
much pains to undo themselves. Let me but appeal to their own Judgments, and
ask them, whether it is not palpable Folly to refuse to do that; for to make
themselves everlastingly happy, which they will not refuse to do, to make
themselves eternally miserable? Ob. But they will say, They intend it not; They
think to make themselves happy, by such Toil and Pains. An. You much mend the
matter, by this Objection, and wipe off the Aspersion: For if thou art not a
Fool the one way, thou art another; Can thou imagine, (unless thou were
guilty of this Accusation) that to rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the
Bread of Carefulness, to get a little more of the World, and the Pleasures of
the Flesh, (when God's Service is neglected) is the way to make thy self happy?
Thou could not think thus, if thou were not ignorant, and wholly bereft of
thine understanding: Consider therefore before it be too late, what Folly thou
have been guilty of, in forsaking God, and following the ways of thine own
Heart; And humble thy self at last, and pour forth thy Tears before God, in the
sense of thy foolish, sinful disobedience; And lift up thy broken Heart to him
for Pardon in the Name of thy Redeemer: And this is the way to recover thy Wits
again, and to come to thy self, as the Prodigal did, when he returned to his
Father, and confessed his sin.

Thirdly, Consider, There is no spark of true Ingenuity left in that Heart,
that refuses to lay to Heart the Transgressions he has committed against God:
Does not thy Heart smite thee, and ^ell thee how shamefully thou have done in
provoking him, to whom thou art so wonderfully endebted? Does not thy Heart
bleed at all, for the Wounds and Dishonor thou have done to his Name? Nor is
it a burden to thy Soul, that thou have wearied him with thy rebellions, and
made him to serve with thy sins? Isaiah 43.24. Does it seem a small matter to
thee, that thou have slighted his Word, neglected his Service, profaned his
Sabbaths, despised the offers of his Grace, taken part with his Enemies, and
preferred every foolish Delight, before his Love and and Favor? Be it known to
thee, thou art of a base and sordid disposition, and utterly forsaken of all
Reason and Ingenuity: God deals not with Men in a way of Violence and
Constraint; He could easily force thee to an Acknowledgment of thy Pride, and
Worldliness, and filthy Lusts, which thou do so carefully conceal, and the
heinous dishonor thou have done to his Name; He could make thine own
Conscience fall upon thee and condemn thee, in despite of thee, and thy Tongue
to fall upon thy self: But he loves to deal with every Creature according to
the Nature he has given them: He leaves thee to thine own choice, having given
thee Reason to discern what is fittest to be done, and his infallible Word, to
guide thee: He uses Arguments to persuade, rather than Power to compel, and
draws thee with Cords of a Man, (as the Prophet expresses it) Hosea 11.4. That
if Love and Ingenuity will not prevail with thee, to do thy Duty to him, Shame
and Ingenuity might persuade thee to repent thee of the Folly: There is some
ingenuity, in a free and open confession of thy sin, and a proportionable
sorrow for it, and endeavor to vindicate the Name of God, which thou have
dishonored, after thou have been so disingenious to dishonor him by thy
Transgressions: He that can harden himself against his dearest Friend, and blot
his precious Name with any foul Aspersions, and then justify and defend what
he has done, or at least manifest himself to be altogether insensible of such
behavior, deserves to be thrust out of the Society of Men; And all Men would
take him for a Monster, and degenerate piece of Humanity: But it is a thousand
times worse to play such Tricks with God, who will lay them to Heart, and not
let them go unpunished: And when he sees thou art past all Ingenuity, and have
out grown the Heart of a Man, and there is nothing to be done with thee,
without stripes and blows, he will deal with thee, as Masters use to deal with
a Scholar, that will no longer be moved by any other Arguments, make them the
common whipping-Blocks of the School, that by their just punishment, the other
that have some ingenuity still left, may take warning: or else turn such
untractable Disciples quite out of their Tuition: O, my Brethren, your Case
would be sad indeed, if it should once come to any of these: The Heathen could
say, Q. Curt.
Illum ego perisse dico ^^i periit pudor: He that has lost all shame, is
utterly lost. And he that has lost all ingenuity, is quite shameless. I
beseech you look into your Hearts, and search; Can you find no Motions to
Sorrow, and Complaints, and bitterness of Spirit, for all those Hours you have
foolishly spent in the Service of the Flesh, or the World, and the Devil, which
are the professed Enemies of him who is your greatest Friend? Surely you cannot
reflect upon those rebellious, sinful Courses you have taken, and not be moved
with indignation against your corrupt Inclinations, that have so much seduced
you: Surely you can never be vile enough in your own Eyes, that have so much
villified and despised the just Commands of him that holds your Soul in life,
and keeps you every moment: If you are past all sorrow for sin, you are past
all hope, and are become like a broken Vessel, that can never be made up again:
Peter indeed was so disingenious, to deny his dearest Master, the effect of
whose sweetest Love he had so often tasted: But it was when he was in a fright
and passion: He no sooner thought upon his odious disingenuity, but the poor
Man melts into Tears, and weeps bitterly: There Is no sin but is curable, but
this of Final Impenitance and Unbelief. It Is possible, that though seven Devils
have got possession of thee, they may be cast out: It was Mary Magdalen's case,
and she yet found mercy with the Lord; but then remember how she wept, and
wiped the very Feet of Christ with the Hair of her Head, Luke 7.44. But if thou
want Tears for thy sin, and a penitent, bleeding Heart for thine iniquities,
thy case is a thousand times worse, than if thou had the greatest sins, and
yet could bewail them, and humble thy self for them: For this would show,
that there is some ingenuity left in thee, which the Lord loves, where ever he
sees it; And will not let the person perish, that confesses from his heart,
that he has deserved to perish, and is afflicted for what he has done.

Fourthly, Consider, there is no Evil or Misery whatsoever calls for Grief and
Sorrow so much as Sin does: And yet we can weep our Eyes out, almost, for some
petty Evils and Miseries that sometimes do afflict us: What an absurd and
preposterous sorrow is it to cry for the death of a Friend, to howl for the
loss of a Child, and to be overwhelmed with grief, when an intimate, dear
Acquaintance is snatched away from thee? And yet to be heart-whole, when God is
provoked to depart from thee, and thou art in danger to lose thy Soul: We take
the Person for a Child or a Fool, that whines and makes a stir for a Trifle,
and makes sad Complaints for a Scratch, or a Flea-bite, and is little or no
whit moved for the loss of his Credit or good Name, or something that is far
better; This, as well as all other Passions in Man, should be governed by
Reason, otherwise they are no more regardable than the howling of a Dog; And
how is that Passion guided by Reason, that makes a great Noise, and is moved
with much Violence for a Matter of nothing; and is very quiet when it has much
more cause to be moved: Is that a rational sorrow, or does become a Creature
that has understanding, that brings a Man down even to death's door, for the
departure of some worldly comfort, and leaves him without Tears and Sighs, when
he is losing that which is a thousand times more desirable? Understand thy self
aright, and thou will be ashamed of such a ridiculous sorrow as this: Sin is
the cause of all other Evil that comes upon thee, and therefore must needs be
far worse it self, and much more to be lamented; It takes away thy Friend from
thy side, thy Child from thy bosom; It bereaves thee of thy Health, deprives
thee of thy Credit and Estate; It parts between thy Soul and Body, and makes
the most lamentable divorce of all between God and thy Soul: As I live (says
the Lord) though the Son of Jehoiakim, King of Judah, were the Signet upon my
right hand, yet would I pluck him thence, Jerem. 22.24. And why is this, but
because he had provoked God by his sin: It is sin that is our greatest Enemy:
It Is our Comfort against all other Enemies, that they can pursue us no further
than the Grave, and there the weary be at rest, Job 3.17. There we shall feel
our worldly troubles no longer; But this Enemy begins then to rage most, when
all other Cruelties cease: Then it comes upon us like a Tempest; It follows us
beyond the Grave, and will never leave us, till it has completed our Misery,
and put us beyond all hope: And shall this trouble us no more? Well might our
Savior bid the Daughters of Jerusalem, not to weep for him, but for
themselves, and for their sins, Luke 23.28. They had some womanish Tears to
command, when they saw him led away to Execution, but might have shed them far
more acceptably for their sins, whereby they had brought such a horrid thing to
pass: It Is a lamentable sight, to see Men endued with reason, to ring their
hands, and weep, for almost nothing, and to be cruelly hard-hearted when they
have the greatest cause to weep: What a vast difference is there, between a
little bodily suffering, and the intolerable pains of thy Soul? between a
little Scratch in thy Flesh, and the Wounds of thy Spirit? A wounded Spirit,
who can bear? says Solomon, Prove. 18.14. Showing by this Question, the
incomparable difference between all external griefs, and those which are
internal, and seated in the Spirit: What a wide difference is there between the
loss of some temporal finite good, and the loss of that which is infinite and
eternal? Thou may repair the one, but thou can never repair the other:
It Is far more tolerable to be scorned by Men, than to be contemned by God; To
be f^ighted by thy Friends and Acquaintance, when thou art in misery and
distress, and do expect some pity and relief from them, than that God should
laugh at thy Calamity, and mock when thy Fear comes: And yet in such like
cases as these, we want no sorrow, but have Tears and Sighs and bitter
Expostulations at command: O Sirs, stop your Tears, cease your Complaints,
forbear your Sighs, when it is but the Flesh, or outward Man, that is
concerned; Keep these in store, for your outward sins, which far better deserve
them, and do you a thousand times more wrong; Noli tristari, nisi quam male
feceris. Keep them in store, for a time of greater Necessity; The Sorrow of the
World works Death, 2 Cor. 7.10. These Tears give your Heart no ease, but
rather make way for greater sorrow; The time is coming when you will wish you
could have ^^^ghted all other Evils, but that of sin.

Fifthly, Consider, This is one great End for which Christ shed his Blood, and
suffered the shameful Death upon the Cross, that he might bring Sinners to
Repentance; He knew they could never be happy, till they should get a true
sight of the Sin and Misery, and till their Hearts were thoroughly broken for
their Transgressions; And that they must part with their Corruptions, or part
with God: Being therefore moved with wonderful pity and compassion toward
them, and loath that they should go on and perish in their Rebellion against
God, has undertook to bring them to Repentance: If the work could have been
done by him alone, it would have been a matter of far less difficulty to effect
and bring to pass; But he well knew, before he began to make the least attempt,
that it was a far easier task to shed his blood, and satisfy for his sins
passed, than to bring us to future obedience: If it had been only to lay down
his Life for us, so great was his compassion to us, that he could easily have
parted with it; But this was not all, no, nor the one half; He had a worse work
to do, the stubborn, rebellious Heart of Man, to change and to renew; He must
be brought to see and confess and renounce his sins, and come again and submit
himself to his Maker, whom he had provoked, or else his Blood would be spilt in
vain: O my Brethren, this was a work indeed, and sets forth the wonderful
amazing Love of our Redeemer, that he would undertake such a Task as this! If
he had had no more to do, but to fulfill the Law of God in his own Person and
our Nature, and to have fought with the Devil, and Death, and to have laid down
his Life for us, he could have conquered these with a far less power, than he
could have conquered the rebellious, untructable Hearts of sinners: It was much
easier for him to have confounded all the Powers of H^ll and Darkness, than to
break in pieces a sto^^, senseless Heart, and to bring a sinner to Repentance
and Reformation: But yet he has undertook the work notwithstanding: And what
course does he t^ke to mollify a flinty Heart, and to make a senseless sinner
feel the odiousness of his sin, and to bend such a perverse and obstinate will
as ours is? Why, he undergoes the most horrible Sufferings, that the Ear of Man
ever heard of; And then he causes the History of them to be written and set
before us; And withal, does most affectionately beseech us by all these
sufferings, to consider the Folly of our former Ways, ^^d to lay them to heart,
till we begin to yield and acknowledge our sins, and are steadfastly resolved to
follow his Directions, and depend upon (...) Assistance, till we can perfectly
overcome our Corruptions, and serve the Lord that made us, with singleness and
sincerity of heart for the su^^^^. To this (...) he sets up an Office on
purpose to (...) us in remembrance of the bitter Pangs and Sorrows that he has
undergone for us; And he both commanded this to be Preached publicly (...) the
World: He has moreover instituted the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, to
represent (...) ^^e his Sufferings to us, To tell us what Poverty land Shame he
has endured, what malicious Usage from the Jews; how he was wounded for our
Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities, and how the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, that through his stripes we might be healed, Isa. 53.5. How
the Lord laid on him the Iniquities of us all, verse. 6. How he was made sin for
us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God through
him, 2 Cor. 5.21. How he trod the Wine Press of his Father's wrath, Isa. 63.3.
and drunk off the dregs of the bitter cup of his displeasure, and swet drops of
Blood, while he was conflicting with the Terrors of God's wrath; And is not
that Man a block indeed, that cannot be moved with such Rhetoric as this is?
Is that Man fit to be pardoned, or to find any Mercy at God's hands, that
stops his Ears to one that has thus befriended him, when he is pleading
with him, to make his Heart give and relent for all his former sins? It Is
certain, that Man's case is desperate, that will not yield to such an Argument
as this is. But, alas! sad and woeful experience tells us how many Thousand
slight it, and are no more moved with the real story of Christ's Passion, than
with a Romance or Fable, no, nor many, I fear, half so much. O how must this
needs Crucify our Lord afresh, to see his love and tender compassion so much
slighted, and his Blood trampled under feet! O wretched unworthy sinner! Can
thou find in thy heart, to run the bloody Spear, and to strike the Nails afresh
into his Side and Hands, and to persecute him whom God has wounded, yea, and
that for thy sin? Have thou the Heart of a Man, or fierce Savage Beast, that
can add Sorrow to such Afflictions? Is it Nothing to thee, that he was such a
Man of Sorrows, and so despised of Men, and smitten of God? What? when thou thy
self art the Person for which he has borne all this? Is it no matter to thee,
though he was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep, dumb before the
shearer? Isa. 53.7. Woe to thee, that ever God made thee a Man, if thou art
become such a hard-hearted Rock: He submitted to all this, that he might
prevail with God, on the one side, to be reconciled unto sinners, and that he
might prevail with sinners, on the other side, to repent, and be reconciled
unto God: The former part of his Work he has already done, He has gained his
Father's Consent; And wilt not thou Consent to lay by thine Enmity to God; to
confess thy former sins, and to return to thy Obedience? It shall be more
tolerable, surely, for the Devils themselves, that never had such Mercy offered
them, in the Day of Judgment, than for such hard-hearted, impenitent sinners:
But this is not all that Christ does for them, he bears with them in wonderful
patience; sometimes he casts a gracious Look upon them, as once he did upon
Peter, as if he would melt them in despite of all their obstinacy; And seems
to say to them, What, sinner, shall I suffer, and will thou suffer too, rather
than repent and live? Shall I bleed to the very death, to save thee from
destruction, and will thou have no Mercy upon thy self? Turn thee, Turn thee;
Why will thou dye, O impenitent sinner? Sometimes he frowns upon the sinner,
and threatens him with a sorer and heavier Condemnation, if he will not repent,
and all that he might gain his Consent; He assaults him on all sides, that he
might recover him by Repentance unto that happy state, which he does so much
desire to see him possessed of: He sets the Motives of Eternal Life and Death
before him, and gives him many a precious Hour to ponder and consider them: He
sends his Spirit also to knock at the door of his Heart, that he may be let in:
Woe a thousand Times to that Man that will not be invited to Repentance, by all
these Means: Good it had been for that Man or Woman, if they had never been
born.

Sixthly, It is the End of all the Ordinances of God, and every Providence, to
work this Godly Sorrow in our Minds and Hearts, and bring us to Repentance: It
is the First intention of the Ministry of the Word, to kill sin in us by
Repentance, and then to bring us on to the Life of Faith and Holiness: And all
the Doctrines that are taught and delivered to us in the Ministry of the Word,
are to drive on this Design: The Doctrine of God's Attributes and Perfections,
is but the better to inform us of our Duty, and what Service is due to such a
Majesty so related to us, and to qualify and prepare our Hearts to a reverend
and humble Performance of our Duty; And to show us what a sin it is either to
neglect it, or slight it over: And consequently to bring us to judge, abhor,
and condemn our selves, when we have any of this Guilt upon us: All the
Doctrines that concern our selves, and that teach us what we were by Nature,
and what we are by Practice, and what we may be through the Grace of God and
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, serve effectually to shame and humble
us, and to break our very Hearts in the sense of that Misery that sin has
brought upon us: If God made us such beautiful, lovely Creatures, and we have
made our selves such deformed, loathsome sinners, does it not become our Duty,
and highly beseem us, to afflict our souls with the bitter remembrance thereof,
especially when God offers Mercy to such penitent afflicted sinners? All the
Doctrines that concern our Brethren, what do they serve for, but to teach us
the Extent of our Duty to them, and the hainousness of our sin, that have so
much failed in all the respects that we owe to God and Men; That so the more
distinct sight and knowledge of our sin, may make our Repentance more sound and
complete. To what end are all the Terrible Threatenings of God's Word against
Sin and Sinners, but either to prevent the Sin, or else to humble the Sinner,
after he is fallen under the Threatening; and to work upon the Passion of Fear,
that by it the sinner may be awakened to consider what he has done. And
whither to serve all the Promises, but to perfect that work more kindly which
the Fear of Judgment has begun? There Is not a Doctrine that is Preached and
Published to us by the Ministry of the Word, but what comes on this very
Errand, and has a subserviency to this End, and should be effectually managed
to such a purpose, by all that are entrusted with this Sacred Office.

Some helpful Considerations to provoke to the Sublime and Excellent Duty of
Joy and Delight in God, To Sing his Praise, and to be Thankful to him.
Judaei dicunt prohibitum esse homini, ulla refrui in hoc Mundo, sine
benedictione.

Et quicunque fruitur re aliqua ex hoc Mundo sine benedictione, perinde est
acci spotiaret Deum: Berach. fol. 35.

Scriptures enjoining Joy and Delight in God, with Thankfulness and Praise.
First, Joy and Delight in God.
Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires
of thine heart.

Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou servedst not the Lord God with joyfulness and
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things, therefore thou shall serve
thine enemies in hunger and thirst, etc.

Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, yea, and again, I say rejoice.

Hab. 3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree should not blossom, neither should Fruit
be in the Vine, though the labor of the Olive should fail, and the Field
should yield no Meat, although the Flock should be cut off from the Fold, and
there should be no Herd in the Stalls: v. 18. Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my salvation.

Psalm. 68.3. But let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea,
let them exceedingly rejoice.

Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest them that rejoice and work righteousness.

Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God (is said there) to consist in righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

John 15.11. These things have I spoken, that my joy may remain in you, and
that your joy may be full.

1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice evermore.

Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is our strength.

Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous, and shout for
joy, all ye that are upright in heart.

Psalm. 66.1, 2. Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.

Psalm. 5.11. But let those that put their trust in thoe, rejoice; let them
shout for joy, because thou defendest them; let them also that love thy Name,
rejoice in thee.

Secondly, Scriptures that command Praise.
Psalm. 35.28. My tongue shall speak of thy righteousness, and of thy praise,
all the day long.

Psalm. 118.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; Thou art my God, and I
will exalt thee.

Psalm. 34.1. I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall continually
be in my mouth.

Psalm. 66.2. Sing forth the honor of his Name, make his praise glorious.

Psalm. 66.8. O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be
heard.

Psalm. 48.1. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the City of our
God, in the Mountain of his Holiness.

Psalm. 135.3. Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good, sing praises unto his
Name, for it is pleasant.

Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to sing praises unto our God,
for it is pleasant, and praise is comely.

Verse 12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Sion.

In the 148 Psalm, all Creatures are called upon and excited to the praises of
God, which must be meant but objectively, of all irrational Creatures: And
rational Creatures are implied, when others that have not reason are spoken to.

Psalm. 148.13. Praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name only is excellent, and
his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

Psalm. 149.1. Praise ye the Lord, sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise
in the congregation of the saints.

Psalm. 149.6. Let the high praises of God be in their Mouth: (1) of the saints.

Psalm. 150.1, 2, 3. Praise ye the Lord, praise God in his sanctuary, praise him
in the firmament of his power.

Thirdly, Scriptures provoking to Thankfulness.
Psalm. 109.4. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise, be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name.

1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In every thing we ought to give thanks.

Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him.

Psalm. 69.30. I will praise the name of God with a song, and magnify him with
thanksgiving.

Psalm. 118.1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his Mercy
endures for ever.

Verse. 29. The same Reason is insisted on 36 times. Psalm 136.1, 2, 3. And the
Reasons largely insisted on in the rest of the Psalm.

Psalm. 26.6, 7. I will wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I compass
thine altar, O Lord, that I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and
tell of all thy wonderful works.

Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord, ye saints of his, and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.

There Is nothing that more becomes a Believer, nor so well suits his Spiritual,
Heavenly Nature, nor is a better Indication of a Child of God, and one that
has attained to a perfect Man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, than to delight and be skilful in this Noble Work: And without all
dispute, There Is nothing that a corrupt Heart is more averse and backward to,
and has less skill in: There is indeed a joyful, merry Heart, pre-requisite to
this Exercise, but such a one as the World intermedleth not with; but is the
greatest stranger to, of all things you can imagine: Though there is none love
Mirth and Joy so passionately, as the worldling, yet his Mirth is quite of
another stamp: It Is the mere distortion of the Countenance, or at best, but the
dilatation of the Blood and Spirits; It is not the delectation and contentment
of the Mind and Spirit: It Is the laughter of a Fool, a mere brutish, sensual
delight, that they are so fond of: Not the solid, serious pleasure of a Saint,
and one that is perfectly in his right mind: And thus to be merry after their
Fashion, is no hard nor difficult Task; It Is but be Mad, and let go the Reigns
of all good Government of a Man's self; It is but to gratify every desire, and
live at Random, and prosper in Folly, and this will screw up a Carnal Mind to
very profuse Laughter and Merriment: All the Town shall quickly hear of it, and
perceive it too plainly in the Vanity, Pride, and Insolency of their Carriage:
And there is no surer way, to damp and dead the Spirit of these Men, and to
drive them into a melancholy, dumpish vein, than to spring some Heavenly
Discourse, that savoureth of Heavenly Wisdom, and tends to the Divine
Praises; It Is easy to vent a little Froth and Mirth, at a Feast, or in a
Jovial Meeting, or when the Spirits are cheared with Wine and Carnal Pleasure:
But to be glad in the Lord, to rejoice in the meditation of his Excellent
Greatness, and Perfection, even when the Flocks are cut off from the Fold, and
there is no Herd in the Stall, and the Vine yields not her Increase, and the
labor of the Olive does fail, and all Earthly Comforts are wanting; Then to
rejoice in the most High, and to vent forth freely in Thanks and Praises unto
him, is the Top and Perfection of Piety: But this is a strain that the merriest
Worldling can never reach, while he continues to be such: Other Mirth needs
great Restraint, but this has need of all Encouragement and Promotion, it
being so much above the Sphaere of corrupted Nature to do it to purpose: And as
some slight Praise (I doubt not) may come from the Mouth of one not yet
ingrafted into Christ by a lively Faith, from the sense of Common Mercies, and
General Grace: So (on the other side) even a Believer, through the weakness of
his Grace, and the distemper of his Body, and the want of Exercise in this
Duty, may make but little Music, and be a very Bungler in this Work; And so
lose the Comfort and Strength that a Heart, fervent and frequent in this Duty
would daily get.

But before I say any thing to stir up to this Exercise, I will first show
what is requisite to, or implied in this Joy and Delight in God, and true
Gratitude and Praise, I put them all together, because there is much Affinity
and Correspondence between them: And therefore

As to the Subject of these Acts, or the Person that must exert them, he must
be thus qualified and prepared:

1. He must be of an open, cheerful Temper: There Is none more unfit for this
Duty, than the lumpish, sad and heavy Heart: Though I deny not but sadness and
heaviness of Spirit is sometimes a Duty, after the Commission of sin
(especially great and wilful sin) till by renewed Sorrow, Confession, and a
more cautelous Heed to prevent it for the future, and the application of
Christ's Blood by Faith, the Cause of such Sadness be removed; But a constant,
habitual sadness and despondency, that neither Faith nor Reason can easily stir
or command, is a great Enemy to this Duty; He therefore that would be always
fit for this Duty, must with all his Might resist the true and principal Cause
of Sadness (I mean Sin) and when he cannot prevent it, he must speedily repent
of it, and turn from it, and renew his Faith in Christ, and then his Soul will
not refuse to be comforted, but will cheer up, and at length attain such a good
measure of Alacrity, as will become Christianity, and constantly dispose him to
this Duty, provided his Body be not oppressed with melancholy Fumes and
Vapors: For in such Case the Art of the Physician must be joined with the
forementioned Prescriptions: And such Temperance and Exercise of the Body must
be used as may reduce it again, and make it fit to subserve a cheerful Mind:
There Is no greater pull-back, nor obstruction, to this becoming, generous,
heavenly Work, than a sower, dejected, and contracted Spirit: The Jews had a
Proverb amongst them, that Spiritus sanctus non descendit super Animum maestum:
which though taken without limitation, is not true; because the Spirit of God,
works Godly Sorrow, and dwells in the contrite Heart that is broken for sin, to
revive, comfort and bind it up again; yet, with some restriction, it contains a
very great Truth, (viz.) That the Divine Spirit in it more Noble and Excellent
Operations of Love, Joy, and Delight, and those other Affections that have a
very near confederacy with these and cheerful Obedience, which results from
these, does not descend upon those that are of a sad and heavy Heart, whilst
such: But they are first exhilerated and cheared by the Heavenly Comforter,
before they can get up to these higher Duties: And though Godly Sorrow for sin,
be consistent enough with some Spiritual Joy, and Concomitant Affections before
mentioned, whilst it keeps its just degree and measure, yet when it proceeds to
Height and Excess, and goes beyond its just Bounds, it greatly indisposeth to
Works of that Elevation: But the Sorrow of the World works Death, and is
therefore very inconsistent with Works that require the greatest Life; yea, the
sorrow and dejectedness that arise from the Temper and Complexion of a
Melancholic Body, do very much hinder the Soul in these more sublime and
raised Operations: And the more voluntary it is through the wilful neglect of
Means, either Medicinal or Moral, whereby it may be shaken off, still the
greater Enemy it is to the joyful Heavenly Work. When therefore we prepare for
this Work, every weight must be cast away, and the sin that presses down, and
all indisposing dullness must be shaken off, as much as may be. And therefore
Elisha, to make way for the Holy Spirit, in these noble Operations of it, calls
for a Musical Instrument, 2 Kings 3.15. the better to compose and exhilerate
his Mind: And it came to pass, whilst the Minstrel played, that the Hand, (that
is) the Spirit of the Lord came upon him.

2. He must be of a competent Candor and Ingenuity toward Men; One that will
readily do good, and as easily acknowledge it, when it is done by others; That
affects not to conceal his own Infirmities, nor the Worth of others, but can
quickly spy out both; That judges not according to outward Appearance, but
judges righteous Judgment; And is prone to take every thing by the right
handle, and to pass the fairest construction upon every thing: He that is
disingenuous and base toward Men, will be so toward God: For it is in other
Affections, as it is in Love: Now he that loves his Brother, whom he has
seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? Is the Argument of the
beloved Apostle, 1 John 4.20.

3. He must be very well contented with his Condition: None more Averse to the
Duty in hand, than he that is displeased with his Estate: How can that Man be
thankful unto God for any thing he has, that likes nothing? Malcontent
fills a Man with rage and bitterness against every thing almost, as supposing
it to contribute something to his uneasy Condition: It puts him frequently
upon sinful study and contrivance, to better himself; And it is so far from
disposing any to the sweet Temper, I am now speaking of, that it prompts him to
be angry with every one; Such a one tastes no sweetness in any good he has, be
it never so great, and therefore forgets all, but his discontents: He pores
wholly upon his Misery, and nothing else seems worthy his observation: And that
Man that has no eye, to observe any Comfort that he has, will never think
himself obliged to him from whom they come; and such a one is most unfit for a
Thankful Acknowledgment.

4. He must have made some good progress in the work of Mortification, and be
pretty well weaned from all Sublunary Good and Pleasure: That has no strong
propension to Sensual Comforts and Carnal Delights, but has got a considerable
Conquest over the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts: And has a Love that is
rational, and does propend most to that which most deserves it: For how can he
perform the highest Acts of Spiritual Life, that is not first dead to those
things, that do stifle and utterly quench the Spiritual Life? Or how can he
thank God aright for any thing, that is not in a capacity to make a true
judgment of what God does bestow? which is the Case of every one, that has his
Affections inordinately wedded to these Earthly Contentments: Such a one cannot
take a worldly Cross, or Reproach, and Shame, and Sickness, and other
Afflictions, to be such Mercies as they sometimes are, nor thank God sometimes
for them more heartily, than for any outward prosperity.

5. He must have a deep Sense and Persuasion of the Certainty and Excellency of
Eternal Things; The Immortality of the Soul; The worth of God's Favor; The
unspeakable Misery of the damned; And the Felicity of those that must live for
ever with God: otherwise the Pleasures of this World are but a Dream, and the
Happiness of this Life but a shadow, and all the Comforts that are tied to this
state, so fickle and unsatisfactory, that a wise and considerate Man will not
much regard them, [unless as they be Pledges and Forerunners of a better
Felicity] and so cannot rise to any high pitch of Joy and Thankfulness, whilst
it has no better Materials to erect such a Frame, nor better Motives to this
Duty.

Thus much for the Matter, or what is prerequisite to make way for these High
and Heavenly Acts of Gratitude and Praise, [which are always accompanied with
some degree of joy and delight in God] which formally and principally imply,

First, A due observation and worthy estimation of the Amiable Perfections of
God, and of his Grace and Favors toward us; If we overlook these, and our
Eyes be in the ends of the Earth, when they should be intent upon the infinite
Majesty, and his Mercies toward us every Hour, and his Right in us, and over
us; we shall be either tempted to deny them, or at least to deny that Homage
which they call for: If we can overlook him that is all, in all, and the Spring
that moves all second Causes, and sets them on work to do us that good which
they do for us at any time; No wonder if we commit Sacrilege, and rob God of
his deserved Praises, yea, or if we undervalue them and mistake the Mercies
that are more worth than Heaven and Earth, to be but petty and inconsiderable,
we shall be as slight in our grateful Acknowledgment.

These two or three Things therefore are comprised in the due Reverence and
Estimation of God, and his Favors.

1st. A clear and solid Apprehension of our own great Unworthiness of any the
least of his Favors, and our infinite distance from his Person, not only by
Nature, but much more through Guilt and Sin: we must be pretty well acquainted
with our own Poverty and Baseness, and that we have nothing but from him; That
All is forfeited again and again; That the Miseries of this Life, and that
which is to come, are our Desert; That God can expect no Advantage from us,
when he bestows his Mercies, but the pleasure of doing good; Nor when we are
most cordial and diligent in his Service, but the pleasure of our receiving
Good, and seeing his Grace prosper in us: And that in all his Threats and
Punishments, he is still designing our Good, and mortifying our Corruption,
which will otherwise be sure to ruin and undo us, if it be not forsaken: And
this would teach us to prize, and thank God and our Redeemer, for every piece
of Bread that we eat; and the House that covers us, and the Clothes that warm
us, the Sun that shines on us, the Rod that corrects us, when we come to know
and consider how much we need them, and how little we deserve them.

2ly. It would help us to prize all the Mercies of God, if we did but consider
and understand the Misery of those that want them: We could not want the Bread
we eat, nor the Air we breath, nor the Limbs we use, nor the Senses that we
have, without Misery enough; But what Man could want the Grace of the Gospel,
the Merits and Intercession of Christ, that knows that he is everlastingly
undone without them?

3ly. It will help us to estimate them rightly, if we consider what they cost,
and the price that paid for them: Our sins, and the sins of our Parents (whose
Flesh and Blood we are) did cry out aloud for vengeance, in the utter
destruction of our Persons; And God, who is the just and righteous Governor of
the World, could not, without disparagement to his Wisdom and Justice, stop his
Ears to the Cry of our Sins, unless his Son had suffered for our Sins, and
satisfied the Demands of his Justice, and purchased all our forfeited Mercies
back again by his Blood: So that all the Temporal and Spiritual Mercies that
now we have were Redeemed not with Silver and Gold, but by the precious Blood
of our most endeared Savior. And this Consideration, if it be not customary,
but serious, will make every Mercy full weight, and enforce better
Apprehensions of them, and Thankfulness for them.

4ly and lastly, It will conduce very much to the worthy Estimation of all
God's Mercies, if we consider the End God has in All; to which he does design
every Mercy that he does bestow in this present Life: And that is our highest
Perfection, and everlasting Felicity, in a blessed Communion with God for ever:
Every Hour he gives us, Every Favor, whether Common, or Special, is valued
infinitely below its worth, if this Reference and Subordination be overlooked:
He can never thank God, as he ought, for his Health, or Food, or Friends, or
any Temporal Mercy or Affliction, but will rather be tempted to murmur and
repine sometimes, that considers not well, what it is intended for, and what it
may and should contribute to his endless Content and Rest: These Particulars
must concur, to make up a due Estimation of all God's Mercies.

Secondly, Gratitude and Praise, with the concomitant Affections of Joy and
Delight in God, do essentially imply,

1st. A Love that is suited to and bears some proportion with the Mercies we
receive, and God does bestow on us: Temporal and Transitory Mercies must be
loved with a lower and subordinate degree of our Love: Spiritual and Eternal
Mercies must be loved with a higher and more absolute degree of our Love: And
the highest Mercy of all (which is himself) with the most superlative and
transcendent Love.

2ly. And they do imply a greater Love to his Person: 1. That has purchased
them: 2. That does confer them: He that has no Complacency in the Things which
he does receive, and that according to the greater or lesser Tendency they have
to lead him to the highest Mercy, even the Fruition of God the Giver, will have
none (worth the naming) in the person that does bestow them; And he that wants
that, can never praise God as he ought, nor do any such Act with acceptance.

Thirdly, There must be some sensible Expressions of this Estimation of the
Mind, and Complacency of the Will in God and his Mercies; In the Affections and
Sensible Passions of Love, Joy, Admiration, Reverence, Humility, which help and
assist the Will, and cannot lie still, when the Soul is well elevated in
Praises and Thanksgiving: when the Soul is exercised with any seriousness and
vigor in these noble Operations of Praise, and Thanks and Complacency in God,
how can it choose but work upon the Blood and Spirits, and cause those
forementioned Passions in some sensible degree?

Fourthly, And as Thankfulness and Holy Praise, if they be right, will become
sensible, by the Affections to the very Body to which the Soul is linked, [more
or less, according as the Grace that causes them is more or less vigorous] so
they will become visible to others, by our more ready observance of his Will
and Pleasure, a greater Zeal for his Interest, and Glory in the World, and a
more cheerful obedience to him, whom we thus praise and admire: And as in the
Law of Moses there were three kinds of Sacrifice, Immolations, Libations, and
Victimes: Immolations were made of the Fruits of the Earth; Libations of
Liquors, as Oils and Wines; Victimes of living Creatures: So the Soul that is
truly Grateful, will not only offer up himself to God for a Victime; and his
Affections as it were for Liquors; but his Actions also for Fruits.

Thanks among Men signify nothing, that evaporate, and melt away into mere
Words and Air, and do not proceed to substantial Acts and Deeds: These are the
Complements and Perfection of every true Moral Act: And if they come not up to
Life and Practice, where there is opportunity, they are but mere Mockery and
Deceit.

Having somewhat explicated the Nature of These Affections which are to be
exercised, I proceed to the Considerations, which if seriously thought upon,
have Force enough to provoke and quicken to this Exercise.

First, These Affections will stir and get strength, if thine Eye be much upon
God, and all other Objects, as much as may be, be thrust out of thy Mind, I
mean his Attributes, as they are expressed in his Word: For, as they are
expressed in his Works, they will be some farther Assistance to this Work: His
unchangeable Eternal Being: His unsearchable Wisdom: His uncontrollable Power,
that can do any thing that implies not a Contradiction: His unexpressible
Goodness: His spotless Purity, that abhors all unrighteousness and injustice;
And the rest of his most Adorable Perfections well thought upon [according to
that Description which the Holy Ghost gives of them in the Scriptures] will
raise a Soul to such a^ pitch, that it shall find no ease or pleasure, but in
the High Praises of his Transcendent Majesty and Greatness: If the Heart be
thus exercised, the Tongue that is most dumb, will be loosed, and even forced to
cry out, Thou only, O Lord, art worthy to be Adored: For thine is the Kingdom,
the Power, and the Glory: A little Glimpse of this Majesty made David, though a
Potent King, to cry out, What is Man, that thou art mindful of him, or the Son
of Man, that thou visitest him? Psalm 8.4. This made Job, who had insisted so
much before upon his own Righteousness, and had stood so much upon his own
Defense and Justification, then to abhor himself, when Elihu had presented him
with some little Description of the Almighty and Independent Being. To gaze a
little upon the Majesty of a King, and that Power of theirs, whereby they can
do almost what they please within the Limits of their Dominions, makes some Men
almost to fall down and worship them; and give them the Honor that is due only
to God: And they think Solomon's Argument warrant enough to such Adoration;
Where the Word of a King is, there is Power; and who may say unto him, what
do thou? Eccles. 8.4. The Parts and excellent Abilities of some wise and
knowing Men, procures them a very great Interest in the Affections and Esteem
of others: How much more should it make us to wonder, and fall down, and be
even swallowed up with Admiration, did we but look up, and cast our Eye upon
the Beauty, Wisdom and Majesty of him that made all things, and gave the things
that are most glorious among Men, that Luster that makes them so much to dazzle
their weak Eyes.

Take therefore, O my Soul! some short Transcript of the All-Glorious God, out
of his own inspired Word; which upon that Account, thou may give the more
heed and credit to.

Job 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching, find out God? Can thou find out the
Almighty to Perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper
than Hell, what can thou understand? The Measure thereof is longer than the
Earth, and broader than the Sea. Which shows us how incomprehensible he is in
all his Perfections, and how far exalted beyond the Reach of our Childish
Apprehensions: Not to discourage and turn away our Thoughts from him, but to
humble them, and to qualify us with due Reverence in the search of what he
has discovered and is to be known of him: That so when we have stretched our
Understandings to the highest, we may have this to help home this
Consideration, He is far more amiable and perfect than I am able to understand.

Now the Perfections of God may be cast into Three Ranks.

For they are either of his 1. Intellect. 2. Will. 3. Executive Faculty.


First, His Intellectual Perfections the Scripture thus describes:

Isa. 40.28. and Psalm. 147.5. His understanding is infinite, and there is no
searching it out: In the Original it is (...) (i.) of his understanding there is
no Number; in Isa. it is (...) (i.) There Is no search: All the Art we have,
cannot give a perfect Account of it, or cast up the Tota^ S m. A Figurative
Expression: Therefore it^s no wonder that Solomon tells us, There Is neither
Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. Yea, the
very Foolishness of God is wiser than Men, (...): 1 Cor. 1.25. And therefore he
regards not any that are Wise in Heart, (that is) so far as to fear their
Machinations and Contrivances against him, or to accept their Persons, Job
37.24. For there is a bundle of Madness and Folly bound up in the wisest Heart:
And our clearest Light is blemished with much Darkness: But he is Light it
self, and in him there is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. Hence he is entitled
the Father of Lights, from whom all our Beams of saint and glimmering Light do
proceed, James 1.17. And therefore nothing is hid from his All-piercing Eye,
Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4. O Lord, thou have searched me, and know me; In Font:
It Is (...) pervestigatus, or perscrutatus es me: which signifies, exact and
diligent search, and knowledge consequently: Thou understandest my Thoughts
afar off: Thou art acquainted with all my ways: (...) (i.) Thou art familiar
to, or accustomed to all my ways: There Is not a Word in my Tongue, but thou, O
Lord, know it altogether: And Verse 12. The darkness hides not from thee,
but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to
thee. And Job 26.6. Hell is naked before him, and destruction has no covering:
And be sure that is a place of the thickest and most palpable darkness: and
therefore in Scripture it is called outward darkness, alluding to the Egyptian
darkness, which was so great: For among all the Children of Israel there was
Light; but without them, among the Egyptians, palpable darkness. And Job
34.22. There Is no darkness, nor shadow of death, wherein the Workers of
Iniquity can hide themselves from him. And Prove. 15.11. Hell and destruction
are before the Lord, how much more the Hearts of the Children of Men? Heb.
4.12, 13. He is there said, to discern the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart;
Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things
are (...), naked, and as it were dissected before him: As the Entrails of any
Creature, that is dissected by the Anatomist, and cut up, lie open to the Eye,
which before were hid.

Secondly, The Perfections of his Will are all summed up in the Attribute of
his Goodness; which contains, 1. His Bounty to all Creatures. 2. His Justice in
the Righteous Administration of all things. 3. His Veracity, or Fidelity. 4.
His Mercy and Compassion to all Rational Creatures. 5. His special Love to
Believers.


To which I might add his Clemency and Patience.

Thirdly, The Perfection of his Executive Faculty is Omnipotency or
Almightiness.

Fourthly, Those Attributes which result from all these in conjunction are His
1. Greatness. 2. Majesty. 3. Glory. 4. Lordship. 5. Immutability.


Fifthly, The Measure of all his Attributes is Infiniteness, (that is) They
have no Stint nor Measure: As the Measure of his Being is Immensity.

Sixthly, The Crown of all his Attributes is his Eternity. Of these in order.

1. His Bounty the Scripture thus expresses, Psalm 145.15. Thou openest thy
hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Matthew. 6.28, 29.
Consider the Lilies of the field, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet
I say anto you, that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these. And Psalm. 104.27, 28. These wait all upon thee, [speaking of the several
living Creatures] that thou may give them their meat in due season: Thou
openest thy hand, and they are filled with good.

2. His Justice in the Righteous Government of all things, the Holy Ghost thus
sets forth, Psalm 89.14. Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of thy Throne.
And Psalm. 9.8. He shall judge the World in Righteousness, and minister Judgment
to the World in uprightness. Jerem. 32.19. Thine Eyes are upon all the Ways of
the Sons of Men, to give to every one according to his Ways, and according to
the Fruit of his doings. Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? Rev. 15.3. Just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints.

3. His Veracity is thus described:

Numb. 23.19. He is not as a Man, that he should lie; Has he said it, and
spoken it, and shall it not be made good? Romans 3.4. God is true, and every man
a liar. Heb. 10.23. God is faithful, who has promised: (...), He is to be
credited or believed. Psalm 138.2. I will woriship toward thy Holy Temple, and
praise thy Name for thy Loving Kindness, and for thy Truth, for thou have
magnified thy Word above all thy Name. Psalm 86.15. But thou, O Lord, art
plenteous in Mercy and in Truth.

4. His Mercy and Compassion to all Rational Creatures is thus expressed: John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Ezekiel. 33.11. As
I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in him that dies, or in the death
of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way, and live: Turn ye, turn
ye, from your evil ways, For why will ye dye? 1 Timothy 2.4. There it is said, that
God would have all to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Besides,

1. All those Scriptures that express the Death of Christ for sinners, without
limitation, serve to this purpose, such as 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a
Ransom for all Men, etc.

2. All those Scriptures that contain a Commission to Preach the Gospel to all
the World, without Exception, magnify this Attribute to the full, and make it
shine forth gloriously; such as Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, etc.

3. Likewise all those Scriptures that promise Pardon and Salvation, upon the
Conditions of Repentance and Faith, not excluding any from these Terms, are a
lively demonstration of this lovely Attribute; such as 1 John 12. As many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe in his Name.

4. So likewise all those Scriptures that set forth the Patience of God toward
sinners in general, may be reduced hither, and serve under this Head.

5. Lastly, All those Scriptures that insist upon the Common Providence of God
toward wicked Men, and his veriest Enemies, in supplying all their
Necessities, and giving them such a large portion of these outward Comforts,
bear ample Testimony to this Attribute, and do very much exalt it: such as
Matthew. 5.45. where God is said to make the Sun to shine upon the Evil and upon
the Good, and to send Rain on the just and on the unjust.

5. His Special Love to Believers, the Holy Ghost thus describes:

Deuteronomy. 33.29. The Lord is the shield of their help, and the sword of their
excellency. Psalm. 94.14. God will not cast off his Saints, nor forsake his
Inheritance. And Psalm. 149.4. The Lord takes pleasure in his people, and will
beautify them with salvation. And Psalm. 1. last. The Lord knows (i.)
approves the way of the Righteous. Isa. 49.16. There they are said to be
graven on the Palms of his Hands, and their Walls are ever in his sight. And
Verse. 15. It Is said God cannot, and will not forget them. Moreover,

1. All those Scriptures that entitle them to Pardon, Reconciliation, Adoption,
and Glory, Comfort in all Conditions, and a blessed Issue out of all their
Troubles, be they more or less, and that entail a Blessing upon their Seed and
Posterity, are a sufficient proof of God's special Love to Believers, and set
it forth illustriously; such as Psalm 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart. Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. Eccles. 8.12, 13. Though
a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I
know, that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him,
etc. Psalm. 102.28. The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed
shall be established before thee. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Psalm. 125.1, 2. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which
cannot be removed, but abides for ever: As the mountains are round about
Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth, and for
ever. Romans 8.28. All things work together for their good. And Gal. 4.6. Because
they are sons, God will send forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts.

2. All those Scriptures that contain their special relations unto God, and
Privileges founded thereupon, do lively set forth God's special Love to them.

Sixthly, His Almightiness the Scripture thus expresses; besides the places
where he is expressly styled Almighty: Ephesians. 3.20. He is able to do abundantly
above what we can think or speak. Job 26.14. The thunder of his power who can
understand? Prove. 21.30. There is no wisdom, power, nor understanding against
him. Jerem. 27.5. He has made the Earth, and all that therein is, by his great
power. Isa. 40.22, 23. It is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and
the inhabitants thereof are as Grass-hoppers; that stretches out the heavens
as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in: That brings the
Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as vanity. Heb. 1.3. God
is there said to uphold all things by the word of his power.

All those Scriptures that assert the Creation of the World, or any part of it
by God; The Division of the Sea, or other Waters miraculously: The strange
Destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha: The Inundation of the Old World: The
Confusion of Languages: The doing things against the Course of Nature; such as
are Raising the Dead to Life, Restoring the Blind: Or above Nature, such as are
most of the Plagues that befell Egypt, amply describe his Infinite Power: And
Romans 1.20. His Eternal Power and Godhead are there said to be seen in the
Creation of the World.

Seventhly, The Measure of himself is Immensity: And of all his Attributes is
Infiniteness, (that is) They have neither Bounds nor Measure.

1. His Immensity is thus set forth by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, 1 Kings
8.27. But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold the Heaven and Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less this House that I have builded? So 2 Chronicles. 2.6. to the same purport. So Psalm 139.7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go
from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there; if I make my Bed in Hell, thou art there: If I take the
wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there
shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. So Amos 9.2, 3, 4.

2. The infinity of all his Attributes, Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of
great power, and his understanding is infinite; And if one Attribute be
infinite, needs must all the rest be so: and therefore Zophar may well propose
it as a Query incapable of solution; Job 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching
find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? It is as high as
Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper than Hell, what can thou understand? The
measure thereof is longer than the Earth and broader than the Sea: See Job
37.23.

Eighthly, His Attributes, that result from all these, are,

1. His Immutability, which the Holy Ghost describes, James 1.17. Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
Lights, in whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. And Malach. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not: therefore the sons of Jacob are not consumed:
Psalm. 102.27.

2. His Greatness, which the Scripture thus describes, Psalm. 145.36. The Lord
is great and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable; he is to
be feared above all Gods. And 1 Chronicles. 15.25. and Jerem. 10.6. There is none
like unto the Lord, great in might. Dan. 9.4. He is the great and dreadful God,
keeping covenant and mercy to them that love him. Psalm. 77.13. There is none so
great as our God. Psalm. 48.1. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in
the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness.

3. His Majesty is thus described: O Lord my God, thou art very great, thou art
clothed with majesty and honor, Psalm 104.1. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness,
and the power, and the glory, and the majesty, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. And Elihu tells
us, that with God is terrible majesty. Job 37.22. and Psalm 96.6. Honor and
majesty are before him, strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. And Psalm.
145.10, 11, 12, 13. All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, etc. They shall
speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power: To make known to the
sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom: Thy
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all
generations.

4. His Glory the Scripture thus expresses: Psalm 138.5. Great is the glory of
the Lord. And Psalm. 148.13. Let them praise the Name of the Lord, [that is the
forementioned Creatures] for his Name only is excellent, and his glory is about
the Earth and the Heaven. And Isa. 6.3. Holy, holys holy is the Lord of Hosts,
the whole Earth is full of his glory. Exodus 15.11. The Lord is there said to be
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.

5. His Lordship and Dominion over all is thus described, Isa. 33.22. The Lord
is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. Psalm. 97.5. Thou
art the Lord of the whole Earth. And Dan. 2.47. He is there said to be a God of
Gods, a Lord of Kings, a revealer of secrets. Psalm. 47.2. The Lord most high is
terrible, he is a great King over all the Earth. Psalm. 103.19. The Lord has
prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. Psalm. 145.13.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all
ages. And Romans 31.1. The Apostle tells us, there is no power, but of God. Prove.
8.15, 16. By him Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; By him Princes rule,
the Nobles and Judges of the Earth. Matthew. 6.13. Thine is the kingdom, the
power, and the glory.

Lastly, His Eternity, the Crown of all, is thus described: Exodus 15.18. The
Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne, O Lord, is for
ever and ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Psalm. 90.2.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth,
and the World, thou art God from everlasting, to everlasting: (i.) a part
ante, and a part post, without beginning, and without end. Psalm 93.2. Thy
throne is established of old, thou art from everlasting. Psalm. 102.27. Thou art
the same, [viz. in opposition to mutable Creatures] and thy years shall have no
end. Psalm. 104.31. The glory of the Lord shall endure forever, etc. Dan. 4.9.
His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. Psalm. 106.10. The Lord shall reign for
ever, even thy God, O Sion, throughout all generations. Dan. 8.18. His dominion
shall be for ever unto the end.

These glorious Attributes of God, especially as they stand in conjunction, and
shine upon one another, calmly considered, will mount and elevate an ingenuous
and understanding Heart, and wing it to this high and honorable employment.

Secondly, It will help on this blessed, heavenly Work and Temper of Joy and
Delight in God, honorable and thankful thoughts, and mention of him, to behold
his Attributes, as they are further displayed in his Works: Particularly his
Bounty, Wisdom, Power Toward the 1. Irrational Creatures. 2. Rational
Creatures.


1st. It will something advance the dullest heart, and dispose it to rejoice in
God, and lift it up in praise and thankfulness to him, to steep it a little in
the meditation of that incomparable wisdom that shines forth in the Being of
every irrational Creature, especially in the whole frame and orderly connection
of all such Creatures: Every Creature in its single existence, has treasure
enough to enrich the understanding of the wisest Man on earth, if it search
into the depth and bottom of it, and to imprint admiring, reverent, and
thankful Inclinations toward him in the Heart: There Is not a Pile of Grass
that shoots up, but directs the Eye Heavenward, [towards which it points up]
unless it be kept shut by ignorance and inconsideration. What excellent skill
and cunning is there in the curious Fabric and Composure of the basest and
most contemptible Creature, especially if we do not overlook the uses for which
it serves? Even a Toad has far more in it to be admired by the Intellect, than
it has to be abhorred by the Sense. The senseless and inanimate Creatures are
no idle Parts of the World, but have enough in them to reproach and shame an
idle Spectatour: There Is not one of them but wears the Livery of their most
wise and wonderful Creator; and carries the Badge and Cognizance of that
infinite Wisdom that did at first contrive and make them, and fitted them to
their proper and peculiar uses. Read over the History of Minerals, and do but
look into an Herbal, where a little of the Nature and Virtue of Vegetables is
described: search a little into the Writers of Zoography, where the Nature and
Properties of Animals are somewhat, though imperfectly represented, and under
each of these are infinite particulars, which magnify the Wisdom of their
Glorious Maker, and set it forth to the life to every intelligent Spectatour.
Since then the Brutish and Inanimate Creatures are not in a Capacity to do this
Homage to their Creator, by direct and proper Acknowledgment and express
Adoration and Thanksgiving, it is comely for us to pay that Debt, for whose use
and service they were made and intended, and to whose Intellect and Senses,
they are objected for the perfecting of them: It Is by our Tongues and Hearts,
that these Creatures must return him the Tribute of their Praises. Can we be
content to behold such rare pieces of Divine Skill and Artifice, and not turn
up a thankful Eye, nor erect an adoring Thought, nor send up a joyful
Hallelujah to him? Whether we look upon the World in the Gross, or in the
Retail; in the several parts of it, or as they are all joynted and set together
in a curious Frame; what stupendous wisdom, what rare and admirable skill do
they display, and call us to behold and consider? Had we but the Faculty to
search into those rich Mines, and dig out those Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, that are hid in them, [as every one may do in some degree, if he set
himself seriously to consider them] what an Acknowledgment would the most
contemptible Creature extort from us? 1. The Matter of which they do consist.
2. The curious Contexture of their Parts. 3. The Manner of their Production.
And then 4. The Means of their Continuance and Preservation. Then 5. Their
Operations both Actual and Potential. 6. And the Ends to which they are both
immediately and remotely subservient, are Heads, which a little considered,
will advance the Heart, and tune the Affections and Tongue, to the Praises of
him that lives for ever and ever, who has brought all these things to pass,
and even compel him to say, Psalm 104.14. How manifold are thy works, O Lord,
in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches. To look
down upon this round Ball of Earth, that hangs upon nothing, that has no other
Pillars to prop it up, than the immediate power of him that made it; And to
look up upon the vast Canopy of Heaven, spread over it; Or the abundance of
Waters, gathered together in a heap, and placed in the depth, as in a
storehouse, Psalm. 33.7. Or to cast an eye upon any one Creature, that dwells
in any of these Mansions, will draw forth a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving,
unless it be from one that is far gone in the Disease of Atheism and
Ungodliness: But to consider them all in one united Frame, their Order and
Connection, and the Beauty that results from that Order, and how they meet
together in one Common Center, and are linked together in one great and
ultimate End, which all of them conspire to promote [though their proximate and
nearest Ends are so various and almost innumerable] will raise a Soul, not
basely captivated to the Body, yet higher. If I should insist upon the
Contrariety that is among the several Creatures, and how one Contrary is
balanced by another: If I should stand upon the Harmony that arises from the
very discord of things, of a very different nature, this would not a little set
forth the wisdom of God.

2. It will very much quicken a Soul to the Praises of God, and to joy and
delight in him, to consider his Bounty, and Goodness, to all his Creatures,
even the worst and vilest of them, from whom they have their Being and Support,
together with their several Virtues and Perfections: To him the lifeless and
inanimate Creatures owe their Subsistence, together with their several Adjuncts
and Properties, whereby they are variously modified and distinguished; He has
imparted that Life to the order of Vegetables which they have, and whereby they
become serviceable to Man and Beast. It Is from the same Hand that those Higher
Perfections of Sense and Motion are bestowed upon the order of Sensitive
Creatures, which his Wisdom has distinguished into such various and almost
infinite kinds, every one whereof has a large share and portion of his Bounty;
The Lord does good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm.
145.9. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 33.5. How liberal
has he been to the Heavens, upon which he has bestowed all the Glory that Sun
and Moon, and those glistering Cressets that shine therein contribute: These he
has covered with Light, as with a Garment, and made of a more refined Matter,
than what is seen here below; and these he has honored to become his
Footstool. Yea, and how bountiful has he been to this inferior Part of the
Creation? What a fertile Womb has he bestowed upon the Earth, which brings
forth yearly such a plentiful Offspring and Increase? What Minerals and
Vegetables is she the Parent of? Some whereof she perpetually bears in her
Womb, and there feeds them: Others she continually carries in her Bosom, and
there suckles them: And what she does not bring forth, she brings up, (as the
several Animals, Rational and Irrational) which she perpetually provideth for:
And as he has dealt thus bountitifully with the Heavens and the Earth, so the
Ocean comes not much behind in the share he has bestowed upon it: And
therefore when the Psalmist had copiously insisted upon God's Bounty and
Munificence toward the Earth, and eased himself in a pathetical Exclamation,
(viz.) O Lord, how wonderful are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them all;
the earth is full of thy riches, Psalm. 104.24. He proceeds, so is this great
and wide sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and
great beasts: there go the ships also, verse. 26. As he has lodged innumerable
sorts of Fishes in the Ocean, so he has made it a famous Boundary, to divide
the several Kingdoms of the World; and a quick Passage for the Nations, that
inhabit the Earth, to Traffic and Commerce with each other: There be many
other ways in which God has expressed his Bounty and Munificence to this Watery
Element: It would take up a Volumn to descend to particulars, and to show you
the Bounty of God, to the Four Elements, (as they are called) of which all
other Creatures, that have their general Rendezvous either in the Earth, Water,
or Air, are compounded; whether they be Lifeless, Vegetative, Sensitive or
Rational, and to tell you the Glory that God has put upon them: And then to
proceed to the several Creatures in their order: This would be to write the
whole History of Nature: A little of this knowledge was that which the
Philosophers and Wisemen of the World so much gloried in: But yet though it
was so much beyond their reach, to bring in a complete Inventory of all those
costly Utensils, wherewith God has so richly furnished and adorned thi^ his
great Family of Heaven and Earth, and much more would it pr zzle them to show
you the ^ost that is expended, and laid out upon ^^ch of these, and to discover
their worth and (...) yet let but a vulgar eye go forth, and look about him,
and view the Fields, and therein the Trees, the Grass, the various Herbage, so
verdant to the eye, so fragrant to the smell, and every one so useful to the
Ends of Food and Physic, even such a one, if he have any Spiritual Life, or
Sense in him, shall not want Arguments for number or weight, able to convince
him, and to enforce a Confession of God's Bounty to these Creatures: But let
him behold the various Fruits and Flowers that every Orchard or Garden almost
will present him with, let him but consider the beautiful Rose and Tulip, or
rather to take the Scripture-Instance, let him look upon the fair Lilly, and he
must needs say, if he understand any thing, That Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these, Matthew. 6.29. or if he will believe the Word of
God. These Vegetables have such a natural Grace and Beauty, that all the Art
and Wit of Man cannot imitate, much less outdo. To say nothing of the dead and
inanimate Creatures, both above and under Ground, of which such Essences,
Spirits, and Magisteries, and other Extracts are prepared, by the Still, and
other ways, that Art and Industry has discovered: No nor to mention any of the
sensitive or more noble Creatures; No nor of those intermediate, bordering, and
amphibious Creatures, that come between these several kinds, that lay claim to
both, and belong to neither, such as are the Minerals that grow like the
Vegetables: And the Plantanimals, that partake partly of the Vegetative, and
partly of the Sensitive Nature, etc. Upon every one of which God has bestowed
various Virtues and Perfections: But I have touched only upon Generals, and
left the Particulars to be the Subject of your more distinct Meditations, as
you shall occasionally light on them.

3. The omnipotency and infinite power of God is no less conspicuous in these
several Creatures, than the other two Attributes of his Wisdom and Goodness, to
a seeing eye, and as fit to assist in the Praises of God, as the other: Power
is the thing that all Men adore, and aspire to, and would purchase at any rate:
Even those that can contemn Riches, and Sensual Pleasures, which most Men
follow after, and are led by like Beasts, yet are very ambitious of Power; As
being the best Instrument to compass any thing that the Will can desire: Well
then, here is Power to be seen in its highest glory, and its utmost perfection:
Alas! that Idol we so much adore in Men, is but a shadow and faint resemblance
of that infinite and unlimitted power, that God was eternally invested with,
that is guided by as immense a Wisdom, and as perfect a Goodness, and therefore
cannot possibly be mischievous and oppressive: Power in Man and other Creatures
is often times pernicious, both to themselves and others, for want of equal
Wisdom and Goodness to guide and balance it: And yet take all their Power
together, in the widest and wildest Notion, the greatest Lord and Emperor of
the World, has but a silly, weak, and contemptible power, in respect of that
which God is possessed of, and the Attribute of his Almightiness does import,
and which he has displayed in the eye sight of all intelligent Creatures: And
this may be seen without any great pains or labor, in the Make or Fabric of
every Creature, and the production of so many Beings, as the World abounds
with, out of mere nothing: Let Paracelsus and the Rose-Crucians boast, that
they can produce Man, or any other Creature, by their Chemical Skill and
Artifice; These are but Boasts, and if they can do any thing that way, which
will deserve some admiration; It will come as far short of God's Workmanship,
as Art is from Nature, or rather finite from infinite: They must have Matter to
work upon, and several Tools to work with: But the infinite Power has brought
to pass these mighty and wonderful Effects, that are every where so visible,
without the help of either Matter or Tool, or any the least Assistance: O what
a Power is that must make an invisible Vapor, that fumes out of the Earth, to
grow into the visible Bulk of Plant or Herb! and to aspire into a Tree,
spreading forth it self into so many Shoots and Branches! And that the same
Vapor should secretly convey it self, through every Bough and Leaf of this
Tree, for its continual Growth and Nourishment! That this subtle Spirit should
produce so many various Shapes, and such different Virtues in the several
Plants! and die them with such various and almost infinite Colors! That a
Vapor that seems so contemptible, should set forth the Lilly in white, and
cloth the Violet in such a purple dress! But what do I speak of these? What a
Power is that, that has hung such a vast Body, as the Earth, upon nothing, in
the midst of the Air! That has made it so immovable, though it has no Pillars
to support it, nor any Basis whereon to rest! That has shut up the vast Ocean
in the deep, as in a Storehouse, Psalm 33.7. And gathered the Waters of the Sea
together in a heap! That has stinted the proud Waves thereof, and bounded
their swelling rage and fury! Job 38.11. What a Power is it that ballanceth the
Clouds, and uses them as a Swadling-band, to wrap up and hold in the Waters
over our Heads, that they are not rent under such a mighty Load! Job 38.9. It
would amaze and even confound the understanding of Man, seriously to think, how
such a vast Body as the Sun, that is 166 times bigger than the Earth, should go
over the whole Circle of the Heavens, in the space of 24 Hours: The Sun is said
to move every Hour 1038442 of Miles.
that is one Million of Miles every Hour: which being so incredible to Man's
understanding, late Philosophers have found out a new way, and would have the
Earth move about, and the Heavens to stand still, which if it be supposed, yet
must be the effect of an infinite Power: It Is the description that is usually
given of a wise Man, That he is one that wonders at nothing, because they
suppose Ignorance to be the Cause of wonder: And therefore the more we know and
understand any thing, the less we wonder at it: But yet for all this, I may
take the boldness to say, That he is a wise Man indeed, that wonders not at
every thing: Especially if he be one that has Wit enough to see the
impregnable Difficulties, that stand in the way, and hinder a distinct and
perfect understanding of any the least of God's Works.

And this is another Confideration, that will do good service, in provoking us
to the Praises of the Lord, if it be weighed with an undisturbed silence and
attention.

2. As it will advance a Heart in Praises and Thanksgiving to God, and help on
this noblest part of God's Worship; to behold these Three great Attributes of
his Wisdom, Goodness and Power, as they shine forth in the Works of Creation
and Providence, about the unreasonable Creatures; So 2. It will elevate a Soul
yet higher, and make it more fit for the work of Thankfulness and Praise, to
ponder these Attributes as they are made glorious in and about the reasonable
and intelligent Creatures: And here I shall pass over the Angels, the most
noble Creatures, which God has made: And because this is an Argument most
likely to move us with the greatest force; Let us more particularly insist upon
his Goodness toward us:

1. In giving us a Nobler Being than he has done to any other visible
Creature: He has stamped his Image upon Man more lively, than he has done
upon any Creature, if you look on him barely in his Natural Capacity, as
consisting of a Body and Soul, The one Corruptible, The other Incorruptible:
The first he has in Common with other Creatures, but the other is a peculiar
Glory, that God has put upon no other Creature here below besides himself: And
yet in his very Body he far surpasses all his Fellow Creatures: If you
consider well the Comeliness and Propo^ition of Parts, the well mixing of the
Humors, that give the Color, and the pure lively Spirit that gives Air and
Motion to the several Parts, his erect stature, and the symmetry of the whole;
To say nothing of Speech that is peculiar to Man alone, all other Creatures must
submit and bow before him: But as to his Moral Capacity, There Is no other
Creature here below, that has any Lineament of his Maker's Image, but Man
only: He alone was intended to represent his Maker in Righteousness and true
Holiness; and had a Capacity first to be honored in his Service, and to be
made happy in his Eternal Enjoyment: The rest of the Creatures, as they have
their Face downward, so they have no disposition to look so high as to their
Maker, nor any tendency of love or desire toward him: For God having made them
incapable of any such Acts or Habits, expects no such Service at their Hands:
But God made Man for his own immediate Service, and therefore gave him a Nature
suited to that employment: He did not only bestow on him the Faculties of
Understanding and Will, but endued them with the knowledge and love of God,
that by the exercise of these Acts, he might find out the Rest and Happiness
that he does so indefatigably seek after.

2. He gave him Seigniory and Dominion over this lower World, Psalm 8. As all
things were made for his use and service, so they were given into his hand to
dispose of; And they had no power to cross his Command, or disobey, till he had
rebelled against his Maker. They were all ready at his service, to go and come
at his beck, and to execute his pleasure to their utmost strength and capacity:
Genesis 1.28. And God blessed them, (that is Adam and Eve) and said to them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have
dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every
living thing that moves upon the Earth. See also Genesis 2.19, 20. And Man wanted
not the Faculty to discern the Nature and Virtue of every Creature, and for
what uses they might serve: Yea, the Inferior Heavens were made to accommodate
him, and every way God dealt with him as a Bountiful Lord, and most Liberal
Benefactour: The Sun was made to enlighten him, and the Heavens to cheer him,
and make the Earth fruitful with their Influences, which was to bring him forth
its various Productions, for his several uses and occasions: And who, that has
the Heart of a Man, and not of a Beast, can think of such Munificence and
Bounty, which God has exercised toward him, and not abhor ingratitude? And
even feel himself delighted in the Praises of his so great Benefactour?

3. When he had undone himself, and had involved his Soul and Body in Misery
unspeakable, the Lord did not utterly forsake him, (as he deserved, but he set
his Wisdom a work, to contrive a way, how to salve the honor of his Justice,
and yet save the miserable Rebels from destruction; When we were all fallen
short of the Glory of God, he found out a Method to recover us into Happiness
again: And when no Creature in Heaven or Earth, could do such a Favor for us,
the Son of God became Man and dyed for us, that he might satisfy offended
Justice, and vindicate the honor both of the Law, and Lawgiver, and procure
Terms of Peace and Favor for us: O what a Remarkable Sentence is that, which
should be engraven upon the Heart of every sinner: When we were without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5.6. This is a faithful
saying indeed, and worthy of all acceptance, (1. highest and most thankful
entertainment) that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy
4.9, 10. We had been now bound hand and foot, and shut up in outward darkness,
and had been Fuel to the Wrath of God, and the Flames of Hell, which are
kindled thereby, and had been tormenting our Souls with the bitter remembrance
of our sin, who are, or may be comforted with the blessed Tidings of the
Gospel. What a comfortable Thought should it be to us, when we lie down, and
when we rise up, to remember, that Christ is risen from the dead, and become
the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. To understand which Text of
Scripture, it is necessary that we be informed, that sin having brought a Curse
upon Man, and upon the Earth, for his sake, and all the Fruit it brought forth,
the Sacrifice of the First Fruits among the Jews, (to which the Apostle here
alludes) was appointed by God as a Means whereby the whole Harvest might be
sanctified and secured, and the Curse removed; Which First Fruits were a Type
of Christ, by whose death, the sting of death is taken out, and by whose
Resurrection ours is secured, even the Resurrection to Life, to all his true
and faithful Members: And as the First Fruits were (as it were) the Pledge and
Earnest of the Harvest, that was to follow after, so the Resurrection of Christ
is the Gage and Assurance of ours.

4. Having not spared his Son, but given him a ransom for us, he has with him
given us all other things, we receive Mercies without number from him every
day: And that 1. Privative, in guarding us from the many Mischiefs that the
desert of our sin, and the desire and endeavor of our Enemies would bring upon
us: And 2. Positive, in bestowing on us the good things which we deserve not,
and which the malice of our Enemies would keep from us: How many dangers have
we oft-times escaped, which we have both known and feared, but they are far
more that we have escaped, which we have neither known nor feared? We see not
the Enemies that lurk continually about our Paths and Beds, and that are always
plotting and endeavoring to devour us, which the secret Power of one that is
stronger than they has hitherto prevented: How often has Satan thirsted for our
Blood, and desired to sift us as Wheat, But Christ has interceded for us, and
infatuated all his Counsels that they have not prospered hitherto: When he has
dug low, to hide his Counsel from the Lord, and laid his design deep, and
covered it with the greatest cunning and secrecy, when he has thought
certainly now he should prevail, and swallow us up, he has missed his purpose,
and gone away disappointed, and God has showed us a way how to escape. Every
Beam of Light that shines on us, every Breath we fetch, every Minutes Health
we do enjoy, every Bit we eat and are refreshed with, the House that covers
us, the Air that we suck in, the Bed we lie on, the Friends that comfort us,
every Sweetness that we taste, either in the Acts of Sense or Understanding,
together with the continuance of all our Faculties; In a word, every Comfort
that befriendeth us, is a distinct Mercy of God, vouchsafed to us in Jesus
Christ. What shall I say? How numberless are these which I have but generally
touched? If I should insist upon the several Circumstances and Degrees of them,
with the frequent Repetition of every one of them: But these are not the one
half of what our Redeemer does bestow: The Mercies that concern our Souls are
far more numberless: So that though I have seemed to name but three or four
Instances of the Bounty of God toward us, yet these are all so comprehensive,
(especially those of Creation, Redemption, and Providence) that they contain
more under them, than can be reckoned up in the Individuals, by any humane Art
or Skill: There are some few of those infinite ways, whereby God's goodness is
demonstrated to us. I might further show, how much the goodness of God is
manifest toward us in all our Sufferings, Streights, Necessities, Afflictions,
Sickness, Death, which breed the only quarrel between us and the goodness of
the Lord, and will not let us speak out and acknowledge it freely, as we ought:
It Is easy to vindicate the goodness of the Lord even in these, to such as will
but bring an impartial ear.

Neither does his Wisdom and Power toward us, come much behind his goodness:
Does it not require infinite Wisdom and Power, to govern such a perverse piece
as sin has made Man to be? And to make him serviceable, either willingly, or
without his Will, to the glorious Ends of Order and Government in the World?
And that both in his Commerce 1. with God, 2. with Men, 3. with other
Creatures; either bridling or conquering his Corruptions, (without any
impeachment of his liberty) that they do not confound and destroy all Piety,
Justice, and Sobriety out of the World: It must be no less than the Power of
God, that must bring down the Proud, that would otherwise trample all under
feet; That must govern the Savage Nations, and tame and restrain the barbarous
and bloody minds, and make the wretched devices of the Enemies of his Church to
be of none effect: It must be a mighty Power indeed, that must turn a furious,
persecuting Saul, into an humble, penitent, and faithful Saul: What a wisdom is
seen, in making Man so great, and yet so little? in designing him for so high
an end, and yet training him up for it by such low and despicable means? But I
will run out no further on this Argument, lest I find no end.

FINIS.

