AN EXACT HISTORY of the several Changes of GOVERNMENT IN England, From the
horrid Murder of King CHARLES I. to the happy Restoration of King CHARLES II.
WITH The Renowned Actions OF General MONCK. Being the second Part of Florus
Anglicus, by J.D. Gent.

London, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

ENGLAND'S CONFUSION During its Interregnum.

A General View of the various Governments in England since the Murder of
Charles the first,
1. England Governed by Oligarchy, from 1648. to 1653. 2. Under Oliver
Protector, the grand Tyrant, from 1653. to 1658. 3. Under Richard not above
seven Months. 4. Under Fleetwood, Lambert, Vane, Haselrig, and the Rump of the
Long Parliament. Lastly, The Actions of Renowned General Monck, the chiefest
Instrument under God of restoring his Sacred Majesty Charles the second to his
Crown and Kingdoms.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Do here present thee with a true, though unparalled History of all the
several Revolutions of Government in England, for the space of twelve years,
since the Martyrdom of our Gracious Sovereigne Charles the First of ever
blessed memory, execrably murdered to make way for the Usurpation of ambitious
Cromwell; who after some time took the Office of Supreme Magistrate upon
himself, and kept it during his Life by Tyranny and Oppression; when summoned
by Death, he bequeathed it to his Eldest Son Richard, who either by cowardice
or folly, permitted himself to be supplanted by his near Relations. When in
stead of one Usurper, England groaned under an Athenian tyranny, and from that
to worse, till at last such a horrid, dismal blackness had overcast the whole
Kingdom (the Sword being drawn at one blow to cut off Magistracy and Ministry)
that it had been utterly destroyed, had not Almighty God raised up that great,
and ever to be Renowned to all posterity General Monck, the chief Instrument
appointed by the Great God for the redemption of poor England from bloody and
violent men, by restoring a Free-Parliament (the undoubted birthright of every
English man) and has likewise, as in duty bound (by Gods blessing) settled us
under the Lawful and happy Government of our dread Sovereign Lord King Charles
the second, whom God has so miraculously preserved from the jaws of his
blood-thirsty enemies, and reserved him to this present time, that England
might once again enjoy her primitive beauty and luster; and have her Kings as
at the first, and her Counselors as at the beginning.

Since then we are through all these miseries, revolutions and changes, by
Divine Providence restored to a settlement: Let it be the care of every English
man, as it is my hearty wish, that we fall no more into those snares, which
formerly entrapped us, but unanimously resolve our selves into a constant Duty
and Allegiance to our Sovereigne Lord the King: For thus and thus only can we
flourish.

J. D.

Courteous Reader, These Books following, are printed for Simon Miller, and
Sold by him at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Small Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be
reprinted with large Additions. The civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of
Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our late
unhappy differences are paralleled in many particulars. A general History of
Scotland, from the year 767 to the death of K James, etc. By David Hume of
Godscroft. The History of this Iron Age. Mr Paul Baine on the Ephesians
Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature, by John Wecker D. in Phys. The
Queen of Arragon, a Play: In fol.
In Quarto large.
Jo. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command.
Quarto Small.
An Eperimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz. Abraham's Faith, or the
good Old Religion, etc. By John Nicholson Minister of the Gospel. The Anatomy
of Mortality: By George Stroad. Three Treatises: 1 The Conversion of Nineveh,
touching Prayer and Fasting. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance. 3.
Sovereigne preservatives against distrustful thoughts and cares: By Will.
Attersoll Minister of Gods Word at Iefield in Sussex. Aynsworth on the Cantic.
Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial. Gralle against Appolinius. A Treatise of Civil
policy, etc. By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in
Scotland. Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates. Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.
Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided. Wells his
Souls Progress. Christ tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition
on the fourth Chapter of St Matthews Gospel: By John Gumbleden Min. of the Gos.
The Saints Society. D. Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his Body of
Divinity. The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren concerning the Presbyterian
Government, together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines. Camdens
Remains. The Harmonious Consent and Confession of Faith, etc. The Argument and
Confession of Faith, of all the congregational Churches of England agreed upon
at the Savoy, 1659. The Description of the Universal Quadrant, etc. By Tho
Stirrup Mathem. The whole Art of drawing painting, limning and etching:
collected out of the choicest Italian and Germane Authors, by Alex Brown
Practitioner.
Large Octavo.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises: By Edw. Leigh Esquire;. Florus Angliens, with
the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens, since the conquest, cut in
brass. The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming
contradictions are fully and plainly Reconciled. Evidences for Heaven,
containing Infallible signs, and real demonstrations for Assurance of
Salvation, published by Edm. Calamy. The Life and Reign of King Charles, from
his Birth to his Death, by Lambert Wood. The Night-search, the second part: by
H. Mill. A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and
Ceremonies. Useful Instructions for these Evil times; held forth in 22.
Sermons, by Nich. Lockyer, Provost of Eaton College The Nullity of
Church Censures, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution, but a mere
humane Invention: Written by the famous Tho. Erastus, and never before
Englished.
Small Octavo.
Ed. Waterhouse Esquire; His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the
Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admirable Nature and Virtues of
Tobacco: By Dr. Everard and Others. A view and Defense of the Reformation of
the Church of England, very useful in these times. Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his
Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the
Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy among us. Herberts Devotions, or a
Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and prayers useful upon all
occasions. Extranem Vapulam, or the Observator releved from the violent but
vain assault of Haman Lestrange Esquire;, and the back-blows of D. Bernard an Irish
Dean: by P. Hoylin D.D. Ovid de Pento, in English. The Loves of Clirio and
Lozia a Romance. Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue. A Book of
Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of times, and
very useful for all Astrologers. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of
England, from the Reign of William the Conqueror to the death of the Late
King. Linguae, or the Combat of the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a
serious Comedy. The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may
certainly know whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not. The
poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion. Physical Rarities, containing the most
choice Receipts in Physic and Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases
Incident to man's body: By R W lliams. To which is added the physical
Mathematics: By Hermes Tris-Megistus. The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of
Wat Tiler's Rebellion. The Christian Moderator, in 3 parts. The Golden Fleece,
or a Discourse of the clothing of England. Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations.
Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes. Grotij Poemata. Three Books of M. Matthews
Minister at Swansey in South Wales. 1 The Messiah Magnified by the mouths of
Babes in America; or Gains and Gamaliel, a helpful Father, and his hopeful
Son. discoursing of the three most considerable points. 1. The great want of
Christ. 2 The great worth that is in Christ. 3. The good way that is chalkt out
by Christ 2. The New Congregationall Church, proved to be the old Christian
Church, by Scripture, Reason, and History. 3 The Reading Churchmember
Regularly called back to Christ and his Church.
A physical Dictionary. An exact History of the several changes of Government
in England, from the horrid Murder of King Charles the first, to the happy
Restoration of King Charles the second, with the Renowned Actions of General
Monck, by J. D.
Duodecim.
Dr. Smith's practice of physic. The Grammar War. Posselius Apothegmes.
Fasciculus Florum. Crashaw's Visions. The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies.
The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three arch-enemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil. Seasonable advice to the Apprentices of
the Honorable City of London, touching their duty to God, and their Masters.
Heinsius de Crepundiis. The History of Russia, or the Government of the
Emperor of Muscovia, with the manner and fashions of the people of that
Country. Drexeliu's school of Patience. Drexelius his right Intention of every
ones action A School or Nurture for Children, or the Duty of Children to
Parents, very useful for all that intend to bring up their children in the
fear of God.
Viginti Quarto.
The New Testament. The third part of the Bible. Sir Richard Bakers Meditations
and Prayers for every day of the Week.
Plays.
The Ball. Chawbut. Conspiracy. Obstinate Lady. The London Chanticlers: a
Comedy foll of various and delightful Mirth, neyer before published.
FLORVS ANGLICVS, The Second Part. CONTAINING Englands Oligarchicall Government
from the Death of CHARLES the I. to the Protectorship of OLIVER.
PART I.
NO sooner had the fatal Axe severed England and her Liberties, by severing
King Charles his head from his body, but the Parliament, the better to maintain
what they had now so far prosecuted, make Proclamation, That none under
penalty of being deemed guilty of high Treason, should presume to proclaim,
declare, publish, or any way promote the Prince of Wales Son to the late
King, or any other Person to be King or Chief Magistrate of England, or of any
the Dominions belonging to them; by color of Inheritance, Succession or
Election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the free consent of the people
in Parliament, etc. This Proclamation though it came not forth in full till the
second of February, yet was in part proclaimed on the very day of the Kings
beheading.

They likewise the more to ensure their Government, and to carry it on with the
more plausibility, publish an Act of State for the alteration of Writs in
England, Ireland and Wales, as that in stead of King, the Name, Style and Test,
and Custodis Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti be used, and none
other, and all Writs, etc. should run so, of which all concerned in the Law
were required to take notice. Yet they provide, that all Patents granted by the
late King should still stand in full force and virtue.

The Houses likewise take upon them a more then Papal power, and because he
Priest could indeed absolve them, they are resolved to absolve themselves and
all those engaged with them, by an Act repealing the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy.

Sr Lewis Dives, Sr Robert Stuart of Irel and the Lord Loughborough, Colonel
Poyer, Colonel Laughorne and Duke Hamilton, having escaped out of several
Prisons, of which the last out of Windsor Castle, a strict search was made for
them, but in vain, except Duke Hamilton, who was the next morning retaken in an
Inn in Southwark.

The Lords House perceiving that by reason of his Majesty's death, the Judges
gave not that assistance to them which was usual, by reason his death had
extinguished their power as Judges, desired that eighteen of the Commons might
be sent to confer with nine of the Lords, but it would not be assented to.

The House of Commons having executed their King, the Nobles are an eyesore to
them, they therefore resolve to take away as many of them as they can bring
within their reach; they resolve to begin with those they have already in hold;
and the Commission of the High-Court of Justice for his Majesty's Trial being
expired, they create a new one consisting of sixty three persons, of which any
fifteen had power to act; for the trial of Duke Hamilton as Earl of Cambridg,
Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell (who attempted an escape but was
retaken at Lambeth;) and Sir John Owen; and in order thereto they likewise vote
the adjournment of Hillary Term, which (because the Judges had not power) they
do by their Proclamation of the second of February.

And now they take into consideration the reception of their numerous fellow
members which by the arbitrary force of the Army had been excluded, and at last
they vote, That none should be admitted into the House who had voted that his
late Majesty's Concessions were a ground for Peace, and for the firm settlement
of these Nations.

The Parliament having cut off one of those three Estates by which the Nation
had so long been governed, think likewise of abolishing the second, that they
alone might have the whole power; therefore upon considerations of the House of
Lords, in what capacity they should stand; they vote, 1. That they would make
no farther addresses to them. 2. That they would receive none from them. 3.
That an Act be drawn to abolish that House as dangerous and useless. Thus is
the whole basis of that Government, which had continued in England so many
hundred years, overthrown in ten days, and the two ancient grand Estates of
the Land cut off.

Having abolished one Government, they proceed to consider of the establishment
of another, but agree only in a negative Vote, That there should for the future
be no Government in England either by King or House of Lords. They break the
old Great Seal, and cause a new one to be made, which is delivered to the
keeping of three Commissioners, viz. Mr Keeble, Mr Whitlock and Mr Lisle. They
likewise consider of Oaths to be administered to the Judges, who thereupon meet,
and upon debate six of them are content to continue in their employments,
provided the fundamental Laws of the Land be not altered, which were, viz.
Chief Justice Rolls, and Justice Jerman of the Kings Bench, Lord Chief Justice
St John, Justice Phesant of the Common Pleas, Lord Chief Baron Wild, and Baron
Yates: and in order to these Judges satisfaction in their forementioned
scruple, the Parliament by their Declaration of the ninth of February do
declare, That they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and will uphold,
preserve and keep the fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the
preservation of the lives, properties and liberties of the people, with all
things incident there unto; with the alterations touching King and House of
Lords already resolved in this present Parliament for the good of the people,
and whatsoever shall be further necessary to the perfecting thereof, and by it
requiring all Judges, Justices, etc. to execute and administer in their
respective Offices and Trusts, etc.

The House order a Committee to consider of such Persons as they should think
fit to be Justices of the Peace throughout the Nation: they likewise order
another Committee, to consider of Persons whom they might judge fit to
constitute a Council of State, whose number should be forty, whereof only five
Lords, or not above. And whereas before they had only repealed, they now wholly
make void the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Thus though the Parliament are endeavoring all means to make themselves as
secure and firm in the Government as they can, yet are the people generally
discontented; those who formerly affected them (now sensible of the
inconveniences like to ensue the cutting off of their Prince) as much
disaffect them, so that there is generally plotting in all Countries, which
makes the Parliament send forces into several Counties to keep them in awe,
whilst the Royalists in Pomfret Castle still hold out, hoping some relief may
arise from those so universal discontents.

But let us from England pass a little into Scotland, and we shall find that
the Kings death is much more resented there: at the first news of his
Condemnation, they proclaim a solemn Fast, with Prayers to God for his
deliverance; but upon the news of his Execution, such was their sorrow, that
the whole City of Edenborough seemd a flood of tears. The Parliament upon this
exigence are convened, and putting it to the vote, it passed (nemine
contradicente) that his Eldest Son should be proclaimed King, and accordingly
a Proclamation was drawn, which because of some niceties in it, not usual in
things of this nature, I think fit to insert as follows; viz.

The Estates of Parliament presently convened in this second Session of the
second trienniall Parliament, by virtue of an Act of the Committee of Estates,
who had power and authority from the last Parliament for convening the
Parliament, considering that forasmuch as the Kings Majesty who lately reigned,
is contrary to the dissent and protestation of this Kingdom, removed by a
violent death; and that by the Lords blessing there is left unto us a righteous
Heir and lawful Successor Charles Prince of Scotland and Wales, now King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland; We the Estates of the Parliament of the
Kingdom of Scotland, do therefore most unanimously and cheerfully, in
recognition and acknowledgment of his just right, Title and succession to the
Crown of these Kingdoms, hereby proclaim and declare to all the world, that the
said Lord and Prince Charles, is by the providence of God, and by the lawful
and right of undoubted succession and descent, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, whom all the subjects of this Kingdom are bound humbly and
faithfully to obey, maintain and defend according to the National Covenant,
and the solemn League and Covenant betwixt the Kingdom, with their lives and
goods, against all deadly enemies as their only righteous Sovereign Lord and
King. And because his Majesty is bound by the Law of God and fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom, to rule in righteousness and equity, to the honor of God the
good of Religion, and the wealth of his people; it is hereby declared, That
before he be admitted to the exercise of his Royal power, he shall give
satisfaction to this Kingdom in those things that concern the security of
Religion, the unity betwixt the Kingdoms, and the good and peace of this
Kingdom, according to the National Covenont and the solemn League and
Covenant; for which end we are resolved with all possible expedition to make
our humble and earnest addresses to his Majesty: For the testification of all
which, we the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, publish this our
acknowledgment of his just right, Title and succession to the Crown of these
Kingdoms, at the Market-Cross in Edenborough, with all usual solemnities in
like cases, and ordain his Royal Name, Portract and Seal to be used in the
public writings and Judicatories of this Kingdom, and in the Mint-house, as
was usually done to his Royal Predecessors; and command this Act to be
proclaimed at all the Market-Crosses of the Royal Burghs within this Kingdom,
and to be printed, that none may pretend ignorance.

God save King Charles the second.

This was done by the Parliament, the Lords in all their Robes; the Cross was
richly hanged, the Chancellor brought up the Proclamation, read it to the King
at Arms who proclaimed it; there being an universal joy in the City; and their
great Guns from the Castle sending peals of the same into the adjacent
Countries. The solemnity being past, care was taken for the sending Messengers
to acquaint his Majesty with the business; Sr Edward Douglas was chosen to go
and acquaint him with it, to desire him to take heed of evil Counselors, etc.
that there should very speedily a more full address be made to him. In the mean
time a Fast is proclaimed, and supplications made, that God would prosper their
addresses to him for the good both of the Kirk and State. The Lords and the
whole Parliament in the mean time put on mourning for the death of his Father.

But to return to England again: The beheaded old King Charles was February 12.
thirteen days after his death buried at Windsor (in the same Vault where Henry
the eighth was interred (without any manner of solemnity, the Bishop of London
Dr Juxon and some few others attending him to his Funeral.

The Parliament not thinking that they are not yet secure enough, whilst they
have only power over men's bodies, endeavor the like over their souls. They
therefore Enact, that every Citizen of London, at the time of their admission
to their Freedom, should take the ensuing Oath, viz. You shall swear, That you
shall be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, and in order there
unto, you shall be obedient to the just Government of the City of London: You
shall to your best power maintain the peace, and all the due Franchises
thereof, and to your knowledge and ability do and perform all Acts and things
belonging to a Freeman of the said City. They likewise Enact, that the said
Oath, Mutatis mutandis, be taken by every Freeman in every City, Borrough, and
Town Corporate, in England and Wales, at the time of their admission to
Freedom, as aforesaid.

The Extraordinary Ambassadors for the States of Holland, (having had audience
and promise of Redress for the injuries done to their Ships, provided the
wrong-doers could be found out) being on departure, many thanks and civilities
having past between them and the House; they Order two Members to give them a
solemn farewell, who accompanied them to Gravesend.

The Army again Petition the Parliament, in prosecution of some desires
formerly presented to them, viz. 1. To make and establish such wholesome Laws
(in the native Language) as may preserve the Interest and Liberties of this
Commonwealth. 2. That Tithes may be abolished. 3. That no punishment be
inflicted upon any man for the Exercise of his Conscience. 4. That all that had
to deal in the public Treasury be called to account; and that free Quarter be
taken off. 5. That all Persons whatsoever may have a free and equal
Administration of the Law. 6. That Persons imprisoned for Debt, having nothing
to pay, may be released; and that such as are able and shelter themselves in
prison, be forced to pay. 7. That all Persons in prison for pretended words,
etc. be brought to trial, and if found innocent, have satisfaction for false
imprisonment. 8. That Provision might be made for the Poor of the Nation. 9.
That constant Pay may be provided to prevent free Quarter. 10. That the Arrears
of the Army might be paid out of the Kings, Deans, and Chapters Lands. 11. That
their want of Horses might be supplied. 12. That care might be taken for
prevention of clipped Money. 13. That the Articles of War might be mitigated.
14. That the Soldiers might not be put to the execution of civil Orders, as
seizing on unlicensed Books, distraining of Moneys, or the like, so that the
people may not complain of their intrenchment on their Liberties.

These were February 19. 1649. drawn up by the Army, as their humble Petition
and Address to the Parliament; but we need not think it strange that every
common Soldier should have liberty to propose what was necessary to be done in
the Government, since they had perfectly the whole power in their hands, and
had first by the fetches of some of their Commanders, excluded and extirpated
all other power, to give life and being to this shadow of a Government, this
little finger of a Parliament, and yet ten times heavier to the Nation, then
the whole loins of its legal Magistracy. But to return to our purpose, the
Parliament (for so in their own language we must call them) order the Trial of
Duke Hamilton, (who though he was no Englishman, yet was arraigned under the
Name of Earl of Cambridge, thereby to subject him to the English Law) together
with the Earl of Holland, Lord Capell, Lord Goring, and Sr John Owen, the two
first of which were afterward beheaded in Pallace-yard, and the two last
meeting with more favor from them, were suffered to depart beyond Seas.

A Council of State being settled by the Parliament, they met at Derby House,
where some Propositions of the Parliaments in order to their unanimous
Proceedings, were tendered to them, viz. the approbation of the Proceedings with
the late King, the House of Lords, the present Alteration and some other. These
were by them received, with some dislike to some of the particulars, and their
dislike being mentioned in the House, was referred to a Committee.

The Prince Elector Palatine makes his Addresses to the Parliament, with
returns of thanks for their former favors, and desires that 5600lb due of his
last years Pension might be paid; that the Pension of 8000lb per annum might be
continued; and that he might have the Pass of the House for himself, Family,
and forty Horse to go home. The first and last desires were granted, and the
Sum due Ordered to be paid him; but the Continuation of his Pension put off
to further consideration.

The Parliament and Council of State agree upon an Attestation, to be taken by
every individual Member of the Council of State, which ran as follows, viz.
I A. B. being of the Council of State, do Testify that I do adhere unto this
present Parliament, in the maintenance and defense of the public Liberty and
Freedom of this Nation, as it is now Declared, and to the Government for
future in way of a Republic without King, or House of Peers: And I do promise
in the sight of God, that through his grace I will be faithful in the
performance of the trust committed to me as aforesaid, and therein faithfully
pursue the Instructions given to this Council by this present Parliament, and
not reveal or disclose any thing in whole or in part, directly or indirectly,
that shall be debated or resolved on in Counsel, without command or direction
in Parliament, or the Order and allowance of the major part of them, that shall
be present at such debates or resolutions. In confirmation of the Premises I
have hereunto set my hand. To which Attestation, the Clerk of the Parliament is
Ordered to see that every individual Member of the Council of State do
Subscribe. And now comes out the Protestation of the Parliament of Scotland,
against the Proceedings touching his Majesty's Life and Person, which because
it was of so eminent concernment, I shall here insert the most material
Circumstances, viz. That by their Letter of the sixth instant (viz. January)
they represented unto you what endeavors have been used, for taking away of
his Majesty's life, for Change of the fundamental Government of this Kingdom,
and introducing a sinful and ungodly Toleration in matters of Religion; and
therein they did express their sad thoughts and great fears, of the dangerous
consequences that might follow thereupon; and further they did earnestly press,
that there might be no proceeding against his Majesty's Person, which would
certainly continue the great distractions of the Kingdoms, and involve them in
many evils, troubles, and confusions; but that by the free Councels of both
Houses of the Parliament of England, and with the advice and consent of the
Parliament of Scotland, such course might be taken in relation to him, as may
be for the good and happiness of these Kingdoms, both having an unquestionable
interest in his Person, as King of both, which duly considered, we had reason
to hope should have given a stop to all Proceedings against his Majesty's
Person. But they understood that after many of the Members of the House of
Commons have been imprisoned and secluded. and also without and against the
Consent of the House of Peers, by a single Act of this Parliament alone, power
being given to certain Persons of their own Number of the Army, and some
others, to proceed against his Majesty's Person; in order whereunto he was
brought upon Saturday last in the afternoon, before this new Extraordinary
Court. Wherefore they do in the Name of the Parliament of Scotland, for their
vindication from false aspersions and calumnies declare; That though they are
not satisfied with his Majesty's Concessions at Newport in the Isle of Wight,
especially in the matters of Religion, and are resolved not to crave his
Majestes restitution to this Government, before satisfaction be given by him to
this Kingdom; yet they do all unanimously with one voice (not one Member
excepted) disclaim the least knowledge of, or accession to the late Proceedings
of the Army against his Majesty; and sincerely profess, that it will be a great
grief unto their hearts, and lie heavy upon their spirits, if they shall see
the trusting of his Majesty's Person to the Honorable Houses of the Parliament
of England, to be made use of to his ruin, so far contrary to the declared
intentions of the Kingdom of Scotland, and solemn professions of the Kingdom
of England; and to the end it may be manifest to the world, how much they
abominate and detest so horrid a design against his Majesty's Person, they do
in the Name of the Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland, Declare their dissent
from the said Proceedings, and the taking away of his Majesty's Life; and
protest that as they are altogether free from the same, so they may be free
from all the evils, miseries, confusions, and calamities, that may follow
thereupon to these distracted Kingdoms.

In thus much is contracted the large Letter of the Scottish Parliament, to
which the Parliament in short answer; That as to the alteration of the
fundamental Laws of the Land, and allowing liberty of Conscience in Religion,
if Scotland had not the same power of liberty; as they did not go about to
confine them, so they would not be limited to them; but (leaving them to act in
relation to theirs, as they shall see cause) resolve to maintain their own
Liberties, as God should enable them. In relation to the putting the King to
death, they had done it upon serious consideration of the miseries both they
and the Nation had suffered, by the Misgovernment and Tyranny of that man of
sin (as they termed him) that they doubted not but God would prosper them in
it. That if Scotland would not now with them assert its Liberties, but espouse
that quarrel, they would reap no other advantage by it, but a lasting War
(and the miseries that attend it) or the intailing of a perpetual slavery
under a Tyrant and his Issue, to them and their posterity. These jarrings at
length produced a bloody War betwixt the two Nations, to the devastation and
almost utter ruin of Scotland, as the sequel of the Story will show. The
Parliament Order the Army to march Northward. The Parliament now more fully
ordered that no Member whatsoever, who had absented himself from sitting in the
House since the 31. of December, 1648. should be readmitted into the House,
but should be utterly secluded and barred from sitting; except such as had been
employed in the service of the Parliament. They then consider of ways for
raising of Money to serve their Occasions; and in order thereto, appoint a
Committee to consider of the Revenues of the late King, Queen, Prince, Bishops,
etc. and how they may be improved to their greatest advantage.

Colonel Popham, Colonel Dean, and Colonel Blake, who are to go with the
Fleet, are ordered to go down immediately, and nine pound a day appointed for
their maintenance: The Lord Warwicks Commission of Admiral of the Seas, and
Warden of the Cinque Ports being nulled, and that power put into the Hands of
the Council of State, who have devolved it upon those three aforementioned.

In the mean time those who stand out in the two Cities of Dublin and
Londonderry for this Parliament, earnestly entreat relief, before that Ormond,
Inchiqueen, and Owen-Roe, who were very near Compositions, should join, which
would go near to ruin all. They therefore desire, that eight thousand men
formerly promised them, might come over, which would either hinder the
malevolous Conjunction threatened, or be a good Barricado against them; however
they promise to hold out as long as possibly they can.

The Earl of Lothian, Sr John Chesley, and Mr Glendonning, who came as
Commissioners from the Parliament of Scotland, to this of England, not having
received any satisfaction in relation to their Instructions, or the Desires of
the Parliament of Scotland, being somewhat angry, but loath to express their
Choler by word of mouth, after their departure from London, send back a Letter
by a servant to the Parliament, (in the Name of the Parliament of Scotland)
enumerating all their Declarations, the breach of all their Covenants, Oaths,
and Protestations, for contiruance of the late Government, and how much they
had gone contrary to all of them, in what they had now done to King, Lords,
etc. desiring them to do their first work, which if they did not as they, that
then they would wash their hands of all the misery, that was like to ensue.
This so netled our Parliament, that they immediately imprison the Messenger;
and besides the giving secret Order for the securing the Subscribers, they put
forth a Declaration against the Paper, arguing it to contain much scandalous
and reproachful matter, against the just Laws and Government of this Nation,
to the high dishonor thereof: That it was a design in the contrivers and
subscribers of it to raise Sedition, and lay the grounds of a new and bloody
War. They therefore Declare, that all Persons whatsoever residing in England,
or Ireland, or Scotland, that shall adhere to the said Subscribers, in
pursuance of the Grounds by them laid in the said Paper, are Rebels and
Traitors to the Commonwealth of England, and shall be proceeded against as
Rebels and Traitors. They likewise Order that a Letter be sent with a Copy of
that Paper to the Parliament of Scotland, to know if they will own or justify
it.

The Parliament are so necessitated for Moneys, that they are resolved to let
no way slip for the raising of it, the ancient Standard in the Palace-yard
shall not escape, but a Committee is ordered to examine what it might be worth,
in case it were sold for public use.

The Parliament in consideration of Sr George Ascues eminent services at Sea,
order him to be Admiral of the Irish Seas, and Model the Expenses of the Navy
as low as they can possibly, whereby a great part of that vast Charge is saved;
yet neither Custom, Excise, nor Taxes made lower, but rather increased, the
Soldiers Petitioning for a larger Tax, that free Quarter (the greater
oppression indeed of the two) might be avoided.

Several Troopers who pretended a Liberty to Petition without the consent of
their Officers, are punished; five of them are condemned first to ride with
their Faces to the Horse Tail, then to have their Swords broke over their
Heads, and lastly to be cashiered; a Letter which they had concerning the
aforesaid Liberty, being judged pernicious and scandalous to the Parliament and
Counsel of State.

About this time began those great disturbances both in Army and Parliament,
occasioned by the distaste given to Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, by the
Parliaments denying some desires of his: But because the Discourse of it would
now be too tedious, we shall let it alone till we come to treat of its Effects.

But let us return now a little to Scotland, where the Parliament upon rumors
that the English Army were marching toward them, prepare to resist, and Vote
the raising for their present defense 2000 Horse and 6000 Foot, whilst the
Lord Seaforth and Colonel Heisell are busied in fortifying Enderness, and
other strong places in the North, all being resolved to defend and maintain the
Cause of Charles the Second with their lives and fortunes, many Englishmen
flocking to them.

In the mean time Prince Rupert makes great Havoc of the Merchants Ships and
Goods in the English and Irish Seas, which makes the Parliament hasten out
their Fleet under the Command of Popham, Dean, and Blake, as aforesaid.

And now on the ninth of March, 1648. those three Lords, Duke Hamilton (as Earl
of Cambridge) the Earl of Holland, and Lord Capell, were beheaded in the new
Palace-yard Westminster, for having raised Arms against the Parliament; nor
could Duke Hamiltons pretending himself a stranger, and not subject to the Laws
of England; nor the Lord Capells claiming the Lord Generals promise of Quarter,
find them voices enough to save their lives, (though the Lord Goring, and Sr
John Owen escaped by Superiority of voices.) They all three died resolutely and
handsomely, befitting men of so noble descents.

The Parliament in some things to answer the Armies Petition, Order a release
of all Prisoners, who were not in a capacity to pay their Debts; the Commission
nevertheless extending to the seizure of all their Estate and Movables, to pay
as far as they will go. They likewise Enact a rebate in Usury, that none should
take above six in the hundred, which is an ease to the poor, but a plague to
the rich.

The 14th of March arrives at London Master Belford from the Parliament of
Scotland, who brings Letters expressing their high resentment for the securing
of their Commissioners; they assure them that they owned the Paper sent by
their Commissioners, by sending another Transcript of it; so their
Commissioners are discharged, and it referred to the Counsel of State to send
them an Answer.

The Parliament proceed in consideration of what was to be done, in the farther
punishing of offenders, and Vote that fifteen be banished, whereof the Marquess
of Winchester, the Lords, Bristoll, Cottington, and Digby, are four. Judge
Jenkins, and Sr John Stowell are Ordered to be tried at the Kings Bench Bar.
That Colonel Laughorne, Powell, and Poyer, or any others, who have held out
any Castle or Fort since the first of March 1648. to be tried by a Counsel of
War. They proceed to the Confiscation of the Estates of the Prince of Wales,
Duke of York, Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Bristoll, Earl of Newcastle, Earl of
Worcester, Lord Digby, Sr William Widdrington, Sr Phillip Musgrave, Sr
Marmaduke Langdale, Sr Richard Grimvile, Sir Francis Dodington, Sr John
Culpepper, and Sr John Byron; any of which being taken in England, are to die
without mercy. The Banishment of the Marquess of Winchester is remitted at
last, and he with Bishop Wren Voted imprisonment in the Tower, during the
Parliaments pleasure.

Brown Bushel is also Voted to be tried for his life.

The Parliament hoping to justify their actions to the world abroad by Logic,
as well as they had done it by force at home, cause a large and specious
Declaration to be drawn up, showing the causes of their Actions and Proceedings
against their late King, and of the Alteration of the Government, which they
order to be Printed in Latin, French, Dutch, and Italian, the better to
satisfy (as they dreamed) the rest of the Christian world.

The Lieutenant General Cromwell now comes in play again (action being so
natural to him) he being appointed Generalissimo of those 12000 Horse and
Foot, which are Voted to be sent for the relief of Ireland, and the reducing of
Ormond, Inchequeen, and Owen Roe, who had now made a full conjunction, and lay
near Dublin with 22000 Men.

And now the Parliament by their Act and Declaration of the 19th of February,
dissolve all Kingly Government, disheriting the late Kings Children, or any
other from any claim, right, or title to the Government of England, Wales, or
Ireland, or any of the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, or
Hereditaments, belonging or appertaining to the Crown of England, or Ireland.
And they by the same Act discharge and absolve all the people of England,
Wales, and Ireland, of what degree or condition soever, from all Fealty,
Homage, and Allegiance, which is or shall be pretended due to any of the Issue
and Posterity of the late King, or any claiming under him. This Act the
Parliament Order to be proclaimed in the City of London by the Mayor, Aldermen,
and Sheriffs in Person, and likewise in the chief places of the Nation, to
which purpose Writs are sent down to the Sheriffs of the respective Counties.

But the Lord Mayor and several of the Aldermen, whose consciences would not
permit them to proclaim it, refusing to do it, put a demur upon it throughout
the whole Nation; the effects of which the Parliament fearing, called him to
the Bar of the House, and finding him resolved, Order the degradation of him,
Alderman Bunce, and three Aldermen more. Alderman Andrews being found fit for
the Parliaments purpose, is appointed to sit on the Bench in the late Lord
Mayors stead, who readily executed the Parliaments Commands.

The Parliament Constitute a Committee for the sale of Parks, Chases, and
Forrest-Lands, of whom any three have power and authority to Act.

The 24th of March, the Castle of Pomfret which had held out near nine Months,
was forced to surrender for want of Ammunition. The private Soldiers who were
most of them inhabitants of Yorkshire, had liberty by Articles to go home to
their habitations, but the Governor and some others were exempted from
Quarter; nevertheless Lieutenant Colonel Morris the Governor escaped.

The Scotch Commissioners are at last dispatched to the King, with full
Instructions to treat with him; of which the chief were: First, That his
Majesty take the Covenant, Secondly, That he put from him all who have assisted
his Father or him formerly; and particularly the Lord Montross. Thirdly, That
he bring but 100 with him into Scotland. And fourthly, That he bring no
foreign force into Scotland without their consent. But whether these
Conditions were by him agreed to or no, I think is hardly known.

In the mean while the Parliaments friends in Ireland are but in a bad
condition, they therefore desire present aid. Clanrickard, Taffe, and Preston,
with their Catholics, having made a full agreement with Ormond, and
Inchequeen, the Articles were, viz. after the Catholics acknowledgement by way
of preamble, That Charles the second is King of Ireland, and that they will
stand to him with their lives and fortunes. It is agreed: 1. That the
Catholics have free exercise of Religion in Ireland, and all penalties taken
off. 2. That a Parliament shall be held within six Months or after, when the
Catholics desire. 3. All Laws made in the Parliament of England since 41, in
blemish of Catholics, in the next Parliament to be null. 4. All Indictments
against any Catholics since 41, to be vacuated. 5. Way and provision made that
Catholics may be Elected and Vote in Parliament. 6. All Debts to remain as
they were, February 8. 1641. notwithstanding any disposition under color of
Attainder. 7. The Estates of the Knights, Gentlement, and Freeholders of
Connaght, Clare, Thomond, Limerick, and Tipperary, to be secured by Act. 8. All
incapacities of the Natives in Ireland to be taken away by Act. 9. All Honors,
Trusts, etc. to be conferred as well on Catholics as Protestants. 10. That the
King take 2000lb per annum in lieu of the Court of Wards. 11. Noble men to be
capable of more Proxies then two in Parliament. 12. That the depending of the
Parliament of Ireland on that of England, shall be as shall stand with the Laws
of Ireland. 13. That the Counsell-Table meddle only with State-matters. 14.
That all Acts forbidding the transport of Wool, be made null by the next
Parliament. 15. That if any have been wronged by Grants from King James or
since, they may have relief in Parliament. 16. That diverse particular Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, who have as they conceive been wronged, may be righted.
17. That all who have had their Estates taken from them in Cork, Youghall, and
Dungarvan, have restoration. 18. That in the next Parliament an Act of
oblivion pass to all Ireland. 19. That no Lord Deputy or other Officer of
Eminency farm the Customs. 20. An Act against Monopolists and no imposition on
Aquavitae. 21. That the Court of Castle-chamber be regulated. 22. The Acts
prohibiting plowing with Horses by the tail, and burning Oats in the Straw be
nul'd. 23. That his Majesty take off the grievances of the Kingdom. 24. That
Maritime causes be determined in Ireland. 25. That no Rents be raised under
pretense of defective titles. 26. That Interest be forgiven from 1641. 27. That
all this be Acted and of force till a Parliament agree it. 28. That the
Commissioners for the Catholics that treated, agree upon such as shall be
Commissioners of the peace, and hear all causes under 10lb. 29. That all
Governors of Towns, Castles, etc. made by the King, be with the approbation of
Catholic Commissioners. 30. That none of his Majesty's Rents be paid till a
full settlement in Parliament. 31. That the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer
do try all Murders, Thefts, etc. 32. That hereafter such Differences as arise
between Subjects, be tried by a Court in Ireland. 33. That the Roman Clergy
that behave themselves according to this Agreement, be not molested. These
Articles thus agreed on, Ormond publishes a Declaration, exasperating the
horrid Murder of the late King, and Declaring Charles the second King of
Ireland, as the true lawful and undoubted Heir to his Father; and to him and
in his Defense they all resolve to stick with lives and fortunes.

The Counsel of State begin now to take the business of Ireland into more
serious consideration; and to dispatch relief the sooner, Order that a
convenient number of Shipping be made ready at Bristoll, Leverpool, Beaumorris,
and Milford Haven, to transport the Army, and to be at the direction of the
Commander in chief for Ireland. They likewise give Order that an Hospital be
provided for maimed Soldiers in Dublin. That all those who are already in the
Parliaments pay in Ireland, do join with those now sent over, under the Command
of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. That Bread, Salt, Cheese, and
other provisions be provided, with a train of Artillery. And that care be taken
that continual supplies of men be constantly sent.

The seventh of April, the Parliament for the better supply of their Army, and
taking off the intolerable oppression of Free Quarter, pass an Act for
90000lb. a Month for six Months. But in relation to their present exigencies,
for setting forward of the relief for Ireland, the General Earl of Pembroke
and some others, are sent to the City to borrow 120000lb. upon the security of
the two last Months Assessment.

And now the business of Ireland goes on vigorously, the Parliament making
sundry Votes for its furtherance, viz. That care be taken for provisions for
the Winter Quarters. That a sufficient number of Ships be employed on the
Coast, at the Command of the General by Land. That provision be made for
maimed Soldiers, and for the Widows and Orphans of Soldiers slain. That a
train of Artillery be provided. That the Troopers be supplied with such Backs,
Breasts, and Pots, as shall be fitting. And that care be taken for the
convenient sending over of Recruits. And indeed it was no time to dally now,
except they meant to have lost all; for Ormond, Taffe, Preston, and Inchequeen,
are mustering their Forces to lay siege to Dublin, Londonderry; and Sr Charles
Coot in it was already besieged by the Covenanters, or Laggan Forces. And
though Owen Roe's standing out might make a kind of schism amongst them, yet
it was judged that their Army would be numerous enough both to besiege Dublin,
and reduce him, (for which last service Inchequeen was intended) his Brother Sr
Phellime not being so sure a friend to him as was imagined; so that Ireland
could not at that time seem to be in any other condition, then near utterly
lost to the Parliament.

The sale of the Deans and Chapters Lands coming under consideration, were
found worth 9000lb per annum impropriate, which goes toward the Ministers
maintenance; and 18000lb per annum old Rent, which is to be sold. But 1. It was
resolved that 300000lb be raised on it in way of doubling, as on Bishops Lands.
2. That no Bill of Faith pass, but such as has been allowed by Trustees. 3.
That the 600000lb due for Soldiers Arrears, stand good upon the Excise, till
other security be settled. 4. That this 600000lb be paid out of Lands belonging
formerly to the Crown. 5. That twelve Trustees be for this Act, six nominated
by the General, and six by the Parliament. 6. That the Attorney General bring
in a Bill to Audit the Arrears of the Soldiers. Thus the Parliament make have
to the sale of the Lands belonging both to Church and State, for the payment of
their Soldiers and servants.

The 25th of April 1649, was Colonel Poyer shot to death; Major General
Loughorne, Coll. Powell, and himself, three eminent Welchmen, were tried for
their lives by a Counsel of War, and all three condemned for holding
Intelligence with the Enemy; but mercy being shown, it was put to the Lot,
which fell upon Coll. Poyer, who suffered death according to sentence.

The Princess Elizabeth Daughter to the late King, petitioning the Parliament
that she might have leave to go into Holland to her Sister the Princess Royal
of Orange, is denied; but is ordered to go (with her Brother the Duke of
Gloucester) to Sr Edward Harringtons in Rutland, who is ordered to take care of
them, and 3000lb a year is allowed for their maintenance; but he excuses it
being ancient.

The Parliament take upon them the Royal Prerogative of Coining Moneys; order
a new Stamp to be made, with the Arms of England on one side, and round The
Commonwealth of England; and the Arms of England and Ireland on the other, and
round God with us.

Several Troops and Regiments of the Army, either discontented at Liev. Coll.
John Lilburns imprisonment, or some other feigned pretense of their own,
mutiny; Coll. Scroops, and Major Genesis Iretons (who were designed for Ireland)
are the chief: but in the end they are all either reduced to obedience or
disbanded.

A Regiment of Coll. Tuthills is sent over to Dublin as a vangard to the rest.

Dr Dorislaus whom the Parliament of this Commonwealth had sent over as their
Agent, to treat with the States of Holland, was the 5th of May murdered in an
Ordinary in the Hague, by six men who entered into the chamber disguised; the
English Cavaliers there were suspected for the murder, but we judge it a
calumny, since the certainty could never be known, though the States of Holland
offered 1000 Guldens to the discoverers of the assassinates.

The Parliament to manifest their surious resentment of the murder of Dr Isaac
Dorislaus their Agent, put forth a Declaration, how tender a sense they have of
so horrid a murder, and the dishonor redounds thereby to the Commonwealth;
and that since they cannot have the authors of that horrid villainy, they are
resolved to execute their revenge upon those Cavaliers (for they are resolved
to believe those there the actors of it) which they have here in their power,
and have not been admitted to compound, and so are left to their mercy, which
they else had found had not their fellows there forfeited it: so sweet is
revenge, though but upon a mere suspicion of an injury.

The Parliament in England put forth an Act declaring what should be
High Treason: the particulars were; 1. That whosoever should maliciously and
advisedly, by writing, printing, or openly declare, that this Government by
Parliament is tyrannical, usurped or unlawful, or that the Commons assembled
in Parliament are not the Supreme Authority of the Nation; or shall plot,
endeavor or contrive to stir up or raise any force to the subversion or
alteration of the Government, and shall declare the same by open deed, shall be
judged guilty of High Treason. 2. That any person who shall maliciously and
advisedly contrive and plot, or cause to be contrived and plotted, any thing
which may tend to the subversion of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, or
the Council of State, and shall declare the same by open deed, shall be judged
guilty of high Treason. 3. That whosoever not being a Member of the Army, shall
plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up any mutiny in the said Army, or draw
any Soldiers or Officers from their obedience to their superior Officers, or
from the present Government, or shall procure, invite, or aid any foreigners
to invade England or Ireland, or counterfeit the great Seal of England, (for
time being) used by Authority of Parliament.: That then they for every such
offense be judged guilty of high Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties
thereof. This Act was by Order of Parliament proclaimed throughout England and
Wales.

But now the straits of Ireland requiring a speedy help, which is daily
solicited for, Ormond having beleaguered Dublin near a Month, and it scarce
like to hold out long for want both of men, provisions, and Ammunition,
Colonel Tuthills Regiment having carried nothing over but themselves, and
their Arms on their shoulders, though scarce Clothes to their backs; so that
the Parliament to answer those reiterated desires of Lieutenant General Jones,
and being indeed sensible of their necessities, expedite their assistance,
appointing Commissary General Ireton, Colonel Scroop, Colonel Horton, Major
General Lambert, with their four Regiments of Horse; and Colonel Ewers,
Colonel Cook, Colonel Hewson, and Colonel Dean, with theirs of Foot, and
five Troops of Horse to be made ready for that service; besides which some
other Regiments are raised by beat of Drum. In the mean time Colonel Reynolds
Regiment of Horse, Colonel Venables, and Colonel Monks of Foot quartering
nearest, are ordered to advance to Chester, and thence immediately take
Shipping as the Vant-guard of the Army; the other eight Regiments were ordered
to march to the general Rendezvows at Milford-haven, where there was a
convenient number of Shipping provided to waft them over into Ireland, and
whither General Cromwell very speedily followed them, departing out of London
the tenth of July 1649.

The Vant-guard commanded by the Colonels, Reynolds, Venables, and Monk, met
with so prosperous a gale from Chester, soon arrived in Dublin Road, and having
landed their men, notwithstanding the Enemy lay so near, entered the City
without any considerable opposition, where they were received with Echoes of
joy by the Soldiers and Inhabitants, who had so long expected them.

The Town being now so well strengthened by this new supply, Colonel Jones his
old Soldiers, Colonel Tuthills Regiment, with the Inhabitants that bore Arms,
and this new Brigade, could now muster between 8 and 9000 stout men. Jones
therefore resolves upon a Sally as soon as he should see occasion, which the
Enemy themselves soon gave him, by coming down on the East side of the City,
with a party of near 2000 Foot and some Horse, intending to have run a trench
along to the Sea, and there to have built a Fort which might have commanded the
Haven, and hindered supplies from England; they within perceiving their design,
were resolved to hinder them; so drawing out near twelve hundred Horse and four
thousand Foot, courageously enter those trenches the Enemy had raised, and
pursued their charge with so much courage, that Ormonds Horse presently gave
back, and his Foot most cut in pieces, or taken prisoners, which easy victory
gave such heat to the English Forces, that pursuing it with as much resolution
as possible could be expected in men, they followed the Chase as far as
Rathmines, where Ormonds Company lay consisting of 19000 Horse and Foot, whom
finding secure and out of order, they charged so vigorously, that they soon put
the whole body to the rout, pursuing them as far as the Naas, Ormond himself
hardly escaping on Horseback. In this Battle were above 3000 slain on the
place, 2517 Prisoners taken, many men of quality, of which Ormonds own Brother
was one, all their train of Artillery, Ammunition, and provision taken, and a
rich Camp left for the Soldiers to plunder. Thus was this great Army of whom
such matters were expected, overthrown and routed by a handful of men, and
with so small a loss, that it would scarce gain belief if mentioned.

But let us leave Ireland, and speak a little of the affairs of Scotland. The
Scoth Commissioners at the Hague could not get the King to consent as yet to a
full agreement with their Estates, it seemed somewhat too harsh to digest the
Covenant, or condescend to the settling of Church Government by Presbytery; nor
could he either in honor or conscience desert those Noble persons, who had
always stuck faithfully both to himself and Father, for a Nation that had sold
his Father to destruction, though now they courted him with golden promises;
but especially he could not tell how to part with Montross, who had ventured so
far for him. Nor would the Commissioners, nor the States of Scotland themselves
upon any terms re-admit him, but upon the grant of those Conditions. The King
therefore (rather then so much descent from his Honor) grants a Commission to
Montross to levy what Forces he could beyond Sea, and with them to go join with
the Lord Seaforth, Major Straughan, and others who had got to a head for the
King without the Kirk, in the North of Scotland; but they were routed before he
came by Lesley, and himself not long after his arrival, defeated by a Party of
the Kirks, taken prisoner, and most ignominiously hanged in Edenborough, which
action next that of selling their King, must necessarily bring as much odium
upon the Scottish Presbyterians, as ever Sect was under.

But let us return a little to England, where at length that turbulent
Headpiece John Lilburn is brought to trial, the grand Champion of the
Levellers, and indeed their only Patriot, a man of an undaunted spirit, neither
to be deterred by threats, or won by favors. He was tried in Guild Hall
London, by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, where most of the Judges
and Justices of the Courts at Westminster, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and
several Aldermen of London were present. His Indictment contained many crimes
of a treasonable nature; chiefly being author of several scandalous reviling
Pamphlets, against the Government and Governors of the Nation, and
particularly that entitled, The second part of Englands new Chains; which
contained most sharp invectives against the Parliament, calling them Traitors,
Tyrants, Murderers, Usurpers, telling them that they were wholly composed of
Rebellion, Villainy, Murder, and Perjury, with a great deal of such rabble; yet
though these Books were verily believed his, the proofs not being clear, the
Jury found him not guilty, whereupon he was acquitted.

But let us return to see how the Lord General Cromwels Army got over into
Ireland. The general Rendezvows being at Milford-Haven, they there had the
news of the great victory over Ormonds Army, which no doubt displeased the Lord
General, who had hopes to have had a share in, or the whole glory of so great
a victory; however he makes what have he can over, and himself August 13
departs from Milford-Haven, with the Van of the Army in thirty two Ships; on
the 15th of May General Ireton follows with the Main in forty two Vessels; Mr
Hugh Peter's brings up the rear in about twenty Sail. Favorable winds brought
them soon to Dublin, where the Canons ecchoed forth the joy of their arrival;
but the Lord Deputy Cromwell being wholly addicted to action, stayed not long
to receive those entertainments, which the Citizens of Dublin gave, but having
refreshed his Army some time, draws out a Body of 15000 Horse and Foot to a
general Muster, out of which he selects twelve Regiments, containing 9 or 1000
able and resolute men for the present expedition, which he intends for
Droghedah; and having furnished his Army with a train of Artillery, fit for the
siege of so well fortified a place, marches on with his Army, and being come
near the Town (according to the custom of War) sends a Summons to Sr Arthur
Aston Governor, but the Summons prevailed little upon a person known to be so
able a Soldier, and who had above 2000 English Gentlemen with him, who had
most of them been formerly Commanders in the late Kings Army; but an answer was
returned, containing a resolution to expire with the taking of the Town;
whereupon the Lord General orders all things for the quickest accomplishment
of his design, which was to take the Town per force, since quick dispatches
must necessarily be the life of his business, the Winter drawing so nigh; and
however should that let be removed, yet if he should stay the starving it out,
he should give Ormond, Inchequeen, etc. time to raise an Army for its relief;
the batteries therefore are planted to the best advantage, and play as
furiously, so that in four hours space it levelled the Steeple of St Mary's
Church, and a Tower by it; and continuing the next day after near five hundrep
Shot, the South-East Tower is beaten down, and two very considerable breaches
made, which are immediately entered by Colonel Castles, Husons, and Ewers
Regiments, Colonel Castle himself (which seldom Commanders of like note use
to do in a storm) leading the Van (by the Lord Deputy Cromwells special Order,
for what intent I Will leave to others to guess) where he was slain; the Charge
on both sides was so hot, as seldom the like has been seen, the grapple being
on both sides at swords point (the only weapon to execution) for near three
hours space, till the Assailants were forced to retire, which Cromwell seeing,
commands a fresh reserve of Colonel Ewers his Regiment to assail the breach,
(but others say that he entered himself, which is very hardly believed, he
having too much wisdom to be so desperate) who meeting with wearied Defendants
forced their way; though they met with a noble and heroic assistance, yet they
gained a sure possession in the Town, though they could not yet subdue it, for
Sr Arthur Ashtons men hotly disputed every corner of the Street, so that the
Assailants were forced to win what they did by small degrees, till at last the
supernumerary force of their enemies overcoming their valor, they all were
massacred by their merciless adversary, the Lord Deputy Cromwell having given
strict Orders, not to allow Quarter either to Man, Woman; or Child, which
unparralleld cruelty, though it may find excuses amongst men who delight in
flattery, yet will it undoubtedly find as cruel a reward from the most just
God, who judgeeth every man's actions impartially.

Some there were who got into Steeples and other places of defense, thinking to
save themselves, but were all forced either by the sword or famine to yield,
who yet in cold blood found as little mercy, as their fellows had done in the
heat of the Battle; there being not above two escaping with their lives, the
Dean Barnard afterward made Almoner, and the other an old man by his leaping
out of a Steeple, which Cromwels Soldiers blew up with Gunpowder, who though
he broke his Leg, yet had his life saved. This great slaughter not being
occasioned neither by the heat of the Soldiers, but by Cromwels special
Command, who vowed somewhat to a noble Officer of his, (pleading for mercy for
the Defendants) That he would sacrifice their bodies to the souls of the
Englishmen they had murdered, which he could not in justice say of those in
Droghedah, knowing them to be most Englishmen, and such whose greatest fault
was to serve their true and lawful Sovereign in his just defense.

However this slaughter works for his ends, for upon the News the Soldiers and
Townsmen in Trim and Dundalke, (two adjacent Garrisons) quit their holds; and
such was their haste in Trim, that they l ft their great Guns behind them on
the Platforms; and well might their fear be great at the News of Droghedahs
taking, when Sr Phelime O Neal at the hearing of it, burst out in a passion
swearing, That if Cromwell had taken Droghedah by storm, if he should storm
Hell, he would take it.

This considerable action having had such wished for success, Cromwell directs
his Army toward Wexford, and in his way engarrisons Killingkerick and Arcklo
Castle (the feat of the Ormonds) two deserted Forts; many others in that March
submitted, whereof most being places inconsiderable were slighted, others
engarrisoned.

The first of October the Army faces Wexford, and the Lord Deputy requires
Colonel Synnot the Governor to make a speedy surrender of it; he returns an
answer somewhat dubious, so that many Papers pass between him and the Lord
Deputy, which was occasioned only by a design the Governor had to waste and
delay time, till the Earl of Castle-haven was entered into the Town with 500 men
to strengthen the Garrison. So when the Governor had received these recruits,
he no longer writes dubiously, but plainly sends word to the Lord Deputy, that
he was resolved to stand it out to the utmost; whereupon Cromwell being enraged
at his mockery, bends his force at the Castle, which stands at the South-East
end of the Town, which after having received some hundreds of great Shot, was
forced to a rendition. This so quelled the hearts of the stout Wexfordians,
that they quitred their Walls, and gave the Enemy free leave to enter, which
they delayed not to do, but meeting with no resistance, fell in pell mell till
they came to the Marketplace, where the Soldiers and Inhabitants reviving
their courage, in vain maintained their ground for a short time, for they were
soon over-powred, and all that were found in Arms, slain.

Thus Wexford being taken, Cromwell marches on to Waterford and takes
Passage-Fort, but because of the Winter, presently raises his Army, and whilst
several parties are disposed in their winter quarters, they reduce several
engarrisoned places, so that in fine all considerable places in Ireland, except
Limerick, Waterford, Clonmell, Galloway and Kilkenny, were in the possession of
the Lord Deputy Cromwell.

But let us leave him thus victorious in Ireland, and return to the King and
Scots. The King seeing business go so ill in Ireland, resolves to comply
somewhat nearer with the Scots, who (notwithstanding his giving Commissions to
Montross) still solicit him by Commissioners, and at length come to agreement
with him.

The news of this, and the Scottish great preparations for war, and as it is
supposed to invade England, makes the Parliament send over to Ireland for their
victorious General Cromwell, whom they intend to send into Scotland, to hinder
their coming into England (General Fairfax having pleaded his disability to
go:) but Cromwell before his coming away, he reduces the City of Kilkenny, and
the strong Fort of Clonmell, the one by Articles, the other by storm: which
done leaving Ireton Deputy in his stead, he takes Ship at Wexford, and so came
over to Bristoll, and from thence by Post to London, where upon Saturday the
first of June, he arrived with unexpressible imaginations of joy.

About this time Prince Rupert who had played many pranks at Sea, is blocked up
by the three English Admirals in Lisbone, (most of his Ships being before
either taken or sunk) who treat with the King of Portugal to force him out of
his harbor, which he by no means, neither promises nor threats, could be
induced to do, though the English surprise many of his Sugar-Ships coming from
Brazill, and threaten to take the rest in case he resolves not to renounce his
protection of Prince Rupert; but at last the English for want of water and
victuals, are forced to depart from before the Port; which opportunity Prince
Rupert taking, gets out and steers for Malaga; whither the English having
victualled follow them, take the Roe-Buck, force the Black-Prince and four more
ashore, and Prince Rupert escaping with two Ships more, they slight him, and
giving over further search, return with victory to England.

About this time likewise the English having sent Mr Anthony Ashcam Agent to
the King of Spain, he arrived the 5th of June 1650. at Sancta Maria, where
hearing many threats against his person, he procured a guard for to convey him
to Madrid; where at his first arrival, lying at an Inn, being the next day at
dinner with his Interpreter, six roaring Dons knocked at the door, and having
easy admittance, Mr Ashcam rose to salute them; whereupon the first stabbed Mr
Ashcam, and his Interpreter endeavouaing to escape, was wounded in the belly,
both falling down dead in the place; the murderers though they escaped to the
Sanctuary, were fetched out by the King of Spain, but again returned thither by
the Popes special mandate.

The League and agreement being as I said before fully concluded between the
Scots and the King, so that there wanted nothing but their having him with
them, which to expedite, he hastens from Breda, comes to the Hague; and there
takes shipping; from whence, notwithstanding the wait laid for him, he arrives
safely at the Spey in the north of Scotland, where he is received with the best
entertainment the Scots could give him.

But before he ascend the Throne, there are other Conditions to be agreed on,
which they told him not of before; 1. He must take the solemn League and
Covenant. 2. He must subscribe to a Declaration of the Kirks own framing;
declaring, That he renounced the sins of his Fathers house, and of his own; the
Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the Cause of God according to
the Covenant, in the firm establishment of Church Government, as it is laid
down in the Directory of public Worship, Confession of Faith and Catechism.
These and many other bitter Pills was he forced to take, to purge him and make
him fit for that Crown which was shortly after put upon his head.

And now the Parliament of England begin to think of their security, and for
fear of an invasion from the Scots, resolve to invade the Scots; they therefore
order the Armies speedy advance, which presently allarms the Scots; they send
two or three Papers to Sr Arthur Haslerig, then Governor of Newcastle,
expostulating for the sudden approach of the English Army, which they do only
to gain time, that they may be in a better readiness to receive them.

The Parliament to satisfy the people of England, publish a Declaration large
and specious enough, showing the causes and reasons of the Armies so sudden
advance into Scotland, though indeed they could pretend nothing in justice, but
only a fear lest Scotland should invade them.

July 22. 1650, The English Army quit their Quarters at Barwicke, and advance
into Scotland, as far as the Lord Mordingtons house; so they are now the first
invaders; thence on to Copperspeth, and so to Dunbar, where they receive
provisions from their Ships, and so march to Haddington.

At Haddington the Lord General Cromwell hearing that the Scotch Army would
meet him next at Gladmoore, endeavors to possess the Moore before them, but no
considerable Party of Scots appeared: Lambert and Whalley are sent with 1400
Horse to attempt somewhat on the Enemy at Musselborough, but nothing could be
done; The English encamped that night within four Miles of the Scots, but the
next day they perceived the Scots Camp so strongly fortified, and flankred with
great Guns, that they judged it in vain to attempt any thing upon it, so the
English retreat to refresh themselves; the Scots fell in on their rear, and put
them to some disorder, till a body of English Horse close with them, put them
to the rout, and pursue them to their very trenches. Lambert was in this
encounter wounded in two places, and taken prisoner, but rescued again; two or
three Scotch prisoners of note were taken, and some few slain on both sides.

The English march off quietly to Musselborough, but very much tired and faint
for want of provisions, and by lying open in the rain, that they expected the
Enemy should fall upon them in the night, which they did, broke through the
English Guards, and put a Regiment of Horse to disorder; but the English
sallying, and the whole Army taking the Allarm, charged, routed, and pursued
those fifteen Troops under Command of Montgomery, and Straughan: These losses
made the Scots keep closer in their trenches.

In the mean time affairs go on well for the Parliament in Ireland;
Teoroghan-Castle notwithstanding the stour resistance of the Lady Governess, is
at last compelled to yield: Waterford before which the Lord Deputy Ireton was
set down, was in a yielding capacity: Ormonds, Castlehavins, and other royal
Forces dispersed, so that there now remained only Limericke, Galloway, and some
other inconsiderable Garrisons, to the wholly reducing that Kingdom.

Somewhat before this the English Plantations in Virginia, and the Caribdy
Island, revolted from their obedience to the Parliament, and declare
unanimously for Monarchy and Liturgy, but the decay of their Trade (without
which they could not long subsist) and a Squadron of Ships sent under the
Command of Sir George Askew, quickly reduces them to compliance.

The Parliament of England the more to afflict the Scots, and increase their
misery, prohibit all traffic with them, command all their Merchants and Ships
to depart in ten days, who going without Convoy, most of them fall into the
hands of the English Frigots, against whom they could make no resistance.

Colonel Eusebius Andrews being taken with a Commission from the King, is
apprehended, and accused for a design to subvert the Government of this
Commonwealth, for which he is condemned, and executed on Tower Hill; one Benney
who was found to have a hand in the business, is hanged, drawn, and quartered
at Tyburne.

But to digress: The Prince of Orange having a design to enlarge his power over
the united Provinces, is impeaded by the City of Amsterdam; whereupon he
endeavors to surprise it: but the Burgers having advice of it, by letting open
their sluices forbid the approach of his Army, so his design failing, he came
off with disgrace; but they afterward came to an agreement, and the Prince was
forced to be content with the power he had before, or less.

The English Army in Scotland (to which it is time to return) having taken
Collington-house, and Readhall by storm, and in the last the Lord Hamilton,
Major Hamilton, and good store of Ammunition, and provision, move from
Pentland-hills, and Collington, and Readhall, within a Mile of the Scotch Army;
both Armies march side by side in view of each other, but a Bog betwixt them
hindered an Engagement, but the great Guns played on both sides, which
nevertheless provoked not the Scotch to fight, but still they kept under
protection of the Bog, which the English seeing, retreated and marched to
Musleborough to refresh themselves; which done, they draw off and march to
Haddington: the Scots attending their right wing, fall on desperately, but are
repulsed by Colonel Fairfaxes Regiment.

September 1. 1650, the English Army marched to Dunbar, whither the Scots
followed them, and drew up their whole Army upon a high Hill, within a Mile of
the Town: The English Army drew up in a Corn-field below, being encamped on a
neck of Land, not a Mile and half from the Sea to Sea; so that the Scots Army
being above them, and finding their advantage, endeavored the gaining of
Copper-speth-pass, which effected, they bragged they had the English in Essex
his pound; and Lesly the Scotch General bragged he would have the English
either dead or alive.

The straits of the English were very great, many sick and disabled, and
themselves pen't up in this manner wanting provisions; they resolved on the
third of September, either to force their way through their Enemies, or die
nobly in the attempt; a Party of Horse is first set to gain the pass, which
effected, the whole Army charged, and after about an hours hot engagement, the
Scotch Horse being routed, the Foot threw down their Arms and fled There was in
the Scotch Army this day near 16000 Foot and 6000 Horse, whereof 4000 were
slain, near 10000 taken Prisoners. The English Army were not above 7500 Foot
and 3500 Horse, besides disabled men. There was taken from the Scots near 200
Foot and Horse Colors, 27 Fieldpieces, 10000 Arms, and many Prisoners of note;
amongst which were the Lords Liberton, Lumsdale and Grandison.

This relation gives me occasion to give you some heads of Cromwell's Letter to
the Speaker, wherein the Reader may please to observe his religious canting,
and judge themselves if they would not have took him for a Saint. Having given a
relation of the fight and victory, he craves leave to add a few words, of which
these are part, viz. It is easy to say the Lord has done this it would do you
good to see and hear our poor Foot go up and down making their boast of God;
but Sr, it is in your hands, and by this eminent mercy God puts it more in your
hands, to improve your power and his blessings to his praise; we that serve you
beg of you, not to own us but God alone. We pray you own his people more and
more, for they are the Chariots and horsemen of Israel; disown your selves,
but own your authority, and improve it, to curb the Proud and the insolent,
such as would disturb the tranquillity of England, though under what specious
pretenses foever, etc. Again, Since we came into Scotland, it has been our
desire and longing, to have avoided blood in this business, by reason that God
has a people here fearing his Name though much deceived, and to that end we
have offered much love to such in the bowels of Christ; and concerning the
truth of our hearts therein we have appealed unto the Lord, etc. and more, this
is the great hand of the Lord, and worthy the consideration of all those, who
taking into their hands the instruments of a foolish shepherd, to wit, meddling
with worldly policies, and mixtures of earthly power, to set up that which they
call the Kingdom of Christ, which is neither it, and if it were, would such
means be found effectual to that end, and neglect or trust not to the Word of
God, the Sword of the Spirit, which is alone powerful and able for the setting
up of that Kingdom, and when trusted to will be found effectually able for that
end, and will also do it. This is humbly offered for their sakes, who have
lately too much turned aside, that they might turn again to preach JESUS CHRIST
according to the simplicity of the Gospel, etc. If this man could not
dissemble well, who ever did?

The Parliament ordered, that the Scottish Colors taken from Duke Hamilton at
Preston in Lancashire, and those sent from Dunbar, taken at the now recited
battle, should be hanged up in Westminster hall, the one on the one side, and
the other on the other side.

About this time died in the Isle of Wight the Princess Elizabeth, third
Daughter to the late King Charles, who had her Funeral rights performed in
Newport Church in the same Island, Tuesed Sept. 24. presently after which the
Parliament gave order for the sending of Henry Duke of Gloucester her Brother to
the University at Heidelberg (a Town of the Prince Electors) where the
Parliament ordered him an allowance of 1500lb per annum. Quam diu se been
gesserit.

In the mean time by the care and pains of the Lord Deputy Ireton, Munster and
Vlster are reduced to obedience, except some Tories which stand out and lie
sculcking in the woods and fastnesses. Waterford being surrendered, there was
nothing now left toward the Conquest of that Country but Connaught; to which
effect Limerick as the pass into it was blockt up Deputy Ireton. But let us by
a little leave these affairs in Ireland, for the more important affairs of
Scotland.

After the Victory won at Dunbarr, the Scots not only lose all their Arms and
Artillery in the Camp, but likewise quitted Leith and Edinburrough; whereupon
the Lord General the 7th of September. sends four Regiments to take possession
of Leith (where they found 37 Guns mounted on the Platforms, some shot, and
store of Ammunition) and the same day Cromwell draws the rest of the Army into
Edenburrough, without any loss, save the Arm of a Soldier, though the Castle
played hot upon them.

After the Army had spent some time in fortifying Leith, and Cromwell had by
beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet proclaimed a Protection of Markets, and
liberty of Trade in Edinborrough and Leith, the Army advances toward Sterling,
whither most of the Scottish Nobility and Gentry had retired from Edenborrough
and Leith,) and September. 18. being within a mile of the Town, a Counsel of
War was called, and a Summons resolved to be sent, for its surrender to the
service of the Commonwealth of England; and accordingly a Trumpeter was sent
with a Letter, who being come near the Town, was met by a Gentleman on foot,
with a Pike in his hand, who told him that he would neither let him come in,
nor receive his Letter.

The same day the Scots sent our a Trumpet, desiring a release of Prisoners
upon ransom; but General Cromwell returned answer, That he came not thither
to make merchandise of men, but for the service and security of the
Commonwealth of England.

The Summons sent to Sterling not being received, caused Orders to be given for
the getting of Ladders and all things necessary for a storm; but upon second
thoughts, the strength of the Enemy and dangers being considered, it was agreed
that the Army should draw off, which accordingly they did and marched to
Linlithgow, which place lying between Edinborrough and Sterling, being judged
fitting to be made a Garrison of, the General ordered to be fortified, and
leaving in it five Troops of Horse and six Companies of Foot, marched with the
rest to Edinborrough.

About this time Sept. 23. the afflicted Kirk of Scotland appointed a solemn
day of Fasting and Humiliation; 1. To humble themselves for their too much
confidence in the arm of flesh. 2. For the malignity and profaneness of their
Army. 3. For the plunderings and wickedness of their Army when they were in
England. 4. For their not sufficient purging their Army. 5. For their
Commissioners unlawful and surreptitious manner of prosecuting the Treaty with
their King, and their crooked ways in bringing him home. 6. For their not
sufficient purging the Kings house. 7. For the just grounds they have to
believe his Majesty's repentance was not sound nor from the heart.

In the mean time General Cromwell endeavors to beget a right understanding
with those that dissented from the King but stood for the Kirk, viz. Coll.
Kerre and Straughan, and their adherents for there were three factions in
Scotland, viz. one in the North was for the King without the Kirk; another
party in the West, was for the Kirk without the King; the third was for King
and Kirk, and these were they then at Sterling, who bore the greatest sway,
viz. The Committee of Estates and General Assembly. To Coll. Kerr, etc.
Commis. General Whalley is sent with a party, but he accosts them first with a
Letter, declaring, That it was not unknown what amicable ways they had used to
avoid the effusion of Christian blood before and since they came into Scotland,
which though hitherto has been ineffectuall, yet they should endeavor the
same. Showing further, That their arms were still stretched out to embrace
them, when ever God should incline them to come in, and that they sought not
dominion over them to enslave them, nor to depress their Kirk Government,
neither that they sought to have their goods or estates, but to carry on the
Lords work, etc. with a great deal of such like stuff.

To this Letter Coll. Kerre sends an Answer to Commis. Genesis Whalley in very
short terms, telling him, That though they were not in a capacity to act
against the Englishmens unjust invasions; yet they were in a capacity to
suffer, and should submit to Gods will either by doing or suffering, till the
time of their deliverance came: that if it were their happiness to perish in
their duty, it would be a sufficient mercy to them, and when the persecution
had arrived to its height, their captivity should be returned. Adding, that he
thought it strange the English should talk of a cessation, whilst they were
captivating their poor people, assaulting their Garrisons, apprehending their
Ministers, tearing them from their holy callings and from their holy sighing
stocks; concluding the departure of the English out of that Kingdom, and then
desiring a Christian Treaty, would be a great favor and mercy equally as great
to the one as the other; that in the mean time he should stand upon his guard
and expect no further overtures of peace.

But to digress a little: About the latter end of this month of October
departed this life the Prince of Orange, who had lately endeavored to curb the
High and Mighty States; in him King Charles lost his greatest interest he had
in those parts. His Princess some ten days after his death was delivered of a
young Prince, which in part mitigated the grief for her Husbands death.

But let us look a little into Ireland, where Sr John Dungan and Scurlog having
gotten together near 500 Horse and Foot, met with a party of the Parliaments
Army of about 300, charged them, and overpowring them in Horse routed them,
slew 50 upon the place, took near 40 Prisoners, and had carried them into the
Woods, had not Captain Essex with about 50 Horse, 20 Dragoons, and 100 Foot
come to their rescue; the body of the English Army lay before Limerick.

But to return again to Scotland: Cromwell seeing that Peace would not be
hearkened to, disposes his Army to the War; Major Brown with a party takes in
Dalhouse, a supposed harbor of Moss-Troopers, of which sort of vermin he took
diverse in Darlington house, whom he caused to be shot upon the place. Colonel
Monk is sent with a party to reduce Roselane Castle, which with the help of
some Grenades he makes yield to mercy. Major General Lambert marches to
Dunfreez to join with Whalley (who had taken Dalkeith Castle by a terrible
summons in his march against Kerre and Straughan. This Castle wall was thirteen
foot broad at the top, and well stored with Ammunition and Provision.

Colonel Kerre was now about Beebles: Lambert having with much difficulty
marched over the River to Hamilton, resolves to quarter there that night; which
Kerre hearing, resolved to beat up his quarters, and if possible surprise the
Major General; this he attempted with a great deal of resolution, but the
English taking the Alarm intime, on a sudden encompassed most of the enemies
Horse, killed 100, took 100, besides 400 Horse and Furniture forsook of their
Riders, therest they pursued as far as Air; in the which pursuit Colonel
Kerre was was taken, and several of his Officers. This defeat caused Straughan
to come in, who was with the rest carried by the Major General to the head
Quarters. Cromwell all this while strongly besieges the Castle of Edinburrough,
yet his mines prove ineffectuall in that hard Rock; so that he causes an
artificial Mount to be raised, whereon to plant his battery, so that his
Canons and Grenades flew thick and threefold at the Castle, at which the
Defendants at first hung out a red Flag in defiance, but after a short time
hung out a white one for Parley, which was accepted, and after a great many
Messages to and fro, surrendered, upon Articles agreed upon between Major
Abernethe and Captain Hynderson on the part of the Castle, and Colonel. Monck
and Liev. Coll. White on the Generals, to this effect: First, That the Castle
be surrendered to his Excellency on the 24th of December, with all the Arms,
Magazine and furniture of war thereto belonging. That the Governor with all
the Officers and Soldiers should then march forth with their Arms, Colors
flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, and Bullet in mouth, whether they shall
think fit. That such adjacent Inhabitants as had Goods in the Castle, should
have them restored; and to that purpose they had liberty from the 19th to the
24th of December to fetch them away. The sudden rendition of so strong a hold
as this was, made the world believe, that the Canons played upon it with Silver
instead of Iron shot.

About this time there was a kind of petty Insurrection in Norfolk, by a
company of inconsiderable persons, who declared for the suppressing of Popery,
restoring King Charles to his Crown, revenge of his Fathers death, and for
rooting out of heresy and schism; but being only begun by a disorderly
number, they were soon vanquished, and the principal risers about 20 in number
executed.

Sr Henry Hide having received a Commission from the King of Scots, to be
Ambassador for him at the Grand-Signors Port in Constantinople; being arrived
there stood in competition with Sr Thomas Bendish, then Ambassador, and the
Case being heard before the Vizier, the Verdict was given on Bendish his side;
so that Sr Harry Hide was forced to depart the Port, whence coming to Smyrnd,
with an intention to go for Venice, he was by a wile invited on board a Ship to
a Feast, was treacherously brought away to England, and here beheaded before
the Royal Exchange, for having taken Commissions from that King.

The Winter being now at the height, made the War in Scotland at a stand on the
English part; but the Scots having now as they thought thoroughly purged their
King, proceeded to his Coronation, which was performed at Scone, with as much
Solemnity and Gallantry, as their necessities would permit, on the first of
January 1651.

The King crowned, they proceed to the Excommunication of Straughan, Swinton,
and others who had deserted them, and were gone in to the English; they then
strive to pacify dissenting parties, and pass an Act for new Levies throughout
the Nation. The King is likewise created General of this Army now intended to
be levied, with an unusual kind of Ceremony, viz. by crossing a Pike, Musket,
Carabine, and Sword over his Head. Lothian Carre is made Major General; and
Middleton Lieutenant General, David Lesley having layn down his Commission.

The English now beginning to stir, Colonel Fenwicke is commanded to march
with two Regiments of Horse and Foot, for reducing of Hume-Castle; who having
faced it, sent a Summons to the Governor, to which he returned an answer; the
capriciousness whereof makes me insert both. Thus ran the Summons.

Sir, His Excellency the Lord General Cromwell has commanded me to reduce
this Castle you now possess, which if you now deliver into my hands for his
service, you shall have fit terms for your self, and those with you, and ease
the adjacent parts of a great Charge. If you refuse, I doubt not but in a short
time by the Lords assistance, to obtain what now I demand. I expect your answer
to morrow by seven of the Clock; and rest

To the Governor of Hume-Castle.
Your Servant George Fenwick.

To which the Governor next Morning returned this answer.

Right Honorable, I have received a Trumpeter of yours as he tells me, without
a pass, to render Hume-Castle to the Lord General Cromwell. Please you I never
saw your General.

As for Hume- Castle it stands upon a Rock,

Given at Hume-Castle this day before seven a Clock. So rests without prejudice
to my native Country. Your most humble Servant Tho. Cockburne.

After this conceited answer of the Governors, he likewise salutes Colonel
Fenwick with these Verses.

I William of the Wastle
Am now in my Castle,
And awe the Dogs in Town
Shall Not gar me gang down.
But after the great Guns had played a little, and a small breach was made, at
which Fenwicks men were ready to enter, he was forced to surrender the Castle
upon Quarter for life, of which Captain Collinson with his Company took
possession. Colonel Moncke likewise though in somewhat longer time had the
same fortune with three Regiments of Horse and Foot in reducing
Timptallon-Castle, (which had many times cut off Passengers, and done no little
harm to the Country by frequent excursions,) the Governor and Soldiers
finding no other Conditions, being forced to surrender to mercy.

But to give some stop to the English Proceedings, General Cromwell was taken
with a violent Fever, which confined him many days to his Chamber, insomuch
that it was generally voted up and down the Scoth Camp that he was dead, but a
Trumpeter coming to Edinborough from Fife (to demand restitution of a Ship
laden with goods, which was taken by the English Frigots, going from Brunt
Island to Fife) and there confidently averring to the Soldiers that their
General was dead; which coming to Cromwels ears, he caused the Trumpeter to be
brought before him, and not only gave him assurance of his life, but of his
recovery in great measure, which at his return caused no small decrease of joy
in the Scotch Army.

General Dean about this time arrived at Leith, with a Squadron of English
Ships, bringing with him a convenient quantity of supplies both of men, Money,
and provisions, together with twenty seven flat bottomed Boats for
transportation of the Army over into Fife, so extremely careful were the
Parliament of their Army in Scotland.

In the mean time the Scotch Levies go on vigorously; Middleton marches out of
the High-lands with a considerable number both of Horse and Foot. The Town of
Dundee to show their affection to his Majesty, advanced a brave Regiment of
Horse at their own charge, and sent them with six brass pieces of Ordnance, for
a present to their King at Sterling.

Whilst these things were acting in Scotland, there happened a very strange
accident at Oxford in England. One Anne Green servant to Sr Thomas Read, having
been got with Child by a Gentleman of the House, about the fourth Month of
her time, by over-working fell in travel, and not knowing what it might be,
went to the House of Office, where with some straining, an abortive Infant of
about a span long fell from her, which being found out, she was carried
prisoner to Oxford, and there condemned for the Murder, and hanged: After she
had hung near an hour, (all which time she was pulled by the Legs, and struck
on the Breast by some of her friends, and some Soldiers that stood by with the
But ends of their Muskets:) she was cut down, put into a Coffin, and brought to
a house to be dissected by some Physicians; when they opened the Coffin, they
perceived a rattling in her Throat, whereupon one standing by stamped on her
Breast and Belly; but Dr Petty and two other Doctors present, fell speedily to
use some means to bring her to life, which they did to the wonder of all men;
she still as upon the Gallows averring her innocence.

The Parliament now to abolish the shadow, as well as formerly they had done
the substance of Monarchy, cause the Statuas of the late King, which were set
up at the West end of the Cathedral of St Paul's Church; aed that set up in the
Royal Exchange, to be pulled down; and over the conspicuous place of the last,
caused this ignominious, Motto to be set:

Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, anno libertatis Angliae restitutae primo. Anno
Domini 1648. January 30. which might far better be inverted.

They likewise cause the Kings Arms in all places of the Kingdom to be defaced
and expunged, the Soldiers using all violence imaginable to his Majesty's
Pictures, though but set up for Signs.

In the mean time the Parliament are courted by several foreign Ambassadors
from the Hollander, Spaniard, and Portugal, all requesting peace and amity;
though it is suspected the Hollander then intended a War.

But however the Parliament of England send over Oliver St John, and Walter
Strickland Esquires, as Ambassadors extraordinary to Holland, where they were
entertained with a great deal of Ceremony. The heads of their Embassage was, 1.
That a firm league and confederacy be made between the two Republics. 2. That
former treaties and agreements of trade and commerce be renewed. 3. That the
States of Holland would make strict search after the Murderers of Dr Dorislaus;
and that like affronts might be prevented for the future.

But notwithstanding the States had put out a Declaration, commanding that none
should upon strict amercements affront the English Ambassadors; yet three
Months were past, and nothing agreed upon, but innumerable affronts received;
the Ambassadors by Order of the Parliament of England returned home, infect a
pace.

But Van Trumps lying hovering with his Fleet of Scilly, made the English
Jealous that they intended some hostile attempt upon the place; but the reason
of his hovering being demanded, the Hollanders answered, that they only lay
there to demand satisfaction for such Ships, as those Pirates had taken from
their people, which satisfied for the present; however the Parliament thought
good to reduce those Isles under their own obedience, which they shortly after
did, by a Fleet under Command of Admiral Blake, and Sr George Askew.

In the mean time Cornet-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, which still held out
with a Party for the King, was assaulted by a considerable Party of Foot, upon
information given that there was but Forty men in the Castle, and eighteen of
them disabled, when upon trial there was found sixty good men in the Castle,
who made hot work for the assailants, breaking their Ladders, and killing many
of them with Caseshot from the Flankers, so that they were fain to get off by
the Boat, which proved as unfortunate, two Boats full of Soldiers being sunk
by Shot from the Castle.

Captain Brown Bushel, a Noble Royalist, who had done many handsome actions
for the service of both the Kings, was beheaded under the Scaffold at
Tower Hill.

In the mean time the Forces under Command of the Lord Deputy of Ireland,
scatter and disperse those Forces raised by Castle-haven, Clanrickard, Dillon,
and others, in the Counties of Kerryathlone, Monaghan, and Wicklow, and settle
several Garrisons, to the distraction of most of their Enemies; no
considerable places being left to them but only Limerick and Galloway. That
considerable Garrison of Finnagh in Westmeath, being surrendered to Commissary
General Reynolds, and Phelim Mac Hugh, who came with 1500 Horse and Foot to
its relief, routed, most of his Company slain, and many considerable Officers
taken prisoners.

But let us return again to the main business in Scotland. Colonel Moncke with
a Party of Horse and Foot marches toward Blackness, a Garrison of the Scots,
which had much endammaged the English Quarters; which after the Batteries
raised, and some Shot was spent, was reduced, the Defendants craving Quarter,
which (considering the strength of the place) was granted.

The Scots in the mean time grow powerful; for notwithstanding all the strifes
and emulations amongst them, an agreement is patcht up, to the seeming
satisfaction of all the dissenters; they are likewise in hopes of a power to
rise for them in Lanchashire, which with a considerable Party promised from
Scotland to join with them, might confront any force of the Parliaments; but
the design is discovered before it was acted, and Thomas Cook Esquire of
Grays-Inne the principal Agent for Lancashire taken.

Major General Harrison upon these discoveries is sent into the North with a
Body of Horse and Foot, and to oppose the Enemy if he should make an invade, by
way of Carlisle.

The abovementioned plot was contrived throughout all England, though by ill
fortune timely prevented; several persons of quality, but most Presbyterian
Divines were taken, viz. Mr Christopher Love, Major Alford, Major Adams,
Colonel Barton, Mr Blackmore, Mr Case, Mr Cauton, Dr Drake, Captain Far, Mr
Gibbons, Mr Hrviland, Major Huntington, Mr Ienkins, Mr Iaquell, Mr Iackson,
Lieutenant Colonel Iackson, Captain Massey, Mr Nalton, Captain Potter, Mr
Robbinson, Mr Sterks, Colonel Sorton, Colonel Vaughan, and others; of which
only two suffered, viz. Mr Love, and Mr Gibbons, who after many delays were
beheaded on Tower Hill, the 22. of August 1651.

There happened much about this time a petty rising in Wales, two or three
hundred persons being gathered together in behalf of the Scots King, upon a
report that the English Army was routed, and the Scotch advancing into England;
but the design proved as void of success, as the report was of truth.

But the Scots make several in-falls upon the Out-guards and Garrisons of the
English, wherein they had frequently good success, killing some, and taking
others, having the advantage of the English in the knowledge of the Country,
which makes the English contract their Quarters, drawing away the
Out-Garrisons, and putting the Army into a posture to march to Fife; but the
Ground not yet affording Grass or Oats, the enterprise was for the present
suspended.

The Scotch Levies were now completed to 15000 Foot and 6000 Horse, with which
they march on this side Sterling, to a place called Torwood, where the King
drew up most of his Horse and Foot, and enrails them in a regular
fortification. Cromwell draws up his Army toward them, and marched in Battalia
within view of their Camp, in hopes to draw them to a Fight; but they got
nothing else from them, then some thundering Messengers from their great
Artillery.

The Lord General vexed at their delays, falls upon Kalendar-house, kept by a
Party of theirs, and in the end though it was stoutly defended out of hopes of
relief, takes it by storm; but when this neither would provoke the Scots to
fight, he resolves now having so fit an opportunity, to do that which he had so
long intended, viz. to land some men on Fife; and accordingly Colonel Daniells
Regiment of Foot having four Companies more joined to it, and four Troops of
Horse, all under Command of Colonel Overton, being imbarqued at Leith, under
pretense of being sent for England, arrived next morning on the other shore,
landed and entrenched in despite of a Party of Scots which strove to oppose
them.

This News brought to the Lord General, Major General Lambert is presently
ordered with two Regiments of Horse and two of Foot to second them, which they
did; but advice of it arriving in the Scotch Camp so alarmed them, that in all
haste Major General Brown is sent with four Regiments of Horse and four of
Foot, to drive the English out, which they might have done had not Major
General Lambert been arrived before them. So there being now almost an equal
force, the Fight began to the great loss of the Scots, whereof near 1500 were
slain, 1000 taken prisoners, among which Sr John Brown, Major General was one,
who shortly after (as it is supposed) out of grief for this defeat, died.

Upon this overthrow the Scotch Army remove their Camp from Torwood, and march
directly to Sterling-Park. Cromwell follows in their rear, hoping yet to draw
them to a Battle, but they would by no means be induced to it, though he
followed them within two Miles of Sterling.

The Lord General perceiving his delays would be in vain, marches with his
whole Army to Lithgoe, whence he sends over into Fife the greatest part of
them, with the train of Artillery, to prosecute the War on the other side; the
remainder with him being only four Regiments of Horse and four of Foot, which
he made use of to secure what was already gained, and observe the Scots motions.

In the mean time the Lord Lambert faces Brunt Island, which is surrendered upon
Articles, without discharging so much as one piece of Artillery.

The Lord General likewise having dispatched those affairs which detained him
at Leith, crosses the Frith, and coming to the Army, draws them into a posture;
and having left Colonel Wests Regiment in Brunt Island, marches with the rest
toward Sr Johnston, and in two days faces the Town, and being informed that
there was no Garrison in it, he sends a Summons to the Inhabitants, not
doubting of a sudden rendition, but it proved otherwise: for the Lord Dafferes
had the day before entered the Town with 1300 Soldiers.

The Lord General hereupon sends another Summons to the Governor, who
sullenly returns him no answer; but after the Artillery had played one day, his
stomach came down, and the Town was surrendered upon Articles.

The English Army being marched as far North as St John's Town, the King seeing
affairs go so desperately in Scotland, and loath to lose so good an
opportunity, advances with his whole Army consisting of about 16000, and
marches with all speed possible into England by way of Carlisle.

This sudden and unexpected action startled the whole English Nation, but
especially the Parliament at Westminster, who though they had doubting such a
thing, ordered Major General Harrison with 3000 Horse and Dragoons to attend
such an irruption, yet knowing him unable to encounter so great a Body, they
could not tell what the event might be; they therefore proceed to the leavying
of new Forces in all the Counties of England; and likewise for the better
carrying on of their business, Enact, That no person whatsoever should presume
to hold any correspondency with Charles Stuart or with his party, or with any
of them, nor give any intelligence to them, nor countenance, encourage, abett,
adhere to or assist any of them, nor voluntarily afford, or cause to be
afforded or delivered to any of them any victuals, provision, Ammunition, Arms,
Horses, Plate, Money, Men, or any other relief whatsoever, under pain of high
Treason; and that all persons should use their utmost endeavors to hinder and
stop their march.

Yet for all this the Scotch Army went on in prosecution of their design,
bending their course by a swift March for the West of England; though it was
expected by the whole Nation, and especially by their friends, that they would
have directed their course to London.

General Cromwell being at St Johnston, and hearing of this sudden march,
leaving such Forces as might secure that part of Scotland which was already
won, and leaving six or seven thousand Horse and Foot more with Lieutenant
General Monck to reduce those parts which remained; he orders Major General
Lambert with five Regiments of Horse and Dragoons to fly away with all possible
speed to get into the rear of the Scots Army, whilst Harrison was in the
Front, aad with the rest of the Army follows as hard as he could, and on the
12 of August crossed the Tine; but let us leave him following the Scotch Army,
and look a little into the affairs of Ireland.

Limerick though for some time blockt up, yet held out stoutly against the
Forces of the Lord Deputy Ireton, they still relying upon the Lord Muskerryes
help for relief, who at length having gathered an Army of near 1000 Horse and
Dragoons and 2000 Foot, had an intention to join with some Forces which were
got together in Lemster; but the Lord Broghill hearing of his design with about
400 Horse and Dragoons and 1000 Foot, endeavored to hinder compaction, so
there happened an engagement between them, which though it was bloody to the Lord
Broghill (himself likewise being endangered) yet in the end he obtained full
victory over the Lord Muskerryes Forces, of whom there were near 600 slain,
many of them Officers, but very few taken; there were likewise near 200 of the
Lord Broghills slain, and many wounded, the dispute being very hot on both
sides; yet this startled not at all either Limerick or Galloway, which were
both beleaguered, and resolved to hold out to the uttermost bit of bread.

But let us return to see how the Scots direct their March in England, where
being come to Warrington Bridge, Harrison endeavors to impead their passage,
but in vain; for they gained the Bridge, and forced him to retire; so they
march on without impediment to Worcester, Lambert following them at the heels,
and Cromwell with all possible expedition advancing from Scotland, the Militia
in every County being raised, or marching toward them, to enclose them in that
City of which they had possessed themselves.

For on Friday the 23 of August, the King with his Army entered Worcester,
resolving to tarry there and abide the brunt, for there were now so many Forces
leavied, that all ways were stopped to impead his Marching farther. He causes
works to be raised here for his greater security, and sends forth his Letters
Mandatory to Colonel Mackworth, Governor of Shrewsbury, and to Sr Thomas
Middleton in Wales, for leavying Forces to assist him; but both his commands
and persuasions proved vain and unnsefull.

And now the black day begins to draw nigh; Cromwell with an iuimaginable
celerity joins with Fleetwood, Desborough, Gray of Groby, Lambert, and
Harrison, who commanded the rest of the Parliaments Forces; the Militia Forces
are likewise joined to them; so they all march unanimously forward to surround
the Scotch Army in this pound at Worcester. Nor was there ever so great an Army
gathered together in so small a time in England; for the whole force could not
amount to less then 80000 men.

The Army being now drawn near to Worcester, the first design they set upon was
the possession of Vpton Bridge, where Cromwell intended to pass over with his
Army. Fleetwood had the management of this enterprise, who sends first a small
party of Horse and Foot, to judge of the feasableness of the attempt: these
though they found the Bridge broken down, all save only one beam of Timber,
which reached from one Arch to another, boldly dismount and venture over, and
secure themselves in a Church, which Massey (who lay in Vpton with about 200
Horse and 60 Dragoons in a great deal of security, not dreading an Enemy)
allarmed at, assaults, whilst in the mean time Lambert passes over a
considerable party of Horse to their relief; whereupon Maffey finding it in
vain to fight, made an honorable retreat toward Worcester, himself still
bringing up the rear, in which service he was wounded by a shot in the hand.

The Bridge thus won is immediately repaired, so that Fleetwoods Army passes
all over whilst Cromwell causes a Bridge of Boats to be made over the Severn,
on the other side, that by passing over his Army, the Enemy might be the more
streightened.

But let us leave them a little at Worcester in the forementioned posture, and
look a little into Lancashire, where the Earl of Derby with about 300
Gentlemen, endeavor to raise the Country, and had a party of near 1500 Horse
and Foot; Collone Lilburne is ordered to oppose him, with whom General
Cromwells Regiment of Foot is ordered to join. To prevent their conjunction the
Earl marches toward Manchester, to surprise that Regiment; Colonel Lilburne
flanks the Enemy in their march, hoping by that means to join with the
Regiment; which to prevent, the Enemy forces him to engage; the dispute was
tedious, by reason Lilburne was over-matched with Foot, but in the end the Earl
was totally routed. The Lord Widdrington, Sr Thomas Tidesly, Sr William
Throgmorton, Sr Francis Gamuel, with many other inferior Officers, and about
60 Soldiers slain upon the place; Colonel Leg, Colonel Robbinson, Colonel
Bay, and Colonel Gerrard, with several other Commission-Officers and
Gentlemen, with about 500 private Soldiers were taken, together with the Earl
of Derbeys George, Garter, and other Badges of his Order, but he himself
escaped to Worcester, there to tell the sad news of his petty overthrow, which
was but as a prologue to a greater.

But to return again to Worcester, Fleetwoods Army having all passed over Vpton
Bridge, make a Bridge of Boats over the River Teame, to attaque the West side
of the Town, which so alarmed the Scots, that they rise from their Leaguer at
St Jones, and with a great part of their Horse and Foot advance to oppose the
Lieutenant Generals passage. The Lord General to divert their design leads on
in person on the other side of Worcester, which he had undertook to attaque,
two Regiments of Foot, Colonel Hookers Horse and his own Lifeguard, whilst
Fleetwood with Colonel Goffs and Deans Regiments of Foot, marches on to a
Hedge-fight, which the Scots thought most secure, and stoutly maintained their
ground, till the fresh supply of Blakes, Gibbons, and Marshes Regiments force
them to retire to Pawick Bridge, where they are again engaged by Colonel
Hayns, Cobbets, and Matthews Regiments, and at length still overpowred by the
Enemies fresh supplies, forced to retreat in some disorderly have into
Worcester.

Their success being so bad on this side against Lieutenant General Fleetwood,
they resolve to try if they could have better fortune against Cromwell on the
other side. Therefore on a sudden they sally out with all the Horse and Foot
they could, and at the first shock made Cromwels men retire somewhat
disorderly, the King himself performing the duty of a valiant Commander in the
head of his Horse; but at length overpowred by their numerous fresh supplies,
they were put to the rout. The Horse flying amain toward the North, and the
Foot into Worcester, followed at the heels by their victors, who entered the
Town with them, which they sacked; killed, or took most of the Scots prisoners,
who found life or death, according to the mercy of those, into whose hands they
fell.

From this Battle there escaped only about 3000 Horse, most or all the
Infantry being either slain or taken, and near 100 prisoners of quality; of
which the chief were, Duke Hamilton, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Derby, (who
fell now into Colonel Lilburnes hands, though he mist him before) Earl of
Cleaveland, Earl of Lauderdail, Earl of Rothes, Earl of Carnwath, Earl of
Kelly, Lord Spine, Sir John Packington, Sr Charles Cunningham, Sir Ralph Clare,
Major General Piscotty, Major General Montgomery, Colonel Graves, and Mr
Richard Fanshaw, Secretary to his Majesty. The number of the prisoners in the
whole was given out to be near 10000, together with whom was taken the Kings
Standard, Coach and Horses, Collar of SS, and Star-Cloak. Major General Massey
likewise though he escaped the Battle, yet not finding any secure shelter, and
being grievously wounded, surrendered himself prisoner to the Countess of
Stamford, and was secured by the Lord Gray of Groby her son, and after recovery
of his wounds, by him sent up to London, from whence he shortly after escaped.

The News of this victory extremely rejoiced the Parliament at Westminster, who
nevertheless were somewhat sorry for the escape of the King of Scots, who
notwithstanding the great search made for him, and the Fine set upon his head,
escaped. For after having quitted the field at Worcester, he with only one
servant with him retired into the Woods, where he hid himself two or three
days, till at length coming to a Gentleman's house, who had formerly been a
servant of his Fathers, he was by him conveyed to a noble Esquires house in
that County, where he lay disguised near two Months, till the heat of the
search was over, from whence he came up to London as servant to a Gentlewoman,
and so at fit opportunity escaped into France.

Many of the Scotch Nobility were about this time taken by General Monck in
Scotland, at a place called Ellet, where they were met together to negotiate
the royal affairs; viz. old General Lesley, Earl of Marshall, Earl of
Craford, Lord Keith, Lord Ogilby, Lord Bargayny, Lord Huntly, Lord Lee, with
many other Knights, Gentlemen, and Ministers, who were shortly after sent by
Sea to London.

The Lord General Cromwell after his great victory at Worcester on the third
of September, (his ever propitious day) on the eighth sets forward toward
London, where arriving on the twelfth he was met by the Speaker, and most of
the Members of Parliament, the President of the Counsel of State, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, with great acclamations of joy, and
acknowledgement of the Parliaments obligation to him for his eminent services,
which was expressed by the Speaker in a very elegant speech.

Shortly after two of the Parliaments Chieftains left this world, both men of
eminent conduct, the one General Popham, one of the Admirals of their Fleet,
who was a man from whom all men expected excellent service for them, had his
days been prolonged: The other the Lord Deputy Ireton, who died of the plague
under the Walls of Limerick, whose body (or a Coffin in its stead) was
afterward brought over into England, and laid in State in Sommerset-House, and
from thence carried with as much pomp (as ever any Kings of England since the
conquest) to be interred in Westminster Abbey, where his Effigies was likewise
set up in requital of his many services, he having a long time been one of the
Parliaments fortunate Commanders.

In the mean time the Parliament take order for the speedy reducing of the
Islands of Gersey and Man, in pursuance whereof Colonel Haynes with two
Regiments of Foot and four Troops of Horse, set sail out of Weymouth the 16 of
October, and arriving at Gersey though they found some opposition at Landing,
yet they easily forced their way, and soon possessed themselves of the Island,
all the Forts in it being presently delivered to them, except Elizabeth Castle,
which held out till the middle of December, and was then surrendered upon
Articles.

Colonel Duckenfield, with his own General Cromwels and General Deans
Regiments of Foot and two Troops of Horse, on the 14th of October departed out
of the Bay of Reaumorris, toward the Island of Man, and arriving there on the
17th in Ramsey-Bay, there came aboard to them an Islander, to assure them that
they should have no opposition in their Landing; that they might come securely
under their Forts which they had taken possession of for them; that only two
Castles held out, viz. Peel and Rushen, which were held by the Forces of the
Countess of Derby, which they would help them to reduce. He is at first
distrusted, having nothing in writing to show, but Major Fox being sent ashore,
finds it true; so the Army lands and besieges both the Castles of Peel and
Rushen, which after short time delivered up with blood to Colonel Duckenfield
for the use of the Parliament, on the 26th of October 1651, where there was
found good store of provision and Ammunition of all sorts.

Shortly after was surrendered to the Parliaments Forces the strong and
impregnable hold of Corne-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, with good conditions
to the defendants, consideration being had to the strength of the place, and
the blood might probably be yet spent in reducing it per force, or the charge
they must necessarily have been at in starving it out, it being still found
very well victualled.

Notwithstanding that numerous company of Noble men and Persons of quality that
were taken with the King at Worcester, there were none suffered under the Axe
of the Parliaments Justice, but only the Earl of Derby; who notwithstanding his
having quarter given him for life, was by a Counsel of War condemned to
death, and accordingly had his head severed from his body on the 15th of
October at Preston in Lancashire, where he first began his rising; and Sr
Timothy Fetherstone who was executed shortly after. Some other persons of
meaner quality suffered death at Chester, Shrewsbury, and other places.

And now the Parliament having settled themselves so well at home, begin to take
into consideration the many wrongs, affronts and mischiefs committed upon the
English Nation by the Hollanders, together with their delays in treating for an
Accommodation: therefore to show their resentment, they put forth an Act for
encouragement of Navigation, the most pleasing to the English Mariners, and
displeasing to the Hollanders that possible could be. The heads of it were
these.

1. That no Commodity whatsoever of the growth or manufacture of Europe, Asia,
Africa or America, or any part thereof, as well of the English Plantations as
others, should be emported into England, Ireland, or any of the Territories
thereof, in any Ships but such only as do truly belong to this Commonwealth or
the Plantations thereof, under the penalty of the forfeiture of Goods and
Vessels.

2. That no Commodities whatsoever of foreign growth or manufacture which are
to be brought into this Commonwealth, in Ships belonging to the people thereof,
shall be by them shipped from any places, but only from those of the said
growth, production or manufacture, or from those ports where the said
Commodities can only be or usually have been shipped for transportation, and from
none other places.

3. That no sort of Fish usually caught by the people of this Nation, nor any
Oil made of Fish, nor any Whale, Finne or Whalebones, shall be imported as
abovesaid, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels belonging to the people
of this Nation, under the former penalty.

4. That no kinds of salted Fish from the first of February 1653, shall be
exported out of this Land in any other save English Vessels.

There were several Exceptions and Provisoes in it in refference to the
Commodities of East India, from the Levant seas, from the Ports of Spain and
Portugal.

This Act extremely perplexes the Hollander, who upon it they send over their
extraordinary Ambassadors to renew a Treaty, and endeavor by all means
possible the calling in of that Act which would be so pernicious to their
engrossing Trade; but their designs failing in its recalling, they grow angry,
and begin to dispute the unquestionable right of the English Sovereignty in the
narrow Seas, refusing to lore their topsails; which was the occasion of that
great breach of peace between these two Republiques, more potent in shipping
then all the rest of the Christian world. The first brush happened thus. In the
beginning of May 1652, Van-Trump Admiral of the Dutch-Fleet, with about 42
sail of Ships was discovered on the back side of the Goodwin sands, bearing
toward Dover-Road. Major Bourne who commanded a squadron of the Parliaments
Ships lying then in the Downs, presently ordered the Greyhound Frigate to make
sail and speak with them: which she did with the foremost, and they civilly
struck their topsails, and said They came from Admiral Trump with a Message to
the English Admiral; and coming aboard our Ships, told our men That the
Northerly winds having blown hard several days, they were forced further to
the Southward then they intended, and having rode some days off Dunkirk, had
lost there diverse Cables and Anchors, professing they intended no harm to the
English Nation. In the mean time Major Bourne having given General Blake who
was to the Westward with the rest of the Fleet, speedy advice of them, he makes
what haste he can toward them, and on the 19th of May in the morning he spies
them at Anchor in Dover-Road; upon sight of him they weigh and stand to the
Eastward, where they met with an Express from the States; whereupon they tacked
about and bore directly for the English Fleet, Van-Trump being in the head with
his Flag aloft and refusing to strike: Whereupon General Blake lets fly three
Guns, but without Balls, at Trumps Flag, and Trump in disdain shot off a Gun to
the windward, and instead of loring his Flag, hangs out a red one of defiance
(as a sign to his whole Fleet to begin the fight,) and gave General Blake a
broadside; which was answered immediately with another, so the fight began
hotly on both sides, and continued about four hours till night parted them.
There was one Dutch Ship sunk, and another of thirty Guns taken with the
Captains of both and near 150 Prisoners: of the English there was about 10
killed and 40 wounded: some Ships, and especially the Admiral, dammaged in
their masts, sails and rigging, but no considerable hurt done.

This attempt of the Dutch upon the English Fleet, whilst their Ambassadors
were treating for Peace, so incensed the Parliament, that notwithstanding all
that possibly could be alleged, either by those two Ambassadors then in
England, or two other sent over, could not appease them, but they were fully
resolved to be revenged of the Hollander for this high and daring affront;
which final answer their Ambassadors having received, had leave to depart.

And now these two mighty Commonwealths, prepare with all vigor possible for
war. General Blake with a gallant Fleet of Ships is sent Northward toward
the Isles of Orkney, to seize upon all such as he should find fishing on those
Coasts, where he took 12 Dutch men of War which were Convoyers to those
Fishermen.

Sr George Ayskew with his squadron of Ships left to guard the narrow Seas,
makes prize of many Holland Merchantmen, and going to Plymouth to clear the
Seas and convoy those English Merchantmen that lay there, to London, being
about 8, or 10 leagues off Plymouth, he receives intelligence of the Dutch
Fleet, calls a Counsel of War, and resolves to find them out; and the same
day being the 16th of August, between one and two in the afternoon, they had
sight of the Dutch Fleet, and presently stood toward them with all the sail
they could pack: The Dutch were 60 men of War and 30 Merchant men; the
English but 46 in all with Fireships and Scouts. Sr George with a squadron of
seven Ships charges through and through the Dutch, notwithstanding they at
first brunt received very much damage in their masts and rigging; and had the
rest of the Captains done their duty, they had in all probability routed the
Dutchmens great Fleet, but at length the night parted them: the English in this
fight had several Captains wounded, and Captain Pack killed.

Prizes of Holland Merchantmen are daily sent into the River by General
Blake, Vice Admiral Pen, and Sr George Askew, to the great encouragement of
English Mariners, those Merchants Ships having generally good plunder, and
being taken with little danger.

And now a Fleet of French falls likewise into the hands of the Engliish, which
as they were going to relieve Dunkirke, are spied by the English, and being
pursued, are most of them taken. The names of them were, The Triton with 31
Guns, the Shepherd 29 Guns, the Gift of God 30 Guns, the Duchess 22 Guns, the
Crescent 26 Guns, the Hunter 22 Guns, the St Lewis 28 Guns, a small Frigot of 8
Guns, and 6 Fireships. The taking of this Fleet making the French in Dunkirke
despair of relief, caused the rendition both of it and Graveling, to the
Spaniard.

And now on the 28 of September happened that notable fight between the English
and Dutch, commonly called the Kentish Knock. General Blake having discovered
a Fleet of Hollanders, consisting of about sixty Sail (on the backside of the
Goodwin Sands) under the Command of Admiral Dewit, makes toward them, and
engages them; but the Dutch having placed themselves under the Sand called the
Kentish Knock, to hinder the English from coming to the Weathergage, they
endeavoring to do it had like to have endammaged themselves: for the Admiral,
the Royal Sovereign, the Resolution, and the St Andrew, and others struck on
the Sands, but getting off again without any harm, fell afresh to the work,
till night parted them. Next Morning September 29 the Duch Fleet was seen two
Leagues Northeast off the English, who made after them all the forenoon with
that little wind there was, but the wind coming to North and by West, they
could not get up to them; yet some of the best Frigots were commanded to bear
as near the Dutch as they could, and keep them in play till the rest came up.
About three a Clock they got within shot of the Dutch Fleet, who fearing that
by degrees the English would get within them, set up their main Sails and ran
for it, whom ten Frigots had in chase till six a Clock; the next day the whole
Fleet pursued the Dutch into their very harbors. In this sight the Hollander
had five Ships disabled, among which the Rearadmirall was one, whose Captain
and men the English took out of her, but left her floating on the sea. The
English lost not above forty men.

But in the mean time the Hollanders get the better of a squadron of our Ships
in the Straits, where they were eleven to four, they take the Phaenix, an
English Ship of 45 Guns, which the English retake afterward by a stratagem.

The Danish Ambassador who was come over just at the beginning of the breach
between the two Commonwealths, the wound now beginning to fester, is recalled
by his Master; who was forced to temporize with the Hollanders, and who to that
effect detains 22 English Merchants Ships which were coming from the Eastland;
and notwithstanding all fair treaties, would not be persuaded to let the Ships
go, but took out the Goods and sold them.

The Hollanders now prepare to be revenged of those rubs they had received from
the English, and to that intent appear on the 20th of December on the backside
of the Goodwin with 90 Men of War and 10 Fireships; the English were 42 sail
in the Downs, yet for all their small number resolve to fight them, though it
proved to their loss; for the Garland and Bonadventure besides two Merchants
Ships were taken, General Blake himself was endangered, and the Vanguard and
Victory scarce got off clear. This loss made General Blake retreat into Lee
Road, so that the Dutch bragged of us (as we before had done of them,) that
they had pursued us unto our Harbors.

The Parliament however provide to revenge this loss, and to that effect order
fit encouragement to the Mariners; That their pay instead of 18s, should be
23s per mensem. That for every Prize they shall take, they have 10s for every
Tunburthen, and 6lb 13s 4d for every Piece of Ordinance, to be equally
distributed, besides the rifling of all above the Gun deck. That they shall
have 10lb a Gun for every Man of War they shall sink or destroy by fire, etc.
That they which will come in to serve voluntarily shall have a months pay
gratis. Care was likewise taken for Provisions for sick and wounded men aboard
and Maintenance ashore.

These encouragements made the Seamen venture more willingly, so that about the
middle of February the English had a gallant Fleet of Ships at Sea, which the
18th day discovered the Dutch Fleet, in number about 80 Men of War, with about
150 Merchant men from Roan, Nants and Bourdeaux, between Portland and the Isle
of Wight. About eight in the morning, General Blake and General Deane in the
Triumph, with three or four of the headmost Ships of the English Fleet, endured
the brunt with near 30 of the Dutch men of War till two or three of the
Clock, when half the English Fleet came up, who continued the fight till night.
The English in this days service had the Sampson (a Flemish Prize) disabled,
the Men they afterward took out and sunk the Ship themselves; the Dutch had
one Ship sunk.

Feb. 19. The Dutch steering on their course, the English made toward them,
brought some of their Ships by the Lee and destroyed them.

Feb. 20. The two Fleets engaged, and the dispute continued very hot for near
five or six hours, till at last the Dutch begun to fire out of their sternmost
Ports, and fly away; so the English gave them a chase, took fifty of their
Merchants, and nine men of War. The slaughter was great on both sides, though
greater on the Dutch then English.

Whilst the Dutch are thus beaten in the Channel, they give us a blow before
the Port of Livorne, where the Leopard, Peregrine, and Levant Merchant are
taken by them, the Sampson fired, and the Bonadventure blown up; Captain
Badiley who lay out at Sea during this fight with twelve Ships, not being able
or willing to come to their assistance.

In the mean time arrives an extraordinary Ambassador from the King of
Portugal to the Parliament, which after many addresses, treaties, and
conferences is concluded, upon obligation to satisfy the English Merchants
losses.

From France there comes two Agents, one from the King of France, desired
release of those Ships taken before Dunkirke; as also that there might be a
right understanding between the two Nations. The other from the Prince of
Conde, craving aid against the Cardinal and his faction, who had strongly
besieged Bourdeaux; but they both proved ineffectuall.

And now happened a very strange alteration in the Scene of affairs in England.
Cromwell whose ambition was now ripe, and who knew that now he might take a
very fit opportunity to usurp that power he had so long gaped for; the people
of these Nations being weary of the actions of this Parliament, and their
dilatory proceedings and apparent intentions of perpetuating themselves; and he
perceiving that as the people were weary of them, so they would be would be
willing to be rid of them: On the 20 of April 1653. enters the Parliament
house, attended by some of his principal Officers, where he delivered several
reasons why that Parliament should be dissolved, and a period put to its
sitting, which was immediately done. The Speaker with the rest of the Members,
(some by force, some through fear, and some through murmuring) departing the
house, all the Nation rejoicing, and scarce a man grieved for their
dissolution, but themselves; it being generally believed, that though the
Nation might not be bettered by this change, yet worse could not befall it.

But to satisfy the wiser sort of people, General Cromwell and his Counsel
of Officers publish a very large and specious Declaration, showing the reasons
of his dissolving this Parliament; in that they regarded not the Nations good,
or proceeded to the establishment of a Commonwealth as they pretended, but only
to an arbitrary perpetuation of their power; and that therefore some other
means must be sought for the establishment of such a Government, as might suit
with the Liberties and Privileges of the people.

Thus that part of the Parliament who had cut off their King and Masters head;
and usurped an authority over these Nations, is turned out of doors by their
servant Oliver Cromwell, and their power wholly taken into his own hands; which
how he executed and improved to his own advantage, in the next part shall be
declared.

FLORVS ANGLICVS, OR THE Government of England UNDER Oliver Lord Protector,
from the Year 1653, to 1658. PART II.
THe Parliament, or at least that part of the House of Commons which then sat,
being dissolved, and their power wholly devolved into the hands of their
aspiring General Cromwell, (their Dissolution being willingly assented to, by
most of their principal Officers both by Sea and Land) he had now nothing to
do, but to give notice to the Magistrates of the Civil and Capital Laws, to
go on in the prosecution of their duties (the generality of the people being
very well satisfied;) to which effect this ensuing Declaration was published

Whereas the Parliament being dissolved persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, are (according to the late Declaration of the 22 of April last) to be
called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those
resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling those
persons, it has been found necessary for the preventing the mischiefs and
inconveniences, which may arise in the mean while to the public affairs, that
a Counsel of State be constittuted to take care of, and intend the peace,
safety, and present management of the affairs of this Commonwealth; which being
settled accordingly, the fame is hereby declared and published, to the end all
persons may take notice hereof, and in their several places and stations
demean themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as
heretofore, and in the exercise and administration whereof, as endeavors shall
be used, that no oppression or wrong be done to the people; so a strict account
will be required of all such, as shall do any thing to endanger the public
peace and quiet upon any pretense whatsoever.

O. Cromwell.

The Dutch (however the English Nation seemed generally satisfied) yet hoped
that such distractions might advance their cause and interest, arising from
this sudden alteration and change of the State of affairs in England
(imagining Chimeraes in fancies, and building Castles in the Air, with vain
hopes that these confusions at Land, would hinder all preparations at Sea to
oppose them; so having manned out a high and mighty Fleet, they begun to play
the Rex.

And first having ready in their habours, a numerous Fleet of Merchantmen,
bound for France, Spain, Italy, the Levant, and East Indies, they with a Fleet
of 90 Sail of men of War, undertake to convoy and secure them from all English
surprizals; yet notwithstanding their force, they dare not venture to conduct
them through St Georges Channel, his Cross having so often proved bloody to them
there, but choose rather to steer their course round the North of Scotland,
which way though it was far more long and tedious, yet was as much more safe
and secure.

Trump having happily according to his Commission left these Merchantmen out
of all suspicion of danger, tacks about, and bends his course to the Sound,
from whence he convoys home a great Fleet of Eastland-Merchant-men, from
Russia, Denmark, Dantzicke, and other Ports of the Baltic Ocean; and in his
voyage he meets with another Fleet of Hollanders coming from France, which
being joined to him, he enters with a great deal of bravery into the Ports of
Holland and Zealand, his Fleet in the whole consisting of between 3 and 400
Sail of Ships.

The Flemmings pufft up with this happy success, and understanding that the
English Fleet was gone Northward, thought to do some noble exploit on the
English in their absence. Having therefore hoised Sail, they stand over for the
Downs; and on the 25 of May ranged themselves in Douer-Road with 108 Ships,
where finding but three small Ships, (a poor prize for so great a Navy) they
began to wreak their malice upon the Town, by beating some Tiles off from the
tops of the houses with their great Shot, wherein they manifested far more
folly then valor.

From thence they stood off toward the North, out of a pretense to seek for
the English Fleet, which they boasted they must send Hue and Cry after, but
they met them sooner then they expected; for the English Fleet being returned
Southwards, and Anchoring three Leagues off the South-head of Gober, early in
the morning on the third of June espied two Dutch Galliots, which being chased
by two English Frigots, brought them within ken of their whole Fleet; upon
which the two Frigots giving the usual and appointed tokens, the whole Fleet
made Sail with what possible speed they could to engage the Dutch; but the wind
being scarce, it was near twelve a Clock before they could reach them with
their Shot.

This first days dispute was very hot on both sides, and so continued till
night parted them, though little harm was done to the English, but only the
loss of General Dean, who was slain in the beginning of the encounter, with a
Cannon shot from one of the enemies Rear-Admirals, as it was supposed.

The second day though it were late before the Fleets could join, yet the
dispute proved very hot and bloody. Van Trump had at first got the advantage of
that little wind was stirring, and brought up his Fleet in very good order,
thinking to charge through and through the English, but his design failed; for
the wind rearing about to the Westerly, the English Generals Blake and Moncke,
fell in so furiously amongst the thickest of the Dutch Fleet, that they soon
forced them to retire; and their thundrings of Shot still continuing, the Dutch
not able to abide it, tacked about, and with all the Sail they could make, ran
toward their own Coasts. But the English in respect of those dangerous flats,
thought it not safe to pursue them too far, but only sent some light Frigots to
discover their course.

In this encounter there was no certain account could be given of the Dutch
that were slain; but there were taken prisoners 6 Captains; 1350 common-Seamen
and others; 11 men of War taken; 6 sunk. Of the English, Gnerall Dean slain; 1
Captain killed; 120 Seamen slain; and 236 wounded: But in all this desperate
Batrell not one Ship lost or disabled.

The Dutch Fleet by the opportunity and advantage of the night, got into the
Wielings; the Vley, and the Texell, to recruit their men, and repair their
losses which were so great; but the loss on the English side being so
inconsiderable, they resolved to keep the Sea, and having mended their torn and
tottered rigging, they call a Counsel of War, where it was agreed on, that the
whole: Fleet should make what have they could toward the Weilings, and by
ranging up and down the Coast, block up the Dutch in their habours, which they
did for a good space of time, taking prizes at pleasure, and not permitting the
Dutch whose Fleet was separated into several harbors, to join or be in a
capacity to make any resistance; so that the Dutch (having now the English
Fleet constantly in sight, though against their wills) need not be put to any
further trouble of making a Hue and Cry after them. But let us leave the
Hollanders thus blockt up, and return to our Scepter-aspiring Cromwell in
England.

Who having finished his Consultations with his Counsel of Officers, about
choosing those persons into whose hands he intended to put the Legislative
power of the Nation, sends out his Warrants to those persons (so by him chosen)
(whom he will have styled a Parliament, though they amounted not to above 140
persons for the three Nations) to appear at the Counsell-Chamber in Whitehall
on the 4th of July 1653. where they being accordingly convened, General
Cromwell attended by several Officers of the Army, makes them a short speech,
which being ended, he delivers them a Writing under his hand and Seal,
impowring them to be the supreme legislative Authority of the three Nations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, with all the Territories thereto belonging; and
that any forty of them should be a Quorum sufficient to dispatch any public
business, make Laws, raise Moneys, and order the affairs of Peace and War as
they should think fit; only their sitting was limited to the third of November
1654, and three Months before their dissolution, they were to make choice of
others to succeed in their room. So Cromwell having canted out a prayer that
God would bless them and their Counsels, dismissed them.

From thence they retired to the old Parliament House at Westminster, where
having chose Mr Rouse Speaker, they began to debate what they should call
themselves, a Parliament, or something else; but at last it was resolved in the
affirmative (by what law or reason few canguess) that all addresses should be
made to them as to a Parliament.

But it is very like many (if not most) of this pact Parliament knew very well
for what end and purpose they were called, viz. to make way for Cromwels future
greatness; and though perhaps these were the fewer part, yet be plainly
endeavored to hedge in the greater by somenting those differences among them,
which his earnest pressing them to take the Tithes and Universities into
consideration, caused.

About this time John Lilburn, who for his factious spirit had long lain in
prison, and was at last banished by the long Parliament, upon occasion of this
change of Government, came into England, and cast himself upon the Lord
General Cromwell for protection; but he knowing his turbulent temper, refused
to intermeddle, but left him to the Law, so being committed to Newgate, he was
brought to his trial in the Old Baily, where notwithstanding the endeavors of
his adversaries, he so strongly pleaded his cause, that the Jury brought him in
not guilty. But however his spirit be very well known, and that he would still
be carping at whatever Government should be established, he was still kept
prisoner first in the Tower, and after in Dover-Castle, where Trandling
according to the madness of his brain, from one opinion to another he at length
fell into Quakerisme, in which heresy he died.

But let us look a little into Scotland, where though the English had got
possession of most of the Forts, Garrisons, and strong holds, in the Low-lands,
yet the High-landers from their craggy Cliffs made many incursions into the
Country, committing many Murders, Robberies, and Outrages upon both people and
Soldiers; forth with again betaking themselves to their inaccessible
fastnesses, whither our Soldiers not knowing the Country nor Passes, could not
tell how to pursued them, and they increasing daily into great numbers, headed
by Glencarne, Atholl, Seafort, and others. The Lord Seafort having surprised
seven or eight men, that came ashore to seek provisions from aboard the Fortune
Frigot, who layar Anchor at Lew is Island, was so vain as to send his Summons
to the Ship, requiring it to surrender, but it proved as could not be otherwise
expected, ineffectuall.

The condition of Ireland was the same with that of Scotland, all the strong
holds and fortresses being reduced to the English yoke, nor any opposition
made, but what the excursions of some Tories (who lurked in Woods and
Fastnesses, and did much damage to the Country people and travelers on the
Road) produced.

The Hollanders perceiving their force too weak to resist the English strength,
send over four Commissioners, viz. Monsieur Bevering, Newport, Youngstall, and
Vanderpaue, (who died soon aftet his arrival here) to renew again the Treaty.
Though three remaining Commissioners pursued their negotiations very close, yet
the Treaty produced at that present neither cessation or intermission of Arms,
but both parties prepared for War, and had during the Treaty a most remarkable
Fight, which happened thus.

On the 29th of July the English Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from the
Weilings, consisting of about 95 men of War, (which Fleet Van Trump had all
that while been preparing with indefatigable labor to beat the English from
his Countries harbors; and to encourage and add resolution to his Seamen, had
made proclamation, That all the men of War taken from the English should be the
Mariners, with a considerable Sum of Money to whomever should take the
Admirals or vice-Admirals Flag. The English Scouts having espied them gave
notice to the Fleet, who made what Sail they could possibly toward them, which
the Dutch discerning, stood away, and the English after them, but the wind
being scarce, came not into Shot till six a Clock, when thirty light Frigots
engaged them, but little was done this day, in regard the night parted them.

The Dutch all night stood into the Texell, where there joined with them 25
stout men of War more, so that now they made 120 in all. With this Fleet Van
Trump the next morning by break of day faced the English Fleet: But the
Generals Blake and Moncke, finding the wind somewhat high and the weather thick
and cloudy, fearing the Sands or a Lee shore more then all the Dutch force,
stood off to Sea, which made the Dutch suppose a flight; so that one of Trumps
Captains urged him to pursue them, telling him, that those dogs durst not abide
one broad side from his Excellency; that he might clearly see they ran away for
fear, and that he should not lose so fair an opportunity. But generous Van
Trump who knew the English better, returned the Captain this modest answer: Sr
be you careful to look to your charge, and trouble your head no further, for
if the English were but 10 Sail, I am sure they would fight us, and so indeed
it happened; for the weather clearing up, and the wind laying, they drew up
their Fleet into a body, and tacked about to meet the Enemy, who being likewise
in a posture, they presently engaged. The Fight was courageously maintained on
both sides, from between five and six in the morning, till one in the
afternoon, both Fleets charging valiantly one through the other; till at length
(the Dutch Admiral Van Trump, fighting in the midst of the English Fleet with
a great deal of courage and resolution, was by a Musket Bullet shot on the left
Pap near the heart, and slain outright.) The Dutch began to decline, many of
their Ships being likewise fired or sunk; and the amazement for their Generals
death possessing the whole Navy, they hoised up all the Sail possibly they
could, and made away directly for the Texell; and the English befides the
damage many of their Ships had received, were loath to be too hold on that
shore, so they pursued them no farther, but steered their course to Soal buy,
that they might there dispose of the prisoners, and mend their tottered Sails
and Rigging.

The English in this Fight had 8 Captains slain outright, viz. Graves,
Chapvian, Tailor, Newman, Crispe, Owen, Cox, and Peacock; and 400 common
Seamen; they had likewise 700 men wounded, of which 5 Captains, viz. Stoakes,
Seaman, Rouse, Hollander, and Cabit; they lost but one Ship, viz. the Oak
which was burnt by a Fireship, and had two or three more disabled. As for the
loss the Dutch received, in relation to those slain or wounded, was uncertain;
but their visible loss was 30 men of War sunk or fired, 6 Captains, and about a
1000 prisoners taken; but their greatest loss and indeed the loss of all was
the loss of their Renowned General Van Trump, who had the hard fortune to be
always beaten by the English; yet could not his judgment be at all taxed, nor
his fame eclipsed, which formerly he had so deservedly gotten, to be esteemed
one of the ablest and best understanding Sea-Captains in the world.

For this ominent piece of Service, Cromwels pact Parliament ordered that
Chains of gold should be presented to the Admirals Blake and Moncke,
Vice Admiral Pen, and Rear-Admirall Lawson; other Chains were likewise
presented to other Flag-Captains; and Meddals of silver to the Officers of the
Fleet, in token of their good service.

But whilst our Fleets are thus victorious abroad, discontents are broached at
home, by reason the Parliament had now sat near six Months, and effected
nothing for the good and settlement of the Nation; having indeed done nothing
at all but made that Act concerning Marriages, out of mere envy and despite to
the Clergy. So beginning at first to lop off a branch of the Ministers
maintenance, that they might afterward cut down the Tree. Concerning Tithes it
is debated in the House what saw fit to be done, and a Committee appointed to
onsider of so weighty a business, who being fully convinced in a full hearing
by arguments, and reasons drawn both from the Laws of God and man, of the
legality of it, make report to the House in the affirmative for Tithes; which
so exasperated those who were of the contrary faction, that they begin clearly
to argue against the Ministerial Function, urging it to be burdensome to the
people, and by that strange consequence Antichristian. There were near 60 of
the Members of this opinion, which the rest (though the major part, fearing
would undermine them, by laying hold of some opportunity to assemble themselves
together, and by any forty of them being a Quorum, accomplish their designs)
resolve to dissolve their House themselves; which motion being made by a Member
on the 12th of December, was readily assented to, and so the Speaker and
several others adjourned to Whitehall, and redelivered their Instrument of
Government into the hands of Oliver Cromwell, from whom they had received it.

This Parliament having thus by writings under their hands resigned again the
power given them, the whole Authority both Civil and Military of these three
Nations, was by this resignation strangely understood to be devolved into the
hands of Oliver Cromwell. Whereupon he calls a Counsel of Officers, who having
some others joined with them to consult of the settlement of a Government, at
length after much seeking of God (where I leave the Reader to judge of the
rabble of hypocritical canting that was blabbered out) they concluded to have
a Commonwealth in a single Person: That that Person should be Oliver Cromwell,
Captain General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland: That his
Title should be, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging: That he should
have a Counsel of one and twenty persons to be assistant with him in the
Government: That an Instrument should be framed, containing the Basis and
foundation of this new established Government, the chief Heads of which were
these,

1. That the Protector should call a Parliament every three years. 2. That the
first Parliament should be convened on the third of September 1654. 3. That he
should not dissolve any Parliament till it had sat five Monoths. 4. That
such-Bills as they offered to him, he not passing them in twenty days, should
pass without him. 5. That he should have a select Counsel (of men faithful to
his interest) not exceeding one and twenty, nor under thirteen. 6. That the
Protectorship should not be hereditary. 7. That immediately after his death the
Counsel should choose another Protector before they rose. 8. That no Protector
after him should be General of the Army. 9. That in the intervals of
Parliament, he with consent of his Counsel might make Laws which should be
binding to the Subject, till the next Sessions of Parliament.
Oliver Cromwell now made Lord Protector, who had taken so many Oaths and
Covenants before, is to swear afresh, which was performed on the 16th of
December 1653 with a great deal of State, in the Chancery-Court in
Westminster Hall, before the Judges, Mayor, and Aldermen of London, with the
chief Officers of the Natron, where in the presence of God he promised upon
Oath, not to violate or infringe the matters and things contained in the
aforementioned Instrument, but to observe and cause the same to be observed,
and in all things to the best of his understanding, govern the Nations
according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs, seeking peace, causing justice
and Law to be equally administered.

Presently after the Administration of this Oath, the following Proclamation
was by Order of the Counsel, published throughout all the Territories and
Dominions of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, viz.

Whereas the late Parliament dissolved themselves, and resigning their whole
powers and Authorities, the Government of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, by a Lord Protector and successive trienniall
Parliaments is now established. And whereas Oliver Cromwell Captain General of
all the Forces of this Commonwealth, is declared Lord Protector of the said
Nations, and has accepted thereof, We have therefore thought it necessary (as
we do hereby) to make publication of the premises, and strictly to charge and
command all and every person and persons, of what quality and condition soever
in any of the said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and
submit themselves to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors,
Bailiffs, etc. are required to publish this Proclamation, to the end none may
have cause to pretend ignorance in this behalf.

This Proclamation was first of all proclaimed by a Sergeant at Arms in the
Pallaceyard Westminster, and by the Lord Major, Sheriffs and Aldermen of London
at the Royal Exchange, and afterward throughout all England, Scotland and
Ireland.

The City of London to show their willing concurrence to this great Change,
invite the Protector to a Dinner at Grocers-Hall, whither he is attended with a
great deal of magnificence, and received with as much pomp and splendour as
possibly could be. There he first first makes use of the Power given him, in
giving Titles of Honor, by dubbing of Sr Thomas Viner then Lord Major of
London Knight.

And now out of imaginary fears of danger, the better to secure his state, a
seeming Plot is found out, some Cavaliers are sent to the Tower, and the others
warned from London upon it; but the Protector to show his clemency at his first
entrance into the Government, after some small time of durance, releases again
those who were imprisoned in the Tower.

The King of Scots being now come into France, was there honorably received by
the Court where he took up his residence, at which time there were many
discontents of the Princes of the blood, against the aspiring ambition of
Cardinal Mazarine, in so much that it had like to have come to a civil war.
To compose which difference, the King of Scots offered to mediate in order to a
reconciliation, wherein he so far prevailed, that he procured a Conference
between Deputies on both sides; to whom, although he urged his own condition as
an argument for the French King to compose the difference in love rather then
to to stand it out; all which proving ineffectuall, both sides betake
themselves to arms; the Treaty not succeeding; caused him to lie under the
displeasure of the Cardinal.

The Scots in the Highlands under the command of Glencarne and Kenmore, by
Commission from the King, rally and rise to a considerable body of near 4000
Horse and Foot, hoping they might once more fairly dispute their quarcell in
field; but Major General Morgan with 1500 Horse and Foot coming upon them at
their Rendesvouz, before they could get into any good order, killed near 200 on
the place, took most of the rest Prisoners, Glencarne himself hardly escaping
with about 40 Horse.

The three Agents from Holland having been here all this while, and little or
nothing agree on for the ratification of a Peace between the two States, two of
them went over to receive fuller power from the Lords States (as was pretended)
but it was rather suspected that it was to fetch Money, which was the only bait
by which the Protector could be won to an accord, for at their return the Peace
was suddenly clapped up, and by a large Proclamation annexed to the Articles
(showing the reason's of the Peace, which would so much (as was pretended)
redound to the good of the Nation, though no understanding Englishman but might
guess at the inconveniences of it) proclaimed on the 5th of April at London,
and after in other parts of England.

And now another Plot succeeds the last, the chief designers are pretended to
be Gilbert and John Gerrard Esquires brothers, one Jones an Apotheeary, Tewdor,
Fox and Vowell; the design was to have slain the Protector, raised an Army, and
brought in the King; but how no man ever knew, (however these feigned Plots, or
at least Plots first contrived by themselves, are good seturers of Tyrants and
usurpers; for hereby they fright men from real designments,) the plotters are
sent to the Tower, and a High Court of Justice is erected for their trial,
Gerrard and Vowell are condemned to be hanged, the rest are saved; Vowell
according to sentence was hanged at Charingcross, but Coll. Gerrard upon
Petition had the favor to be beheaded at Towerhill, where he behaved himself
so gallantly, and looked death so unappalledly in the face, that his very
enemies were forced to admire his courage and constancy.

At the very same time Don Pantaleon Sa Brother to the Lord Ambassador of
Portugal, was beheaded on the same scaffold, for having committed a ridiculous
Riot on the New Exchange, where (followed by a crew of mad fellows, Servants,
and Lacquies to his Brother or himself) he shot a Gentleman that was there
walking, in the head, and had done further mischief, had not the noble Coll.
Gerrard (who was for an other cause beheaded before him) stopped their fury, and
with his Rapier drove them before him down stairs: This Portugal came with so
great fear to the block, that many deemed his life was gone before the blow
with the Axe was given.

The King of Scots being still in France, and finding notwithstanding his own
and his Mothers endeavors, that the Treaty with France and England was
vigorously solicited by Monsieur Newfvill: Seeing that by necessary consequence
the Peace being concluded, he and his party must be enforced to leave France,
thought it a great deal better and more honorable, voluntarily to desert that
Kingdom, then to stay till he were forced out by complement: so he with his
Brother the Duke of York, his Cousins Prince Rupert and Edward, retired
themselves to Chatillon a house of the Prince of Conde's, from whence not long
after the King and Prince Rupert went into Germany.

But now Glencarne reenforced by hopes of Middletons coming out of Holland with
supplies of Money and Ammunition, begins to stir again in the Highlands,
exhorting his Countrymen to gain themselves immortal fame, by redeeming
themselves and their posterity from the slavery and bondage they now lay under,
filling their ears with those vast supplies which Middleton was to bring out of
the Netherlands. At length Middleton arrives, and amongst other things brings a
Commission for himself to be Commander in Chief, and Monroe Lieutenant
General. But Glencarne looks upon this as a very high affront, that he should
take the pains to raise an Army, and others be appointed to command over it;
that he was a Soldier, and equally fit to command with the best, and therefore
could not comport this affront done to his honor. Middleton endeavors to
reconcile these differences, but in vain, Clencarne disdaining to condescend
lower then to be Lieutenant General, which neither Middleton nor Monroe would
yield to; whereupon Glencarne challenges his adversary to a single Duel,
where Fortune favoring him, he wounds and disarms Monroe, and presently after
with near 506 Gentlemen deserts Middleton, and makes his composition with the
Governor of Dunbarton.

However Middleton prosecutes his designs as well as he can; General Monk is
sent against him, with Commission to be General of the Forces in Scotland; he
hearing of these dissentions, delays marching toward them till he see the
event, which happening as before, he advances toward Middleton, engages him at
Loughgerry, Routs him and forces this stubborn General to fly back again into
Holland.

And here I cannot omit a passage which may sufficiently vindicate the Kings
Majesty of Scotland from those aspersions of Popery laid against him. After the
Kings departure out of France into Germany, the young Duke of Gloucester, was
placed by the Queen Mother in a Jesuits College, to be instructed in the
Roman Catholic Religion, which his Brother the King hearing of, sent speedy
order to have him brought to him; which being obeyed, as he was departing Paris
with the Marquess of Ormond, the Queen desired only that he would stay and take
a dinner in the College before he went; to which he answered, That though she
were his Mother, yet he ought rather to give obedience to his Brother who was
his King. This denial so angered the Queen, that she permitted him not to take
leave of her; and after when the King sent a Letter to excuse the business, she
in fvry burnt it; which circumstances may sufficiently evidence, that the King
is still truly Protestant.

In the mean time our new Lord Protector, according to his Oath taken in the
Instrument for Government, summons his Parliament on the 3d of September 1654,
which being assembled, the day before their Sessions, the Protector meets them
in the Painted Chamber; where he only desires them to accompany him to hear a
Sermon in Westminster Abbey, and that afterward he would impart his sense to
them. About nine of the Clock his Highness went from Whitehall to the Abbey,
attended by his ordinary Guard and some of his Counsel bare, the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal and of the Treasury, following in their
Coaches, he going likewise in his Coach accompanied by Lambert and his Son
Henry; here they staid whilst Dr Goodwin finished his Sermon, after which
retiring into the Painted Chamber, he was followed by the Parliament, to whom
he made a formal Speech much to this effect;

That that Parliament was such a Congregation of wise, prudent and discreet
persons that England had scarce seen the like, and that it would have been very
necessary and worthy such an Assembly, to give a relation of the series of Gods
Providence all along to these very times; but that being very well known to
them, he should at present omit it, and proceed to the declaring how the
Erection of this present Power was a suitable providence with the rest, by
showing them what a condition these Nations were in at its erection; every man's
heart was then against another, every man's interest divided against another,
and almost every thing grown arbitrary: That there was grown up a general
contempt of God and Christ, the grace of God turned into wantonness, and his
Spirit made a cloak for all wickedness and profaness; nay the axe was even laid
to the root of the Ministry, and swarms of Jesuits were continually wafted
over hither to consume and destroy the welfare of England: That the Nation was
likewise then engaged in a deep war with Portugal, Holland and France, so
that the whole Nation was in a heap of confusion: but that this Government was
calculated for the peoples interest (let malignant spirits say what they would)
and that with humbleness toward God and modesty toward them, he would recount
somewhat in behalf of this Government. For first it had endeavored to reform
the Law: it had put into the seat of Justice men of known integrity and
ability; it had settled a way for probation of Ministers to preach the Gospel;
and besides all this, it had called a Free Parliament ( blessed be God they
that day saw a Free Parliament.) As for the Wars a Peace was with Sweden,
Denmark, the Durch and Portugal, and one was likewise near concluding with
France. That these things were but entrances and doors of hope, but now he made
no question to enable them to lay the top stone of this work; he recommended to
them this Maxim, That Peace though it be made, is not to be trusted further
then it consists with interest. That the great work now lay upon this
Parliament, was that the Government of Ireland might be settled in terms of
Honor; That they would avoid confusions, lest foreign States should take
advantage by them: That as for himself he did not speak like one that would be
a Lord over them, but as one that would be a Fellow Servants to them in this
great affair. So to conclude; he desired them to repair to their House, and use
their liberty in choosing a Speaker.

The Protectors speech finished, the Members immediately repair to their House,
and there choose William Lenthall Esquire Master of the Rolls to be their
Speaker, which done they begin upon the Instrument for Government. The Question
is in the first place proposed, Whether the Legislative power shoald be in a
single person and a Parliament? The Protectorians endeavor by all means
possible to persuade that it should be no Question, but be carried absolutely
in the affirmative. This is as strongly opposed by the greater part of the
House; and amongst the rest a Member who had all along strongly opposed
Monarchy, as incongruous to his interest, stood up and told them, That they
could not but discern the snares that were laid to entrap the privileges of
the people; for his own part he declared that as God had made him instrument
all in cutting down Tyranny in one person, so now he could not endure to see
the Nations liberties shackled by another, whose right to the Government could
be measured out no other ways then by the length of his Sword, which was only
that which emboldened him to command his Commanders. Many speeches were made
confirming what he had said, and in direct opposition to a single person.

These debates and divisions upon the Protectors instrument were soon carried
to his ear; and therefore (he fearing that in the end they would produce
irreconcilable jarrs) resolved to remedy them in time, and to put the
Parliament into a posture more complacent to his designs if possible; he goes
therefore by water from Whitehall to Westminster, enters the Painted Chamber,
and sends for those Members of Parliament which were then sitting, to whom he
declared.

That the God of heaven knew what great grief and sorrow of heart it was to
him, to find them falling into heats and divisions: That he would have them
take notice of this, that the same Government made him a Protector whech made
him a Parliament: That as they were entrusted with some things, so was he with
others: That in the Government there were certain Fundamentals, which could not
be altered: As,

1. That the Government should be in a single person and a Parliament.

2. That Parliaments should not be perpetnall.

3. That the Militia should not be trusted into one hand or power, but so that
the Parliament have a check on the Protector, and the Protector on the
Parliament.

4. That in matters of Religion there ought to be liberty of Conscience, and
that persecution in the Church was not to be tolerated.

That the rest of the things in the Government were examinable and alterable,
as the State of affairs did require: That for his own part his heart was even
overwhelmed with grief, to see that any of them should go about to overthrow
what was settled, contrary to their trust received from the people, which cannot
but bring very great inconveniences upon themselves and the Nation.

This was the sum of his persuasions to them; but fearing that this would not
sufficiently win them to his interest, he provided a recognition to be signed
by every individual Member, as follows.

I do hereby promise and engage to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector,
and the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and shall not
(according to the tenor of the Indenture whereby I am returned to serve in
Parliament) propose or give my consent to alter the Government, as it is settled
in one person and a Parliament.

This was subscribed by many of the Members, though the major part rather chose
to abandon the House; the rest conntinued sitting to the end of the five
Months, at which time the Protector seeing their dilatory proceedings, and
that they delayed the settling him in the Government, the time being expired
wherein his Instrument gave him leave (not letting slip one day nor sarce an
hour) dissolves them.

Some time after the time of this Parliaments dissolution, was there a horrible
terrible Plot discovered, against his Highness the Lord Protector and his
usurped power: The first appearance of its effects was at Salisbury, whither on
the 16th of March came a Body of about 200 Cavaliers, and it being then the
time of the Assizes there, they took away the Judges Commissions, clapped guards
on all the Innes, till they had seized upon all the Horses, then left the Town
and marched toward Pool, commanded by their Captains; Wagstaffe, Penruddocke,
and Jones.

Another Party at the same time surprised the Town of Shrewsbury, and
endeavored to have taken the Castle; but being discovered, that design was
prevented.

There was likewse a Party to the number of 800 or a 1000 men got together in
Montgomeryshire.

In Sherwood-Forrest likewise in Nottingamshire, there was a Party gathered
together, but frighted with their own shadows, they dispersed; as did likewise
two parties which were upon Yorkshire and Northumberland.

This Plot was said to have been laid all over the Nation, though there were so
few appearances, and all those vanished of themselves, except that commanded by
Wagstaffe, Penruddocke, and Jones, which being pursued by Colonel Vntoncrooke
out of Wiltshire into Devonshire, were by him and John Copleston Esquire
Sheriff of Devon totally routed, Penruddocke and Jones taken, and Penruddocke
with some others executed. For this service the Protector afterward dubbed the
Sheriff of Devon, and in token of more favor gave him the Sword wherewith he
Knighted him.

About the end of this year 1654, died that famous Antiquary and accomplished
Scholar Mr John Seldom of the Inner Temple, whose fame was so great in
Foreign parts, that many persons of known wisdom and Learning, came over on
purpose into England to see and admire him. Nor need any give him any larger
Encomium, then the Right Reverend Bishop of Armagh gave him in the Pulpit when
he preached his Funeral Sermon, viz. That he esteemed Mr Seldom a man of such
vast parts and Learning, that he judged himself not worthy to carry his Books
after him.

The Protector had a great while been preparing a mighty Fleet with all
necessary provisions for some notable voyage; all the world standing amazed at
his preparations, and every one fearing thuir own States, they could not guess
whither his design tended. At length those vast preparations produced two
mighty Fleets, the one under command of General Blake, was fitted only for the
Sea and sent to the Streights; The other about two months after was committed
to the charge of General Pen, who was to take aboard him a Land Army commanded
by General Venables. These Land Forces being about 3000, were divided into the
several Ships, which were in number 30 sail of good Ships, but not provided
with Provisions necessary for so great an Army, nor so long a voyage; nor
indeed could the Commanders provide themselves things fitting, they not knowing
whither, nor how far they were to go.

The 19th of December 1654, this Fleet set sail for Portsmouth directly for the
Barbados, where the Generals had order to break open their Commissions, this
being the appointed place of Rendesvouz, whether having a fresh gale of wind
and fair, they arrived on the 29th of January, and came all to anchor in
Carlyle-bay, where presently after they landed their men.

The sudden departure of these two great Fleets, made the King of Spain (who
feared thry were designed against him,) to send an express command to the
Marquess of Leda then Governor of Dunkirk, to pass into England in the quality
of an extraordinary Ambassador, to see if he could possibly search out the
certainty of that grand Court secret: he accordingly being arrived in England,
spent several days here, but having no satisfaction in that which he most of
all desired, returned back again.

But to return to our West India voyage: whilst the Fleet abode at the
Barbados, the Generals, Colonels and inferior Officers looked diligently
after their respective charges; the Shallops brought in quarters out of England
are set up; the Coopers are ordered to trim the Watercaske: two Frigots are
sent to St Christophers and St Mevis to raise Men; the Generals striving to
complete their Regiments at the Barbados, and form Regiments out of the Seamen
to serve upon occasion; and at length being in a full readiness, they shipped
about 6000 Men, and a Troop of Horse (which the Islanders of Barbados had set
out at their own charges) and on the 31th of March 1655, set sail from the
Barbados, and six days after arrived at St Christophers, where there joined
with them 1300 Volunteers, (the Planters servants both here and at the
Barbados, being ready and willing to go, upon condition that their time should
go on, and that they might as well be free by serving the State as their
Masters) so though the Fleet were increased by 20 sail of Dutch Merchantmen
(which were seized on at the Barbados, for trafficking there contrary to the
Articles of Peace between the two Nations) yet were all the Ships as full as
they could well hold, though there were hardly Provisions (the chance supposed
which might in probability retard the voyage considered) for half the number
that was aboard; but as they were, they set sail from thence, and steered their
course directly for Hispaniola, whither on the 13th of April the whole Navy
arrived, and came within sight of Sto Domingo, upon which place their first and
chief enterprise was designed: Being here a general Counsel of War was
called, and by their whole votes it was agreed, that General Venables should
land with his Forces: and he accordingly the next day lands 7000 Foot, a Troop
of Horse, and three days Provision about ten or twelve leagues to the westward
of the Town. The Soldiers were half out of their wits, with consideration of
the great mountains of Gold which they expected to find in the Town, insomuch
that every man encouraged his fellow with hopes of being made for ever; there
seemed such an universal courage over the whole Army (though more out of the
hopes of an imaginary gain then true valor) that without doubt had not those
hopes been quelled, there might have been almost a certainty of victory
presupposed. But the General (I know not whether according to his
Instructions, or the desire he had to engross the whole spoil to himself, or at
least get it into his own hands) finding their designs and intentions,
immediately causes Proclamation to be made, that upon the taking of Sto
Domingo, (which he might perhaps have had had this Proclamation been kept in)
no man should presume to plunder either Money, Plate or Jewels, or take or kill
any tame Cattle whatsoever, upon pain of death. This without doabt was in
great part the ruin of the business; for had the Soldiers had but the hopes of
so great a gain as they promised themselves, they would have undergone those
dangers and streights which so much weakened them, with thrice the courage they
went, and without that vexation of spirit for an imaginary loss, which
destroys a man more then the pain and travel of his body; however their
streights were great, for they passed through almost unpassable Woods, through
which they were forced to cut their way, and where they found not a drop of
fresh Water, so that what with the heat of the Sun, which was excessive and
pierced their very brains, and the Drought which that heat caused, together
with their discontent of mind, (and we know sorrow is likewise dry) they were
most of them grown faint, and disabled for service.

Having marched thus two days and half, and with much difficulty passed those
Woods, (though without any opposition but what those Woods themselves, the heat
of the Sun, and want of fresh Water made) they at length joined with Colonel
Bullards Brigade, consisting of three Regiments of Foot, (which Admiral Pen
bad landed on the side of a Bay, about two Leagues from the Town, where
likewise a fresh water River disburdned itself, and which was the appointed
place for conjunction of the whole Body, which consisted now of 9000 or 10000
men, though most fainting, scarce able to walk much less fight for nothing; but
the Army being thus conjoined, they make what speed to march on, not doubting
but to possess the Town on the sudden. There first advances a forlorn hopes
of about 500 men, commanded by Captain Cox the chief guide for the place, after
whom followed the main Body of the Army. Being thus come within four Miles of
the Town, the Spaniards with a small Party of Horse suddenly encounter the
forlorn hopes, and in an instant routed them, forcing them through the next
Regiment, which they likewise put to flight, and had pursued their victory to
the slaughter of most of them, had not the whole Army come up to their relief.
Whereupon the Spaniards in very good order and without any considerable loss,
retired to a Fort close by the Woods; but there were near 50 of the English
slain, besides Captain Cox chief guide (as I said before) for the place.

The General having received this loss, and finding that the chief reason of
his men's weakness was want of Water, retreats back again to the River before
spoken of, resolving that he would having refreshed his men, carry on his
design against all resistance; and to that effect causes scaling Ladders to be
made, and two small Drakes with a Mortar-peece and Granado-shells to be landed
from the Fleet, which were to be convoyed by Water, near the Town. And so being
in readiness they once more advance toward the Town, some guides having
undertaken to lead them by a private way, without danger of the Fort; but
missing the intended way, they fell again into the same path, and into worse
disgrace then they had formerly received; for the Spaniards having certain
advice by the Negroes and Molattoes of the English March, resolved to entertain
them in their passage, and according as they had resolved it so they performed
it. For on the 25th of April 1655, the whole Army approaching near a Brick Fort
(built there by the Spaniards, and defended with nine good pieces of Ordnance,
and 300 men) were upon a sudden charged by a Party of the Enemy, which lay
undiscovered among the Trees. These resolute fellows though not above 70 in
number, having fired a volley of Shot upon the forlorn hopes, flew in upon the
English (who were already wearied and almost choked with thirst) with their
steel Lances, and that with such fury, that in a moment they routed both them
and the Generals Regiment, with near half of the Army, who flying back into the
Rear, possessed them there with such a pannick fear, that every man began to
fly and shift for himself, whilst the Spaniards pursued their victory with
infinite slaughter, finding no resistance, but what was made by that only in
this action valourous Gentleman Major General Haines, who resolved not to stir
a step, but fighting valourously in the midst of his Enemies, sold his life at
no cheap rate. At length the Spaniards weary of killing, retreated with seven
English Colors, which they carried with them as sure Trophies of the victory.
There were sound dead of the English 600 upon the place, 300 wounded, besides
200 more who flying into the Woods to save themselves, were afterward knocked
on the head by the Molettoes and Negroes.

Upon this distaster, the Army that night drew up to the Spanish Fort, and
planted a Mortar-peece in a convenient place, and all things were in readiness
for a battery, when on a sudden the Army was commanded to draw off, and
without doing any harm to march to their old Watering place in the Bay. For
what intent or by whose counsel this was done, I have not the capacity to
guess.

And now they were come into the Bay there wanted victuals, so that they were
forced to go out in Parties to fetch some in, whence many of them came short
home, being knocked on the head by the Negroes: Till at last forced by
necessity, they were fain to eat the Horses of their own Troop. In this
miserable condition they remained some days, till at length a resolution was
taken to ship them, which being finished the third of May, the whole Fleet set
Sail, and on the 10th arrived in the Port of Jamaica, whither they bent their
course from Hispaniola, and though they failed of their first enterprise there,
yet here they had better success, for they soon possessed themselves of the
chief Town called Oristano, where the Army began to take up their habitation,
and to plant. This has since proved a pretty thriving Island, profitable to
the English, and an ill neighbor to the adjacent Spanish Islands.

Shortly after (but one after the other) the Generals Pen and Venables returned
into England, whom at their arrival the Protector in thanks for the service
they had done, committed to the Tower.

Thus much concerning this unfortunate voyage: Let us now sweeten it a little
with the noble exploit performed by General Blake in the Streights, whither he
was sent with a gallant Fleet to scour those Seas of Turkish Pirates, which took
and destroyed many English Ships, making slaves of their persons. He first
seeks for them out at Sea, but missing his aims there, resolves to seek them
where they were to be found: And first on the 10th of March arrives at Algier,
where the most considerable both in quantity and quality lurked, be anchored
without the Mold; he sends a Messenger to the Dye, requiring restitution of
such English Ships as had been taken by them, and that the Captives be
immediately released. The Dye having provided a large present of Beef and
Muttons, and other fresh provisions alive, returns the Messenger with them, and
this answer to the General: That the Ships and Captives already taken were of
particular men, and therefore it lay not in his power to restore them, without
the general discontent of all his Subjects. Yet as for the English Captives
that were there, if he pleased to redeem them he should, and he would set a
reasonable and indifferent price upon their heads. And that if the General
thought good, they would conclude a peace with him; and for the future offer no
acts of hostility on their part, to any of the English Ships or Natives. This
answer seemed satisfactory to the General, and accordingly the Captives were
redeemed, and a peace concluded.

This business thus dispatched at Algier, he bends his course for Tunis, where
having sent a Summons to the Dye, he received but a rough compliance, they
wholly slighting his desires. And having drawn their Ships under the Castle of
Goletta, thought them secure, sending him word; That there were their Castles
of the Goletta, and their Ships and Castles of Porto Ferino, that he should do
his worst and not think to sear them with his Fleet. This resolute answer
exasperated both the General and Seamen, who resolved to be revenged for this
insolence. A Counsel of War is called, who conclude on a resolution to burn
those nine Ships in Porto Ferino, which they effected thus. Every Ships Boat
being manned with stout and resolute Mariners, are sent into the Harbor to
assault and fire the Ships, whilst the Admiral, Vice Admiral, and
Rear-Admirall, ply continued broad sides upon the Castle, to hinder it from
endammaging their Boats, who after a stout assault fire the Ships, and return
back again with the loss of but 25 men, and 48 wounded. This noble action of
General Blake resounded to the praise of the English Nation, as far as the
Port of the Orand-signor.

But to digress a little from our Story: About this time happened the Queen
Christiana of Swedelands unparalleld resignation of her Crown and Kingdom, to
Carolus Adolphus her Kinsman, being contented from a mighty Princess, to put
her self into the condition of a Lady Errant; only these Conditions she would
have granted and accorded to by her sucessor.

1. That she retain a good part of her, Kingdom, and the Custom to her self.
2. That she will be no Subject, but free of her self without control. 3. She
will travel whither she pleases.
To these the Prince replied;

1. That he would not be a King without a Kingdom. 2. That he will have no
Rival nor Superior. 3. That he will not hazard himself about her designs
abroad.
How these Differences in the Proposals were accommodated I know not, but
shortly after she resigned up her Kingdom to her Cozen, leaving to her self
only the bare title of Queen, but to him both the title of King and possession
of a Kingdom. With him the Lord Whitlock who had some time been Ambassador
there, soon concluded a firm League both offensive and defensive between these
two Nations; the effects of which had been felt to purpose in some parts of
Christendom, had Oliver Cromwell lived much longer then he did.

The horrible massacre which had been committed by the Forces of Charles
Emanuel Duke of Savoy, upon the poor Protestants in Piedmont: The Protector to
show his pious care of his fellow-Brethren, ordered a day of Humiliation to be
kept, and great sums of Money raised for their relief, though it is highly
suspected most of it was otherwise employed.

And now the Lord Protector to curb the people the better, and secure himself,
constitutes a new kind of Officers, called Major Generals of Counties; but in
effect the same with Turkish Bassaes, he divides England into eleven parcels
amongst them. The Names of these Bassaes or Major Generals as he called them,
and their several parts were as follows, viz.

Major Haynes For Essex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. Colonel Kelsey For Kent and
Surrey Colonel Goffe For Suffex, Hampshire, and Barkeshire. Lieutenant
General Fleetwood For Oxfordshire, Bucks, Hartford, Cambridge, Isle of Ely,
Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk. Major General Skippon For the City of London.
Commissary General Whaley For Lincolnshire, Nottingham, Derby, Warwick, and
Leicestershire. Major Butler For Northamptonshire, Bedford, Rutland and
Huntington. Colonel Berry For Worcester, Hereford, Salop, and North Wales.
Colonel Wortly For Cheshire, Lancashire, and Staffordshire. Lord Lambert For
Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland, and Northumberland. Colonel
Barkestead For Westminster and Middlesex.
The greatest service which these Major Generals did the Protector, was the
forcing the Delinquents in their respective Provinces, to pay in the Decimation
of their Estates for old offenses; which performed, he himself finding these
Major Generals to be an eclipse of his glory, reduced them again to their
former Stations.

Another design of the Protectors to raise Money, should have been the
introduction of the Jews into England: Here was two hundred thousand pounds to
be got, which made the care of the increase of the Church of Christ lie
extremely. So he proposes it to several Ministers for their approbation,
alleging that since there is a promise for their conversion, means must be
used to that end, which is the preaching of the Gospel, and that cannot be
had, except they be permitted to reside where the Gospel is preached. But
notwithstanding these Arguments, the design was declaimed against both by
Clergy and Laity; so the Jews were denied their Readmission, though it is
supposed the Protector swallowed down some part of that sweet promised morsel.

The Spaniard having had certain advice of the attempt and repulse of the
English at Hispaniola, and their Possession of Jamaica, thought this a
sufficient breach of the peace, (though there was never any peace made with him
beyond the Line, he always taking those English Ships he could light on and
master, though they went to traffic thither) presently makes a seizure of all
the English Merchants persons and goods then resident in Spain; so that the War
begins to grow hot on both sides the Tropic. The Protector therefore orders
the Generals Blake and Montague, to block up Cadiz, the chief Port-Town of the
King of Spain, and whither his Plate-Fleet used yearly to come. He likewise
endeavors a peace with France, (who had had Wars with Spain for a long time)
to which the Cardinal Mazarine consenting, it was easily concluded on. The
French King being so inhumanely unworthy as (upon Mazarines instigations) to
banish his Majesty the King of Scots, and the rest of the late Kings children
his nearest relations, out of his Dominions; though indeed he could do no more
but forbid their re-entrance, they being already gone to further the making of
a peace with him, who had so unjustly exposed them from their inheritances.

The English Fleet under Montagues and Blakes Command, had for a good while in
a manner besieged Cadiz by Sea, but could by no exasperations be drawn out of
their harbor to fight them, the Spaniards thinking it a safer policy to let
the English beat at Sea, and at last be forced to depart for want of
provisions, rather then venture either men or Ships against them, who they had
seen so well experienced in such terrible Sea Fights with the Hollander. But
the English found in Wyers Bay in Portugal, a convenient supply both of Water
and provisions, which proved a great deal nearer, then the Spaniard imagined
they would be forced to fetch it.

Hither were the Generals gone for fresh Water and provisions, having left only
a Squadron of seven Ships, under Command of Captain Stainer, before the Port of
Cadiz, to have an eye upon whatever Ships should pass in or out at that Port.
Being thus plying to and fro thereabouts for some days, it happened that a
stiff gale of Wind forced Stainer to stand out to Sea, where he spied a very
pleasing object, part of the King of Spains Fleet coming from the West Indies,
and making directly for Cadiz; he was somewhat to the Lee-ward, made up toward
them with all the Sail they could possibly, and after some two hours hard
plying, Captain Stainer with his Ship, the Speaker, the Bridgewater, and the
Plymouth Frigots got up to them, (the other four of the English never being
able to come up) and presently these three engaged them. Though the Spaniards
were eight tall Ships or Galleons, yet in short time the Spanish whole Fleet
was spoiled, whereof one was sunk, two burnt, two ran ashore and were bulged,
one escaped, and two remained in the hands of the English, one whereof had a
great quantity of Plate and Cochenill in her, the other was for the most part
laden with Hides. In these Ships many persons of note were taken, who together
with the Ships were safely convoyed home, to the great joy of the Protector,
who made a particular day of Thanksgiving to God for so great a booty.

But notwithstanding the late great Plate prize, yet our Protector is still
necessitated for Moneys; therefore to procure some, and out of a longing desire
he had to have his power confirmed to him by the people, hoping that a new
Representative might grant him that which the first denied or refused, issues
out his Writs for the Election of another Parliament.

Yet remembering the speeches and carriages of many Members in the late
Parliament, he gave secret advice to the Sheriffs in most Counties, not to
permit them, if possible to be chosen; however the people in most Countries
choosing according to respect, his secret advice would scarce hold water.

The 17th of September 1656, this Parliament met first at Westminster, where
they found the ancient privilege of Parliament broken, by a promise imposed
upon every individual Member, before he should be permitted to sit in the
House; to wit, that he would not act any thing prejudicial to the Prebyterian
Government; which promise so to be made, so digusted many of the Members, that
they choose rather to return home; but the major part assenting to it, entering
the House, chose Sr Thomas Widdrington for Speaker, and began to act suitable
to the wishes and desires of the Protector. For first that they might secure
his Highness person (whose loss would certainly have been the ruin of the
Nation) against all attempts which should be made against him by the Malignant
Party, or such desperate Fellows as Sindercombe. They make an Act, wherein it
was Enacted high Treason for any to attempt, compass, or imagine the Protectors
death.

They likewise considering the end for which they were called, grant him round
sums of Money for the carrying on of the Spanish War; and to that effect make
these ensuing Acts.

An Act for an Assesment upon England for three Months, at the rate of a
Month 60000lb On Scotland for three Month a Month. 05000lb On Ireland for
three Months a Month. 05000lb On England, Scotland, and Ireland, for three
years. England to pay 35000lb. Scotland to pay 06000lb. Ireland to pay 09000lb.
An Act for continuing of Tunnage and Poundage. An Act for preventing the
multiplicity of Buildings in about the City of London, and within ten Miles
thereof. A whole years revenue to be prefently paid for dwelling, or
Outhouses, that have been reared upon new foundations since the year 1620. An
Act for Excize of Merchandise imported.
These with many other being presented to the Protector for his consent, were
by him gladly passed, at which time he spoke somewhat to this effect to the
Speaker. I perceive that among these Acts of Parliament, there has been a very
great care had by the Parliament, for the just and necessary support of the
Commonwealth, by these Bills for leavying of Money now brought to me, which I
have given my consent unto. And understanding it has been the practice of
those who have been chief Governors, to acknowledge with thanks to the Commons
their care and regard of the public, I do very heartily and thankefully
acknowledge their kindness herein.

But let us a little leave the Parliament perfecting all things to the
Protectors content, and see a relation of the victorious General Blakes thrice
worthy exploit at Sancta-Cruze.

General Blake lying with his Fleet near Cadiz, had advice brought him that
the Spanish West India Fleet was put into the Port of Sancta-Cruze in
Teneriffa, the chief Island of the Canaries. Whereupon the Fleet weighs Anchor,
and on the 20th of April 1657, were at the mouth of Sancta-Cruze Bay, where
they espied the Spanish Ships sixteen in number, lying in an order almost
semi-circular; at the mouth of the Haven stands a Castle well furnished with
Guns, and besides that seven Forts more with three, four, and six Guns a piece,
so that the passage in must needs be dangerous or rather desperate. Besides Don
Diego D'aques the Spanish Admiral to make all safe, had caused the smaller
Ships to be mored along the shore, and the six great Gallions lay farther off
at Anchor, with their broad sides toward the Sea. General Blake having
perceived this posture of defense in which they lay from the offing, presently
calls a Counsel of War, where it was resolved that they should presently
attaque them, not at all considering the eminent hazard. Captain Stainer
Commander of the Speaker is ordered first in with them, who presently falls
upon the Ships, not at all considering or regarding the number of the Shot,
which the Forts on every side continually powered upon him; and maintains near
an hours Fight, till the Generals Blake and Montague (having ordered some
Frigots to ply the Forts and Brest-works with continual broad sides) came up,
and with all their power encountered the Spaniards, who though they made a
gallant resistance, yet in four hours space they were driven out of their
Ships, which though possessed by the English, yet could not easily be brought
away, so they were by them fired to the number of sixteen small and great. This
noble attempt cost the English but 48 men, and 120 wounded. The Spaniards
besides the loss of their whole Fleet, had many hundreds of men slain on the
shore, and in the Forts and Brest-works, besides those which lost their lives
in the Ships.

For this noble exploit the Protector by Order of Parliament, sent a Diamond
Ring worth 500lb, for a present to General Blake. And Captain Richard Stainer
who led on the first Squadron, was at his coming to England, for this and his
former service, Knighted.

This year happened a Conspiracy of other sort of men then Cavaliers; for on
the 19th of April 1657, at a House in Shoreditch, several discontented
persons who had been formerly of the Army, were apprehended, who had appointed
to have Rendesvowzed on Mile-end-Green, and so have marched into other Counties
to augment their Party. Store of Arms were taken, and the number of the
Conspirators being many, they were disposed of in several prisons. Major
General Harrison, Vice Admiral Lawson, Colonel Rich, and Major Danvers, were
secured as the chief Ringleaders. This was called the Plot of the
fifth-Monarchy-men.

The Protector out of a desire he had to keep the Spaniards to it every where,
makes a private agreement with France, to send out a Brigade of his best
Infantry, (which the French extremely wanted) to assist them in Flanders. These
were begun to be raised about the 4th of May 1657; and about the latter end of
the Month, having had a very fine passage into Picardy; joined with those
Forces commanded by the Marshall of Turene. Over these Sir John Reynolds (one
of the Protectors Knights, but formerly Commissary General of the Army in
Ireland) was appointed Commander in chief, and Colonel Morgan was made Major
General.

But to return a little to our affairs at home: The Parliament had long been
debating concerning the settlement of his Highness, and had almost concluded of
it; when on a sudden a Paper was sent into the House, desiring his Highness
advance of Title. Upon this the grand machine of Government was printed,
entitled, An humble Petition and Advice, humbly entreating that his Highness
would be pleased to change his Title of Protector, to that of King. This was
extremely averse to his nature, who (God bless us) would be a Servant and not a
Master of his Country. He knew Monarchy to be odious both to the Army, and (as
he said) to the people; and therefore he gave the Parliament this positive
answer in the painted, Chamber, That he could not accept the Government under
the Title of a King. Whereupon the Parliament voted that Protector should be
the Title of the chief Magistrate; and the Petition and Advice being altered
accordingly, nothing now wanted to the making it a Law, but his Highness
approbation: So a Conference is desired with him, which granted, the Protector
on the 25th of May 1657, meets the Parliament in the painted Chamber, where Sr
Thomas Widdrington Speaker presents him with the humble Petition and Advice,
the substance whereof was 1. That his Highness Oliver Cromwell under the Title
of Lord Protector, would be pleased to execute the Office of chief Magistrate
over England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Territories thereunto belonging,
etc. and to govern according to all things in this Petition and Advice: And
also that he would in his life time appoint the person, that should succeed in
the Government after his death. 2. That he would call a Parliament consisting
of two Houses once in three years at farthest. 3. That those persons who are
legally chosen by a free Election of the people, to serve in Parliament, may
not be excluded from doing their duties, but by consent of that House whereof
they are Members. 4. That none but those under the Qualifications therein
mentioned, should be capable to serve as Members in Parliament. 5. That the
power of the other House be limited, as herein prescribed. 6. That the Laws and
Statutes of the Land be observed and kept, no Laws altered, suspended,
abrogated or repealed, or new Laws made, but by Act of Parliament. 7. That the
yearly sum of a Million of pounds sterling, be settled for maintenance of the
Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand pounds for support of the Government,
besides other temporary supplies, as the Commons in Parliament shall see the
necessities of the Nation to require. 8. That the number of the Protectors
Counsel shall not be above twenty one, whereof the Quorum to be seven. 9. The
chief Officers of State, as Chancellors, Keepers of the great Seal, etc. to be
approved by Parliament. 10. That his Highness would encourage a godly Ministry
in these Nations, and that such as do revile and disturb them in the worship of
God, may be punished according to Law, and where Laws are defective, new ones
to be made. 11. That the Protestant Christian Religion, as it is contained in
the Old and New Testament, be asserted and held forth for the public
profession of these Nations, and no other; and that a Confession of faith be
agreed upon, and recommended to the people of these Nations; and none be
permitted by words or writings, to revile or reproach the said Confession of
faith.


The Petition and Advice of which the foregoing Lines were the heads, being in
the painted Chamber read to the Protector, was by him passed, though with much
seeming reluctance; he declaring, That he came not thither that day as to a
triumph, but with the most serious thoughts that ever he had in all his life,
being to undertake one of the greatest burdens, that ever was laid upon the
back of any humane creature; so that without the support of the Almighty, he
must necessarily sink under the weight of it, to the damage and prejudice of
these Nations.

That this being so, he must ask the help of the Parliament, and the help of
all those that fear God, that by their prayers he might receive assistance from
the hand of God, seeing nothing but his presence could enable him to the
discharge of so great a trust.

That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government
of these Nations; and forasmuch as there were many things which could not be
supplied without help of Parliament, he thought it his duty to desire their
help; not that he doubted of it, for he believed that the same spirit that had
led the Parliament to this, would easily suggest the rest to them.

That nothing should have induced him to have undertaken this intolerable
burden to flesh and blood, had he not seen that it was the Parliaments care to
answer those ends for which they had engaged, calling God to witness, that he
would not have undergone it, had he not saw it to be determined by the
Parliament, to make clearly for the liberty and interest of the Nation, and
preservation of such as fear God; and that if these Nations be not thank full
to them for their care therein, it would fall as a sin upon their heads.

To conclude, he recommends to them other things which would tend to
Reformation, and the discountenancing of vice, and encouragement to good men
and virtue, desiring them that they would not be wanting in any thing that
might make for the good of the Nations. So wishing the Lord to prosper their
endeavors, ends.

The Members having heard this speech are dismissed, and return to their House,
whither in few days the Protector sends them a Letter, desiring their
adjournment some convenient time, till the Inauguration of his Highness the
Lord Protector, could be conveniently performed. And accordingly they passed a
Bill for their adjournment from the 26th of June 1657, to the 20th of January
following, the said 26th of June being the day appointed for his Highness
solemn investiture.

His Highness with accustomed Ceremonies, being conducted to the place which
was prepared for him, under a Cloth of State in Westminster Hall, the Speaker
in the name of the Parliament, presents several things (which were ready laid
upon the Table) unto him. First a Robe of purple Velvet, lined with Ermine,
being the habit anciently used at the solemn investiture of Princes; next a
large Bible richly guilt and boss'd; then a Sword; and lastly a Scepter of
massy Gold: Which thus presented in the whole, the Speaker arose, and assisted
by the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Whitlocke, vested his Highness; then
presented him the Bible; the Speaker girt his Sword about him; and lastly gave
him the Scepter; which done, the Speaker returned again to the Chair, and
administered the Oath to the Protector in these following words.

I do in the presence and by the name of Almighty God promise and swear, that
to the uttermost of my power I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof as it is contained in the
holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and
understanding, and encourage the profession and professors of the same; and
that to the utmost of my power I will endeavor, as chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of the peace and safety, and
just rights and privileges of the people thereof; and shall in all things
according to my best knowledge and power, govern the people of these Nations
according to Law.

This Oath administered, and some attending Ceremonies performed, a Herald stood
up aloft, giving signal to a Trumpet to sound three times; after which he did
by Authority and Direction of Parliament, publish and proclaim his Highness,
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, requiring
all persons to yield him due obedience.

This Proclamation ended, the Trumpets again founded, and some Soldiers, and
others set there on purpose, ecchoed forth, God save the Lord Protector. Then
was he again proclaimed by an Officer at Arms, standing on the stairs, which
was answered again by the same Echoes of some of the Soldiery.

These Ceremonies ended, the Protector attended by all the Officers of State,
went into the Palace-yard Westminster, in his Robes, where entering his Coach,
he returned in State to Whitehall.

But let us now return a little to our English Forces, which went over under Sr
John Reynolds, to assist the French King, who this year about the latter end of
October, advance into the Spanish Territories; and joining with the Marshall
Turine, the whole Army according to agreement, sat down before the
Mardike-Fort, which lies about two Miles from Dunkirke, and was judged of
concernment to the taking of Dunkirke it self, (which place according to
agreement, the French Army in consideration our helps, was joined with theirs
to the siege, before any other service, and if taken to deliver it into the
English hands) after a short siege Mardike was upon Articles surrendered to the
French and English, and presently a Garrison of Soldiers placed in it; whom
the Spaniards suddenly after endeavored to remove, by giving a fierce Camisado
to the Fort, when the Armies were drawn into their Winter-Quarter; but it
proved ineffectuall. For though there were no want of courage in their charge,
yet the English repulsed them; though they not content with this expulse,
adventured upon it again, where though the Duke of York, who commanded in
chief, performed things worthy of so gallant a Prince, yet were they forced to
a second retreat.

Whilst the sweetness of these successes made many men rejoice, there arrived
news to imbitter it, viz. the death of that noble and thrice valiant General
Blake, who had done such noble and gallant service for his Country; had beaten
the Hollanders (that potent Nation at Sea) forcing them to run into their
harbors for shelter, he had lately burnt the mighty King of Spains West India
Fleet in his own harbors, and under his own Castles; and to shorten his
praises in a word, had he been but as loyal as he was valiant, his praise
might justly have exceeded the ancient Semi-gods, (and the Pyramids of his same
have endured with glory to eternity; though he was now buried obscurely in
Harry the sevenths Chapel, and neither Statua nor Tomb erected to his memory.

The Lord Protector having how ensured his greatness, begins to confer Titles
of honor upon his Children, his eldest Son Richard is made Chancellor of the
University of Oxford; and his younger Son Henry sent over Lord Deputy into
Ireland, where it is affirmed by some, that he governed both with such prudence
and magnanimity together, that he had in short time gained the loves both of
the English and Irish in that Nation. And it is by most conceived probable, that
had his Father lest the Government of England to him, as he did to his Son
Richard, these Nations might have still remained subject to that Family.

About this time the Armies in Flanders being still disposed in their
Winter Quarters, Sir John Reynolds Commander in chief, together with Colonel
White, and some other Commanders of Note; imbarquing in a Shallop at Mardike,
to come over and visit his Highness the Lord Protector, were by a sudden storm
driven upon the Goodwin Sands, and were there all drowned.

His Highness had in this intervall of the Parliaments Sessions, made choice of
sundry persons to fill up his other House, or Pageant-House of Lords; which
because posterity may know what persons they were, every one almost having
heard both of them, and known the rise of most of them, I shall here insert
their Names.

1. Richard Cromwell. 2. Henry Cromwell. 3. Nathaniell Feins. 4. John List.
Commissioners of the great Seal. 5. Henry Lawrence. President of the Privy
Counsel. 6. Charles Fleetwood. Lieutenant General. 7. Robert Earl of Warwick.
8. Edmund Earl of Malgrave. 9. Edward Earl of Manchester. 10. William Viscount.
Say and Seal. 11. Phillip Lord Visc. List. 12. Charles Lord Visc. Howard. 13.
Phillip Lord Wharton. 14. Thomas Lord Falconbridge. 15. George Lord Ewers. 16.
John Cleypool. 17. John Disborow. 18. Edward Montague. 19. Bulstrode Whitlock.
20. William Sidenham. 21. Sr Charles Woelsey. 22. Sr Gilbert Pickering. 23.
Phillip Skippon. 24. Walter Strickland. 25. Francis Rouse. 26. John Jones. 27.
Sr William Strickland. 28. John Fines. 29. Sr Francis Russell. 30. Sr Thomas
Homeywood. 31. Sr Arthur Hasterig. 32. Sr John Hebard. 33. Sr Richard Onslow.
34. Sr Gilbert Gerrard. 35. Sr William Roberts. 36. John Glyn. 37. Oliver St
John's. Judges. 38. William Pierrepoint. 39. John Crew. 40. Alexander Popham.
41. Phillip Jones. 42. Sr Christopher Pack. 43. Sr Robert Tichborn. 44. Edward
Whalley. 45. John Barkstead. Lieut. of the Tower. 46. Sr John Hewson. 47. Sr
Thomas Pride. 48. Sr George Fleetwood. 49. Richard Ingoldsby. 50. James Berry.
51. William Goffe. 52. Thomas Gooper. 53. Edmund Thomas. 54. George Monk
General in Scotland. 55. David Earl of Cassils. 56. Sr William Lockhart. 57.
Archibald Johnson of Warreston. 58. William Steel. 59. Roger Lord Broghill. 60.
Sr Matthew Thomlinson. 61. William Lenthall. 62. Richard Hampden.
This is the Catalogue of those Lords (at least such as were ordered to be so
esteemed by the Protector) which were by him created Peers of the Land, (though
without any other Title then that of bare Lord (how unfit many of them were to
be so, I Will leave to any rational man to judge, since (though there might some
persons of honor he picked out amongst them) men raised by the power of the
Sword, yet were the greatest part of them such as had either raised themselves
fortunes out of these Kingdoms distractions, and so were as deeply engaged
against their King and Country as himself, which made them indeed the fitter
for his designs, as being most likely to stand true to his interest.

But the time of the prorogation of the Parliament being expired, they make
their appearance in the House, the Pageant-House of Lords likewise sitting
according to ancient custom, whither the Protector coming, sends to the
Commons to tell them that he attended them in the House of Lords, whither the
Speaker with the rest of the Members immediately go, to whom he makes a very
fair speech; telling them in conclusion, that if they would go on to prosecute
his designs, that they should be called the blessed of the Lord, and the
generations to come would bless them, etc. But the Parliament according to the
fourth Article of the Petition and Advice, which says, That no Members legally
chosen should be excluded from performance of their duty but by consent of
Parliament, immediately proceed to the calling over and re-admitting of those
Members, which had formerly been secluded by the Protector, to his Highnesses
no little discontent.

The Parliament being now full, began to be angry at the House of Lords, and to
esteem it only as a Pageant-Parliament, set up on purpose to mock them; for it
was strange to them, that that power which was created but by a part of a
Parliament, should have a negative voice over a sull House. And at length they
went so far as to question the Protectors power in calling them or Authorizing
them to sit as a House of Peers, which he finding, thought it not fitting to
let businesses of this high nature run too far. So on the 4th of February he
goes to his House of Lords, and by the Master of the black Rod he sends to
acquaint the House of Commons of his being there; so the Speaker, and the rest
of the Members repairing thither, and standing without the Bar, his Highness
sitting under a Chair of Estate, made a large Speech to them; and in conclusion
told them, That it did concern his interest as much as the public peace and
tranquillity of the Nation, to terminate that Parliament, and therefore he did
now put an end to their sitting. So the House in obedience to his commands,
dissolved.

And now the Protector having a plot near discovery, orders the settlement of
the Militia of London, (but in such men's hands as would certainly be faithful
to his interest) this he does under pretense to persuade the people how much he
labors for their security; which to make them more sensible of, presently
after succeeds the discovery of this horrible terrible plot, and herein not
only his own person must be endangered, but the Tower and Mews must be
furprized both at one time, the City of London fired, and all the Soldiers
about it to be put to the Sword; and all this monstrous Gunpowder-work to be
performed by not above thirty persons, of whom the Reverend Dr Hewit, a man so
truly Christian, that he would rather have prayed for, then revenged himself of
an enemy, must be head here; whilst Sr Henry Slingsby must from a prisoner in
the Castle, take possession of the Garrison of Hull; yet these two, with about
twenty or thirty others of meaner rank, were clapped up into the Tower, and after
some time being brought before the high Court of Justice, erected for that
purpose, were charged with high Treason: For

1. That they had traitorously and maliciously endeavored to raise force and
leavy war against his Highness and the Government, and to subvert and alter
the same.

2. That they had traitorously declared, published and promoted Charles Stuart
eldest Son to the late King Charles, to be King of England, Scotland and
Ireland.

3. That they had held intelligence with the said Charles Stuart. These were
the heads of the Charge against them. Sr Henry Slingsby was likewise charged
for endeavoring to seduce the Governor of Hull, and persuading him to
surrender that Garrison to the King: for these they were both condemned as
Traitors, though there were no witness against Dr Hewit, but the Confession of
one Mallory, (who pretended himself to have been in the Plot,) and accordingly
on the 8th of June, he and Sr Henry Slingsby lost their heads on Tower hill;
how justly God of Heaven knows! but we may have the liberty to guess by
circumstances.

Many endeavors were used by several persons of quality for the saving of Sr
Henry Slingsby, and many Peritions presented by the Ministers of London in
behalf of Dr Hewit, and his Daughter Cleypool begging on her knees; but nothing
could pacify the Protector, who was resolved these two worthy persons should
be sacrifices to his tyranny.

There were likewise executed for this business Colonel Edward Ashton, who was
hanged, drawn and quartered at Mark lane end in Fan-Church street, Edmond Stacy,
who suffered the same death in Cornhill, and John Betteby, who suffered like
wise in Cheapside; the Romanlike death of the last being very well worth
remembrance.

As the death of Dr Hewit was a prodigy to to the world, so there could no
less then a prodigy attend it. For some time before his execution, there came
up the Thames as far as Greenwich a Whale of a very great length and bigness,
it being the wonder of the all the beholders to imagine, that such a Creature of
such a vast bigness, should either find the way up, or be content to leave
(especially at that season of the year) its natural Element.

But let us return again to the scene of war in Flanders, where the English
and French Armies are joined together, and set down before Dunkirk, with a
resolution to take it before they stirred; whereupon Don John D' Austria
knowing the importance of the place, it being the Key of Flanders, and next
after Graveling a frontier to France; besides the continual supplies of Money
it brought his Treasury, and the many inconveniences would ensue by the English
possessing it, resolves rather to hazard his whole Army then not attempt its
relief.

But whilst he is getting of force together, the English and French forces had
in a small time run their trenches to the counterscarp, and still incroached
nigher and nigher to the wall; which the Spaniards having advice of, and
fearing lest their relief might come too late, make what haste possible to its
a shstarce: the better to effect which, Don John dreins most of his Garrisons,
and compleats a body of 10000, with these he marches post have through Fuornes,
and encamps within a mile and a half of the Marshall Turines quarters; of which
the Confederates having advice, immediately dislodg with a body of 15000 or
thereabouts, leaving still sufficient to guard the trenches and make good the
approaches, in case the Townsmen should attempt a sally. With this force of men
and 10 pieces of Cannon Turine faces the Spaniard; the English foot were drawn
up in four great battalions, and were ordered to give the first onset on four
other battalions of the Spaniards foot which had taken the advantage of the
ground, by placing themselves upon three rising hillocks, and were seconded by
Don John himself. The English were commanded by the Lord Lockhart, who having
first commanded a forlorn hope of about 300 Muskiteers to mount the sand
hills, which he seconds with his own Regiment of Foot commanded by Colonel
Fenwick, who stoutly maintained their ground, though the Spaniards played down
continual volleys of shot amongst them, and the French refused to second them,
sent another considerable Brigade to their relief, which made no dallying, but
immediately fell in amongst the Spanish Foot with the buttend of their
Musquers, who after some small resistance, not having been used to such kind of
Club-Law, left the field and fled; whereupon the French Horse seeing the good
fortune of the English Foot, fell in upon the Spanish Horse, who few or none of
them stood the charge, except those under the commands of the Dukes of York,
and Gloucester, who having made a gallane resistance, were forced, more
overpowred with number, then overreached in valor, to quit the field after the
rest.

In this Battle a great part of the Lord Lockharts Regiments were either slain
or wounded; and amongst the rest, Lieutenant Colonel Fenwicke who led them on,
was slain by a Musket-Bullet of the Spaniards side. The slaughter was very
great, the French Horse after the Battle having little or no mercy in the
pursuit, so that there were near 3000 slain, besides many the Spanish Nobility
who were taken, most wounded, and many of which after died of their wounds.
This total rout of the Relievers Army, as it encouraged the besiegers, so it
totally discouraged the besieged: for they could expect no relief neither by
Sea nor Land, the English Frigots blocking them up by sea, and Don John D'
Austria not being able to recruit his Army by Land. But yet the Marquess of
Leda to show he was not totally disheartened, with a strong Party sallies out of
the Town, and falls upon the French Quarters, which was counted rather an act
of desperation, then valor, or hopes of success; for here he who was the life
of the business, and whose life might still the action in being, received a
wound, of which he shortly after died; and with him the Spaniards possession of
the Town of Dunkirk. For those within after the French and English had for
fourteen days together continued to play their Mortar-peeces upon the Town;
the inhabitants weary of the sport, and despairing, beat a Parley, and desire to
come to capitulation; which being granted, the Town was surrendered up upon
Articles, viz.

1. That the Town should be surrendered up, with all their great Guns, store of
victuals, magazines of Arms and Ammunition without any imbezlement whatsoever.

2. That the Officers and Soldiers should march out with Drumms beating,
Colors flying, two piece of Ordnance and their baggage.

3. That they should have free liberty to march to St Omers, with a conduct to
convey them-thither.

4. That the Inhabitants should remain indemnified in their persons or goods,
and enjoy their former privileges and customs for two years; nor be molested
by any one in matters of Religion.

These Articles being thus concluded on and ratified by his Majesty of France,
the strong Town of Dunkirk was surrendered, and possession taken of it by the
King of France and Cardinal in person on the 25th of June 1658.

The Spaniards then marching out to the number of about 1700 Horse and Foot,
the English had the possession of the Town immediately delivered over to them,
wherein they found 136 brass piece of Ordnance, with great store of Ammunition
and Provision in the Magazines: it was immediately engarrisoned by three
Regiments of the English Foot then there, and a Regiment of Horse to be under
the command of the Lord Lockhart was immediately raised, and as fast as
possibly could be sent over thither.

But whilst the Armies lay before Dunkirk, the King of France lying then at
Calice, the Lord Faulconbridge (who was made one of the Protectors blood by
marrying the Lady Mary one of the Protectors Daughters) was sent to Calice to
complement that King and Cardinal; in return of which, Mounsieur Manani Nephew
to Mazarine and the Duke de Grequi, are sent to salute his Highness, who are
here very nobly entertained, and sent back with high satisfaction and content.

The Lord Lockart having now got sure possession of the Town of Dunkirk,
endeavors to keep fast his hold; and to that effect he causes Proclamation to
be made.

1. That whatsoever Burger has withdrawn himself out of the Town, out of
hatred or aversion to the present Government, shall not return without
satisfaction given, and a Pasport from the Governor.

2. That no Burger remaining in Town shall go out, nor any abroad return into
the Town, without a Pasport.

3. That no Burger entertain an enemy in his house without disclosing him, on
pain of being proceeded against as an enemy.

4. That whosoever shall conceal in his house any Arms, Ordnance, or
Ammunition, shall upon discovery pay ten times the value.

5. That no Inkeeper receive or lodge any guests or strangers, without bringing
their names and qualities immediately to the Governor.

6. That no man remove or convey any goods out of the Town, without giving a
particular thereof, and obtaining license so to do.

7. That no Tradesman open shop on Sunday, and that no punishment be inflicted
for following their callings on other Holidays, notwithstanding any power or
eustome to the contrary, (is not this a breach of the fourth Article?)

8. That the values of Money within the Town, the prices of Wine and Beer, and
the weight and proportions of Bread be henceforth according to the Orders
ensuing, (the value of Money there I have inserted, in regard it may be useful
to those that travel thither) viz

Old Jacobusses at 15 Gilders. New ones or Carolusses 14 Gilders. English
Shillings 13 Stivers or pence. English half Crowns 32 Stivers and a half. Gold
Spanish Pistols 11 Gilders. Gold Rials 8 Gilders. Gold Sovereigns 18 Gilders.
Gold double Ducats 12 Gilders. Gold French Crowns 5 Gilders and 10 Stivers.
Gold Hungary Ducats 6 Gilders. Gold Albertine 7 Gilders and 16 Stivers. Gold
Reinis-Gilders 3 Gildets 15 Stivers. Gold Riders of Zealand 7 Gilders 10
Stivers. The double ones and half accordingly. Gold Flemish Crowns 4 Gilders 16
Stivers. Italian Pistolls 9 Gilders 12 Stivers. Gold Crowns of Liege 3 Gilders
10 Stivers. Silver Duccatoons 3 Gilders 15 Stivers. Flemish or sealed
Pattacoons 3 Gilders. Silver Lewisses 3 Gilders. Holland Rix Dallors 3 Gilders.
Cardeques of Weight one Gilder. French Testoons of Weight 19 Stivers. French
silver Franks or Livers of Weight one Gilder 7 Stivers. Flemish Shillings 7
Stivers and a half. Zealand Shillings 7 Stivers. Flemish Stooters 2 Stivers and
a half. The Flemish ten Stiver piece 12 Stivers. The Flemish five Stiver piece
6 Stivers. Flemish Stivers and marked pieces at one Stiver or 4 Farthings.
Flemish and French Farthings four to a Penny or Stiver.
The rest of the Declaration contained the prices of Wine, Beer, Bread, and
Flesh; and that no man should presume to sell or transport Wine, or Beer, upon
several penalties or amercements.

There was likewise an Oath to be administered to all the inhabitants of
Dunkirke, as follows, viz.

I A. B. do in the presence and by the name of the Almighty God, promise and
swear, that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance, and shall
be true and faithful unto Oliver now Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, and his Successor as chief Magistrate thereof, and shall not design,
contrive, or attempt any thing against the Person or Authority of the Lord
Protector, or against the safety, just defense, or necessary preservation of
this Town or place of Dunkirk, in and for its safety, defense, and
preservation, under the Government of the Lord Protector, and his Successors,
against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, and will do my best endeavor
to make known and disclose unto the Protector and his successors, or the
Commander in chief in this place, under his said Highness for the time being,
all treasons and traitorous conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be
against his Person or Authority, or against the safety of this Town or place of
Dunkirk, for the betraying of it into the hands of any other persons, or that
tends to the withdrawing of any of the persons or people in it, from their
fidelity to the Lord Protector, or his Government.

Dunkirk thus securely estated in the hands of the English, the French Army
after about a Months siege, possess themselves of Graveling, a strong Tower
not far from Dunkirk; so that the English and French had now in their hands all
the Frontier-Towns on this side of Flanders.

But whilst the Armies are thus triumphing in Flanders, God sends the
Protector a scourge at his own doors; for his dearly beloved Child, the only
darling of his eyes, the Lady Elizabeth Cleypool, on whom he had placed the
whole affections of his soul, was by the revenging hand of the Almighty (for
the innocent blood of his Prophet and servant so lately added to the great mass
before shed) on the 6th of August taken out of the world, from before the eyes
of her dearly loving Father, whose very image it is said she was, and into whose
praises many are pleased to lash, and advance her fame to the skies (either out
of fear, flattery, or to show the world how they can command their Pens to any
subject,) but amongst the rest he most pleases me, who is pleased to style her
an Amazon, perhaps not unfitly; but de mortuis nil nisi bonum.

She dying at Hampton Court, was from thence the fourth day after conveyed by
water (with a great many Barges in mourning accompanying her corpse) from thence
to Westminster, and there laid in the Painted Chamber (where a stately Hearse
was prepared for her,) till about 12 a clock at night, when with a Noble, but
no over stately Funeral pomp, her body was conveyed into Henry the seavenths
Chapel, and there interred in a place purposely provided for it.

Her death was the cause of so great grief to the Protector her Father, as most
affirm, that it was one chief cause of his, which followed not long after; for
having been very pensive and melancholy, from her death till aboutthe middle
of August, his distemper was perceived to be an Ague, which together with other
malignant humors so depressed his vitals, that it brought him at length to his
final Exit, though with many strivings and struglings, he often falling into
swouns and trances, being loath to go to give an account.

He could not be persuaded that his distemper was mortal, being an Enthusiast
in judgment, firmly believing, That as God had carried him to that height, so
he had some farther work for him to do; he having about him such sycophantine
Chaplains, one of which but three days before his death praying by his bed side
used this expression, Lord we beg not of thee life, for that we are already
assured of; but that thou would be pleased to ease him of his languishing
misery.

Having had several discourses with diverse of his Privy Counsel, who
earnestly pressed him according to the first Article of the Petition and
Advice, to name his Successor, being ambitious to leave what he could no longer
enjoy himself, to his own line, named his Son Richard Cromwell for succeeding
Protector after his death.

The night before his departure (says one) he was observed to have uttered this
Prayer:

Lord, I am a miserable creature, yet I am in Covenant with thee through grace;
and I may, I will come unto thee for thy people. Lord thou have made me, though
very unworthy, a mean instrument to do them some good, and thee service; and
many of them had too high value of me, though others would be glad of my fall.
But Lord, howsoever thou disposest of me do good for them. Give consistency of
judgment, one heart and mutual love unto them. Let the Name of Christ be
glorious throughout the world. Pardon such as delight to trample upon the ashes
of a worm, and pardon the folly of this short Prayer, even for Jesus Christ his
sake.

This was on Thursday night, and on Friday morning being the 3d of September
1658, (his twice auspicious day) he showed all the signs of a dying person,
though he continued still alive till about three a clock in the afternoon, when
his great soul expired, and went to give an account of his actions in this
life, to the great High Court of Justice, who had so often called men to
account before his High Courts of Justice here: yet there he might have this
surety, which could not be given here, that there are neither Trepanners nor
false Witnesses.

The Privy Counsel upon advice of his death, immediately assembled together,
and being satisfied of his departure out of this world, and that he according
to the first Article of the Petition and Advice, had appointed his Son
Richard Cromwell to succeed him in the Government of Lord Protector of England,
Scotland and Ireland, etc. they agreed to his choice, and the Officers of the
Army having likewise assented thereto; they immediately sent the Lord
Chamberlain to acquaint the Lord Richard Cromwell, that they were coming to
wait upon him; whereupon he attended their coming; and the Lord President being
the foremost, made a Speech to him in the name of the whole Counsel: wherein he
let him know, how deeply the Counsel was affected with grief for the death of
his Princely Father, and that they could not but very much condole with him for
so great a loss; and withal to acquaint him, that his late Highness his dear
Father, having in his life time, according to the humble Petition and Advice,
declared and appointed him to succeed in the Government of these Nations; the
Counsel had taken the matter into consideration, and thereupon resolved it,
and had caused a Proclamation to be drawn up which was passed by the Counsel,
communicated and consented to by the Officers of the Army, and subscribed by
the members of the Counsel, and the Lord Major of London and Officers of the
Army with one consent, whereby his Highness was to be proclaimed Lord Protector
of these three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that the said
Proclamation was to be made public the next Morning at nine of the Clock, etc.
To this his Highness returned answer, That he had a very deep sense, as well of
his own sorrow for the loss of his Father, as of the faithfulness of the
Counsel of the City of London, and Officers of the Army, toward his deceased
Father and himself in the present occasion; and likewise the sense he had of
the great weight of the Government now by Gods providence thrust upon his
shoulders, which he could no better way hope to sustain, than by theirs and the
good people of the Nations Prayers, whose peace and prosperity he would
endeavor to maintain to the utmost of his power, etc. so he dismissed the
Counsel.

Thus you have a full relation of the end of Oliver Cromwell Lord Protector of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, whose valor only mounted him to that height,
and for which only he deserves remembrance or applause; and by which he raised
his Family to that pitch, to equal with the best of the Kingdom, and the
Nation to that glory, that foreign Princes both feared and envied it. He had
issue two Sons, viz.

1. The Lord Richard Cromwell, (who was brought up in a soft kind of life, and
more addicted to hunting and pleasures, then either to Wars or Governments)
who succeeded him in the Protectorship.

2. The Lord Henry Cromwell, who from sixteen years of age was by his Father
bred a Soldier, and was at his death Lord Deputy of Ireland. And four
Daughters, viz.

1. Bridget his eldest Daughter was first married to the Lord Deputy Ireton,
and after his death re-married to the Lord Fleetwood, who succeeded Ireton in
the Deputyship of Ireland.

2. Elizabeth his second Daughter married to the Lord Cleypool, Master of his
Highness Horse.

3. Mary his third Daughter married to the Lord Faulconbridge. And

4. Frances his youngest Daughter who was married to the Lord Rich, Grandchilde
to the Earl of Warwick. So high were his fortunes raised, that those of the
Nobility who would once have hardly deigned to have spoke to him, would now
have accounted it an honor to have matched into his Family. But let us leave
him sleeping in his ashes, and proceed to his Son Richard.

FLORVS ANGLICVS, OR THE Government of England UNDER Richard Lord Protector, in
the Years 1658, 1659. PART III.
OLIVER Lord Protector of England, etc. being thus deceased, the Privy Counsel
send a Committee of their own members, viz. the Lord Mountague General at sea,
Walter Strickland Esquire, and Major General Skippon, to the City, who
acquainted them with the Counsels intentions to proclaim his Highness Richard
(the eldest Son to the late deceased) Lord Protector of these Nations, and
their territories and dominions; which being readily assented to by them, the
ensuing Proclamation was the next day after Olivers death, first read at the
Counsel window by Norway King of Arms; viz.

Whereas it has pleased the most wise God in his Providence, to take out of
the world the most serene and Renowned Oliver late Lord Protector of this
Commonwealth, and his said Highness having in his life time, according to the
humble Petition and Advice, declared and appointed the most Noble and
Illustrious the Lord Richard, eldest Son of his said late Highness, to
succeed him in the Government of these Nations; we therefore of the Privy
Counsel, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of London, the
Officers of the Army, and numbers of other principal Gentlemen, do now hereby
with one full voice and consent of tongue and heart, publish and declare the
said Noble and Illustrious Lord RICHARD, to be rightfully Protector of this
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and
territories thereunto belonging, to whom we do acknowledge all fidelity and
constant obedience, according to Law and the said humble Petition and Advice,
with all hearty and humble affections; beseeching the Lord, by whom Princes
rule, to bless him with long life, and these Nations with peace and happiness
under his Government.

This Proclamation was signed by the Lord Mayor of London, the members of the
Privy Counsel, and most of the Officers of the Army, and was afterward
proclaimed in the Palace-yard Westminster, at Cheapside, the Royall-Exchange in
Cornhill, and so in order throughout all the Dominions of England, Scotland and
Ireland.

Proclamation being thus made, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in their
formalities, came in the afternoon to condole the death of his late Highness,
to congratulate his Highness advancement to the Protectorship, and to surrender
up into his hands the Sword of the City: they were received with the accustomed
Ceremonies, and the Lord Mayor having delivered up his Sword, received it again
from his Highness hands; and after some other Ceremonies performed as usual,
and Dr Goodwin having prayed for a blessing upon his Highness Person, his
Government, his Forces by Sea and Land, and upon all the People of these
Nations, Nathaniell Fines one of the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal, and
one of his Highness Privy Counsel, administered the same Oath to his Highness,
which had been formerly administered to his Father upon his Installment

After the Oath administered, his Highness first addressed himself to the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, thanking them for theirs and the Cities fidelity and good
affection toward him, and then having returned the like thanks to the
addresses of the Officers of the Army, he dismissed them; and then passed a
Proclamation for continuance of all such as were in any Office of Government at
his Fathers death, till further directions from his Highness.

The sixth of September, by his Highness Order the Imbargo made upon his
Fathers death on all Ships and Vessels in the Ports of England and Wales, was
taken off, and Sr Oliver Flemming Master of the Ceremonies, was ordered to
acquaint the Ministers of all foreign Princes, of the death of Oliver Lord
Protector, and that both that Title and the Government of these three Nations,
was devolved and established on his eldest Son Richard Cromwell.

The Lord Newport who was come over as Ambassador extraordinary from the States
of Holland, to the Protectors Father, but first by reason of his indisposedness
being retarded his audience, and afterward by reason of his death, his
Embassage proved ineffectuall; he having received new Letters from his Masters,
ordering him to condole his late Highness death, and complement his present
Highness for his advancement to the Government, hoping that the same firm
league and peace might be continued between his Highness and those States, as
had been between them and his princely Father; delivered his Message in a
public audience before his Highness, and received an answer conformable to his
desires.

Several addresses protesting both love and obedience to his Highness, are
presented both by the Army, City of London, and most of the Countries; the
whole Nation being seemingly content and satisfied with his advancement to the
Government of these Kingdoms. Nor were the Officers of the Army, even those
who afterward showed themselves most active in depriving him of his
Government, backward; but every particular Regiment gave in their addresses,
condoling his Fathers death, and protesting their willingness, nay joy, in
becoming obedient to him. But amongst all those addresses, I cannot omit one
passage in that presented by Major General John Disborow and his Regiment, in
which condoling his Fathers death they add thus, viz. Your Highness, your
Armies, and people, reap the benefit of his prayers and successes; but alas!
this our Moses (your dear and blessed Father) the servant of the Lord is dead,
and shall we not weep! Though we weep not for him, we cannot but weep for our
selves. We cannot but look after him, crying, Our Father, our Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; the fiery Chariot indeed of
England, whose fury and ambition had set the whole Nation in flames and
combustion.

Nor are the rest of those foreign Ministers which were then in England, viz.
the Ambassadors of France, and Sweden, and Portugal, the Agents for the
Hans-Towns, Florence, Venice, and Genua, backward in coming to lament with his
Highness for the death of his Father, and desire the continuance of that
league; friendship, and amity, which was maintained and granted by him. To
which the Lord Protector returned answer, that there could not be any greater
argument used for his continuance offriendship with any Kingdom or
Commonwealth, then by telling him that his Father had contracted it.

Nor are Scotland, or Ireland, less complyant to his desires then England had
been, they thence send their addresses and promises of obedience; so that his
Government seemed every where to begin with a great deal of serenity, and fair
promises of a long continuance. In Scotland likewise, General Monk who
continued Vicegerent there, published a Declaration for the better securing the
peace of that Nation: declaring

First, That no person then beyond the seas, or out of the Dominions of this
Commonwealth, etc. Except Masters of Ships, or Seamen belonging to Ships of
this Commonwealth, should after the first of December 1658, presume to come
into Scotland, without License from the Lord Protector, or his Counsel in
England, the Lord Deputy or Counsel of Ireland, or his Highness Counsel of
Scotland; as they would answer it at their perils.

Secondly, That such Persons as shall arrive in Scotland after the first of
December, having such a Pass, shall at their arrival be bound to give
intimation to the Governor of the next adjacent Garrison, who is to examine
them, and see that their Pass be not counterfeit: and for all those who shall
arrive before the first of December, they are to make their appearance before
the Governor of the next adjacent Garrison, who is to examine the cause of
their coming into Scotland, and if he find them to be persons suspected, to
apprehend and secure them.

Thirdly, That no Master of any Ship, shall either coming from beyond the Seas,
or going out of Scotland, bring in or carry out any person whatsoever who has
not such a Pass as aforesaid.

This Proclamation was published under high pretenses of preventing the design
of the Cavalier party there.

And now the time approached for celebrating the Funeral Pomp of his Highness
Oliver late Lord Protector, of which great care had been taken, and no
imaginary state neglected: for he being first embowelled, was from Whitehall
carried to Somerset House, where his Effigies was set up in state after this
manner. Three Rooms were first hung with black Cloth, adorned each of them with
a Canopy and Chair of State of the same. The fourth where the Corpse was and the
Effigies did first lie, was hung with Velvet, and adorned with Scutcheons and
Banners in most Noble sort; after which, the Effigies was removed into another
Room, and there exposed to public view, standing in Princely manner upon an
ascent under a Canopy of State, with a Scepter in one hand, a Globe in the
other, and a Crown on his head, after the ancient manner of the Kings of
England; his Armor lying by him, and the Banners, Banrols and Standards placed
round about hm, and so continued until the solemnizationi of the
Funerall-Pomps and Ceremonies, which were performed on the 23th of November
1658, in form following:

The Effigies being taken down by several of the Protectors Gentlemen, was
with a rich Canopy carried over it, taken and placed in a Chariot, covered with
black Velvet, adorned with Plumes and Scutcheons, and drawn by six plumed
Horses, covered to the heels with black Velvet: Then the Train began to march,
betwixt the Rails set up on purpose, from Somerset House to Westminster, on
each side of which stood the Soldiers with black Ribbons on their red Coats,
and their Ensigns furled and covered with a vail of Cypres. And first went a
Knight-Marshall on Horseback, with his black Truncheon tipped with gold, attended
by his Deputy, and several other Officers to clear the way. Next followed the
Poor men of Westminster, two and two in mourning Gowns and Hoods: Then the
Servants of those Persons of Quality attended the Funeral: Then the Servants
of the deceased Protector, in their respective places and orders: Then the
Servants of the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of London: Then the Servants
attending the Ambassadors and Agents of Foreign Princes: After them the Poor
Knights of Windsor in their Gowns and Hoods: Then the Clerks, Secretaries and
other Underofficers belonging to the Army, Admiralty, Treasury, Navy and
Exchequer: Then the Commanders in the Fleet, and Officers of the Army: Then the
Commissioners for Excise, the Committees of the Army and Navy: Then the
Commissioners for approbation of Ministers: Then the Officers belonging to the
Privy Counsel and both Houses of Parliament: Next followed the Protectors
Phisicians: Then the Field-Officers and general Officers of the Army: Next the
Aldermen of London: Then the Masters of the Chancery, and the deceased
Protectors Counsel at Law: Then the Judges of the Admiralty, the Masters of
Request with the Judges in Wales: Then the Barons of the Exchequer, the Judges
of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London: Then the Persons allied to his
Highness. and the Members of the Lords House: After them the Agents of Venice,
Genoa, the Hans-Towns, and other public Ministers: The Holland Ambassador
alone: The Portugal Ambassador, whose Train was born up by four Knights of the
Order of Christ: The French Ambassador whose Train was likewise born up by
four Persons of Quality: The Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal: The Lords
of the Privy Counsel: Then followed the Chief Mourner, with those Persons who
bore up his Train: most of the Persons of Honor were in Close Mourning, and
were in their divisions distinguished by Drumms and Trumpets, and by a Standard
or Banner, and by a Mourning Horse, of which there were eleven in all, four
covered with black Cloth, and seven with Velvet; These being all past in order,
the Effigies followed in the Chariot, with six Banner Rolls born on each side,
and eight Persons bearing the several pieces of the deceased Protectors Arms,
all which were attended by Heralds; after whom came Garter principal King at
Arms, attended by a Gentleman on each side bareheaded: Then followed the Horse
of Honor, in very rich Trappings of Gold embroidered upon crimson Velvet, and
adorned with white, yellow and red Plumes, which was led by the Master of the
Horse: And last of all followed the Protectors Guard of Halbertiers, with the
Warders of the Tower.

In this State was the Effiigies conducted from Somerset House to Westminster,
where it was taken off the Chariot, and in the same State as it was first taken
out of Somerset House, carried into the Abbey Church, and placed under a wooden
Monument stately erected for it, with the Bannors and six Ensigns of Honor
placed about it; the Corpse having been some days before buried in a Vault
purposely provided for it in Henry the 7ths Chapel, over which a stately
Monument was intended to be erected over it, but the after sudden Revolutions
of State hindered that undeserved remembrance of him.

With all this Pomp and Splendour were the Funeral Ceremonies of the deceased
Lord Protector performed, so prodigal were the Counsel of State to the very
memory of their so beneficial a Master, not regarding at all the Debts or
other inconveniences which they might run the Nation into, by so vast an
expense; so that in requital to him, or to ingratiate themselves with his
Son, they were so vain as to extend the pomp and expense of his Funeral,
beyond that of any English King since William the Conquerours time.

The deceased Protector had in his life time contracted a firm League both
offensive and defensive with the King of Swetheland, which caused the now
Protector his Son, upon the Swedes desires, to man out a great Fleet for his
assistance, against the Dutch who aided the King of Denmark his enemy. Between
forty and fifty sail of gallant Ships were sent forth under the command of the
Lord Mountague: this Fleet having spent near six months in the Sound, even to
the time of the dissolution and annulling of that Power that set them forth,
returned home having done nothing worth the mention.

The Protector now to strengthen himself, by the advice of his Counsel calls a
Parliament, and Writs are issued out for their appearance on the 27th of
January 1658, whether they being accordingly convented, and having (according
to custom) made choice of Challoner Chute, Esquire; for Speaker of the House; the
Protector the same day, attended by many of his Fathers new made Nobles, went
in state to Westminster, the Lord Cleypool bearing the Sword before him, where
having heard a Sermon, he went in his formalities to the new Lords House, from
whence he sent the Usher of the Black Rod, to acquaint the Parliament that he
expected them; who being come to the bar, he made them the following Speech:

My Lords and Gentlemen;
I believe there are scarce any of you here, who expected some months since to
have seen this great Assembly at this time, in this place in peace, considering
the great and unexpected change which it has pleased the all disposing hand of
God to make in the midst of us. I can assure you, that if things had been
according to our own fears and the hopes of our enemies, it had not been thus
with us. And therefore it will become both you and me, in the first place to
reverence and adore the great God, possessor of Heaven and earth, in whose
hands our breath is, and whose are all our ways, because of his judgments, so
to acknowledge his goodness to these Lands, in that he has not added sorrow to
sorrow, and made the period of his late Highnesses life, and that of the
Nations peace to have been in one day.

Peace was one of the blessings of my Fathers Government, a mercy after so long
a Civil War, and in the midst of so great division which that war bred, is
not usually afforded by God unto a people in so great measure.

The Cause of God and these Nations which he engaged in, met in all the parts
of it, as you well know, with many enemies and great opposition. The archers
privily and openly sorely grieved him, and shot at him, yet his bow abode in
strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty
God of Jacob.

As to himself, he died full of days, spent in great and sore travail, yet his
eyes were not waxeddim, neither was his nature or strength abated; as it was
said of Moses, he was serviceable even to the last.

As to these Nations, he left them in great honor abroad, and in full peace at
home, all England, Scotland, and Ireland dwelling safely, every man under his
Vine and under his Figtree, from Dan unto Beersheba.

He is gone to his rest, and we are entered into his labors; and if the Lord
has still a blessing for these Lands, (as I trust he has) as our peace has
been lengthened out to this day, so shall we go on to reap the fruit, and
gather the harvest, of what his late Highness has sown, and laid the
foundation of.

For my own part being by the providence of God, and the disposition of the
Law, my Fathers Successor; and bearing that place in the Government that I do,
I though it fit for the public good, to call a Parliament of the three
Nations, now united and conjoined together into one Commonwealth, under one
Government.

It is agreeable not only to my trust, but to my principles, to govern these
Nations by the advice of my two Houses of Parliament. I find it asserted in the
humble Petition and Advice, (which is the corner stone of this building, and
that which I shall adhere unto) that Parliaments are the great Counsel of the
chief Magistrate, in whose advice both he and these Nations may be most safe
and happy. I can assure you I have that esteem of them: And as I have made it
the first Act of my Government to call you together; so shall I further let you
see the value I have of you, by the answers that I shall return to the Advice
that shall be given me by you, for the good of these Nations.

You are come up from your several Countries, as the heads of your Tribes, and
with hearts I persuade my self to consult together their good; I can say I meet
you with the same desires, having nothing in my designs, but the maintenance
of the Peace, Laws, Liberties both Civil and Christian of these Nations, which
I shall always make the measure and rule of my Government, and be ready to
spend my life for.

We have summoned you at this time, to let you know the state of our affairs,
and to have your advice in them, and I believe a Parliament was never sommoned
upon so important occasion.

It is true as I have told you, we are through the goodness of God at this time
in peace, but it is not thus with us because we have no enemies; there are
enough both within us and without us, who would soon put an end to our peace,
were it in their powers, or should it at any time come into their powers.

It will be becoming of your wisdoms, to consider of the securing of our
peace, against those who we all know are, and will be our implacable enemies;
what the means of doing this are, I shall refer unto you.

This I can assure you, that the Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, are
true and faithful to the peace and good interest of these Nations, and it will
be found so, and that they are a consisting body and useful for any good ends;
and if they were not the best Army in the world, you would have heard of
inconveniences by reason of the great arrear of pay which is now due unto
them, whereby some of them are reduced to great necessities: but you shall have
a particular account of their arrears, and I doubt not but some consideration
will be had thereon in some speedy and effectual way. And this being matter of
money, I recommend it particularly to the House of Commons.

You have you know a war with Spain, carried on by the advice of Parliament:
he is an old enemy, and therefore it will be necessary both for the honor and
safety of these Nations, that the war be vigorously prosecuted.

Furthermore, the constitution of Affairs in all our neighbor Countries and
round about us (as well friends as enemies) are very considerable, and calls
upon us to be upon our guard both at Land and Sea; and to be in a posture able
to maintain and conserve our own interest.

Great and powerful Fleets are preparing to be set forth into these seas, and
considerable Armies of several Nations and Kings, are now disputing for the
mastery of the Sound with the adjacent Islands and Countries, among which is
the Roman Emperor, with other Popish States; I need not tell you of what
consequence these things are to this State.

We have already interposed in these affairs, in such manner as we found it
necessary for the interest of England, and matters are yet in such a condition
in those parts, that this State may, with the assistance of Gods provide, that
their differences may not prejudice us.

The other things that are to be said, I shall refer to my Lord Keeper Fines,
and close up what I have to say, with only adding two or three particulars to
what I have already said.

And first I recommend to your care the people of God in these Nations with
their concernments: the more they are divided among themselves, the greater
prudence should be used to cement them.

Secondly, The good and necessary work of Reformation both in manners and in
the administration of Justice, that profaneness may be discountenanced and
suppressed, and that Righteousness and Justice may be executed in the Land.

Thirdly, I recommend to you the Protestant cause abroad, which seems at this
time to be in some danger, having great and powerful enemies, and very few
friends, and I hope and believe that the old English zeal to that Cause is
still among us.

Lastly my Lords, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, That you will in
all your debates maintain and conserve love and unity among your selves, that
therein you may be the pattern of the Nation, who have sent you up in peace and
with their prayers, that the spirit of wisdom and peace may be among you, and
this shall also be my prayer for you, and to this let us all add our utmost
endeavors for the making this a happy Parliament.

This was the Protectors so much applauded Speech to his Parliament: which
finisheed, the Lord Fines began, and after having enumerated the deceased
Protectors great endeavors, etc. for the peace of the Nation, and his
Highnesses following his steps in the calling of this present Parliament for
the three Nations jointly, he recommended more effectually to them the wars
abroad, and the probabilities of homebred disturbances, desiring their
provision to maintain the one, and care to prevent the other: the Parliament
having every one taken the Oath formerly taken by Olivers Parliament, not to
alter the Government, were returned to their House, and the Protector to
Whitehall.

The House of Commons being returned to their House, spent muce time about the
rectifying of their Elections, and expelling several Members out of the House
(but causing others to be elected in their steads) under pretense of being
Malignants, and having born Arms against the Parliament in behalf of their
lawful Sovereign; and not only expelling them, but disabling them from being
elected or chosen as Members of future Parliaments; so though this Parliament
was esteemed one of the freest that had been called since 1641, yet it was not
free indeed.

The House having as far as they could rectified their Members and Elections,
proceed to the calling to an account of all those who had been entrusted with
the Customs, Excize, Taxes or other Revenue of the Commonwealth, and to
consider of the present state of the Revenues, and some ways to pay the arrears
of the Army, Navy, etc. and other National Debts; but this business being put
off, by delays never came to any effect.

They likewise proceed to the drawing up of a Bill (for it never came to be
either Act or Ordinance) which should be entitled, An Act of Recognition of
his Highness right and Title to be Protector and Chief Magistrate of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging. Many demurs were there in this debate, and
several praevious Votes to be passed before this Bill could be committed; as
whether the Parliament should consist of two Houses; and whether this House
should transact with the Persons sitting in the other House, as a House of
Parliament: This business took up a great deal of time; the Protectorians stood
stiffly for it, and the Commonwealthsmen as stong against it, alleging, that to
treat with those men as a House of Lords, was to enslave themselves more deeply
then ever they had been before. That they should now by it clearly evince to
the world their folly, perjury and villainy, that whilst they had taken their
Oaths to be true and faithful to govern without a House composed of the Peers
of the Nation, they should now both break their Oath, and subject themselves to
such as were scarce Peers to the Commons: That if they did but consider the
Creator of this House of Peers (as they were called,) they could not but
foresee the necessary thraldom they must run themselves into, these being all
such as were made sure to his interest, and were so many sure Votes for
whatever arbitrary actions he might undertake; and if it were thought unlawful
for the Bishops to sit in the House of Lords, because they were accounted so
many sure voices for the King, how much more might these be excepted against,
who were certainly so many sure voices for the Protectorall interest, being all
created by it. Yet notwithstanding these Arguments, the Vote was at length
carried on the Protectorian side, and Resolved, That the House of Commons would
transact with the Persons then sitting in the other House as a House of
Parliament, during the present Parliament: but with this Proviso, that it was
not intended thereby to exclude such Peers as have been faithful to the
Parliament, from their privilege of being duly summoned to be Members of that
House.

Whilst the Parliament are thus pursuing their Votes to settle the Protector
in England, the French and Spaniard are endeavoring to conclude a Peace
betwixt themselves, and to leave the English in the lurch; which howsoever, it
then and ever since went vigorously on, yet are not the Conditions spoken of,
performed on either side, to the full-consummating of it.

During the Sessions of this Parliament, on the 24th of February, Mr George
Strangways, formerly a Major in the Kings Army, was pressed to death in the
Press-yard in Newgate, for refusing to plead to his Indictment, for having
caused his Brother-in-Law, one Mr Fussell an Attorney of Dortsetshire, to be
shot in the head as he sat writing in his Chamber-window, of which he died.
The magnanimity, nobleness and pe nitence of Major Strangways at his death,
deserves this memory.

This Parliament took into consideration the Cases of diverse Persons who had
been imprisoned in the time of the late deceased Protector; Maj. Genesis Overton
is sent for out of the Isle of Jersey and released: The Duke of Buckingham is
likewise released out of Windsor-Castle, upon the Lord Fairfax his giving
20000lb security, that he shall demean himself peaceably for the future, and
not join with, abet, or have any correspondence with the enemies of the
Lord-Protector, or the Common wealth. Several other Persons of Quality were
likewise by them released out of the Tower. Maj. Genesis Brown likewise who had by
the long Parliament in 1649, been disabled from bearing any Offices in the
City, is by them restored, and made capable of all Offices, privileges and
precedencies there, and the long Parliaments Vote of the 4th of December 1649,
made in his prejudice, vacated.

The Quakers to promote their Turbulencies, on the 16th of April sent a Paper
into the House, sealed and directed on the outside, For the Speaker of the
Commons assembled in Parliament; these are for him to read to the Commons. The
inside contained a Declaration, entitled, A Declaration to the Commons
assembled in Parliament: Delivered the sixth day of the second Month called
April 1659, to the then Speaker of the said House. This Declaration contained
many ignominious scandals, thrown by those Fanatiques both upon the Magistracy
and Ministry; for which the Parliament express their Resentment to the
Declarers, requiring them to repair to their respective habitations, apply
themselves to their callings, and submit themselves to the Laws of the Nation,
and the Magistracy they lived under.

But whilst we are talking of this crabbed sour generation, let me give an
account of one passage of them in New England. The Governor there being
troubled with their disturbances, and abuses both of Magistracy and Ministry;
made a Law for their banishment, that if any of them came thither again, they
should at their first coming be whipped and sent away; at the second lose their
Ears; but if they still persisted, their lives should be forfeit. According to
this Law, some of them still being obstinate, notwithstanding they had been
whipped at Boston, returned. Whereupon the Governor ordering their ears to be
cut off according to Law, shortly after he received a Letter from one Humphrey
Norton a Quaker, from about fifty Miles from Boston; which because of the
horribly blasphemous curses in it, I shall insert the heads of. Thus he begins:

Accursed are thy Rulers thou Town of Boston, for they are become the High
Priests servants, and have cut off the Saints right Ears.

Accursed are thy Teachers, for they are the troop of Robbers, which murder in
the high way by consent.

Accursed are thy people, who vote up and consent unto their actions of
bloodshed, murder, and cruelty.

Accursed is that Counsel, that sits to shed the blood of the innocent, as
has been done in thee.

Accursed is thy Governor, who past the sentence against his own soul, he
being forewarned in it by express words from me.

Accursed is that Hangman that did it, as he is called so is his Name; he is
servant to the Devil, one of his familiar spirits, ( his Name in the Hebrew
tongue is Abbadon) and his Master which first cast them into prison, and now
has caused him to cut off their Ears, must be bound in the Lake of oblivion
for a thousand years; his Name there shall rot, and his posterity perish, etc.
(and so he goes on in most horrid curses, and in the end)

The curse of God light upon thee John Indicot; for my brethren and companions
sake, the curse of God rest upon thee, thy deeds thou shall answer for, as sure
as ever thou consentedst to that deed, thou son of a Murderer.

Lucifer thou cursed Bird, who dare attempt to say thou speak from Heaven,
get thee down into the lowest hot Lake, thou liar, for within the gates of Hell
is thy habitation.

This was the sum of his Letter, which was thus directed. Let this Letter be
delivered with care to the hands of John Indicot, Governor of Boston so
called: have, have, have. But I have digressed too much, in discoursing thus
long about this perverse generation.

Let us now return to the Parliament, who had long been debating about the
Writs issued out by the Protector, for Election of Members for Scotland and
Ireland, to serve in this present Parliament. The debates hereon were the more
long and tedious, in regard those two Nations had never yet by any President,
the liberty to have their Members sit in the English Parliament; but at length
a President was made, and it was resolved, that the Members that returned to
serve for Scotlad and Ireland, should continue to sit as Members for that
present Parliament.

About this time happened a very sad accident at Barbados, the Town of St
Michaels being near wholly consumed with fire, to the great loss and utter
undoing of most of the Inhabitants, besides the losses sustained by Merchants,
who had goods in Warehouses on shore.

But now about the latter end of March 1659, began the first sparks of
discontent to break out, which afterward burst into such a flame, that it
consumed the Protectors greatness and Estate. The original cause of this
distemper, there is very few, but those that effected it can tell; but the first
appearance of it was in a representation presented on the 6th of April, by the
Lord Fleetwood to his Highness, in behalf of the Army, the heads of which were
as follows.

1. They pressed their urgent wants by reason of their Arrear-pay, and desired
redress.

2. They complained that they who had born the brunt of the War, were now
derided and like to be laid by.

3. That many Cavaliers were lately come out of Flanders, and had dangerous
meetings in and about London.

4. That the faithful servants of the Good Old Cause, were affronted by
malignant and disaffected persons.

5. That Lists of the actual Tryers of the late King printed in red letters,
were scattered about, as if they were appointed for destruction.

6. That Suits were commenced at common Law against many well affected persons,
for things they had transacted as Soldiers.

7. That the famous actions of the Long Parliament, and his late Highness in
and since 1648, were vilified and evil spoken of.

That all these Circumstances clearly evidenced a declension of the Good Old
Cause, which they were resolved to assert; and therefore they desired that his
Highness would be pleased to represent these things to the Parliament, and
procure their remedies: And particularly, that he would recommend to them the
present necessities of the Soldiers for want of pay, and that satisfaction
might be given to the Militia-Forces.

The Militia of the City of London took it very kindly, that the Army had been
pleased to mention satisfaction to be made for the Militia-Forces, they
therefore instigated by their chief worthy Commanders Tichborn and Ireton, draw
up a representation, confirming their resolutions with the Army to stick to the
Good Old Cause, which they likewise accompany with a Letter to the Lord
Fleetwood, to be communicated to the general Counsel of the Officers of the
Army, declaring their intentions to go along with them in whatever they should
undertake, for the pretended good of the Nations.

These Declarations and Remonstrances both of the Officers of the Army, and
City-Militia, were foreseen by the Parliament to intend no good to them; they
therefore in hopes to prevent them, vote that there should be no meeting or
general Counsel of Officers, without consent and by Order of his Highness the
Lord Protector; and that no person should have any Command either by Sea or
Land in any of the three Nations, who should refuse to subscribe, that he will
not disturb the free meetings in Parliament, of any the Members of either House
of Parliament, or their Freedom in their debates and Counsels.

The Protector himself was likewise fearful of these proceedings, and meetings
of the chief Officers of the Army; he therefore sends to them these Votes of
the House: Whereupon on the 22 of April after they had sufficiently sought God
by prayer, Desborow, Fleetwood, and other the chief Officers, with most of the
Army at their heels, came to the Protector, and forced him to sign a Delaration
and Commission, ready prepared for the dissolving the Parliament. The
Commission was directed to the Lord Nathaneel Fines, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal, who coming to the House of Lords, sent the Usher of the black Rod to the
House to desire their attendance on the Lords, but they refused to give him
entrance; but understanding there were Guards in Westminster Hall, they thought
it best to adjourn, which they did till the following Monday being the 25th of
April, whereby they prevented both their formal and forceable dissolution.

But the next day being the 23 of April, the Proclamation signed by his
Highness the Lord Protector, for the dissolution of the Parliament, was
published; the Contents of it were as follows.

By the Lord Protector. A Proclamation for dissolving the Parliament.
Whereas we assembled our high Court of Parliament, to assemble and meet at our
City of Westminster the 27th day of January last, which has continued unto
this present day: And whereas we did by our Commission under the great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster this present 22 day of April, for diverse
weighty reasons declare our pleasure and resolution to dissolve the said
Parliament; and to that end did thereby constitute and appoint our right trusty
and right wellbelovod Counselor Nathaneal Lord Fines, one of the Keepers of
our great Seal of England, and others our Commissioners in our name, this said
present 22 day of April, to dissolve our said Parliament, which was by them
done according to the tenor of the said Commission in the usual place; and by
virtue hereof our said Parliament is absolutey dissolved. Nevertheless we have
thought it necessary by advice of our Privy Counsel, by this our Proclamation
to publish and make known the same, to the end all Persons whom it may concern
may take notice thereof.

Given at Whitehall the 22 day of April, in the year of our Lord 1659.
Yet notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Members on Monday the 25th of April
repaired to the House according to the vote of adjournment, which they found
guarded by red Coats, whose Officers told them, that they should not enter the
House any more.

With the dissolution of this Parliament, we may put a period to the short
Reign of Richard Lord Protector, no further use being made of him; besides what
a Declaration of the 25th of April, (commanding all Cavaliers and Papists to
depart out of London) upon these present disturbances, did amount to.

Behold the visible hand of God, that those very persons and Relations that
Oliver had advanced into the highest places of trust, for securing his usurped
power, are by the Almighty made isntrumental to pull down and destroy that,
which he had so perfidiouslly got by murder and hypocrisy.

Various Revolutions of Government in 1659, 1660.
BY the dissolution of the late Parliament, the power over the Nations is
devolved into the hands of those who devolved it, they being then the only
visible force (I will not say power) in these Nations, viz. the chief Officers
of the Army, who first of all begin to model their own Family, which they did
by cashiering those of the Protectorian faction (for some such there were in
the Army) viz. Okey, Ingolsby and Goffe, and some others, into whose places and
commands, they by their own authority put Lambert, Haslerig, Gbey, and such
others as had been displaced by the late deceased Protector. These men
considering that as they now stood, they had no visible form of a Civil
Government, but their proceedings in this manner would render them most odious
to the common people, and in time ruin them; begin to think what Civil Power
they might establish, which might be most concordant to their designs, and at
last send for some of the members of that Parliamentary Juncto, which were
dissolved by General Cromwell in 1653: to these they make motion of returning
to the exercise of their trust, desiring them to inform the Speaker and the
rest, of the Armies intentions. They all readily and willingly assent; but the
Speaker makes some conscientious objections against their resitting, which
notwithstanding (though I think they were never yet answered) he at length
consents to their desires: whereupon the Army publish a large and specious
Declaration, asserting their resolutions to stand steadfast to the Good Old
Cause (as they called it) with repentance for their errors, and to that effect
they conclude their Declaration to this purpose.

That they amongst other things calling to mind that the long Parliament
consisting of the Members, which continued their sitting until the 20th of
April 1953, were eminent assertors of that Cause, and had a special presence
of God with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many
good people concurring with theirs therein,) they thought it their duty to
invite the said Members to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust,
as before the said 20th of April 1653.

And therefore they did by this Declaration, earnestly desire the Parliament,
consisting of those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648, unto the
20th of April 1653, to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust;
that they should be ready in their places to yield them their utmost assistance
to sit in safety, for the improving present opportunity for settling and
securing the peace and quiet of this Commonwealth, praying for the presence and
blessing of God upon their endeavors.

This Declaration published, there were several Articles agreed upon, between
the Officers of the Army, and several Members of the then to be restored part
of a Parliament; which accorded to and signed, on the next day being the 7th of
May 1659, they convented together in the Painted-Chamber, where those Members
appointed to meet being all present, forty two in number: the Speaker with the
Mace carried before him, and followed by the rest, went into the House and took
their places.

Upon notice that those men had taken their places in the House as a
Parliament, several of the Members secluded in 1648, (there being double the
number of them in the City) came into the Hall, and agreed that some persons of
their number should go up to the House, to try whether they could find
admittance. The persons appointed to go up were Mr Ansley, Sr George Booth, Mr
William Pryn, Mr James Herbert, Mr George Mountague, Sr John Eveling, Mr
Eveling, Mr Knightly, Mr Gewen, Mr John Herbert, Mr Peck, Mr Hungerford, Mr
Harly, and Mr Clive; these according to the desire of the rest went up, but
found restraint upon the House, so that with much ado they prevailed to get
into the Lobby; but here they were opposed by Lieutenant Colonel Allen, though
they earnestly disputed the undoubted right they had to sit in the House as
well as the others; but no reasons could prevail.

Yet on Monday May 9th, Mr Ansley, Mr Pryn, and Mr Hungerford, understanding
that there were no guards upon the House, went to Westminster Hall and found
admittance without any opposition at first, though afterward when Mr Ansley
went forth to acquaint those secluded Members, which attended their success in
the Hall, of their admittance, endeavoring to enter again, he and some others
with him were forcibly kept back by Captain Lewson of Coll. Goffs Regiment.
However Mr Pryn continued there, and disputed highly with the Juncto, of the
privilege which he and the rest of the secluded Members had to sit, which only
a little disturbed, and made them (who were loath to hear right disputed)
adjourn till the afternoon; when Mr Pryn attempting again to enter, was impeded
by a Troop of Horse and two Companies of Foot, which were there ready to guard
this piece of a Parliament, against those whom they pretended were intruders.

And thus this Parliament sat in quiet among themselves, and to the end they
might be no further disturbed, voted, That all persons heretofore Members of
that Parliament, which had not sat in this Parliament since the year 1648, nor
had subscribed the Engagement in the Roll of Engagement of this House, should
not sit in the House till further order of the Parliament.

They likewise published a Declaration, wherein after a large and specious
Preamble, they declared; That they were resolved (through the gracious
assistance of God) to apply themselves to the faithful discharge of the trust
imposed in them, and to endeavor the settlement of this Commonwealth upon such
a foundation, as may assert, establish and secure the properties and liberties
of the people in reference to all, both as men, and as Christians, and that
without a single Person, Kingship or House of Peers; and that they should
vigorously endeavor the carrying on of Reformation so much desired, and so
often declared for; to the end there might be a godly and faithful Magistracy
and Ministry upheld and maintained in these Nations, to the glory and praise of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reviving and making glad the hearts of the
upright in the Land. By such fair pretenses did they begin to gull the people.

And immediately, because they could not have time as yet to appoint a Counsel
of State, (the usual dependant of a Parliament since 1648,) they for the
present erect a Committee of Safety, consisting of Fleetwood, Haslerig, Vane,
Ludlow, Sydenham, Salway, John Jones, Lambert, Desbrough, Berry and Scot. In
imitation of this was that Committee of Safety I suppose erected afterward by
the Army. But the Counsel of State being shortly after nominated, whatever
power they had, was void, though it is true most of the forementioned were
members of it.

The Great Seal of England made by the Protectors is likewise by them broken,
and the old Seal used by the Parliament in 1651, voted to be the Seal of the
House, and no other. Easter Term is also by them adjourned, to the great
discontent of many persons, who had then suits depending against many Members,
especially against Vane and Haslerig.

This Parliament now thinking themselves fixed in their authority, begin to
bustle strongly, but especially they take care to please the Army who had made
them a Parliament, which they do by passing Votes, That effectual care be
taken for satisfying their arrears, and paying them their pay in due order for
the future.

At this Parliaments reentrance into the Supreme Government of these Nations,
there happened a sad accident in the Town and Corporation of Southwould or
Soulbay in the County of Suffolk, where near 230 dwelling-Houses were wholly
consumed with fire; all which was but a spark to the fire might have been
kindled in this State, had they continued in power.

The Army likewise at this time put up a Remonstratory Petition to this
Parliament, wherein they desired several things, as they pretended, toward
the settlement of the Nation; to which the Parliament gave them these
contentive answers, for they durst indeed do no otherwise.

1. That the liberty of the persons, and property of the Estates of the free
people of these Nations, should be preserved inviolable according to Law, under
the Government of a free State or Commonwealth, without a single Person,
Kingship, or House of Peers.

2. That there should be a just and due regulation of the Law.

3. That all persons who professed one God in Trinity, and acknowledged the
Scriptures, should have liberty of conscience, provided it extended not to
Popery or Prelacy.

4. That a godly and faithful Gospell-Preaching-Ministry should be encouraged.

5. That all Universities and Schools of learning should be countenanced and
reformed.

6. That none but men of approved godliness, and whose interests suited with
the Good Old Cause, should be admitted to employments in State.

7. That an Act should be made for confirmation of the sales of all Kings,
Queens, Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands.

Thus they endeavor to please the Army by complying with their desires.

Yet notwithstanding the fickle establishment of this House, the States of
Holland court them by their Ambassador, who on the 24th of May had audience in
the House; but perhaps those States might have more reason to do so then
others, these being the men who first began that War with them, which almost
totally ruined them.

And now on the 25th of May, Richard Cromwell Esquire; late Lord Protector of these
three Nations, makes a free resignation of that Government to the Parliament,
which the Army had before taken away without his leave or consent. His
resignation or rather submission ran thus:

I have perused the Declaration and Resolve you were pleased to deliver me the
other Night; and for your information, touching what is mentioned in the said
Resolve, I have caused a true state of my Debts to be transcribed and annexed
to this Paper, which will show what they are and how they were contracted.

As to that part of the Resolve whereby the Committee are to inform themselves,
how far I do acquiesce in the Government of this Commonwealth, as it is
declared by this Parliament: I trust. my past carriage hitherto has manifested
my acquiescence in the will and good pleasure of God, and that I love and value
the peace of this Commonwealth, much above my own concernments; and I desire
that by this, a measure of my future deportment may be taken, which by the
assistance of God shall be such as shall bear the same witness, having I hope
in some degree learned rather to reverence, and submit to the hand of God, then
be unquiet under it. And (as to the late providence that have fallen out
amongst us) however in respect to the particular engagements that lay upon me,
I could not be active in making a change in the Government of these Nations;
yet through the goodness of God I can freely acquiesce in it being made, and do
hold my self obliged (as with other men) I expect protection from the present
Government, so to demean my self with all peaceableness under it, and to
procure to the uttermost of my power, that all in whom I have interest do the
same.

Thus he who was lately Protector of these three Nations, craved protection
from his Quondam Subjects; and thus easily did he resign those three Kingdoms,
which his Father had got with so much hazard of his body, if not of his soul.

His Brother also Henry Cromwell, late Lord Lieutenant int Ireland, upon the
Parliaments advice surrendered his Government; and Colonel John Jones, William
Steel Esquire, Colonel Matthew Thomlinson, Robert Goodwin, and Miles Corbett
Esquire, were in his stead appointed by the Parliament, to be Commissioners for
the Government of Ireland.

In Scotland General Monk though he resignes not up his Government to the
Parliament, yet holds a fair correspondency with them, and by his and the rest
of the Officers of his Armies, declare and keep a compliance to their
Government, which he punctually performed. The Parliament endeavoring still
more and more to oblige the Army, pass an Act of oblivion and indemnity for all
force or violence formerly put upon the House; yet nevertheless to restrain
them for the future, the Commissions are issued out by the Speaker in the Name
of the Parliament, and not by a General as formerly.

Yet the Parliament take so much care to perform their promises to them, that
they order the immediate sale of Whitehall, Hampton Court, and Sommerset-House,
toward the present payment of some of the Armies Arrears.

About this time on the 11th of July 1659, happened a strange kind of Tumult in
or about Enfield, some part of the Chase which formerly lay common, and was the
chiefest stay and support of the Country people thereabouts, for the feeding of
their Catttle, from whence proceeded the chief support and maintenance of
themselves and Families; being by the Parliament given to some of the Soldiers
for their arrears, was by them built upon, and euclosed; which so incensed the
poor of the Country, whose Families were almost ready to starve for want of
such relief, that notwithstanding Soldiers were sent to secure those Grounds,
the common people made a head, fell upon the Soldiers, took nine of them
prisoners, threw down a Barn, and levelled the enclosures.

The Parliament upon audience given to an extraordinary Ambassador of the King
of Sweden, appointed three persons to go over as Plenipotentiaries to
Coppenhaguen, to treat of such a reconciliation between the two Kings of
Swedeland and Denmark, as might best stand with the interest of England; but
their Embassage has as yet produced no considerable effect.

And now further to secure themselves in those designs they had in hand here,
they banish all Cavaliers, under the style of Malignants, from London, and
twenty Miles about; and pass an Act for the settlement of the Militia, in the
respective Cities and Countries of England, and Wales.

But though this Parliament had taken away the Government of these three
Nations from Richard Cromwell, yet they are so kind to him, as to protect him
from all arrests, and take care for the payment of his Debts, which amounted to
29640lb; and besides order him 10000lb per annum for his life, out of the
Commonweal hs Lands; as much of which it is probable he received, as his
Creditors did of what was owing to them.

And now the Parliament discover a female-Plot of the shee-Cavaliers, for the
subverting of their Government; the Lady Mary Howard Daughter to the Earl of
Barkshire, and one Mrs Sumner are committed to the Tower, upon pretense of
being pryers to a horrible terrible design against the Government, upon whose
Examinations all the Horses about Town are taken. Sr Ernestus Byrom and others
committed to prison.

But now somewhat begins to appear, several Troops of Horse are sent into Kent
and Surry, to prevent infurrections there; where they take several Cavaliers,
to bring them up to London. Major General Massey being likewise in
Glocestershire, endeavoring as it was pretended to raise Forces there for the
King, was surprised by a Troop of Horse, who for the better securing him, set
up a Trooper behind him, with whom coming down a Hill, the Horse stumbled and
fell, and the night being dark, and Massey nimble legged, escaped from them
into the Wood.

The Parliament now begin to discover the reason of the buying up of so many
Arms in London; for Sr George Booth, Sr Thomas Middleton, and some others of
the secluded Members, having got a considerable quantity of Arms, raised a
Party in Cheshire, Flintshire, and Lancashire, to the number of between three
and four thousand men; and declare for a Free Parliament, and the due rights
and privileges of the Nation, against that Fanatic and unlawful power, which
now usurped dominion over them. With these they rendezvows at Routon-Heath; and
from thence march to Manchester, endeavoring to augment their Party; Colonel
Ireland in Lancashire, and Governor of the Cattle of Leverpool, promising them
what aid and assistance he could, though he never performed it.

This great rising at first startled the Parliament, who immediately dispatch
the Lord Lambert with three Regiments of Horse, one of Dragoons, and three of
Foot, to march with all possible have to suppress them; whilst several
Parties which endeavored to rise in other Counties, are prevented either by
the Militia, or the Parliaments Forces.

But Sr George Booths number daily increases somewhat, by the confluence of the
Gentry of those parts unto him; so that he made up a very gallant body of
Horse. He sends his Letters and Declarations up to London, inviting them to
join with him to maintain their privileges, and redeem themselves from the
slavery they were now in: But all proved ineffectuall, that great City being
overawed by a small Party of the Parliaments Forces.

In the mean time Lambert makes a speedy march toward them; two Regiments, the
one of Horse, the other of Foot, are by Order of Parliament sent out of
Ireland, under the Command of Colonel Axtill, Colonel Hierom Zankey, who join
with Lambert near Nantwich, notwithstanding some endeavors of Sr George Booths
Party to hinder their conjunction; and on the 16th of August the Army faced one
another, the one on one side the River, the other on the other.

Hereupon Sr George Booth sends a Trumpet to Lambert, to tell him the reasons
of his taking up of Arms; and desiring, that to avoid shedding of blood, some
persons might be appointed to confer in order to a Treaty. But Lambert
returns him a short answer; telling him, that the readiest way to avoid
shedding of blood, was for them to lay down their Arms, and surrender Chester
and other Strengths; which if they refused to do, that he was sent to reduce
them to their due obedience, which by the help of God he did not doubt but to
do. Hereupon the next morning Lamberts Army advanced toward Nantwich-Bridge,
which was kept by a Party of Sr George Booths. Sr Georges Horse and Foot were
drawn upin Battalia in a Meadow just below the Bridge. Lambert seeing that he
could not draw his enemy out of his advantage, resolved to beat him out; and
thereupon comands a stout Party of Foot to assault those which kept the Bridge,
which they did with a great deal of courage and resolution, and were as stoutly
resisted on the other side, sometimes one gaining the advantage, and sometimes
the other; till at length Sr George Booths Party giving back, made way for all
Lamberts Army to get over, who immediately fell upon Sr Georges Foot, and put
them to the retreat, but with little execution, by reason of the enclosures,
which gave them liberty to make good their retreat from hedge to hedge. The
Horse then on both sides charged likewise with good courage and resolution, but
the Cheshire men being overpoured, turned their backs; and after a quarter of a
Miles consused retreat, rallied again, but were presently routed: And so both
Horse and Foot betook themselves to flight. The Foot by reason of the
enclosures made their escape; and the Horse dividing fled some toward Chester,
and others toward Warrington, whither they were pursued by Lamberts victorious
Cavalry; who notwithstanding could proceed no further, the Town being
garrisoned with four Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horse of Sr Georges
Party.

In the time of the fight there were left in Nantwich two Companies of Foot,
and two Troops of Horse of the Cheshire Forces, who were immediately forced to
fly toward Manchester, where they dissipated themselves. The grand Body of the
Cheshire men being thus broken, the remainder of them quickly surrendered
themselves; and Chester it self seeing no hopes of relief, should they stand
out, submitted themselves immediately to Lamberts mercy, whose example all
other places likewise followed.

The number of the slain in the late action was not great; but there was scarce
any person of quality, who either before or after the Fight became not Lamberts
prisoners. Sir George Booth seeing all things thus lost, and himself reduced to
the extremity of saving himself by flight, left Chester in disguise, with
intentions to come up to London, the better to make his escape; but by the
permission of Almighty God, this noble Gentleman (who when all the Nation
almost was buried in a slavish lethargy, did endeavor to rouse them out of
their sleepy slavery) was discovered at Newport Paynell in Bedfordshire, and
fell into the power of his merciless and tyrannical enemies, by whom he was
committed prisoner to the Tower of London.

As soon as they had thus got him into their power, they send two of their
chiefest bloud-Hounds, Sr Henry Vane and Sr Arthur Haslerig, to draw what they
could by his Examination; but he notwithstanding their reiterated threats of
death and Scaffolds, and the scandalous report of perfidious friends, and
malicious enemies, with undaunted courage refused either to excuse himself, or
accuse others by a pusillanimous confession.

The Parliament being now overjoyed with their success, immediately in token of
their favor and thankfullness, order a thousand pounds, as a remuneration of
Lamberts so signal service, to be immediately sent him; but he having other
designs in his head, then tended merely to the advancement of their interest,
presently distributes to his Soldiery, with high carouses for their worthy
deserts of it.

The attempts which were made in other parts of the Kingdom, to have risen at
the same with Sr George Booth, being all of them nipt in the bud, deserve
nothing else but silence: Though there were diverse worthy and eminent persons
engaged in them, who deserved the thanks and praise of their Country, for those
their willing (though fruitless) endeavors.

The Parliament had (whilst Lambert is fighting their enemies) in the mean
time taken care for dividing the spoil, and prepared an Act for Sequestrations,
which now they immediately pass, and appoint Commissioners for the prosecution
of it, by which they intended the utter ruining of most of the Nobility and
Gentry of the Nation, that so they might render them incapable for the future
of making head against their arbitrary usurpation. And this Act was to continue
to the first of May 1660, a day which it pleased God to ordain to a better use,
and another manner of termination for their tyranny, then these notorious
Traitors had intended.

The next thing they do, is to endeavor the extinction of those small sparks,
which seemed to remain of the late insurrection. And to this end they put out a
Proclamation against John Mordent Esquire; Son to the Earl of Peterborough, Major
General Massey, the Earl of Litchfield, Sr William Compton, Thomas Fanshaw
Esquire; and Major General Brown; and declared the reward of a hundred pounds, to
whomsoever should apprehend any of the said persons; some of which rendered
themselves to the Counsel.

The House about this time having now lost the affections of the whole Nation
besides, that they might the better engage the Schismatics, order the release
of James Nailor out of Bridewell, to the great satisfaction of the Quakers and
Fanatics, upon whom they now chiefly relied.

And now the Parliament thinking the longer keeping up the Militiaes of the
Counties, to be both useless and dangerous, order their disbanding; which
whether it was promoted by some friends of Lamberts in the House, is very
uncertain; but the consequence showed it very much conducing to his succeeding
designs.

For now Lambert having finished his work in Cheshire, was advancing toward
London, but all the way had by Agents under hand so tampered with the Army, as
might render them ready for his devotion and interest. To which purpose a Paper
is promoted amongst them, entitled, The humble Petition and proposalls of the
Army, under the Command of the Right Honorable the Lord Lambert, in the late
Northern expedition: in which they expostulate their deserts and affection to
the Parliament; and desire that the Command of the Army might be under the
Command of Fleetwood, as Captain General; Lambert, Major General, etc. This
was sent up to London to Colonel Ashfield, Cobbet, and Lientenant Colonel
Duckenfield, to be by them presented to Fleetwood, and by him to the House. The
forementioned persons acquaint Fleetwood with it; and he for the better
promoting of it, desires a Conference with Sr Arthur Haslerig, and Sr Henry
Vane, in order to its presentation to the Parliament; but Sr Arthur immediately
informs the Parliament of the Paper (as he said) of most dangerous consequence.
Whereupon they presently order that the said three persons, or one of them in
whose hands it was, should immediately bring in the original Copy, which was
by one put off to the other, and so not to be found amongst them. But the
Officers of the Army immediately meet in Counsel, in order to the drawing up
of a Remonstrance of their submission to the Parliament, and disclaiming the
said proposal. The Parliament having thereupon passed a Vote, That the having
of more General Officers, was a thing needless, chargeable, and dangerous to
the Commonwealth.

Whilst the Officers are thus meeting, seemingly in order to their quiet
submission to the Parliaments resolves, the House had ordered a day of
Thanksgiving for their Cheshire-victory, on which together with the Counsel of
State, and the Officers of the Army, they dined together with the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common-Counsell at Grocers-Hall.

They now put out an Additionall Act for Sequestrations, intending that the
severity of their arbitrary justice should provide them with rewards for the
present, and security for the future.

And now comes out the humble Representation and Petition of the Army; wherein
though they seemingly professed all obedience, yet they tacitly harped upon the
former string, and drove at the maintaining their own power, in opposition to
the Houses interest. This was tediously discussed in the House, and every
particular exactly scanned: some of which the Parliament utterly disliking, as
tending to the overthrow of their Power; and perceiving the Army still to go on
in their clandestine designs, they resolve to make provision against them. And
the Army seeing their resolution, proceed vigorously likewise, though
privately, yet they put out the former Representation in Print, and endeavor
as much as they could to increase the number of the Subscribers. The Parliament
on the other side, to cut off all hopes as they thought of the Armies
subsistence, except in and by them, and so prevent their designs, pass an Act,
that it should be treason in all persons whatsoever, to raise, levy, or collect
Money without consent of Parliament; and likewise make void the Acts for
Custom and Excize; that if the Army should proceed in their designs, they
might be cut off from maintenance. This being thus ordered, they likewise vote
the Commissions of those nine notorious Worthies, and so infamous Patriots of
their Country, and promoters of its good and settlement, the contrary way, viz:
Lambert, Desborough, Berry, Kelsey, Ashfield, Cobbet, Creed, Packer, and
Barrow, to be null and void, and disposed their Regiments otherwise; and
likewise order the Government of the Army to be by seven Commissioners, in whom
the power should jointly reside; these were Fleetwood, Ludlow, General Monk,
Haslerig, Walton, Morley, and Overton, thinking hereby to cure this hot
distemper, and reduce them to obedience.

But whilst they are thus quick and nimble in their resolutions, Lambert and
the rest of his accomplices are not behind them in diligence; but having
strengthened their Party as much as time would give leave, and drawn as many of
the Soldiery as they could from the obedience of the Parliament, resolve once
more to put an end to their sitting, and rather turn them out of doors, then
sit down quietly with the loss of their Commissions.

The Parliament having over night notice of what was intended the day
following, had given order for the drawing of what Forces were yet faithful to
them to Westminster; in order to the guarding them the next day. Colonel
Mosses and Colonel Morleys Regiments immediately obeyed their Commands, and
repaired to the Pallace-yard in the night, and early in the morning; but
Lambert having gathered the rest of the Army together, did immediately there
surround them, stopping all the avenues, so that there was no hopes of any more
assistance: and whilst they were thus in opposition, the Speaker was by Major
Creed turned back again, and not suffered to pass to the House; and at last
both parties having stood almost all the day at bay, were on a sudden
reconciled, with mutual resolution to advance a Lambertonian faction.

Lambert having thus over-master'd his Masters, and dismissed them from their
Power and Authority, upon consultation with his fellow-Worthies, calls a Counsel
of Officers, who immediately post away Colonel Barrow for Ireland, and
Colonel Cobbet for Scotland, to win the Armies there, if possible, to a
compliance with their actions.

And that these migh be thought Devils, which did believe and tremble, they
order a Day of Humiliation, intending to mock God, that they might, according
to the custom of their Predecessors, with greater ease and secrecy gull the
people.

They proceed in the next place to the settlement of the Army, and make choice
of Fleetwood for Captain General, or rather stalking-horse to Lamberts
all-commanding power; Lambert Major General, and Disbrow Commissary General of
the horse; and appoint a Committee for nomination of Officers, in the rooms of
those, who for their taking part with the Parliament against them, they had
discarded.

Having in some sort settled their military Power, that they might not be seen
to do what they really intended, that is, to rule by the Sword alone, they make
out a kind of spurious Oligarchy, or rather Anarchy, in whose Power without
more ado, they put the Laws, Lives and Liberty of the English. This they call a
Committee of Safety; which, how it deserves the name, I will leave the Reader
to judge, giving him the names of the members thereof, men either of lunatic
and crackbrain'd principles, as having been all along the grandest ringleaders
of the Sectaries; or such, whose ambitious spirits would terminate no where,
but in the slavery and ruin of their native Country, most of which was
engaged in the horrid murder of their lawful Sovereign. But let Posterity
know and detest their memory.

Charles Fleetwood General. John Lambert Major General. John Disbrow Commissary
General. Lord Chancellor Steel. Bulstrode Whitlock. Sr Henry Vane. Lt General
Ludlow. Col. Sydenham. Major Salway. Lord Strickland. Col. Berry. -- Lawrence.
Sr James Harrington. Sr Archibald Johnston, alias Lord Wareston. John Ireton Ld
Mayor. Robert Titchburn Ald. Henry Brandrith. Robert Thompson. Col. Hewson.
Col. Clerk. Col. Lilburne. Col. Bennet. Cornelius Holland.
A happy case was the Nation like to be in, when such a crew of mechanical and
fanatical persons (excepting two or three) was to have the Command of its Sword
and Laws. These are the men, who now must model our Government, and bring us
into a free and equal Commonwealth; alias, the most intolerable of all
bondages and slaveries.

But whilst they go on thus jocundly in their proceedings, conceiving now all
was their own, and that the Government would be perpetuated to the Saints and
their children; there comes a Letter from General Monck out of Scotland,
declaring the dis-satisfaction of himself, and several Officers to their
proceedings; this awakes the worm of their consciences, though for the present
they take no public notice of it.

But that they might give their former actions the best gloss they can, they
put out a Declaration, showing the reason of their late transactions, and
highly rail against the injustice and arbitrary Power of the Parliament, who
without any reason given, would have turned away their good servant Lambert,
and his associates, which might have made such a president, as must have laid
the Officers of the Army at the feet and mercy of the Parliament at pleasure;
to prevent which, and other inconveniences, they thought good to dissolve them;
and did likewise declare their late hasty and irregular Acts against levying of
money, and for governing the Army by Commissioners; acts which tended
absolutely to the ruin of the Army, and so consequently (as they said) to the
destruction and confusion of the Nation, to be null and void.

THE Renowned Actions OF General MONCK, The true Politician, 1659, 1660.
BUt now the noble General Monck (a man of other principles then to join hand
in hand with a company of such perfidious Traitors) is not idle; he seises
upon, and secures such Officers of the Army there, as he knew any ways
inclining to such dangerous attempts, and presently possessed himself of
Barwick, and other places of strength, committing all the suspected persons
prisoners, first to Tyntalian-Castle, and afterward to the Basse-Island.

This news extremely startles our Reformadoes, and make them begin to look
about them; and to think what way they might either compose the differences, or
reduce them to reason by force of Arms. But they are resolved to use all means,
to compass both Land and Sea to make him a proselyte; and to this purpose, in
hopes to win him by fair means, they send down his brother-in-law Dr
Claerges, with Colonel Talbot to mediate with him, their former agent Colonel
Cobbet having found no better reception then the prison of Edinburgh Castle.

Nay, and least these two should not have power enough to prevail, they order
after them Commissary General Whaley and Colonel Goffe, both formerly grand
Protectorians, and with Mr Caryl, and Mr Barker, two Independent Parsons, that
so he might have all argument alleged to him, which either the Sword or the
Spirit could furnish them withal.

Whilst these are on their journey, Major General Morgan, a man too honest for
such knavish association, takes his journey out of Yorkshire to General Monck,
with whom he has demonstrated himself a good help to the restoration of his
King and Country.

General Monck having new modelled his Army in Scotland, and weeded those
noxious plants, which by their infection must needs have given poison in stead
of nutriment, resolves to advance toward the Borders, taking Oath in the mean
time of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, an Assembly of whom he convened to
acquiesce themselves, and likewise endeavor to keep all others in quiet in the
time of his absence from them.

The aforesaid Commissioners of the Army coming to him, he received them with
all demonstrations of civility, and professed his readiness to join with the
Army in England, provided they would restore the Parliament to its due Rights
and Privileges; and that then he would use his utmost endeavors for the
composing of differences, and obtaining an Act of Pardon and Oblivion for all
in general. But that they might see in the mean time, how unwilling he was to
be any cause of bloodshedding, and to avoid bringing a war into his native
Country, which though raised for the defense of it, must needs be its ruin
and destruction; he had ordered three Commissioners, viz. Colonel Wilkes,
Lieutenant Col. Clobery and Major Knight to go up to London, and if possible to
make a fair end of the Controversy. And this signified to the Officers at
London by their Commissioners there.

This was the way of their endeavors by peace; but lest this should prove
ineffectual to to reduce him, they had prepared for War likewise. Lambert was
already on his march thither, with all the strength of the Army both Horse and
Foot, in so numerous a body, that in all probability, had they had to do with
a person less wise and prudent than this noble General, they would quickly
have consummated their own victory and his, and this Nations ruin.

They likewise upon Lambert's departure, had ordered and chosen new
Commissioners for the Militia in London, picking out such persons for the most
part, whose schismatical principles, or else former notorious crimes, were like
to make them stick surest to so bad compartners; and into these men's power,
they put the whole Command of the City.

Lambert being already advanced Northward, coming into Yorkshire, does there
join with the Irish Brigade, and those forces under the Command of Colonel
Lilburne; and whilst every body expected that a sudden fight would make a
decision of the controversy; General Monck by extraordinary prudence keeps off
at swords point with fair words, and as we may truly say pious fraud deceives
this so grand jugler and deceiver.

The Commissioners of General Monck, which we aforementioned, were now arrived
at London, and by the appointment of the Counsel of Officers, persons were
ordered to treat with them, who after several debates, brought businesses
almost to a period, by the fault of Colonel Wilks, who transcended the bounds
of his Commission, and for his pains was upon his return justly imprisoned by
the General. By his simplicity I say, things were brought to a result or
agreement, the heads whereof were these.

The utter renouncing of Charles Stuart, or any other claiming from that Family.

The Government to be by a Free State, and not King, single Person, or House of
Lords.

That a godly and learned Ministry be maintained and encouraged.

The Universities to be reformed and countenanced, so as to become the
Nurseries of Piety and Learning.

That the Officers and Soldiers, and other Persons on either side be
indemnified for what is past, touching their late differences, and that all
unkindnesses betwixt them be buried in oblivion.

The Officers prisoners in Scotland to be set at liberty.

The Armies on both sides presently to depart to their respective Quarters.

And lastly, That there be a Committee of nineteen, consisting of five persons
for England, and five for Scotland (not Members of the Army) and three for
England, three for Scotland, and three for Ireland; all of which, except one,
are Members of the Army; and of these nineteen nine shall be a Quorum, and are
to meet to determine and conclude what is necessary for the Qualifications of
Parliaments, etc.

This is part of that Agreement which was pretended to be made between the Army
here, and the Commissioners of the Lord General Monck, which because it did
prove vain and abortive, deserves no further particular mention.

About this time several designs of the Rump to restore themselves to their
former power, began to be glimmeringly perceived. Colonel Morley, and several
other Officers of the Army making protests against the present proceedings.

But the Committee of Safety perceiving the danger their new Government was in
of being stifled in the birth, and finding City and Country to be generally
disaffected with them, except those who were of schismatical principles, do
order Commissions to be issued out for raising several Foot-Regiments of these
throughout the Nation, under the notion of the well-affected. And that they
might seem to have conquered some difficulties, they daily by their
Pamphleteer, publish the best of their own Condition, and produce Letters from
Ireland of November. 10th, 1659. wherein they declare the Armies in Ireland
non-approbation of the actions of General Monck, and their free concurrence
with their Brethren in England. But as this was only a pretense from some
persons there equally interessed with themselves in the late irregular actions,
so did it suddenly after vanish into nothing; the generality there under Sir
Hardresse Waller perfectly declaring for their enemies the Rump.

But here I must make some short digression. For this Month it pleased God
that that monster of men, and unparalled murderer Bradshaw died in his bed;
a man whom I need not much defile my pen to set forth, since that very name
does now, and will to eternity contain, all that is matter of shame and
detestation to the English Nation; and yet it pleased the wise God to suffer
him on the 22th of this November, to be laid quietly in his grave; who may,
according to the judgment of some men have deserved better to be buried alive
in the entrails of dogs, then to have enjoyed the benefit of Christian
Funerals; but we are not to censure the pleasure of Divine Providence.

On the 23th of this Month Lambert arrived at Newcastle, where he found
several discarded Officers to be come from General Monck, which though they
cried up at London, as a weakening of his party, yet they found it by experience
to be a wise strengthening of his interest, by ridding himself of those, which
he knew neither could, nor would be true to any sober designs.

Now were Letters from General Monck, sent to the Common Counsel of London, and
delivered to them by Colonel Markham, and Colonel Atkin, which containing
things directly in opposition to what the Committee of Safety had flattered
their party and the people withal, were by them given out to be forged, and
thereupon they ordered the confinement of the two forementioned persons.

But in this interim the Parliament (which as I said before the General had
summoned) in Scotland were assembled, to whom he delivers his sentiments of the
present posture of affairs, which terminated in these three Propositions.

First, That he having a call from God and man, to march into England for
resetling the Parliament, they would, during his absence, which would not be
long, preserve the peace of that Nation.

Secondly, That if any troubles should arise, they would assist him in
suppressing them.

Thirdly, That they would raise him some money.

To which Propositions the sum of their answers, was briefly thus.

First, That they could not engage to preserve the Peace of the Country,
wanting Arms, but should notwithstanding use their endeavors.

Secondly, They were incapable to answer his desires; and besides thought it
imprudent and inconvenient, to engage in a War, whereof the success was
dubious, and the advantage to them uncertain, and not intelligible.

Thirdly, They were content to levy him twelve months assessement.

Though in the two first they did not quadrate their answer to the affirmative
of his Propositions, yet in this last (I suppose) they satisfied the whole of
his intentions, it being that which he chiefly stood in need of, for carrying
on the great work he had in hand. whilst Genesis Monck is thus vigorously
providing against them in the North, they are not less violently attached, by
discontents of the people at London, and open force more Southward. At London
the Apprentices, whose tumultuary Assemblies, and confused Petitions had been
instrumental to the first disturbances, 1640. begin now to recollect their
spirits, and (as was thought) abetted by some considerable persons, resolve to
petition the Heads of the City, to endeavor the restitution of them, and the
whole Nation to their due Rights and Privileges by a Free Parliament. The
noise of this extremely startles the Army and Committee of Safety; so that they
endeavor all means of prevention; and to this purpose they publish a
Proclamation against it, and send their forces into the City, on the day
whereon they heard it was resolved to be presented to the Common Counsel; where
notwithstanding the violence, and other high misdemeanors committed by Hewson
the Commander of the Soldiers, yet the Petition was by six noble spirited
Apprentices presented to the Common Counsel, and the thanks of it returned to
them for it.

Several other Petitions and endeavors were promoted likewise in order for a
Free Parliament; not was the Designers for the Rump less active, but sat
daily in consultation for the undermining the present Usurpers, but their
designs in London came to no head; but on the fifth of December news arrived of
the appearance of the grand Heads of them at Portsmouth, whether Morley and
Hasilrig were arrived; and the Governor Colonel Whetham sided with them, and
immediately secured Captain Brown, Captain Peacocke, and such other Officers of
the Garrison, as they knew were principled contradictorily to that interest.
These in power here, though they had little hopes to cope with so many
adversaries, yet immediately order a Body of Horse and Foot that way, if
possible, to blow the storm over, and reduce that revolting Garrison.

Major Cadwell was the first that with a party of Horse marched toward them;
but he was no sooner going that way, but part of his Forces desert him, and
took part with the contrary faction.

But this was not all the misery that attended them; they had an enemy nearer
home to deal withal, the City was to the height discontented, and having
recovered some part of its former vigor, resolved no longer to be fooled. The
Common Counsel met daily, and their results produced nothing but was heterodox
to the Army interest, who finding all their threats and force to be now of no
effect, resolve to see what they can do by treaty, and whither or no they could
still these neighbor storms by fair and gilded promises. The Common Counsel
elected a Committee of worthy and eminent Citizens to confer with them,
esteeming them not worthy any other owning, or any way deserving the
acknowledgement of an Authority. With these Fleetwood, and the rest of the
Grandees had a conference, and that they might to the vulgar give them some
seeming satisfaction, they are willing to condescend to these particulars.

That a Parliament shall be called and appointed to sit down at or before the
first of February next.

That the said Parliament shall be according to such qualifications as are, or
should be agreed upon, and may best secure the just Rights, Liberties and
Privileges both Civil and Religious of the people of this Commonwealth.

This they thought enough to stop the mouth of the City for the present,
intending what performance or after-termes themselves pleased; but their
endeavors remained fruitless, the City keeping still the same face of
discontent.

But upon the neck of this news, comes still of several endeavors for
insurrections against them, in defense of the Rump. In Sussex a Party had been
formed under one Colonel Fissenden, which notwithstanding were dispersed; and
Colonel Fagg likewise, who was raising Forces, with intentions to strengthen
the Party at Portsmouth, was taken and brought up to London.

But their Portsmouth enemies grew daily stronger and stronger. Major Bremen,
Major of Colonel Rich his Regiment, and several others, instead of resisting
them, going in to their assistance, and so adding daily to their number.

And at this time was a design framed to have seized on the Tower of London,
for the behalf of the late Peer of a Parliament, which was thus to have taken
effect. The designers having brought over Colonel Fitch to their Party, and
engaged him to the promotion of the enterprise, he was on Monday the 8th of
December about eight in the Morning, to have come out of the Tower in his
Coach, and returning about ten, to have carried in with him in the Coach
Colonel Okey, Major Wagstaffe, and John Streater, late Comptrollers of the
Armies train of Artillery; and immediately after the Coach were four Companies
of Foot, ready prepared for that purpose, amongst the Sectaries in London to
have rushed in, upon Pretense of Orders from Fleetwood for strengthening the
Garrison; and so bing entered, to declare immediately for the late disturbed
Rump. But this design of theirs was not so privately carried, but that it was
discovered to those at Wallingford-House, who on the Sunday before sending for
Fitch, did there secure him, and forthwith Desborough and Colonel Salmon to
take care of the security of the Tower; and so this machination vanished into
nothing.

But now the General Counsel of Officers sit daily, that they might conclude
something concerning the mock-Parliament they intended, which they resolved
should have nothing of a Parliament but the name, being to be curbed and kept
under by the negative voice of a company of ridiculous and schismatic
persons of their own faction, whom they termed Conservators, and were in number
twenty one.

On the 15th of December they publish the Proclamation for this their
Parliament, and resolve Writs should immediately go forth, as soon as they had
considered what number it should consist of, and what persons for best
conducement to themselves.

On the 17th comes news far worse then all the rest, they are now like to be
forceably set upon at their own doors; Lawson with a squadron of Ships comes
into the River, and makes protestation against them and their proceedings,
resolving the restoration of the late pretended Parliament. To remedy this if
possible, they send down with all speed Sr Henry Vane, Major Saloway, and
Colonel Salmon, to treat with him, who were no sooner come aboard, but they
find with him Sr Anthony Ashly Cooper, Mr Scot, and Mr Streater, three of the
Rumps great Agents; so that instead of a friendly compliance, this conference
ended in nothing but taunts of these Adversaries.

Nor was London and the adjacent places in this interim, free from designs
against them; a plot was formed generally over the City, to have made a
general insurrection in vindication of their liberties; but this being (as was
supposed) discovered by some of the chief undertakers, was broken, and several
persons taken and secured for it, both at London and at Greenwich, where a
Party was likewise to be formed to second these.

The Common-Counsell of London seeing these strange distractions and tumults
which every day happened, and knowing of how dangerous consequence they were to
the welfare of the City, which by these means might be made the seat of War,
resolved to take the liberty to themselves, since they were absolutely denied
it, of settling their own Militia in such hands, as they might confide in for
the safeguard of it; and accordingly made choice of their respective Officers,
which was since presented to the Rump, but denied, though afterward confirmed
upon the readmission of the secluded Members.

But now comes the period of this Embryo of a Government; for messengers coming
hourly, bring news of the advance of Sr Arthur Haslerig, and the rest from
Portsmouth toward London. Whereupon the Officers themselves begin to be
various and uncertain in their ridiculous determinations, concluding on one
thing, and then resolving the contrary, and the Soldiers perceiving how unable
they were to help themselves, resolve to provide for their own security, and
leave their Officers to shift for themselves. Upon the Summons therefore and
Orders of the Rumps Agents here in Town, they muster themselves in Lincolns
Inn-field, under the Command of Colonel Okey, Colonel Alured, and Colonel
Markham, and there with shouts testify their resolutions to return to the
obedience of the Parliament; and so from thence marching into Chancery Lane,
and by the Speakers door, they all submitted themselves to his command, as the
Parliaments Soldiers.

That night the Speaker accompanied with diverse others, comes into the City,
and acquaints the Mayor and Sheriffs of the Parliaments intentions to sit again
very shortly; and therefore desires him to endeavor, that seeing they were
again restored to the exercise of the Government, he would endeavor to still
and quiet the animosities of the City, that they might acquiesce and submit to
their determinations. From thence he goes to the Tower, and having distributed
twenty pounds amongst the Soldiery, commits the charge of it to Sir Anthony
Ashly Cooper, Mr Weaver, and Mr Josias Barnars, who were confirmed a while
after by the Parliament, with addition of Mr Scot.

And no sooner were things thus overturned at London, but news comes likewise
of the overthrow of the Army-faction in Ireland; Sir Hardress Waller and other
his associates, declaring publicly in behalf of the Rump, having imprisoned
Colonel Jones, and the rest of his Party.

Desborows Regiment had advanced out of the North from Lambert, in order to
help to quiet their disturbances here, but the work being done before they
came, their labor was lost; and so they thought it better to submit to the
mercy of the Parliament, then by standing out in defense of their Colonel, to
hazard both their lives and Arrears.

Monday December the 26th was the day of the Rumps re-installment, and final
perdition of the late imaginary Government, the fictitious Embryo of Sr Henry
Vane; but it is hard to say, whether England had not as much reason to be sorry
for the restoration of the one, as for the destruction of the other, since both
of them made it their aim and interest to inslave and oppress their native
Country. But the Rump being thus reseated, confer without delay the
Government of the Army upon Colonel Alexander Popham, Colonel Thompson, Mr
Scot, Colonel Okey, Sr Anthony Ashly Cooper, Colonel Alured, and Colonel
Markham, who, or any three of them, were to be Commissioners for that end and
purpose.

They next take into consideration the business of Moneys, and order the
continuance of Custom and Excise: For though they had voted it down as
oppressive to the Nation, that they might thereby deprive the Army of the
benefit of it; yet were they resolved they would not themselves lose the
profit, though never so much to the prejudice of the people; it being envy and
not good will, which made them formerly vote it down.

That they might likewise seem to give some satisfaction to the desires of the
Nation, they appoint a Committee to consider of the cases of absent Members,
and filling up of the House; a thing they would never have done, had not
General Monck so nobly forced them to it.

But next that they might dissipate the grand enemy which they had in the
North, to wit Lambert, they order, First the disbanding of all such Forces, as
had been raised without Authority of Parliament. Secondly the returning of all
Arms which had been taken out of the public stores. Thirdly that all the
Regiments of Horse and Foot in the Northern Counties, do forthwith repair unto
such Quarters, as shall be appointed for them by the Commissioners for
management of the Army, and observe their order inddirections for time to come.
And then they ordered thanks to be returned to General Monck, Vice Admiral
Lawson, and the Portsmouth Commissioners, as an acknowledgement of their
fidelity and good service. And this was their first Act, upon their resetling
their Rump in its former seat.

Diverse were the other Votes and Orders which they made, for settling their
Army, and securing their power, which because not much material for our
purpose, we shall pass on to what is more properly historical; namely the
actions of General Moncke, and his march toward London; yet not forgetting
such things, as in the mean time passed at London or elsewhere, and ought to be
considerable.

General Monck had after his first Treaty at London by his Commissioners, and
that he might keep things from running to bloodshed, and prevent the hazard of
a Battle, knowing that time it self must certainly make him victorious, upon
notice of the agreement made by his Commissioners here, contrary to the tenor
of their Commissions, or his intentions; had I say agreed upon a second Treaty
to be had at Newcastle. By which means he delayed time so long, that Sr Arthur
Haslerig and the rest, making that diversion at Portsmouth, the Parliament was
on a sudden restored, and his enemies immediately upon news vanished like
smoke, all the Forces being by the Parliaments Order to submit to his command
and disposure. Having therefore settled all things according to his pleasure,
and as was most convenient to his purpose, he resolves upon his march to
London, and for that purpose took up Horses in the Country to horse his Foot,
the Parliament approving of his actions, for fear to displease him, though they
had ordered his coming up only with 500 Horse, and disposed his Army in their
respective Quarters. But he who was to do other things then barely the
restoring of a putrified Rump, resolves to march up with his whole strength;
but in the mean time lulls them asleep with a smiling compliance with their
humors and desires. His march toward London was but slow, he being resolved to
keep his Army in such a posture, as might provide security for the Soldiery,
and testify the prudence of the General. In Yorkeshre he was met by the Lord
Fairfax, and other Gentlemen of the County, (who before Lamberts dispersing,
had raised a considerable Body, and with the assistance of the Irish Brigade
had secured York) and by them was caressed with all testimonies of affection,
and courted with their desires that he would be isntrumental to make the
Nation happy, by restoring the Members secluded in 1648, or in helping them to
a full and free Parliament. This likewise was the substance of many
Declarations, which at this time were tendered to the Speaker and City of London
from several Counties. And this likewise was the subject of those other
addresses, which he received from the Gentry of all places in his march. But
the Parliament a little alarmed by this news, and sensible of the danger was
thereby imminent to themselves, should the intentions of the General be
otherwise then they seemed to them, order Mr Scot and Mr Robinson to go down to
him, under pretense of congratulating him for his signal services; but indeed
to search if they could into the depth of his intentions. But he who was too
wise to be caught by such gulls, carried himself with such an even poise, that
both Parliament and Country thought him surely inclining to their several
Parties. And notable was his Letter, in answer to one the City had lately sent
him by their Swordbearer; in which he both resolved as he said to satisfy
their desires for a Free Parliament, and yet resolved to continue faithful to
this Parliament, giving the City matter of hope, and taking from the Rump all
cause of discontent. But the Parliament having sent persons to search into his
thoughts, the City likewise whom it as nearly concerned, were resolved to do
the like; and therefore made choice of Alderman Fowke, Alderman Vincent, and
Colonel Bromfield, to go down and present him with their affections and
desires, together with their resolution to stick by their former resolution;
who were received by the General with all expressions of civility; but nothing
was promised to them, which might give the Rump any suspicion or jealousy of
his intentions. After a long and tedious march on January 28. 1659. he arrived
at St Albans, where he was presented with the Addresses of several Counties,
together with one from the City of London; all which containing the
forementioned subject received from him the like courteous, though dubious
answers. The same day he arrived at St Albans, his Lady arrived at Whitehall,
and took up those lodgings, which had been prepared for her. On Friday February
the third he arrived at London, the Army which was quartered there, having
marched out the night before, though with a great deal of discontent, and some
disorder and mutiny. He was the next day by the Parliament desired to come to
the House, and Mr Scot and Mr Robinson sent to attend him; where being come,
the Speaker in the highest expressions might be, did endeavor to testify the
grand esteem the House had of his merits, and the hearty thanks they did return
to him for them; and he afterward retaliated his language, in an excellent
speech, whereof though in all things he seemed to comply with their desires,
yet in some sort he put them in mind of the peoples desires and inclinations,
which notwithstanding he left to their determination, and upon parting left
them well satisfied with him, in all outward appearance.

There were not many things remarkable which fell out at London or elsewhere,
in the interim of the Generals march thither, only the ejection of Sr Henry
Vane, and Major Saloway, (who had been instruments in the late interruption)
out of the House, and confinement of the first, with Lambert, and the rest of
the nine Worthies, to their several Houses, and the committing the last to the
Tower.

There happened likewise two mutinies, the one at Gravesend by the Soldiers of
Sr Brice Cockrains Regiment; and the other at Bristoll by the inhabitants, in
relation to a Free Parliament; but both were sunddenly quelled.

The General being as aforesaid come to London, the Parliament, alias Rump,
(for by that name they may be best known,) being extraordinary jealous of him,
and the power he might at pleasure exercise over them to their prejudice,
consult amongst the grandees of them, how they might best abridge his power,
and overtop him; and for this they designed this expedient. The City continuing
as before malecontent, and denying to pay any Money without the consent of a
full Parliament, and refusing to be satisfied with any thing could proceed from
the Rump, whose villainies were now grown execrable to them, and his strength
likewise chiefly consisting in the affection and interest he had in the hearts
of the Citizens; they resolve to kill two Birds with one stone, undo the City,
and make him the instrument of the action. On February the 9th they send him
with part of his Army into the City; and he according to their Order marched in
that day, and took up his Quarters at the three Tuns at Guild Hall gate, where
he was caressed, and saluted by diverse principal Citizens. But he who knew
times were not yet ripe for his after comfortable actions, granted them
nothing, but sends up to the House to know what he should do; who immediately
return him these Votes for an answer, That he should immedihtely pull down and
destroy the Gates, Posts, Chains, and Portcullises; which accordingly he put in
execution. And moreover sent these following persons, who had lately been very
active for the interest of the City, to take up their lodgings in the Tower of
London; viz. Mr alias Alderman Thomas Brown Grocer, Mr Daniel Spencer, Colonel
Bromfield, Major Chamberlain, Mr Richard Foord, Major Cox, Mr Bludworth, Mr
Penning, and Lieutenant Colonel Jackson; all of them Common Counsel men, and
persons of highest repute and desert.

These actions of his exceedingly startled the faith of all men, who had
grounded the opinion in themselves, that God had appointed him for the only
instrument of his Countries deliverance, and were now in such a maze, that they
almost gave over the good hopes they had conceived of him. But he who
understood well enough what he went about, and knew that by this action he
should perfectly understand, whether the City would not be wavering and
inconstant, should he make a nearer conjunction with them, which must have
ruined him and his good purposes together, did fulfill this execrable Command
of the Rump, that so he might set them and the City at the utmost variance, and
so make them surer and faster for an after compliance with him, which he not
many hours after did make with them, and so plenarily satisfied the longing
desires of the City, and deceived the Parliament with their own snare. For that
they had perfectly designed this action to cast dirt in his face in the eyes of
the City, may be seen, in that whilst he was about this hateful drudgery, they
already fell to abridge his power, by joining several others, as Hesilrig,
Walton, Morley, etc. in Commission with him for the Government of the Army,
that so they might restrain and curb him at pleasure. But he, who understood
them well enough, had no sooner finished this dirty work, but upon his return
to White Hall, he sends them a Letter, which rang another peal than they
expected after their City-Victory, wherein he notably expostulated with them
for their last injurious commands, tells them, Of their countenancing and
abetting such as they had seemingly declared enemies, and had been the occasion
of their last overthrow, which were then in Town hatching designs for the
ruin of all. And then concludes with a prefixed time, by which they would
resolve to issue out Writs for a new Parliament, that so they might terminate
their sitting, and come to a dissolution, which both Army and Nation longingly
expected. After this Letter, he sent on Saturday, Febr. 11. in the morning, and
forthwith he gives order for his Army both Foot and Horse to be in a readiness,
and with them he marches by the backside of the Town into Finsbury-field, where
he musters them, and goes himself with several of his Officers to Dinner with
the Lord Mayor at his house; at night he marched them into the City, where
Quarters were provided for them, with the hearty good will of the Citizens,
whose Bonfires and Bells did in some measure testify the unmeasurable joy they
had conceived, by having got so noble a Guest.

But I must not omit one passage in his Letter, which was the detestation of
that damnable and hellish Petition which was presented to the Rump by
Praise-God Barebones, contrived by themselves, and pretended to come from many
thousand well-affected Brethren in London, Westminster, and the places
adjacent, Wherein they bitterly rail against King, Nobility and Clergy,
casting all the scandal possible upon those worthy persons, who were by armed
violence excluded in 1648. because by a Treaty with the King, they would have
composed the bleeding differences of the Nation: and likewise they utterly
cried out against the restoring those Members, or bringing in a Free
Parliament, as that which must inevitably ruin the godly of the Land. For
prevention of which they desired no more than the bare ruin both of Church and
State, in these following particulars. That no man might be admitted into any
place or function, either in Church or State, but who would absolutely abjure
and renounce the King, and all his Family, and any single Person whatsoever. By
this means intending the overthrow of that small remains of Magistracy and
Ministry they had left us.

That whosoever in Parliament, or elsewhere should make any mention of restoring
the King, should be adjudged guilty of High Treason. Intending hereby to cut
off the hands, and stop the mouths of those, who had not such pernicious
resolution for their Countries ruin, as themselves. And yet notwithstanding
this cursed Petition, contained things in it thus horrid and villainous, their
Rumpships was graciously pleased, to think it deserved the thanks of the House,
which by Order the Speaker returned to them.

But this our Noble General makes one reason of his so sudden desertion of
them; and happy was that action of his for London. For the Rump (as was
reported and believed) had designed the utter overthrow of the City-Government,
by taking away both Mayor and Common Counsel, and hanging up diverse of the most
eminent, both Aldermen and Commoners. But when now they see their pregnant
hopes of compassing their mischievous ends prevented, they seem to approve of
General Moncks action; and that they might leave no stone unturned, which might
serve for some support to their now falling interest: They return hearty thanks
to the Lord Mayor for his good affection to them; hoping thereby to create such
animosities between the City and him, that might render him incapable of doing
them a mischief, by the affection of the Populacy to him. They had likewise
designed a new Militia, made wholly of factious and mechanic persons, who
should have exercised what tyranny they pleased over the City: But blessed be
God, these their machinations were blasted by the care and wisdom of our
thrice noble General. But to content him, if possible, they order a Committee
to consider what Lands were fitting to be conferred upon him; and to satisfy
him in one particular, they order a Proclamation to be published against John
Lambert, wherein he was required to render himself within four days, upon the
forfeiture of his Estate. And then as for another Parliament, they make show,
to resolve a speedy sending out Writs, but resolve to tie up their hands to
their blocks, by previous engagements against King, House of Lords, etc. But
this was no satisfaction to the General. For he having taken away those arms
which were in the hands of the Fanatics, and such as might have caused
disturbance in the City, on Tuesday the 21th of February (a day not to be
forgotten, as long as England endures, being the first light which glimmered
some cheerfulness to us) having drawn his Army together, he marched to
Westminster early in the morning; and having beforehand prepared the secluded
Members to be ready, who were then very many of them in Town, and had had
diverse private meetings; he met them at White Hall, where having recommended to
them the care of the National interest, yet in such terms as the Rump might
not absolutely despair, he saw them admitted into the Parliament House, to the
great grief and amazement of the former Housekeepers, who look upon these as
Intruders. That night there was Bonfires, and great rejoicing in London.

But the secluded Members being in, they fall to their work in good earnest;
they had not such by-ends, or corrupted interests to drive on, as their
Predecessors; and therefore found no such haltings in doing things, which the
Nation required. But in the first place they order the release of those
prisoners, which for Free-Parliament-Petitions had been lately clapped up, as
likewise the Members of the Common Counsel of London. They disanull the Militia
which the Rump had instituted, consisting only of persons both Fanatic and
Factious, and order a new Militia throughout all England, wherein they
nominated the most principal of the Gentry, who were thought most willing and
ready to promote the settlement of their Country; yet with this proviso, that
they should subscribe that they should acknowledge the war was lawful against
his late Majesty till 1648. the Parliament by violent force was broken. And
that they might be furnished with that which is the sinews and strength of all,
money, they send to the City to desire them advance some money beforehand upon
security of the next six Months assessement, which was freely granted by the
City, and 27000lb. immediately lent them. Whereupon the City petition for the
confirmation of the Militia, which the Parliament presently settled according to
their desires.

The next work they did, was to choose a Counsel of State, which was done by lot
(of all manner of choice the most equal, by reason no man can find himself
aggrieved, not knowing who is pro, or who is con) which prevents all rancour
and animosity. The persons which were by them chosen, being for the most
Gentlemen of eminent worth, and such as have to the height testified their
abilities for the good of their Country in this last emergency; although there
were some Rumpers amongst them. I have thought it not amiss to give you a
Catalogue of them, that we may pay due homage to their names and memory.

Arthur Ansley Lord President. William Pierpoint. John Crew. Richard Knightly.
Colonel Popham. Colonel Morley. Sr A. A. Cooper. Sr Gilb. Gerhard. Lord St
John. Sr Tho. Widdrington. Sr John Evelin. Sr William Waller. Sr Richard
Onslow. Serjant Maynard. Sr William Lewis. Col. Montague. Col. Hanley. Col.
Norton. Denzil Hollis. Sr John Temple. Col. Thompson. Sr John Trever. Sr John
Holland. Sr John Potts. Col. Birch. Sr Herbottle Grimston. John Swinton. John
Weaver. Col. Rossiter. Lord Fairfax. L. General Monck.
Then they repealed such Acts of the Rump, as they had made merely for the
satisfaction of their own self ends, and were exceedingly destructive to the
interest of the Kingdom; taking off those Sequestrations which they had laid
on Sr George Booth, and his party, which must have proved almost a general
calamity to the Nation: and they likewise released them from that confinement
which they had for a long time lain under. Making moreover such acts as might
best secure the interest of the people, and conduce to the settlement of the
Nation, some of which were directed to the taking away all places of power or
profit, out of the hands of the Fanatic or Commonwealth party, and putting in
those who were like to prove better Patriots. But these acts being very
numerous, I think not convenient to insert the particulars.

In the next place they commissionate the Lord Monck to be Captain General of
all the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland, a place of the highest honor,
and which he had as highly deserved. And now to show that God was pleased,
notwithstanding the continued sins of the Nations to remit his punishing
hand: no sooner were the Members seated in the House, but news came that
Ireland was by his good providence, through the endeavors of Sr Charles Coote
already put in such a posture, as might make it capable of receiving the first
state of affairs; he having secured Sr Hardresse Waller, and others of the
Rumps faction.

But now some sign of discontent appeared in the Army here, which had formerly
been under Fleetwoods and Lamberts command. For Colonel Rich's Regiment upon
news of this change at London, began to mutany at St Edmondsbury; but the
Parliament hearing of it, instantly sent out Colonel Ingoldsby, a Lover of his
Country, their former Commander, with a party of Horse, to whom upon his
approach they quietly submitted themselves.

The Parliament now restored the Charter to the City of Chester, which had been
taken away by the Rump upon Sr George Booths business; as shortly afterward
they likewise revived the Duchy of Lancaster, which had been voted down by the
others, and made Sr Gilbert Gerrard Chancellor, Nich. Letchmere Attorney of
the Duchy; and the Speaker William Lenthal Esquire, Chamberlain of Chester.

And perceiving that endeavors were daily used to sow sedition in the Army,
and that there was designs on foot to draw them together to a mutiny, they
order, That none either Officers or Soldiers should depart from their
respective Quarters without leave from the Lord General, and those that had,
forthwith to return to their assigned stations.

To gratify Dr Claerges, and in him his brother the Lord General, the
Hamper-Office, a place of good profit was conferred upon him.

Febr. 29. Upon notice of some design contriving by the Fanatic party, several
arms were seized in diverse places of the City of London, and Captain Kiffen a
grand Ringleader of the Anabaptists, and several others were secured, though
afterward released, no matter of weight being then found against them.

And now that they might testify to the world they were other men than their
predecessors, who would have continued themselves a Parliament to posterity,
they order their dissolution to be on the 15th of March, resolving before that
time to take order for summoning a New Representative. They confirmed the
Confession of Faith formerly made by the Assembly of Divines, and enacted, That
it should be the Confession of Faith of the Church of England, except only the
thirtieth and one and thirtieth Articles concerning Church-censure and Synods.
They likewise constitute General Monck, together with General Montague to be
Generals at Sea for the next Summers expedition, and accordingly command
Montague to go to Sea with all possible speed.

And because several Members had impeachments against them, and upon that score
were secluded the House, they disanull those impeachments, and re-admit them,
as namely Mr Denzil Hollis, and Sr Robert Pie.

About this time the Deanery of Christ-Church, which had for a long time been in
the hands of Dr Owen (a man looked upon at Oxford as a hair-brained
schismatic) was taken from him, and confirmed to Dr Reynolds, a man who far
better deserved it. They likewise at the beginning of March released the Lord
Lindsey, the Lord Sinclare, and Lord Lauderdale from their tedious
imprisonments, to which upon various pretenses they had been committed.

Dr Walker and Dr Turner were made Judges of the Admiralty, and Probate of
Wills, and Dr Wiseman constituted the Commonwealths Advocate.

And now was the Lord General invited to Dinner by the Company of Mercers, and
afterward by several other of the Companies, the Citizens striving mutually,
who should in the best manner discover and express the gratefulness and esteem
they bore for his noble and heroic actions.

At this time there was an assembly of a Parliamentary Convention in Ireland,
summoned by Sr Charles Coote, and the Lord Broghill, for the better Regulating
of affairs there, till all things in England might be in a better posture.

The Parliament that they might testify to the world, that they were not so
forgetful of Oaths as their Fellow Members, order the solemn League and
Covenant to be set up and read in all Churches; and likewise to be set up in
the Parliament, that they might remember they had sworn for the maintenance of
the King and his posterity.

Colonel Lambert being found to lurk up and down about the City,
notwithstanding the Order of the Parliament, was (as a person too dangerous to
be trusted to himself at such a time as this) committed to the Tower.

Orders were sent down to Hull by Colonel Alured and Major Smith, that
Colonel Overton should immediately deliver up that Garrison into the hands of
Colonel Fairfax, and to repair immediately to London; and he notwithstanding
his former Declaration, that he was resolved to keep it till the coming of King
Jesus, presently obeyed the Order, and Colonel Fairfax accordingly took
possession of the place.

Sr Arthur Haslerig and others were questioed before the Parliament and
Counsel of State; but nothing extraordinary being found against him, as to the
designs were then on Foot, it was passed by. The Parliament made Sr Peter
Killigrew, Governor of Pendennis-Castle; and worthy Mr Morris, Commander of
Plymouth-Fort and Island.

There was about this time a conference between ten of the Counsel of State,
and ten head-Officers of the Army, the General being present, concerning the
Government; but the conference being only for mutual information and
satisfaction, it had no result.

The Parliament ordered that the Examination of Sr George Booth and his Lady
should be taken off the File, and given to him, he deserving to have his
Encomium put on in the room of it.

And now they obliterated the Engagement which was made by the Rump in 1649,
(to free them from punishment, for the impious murder of their Gracious
Sovereign) out of the Journall, and voted it to be null and void.

And now the time of their dissolution being come, they put out the Act for
summoning a new Parliament, in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of the
Commonwealth of England. The Qualifications which they put out, being only
these.

That all persons who have advised, aided, or any ways assisted or abetted the
rebellion in Ireland.

All those who profess the Popish Religion.

All that advised or voluntarily aided in the War against the Parliament in
1641, unless they have since given a manifestation of their good affection,
shall be incapable of being elected Members for the ensuing Parliament; and no
person elected and thus qualified, to sit in the House upon a high penalty.

Though these Qualifications did seem at first to exclude a great number, yet
diverse eminent and worthy persons, though they had actually been in the Kings
service in the late War, having been engaged in Sr George Booths quarrel for
the natural interest, were elected and admitted to sit in the House.

The City having completed their Militia, as well Auxiliaries as trained
Bands, made choice of his Excellency the Lord General, to be Major General of
all their Forces; Major General Brown being Colonel of the Regiment of Horse.

The Parliament ordered 9000lb to be given to Major General Brown, in
satisfaction for those great losses which he had received under the tyranny of
the Rump, for his noble and public spirit. They likewise gave 20000lb, as a
gift to his Excellency.

And before their dissolution they released Dr Wren, who for about eighteen
years had suffered imprisonment in the Tower of London, a man who doubtless
deserved better usage, but that the times then did not well understand him.
They gave power also to the Counsel of State to release what Prisoners upon
State-matters, they should see good, and particularly Maj. Genesis Lambert. They
ordered a stop should be put to the sale of the Estate of the Lord Craven and
Lord St John, the first of which had his Estate taken away from him by more
than hellish injustice.

Some neglect being in the Printer concerning the Printing of the Act for the
Militia, and it being supposed, there was a design of some of the late Rump,
to make some alteration in the Act, as might suit for their turn, or else upon
the Parliaments dissolution, by violence to hinder it: The Parliament ordered a
Committee to take care that it should be finished with all expedition, which
accordingly was performed. And so this part of a Parliament, which was chosen
in 1640. was now finally dissolved in 1660. by their own Act, which was, That
the day for dissolution of this Parliament be from the sixteenth of March 1660.
Multiplicity of business having caused them to alter the first appointed day.

About this time our gracious Sovereigne King Charles the second, hearing of
the transactions of affairs in England, and seeing how the face of all things
began to alter, so that great probability there was of being admitted to his
undoubted Right, without the effusion of his Subjects blood, removed his Court
from Brussels to Breda in Holland, a Town belonging to his Sister the Princess
of Orange; there expecting till England might be brought into such a posture,
as might fit it for his happy and wished for reception.

The Parliament at their dissolution had conferred on the Counsel of State all
Power whatsoever in the Interval, till the assembling of the Free Parliament,
April 25. 1660. which accordingly they executed so prudently and wisely, and
preserved the Nation in peace, and put the affairs of the Kingdom in such a
posture, as did give the ensuing Parliament, liberty to do what they pleased,
or found convenient for the right settlement of the Government.

The Counsel of State had nothing more to take care of then the Militia, which
blessed be God was through the care of the Commissioners in the respective
Counties, and their approbation of the same put into the hands of such
considerable persons of the Nobility and Gentry, as were not like upon any
occasions to prostitute their faith and Country, upon the base Mechanical ends
of self-profit or advantages. And good reason was there for its speedy and good
setlement, the Fanatics, and discontented Officers of the Army, with several
of the late discarded Rump, did all they might underhand, to bring the Counsel
of State and their proceedings into odium with the people, and to stir up their
own followers, with the Soldiery to mutiny against their Commanders, and the
present power; and to this purpose they put out several most scurrilous, and
abusive Libels in defamation of the Kings most Excellent Majesty; representing
him to the guilty consciences, of those whose crimes had justly made them
fearful, To be of all persons the most cruel and arbitrary, and that
notwithstanding the thoughts of the Presbyterians, who so vigorously now
promoted his interest; he would show them as little mercy, as to those they
called Fanatics; nor would they find any distinction from him when once
resetled. These and the like most opprobrious calumnies were divulged
concerning him, in general Pamphlets, but especially in one, entitled a
letter from Brussels, supposed to be writ by Marchamond Needham, (a fellow who
most highly deserves the prefixion of the black Theta) or the Rumps man Thomas,
but printed by Live-well Chapman; who for his private profit had for a long
time been the Devils instrument, in making public diverse erroneous and
dangerous opinions of the hotheaded Sectaries; and now was so impudent, as to
endeavor the destruction of of his Country, by such inflaming Libels. But the
prudent Counsel of State having notice of it, immediately sent order for his
apprehending, which he understanding, forthwith fled, but was followed by a
Proclamation, which for sometime he avoided, by hideing himself; but at last
being by Gods just judgment discovered, is now in prison, expecting the due
reward of such nefarious practices.

But they were not only blowing the bellows of sedition, by their incendiary
Libels, but also by the old trick of Agitators (which were two out of every
Regiment chosen to debauch the Army) the endeavor to draw the Soldiery from
their due obedience, and seduce them to side with their corrupt interest; and
very busy were these instruments of sedition, till by a wholesome Order of the
Counsel of State, which was a Proclamation, That whosoever should apprehend any
of these Agitators, should have 10lb given him as a reward: there were diverse
of them seized on, and secured, and so their designs in a good manner rendered
ineffectuall. Yet notwithstanding all care taken for suppressing their
endeavors, they had formed a design, which had not it met with most timely
prevention, must have proved most dangerous to the Nations quiet, and involved
it in the confusion of a second War. For these infamous persons who so lately
lorded it over the Kingdom, not able to endure themselves to be turned into
their first Sphere, and fearing they should shortly feel the weight of their
crimes, to sink them, under a just revenge, had throughout the whole Nation
stirred up as many as possible they could engage, upon the first opportunity to
make an insurrection; and so having prepared their design, in order to action,
they find means for Lambert's escape out of the Tower of London (as may justly
be supposed by the conveyance and consent of some who had charge of the
Prisoner) that so they might not want a head, who would in some sort be
acceptable to their party. The Counsel of State having notice of his escape,
proclaimed him guilty of High Treason if he did not within 24. hours render
himself to the next Garrison; but he notwithstanding this escaped, and after a
while appeared hard by Edgehill, together with Creed and other of his
associates, in order to the framing of a party; for thither it was that all the
Fanatiks, together with discontented Soldiers were to repair, and make their
rendezvouse; and there doubtless had they been suffered to remain a while,
they would have made a very formidable party. But their appearance being heard
of in the Country about, notice was given to valiant Coll. Ingoldsby, Coll.
Rossiter and others, whose Forces quartered about them, and so all the passages
thither being on every side stopped, these Rebels removed their quarter, and
marched toward Daintry, whither they were followed by Coll. Ingoldsby with a
party of Horse and Foot, and there dispersed, without scarce a drop of blood;
the Party betaking themselves to their heels, and their grand Ringleader Lambet
falling into the hands of stout and victorious Ingoldsby, was taken without
offering so much as to draw a sword in his own defense; and was presently after
sent up to London, with Creed, Hesilrig's son and others; the Coach which
brought them, coming by Hide-Park corner, just when the whole Forces of the
City were there Mustring, to be in a readiness to defend their Country, against
all such Traitors and Rebels as he had manifested himself. Being brought up to
London, he was with the rest committed to his former place of residence, and
there remains till his due time.

About this time a dangerous tumult had like to have happened at Gloucester,
about the coming of Major General Massey thither, to be elected for a
Parliament man; which was briefly thus. He ariving there on Saturday night in
cognito intended to lie private: but notice being brought to the Major, he
came, and with an invitation, fetched him to his own house; and the next day
took him with him to Church, but as he was going home from thence together with
him, and the Minister who preached before them; the Captain of the Guard having
notice, came and said hold of the Major General, and told him he was his
Prisoner: and the rude Soldiery (the Minister steping up to speak in his
defense) drew, and threatened to take away his life: which being heard by some
of the Townsmen, who feared some violence would hereupon be offered to the life
of their beloved Governor, immediately raised the whole Town in a commotion,
and a party of Soldiers going to the Cross with resolution to suppress some
which were there assembled, were set upon by the Townsmen and dispersed, and
their Commander with several of them knocked down and wounded; and the mutiny
being thus heightened it is verily thought it must have ended in the slaughter
of all the Soldiers in the Town, had not the mediation of the Major, and his
passing his word that the Major General should make his appearance before the
Counsel of State at London, at last put an end to the fray and difference. And
the Major General being that afternoon made a Freeman of the City, did a day
or two after come up to London, and render himself to the Counsel according to
their Order, whereupon he was dismissed, and was by his Gloucester friends
chosen with free consent for one of their Burgesses.

Great were the expectations of this time, what the Counsel of State would do
concerning the King, many being of opinion and resting confident, that they
would bring him in before the beginning of the Parliament, all men antedating
the time of his restoration by their longing and earnest desires of that happy
day, wherein they might see him settled upon the Throne of his Ancestors, and
the Nation restored to its true and ancient Liberties.

The designs of the Fanatics did now appear almost in every County; but the
head being brok in Lambert, the Members could not long enjoy life and motion;
but in every County they were dispersed, and the chief Ringleaders taken,
amongst whom Major General Harrison, who was taken in Staford-shire, was most
considerable.

But the 25th of April being now come, a day of greatest expectation by the
whole Nation, the Parliament met in their House, where the first day nothing of
moment passed, but only they chose their Speakers, and Sr Harbotle Grimstone
for the House of Commons, a man of eminent parts and deserts.

The next day the House of Commons appointed several Committees to take care
of such things as were first to come under consideration; and the first was
concerning double elections, and till the business was determined, none but
those who were returned in both the indentures, were to sit in the House. A
Bill against vagrants, wandering, idle and dissolute persons was read. And not
long after, The Lords confirmed their old Speaker, the Earl of Manchester.

Both houses likewise. Ordered Thursday May 10. to be set apart for a day of
public thanksgiving to Almighty God for his wonderful goodness in stirring
up and assisting of General Monck and other worthy persons in being so grandly
isntrumental to the restoring of happiness to their Country; and Ordered to
be observed by this House, and the Cities of London and Westminster, and late
Lines of Communication; and that the Thursday fortnight after, be likewise
observed the whole Nation; and this their Resolve being by Mr Herbert carried
up to the Lords, they immediately concurred with them therein, and so passed
the Orders.

The Commons resolved, that the thanks of their House should be given to
General Monck, as an acknowledgement of his eminent and unparalleled services
for the good of these Nations, and likewise Ordered thanks to be returned to
Coll. Ingoldsby for his late eminent services; both which were by the Speaker
elegantly performed accordingly.

The Houses on Friday April 27. adjourned till the Tuesday following,
appointing Monday to be observed as a day of Humiliation by both Houses,
whereon Dr Reynold and Mr Hardy preached before the Lords, and Dr Gauden, Mr
Calamy and Mr Baxter before the House of Commons.

And now appeared that happy day, Tuesday May 1st which is not to be mentioned
amongst English men without praise to Almighty God for his infinite mercy; it
being the day whereon he pleased at length to bring us out of that mass of
confusion and misery, into which his just hand had suffered us to plunge our
selves, into our former blessed and happy estate. For the Parliament having
received by Sr John Greenvile, his Majesty's most Gracious Letters and
Declarations, it was unanimously passed by both Houses, That according to the
ancient and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Government is, and ought to
be by King, Lords, and Commons.

The Kings Majesty besides his Letters to both Houses and Declaration, had
likewise sent a Letter to General Monck with the Officers under his Command;
together with one to General Mountague and the Commanders at Seas: The
substance of all which was, His Majesty's free and Gracious pardon to all that
should within forty days lay hold on the same, with resolution (as far as in
him lies) to preserve them free from injury in their lives and Estates, liberty
for tender Consciences, and such as differ in matters of Religion, provided
they disturb not the peace of the Nation, and that all things relating to Sales
and Purchases, shall be determined in Parliament; And the full satisfaction of
the Arrears of the Soldiery, and receiving them into his Majesty's pay. Upon
the reading of the foremention Letters and Declaration in the Houses, there was
all reverence shown due to his Majesty and so Royal a concession; and one
thing is worth observation, that the first who celebrated his Majesty's grace
and extraordinary goodness was Luke Robinson, a man whose former actings had
rendered him deservedly odious, but now I hope he has made a real repentance.

Never was Vote received with more joy then this was, by the Citizens and all
others who could hear of it, at night the Bells, Bonfires, and shouts of the
people, did highly demonstrate their extraordinary content and satisfaction.

On the next day the House of Commons agreed upon a Letter in answer to his
Majesty, and resolved that the Superscription should be, To the Kings most
excellent Majesty. And General Monck acquainted the House, with an Address
made to him by the Officers of the Army, wherein they did with one heart
testify their resolutions to demonstrate themselves the best and most loyal
of his Majesty's Subjects. Which Address was presented to the General by
Coll. Sr John Lenthall and subscribed by all the chief Officers then in London.

The House Resolved, that Dr Claerges have leave of the House to go to the King
with the Lord Generals answer to his Majesty's Letter to him. They likewise
Resolved, that Sr John Greenvile should have the thanks of the House and,
receive 500lb to buy him a jewel as a restimony of their respect to him. Honest
Ald. Robinson acquainted the House, That the Lord Major, Aldermen and
Commoncounsel had likewise received a Letter with the Declaration from his
Majesty, to which they desired liberty of the Parliament to return an answer,
which was by this House accordingly granted.

An Agreement was made between this Commonwealth and the King of Spain for
metuall exchange of all prisoners, which was signed by the Marquess of
Caracena on the behalf of his Catholic Majesty, and the Lord General Monck, in
behalf of this Commonwealth; and the Orders taken according for the
transportation of such Spaniards as were prisoners here, which agreement is
hoped will not end there, but that there will shortly be a final conclusion of
all differences between both Nations.

May 3. The Lords and Commons Ordered a Declaration for continuance of all
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Major, and other Officers that were in office
the 25th of April, 1660. and to exercise their functions in his Majesty's name
and style, and suppress all unlawful Assemblies, and punish all misdemeanors
against his Majesty's Royal Person and Authority, and to proceed against all
such Offenders according to Law and Justice, which Declaration was published
Monday May 7th.

From Ireland arrived a Declaration of the General convention there, wherein
they expressed their detestation of the most execrable murder of our late most
Gracious Sovereign Charles the first, and the illegal proceedings of the High
Court of Justice against him.

The Parliament Ordered 50000lb to be sent over to his Majesty for a present,
as a test of their duty and loyalty, and 50000lb more toward the payment of
the Arrears of the Army, and sent a Committee to the City to desire them to
raise the money immediately, for which they should receive satisfaction by the
next assessement, and receive in the mean the interest at 6. per cent. which
was presently granted by the City and care taking for its spedy provision.

The Commoncounsell of the City of London to testify their loyal gratitude to
his Majesty Ordered 10000lb to be sent for a present to his Majesty, and 300lb
to be given to the Lord Mordant and Sr John Greenvile, who brought them his
Majesty's Letter, to buy each of them a Ring. They likewise ordered that to the
most illustrious Prince James Duke of York, and his Princely Brother Henry Duke
of Gloucester, a 1000lb be presented to each of them.

The Parliament Order that a stop be put to the sale of the Estates of the Lord
Craven, Sr John Stawell, and Alderman Bunce, and likewise to the estate of the
Duke of Buckingham, and that their names be inserted into the proviso of the
Bill of of Grants and Sales. The Horse adjourned Easter Term to Quinque Paschae
being May 28th 1660.

Upon the third of May the Lord Mountague having received a Letter from his
Majesty, together with his Majesty's gracious message to the House of Commons;
the Letter to his Excellency and Declaration; presently called a Counsel of
War, to whom he communicated the said Letters, which were received by them all
with much hearty affections and testimonies of their exact loyalty and duty to
his Majesty: whereupon the General firing the first Gun himself cried, God
bless King Charles; the Guns from the rest of the Fleet, with those from Deal
and Sandwich Castles, did with loud Vollies re-eccho the joy for such a happy
time, the shouts of the Seamen testifying their extraordinary cheerfullnesse
and alacrity.

But now comes the day, the like whereof was never enrolled in the Enguish
Calender, nor ever was there known a day whereon the people did with so
unanimous and general consent testify their unexpressible content and
gladness. And well might they, since from this time alone we can truly date the
restored happiness of the English Nation, what passed before being as it were
only glimmerings of this immense, and radiant light. The Parliament having the
day before Ordered the Proclamation of his Majesty to be on the 8th day of May
he was with the greatest solemnity possible, all the chief Lords of the
Parliament attending in their Coaches; together with many eminent Members of
the House of Commons, the Lord General, the Lord Major and Aldermen, with the
whole Militia of the City, Proclaimed Charles by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, the most potent mighty and undoubted King. Nor
did they intend by this Proclamation to seem as if they thought his Reign was
to be begun from that time, but confessed that forthwith upon the death of his
Father, the Imperial Crown of England, and the Dominions thereof did as
absolutely bring unto him, as now after Proclamation; so that this is the
twelfth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, whom
God preserve.

The House of Lords, the House of Commons, and the City of London, made choice
of several most eminent and worthy persons of their number to attend his
Majesty, which that they may not by posterity be forgotten, I have inserted
their names.

For the House of Lords.
Earl of Oxford. Earl of Middlefex. Lord Brook Earl of Warwick. Lord Viscount
Hereford. Lord Barkley.
For the House of Commons.
Lord Fairfax. Lord Bruce. Lord Falkland. Lord Castleton. Lord Herbert. Lord
Mandevile. Sr Horatio Townsend. Sr Ant. Ashey-Cooper. Sr George Booth. Denzill
Hollis Esquire; Sr John Holland. Sr Henry Chomely.
For the honorable City of London
Sr James Bunce Bar. Alderman Langham. Alderman Reynardson. Alderman Brown. Sr
Nicholas Crispe. Alderman Thomson. Alderman Fredrick. Alderman Adams. Recorder
Wild. Alderman Robinson. Alderman Bateman. Alderman Wale. Theophilus Biddulph.
Richard Ford. Will. Vincent. Thomas Bludworth. Will. Bateman. J. Lowes Esquire;
Major Chamberlain. Coll. Brumfield.

By Order from the Parliament that all Signs of the late Arbytrary Power might
be rased, the States Arms were to be taken down from all Churches and public
places, that in the Parliament House and in Guildhall being taken down, and the
Kings Arms set up in their room, the Statue of his late Majesty was likewise
set up again at the Chapel in Guildhall-yard.

The Votes of the Parliament were also for the Fleet to go immediately to
receive his Majesty's Orders, and be at his Devotion. That the Kings Majesty be
desired to return speedily to Parliament, and exercise of his Kingly Office.
That all Ministers shall in their public prayers pray for his Majesty under
the name of, Our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. And the most
Illustrious Prince, James Duke of York, with the rest of the Royal Progeny.
Which is the hearty and fervent prayer of the Author and all good Subjects, and
so let the conclusion be,

Long live King Charles. II.
THere is now made public Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature,
being the sum and substance of Natural Philosophy. First designed by John
Wecker, and now much enlarged by Dr. R. Read; Sold at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard.


