An Humble PROPOSAL That may entirely Check and Restrain, The GROWTH of
Highway-men, Foot-pads, House-breakers, Shop-lifters and other Incendiary's, by
threatening Letters; and at no Charge to the Government, but in case of a War,
may be an Hundred Thousand a Year, in the way of Trade of this Kingdom.

By JOSEPH DAVIES.

LONDON: Printed, by L. How, in Petticoat-Lane.

An Humble PROPOSAL etc. It is most Humby Proposed,
THAT if his Majesty and the Nation, will be pleased to allow of a few Galleys
to be built at, or sent to Gibralter or Port Mayhone to be Manned with Convicts,
such as are Caft for Transportation; the bare apprehention of being made a
Galley Slave off will strike such a Terror into the Minds of those Villians;
such as Highway-men, Footpads, House-breakers, Shop-lifters, and all
Incendiarys, whether by threarning to Murder the Persons, or to Burn their
Houses, which has such shocking Reflections; and are Crimes of so black a
Nature, that the very mentioning of them has been terrifying. And these who
like Locust, does swarm in our Roads and Streets, and infects all our Places to
such a degree that honest People are not safe, either at Home or Abroad; but
when these vile People shall know, to there dread, that they shall instead of
Transportation be sent to the Galleys without any hopes of Freedom till their
Sentance is expired; It will certainly put a Stop to the further growth of
Thieveing and Villiany, for it will have such terror upon their Minds, of the
Rigor that those Patterroons or Officers of those Galleys, exercises over those
unfortunate People, who for the Punnishment of their Crimes are thus dealt
with, and would not be restrained by any milder METHODS.

This with all Humble Submission, seems a far better way than to take away the
Lives of so many hale young People, that are cut off before they have lived out
half their Days, that by this Proposal might be saved, and brought to a Sense
of their past Follys, in following of an Extravagant Vicious course of Life;
and may convince them and Others, of the real Advantages of an Honest Sober way
of Living, that they may become serviceable to their Country in their several
Trades and Capacitys

Now I shall beg leave to Offer some of the Services, that these Convict thus
confin^d to the Galleys may be of; As First, that they have by their repeated
Robberies and other Villainy's, wronged the Nation in General; they may be made
use off as a National Service: which in some measure may atone for the
Mischiefs they have done in the course of their past Lives.

And in case of a War with any Nation that Trades in the Straights, we having
of Gibral^er, can with our Galleys in Conjunction with our Men of War, Command
all Ships passing or repassing in those Seas, rendering their Trade so
Difficult to them, and with such advantage to us, that we of this Kingdom will
soon find the many and great Proffits that will arise by what is Offered.

For as their is a strong Current sets always through the Gut, so that if it
proves Calm, which is very frequent in those Parts; so that Ships that have
been comeing through, have drove past Gibralter, as high as Malago; and others
that have been comeing down, have met with these Calms, and Ships of great
Value which could not fetch into the Bay, and so Exposed to great Dangers, and
some that have been took by the Spaniards (who always kept lurcking with their
Galleys on purpose for those Oppertunitys,) that our Cruisers could not come to
assist them, and and in sight sometimes of Gibralter: which is the highest
Provocation, and has been done, to the unspeakable loss of Trade, the Ruining
of abundance of Merchants and Sailors: but these Evils will be sufficiently
made up and provided against by our having of Galleys added to our Men of War,
that it may be some Thousands a Year in this Kingdoms Way, between the Trade we
may Ingross, and what Ships we shall save of our own, and what we may take of
others: for then not a Ship shall be suffered to pass either coming in or going
out but we may speak with them BLOW HIGH, BLOW LOW.

I shall farther Appeal to all Captains of Men of War, how Serviceable they may
be made use off in an Engagement, for to Tow out of the Line all disabled
Ships, and to bring others in their Stations, and if once that we have Galleys
at Gibralter it will Awe the Algerines and Sally Rovers, and will entirely
prevent any Trade by Sea to old Gibralter, and their other Harbors with their
small Vessels that went along Shore in the last Rupture, and brought them fresh
supplys that our Men of War could not prevent, it being not safe to Venture so
close in with the Land.

And I shall farther Offer, that by sending those Convicts to our Plantations,
and Collonies we find by woeful Experience that it does not Answer the good
Purposes for which that Law was Enacted; it neither puts a stop to or lessons
the Complaints of the poor Sufferers; for the change of the Climate makes no
alterations either in their Manners or Morrals, for the Rude and Disorderly
Practices of those vile Ungovernable People in their Behaviors; has made
Jamaica and other Parts of the West India Islands to entirely refuse taking
them, and no doubt but other Places will be fore'd to follow their Examles; for
their wicked Inclinations and ill habits are still the same, which hurries them
to all kinds of Mischiefs in those Places where they are sent to and their
Banishment which was designed as their Punishment they make use off to repeat
all their form* Villianies giving of ill examples to their Youths, often
Persuading their Negros to Robb their Masters, and Run away with them; this
being the sole Nursery for Pirates, they being thoroughly Quallified for so vile
base, and desperate an Employ; that the poor Sufferers that have gone in Danger
of their Lives, and been sadly Abused in their Persons; and have had their
Substances taken from them, and the overseting of their Voyages by these
Savages in the shapes of Men, have often Reflected on those that gave them
those Oppertunity's, making a Redicul of Transportation, telling one another
that it is but a Trip over the Herring-Pond, (their Passages being Paid) D --
ming their Precious Bloods if that Country shall hold them long. Which is the
highest Contempt of that Law, and it seems to Boy them up in their vile
Practices, and by sending these People there, it discourages honest People from
going there, which might be to the great increase of Trade, but it may be hoped
that our Government will take what has been Sincerely offered for a Public
Good, into their Consideration, and to Prevent these Evils for the Time to Come.

But as to the duration of these Peoples Servitude, I shall not offer to Name
but leave that to the Wisdom and Prudence of the Lawmakers and their Judges,
to the Nature of the Crimes of which they are Convicted off.

I shall beg leave to Answer briefly to some Objections, that may be brought
against this PROPOSAL: First,

It may be a great Expense to the Nation in Building of Galley

I Answer, that by what it has cost the Government, between the Rewards of
those that have been Capitally Convicted, and the Four Pounds Four Shillings
for such Numbers of these vile People, that have been Transported since this
King came to the Crown; but that it may be made appear, that they will far out
Balance the Charge of Building a sufficient Number of Galleys, and if I might
offer further without Disobligeing of any Captains of Men of War or others,
that the Charge of one Third Rate, in siting her out for the Sea, by a Modest
Computation; will far surmou^t the Cost of Eight Galleys. But I humbly beg that
I may be understood, that I am not for lessoning of any one Ship, in His
Majesty's Royal Navy, which is so much the Glory and Defense of these Kingdoms,
and the Terror of the whole World: but that Galleys may be aded as Tenders or
as shall be Thought most for Service to them.

Another Objection is, How many Galleys will be Sufficient to employ such
Numbers, that are sent away from Time to Time.

I Answer, Eight may be enough, Four or Six at Gibralter, the other at Port
Mayhone, as shall be Thought most for Service, every Galley to employ 312 Men a
Board, so that I humbly do Conceive by what shocking Terrors it may cause on
the one Hand, and the so shurely Secureing them on the other, Putting it out of
their Powers to be ever Transported more than once, as some have been from
different Places by fictions Names, so that they will be Reduced to such small
Numbers, more than ever could yet be done by DEATHS or BANISHMENT.

And it is plain that we have had more Robbing in England in one Month, than is
in Italy, Spain and Portugal, in Twelve Months; and its thought it is oweing to
those Countries having of Galleys, putting it out of their Powers of these People
to play at FAST and LOOSE,

Another Objection may be, that it is offered against a free People

Answer* I humbly Conceive that by Breaking of the Kings Laws by taking away
the Lives or Goods or Threatening to Murder burn, or destroy, them or their
Goods in order to extort Moneys from any of his Majestys Subjects, when any
such are Convicted by Evidence, they have loft all Pleadings of their Freedoms,
but is entirely at the Laws and Kings Disposal; whether for Life Death or
Banishment, longer imprisoument or Liberty: and Transportation was at first
well designd, and very shocking, though thought to be as great a breaking into
the Rights and Freedoms of these People; as now Galleys is Offered to the same
intents and Purposes, for a National Service: though Transportation has of late
Years proved the Reverse; now if they are sent to Giberalter. they nor their
old Companions in Sin, cannot Boy up themselves in Running away at Pleasure, but
may be employed though in times of Peace, in Building some Necessary
Fortificatitons there, and at Port Mayhone, as may render those Places
IMPREGNABLE.

Another Objection that may be brought against this is, that some Men would
rather Choose Death, than to suffer themselves to be thus Confined.

Answer, that it is the Unhappy Temper of some Men, that they never was, or
desired to be made usefully Good, or Morrally Honest; for their Exorbitant
Humors which admits of no Bounds, when that comes to have a Restraint put upon
it by the just Methods of the Law: It either flings them into those vile wild
Resolutions, that had always been their Directors to choose Death, Rather then
to undergo these gentle Severeties, or else it so Dispirits. them by a sullen
Change of their minds that they wou^d also Rather prefer Death in all its
heidous forms, than be brought under any Subjection: like some Creatures that I
have seen in Virginia, when first caught. wrangles with their Masters and Yoke,
and Endeaver to be their own Executionres which when by degrees, after proves
of very great use and so may they made to be Servicable both to God and their
Country, and run wild no longer.

The main Objection that can be brought against this Proposal is, that as it is
Peace, we have no Occasion for Galleys.

I Answer as all wise Parents provides the Rod, and has it fixed in a proper
Place, ready to make use off when necessity requires it; and as his Majesty,
Lords and Commons, are the Nations Parents, so they are not to depend upon
being allways so: with Frence and some others, that are our Rivals in many
Branches of Trade in the Mediterranian, and we hear how Industrious the
Spaniards are at this Time in Forrifying Caprita Point, and the Bay of
Gibralter, against any Rupture: and it may be hoped that our Government will be
as Thoughtful and Industrious to Promote things for a Public Service as they
are; and no doubt but that Galleys will fully Answer to what has been Proposed
and be as great a Thorn in the Eyes of any Nation, with whom we may have
Disputes, as any one Thing we can do to our farther Preservation of Trade.

This Proposal is to check Robbing, and other Villianey and a tender Regard for
the Lives of Thousands of young Men; the Good of our Men of War and
Merchant's-Ships in the Straights; an additional Strength to Gihralter. the
Peace and Quiet of our Collonies abroad, and a prevention for Pirates. And
offered by a Person; that is well acquainted with this Proposal; and hopes may
deserve the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament.

By JOS. DAVIES.
FINIS.

