A TRUE RELATION, of a most Dreadful Fire which happened on the City of Udem or
Uhien IN GERMANY: Together, with an Account of the Regulars, Monastries,
Churches, Houses, People, and Cattle, that suffered in those most Devouring
Flames, very Remarkable, and not inferior to that of London.
SIR,
ACcording to my Obligation, when I set forward in my Travels, of transmitting
to you my Observations, and other Occurences; I am sorry that my first Letter
should come frait with so Tragical a Story, which scarce ever was paralleled,
but in the dreadful Conflagration of London: I question not, but the
Commemoration of your own Losses, in that, will cause a Christian feeling and
compassion in all that shall hear of this, for those poor Wretches, that one
hour gloried in their Riches, Relations and pleasant Habitations; the next, was
forced to wander in the Fields, with their parched Bodies, destitute of any
Abode: But let the Relation speak their doleful Condition.

At Vdem, or Vhien, a small but Beautiful City, near Xanten, on the lower part
of the River Rhine, in Germany; that on Wednesday in the Holy Week of Easter,
in the House of a Brewer; at the sign of the Red-Hart, broak out a most
dreadful Fire, which in an hour and half; or two hours at most, by it is Raging
Flames, the whole City was turned into Ashes, with all the Rich Furniture their
Houses were adorned with. The devouring Fire knew no difference betwixt things
Sacred and Profane; but equally in the Combust fell, the Monasteries of the
Regulars and Monks, the common Granary, in which was Stored the City Corn, the
Townhouse or Court, with all the Houses of the Citizens; excepting that of the
Town-Clark, and a little Shed, not far from the Court, in which was kept the
Engines, on which the Flames, (which makes us wonder) never exercised it is
Fury, but the Temple of the Catholics, is still standing without a Roof: The
Bells were melted down, the Organs and the Altar spared; all things mournfully
appeared.

Amongst those that were burnt, are Two and Twenty Regulars, and Fifty Seven
others; and we fear many more, who are not yet discovered. The hopes of saving
their Lives made them fly to Subteranus Vaults: One Man, thinking to avoid
that intolerable heat, made his Sanctuary his Sepulcher, the Oven, in which he
thought to have secured his tender Flesh from Raging Flames, proved the Vrne of
his pulverated Carcass.

A large Chest, in which the Citizens and Country People had treasured up their
Wealth, and deposited in the Church, as a Sanctuary against the rapine of
hungry Soldiers, who like Locust, have for some years overspread and infested
those Countries, was at the beginning of this horrible Incendium, drawn forth
into the Churchyard and there devoured by Flames, with the Wooden Crosses that
graced the Tombs of slumbering Saints.

The Cattle perished, one Cow only escaping; the Hair and Ears being burnt off.

So great was the horror and confusion of these poor Wretches, and so violently
raged the Flames; that all their Wealth and Substance was consumed before they
could reach the City Gates. A little Trunk belonging to a Lady, in which was
Money and Jewels, valued at Ten Millions of Imperials; being mounted on a
Porters back, thinking to have saved it from the Flames, not far from the City
Gates the Iron-Ring broak by which he carried it; and down it fell, the Fire
pursued so close, the Porter to save his Life was forced to run and leave his
Treasure, which was soon devoured by the raging Element, but the melted Mass
was after found.

The Goods that was cast into Wells, and Pools, was in a manner with the Water
dried, and burnt up; the Chains and Winals, with which they drew Water looked
like Firebrarnds, so that no man with his hands could endure to touch them;
almost impossible was it, for man to find a passage out of the City: Some ran
one way, some another, the Flames still met and pursued them. Horrable shriks
filled every corner; Children lost their Ancient Parents; Mothers left their
tender Babes: and happy was he, that by his swiftness could escape, which none
did, but those that left in the Flames their Hair and Clothes, as pawns for
their Lives. The memory of man has not heard of so sudden and terrible a
Conflagration; the Destruction of this City being as total as that of
Jerusalem; scarce any man, knowing the Foundation of his late Habitation.

Thus Dear Sir, as brief as I could, have I drawn you the Scene of their
miseries, having rid three German Leagues out of my way to view the Ruins, and
observe the poor Inhabitants scattered about the Fields in Huts and Tents.

I shall now prosecute my Journey for Vienna, where I hope to receive your
Letters and Bills, and in the intrim am,

Your Obliged Frind and Servant I. D.
Xanten, April the 13th. 85. Stila Nova.
London, Printed by E. Mallet in Black-Horse-Ally, near Fleet-Bridge.


