Geographia Vniversalis: THE Present State Of the Whole WORLD: GIVING An
ACCOUNT of the several Religions, Customs, and Riches of each People; The
Strength and Government of each Polity and State; The Curious and most
Remarkable Things in every Region; With other Particulars necessary to the
understanding History, and the Interest of Princes.


Written Originally by the SIEVR DVVAL, Geographer in Ordinary to the French
King; And made English, and Enlarged By FERRAND SPENCE.

-- Venient annis
Soecula seris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat Tellus, Tiphysque novos
Detegat Orbs; nec sit terris
Vltima Thule.
Senec. Tragaed. Med. v. 374. London: Printed by H. Clark, for F. Pearse, at
the Blew Anchor at the West End of St. Paul's, 1685.

John Ward of Capesthorne in the County of Cheshire Esquire. and of the Inner
Temple 1704
bookplate

To the Honorable Edward Coke, Esquire
SIR,
ONE of the Principal Designs of most Dedications inscribed to Men of Eminence
and Condition, is the imploring their Patronage and Protection. This the
Authors ever pretend, and add, that their Books, being to travel in a wide and
censorious World, do want a Passport from some Grea Name, which may defend them
from the arrogance and obloquy of Critics, a sort of Men, that are born to be
the Scourges of Mankind in all Ages, and therefore ought either to be tied up
by the Public Magistrate, or awed down by Persons of Celsitude and Honor; so
that if Hobbs his State of Nature awakens and kicks-up in 'em, they may vent
all their Malignity on the Dust, without any Noise of their own, or the Hearing
of others. They pretend, that the least Trifles and Dwarflings of Wit, are most
mightily safe and secure, provided they have but kindly and favorable Patrons:
And, to hear at what rate they talk, a Man would say, that those glorious and
adorable Personages, whom they with so much Religion invoke, and to whom they
so devoutly consecrate their Labors, have either the Will or the Power to give
Estimation to such things, as by no means deserve it; as if, like Deities, they
could Create something out of nothing, and the Merits of one Man could be
transferred upon another.

This Custom, SIR, I shall not follow, though I have so much good Company, it
being bottomed upon a very Chimerical Foundation; but shall leave the Book and
its Author to shift for themselves, as well as they can. Yet even this
Amusement is superseded by their having done so already: For, Both of 'em have,
for some Years, stood the Test of France; and as it has been the Happiness of
the Author to be applauded^ and preferred by that Great-Prince, for his
profound Skill and Knowledge in these no less pleasurable than useful Studies
of Geography, so has his Book been Universally received and Unanimously
approved by the learned part of that King's Subjects, as it appears by the
repeated Editions of this Work in the Original.

As to my share in it, that am only the Englisher, I can pretend to nothing of
Merit, but only that of Translating it Faithfully. It is a Subject made more
for Use than Ostentation, and serves rather to the Information than
Divertisement of Humane Life. Here are none of the Heroic Flights of
Eloquence, nor the more Delicate Curiosities of Wit: But the Words both are and
ought to be as plain and un-metaphorical as those in the last Confession of a
Dying Man. Would it not be an horrid, absurd and amasing Spectre, Sir, to see a
Fellow, when he is rea- to Expire, use either a starched Eloquence or Nice
Witticisms, when he was to draw all the Lineaments of his Soul, to show the
several risings and tumors of his Passions, and consequently his Vices
depending thereon, to discover all the Deformities, and let the Bystanders
guess at the Landscape of his Virtues, and (in one word) when he was to write or
dictate the whole Geography of his Mind? The same thing holds good in this kind
of Knowledges: They must be drawn as Naked, as Truth or Nature; Otherwise,
Poetry would Commence Geography, and this Globe of Earth would be like a Castle
in the Air, not only in its local Hanging, but its real Existence.

But though the Argument does not admit of much Verbal Ornament, yet it carries a
great deal of Delight along with it, which arising from the things themselves,
most undoubtedly, is much more real, steady, and substantial, than what derives
its Origin from Words. Here we are only tickled, but there a solid Joy runs
through the whole Circle of Blood, which keeps it warm a good while afterward.
By the former we are put, peradventure, into a small sort of Ecstacy, but we
are flushed and transfixed by the later. The First slackens and relaxes the
Mind, but the Second enlarges it and fills it up. And (to instance in the
Studies under my hands) when we take a Prospect of the several Scenes of this
Globe, of its different Soils and Climates, of its various Kingdoms and
Nations, of their respective Arts and Policies, of their diverse Religions and
Devotions; though all this be described without any Rhetorical Paint and Fucus,
it must needs both extremely divert and sat the widest Capacities of our
Souls, not only upon account of the Nature of the Things themselves, but
likewise of their admirable Variety: And, for my part, I am unable to express
the mighty Satisfaction I took two Years ago, when I ran this thing over with
my Pen, only to settle these Notices in my Mind.

It is my Opinion, SIR, that our Minds stand in need of as much Nutriment as
our Bodies: As we are perpetually recruiting the latter, so we must be always
refreshing the former, and not let it, by continual Expiration either grow
Empty or be harrass'd by Famine. Men are not to imitate their Methods in
furnishing their Houses, while they lay out so much in adorning all their lower
Rooms, but the Garret is either Empty or filled with Rubbish. Yet it is
generally seen, that when Men have got some small stock and smattering of
Learning, there they stick and proceed no further; they have already enough for
common Conversation, and talk the rest by hints and guesses; not considering,
that so frail is the Mind and Memory of Man, that even that knowledge runs
through it, as through a perforated Vessel, and they must imitate the Danaides
in their Labor, though they do not in the vanity of their Labor: for in the
sifting of Letters, as in other things, though the greater part passes through,
yet what is fine remains, and the more it is sifted the finer and richer it is:
But those, Queis art Benigna Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan, though
they have less Necessity, yet take more Care about this Repletive Faculty, (as
I may call it;) and as what Aliment enters the Stomach, turns gradually into
Chyle, and Blood, and Animal Spirits; so they refine more and more the Notices
that come into the Brain; and Conversation [the true Touchstone] turns what
they Read into good and current Coin, as Midas turned all he touched into Gold.

Another Reason, for a Constant Infusion of Knowledge into the Mind, arises by
immediate Deduction from the former; since the Soul ought no more to be in the
same temper and frame than the Body, if we intend either to live happily or in
health. As a continual renovation of the Blood conduces to the health of the
Body, so a constant Redintegration of thoughts makes up the welfare and good
estate of the Mind. Variety is the great Mistress of the World, and what would
become of Love it self, and all other Mistresses, if she was not adored? What
Man in the World would be always in the same Garb, or be always chewing the
same Meat? Greatness it self is tyrannical and tiresom without Learning on a
Day of Physic or Rain: and Men ought to value 'emselves as much upon their
Minds as their Bodies.

Now, to apply, Sir, that which I have said to the present Case; what can be
more charmingly various and diversifi'd, than the knowledge of the several
Circumstances of this sublunary Globe? What can be more serviceable and
conducive toward our Attainment of a Vitae Modus, (as Terence calls it) than
our reading the greater World, and so learning how to form our own Microcosm?
What better way, Sir, can there be taken to understand the Constitution of our
own Government, and be able to shake St. Stephen's Chapel by a Logical
Eloquence, than by weighing the Frames of all other Polities and Regiments on
this side the Sun? What other Considerations can better incite you to a braver
Mettle and more sudden Skill and Experience in the Arts of Gallantry and the
Sword, than the Fancy of a Fame Equal to the extent of the whole World? These
sublime and lofty Meditations have precipitated me into the undoubted Foresight
of future things: And even now I see a Life, that will be the Labor and
Embellishment of our Chronicles, not only the Illustrious Greatness and Divine
Wisdom of your now Grandfather, with the Excellencies of that your other so
celebrated Ancestor of your own Name, but all the Personal Perfections of your
glorious Mother centered and conspicuous in you; insomuch that as you will be
the Ornament and Support of the Masculine, so I must necessarily Infer you the
triumphant Delight of the Fair Sex; and in passionate Expectation of that time,
I lay the whole World, and my Self, at your feet; Who am, SIR,

Your most Obedient, And most Humble Servant, F. SPENCE.

THE Englisher's PREFACE TO THE READER.
Though the Multitude of Books of this Nature is already very great in our own,
as well as other Languages, yet I question not, but what incited our Author,
(the French King's Geographer in Ordinary) to the first Writing this Tract,
will also sufficiently excuse, if not justify me in Copying from his Original.
For besides, that commonly this subject, among Us, is expanded into vast
Volumes gathered out of Ancient Authors, which some People, very desirous of
this kind of pleasant and necessary Knowledge, have not the leisure to read, you
will find herein a short, and yet (I think) no unpleasant view of the Great
World, Collected from the newest Relations, that the latest Travelers have
made, of all parts of the Habitable Earth: Insomuch, that our Author is not
afraid to call his Book, The Present State of the Whole World.

Otherwise, this is a Title I durst not have ventured upon, in
Down-right-honest-English, with reference to Asia, Africa and America, in
regard there have been some Mutations in those Parts since this Version of
mine; and it is impossible to give a Perfect, or so much as an Indirect Account
of the present Circumstances, under which all those parts of the World now lie:
And accordingly, the Consideration of 'em is Brief, though interlined with many
Curious and Notable Observations, which make up about half the Book. The other
half is wholly destined to Europe, and gives a ready Prospect of Affairs and
Things, as they now stand, and have stood since the last public Treaty of
Peace, and since the Mighty Growth of the French Monarchy, excepting some
Abatements of very late Transactions.

Nevertheless, our Author is not wholly to be Condemned for his wide Title,
since, in some measure, he may lay Claim to have given very Necessary and
Present Notices of the farthest Parts of the Earth; where he shows the
settlements the Europeans have made in the West and East Indies, and the
Passages, Tracts and Courses they now take, or of old took in Navigation, with
other particulars, of the like stamp, peculiar to our Times.

And here, one thing I must not be silent in, that since our Author was very
short and Careless in the Description of our Colonies and Plantations abroad
(and who could expect any other from him; I have presumed, and, I hope,
innocently enough, to add several things, to him, in several places, and would
have added many more, had not the Sheets been committed to the Press without my
re-touching them, and the greater part of them Printed off without my Privity:
And this true Excuse I have for the sparing and stingy Description of France,
and for the want of our own Routs to the East Indies, and other Places, which I
had designed to have enlarged and added. For, though no one, in strict Justice,
has such a Right over another Man's Work, as may Authorize and Privilege him to
change and alter what he please, yet having so much good Company, I must
confess, in the Additional way among my Brother-Translators [though we did not
learn it from our Great Country-Master, Philemon Holland] I hope I may have the
English Reader's pardon, especially since it is for the Glory of our Common
Mother, whose Reputation and Honor we ought not only to defend with our Swords
and Pens, but to propagate to the utmost borders of the Universe. And the
Author, I suppose, will think no injury done him; for if he had been an
Englishman, he would have Writ so: But if he thinks himself concerned, I must
give him satisfaction from his own Countrymen, who, when they translate our
Books, are notoriously known to corrupt them in much more material Points,
witness some of my Lord Bacon's Works, which, while they are taught to speak
French, are instructed also, by the highest Injustice, to speak him a
Roman Catholic.

You must not expect here any Praecognita to this Geography, nor the treating
of that part of it, which is called Spherical, it being no part of his Design,
and the World being cloyed with Books enough of such a Concern already. Our
Author does not dispute the roundness of this Body of Earth and Water from the
Celestial and Terrestrial Phenomenon, nor where this Globe is situated. Here
are no Lectures upon Zeniths or Nadirs, Azimuths or Almicanters: Neither does
our Author divide the Winds into 64 Parts, as some very nicely have done. He
has not determined, whether the first Discoverer of America's right Name was
Columbus, or Colonus; Nor whether the Quadripartite Division of the World is
rational, or any Equality to be found in it. The Reader is supposed to have
some acquaintance with these things, and to know what is the meaning of the
Meridian, Equator, Zodiac, Tropicks, Polar Circles, and Zones; or at least,
without these Knowledges, may reap benefit enough from this Book. But though this
Treatise does not pretend to show, how the Latitude (in the Abstract) may be
found either in the daytime by the Sun, or in the night by the Stars, though it
does not brag of having invented any new, more certain and ready, way than
hitherto has been used for the finding out the Longitudes of Places, yet in the
Descriptions of the most considerable Regions, the Longitudes and Latitudes of
them are not past over, but are very carefully set down.

There is one Exception more, which I am to take notice of: That whereas our
Author having divided the World into Upper and Nether Hemisphere, has
considered the first with Relation to France, which will not do exactly in
England, yet, since that England, for the most part, is under the same Meridian
with France, I have made bold to venture all Countries, so considered in
English, without any Change or Alteration, because there will be no great
Squares broken: For the like reason, and by a Pardonable figure of Speech, I
call Europe, Asia and Africa, our Continent, though we live in an Island, which
yet, as some have said and proved (how truly I shall not here question) to have
been once joined to the Terra Firma. I said, I had but one Exception more to
wipe off; for I am sorry I have not forgot that nice one, which some Critics
may make, that, I say, of different Places, such a thing, in such a Place, is
the best in the World: But besides, that some things may be best in different
Prospects and Relations, these sort of Expressions follow the French, and are
vulgarly used in our own Tongue, and are of a very ancient Date, as appearing
frequently in the Lively Oracles of God, when both Hezekiah and Joshua are
commended, To have had none like unto them, neither before nor after them.

THE PRESENT STATE Of the Four Parts of the WORLD.
The Terrestrial World.
WE mean, by the Terrestrial World, this round Mass, which Comprehends the
Earth and Water. The Earth, whose Description, is here intended, consists
principally of two great Continents, and some Lands toward both Poles. The
first of these Continents has three great Parts; to wit, Africa, Asia, and
Europe: Africa lies toward the South and the West; Asia on the East; Europe
North-West. These three great Parts are in our Hemisphere, which we call
Superior and Oriental, with regard had to that of the Americans, which seems
to be below us, and is West of us. America possesses the other great Continent
in the Inferior and Occidental Hemisphere. The Lands near the Poles are of two
sorts, Artick and Antartick; neither have they long been, nor is there much of
them discovered, than what is along the Seacoasts. The Antartick Lands are
separated from the other great Continents by the Ocean; the Turn that Merchants
and Travelers take in circling the World, from East to West through the South
Seas, having left no subject of doubt. We cannot with certainty say the same
thing of the Artick Coasts, though some affirm the Northern Sea communicates with
the Oriental, toward the North-East of our Continent, and with the South Sea
toward the North-West of Northern America.

The Artick Region.
THese Parts have been called by the name of Artick, because they are near the
Artick Pole: they are called Northern, because of the North, in which they are
situated; (...)
Boreales, from a Greek Word which signifies the North Wind: they consist of
Islands and Peninsula's, where there are Bears, Foxes, and Rain-Deer, in
abundance, the Inhabitants living commonly on Hunting or Fishing.

The Seas of these Regions make a part of the the great Ocean, which is here
known under the name of Northern and Frozen.

The Ice there lasts a long time, because to these Parts the Sun during several
Months discovers not himself, and when he appears, he does not heat or thaw it.

The Bays and Streights of Hudson, Davis, and Forbisher, are in the Inferior
Hemisphere; that of Weygats, otherwise of Nassaw, in the Superior Hemisphere,
on the North of our Continent: Cabot, Willoughby, Forbisher, Davis, Hudson, and
other English men, have sought a Passage to the East Indies through the three
former Streights; Barenson, Heemskirk, and other Hollanders, have done the
same, through that of Weygats; but all to no purpose, by reason of the Ice, which
is almost continually there, and stops Ships in their Navigation; and this it
is, that has hindered 'em from going beyond the 80. Degree of North Latitude.

Three Courses have been commonly steered in these Northern Seas, to Archangelo
into Moscovy, for Furs; to Spigelberg, and Greenland, for Whales; and into
Norway, for Herrings and Timber.

The Artick Lands are Estotiland, Greenland, Island, Spigelberg, Nova Zembla,
to which may be added, the Land of Jesso, though it be in the Northern temperate
Zone.

Estotiland is toward the North of the great Continent of America.

Greenland is of a vast extent to the North of Estotiland. Christian the
Fourth, King of Denmark, called it His Philosophers Stone, because the Ships he
sent thither could hardly find it out. His Successors keep a Governor there,
at Bearford. The Greenlanders Clothes are made of the Skins of Wild Beasts, and
their Wastcoats of Birds Skins, garnished with their Feathers: the Flour of the
Bread they eat, is made of Fishes Bones: they drink Sea Water, without
receiving any inconvenience by so doing.

Iseland.
ISeland, the Thule of the Ancients, one of the greatest Islands in the World,
lies toward the North in both Hemispheres, where it is part of the Dominions
of the Crown of Denmark. This advantage it has of not having so many Rocks upon
its Coasts, as have the other Northern Countries.

There are two Principal Villages, Hola and Schalholt: As for Cities, it has
none; the Houses in other places are commonly of Wood; covered with the Bark of
Trees and with Turfs. The Inhabitants are of the Confession of Augsbourg; have
no Physicians, feed their Oxen and their Horses with dry Fish, when they are in
want of Hay. They receive often great floats of Ice, which are loosened from
the Northern Shores, whereon is Wood and several sorts of Creatures, which they
accommodate themselves withal. Therefore they inhabit more willingly the
Seacoasts, than the inner part of the Island. There are several Mountains,
whereof Mount Hecla is the most considerable; It casts forth Fire, and is not
to be approached within six Miles distance. Danish, Hambourger, and Lubecker
Ships, frequently refort thither with diverse Commodities of Europe, which the
Islanders stand in need of. The Danes fetch from thence dried Fish, Whale-Oyl,
Butter, Suet, Sulphur, Ox-Hides, and those Teeth of Valrushes, which some
esteem as much as Ivory.

Spigelberg, or Spitsbergen, is a Country in our Hemisphere, the most advanced
toward the Artick Pole. It produces only green Moss: those that have been left
there to make a full discovery of it, perished through cold, after having
fought with White Bears, who pretended a right to eat them. Upon its Coasts
Whales are taken of a prodigious bulk, since from one alone has sometimes been
drawn a a Hundred and twenty Tun of Oil. The English and Hollanders lay claim
to the Dominion of it.

Nova Zembla is the Island Carambice of the Ancients, very near our great
Continent, from whence one may pass to it upon the Ice, and one way stretches
as far as Spitsbergen, nay, and much farther; so as it may probably be said,
that this is the place, where those passed who first of all inhabited America:
the straight which parts it from the Terra firma, has in its Eastern part high
Mountains of Ice, which are called Pater-nosters. This Name of Nova Zembla, is
by reason of the Way that has been so long sought after along those Coasts, to
go to the East Indies, through the Tartarian-Sea. In the year 1676. Capt. Wood,
that Ingenious and Industrious Seaman, was again sent out by His Majesty, King
Charles the Second, to make a more perfect Discovery of that North-East
Passage; persuaded unto it by diverse Relations of our own and Dutch Mariners;
who reported many things concerning it, which Capt. Wood upon his own
experience conceives to be false; as that they were either under or near the
Pole; that it was there all thawed Water, and the Weather as warm as at
Amsterdam, etc. He says further, That he himself could pass no further than 76
Degrees. where he found the Sea as far as he could discern, entirely frozen without
intermission. That it is most likely, that Nova Zembla and Greenland are the
same Continent, at least that there is no passage betwixt them; for that he
found scarce any Current: And that little, which was, ran E.S.E. along the Ice;
and seemed only to be a small Tide, rising not above Eight Foot. And whilst he
was in that Degree, there were nothing but Frogs, Frost and Snow, and all
imaginable ill Weather, though at the same time the heat seemed to be as great as
at any time in England.

The Land of Jesso lies between Asia and America, being separated from each of
those Continents by great Arms of the Sea. Its Inhabitants exchange in those
Cities of Japan that are nearest 'em, their Fish, their Skins, the Tongues and
the Fat of their Whales, for other Merchandise which they fancy most. The
Planks of their Vessels are not nailed; they are sewed very dexterously with
Ropes made of the Rind or Bark of Cocoes, and they do not rot in the Water. The
Hollanders have been there several times. Their Relations affirm, That part of
this Territory acknowledges the King of Japan for its Sovereign; That the
Commander in Chief of this Country, who has his Residence at Matzimai, carries
that Monarch every year, Silver, Birds Feathers of several Colors, with very
fine Furs.

The Antartick Lands.
THe Antartick Land is often called Australis Magellanica Incognita. We might
with just title name them the Southern Indies, and the third World. Those who
would engage Sovereign Princes, to promote the discovery of these Lands, say,
that they are of as great an extent as all America, nor less Peopled, or less
Fertile, than Europe: They may have above Six thousand Miles of Coast in three
several Zones of the Southern part of the World, the Hot, Temperate, and Cold:
Perhaps Countries might there be found of all manner of temperament, though none
have yet been beyond the 68 Degree of Southern Latitude. Amongst the Streights
that are there, that of Magellan, first afforded a way in the year 1523. to
voyage it round the World through the South Sea: this Straight is Two hundred
Leagues in length: in breadth, in some places, two, three, in others, five,
six, or ten. Those who pass through it, receive great inconveniences, by
reason of the sinuosities and windings, and the frequent storms that are there.
The Streights of Maire, which were discovered in the year 1615. are much more
commodious; it is but ten or twelve Leagues in length, and as many in breadth.
That of Brouvers, which was passed in the year 1643. is on the South-East, and
has the same advantages with that of Le Maire. The English and Hollanders
sometimes steer this Course to go to the East Indies.

Besides, under the name of Antartick Lands, are reckoned Countries which
indeed are very far distant from the Southern Pole, but which cannot be
attributed to the other great parts of the World, since they are separated from
it by Seas of a vast extent; New Guiney, the Isles of Solomon, New Zealand, the
Land of Fire, the Land of Parrots, New Holland. There Is hardly any thing known
of the other Southern Parts befides the Names of those who discovered them.

New Guiney, toward the South of the Equinoxial Line, and in the Inferior
Hemisphere, is a very great Isle, and bears this Name, because it seems to be
Diametrically opposite to the Guiney of Africa.

The Isles of Solomon are in the South Sea, at ten or twelve Degrees of the
Southern Latitude. The Spaniards, who have them in possession, give them the
name of Solomon, to persuade the World, that that wise King sent for his Gold
from thence.

New Zealand is the Country where the Hollanders have met with scurvy usage,
when they would have settled themselves there. There it is, they say, are great
Men, and of a huge stature; whether they really be so, or fear made them appear
such, at least each of their two Companies to the Indies avouched the same
thing. In all probability it was discovered by Fernandez de Quir, who tells a
thousand advantageous particulars of it; He spent Fourteen Years in his
Travels, Fourteen Months at Court, and presented, in vain, Eight Petitions, to
the King of Spain, to persuade him to send Colonies thither. Between New
Zealand, and the Streights of Magellan, some have placed several small Islands,
which are said to have been discovered in the Name of the King of Spain, by
Hernando Gallego, in the year 1576.

The Land of Fire, on the South of America, consists of several Islands that
are called Magellanic, and the Fires that were seen there, the first time the
Europeans went on shore, have given occasion to this Name.

The Land of Parrots is probably that which we call Terra Australis. In the
year 1504. a Frenchman, called Gonneville, went on shore there, and was kindly
received by a petty King, called Arosca: After several Months abode, he brought
away with him some of the Inhabitants, and amongst others, one called
Essomeriq, a King's Son, who has left of his Posterity in Normandy.

New Holland seems to be that Land, or rather those two great Islands of Petan,
and the lesser Java; which Mark Paul says, lies South East of the Isle of
Java. The Hollanders set so great a value upon these New Lands, that they have
caused the Map of them to be cut in inlaid or Mosaic Works upon the Pavement
of their Stadt-House in Amsterdam.

America.
IS a part of the World, bearing the Name of Americus Vesputius, a Florentine,
though Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, discovered it before him. It has been
also called, the New World, because it was not well known until the last Age,
and its bigness has made it pass for the greatest Continent of the Earth.
Sometimes it is called the West Indies, and the Little Indies, to distinguish
it from the East Indies, which are great and part of Asia. Some give it the
Name of the Spanish Indies, because the King of Spain has the greatest and
better part of it in his possession. Thus the Name of Indies is common to two
great Regions; the one in our Continent, the other in the other Hemisphere;
whether they were discovered at the same time; or that in both the Inhabitants
go commonly naked; or that from the one and the other are brought rich and
precious Merchandise and Commodities; or lastly, whether the Pilot Alonze
Zanches d' Andalousia, being the same that saw America, before Columbus, and
left him his Memoirs, did think that it was joined to the Indies of Asia. In
all probability, America is the Atlantic Island of the Ancients: some say that
it is the real Tarsis; which Monarchs, to take from their People the knowledge
of its great Riches, and the desire of trading thither, had given it very
strange Names, calling it Hell, the Elysian Fields, and the Fortunate Islands:
and that for the confounding the Name of Tarsis, they had called by the same
Name several Places of our Continent, where the Merchants had their Banks and
their Correspondencies. Several are persuaded, that the City and Island of
Cadiz are now what was formerly Tarsis. Those Sovereigns pretended there were
Dragons, Infernal Rivers, sometimes a Cherubim with a flaming Sword; which were
probably nothing else than those storms which are frequent in the Torrid Zone,
and the Insults of Corsairs and Pirates, who watched the the coming of the
Galleys and Fleet from Terra firma, to get Booty. Several do assure us, that it
was to the Atlantic Isle, Hanno the Carthaginian went, when he conducted
toward the South West, a Fleet of Sixty Sail, with Thirty Thousand Men. They
also say, That five years afterward, the same Hanno, being returned into his
own Country, prohibited all such Voyages to his Citizens, that their City
might not be depopulated, by their going to dwell there, charmed with the great
Riches that were to be found in those-Countries, for fear the Rebels might make
it an Asile, to the ruin of their State. Those Authors find but little credit,
who undertake to prove by a feigned Medal of Augustus, which was pretended to
be found in those parts, or by a supposed Marble, taken out of the ground in
Portugal, under King Emanuel, with Latin Verses of a forged Sybile, touching
the discovery of this New World. If it be then true, that America was known by
the Ancients, we may say, that the perils People must expose themselves to in
traversing the Seas that are between the two great Continents before they
arrive there, and the little experience the Ancients had in Navigation, did
make 'em abandon the persuit of their Commerce into these Regions; and that had
it not been for the favorable reception that was made by Ferdinand, King of
Arragon and Castile, to Columbus, whose proposal had been rejected by the
Government of Genoa, the Kings of Portugal, and England, we should perhaps be
still to learn, if there was any other Continent than ours.

America is divided into two great parts or Peninsula's, the one Northern,
called Mexicana; the other Southern, called Peruana. This Division is according
to the Isthmus or neck of Land which lies near Panama, and not according to the
Equinoctial Line. The Spaniards had once a design in their heads to cut through
that Isthmus, for the sparing the Charges, which are far greater to them in
that Tract of Land, by the transportation of their Merchandises, when they go
to Peru, or return from thence, than in all the way by Sea they make between
Spain and America, though this way be above two thousand Leagues; But were not
able to bring this Enterprise of theirs about. The Countries of Northern
America, are as you go from the North to the South, Canada or New France,
Virginia, Florida, New Mexico, Mexico or New Spain, and the Islands of the
Antilles. You find in Southern America, all along the Seas, the Terra firma,
where is Castella del Oro, and Guyana, Peru, Chili, Magellanica, Paraguay,
where is Tucuman, and la Plata, and lastly Brasile.

America is environned with the Sea, if it be true, that toward the North West
it is separated from the Land of Jesso by the Streights of Anien. Those who
make it as big as Asia and Africa together, compare its Northern part to Asia,
and its Southern to Africa. It has the advantage of being fertile and temperate,
by reason of its great and goodly Rivers, and of the cool Winds that arise
there, even in the Torrid Zone, where the Inhabitants have not the blackness
which is natural in most of the Africans, and in some Asiaticks of our
Continent, who inhabit under the same Zone. This makes us see, that the most or
the least heat is not always caused by the proximity or remoteness of the Sun,
and that which contributes thereto often is the situation of Places, the
disposition of the Mountains and Valleys, the quality of the Soil, and the
diversity of the Winds which blow in those respective Regions.

The Riches of America are so great, that Spain has drawn out from thence, and
does still draw every year a prodigious quantity of Gold and Silver, of which
many private persons of Europe, both in Peace and War, under diverse borrowed
Names, receive a good share. The Mines of Potosi have always furnished an
immense number of Millions. Never were any Riches comparable to those of
Atabalipa, and of Guainacapa, Kings of Peru, and to the precious Furnitures of
the City of Cusco, It was no extraordinary thing, during the Reign of those
Kings, to see in some Cities of those Countries, Temples Wainscoted with
Silver, and Houses Covered with Sheets of Gold. The Spaniards do affirm, their
King draws from thence every year, above Twelve Millions of Livres, by means of
the Impositions he lays upon Commodities that are transported from those Parts;
As Gold, Silver, Pearls, Emeraulds, Skins, Sugar, Tobacco, Cutchenelle,
Sarzepareilla, Ginger, and several other things. Yet it is made out, that the
first Expense, for the discovery of America, came but to Fifteen Thousand
Ducats, which were advanced to Columbus, by a Secretary of the King of Spain.

The Mexican and Peruvian, were the only Nations amongst the Americans, who had
Cities. These Cities, though built by People we style Salvage and Barbarous,
yielded in nothing to those of Europe, or for bigness or magnificence. No
Horses were in America. An Indian of good sense, reckoned a Horse in the number
of the three things he most esteemed; the two others were, a new laid Egg, and
Light. Horses gave so much terror to the Americans, that for above a hundred
years they could not be prevailed with, to mount 'em. The Inhabitants are of
four sorts, Europeans, Metis, Negroes, and Salvages. Most of the Nations of
Europe have Colonies in this Portion of the World, which for the most part bear
the Names of their respective Provinces and Cities. The Spaniards stand
possessed of the greatest, the richest, and the fertilest Countries of America;
Among others of Mexico and Peru, formerly two famous Kingdoms; the latter
Hereditary, the other Elective: their King pretends a Right to All, by virtue
of the Donative of Pope Alexander the Sixth, in the year 1493. But this other
Nations do not allow of. The Portugneezes have the Coasts of Brasile* The
French have Colonies in Canada, in several Islands, and upon the firm Land: The
English have fair and great Establishments all along the Coasts of Northern
America, and in the Islands: The Metis are those who are born of the Europeans
and Indians. In the Territories, conquered by the Spaniards, they call Crioles,
those who are born of a Spanish Man and Woman, and these are they whom the
Spaniards of Europe have a mortal aversion to, and whom they put by all great
Offices, for fear of a Revolt. The Negroes are transported into America, from
Angola and other parts of Africa, to labor in the Mines, which drudgery the
Americans are not able to support. The Salvages here live commonly on Hunting,
Maiz, Cassave, which is their Corn. They have amongst 'em almost as many
Tongues, as Villages; He who has the use of those of Mexico and Casco, may make
himself understood through all America. This diversity of Tongues, is the cause
that we have little knowledge of their Origin. They are all naturally
dexterous and active, good Runners and excellent Swimmers. Several amongst 'em
live like Beasts, without King, Policy, or Law. The Sun, Moon, nay, and the
Devil too, are considered by them, as so many Divinities: The Soothsayers, who
are very numerous in these parts, keep 'em in these Errors. The Kings of Spain
have caused five Arch-Bishopricks to be erected there, and about thirty
Episcopal Sees. The French have one Bishop in Canada. The Portugueezes have at
this present three in Brasile, under the Archbishop of S. Salvador. The other
Nations, who have Settlements in these Countries, have likewise established
there the Religion they profess.

America is not peopled comparatively with the parts of our Continent; perhaps
by reason of the continual Wars which the Inhabitants wage there against one
another, or else because of the cruel treatments the Indians have received from
the Spaniards: some Authors do attest, they have put to Death there several
Millions of Persons, whether for Religion, or for other Pretexts; and that the
Blood of those who have perished in the, Mines where they have been forced to
labor, would weigh more than the Gold and Silver they have thence extracted.

The Spaniards met with no strong resistance in their Conquests, where they
found none to make head against 'em, but naked People, whose Armies were easily
broken by the Noise only of a Canon-shot, or at the sight of a Horseman. The
poor Indians steadfastly believed, that the Spaniards were the Masters of
Thunder; they thought 'em half Men and half Horses, or some Sea Monsters, when
they saw 'em on Horseback; And when they saw them on board their Ships, eating
Biscuit, and drinking Claret, they said they were descended from Heaven upon a
great Bird; that they eat Stones, and drank Blood.

If we confider the situation of the Islands of that part of the World, we
shall find that California is in the West of Northern America; the New Lands,
the Bermudas, and the Antilles, toward the East.

The Mountains of the Andes Cross all Southern America from the North to the
South. That of Potosi in Peru, is esteemed the richest of all, by reason of its
Silver Mines. The Spaniards would persuade us, that there are others in the
Neighborhood at least as rich.

The North Sea is so called, because it is on the North of the firm Land, which
makes part of the Southern America, and was sooner discovered than the Northern
America; in regard of which it cannot bear the Name of the North Sea. It Is
called the Green Sea toward the Tropic of Cancer, by reason of the Herbs
found there upon the Surface of the Waters. The South Sea is really Southern,
in regard of that North Sea; but if we consider all America, both Northern and
Southern, we shall find that it is Western. It Is often called Pacific, by
reason of its pertinacious Calms, or else because very few Acts of Hostility
are performed there. Between Mexico and the Island of California, it is called
the Vermillion Sea: It hardly receives any considerable Rivers. The Sweet Sea,
which is in Canada, and the Parime Sea, in Southern America, bear the names of
Lakes, because they are in the midst of Lands. Many are of opinion, that by
this Sweet Sea, the Northorn Sea communicates with with the Southern.

Among the Rivers of America, that of Canada, or St. Lawrence, is vulgarly
called the Great River, perhaps for that it receives above two thousand others,
great and small, and that above five hundred Leagues above Quebeck; its source
has not yet been found out: It makes some Lakes grow narrow; sometimes it casts
it self among the Rocks with such impetuosity, that it is impossible to pass
there, by reason of the number of Water-falls, which they call Saults, and
Carriages, because those who mean to go over, must carry their little Boats
upon their shoulders, which they term Canoes. Its ordinary breadth is full
twelve or thirteen Leagues; its depth does often exceed two hundred fathom: it
keeps its Waters clear as far as below Quebeck. The River of Chair, upon the
Confines of the two America's, affords means for the Transportation of
Merchandises from one Sea to the other. L'Orenoyu is the largest of all those
of America. The Amanzon is esteemed the greatest, strongest, and deepest of all
those of these Countries, and one of the fiercest in the World. In the Year
1638. the Portuguese, who were then under the Crown of Spain, remounted it up
as far as Quito in Peru, and came down again the following Year. It has its
Inundations as well as the Nile, whereby the neighboring Country is not
incommoded with Insects: Above a hundred and fifty several Nations have been
observed to dwell in the Neighborhood of this great River, and those which
fall into it. La Plata has its Name from the Mines of Silver which are near it.
Toward its beginning it bears the Name of Paraguay, after having joined that
of Parana; it rowls its Waters for above sixty Leagues, without any mixture:
it is not deep, though toward its mouth it is sixty or eighty Leagues broad, and
ten for the most part of its Course, where after having formed several Islands,
and the greatest Cataract in the World, it keeps its swiftness for above forty
Leagues distance in the Sea. It might contribute much toward the carrying on
the Commerce from one Sea to the other; but the Spaniards do not think fit to
put this Adviso in practice, for fear other Nations might thereby become
acquainted with it, who would make better advantage than they do of such
Discoveries.

Canada.
THe Name of Canada is that which the Canadians gave their Country, through which
passes the greatest River of Northern America, which they call the River of
Canada.

This Country is full of Woods, and the Climate colder than that of France,
though both be in an equal distance from the Equinoctial. Canada furnishes [Us]
with Beavers, Stock Fish, Mouse-skins and Whale-oyl. According to the late
Relation, you cannot go for half a League together along the great River,
without meeting with either another River or a Lake. Wood costs nothing more
than the trouble of cutting it. All these Conveniences would be considerable,
if there happened not from time to time horrible Tempests, which they call
Hurricanes. In the Year 1663. an Earthquake lasted there for above six Months.

The Savages are distributed into several Nations under the Government of their
Sagamos's, who are the eldest of their Families. They wear Vestments of Skins,
almost like to those which our Painters very generously bestow upon Hercules,
or John Baptist. They make use of Bows and Arrows, the points whereof they
garnish with Iron and Fish-bones, and make War by Courses and Surprises. They
are almost most all alike in manners, but are different in tongues; some are
wandering and Vagabonds, others have Villages and settled Abodes; that is to say,
Hamocks, which consist in some Cottages. They live almost all of them without
any care of Futurity, and are very fond of Tobacco. And therefore they call
their Festivals and their Feasts, Tabagies. They can bring but very few men
into the Field, for which reason the Europeans found it no difficult matter to
settle themselves there, though they brought along with them for that purpose,
but very inconsiderable Forces. The French have Forts here for the security of
Commerce, and to put a stop to the Courses of the Savages, who are their
Enemies. The Jesuits, Capuchins and other Religions have their Convents.

Canada contains the following Countries, New France, New Denmark, New Wales,
New Britain, otherwise the Land of Labrador, and Terra Coterialis; Accadia, New
England, and New York, formerly called New Holland. Besides these Countries,
there is that of Saguenay, which receives its name from a River, whose mouth is
not above a quarter of a League broad, but which enlarges it self when you go
up it, and is above two hundred fathoms deep in several places. This
Circumstance has given occasion to some Adventurers to seek a passage there
for the going to China through the Northern Ocean. Quesbeck the Principal Colony
of the Country, Founded in 1608. is the Capital of all Canada, the Residence of
a Viceroy and Bishop. The City is divided into High and Low, with a Fortress
upon the Rock, which commands the great River, that carries the flowing of the
Sea above the City. Tadousac, the three Rivers and Montreal upon the same
River, are three very considerable Colonies of the French. The two best Sea
Ports are Miscou, and the Port Royal of Accadia. As concerning the people, the
Hurons and the Algonquins toward the beginning of the great River, have ever
been friends of the French, the Iroquois are cruel and great Buccaniers, that
is to say, they suck the flesh of their Enemies, they fortify their abodes
with Palisadoes: They have been sturdy Enemies to the French, and have done
them great damage by means of the fire Arms they had from the English and the
Hollanders of their Neighborhood. Yet the French boast that they have
prevailed over them; and that though these Savages have been able to bring
several Troops into the Field without disgarrisoning or emptying their
Retreats, which are inaccessible; they have nevertheless been constrained to
yield to the Arms of France. Their Country is pretty fruitful, seeing it
produces Muscadine Grapes, Lemmons, vence and Melons, even as good as those of
Pro- in France.

The principal Isle of New Foundland, is one of the greatest in the World,
with a great number of Ports, whereof that of Plaisance possessed by the
French, is the best. Heretofore they burnt one part of the Forests of this
Island, to render it the more habitable; But the Rosin and other Gums which ran
into the Sea, were the occasion of the Fishery being spoiled in the
Neighborhood for above seven years. Almost the like thing happened in the Isle
of St. Christophers, when several Ships loaded with Tobacco, perished there;
the strength and bitterness of that Herb poisoning the Fish. France sends every
year a great number of Ships to this Island, which it calls for that reason
Terra Neuviers. The English have likewise fetled themselves here. The Isle of
Cape Breton, has the Port of Chibou in its Eastern parts, which Nature has
formed with all possible advantages for the security of a Fleet.

There is a Shoal and Ridge of Sand on the East of New Foundland, notorious
for the taking of Stockfish, and its extent of two hundred and sixty Leagues,
which has given it the name of the Great Bank. It Is not a Rock as several do
imagine; they call it Bank by reason of the shallowness all along by its side,
in respect of the Depth which is very great in the other parts of that Sea. The
fishing there is of two sorts, The one for Cod, and the other for dry
Stock Fish. The Seamen who Fish there, have at the same time the pleasure of
taking with the Line great Birds, or Fowl, which they call Fauquets and
Happefoyes, which they effect by baiting their Hooks with the Livers of Cods.

Virginia.
VIrginia bears this Name in honor of the most Illustrious and Renowned
Elizabeth, the Maiden-Queen of England. First some French nested themselves in
this Country, but the English were too hard and powerful for them, took
absolute possession of it, in the Year 1584, and have continued in their
settlement there, notwithstanding the loss of five or six Colonies. They have a
Governor, an Admiral, and several particular Officers. This Establishment
facilitates to them the communication of what they have in New England and
Florida. The Air of Virginia which is extremely healthful, produces several
sorts of excellent Fruits. It is somewhat cold, and yet the Inhabitants go
naked: the Oil and the Colors with which they rub themselves, defending them
against the injuries of the Weather. From thence is Exported Tobacco and Silk,
which is drawn from an Herb wholly peculiar to Virginia. They would make us
believe that there is a flying Squirrel, which makes use of its paws as if they
were wings.

The Inhabitants of Virginia love to make good Cheer, are Idolaters, and have
diverse Lords, whom they call Werouns. Their Towns which they surround with
Pallisadoes, have only 18 or 20 Houses. Pomeiock and James-Town, are the
Principal places of this Region. The Bay of Chesapeack is very considerable,
being seventy five Leagues in length, for the most part six or seven broad, and
ten or twelve toward its entrance. The Ships sail up above sixty Leagues, for
it is often fifteen or sixteen fathom deep, and six or seven where it is most
shallow.

The Islands of Barmudas, or Summer Isles, are under the same Crown, and almost
in the same Parallel with Virginia, distant above three hundred Leagues from
the Continent of America. They are several in number around the principal one,
and almost all environed with Rocks, and sufficiently known for the Shipwracks
that happen there. The Merchants bring thence Cocheneal, Tobacco, Pearls, and
Amber; there are found Tortoises of an excessive bigness, and Spiders without
venom, extraordinary large, of a streaked color, which spin Webs capable of
holding little Birds. In the Year 1516. five men being embarked at the Barmudas
in a little Pinnace, traversed above twelve hundred Leagues at Sea, and by a
singular happiness arrived in Ireland. In the Year 1525. a Portuguez who was in
the East Indies, being desirous to do a notable piece of service to his Prince,
undertook a Voyage which was no less perilous; for with a small Gally, but
sixteen foot long, and six-broad, he departed from Cochim, and having traversed
the Occan, and all its particular Seas, at last he arrived at Lisbon, where he
brought the King of Portugal the news of the building a Citadel at Diu; a
piece of news which was agreeably received in that Court.

Florida.
THe Spaniards and French, the Discoverers of this Province, have but very
small knowledge of it, as not having been very far in the Country: the
Spaniards under diverse Leaders, and principally under Soto, made some
Expeditions into it, but both he and most of his men, dyed in the prosecution
of their design. The Name of Florida was given it, either upon the account of
its Flowers which it produces in great abundance, or by reason of the first
Discovery of some of its parts, which was on a Palm Sunday. The French that
settled themselves in that part which lies toward the North-East, had left
there the names of the Scine, Lonaloire, Garrone, Gironde, Chorcute, to the
Rivers they met withal in those parts. But the Spaniards jealous of the French
Names, having given them others, and the English, who have lately settled
several Colonies here, do still at this day Christen them anew. In the Year
1562. John Ribaud caused to be built upon the River of Port Royal, the Fortress
of Charles's Fort, which he called by that Name, in consideration of King
Charles the Ninth of France. Two years after, one Laudonier built the Fort of
Carolina, upon the River of May, (Now, by the way, it is to be observed, that
several Geographers do not give to these two Places their true Position.) Since
which, the French were constrained to abandon 'em, both upon the account of the
Civil Wars which arose in France, and of the jealousy of the Spaniards, who
could not well bear with the Frenchmen having footing in Florida. The Spaniards
made Florida much greater than it really is, for they attribute to it Virginia,
and New France, perhaps not to prejudice the Pretentions of their Sovereign,
who attributes to himself all America, though his Subjects have only appeared in
some of its Provinces: Others give only this Name of Florida to the Peninsula
of Tegesta, which advances to the South, and contributes to form the great and
famous Gulf of Mexico, and the Channel of Bahama. The Air of Florida is so
temperate, that there has been often seen old Men at the Age of Two hundred and
fifty years, whilst the Children of five Generations are all alive at the same
time. The Land is fertile, full of Fruit Trees, and its Towns the best peopled
of all America, having in several places rich Furs, and an immense quantity of
Pearls. Its Mountain Apalatei, produces abundance of Copper: Its principal
River is that of Spirito Sancto, or Chucagua, which falls into the Mexican
Gulf. The Coast is not over convenient for great Ships, because the Sea is but
very shallow. The Inland parts are possessed by the Savages, under the
Government and Jurisdiction of diverse Paroustis or Caciques, who are their
Lords. Relations acquaint us with the Brave Resistance they made against the
Spaniards. These Savages adore the Sun and Moon. Upon the Coast the Spaniard
holds St. Austin, and St. Matthews, two Colonies of small consideration, though
in each there be a Castle. St. Austin is of the greatest importance, by reason
of its Haven, and its nearness to the Channel of Bahama, where the
Spanish-Fleets commonly pass, when with their Cargoes, they return from Havana
into Europe.

New Mexico.
THis Mexico is called New, because it was one of the last Conquests of the
Spaniards in Northern America, not being subdued till after the Year 1583. It Is
the Ancient Mexico, according to some Authors, who say, its Inhabitants people
part of New Spain. The scarcity of Victuals, and other inconveniences of this
Country, have not hindered the Spaniards from going to search for Mines in its
Entrals. The Natives are Idolaters, and call their Chiefs, Caciques. New
Mexico, California, Anien, Quivira, and Cibola, are its principal parts, and
Santafe the most considerable Town. California, on whose Coasts some Pearls are
found, is one of the greatest Islands in the World. Anian gives its Name to a
famous Straight, beyond which is the Land of Jesso. The Wealth of Quivira
consists in certain Bulls or Oxen, which are very benificial to the
Inhabitants; their Flesh is their Food: of their Skins they make Clothes and
Coverings for their Houses; Thread of their Hair; Bow-strings of their Nerves;
Awls and Bodkins of their Bones; Trumpets and Bugles of their Horns; they
preserve Water in their Bladders, and make Fuel of their Dung dried. This
Creature has something of the Lion, the Camel, the Goat, and the Sheep. There
is in Cibola, Grandeda, Acoma, and some other Fortresses upon the Mountains,
with Palisado's and Ditches, which show that the Americans were not ignorant of
the Art of Fortifying such places as they meant (or stood in need) to defend.
Other Enumerations are made of the Countries of New Mexico, but very uncertain
are they: the Inhabitants commonly have no settled abode; give the Names of
their Chiefs to their Villages, and those Names only subsists during the Life
of each of those Leaders.

New Spain.
THe Indians name this Country Mexico, and the Spaniards, New Spain; so that
hereby they call their King, the King of Spains. The Spaniards here established
in this Country several rare Colonies, as in the most considerable of their
Conquests, notwithstanding the misunderstanding that arose between Cortez and
Narvaez their principal Commanders. This Region, though under the Torrid Zone,
seems to enjoy a perpetual Spring, by reason of the purity of its Air, and the
goodness of its Soil. It Is the finest, the most agreeable, and the most
populous of all America: All Northern America is called Mexicana. It has Mines
of Gold and Silver, wherein they work with more ease than in those of Peru: the
Silver that is drawn from thence, is unquestionably the best in the World. It
produces that admirable Plant of Magucaz, which produces small Wine, Vinegar,
Honey, Needles, Thread, Stuffs, and Timber proper for building. It has Cotton,
Hides, Silk, Wool, Balm, Sugar, Salt that is made in its Lakes, and several
sorts of good Fruits. It has all the Commodities of Europe, unless Wine and
Oil. Formerly 'twas an Elective Kingdom, full of great Cities, governed with
great Policy, and its Inhabitants very civil. Its Kings could bring into the
Field, Armies of three or four hundred thousand tall fighting Men. The Kings of
Spain, who have a Viceroy there, whose Residence is in the Castle of Mexico,
have taken care to erect several Bishoprics. The Mexicans are well made,
dexterous in melting their Metals, and in making Pictures of their Feathers,
which they have off their Cincons, small Birds of their Country, which live
only upon Dew. They keep their Balls in the open Field, where it is pleasant to
see 'em Dance, or rather, make Gamboles, and perform the Double Sommerset,
sometimes two or three thousand together.

Formerly the Mexicans divided their Countries into hot and cold. At present
the Spaniards reckon their several small Provinces; as New Galicia, Guadalaira,
New Biscay, Mexico, Mechoachan, Panuco, Jucatan, Guatimala, Honduras,
Nicaregua, Costarica, Veragua, and others. They have established Royal
Audiences, I mean Parliaments, at Mexico, Guadalaira, and Guatimala. There is a
sort of Ravenous Birds in Guadalaira, which are not much greater than our
Sparrows, and nevertheless make a horrible destruction of their Corn: they have
Bees too without stings. The Province of Mexico, properly taken, is that which
lies near the City of Mexico, the greatest, richest and best peopled of all
America. This City suffered a great loss in the Year 1629. all its Digues, and
most of its Houses, having been carried away by the violence of the Waters, its
situation being near a Salt-water-Lake, of about twenty five or thirty Leagues
in circuit, where there enters another Lake of sweet Water. Since that, it has
been rebuilt, and has full a hundred thousand Houses, great and small. Before
the coming of the Spaniard into this Country, there were several places very
considerable near Mexico. Chulula contained above twenty thousand Houses, with
as many Temples as there are days in the year; and its Inhabitants did annually
put to death five or six thousand of their Children, in sacrificing them to
their Idols. Tezeuco was twice as big as Seville in Spain. Queretaro had a
Fountain which would furnish Water for four years together, and cease running
four years after. Los Angelos, upon the way from Vera Cruz to Mexico, is a City
of ten thousand Inhabitants, where is a Bishopric of great Revenue; there is
also a Mint for the coining of Money: Cloth, Hats and excellent Glasses, are
made there too. Acapulco upon the South Sea, with a Fort of five Bastions, is a
Bay of good security, though at the entrance it be but a League in breadth.
Jucatum is a Peninsula between the two Gulphs, where the City of Merida is so
called, upon the account of its ancient Structures and Buildings, which were
found equal to those of Merida in Europe. Tabasco, the first City that made any
defense against the Spaniards, is a Province, where the Inhabitants have great
Privileges, because they contributed much to the Conquest of Mexico. Near
Tabasco, Cortez gained a great Victory in the Year 1518. over Montezuma, the
Ninth and last King of Mexico; We killed there upon the spot above three
hundred thousand Indians. This Land is so fertile, that a Peasant having caused
two Sheep to come thither from Castile, those two Sheep multiplied in such a
manner that there were above forty thousand of 'em in a few years: The Isle of
Cozumel, near the Coast, is famous upon the account of its ancient Idol.
Guatimala produces Balm, Sulphur, Wood, and Cacao, which is a Fruit like to
little Almonds, whereof the Inhabitants make a very delicious Drink. Near
Guatimala, is a Vulcan, that is, a Mountain which casts forth Fire; where a
private person seeking after Treasures, which he fancied there, found the End
both of his Wealth and his Life. The Henduras furnishes Honey, Cotton, Clothes,
and Wool. Niceregua was first of all named the Paradise of Mahomet, by reason
of its fertility, and the quantity of its Gold. Its Lake of a hundred and
thirty Leagues in length, ebbs and flows and disgorges it self into the North
Sea. There was once a design of communicating it with the South Sea, but they
imagined this would cause a great deal of disorder, this Sea being much higher
than the North Sea, because of several Rivers, which have their source in its
Neighborhood, and nevertheless fall into the North Sea. One of the last Kings
of Niceregua, seems to have had some knowledge of the Mysteries of our Faith;
He asked the Spaniards, What they knew of the Deluge? If any was to happen? If
the Sun and Moon won'd one day lose their light? What was the Cause of their
Motion? Whither the Souls went after the separation from their Bodies? If the
Pope and Emperor were immortal? And for what reason they sought after Gold and
Silver with so much Eagerness and so many Perils?

The Caribby Isles, or the Antilles.
UNder the Name of Antilles are generally known, all the Islands of the North
Sea which are between Florida, New Spain, and the Firm-Land of Southern America.

The Luccayes, seem to be so called from that of Lucayonequo. Bahama gives its
name there to a Channel wondrously rapid from the South to the North, and
famous at present for the passage of the Spanish Fleets in their return from
Mexico, and from the Terra Firma of America in Europe. Bimini which is a place
of no easy access, by reason of the Flats and Rocks thereabouts, has had the
renown of having a Fountain which made people young again, because the Women
there were extraordinary Beautiful, and that for their sakes several Men went
to dwell there. Guanahani is that which was first spyed out by Columbus, who
called it San. Salvador, by reason it was the cause of saving him from the
Conspiracy of his Men, who a little before would have cast him into the Sea, as
not in their mind meeting soon enough with those Lands, whereof he had given
them such hopes.

Hispagniola [otherwise Saint Domingo] is the first Country in the New World,
where the Spaniards built Towns and Fortresses. It has abundance of Cattle,
Hides, Cassia, Sugar, and Ginger, Cocheneal, Guiacum, and other Herbs for
Physic and Dying. It has Mines, from whence came the first and finest Gold of
America; Here was found that rare piece of Gold which weighed full thirty seven
pound, and was lost in the way when it was bringing to Spain. It has little
Birds called Cuyeros, which gives such a light in the night time, that by it
one may see ones way plainly, and hunt, and fish, and read and write; and the
Priests make use of them by night instead of Candles to read in their
Breviaries. Amongst the fish that are taken upon that Coast, there is the
Manate, which is a Sea Calf above twenty foot long: the Revers which is very
small, and serves to catch Fish of another sort, by fastening them on the
thorns of its back. St. Domingo, the Metropolis of the Isle Hispaniola, drove
formerly a more considerable Trade than it does at present: The French have
possessed the most Western part of this Island, where they have a great number
of Buccaniers, as well as the little Island la Tortue, which is near it; this
has made the Spaniards change the Course they held when they returned into
Spain. Cuba is more fertile and temperate than Hispaniola. It has Parrots,
Partridges, Turtles, and Gold sand in its Rivers; for which reason, some
Authors have placed here the Country of Ophir, from whence Solomon sent for his
Gold. One of the Caciques or petty Kings of that Island, having made his escape
out of the hands of the Spaniards, told his people that the Gold and Silver of
their Country was the God of their Enemies, since that to possess it, they
sought for it in their very Entrails, and that so to enjoy their own repose,
they must aband on it all to them. Another of those C aciques being Condemned
to be burnt, was solicited by a Priest to turn Christian, that he might go
into Paradise, but he openly protested he would not go thither, since Spaniards
were there too. The poor Savages abhorred them to that degree, that they
abstained from their Wives, that their Children might not become slaves of such
Masters; And when they fell upon them to boucanize them, or to eat their flesh,
it was rather out of revenge, than out of any relish they found therein; for
they frankly said, That the flesh of a Spaniard was too hard, and that to make
it fit for eating, it was first to be souz'd and mollified for two or three
days in Vinegar. St. Jago is the Capital City with a Sea Port, and Havana the
Key and Staple of all the West Indies, the Magazine of the riches of America,
by reason of the situation, the bigness, and convenience of its Harbor, which
can shelter above a thousand Ships. It Is the usual Rendevouze of the Spanish
Fleets when they return into Europe, and is defended by three Castles, whose
strength is compared by the Spaniards to that of the Cittadels of Antwerp and
Milan. Yet for all this, the English plundered the City in the Year 1662. The
Port de Matanzas is the same where in the Year 1629. Peter Hein a Hollander,
made himself Master of the Spanish Fleet, which was prodigiously rich. Jamaica
now belonging to the English, who have settled themselves there, since the Year
1655. has three small Cities, whereof Seville is the most considerable. It
produces so much Yuca whereof Cassia is made, that it passes for the Granary of
the Antilles. The Civil Wars of the Spaniards in America began in this Island,
where Christopher Columbus to free himself out of danger foretold the Savages
an Eclipse of the Moon with as much prudence as success. These Savages had
Letters missive in admiration, thinking one must necessarily partake of
Divinity, to discover by a scrowl'd paper ones sentiments to another a great
way off. Porto-rico with the City, of St. John, has Sugar, Ginger, Cassia and
Skins; this is the Island where the Spaniards passed for immortals, till one
Salsedo was drowned, at the Passage of the River Guarabo.

The Caribby Islands are twenty eight principal Ones, possessed for the most
part by Europeans, sometimes they have been called by the Name of Camereanes,
and because they are more Eastern, and as in the head of the Others, they have
had particularly attributed to them that of the Antilles, which seems ought to
be common to all the Neighboring Islands. They enjoy so temperate an Air, that
they feel there no excessive heats, nor do they ever see any Ice. There is
indeed but three Seasons, the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, unless we give the
name of Winter to the rainy Season. They have all manner of good Pulse very
plentifully; but their Corn does not attain to its maturity, and can only serve
to make Green-sawce of. There are Trees which produce excellent Fruits, and
others which furnish Wood for Physic, for Dying, for the Carpenters use, and
Wainscotting. Those parts of these Islands go under the Name of Cabissi-terre,
which have the Cape to the Wind, which in those parts blows almost always from
the East: and Buss-terre is called what is toward the West. They name the
little Mountains Marnes, the Villages Carbets, the great Winds of short
continuance, Rufales; and those that take their Turn around the Horizon,
Huricanes. These Hurrycanes often cause great disorders: They commonly happen
at the times of the Equinox upon the Eastern Coasts. The Pilots foreseeing
them, get their Ships off from the Shore. Saint Christophers has Colonies of
the French, who in the Year 1627. shared it with the English, establishing
Customs, which have since been received in the Neighboring Islands: No place
is there out of France, where the French have a greater Establishment; Its
Governor is said to be able to bring seven or eight thousand Foot into the
Field, besides several Troops of Horse; and they have four good Forts.
Martinico has about 1000. French, besides Indians, and Negroes in great
numbers. Guadaloupa, vulgarly Gardeloupa, furnishes fresh Water to the Ships
that come from Europe. It has made great advantage of the ruins of the Dutch
Colony of Recif in Brafil. This occasioned its being Cultivated with Sugar
Canes, whereby it has profited more than by the Tobacco Trade, drove before.

Barbados.
Barbados is one of the best of the Antilles, and the most considerable of
them, which the English possess. They have there above twenty thousand
Inhabitants beside the Savages and Slaves, who are full as many again. It has
two or three small Hills which are very fruitful, and fit for Culture, to the
very top. This Island is divided into a Eleven Precincts or Parishes, in which
are fourteen Churches and Chapels, and is throughout beset with Houses, and no
great distance from one another, so full of Planters is it; but the principal
Towns are St. Michaels, formerly called the Bridge-Town, or Indian-Bridge,
situate at the bottom of Charles le Bay, in the Southern part of this Isle.
This Bay is in the form of a Crescent, very capacious, deep, and secure for
Ships; being big enough to secure five hundred Vessels at once from all storms.
The Town is long, containing several Streets, and adorned with abundance of
well built Houses, being the place of Residence of the Governor, or His
Deputy, where the Courts of Judicature are kept. It has two strong Forts
opposite to each other for its defense, and the security of the Ships, but the
Town is ill seated, the Ground being lower than the Banks of the Sea; Little
Bristol formerly Sprights Bay, situate about four Leagues from St. Michael, a
commodious Road for Ships, well frequented, and defended by two strong Forts,
St. James, formerly called the Hall, seated not far from Bristol, here is a
good Road for Ships also, and is a place of considerable Trade, Also
Charlestown, about two Leagues from St. Michael, where are kept weekly
Markets, and Monthly Courts for the Precincts; there are also several good Bays
belonging to this Island, as Fowle-Bay, Austins-Bay, Maxwel-Bay, etc. and here
are diverse Caves, some of which are very deep, and large enough to hold five
hundred men, and those Caves are often the Sanctuaries of such Negro slaves as
run away, and it is supposed that these Caves were the Habitations of the
Natives. The Riches and Commodities of the Island, consist in Indico, Cotton,
and Ginger in great abundance, Logwood, Fustick, Lignumvitae, and Sugars,
whereof there is so great a quantity, that they freight above a hundred Ships
with it every year; the Inhabitants truck it for other Commodities at the rate
of thirty shillings the Quintal; this Isle is so very fertile that it bears
Crops all the year long. The Trees, Fields and Woods, being always in their
Summer Livery. They have here in their Seas several sorts of Fish, as Cavalos,
Cong-fish, Green Turtles, etc. which of all other are the most delicious, with
several other sorts appropriate to this and the rest of the Caribby Isles; Here
are also almost all sorts of English Herbs and Roots, and several sorts of
Fowls, and great variety of small Birds; but no Beasts or Cattle, but what are
tame and imported as Camels, Horses, Asnegroes, Oxen, Bulls, Cows, Sheep,
Goats, and Hoggs in great plenty; here are also Snakes a yard and a half long,
Scorpions as big as Rats and Lizzards, but neither of them hurtful to Man or
Beast, Musketoes, Cock-Roches and Merry-Wings, which are very troublesome in the
night in stinging, and here are Land Crabs in great abundance, which are found
good to eat; and a small Fly called Cayo, whose Wings in the night, as it
flies, affords a mighty luster, and the Indians do commonly catch them, and tie
them to their hands and feet, and make use of them instead of Comets which are
forbidden them; here are also abundance of Fruits, as Dates, Oranges,
Pomgranates, Citrons, Lemmons, Icacos, Cherries, Raisins, Indian Figgs,
Pine-Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies, with several other sorts; and for
Trees here are great varieties fit for several uses, as the Locusts, Mastick,
Red-wood, the Prickle Yellow-wood, Ironwood-tree, Cedar, Cassia Fistula,
Colloquintida, Tamorins, Cassary, Poyson-tree, Physick-Nut, Calabash, the
shells of which Tree serves them for Troughs, to carry liquid things in, and
the Roneon, of whose Bark is made Ropes, and also Flax, Lignum-vitae, with
several others: The other Antilles Islands which are Inhabited, have Colonies
either of English, French, or Hollanders.

There are some other Isles along the Coasts of Terra-firma; which are called
Sotavento, because that in respect of the others which are on the North-East,
and which go under the Name of Barlovento, they are below the Wind which blows
commonly from the East to the West. Margareta, and Cubagua, had formerly the
Fishing of Pearls, which proved very profitable to the Spaniads, having used
all imaginable stratagems to Fish there for those Oysters, wherein they found
the Pearls. Tobago, which has given its name to Tobacco, or else has received
its own from that weed, has a Colony of Zelanders. Tobacco was formerly called
the Nicotion Herb, by reason one Doctor Nicot was the first who introduced the
use of it into Europe. Those who called it the Queens Herb, gave it that name,
as having been first presented to a Queen of Spain.

Castella Aurea.
CAstella Aurea, so called from the Gold which the Spaniards found there in so
great abundance, that in the Year 1514. several of their Countrymen would
needs go thither, in the Opinion that it was there to be Fisht for with Nets.
Its Inhabitants eat Crocodiles and Serpents, whose flesh they find very
delicate Food. The Spaniards have there several Provinces, Terra-firma,
Cartagena, Sancka Martha, the Rio de la Hacha, Venezuela, New Andalousia,
Popayen, and the New Kingdom of Granada.

The Terra-firma lies near the Isthmus, which joins the two America's. It is
different from the great Terra-firma which makes part of the Northern America
upon the North Sea. Its called so as being the first Land of the Continent of
America that was discovered after the Islands. Its City of Panama upon the
South Sea, is the Storehouse, or Magazine of the Gold and Silver of Peru,
which is afterward carried by Land to Porto Belo, which is sixteen or eighteen
Leagues from thence, upon the North Sea, which is much augmented from the ruins
of the City of Nombre de Dios, which the ill Air had caused the Spaniards to
abandon. At Porto-Belo, this Gold and Silver is put on board of Ships, which
carry it into Spain. In the way from Panama to Porto-Belo, they have the
convenience of the River of Chagre, if they please to make use of it, and then
departing from Panama, you have but five Leagues by Land; after which they
Embark upon that River. By the same way do they bring their Merchandises out of
Spain into Peru. In the Year 1668. the English plundered Porto Belo, and
exacted very considerable sums from the Spaniards before they would restore it
them. The Buccaniers and other Privateers have done the like. Cartagena affords
Balm, Rosin, and several sorts of Gums. Its Inhabitants had formerly peculiar
places, whither they carried the Bodies of their Dead, with their Gold, their
Necklaces, and other most precious Ornaments: The Spaniards to take advantage
of this, have shown those Relics the light for the second time; the City which
is in a Peninsula, has had its Name from the resemblance of its Harbor, with
that of Cartagena in Europe. It Is one of the best of America, the Rendezvouze
of the Fleets which come from Cadiz for the Terra-firma. Sancta Martha produces
almost all the sorts of Fruits that are had in Spain; and there you see the
beginning of those High Mountains, which under the Names of Andes, advance
toward the South. The Rio de la Hacha, no longer affords the fishing of Pearls
in its Neighborhood. Venezuela had this Name from a Town that was found built
there upon Piles of Wood in the midst of Waters. When this Country was
Discovered, the Germans to whom Charles the Ninth had engaged it, had a design
to build a City at the mouth of the Lake Macaraybo, upon the model of that of
Venice, but in a little while after they changed their design, and chose rather
to return into their Country; New Andalousia is otherwise called Paria from
its great River; Its Coast as well as that of Venezuela, goes under the name of
Costa de las Perlas, by reason of the Pearl-fishing that is there, since they
have ceased so doing in the Neighborhood of the Isles of Margaretes and
Cabagna. Some Indians maintain and defend themselves there still against the
Spaniards; and most of the Sea Towns have often been pillaged and plundered by
the English. That of Comana has Salt Pits in its Neighborhood. The Country
and City of Popayen have kept the Name of their last King.

The New Kingdom of Granada, which was discovered by one Ximanes a Granadian,
furnishes Silver, Copper, Iron, and Emeralds. There was formerly one brought
from hence to Philip the Second, King of Spain, that the Goldsmiths could not
sufficiently esteem the value of it: It was put into the Treasury of the
Escurial.

Guayna.
THis Country has been named by some, the Savage Coast, the Country of the
Amazons, El-Dorado, and Guayna; this last Name, which is Indian, has prevailed
over the rest. L'Orenoque bounds it on the West, the Amazon River on the East,
the North Sea on the North, and the high Mountains toward the South; and all
these bounds leave it a figure, which approaches very much to Oval. L'Oronoque,
called also Paria, which in the Indian Tongue, signifies River, does often
constrain its Inhabitants, by its over-flowings, to make lodgings upon Trees,
which resemble the Nests of great Birds. Amongst other Rivers of Guayna,
Surinam is the most Navigable: Cayenne forms the Island of the same Name.

At the Mouth of these Rivers, and all along the Coast, which is generally low,
and extends above two hundred and fifty Leagues, there are several Colonies of
English, French, and Hollanders.

The Territories that lie near the Lake Parima, which is in the midst of
Guayna, are said to acknowledge for their Sovereign, a a Successor of
Guainacapa, of the Family of the Incas of Peru, and compose the true Kingdom of
the Golden King. The rest drawing toward the Sea, is possessed by diverse
Nations, who are Idolaters, and obey the most ancient of their Families. Some
Relations make mention of Amazons inhabiting there, or rather great Women, who
make War with an admirable Dexterity and Valor; that those of the Isle of
Arowen, which is at the Mouth of the Amazon River, go particularly under that
Name, by reason of their long Hair: that there are some Nations in those Parts,
where they truck their Women, and where the Men commonly seek after the oldest,
because they are more laborious, and fitter than the young for the management
of their business.

The Inhabitants of Guayana are long lived, by reason of the good Air they
breath. The East Winds are regular there; and it is never excessively hot or
cruelly cold. There are places proper for the Cultivating of Manioc, for
Cotton, for Sugar and Tobacco, and others, which furnish Gums, Timber, Precious
Stones of several sorts, Parrots and Monkeys. Hunting and Fishing are here
equally useful and pleasant.

Manoa, near the Lake Panima, the principal City of Guayna, is called Eldorado,
by reason of the quantity of Gold, which is said to be there so great, both in
Coin, Plate, Armor, and other Furniture, that the Inhabitants make their Arms
of it, cover their Bodies with it, after having rubbed them with Oil or Balm:
from whence it comes, that people would make this Town pass for the Richest in
the World.

The Island Cayene, the principal Colony of the French in those parts, is
sixteen or seventeen Leagues in circumference, whereof it presents five to the
Sea, the rest is between the arms of the River of the same Name. It has several
Hills and Meadows which are there called Savanes.

Peru.
PERV is so considerable a Region, that the Spaniards thought fitting to
comprehend under that Name, all the other parts of Southern America. It is
almost all under the Torrid Zone, and yet it has not the Qualities of the
Countries of our Hemisphere, that are in the same Zone. There are three sorts
of Countries very different from one another, the Plain, the Mountainous, and
the Andes. The Plain, which borders upon the Sea, and where it hardly ever
rains, is sandy, and subject to Earthquakes, and but ten or twelve Leagues in
breadth. The Mountainous, which has full twenty, consists in Valleys, in Hills,
and Mountains, where it is very cold. The Andes, that are as broad as the
Mountainous part, and where there be almost always continual Rains, are
Mountains excessively high, and nevertheless fertile and well peopled: so as
under the Name of Peru, many more Territories have been contained than those
that have been conquered.

The Spaniards have a Vice Roy in this Country, where they have particularly
fortified Arica, as a Seaport, whether are brought the Commodities of Lima,
and the Riches of Potosi. They invaded this Kingdom under Pizarra, in the Year
1525. the Civil Wars which followed, did for some time retard the absolute
Conquest. The Indians not being able to defend themselves, pay them Tribute.
The King of Spain draws immense Sums from the Mines of Peru; the principal
Towns have almost all of 'em some, and the Fond of Earth is there often of Gold
and Silver; for which reason Peru is without contradiction, the richest
Country in the World. It is certain, that the Spaniards brought from thence to
the value of above twenty Millions of Ducats, in the first Voyage they made
thither. The security of the Ways is so great, that Commodities often to the
worth of three or four hundred thousand Ducats are frequently conducted under
the Convoy only of four Musketeers.

The Incas had reigned hereditarily in Peru for above three hundred years,
before the coming of the Spaniards. They had caused there to be made two Royal
Highways, the one in the Plain, where they were at great Charges in settling
the Sand; and the other in the Mountains, where it was necessary to fill up
several Valleys. These Ways were each of 'em five hundred Leagues in length,
and there were Houses where Travelers were entertained by the Inhabitants,
with all the care and civility imaginable. The same Incas had also caused
Temples to be built to the Sun, to the Moon, and the Stars, which they called
the Moons Waiting Gentlewomen, to Lightning, to Thunder, and the Rainbow,
which they said was the Executioner of the Kings Justice. Some say, that their
Policy resembled in some manner that of the Greeks and Romans; that their
Government was full of Ease, Franchises, and Liberality. They divided the World
into three parts, High, Low, and Subterranean, signifying thereby, Heaven,
Earth, and Hell. Atabalippa, one of the last of those Incas, said, The Pope was
not wise, to give away what belonged not to him; and that he the said
Atabalippa, had right to prefer the Divinity of the Sun, before that of a
Crucified Man: He likewise threw down upon the ground a Breviary that was
offered him, because it spoke not a word, and they had made him hope it would
tell him fine things. This unhappy Prince having been defeated and taken by the
Spaniards at Camamalca, offered as much Gold as a Room seven and twenty foot in
length could hold, seventeen in breadth, and proportionably high, to the half
of its height: Notwithstanding which, he was put to death, as a Conspiratour
and a Tyrant. It is not to be wondered at the abundance of the Incas Gold and
Silver, since they had in Gold all the Animals and Plants they had the
knowledge of, and had Temples, where they placed a number of Statues of pure
Gold, and an infinite company of Precious Stones: those rich Fabrics have been
demolished by the Spaniards, in hopes of finding Gold in the Materials and
joining of the stones, which were cemented with it, though they were of a
prodigious bigness.

The Provinces of Peru, are Quito, los Reyes, los Charcas, la Sierra. Quito has
a great deal of Gold, Cotton, and Medicinal Herbs, and a Town of the same Name,
the ancient abode of the Inca Guainacapa. The Province de los Reyes, has the
finest Cities of the Country, Lima and Cusco. Lima is new, and one of the best
of all America: Its great Trade, as well as the Residence of the Viceroy, and
of the Archbishop, have rendered it the Capital of Peru. Callao, a Seaport
Town, two Leagues from Lima, is capable of receiving and securing several
Ships. Cusco, built four hundred years before the Spaniards took it, is very
Populous, because the Kings kept commonly their Court there, and obliged the
Caciques, or Lords of the Country, to build each a House there, and make it
the place of their Childrens Residence. There is in the Province de los
Charcas, the Cities de la Plata, and Petosi; this last, one of the best
inhabited in all the West Indies: It has all the Conveniences and Delights of
Life; and for that reason several persons go to dwell there. The Silver Mines
of its Mountain are really the richest in the World; they are in no wise
subject to the Inconveniences of the Waters, which commonly incommode other
Mines. The King of Spain drew thence formerly every year above a Million of
Ducuts for his Fifth; but since, they are much diminished. The Spaniards are
not sparing of proclaiming from time to time the discovery of other Mines in
their Provinces of America.

Chili.
CHili derives its Name from that of one of its Valleys, or from the Cold which
people suffer in its Mountains, that environ it toward the North and East. The
difficulty of passing through these Mountains, obliges the Spaniards of Peru,
when they go thither, to take their way by Sea: They have had it in possession
since the year 1554. Some parts of this Country are so fruitful and pleasant,
chiefly to'wards the Seacoasts, that there are none of all America that better
resemble those of Europe, which we esteem the finest. They have Ostridges,
Copper, and the purest Gold in the World: there are so many Mines of that
precious Metal, that Chili is compared to a golden Sheet, which has made the
King of Spain resolve to keep it; though what he holds there, costs him more to
defend, than the rest he has in America. The Cold is excessive. Almagre lost
more Men and Horses by the Cold, than by the Sword. At the four Months end,
after he had invaded this Country, they found some of his Troopers dead, in
the same posture, and as fresh as if they had but just mounted on Horseback.
The Rivers only run in the day time, and remain frozen during the night. This
does not hinder, but there are a number of Vulcano's, or Mountains belching
forth fire. The Spaniards have a Governor, who depends on the Viceroy of
Peru. The Arauques made such a Resistance against them, that in the year 1641,
they were constrained to make Peace with them. There is not in all America a
more Warlike and Valiant People than these Arauques; they know how to make
Swords, Muskets, and Cuirasses: they have the dexterity to draw up in Battle,
to Attack, fight in a Retreat, to Encamp advantagiously, to build Forts, and
they put in practice most of the stratagems of War; which they have learnt in
having seen them but once used. They have often surpised and ruined Cities,
massacred Garrisons; they have also demolished the Fortresses of Arauco, Turen,
Tucapel: An Arauque makes no difficulty to attack a Spaniard.

San Jago, the Conception, and the Imperial, are the principal Cities of Chili:
San Jago has its Seaport, called Valparaiso: the Conception is the abode of
the Governor, by reason of the Neighborhood of the Arauques. La Mocha, at
five Leagues distance from the Terra firma, is a small Isle, where the Ships go
often to take in fresh Water, and where several Inhabitants of Chili have taken
refuge, to exempt themselves from the rigor of the Spanish Yoke.

Magellanica.
MAgellanica is at the point of Southern America, near the Streights of
Magellan. It Is sometimes called Chica, and the Country of the Patagons. It Is is
a Land very poor and subject to cold, by reason of its high Mountains, whereon
Snow is almost ever lying. The Natives dwell in Dens, where they adore the
Devil, for fear he should do them some mischief. The English, Spaniards, and
Hollanders, have given very different Names to the places to which they have
resorted. The Spaniards, in the time of their King Philip the Second, built
Ciudad del Rey Filippe, and some other Fortresses at the Eastern entrance of
the Straight of Magellan, with design to hinder their Enemies from passing into
the South Sea; But the Channel was found too large for the compassing such an
Enterprise, and the want of Victuals caused that Colony to perish there. So
that Ciudad was called Puerto del fame. The Haven of St. Julian, where Magellan
wintered and punished his Mutineers, and the wished for Haven, are upon the
Eastern Coast. Here is Sweet Water, wherewith most Ships have provided
themselves, as those of Magellan, Drake, Candish, Olivier de Nort, le Maire,
Schouten, and others, that have touched there. The Spanish Relations affirm,
there are Men called Patagons, ten foot high, that will thrust Arrows of two
foot and a half long, down to the bottom of their stomach, and drew 'em out
again, without receiving any harm; that eat at one Meal, a great Basket full of
Biscuit, and drink as much Wine, as a Horse can drink Water; that one alone can
carry a Tun of Wine; that three or four of 'em can launch a Ship into the Sea;
that they run as swift as Staggs; and lastly, that fifty Spaniards can hardly
bind one of these Patagons. The English, who have since landed in Magellanica,
relate things quite contrary to what is before specified, and say, that the
Inhabitants there are not bigger than the Europeans.

Tucuman.
TVcuman is a temperate Country, interlaced with several Rivers, which after
having watered the Plains, fall into the great River de la Plata. Its
Inhabitants are docible, and ingenious, being more given to Peace, than War;
the Spanish Captain, who subdued them, stood in no need of very considerable
Troops for that purpose. They obey Caciques, their Lords; their Riches consist
in Cattle. The Spaniards have there a Governor, and their principal Town is
San-Jago d' El-Estero. Cordoua is the next best Town of Tucuman. Chaco and
Trapalanda, are two of its principal Countries. Its People, Quirandies, toward
the Southern part, have much of the Scythian humor; they have their moveable
Habitations, and have always made a great resistance against the Spaniard.

La Plata.
THe Name of La Plata was given by the Spaniards to this Country, and a great
River which waters it, in consideration of the Silver they received there, and
of the Mines they found. This Country is pleasant and fertil^: It has a good
Corn-Soil, Vineyards, fruitful Trees, and Cattle in abundance. It has a Rock,
which by Antithesis is called Poor. Several Europeans have had a passionate
desire to settle themselves here, in hopes of finding great Treasures. The King
of Spain is acknowledged in most of the places of De la Plata: Wherefore in the
year 1680, the Colonies of the Country sent Men to hinder the settlement of
the Portuguese in the Isles S. Gabriel, near Buenosaires. The Spanish Governor
has his Residence in the City of the Assumption, wherein there is a Garrison.
The true Paraguay is toward the beginning of the great River of the same Name,
which in our Tongue signifies the River of Feathers. Parana is along the River,
which has Cataracts, or falls of Water, near two hundred Yards high.
Buenos-aires is one of the best Spanish Colonies, by reason of the Commerce it
drives in Brasile, from whence it receives the Merchandises of Europe; which
has invited the Spaniards of Potosi to go often thither to furnish themselves
with Necessaries, in exchange for their Ingots of Silver, notwithstanding the
rigorous Prohibitions of their King, whose Rights are lost by these means. A
Proposal was made to his Catholic Majesty, to have his Silver of Peru brought
this way, which is much nearer and shorter than that of Panama: But he thought
not fitting to consent to it, for fear his Subjects should communicate their
Commerce of Silver with the Portuguese of Brasile. The Inhabitants have great
Trees, which they call Zaines, whereof they make Boats all of a piece. They
show the right ways to several places by the felling of Trees: and as those
Trees are some green, others either black, yellow, or red, the Forests are
agreeably diversifyed by them. The Orechons are there remarkable for the
bigness of their Ears. According to the Relations of the Year 1627, there are
in La Plata, People more Civilized, and more succeptible of our Arts and
Religion, than in the other parts of America; they say that according to a
Tradition, left their Forefathers by St. Thomas, whom they call St. Sum,
Priests should come into their Country with the Cross to instruct them, and
teach them their salvation.

Brasile.
BRasile has its Name common with a sort of Wood, which it furnishes in
abundance. It was called the Country of the Holy Cross, when discovered in the
Year 1501, in the Name of the King of Portugal. It extends along the North Sea
toward the North. It has great Rocks under Water, whose Mouths make several
good Harbors. Its Bounds toward the West are unknown; those it has toward
the South, are placed diversely according to the will of the Castilians and
Portuguez, who explain, their own way, the Regulation of the Year 1493, Each
pretending the Possession of the River La Plata, with that of the Molucco
Islands, and causing Geographical Cards to be made for that purpose to their
own advantage. By the Regulation above mentioned, Alexander the 6th, whom
Sixtus the 5th Lists in the Rank of the three greatest Popes of the Church,
invested Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isabella Queen of Castile his Wife, in
all the Lands, which they should cause to be Discovered on the West of a Line,
which was imaginarily to be drawn from one Pole to the other, a hundred Leagues
beyond the Islands Azores: What was to Discover on the East of that Line, was
to belong to the King of Portugal. Now the difficulty was in the Execution: the
Castilians would reckon those hundred Leagues, from the most Western of the
Azores; the Portuguese, from the most Eastern, with design of making pass, for
what they abandoned within the Deserts of America, the rich Possession of the
Molucco's, which since was pawned to their King, by the Emperor Charles V. for
Three hundred and fifty thousand Ducats. In short, these two Nations not
agreeing in this affair, no more than in several others, the Portuguez
reckoned, as Brasile, all that extends, from the River Maranon, unto that of La
Plata, and the Spaniards placed the Southern Bounds of it at the Capitania of
St. Vincent. In the Year 1680. the Portuguezes have shown, by their Descent
into the Islands of St. Gabriel, that they mean not to abate the least of their
Pretensions.

Though Brasile be under the Torrid Zone, its Air is temperate, its Waters the
best in the World; Its Inhabitants live often a hundred and fifty years and
more. Besides the Woods of Brasile, there is Amber, Balm, Tobacco, Whale-Oyl,
Cattle, Confitures; Sugar in abundance, the Engines with which they prepare it,
being of great value. There are such Animals, Trees, Fruits, and Roots, as are
not seen in other parts. The Serpents Adders, Water-Snakes and Toads, have no
Venom, and serve for Food for the Inhabitants. The Fields are destined to
Sugars, the Mountains for Woods, and the Valleys for Tobacco, for Fruits and
for Mandioche, which is a kind of Root, which the Inhabitants make their Bread
of. In this Region is an Herb, called Viva, which if touched, will shut up as a
Dazy in the night, and will not open till the Party, that injured it be out of
fight. Most of the Towns are not of above a hundred, or an hundred and twenty
Houses.

The Coast of Brasile is divided into fourteen Praefectures, or Lordships,
which are called Capitania's, and belong at present all to the Portuguese. In
the Year 1654, the Hollanders lost all they had Conquered in these parts, the
War they had then with England not suffering them to send succors thither, and
the Portuguese Colonies were there much better established than theirs. In the
Year 1662, the Portuguese entered into Treaty with them, to give them
satisfaction, that they might not have them their Enemies, at the same time
they were to defend themselves against the Spaniards. Amongst the Capitanias,
Tamuraca is the most ancient, though the smallest: Fernambuca is esteemed a
Terrestrial Paradise, by reason of the Beauty of its Territory. Bahia de todos
os Santos, to the City of San-Salvador, at present an Archbishops See, and the
Residence of the Governor: It was taken in the Year 1624, by the Hollanders,
who got such a Booty there, that each Soldier had for his share above fifteen
thousand Crowns: This good fortune occasioned their Retreat, and their Retreat
gave occasion to the Spaniards and Portugueses to retake it. The Capitania of
Rio-Janeiro, which the Savages call Ganabara, has a great resort of Ships by
means of a Navigable River, or rather of an Arm of the Sea which advances full
twelve Leagues within the Land and is seven or eight in Breadth. In the Year
1658, a Mine of Silver was found in the Capitania. The City of Santos can
receive Ships of two hundred Tun by means of its River.

As concerning the inward part of Brasile, it is not much known; but what is
known, take as follows; The Inhabitants there go naked for the most part, and
have the dexterity of passing great Rivers by the help of a Panyer, and a Rope.
Three Letters of our Alphabet, are of no use amongst them, F, L, R; Some say,
its because they have neither Faith, nor Law, nor Ruler. The Principal nations
amongst them are, the Toupinambous, the Morguices, the Tapuyes, and others who
differ in Manners, and in Language, and commonly are distinguished by diverse
Head-Gears, and Forms of Hair they wear. Their number was much greater before
the coming of the Portuguese among 'em; several Toupinambous, to preserve their
freedom, have traversed great Deserts, and are gone to dwell near the River
Maranhaon. The Tapuyes are more hard to be Civilized, than the Brasilians who
inhabit Aldea's. These Aldea's are Villages, which have but five or six Houses,
but very long, and each capable of containing five or six hundred Persons. Most
of the Inhabitants of Brasile have made a brave Defense, notwithstanding the
Wars they make among themselves; they have hindered the Europeans from making
any progress in the Inlands of their Country, and have often ruined the Towns
and Sugar-Engines, which the Christians had made along the Coast.

Africa.
THat, which the Romans called Africa, was known among the Greeks under the
Name of Libya. Thus these two Nations styled the Provinces that were opposite
to them toward the South, on the other side of the Mediterranean Sea, and
these Names were afterward communicated to the rest of Africa: The Writers of
Holy Matters call it the Country of Cham, because that, in the Division made by
the Children of Noah, it fell to Cham's share.

Africa is a great Peninsula, which represents in some manner the Figure either
of a Heart, Pyramid, or Triangle. Those who compare it to a Bow, say that the
Cape of Sierra-Leona, and that of Good Hope, are the two ends of it; that the
Isle of St. Thomas in the Ethiopick Sea, is the Middle of the string where they
put the Arrow, whose Heel they place at the Isthmus of Sues in Egypt.

This part of the World advances thirty five Degrees beyond the Equator, and as
many on this side the same Line, and yet the Inhabitants of the Southern parts,
are much blacker, and less Politic than those of the Northern. Its length is
from West to the East, from Cape Verd, to that of Guardafuy, which are above
two thousand Leagues distant from one another: Eighteen hundred are reckoned
from Cape Boa, toward the midst of the Coast of Barbary, as far as the Cape of
Good Hope.

The Portuguese were the first who discovered the African Coasts upon the
Ocean. Some say, it was first sailed round under the Ptolemeys, others that
Solomon sent Fleets to Ophir, which having been fitted out in the Red Sea,
returned to Joppa in the Holy Land, by the Mediterranean Sea. Three famous Seas
serve for its Bounds, as the main Ocean, the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea.
The Ocean communicates it self to the Mediterranean Sea, by the Streights of
Gibraltar, and to the Red Sea, by that of Babel-Mandel. Several Opinions walk
about touching the rise of the Name of the Red Sea; the Vulgar believe this Sea
to be so called by reason of its red sand: some assert, that the reflection of
the Mountains, which seem reddish, burnt, and glowing, communicates that Color
to it: Others attribute it to the Rain-Waters, and to those of a Fountain,
which run into that Sea from the Coasts of Arabia. Probably this Name of Red,
and that of Rubrum, which the Latins, have given the Gulf of Arabia, came from
that of Erithrean, which is Greek, and was peeuliar to that Gulf, which was
known to us sooner than the other parts of the Erithrean Sea. The Red Sea is
very long and narrow, full of Rocks, and divided into three Channels according
to its length: The middle one, called the Long Sea, is from twenty five, to
fifty Fathoms deep, Navigable by night and day; the two others, along the
Shoars, are so full of Rocks, small Islands, and Woods, that they are only to
be sailed in the day time, nor that neither, without having Pilots, which are
taken at Babel-Mandel, or Zeilan. This Sea receives no considerable Rivers.
There is green and red Corral, and they fish and take some Pearls, near the
Island Dalaca. The ebbing and flowing is so great, that some Naturalists have
affirmed, that the Children of Israel past it dryfoot, during the Ebb, and that
the Egyptians, having not well nicked their time, were overtaken and lost by
the return of the Tide. But the Holy Scripture tells us, that the Sea divided
it self for the facilitating the passage to the Israelites, and the Arabians
still show the place of their passage between Azirut and El-Tor.

The greatest Rivers of Africa, are the Nile and the Niger. The Nile according
to the newest Relations, has its Sourse in Abyssinia, at twelve Degrees of
Northern Latitude; and runs a Course of full five hundred Leagues, after having
passed through the Lake Bar-Dambea. Its Cataracts, or Water-falls, are toward
its Source, and in the Confines of Aethiopia and Egypt; its Mouths make their
influx into the Mediterranean Sea out of Egypt, where the Ancients have left
seven, and the Neotericks four: Though, indeed, there are but two of them now,
unless there is an Inundation. Its Waters enrich and fatten the Land, and
nourish Egypt, by their regular Overflowing. Its ufual height and increase is
to sixteen Cubits: more or less proves inconvenient. It is to be perceived by
the retreat of the Cattle by the marks which are in the Pits, and by the
heaviness of the Rivers Mud, which they expose in the night out of doors, to
receive moisture or Dew, which precedes and foreshews this Overflowing. The
cause of it has been diversely alleged; some have said this River communicates
its self with the Ocean, by the Lake and River of Zaire: and that the storms of
the Sea cause its Waters to swell: Others affirm, that the sand, which gathers
toward its Mouths, stops them, and that the Northerly Winds drove them up.
Several Moderns believe that these Waters increase from the thawed Snow, and
from the Rains, which fall regularly, and abundantly in Ethiopia. It has lately
been found out, that the Nitre, wherewith the Nile abounds so much, is the
cause of all these wonderful effects, and that being heated by the Sun, it
mingles it self with the Water, renders it troubled, swells it, and makes it
pass over its Banks, insomuch that the Mud, which the Nile conveyes, does not
come from elsewhere, nor does it make its Banks the higher.

The Niger keeps its ancient Name, which it received from the people whose
Country it Waters; It sometimes goes under the Earth, and before it empties it
self into the Atlantic Sea, it forms three principal Branches, the Senega,
Gambia, and Rio Grande. It fertilizes all the places it passes through, and an
abundance of Grains of Gold are found in its Sand. The Zaire is considerable
for the rapidity and plenty of its Waters: the Zambre forms three Branches,
Cuama, Spiritu-Santo, and Rio-de los Infantes. The Ghir often loses it self in
the Sand, and almost as often gets out thence again.

The three greatest Lakes, are Zaire, Zembre, and Zaflan; all three in Ethiopia.

Amongst the Mountains of Africa, none are more renowned than Atlas, and those
of the Moon. The Poets have feigned, that Heaven was supported by Atlas, by
reason of its excessive height, or else upon the account of a King of
Mauritania, called Atlas, who was one of the first that studied Astrology.
Antiquity thought this Mountain to be the boundary of the World. In respect of
its situation, the Romans have divided all Africa into Citerior and Vlterior,
and those of the Country divide it into Interior and Exterior.

Strabo and Mela separate Africa from Asia by the Nile; some Arabian
Geographers shut it up between the Mediterranean, the Ocean, and the Rivers
Zaire and Nile: In matter of division it seems more proper to follow the Seas,
than Rivers. The Isthmus of Sues, which hinders Africa from being an Isle, is
of about nine Leagues between the Red Sea and the nearest Channel of the Nile:
for from one Sea to the other, there is above twenty five Leagues, or three
days journey by Camels. They say, that one of the Ptolemeyes, Queen Cleopatra,
some Sultans and other Sovereign Princes of Egypt, have endeavored to no
purpose to pierce or cut the Neck of this Isthmus, and that they have been
discouraged from their undertaking, by the vastness of the Work, and by the
damage the Waters of the Red Sea might do, being found higher than those of the
Mediterranean; and so might have corrupted by their bitterness that of the
Nile, the only Water that is drunk in Egypt. Ptolomey intended a Memorable Work,
in making Africa an Island; Cleopatra's design was to make her Ships pass into
the Red Sea, that she might have escaped falling into Augustus's hands. The
Sultan's meant to facilitate the Commerce of the Europeans through their
Dominions, toward the constant Levy of a vast Tribute.

The Africans exact great Services from their Elephants, their Camels, and
their huge Apes; Dromedaries they call a sort of Camels, smaller and swifter
than the others: they have wild Asses, Unicorns, Barbes, Cameleons, Marmousets,
and Parrots. They get fine Feathers from their Ostriches, and their Civit Cats
are much esteemed for their scents.

There is no living-Creature in the World, that becomes so great, from so small
a beginning, as does the Crocodile: it is formed of an Egg, and still grows as
long as it lives; insomuch that there are those that attain to twenty five or
thirty Cubits.

The situation of Africa, under the Torrid Zone, and the abundance of its
burning Sand, occasions insupportable heats, principally toward the Tropicks,
and make it the least fertile and worst peopled part of our Continent. Its
greatest Rivers have Crocodiles; Its Mountains and Deserts are full of Lions,
and other wild Beasts: The lack and scarcity of Water produces several
Monsters, Creatures of several kinds, coupling commonly at the Wateringplaces,
where they meet. The Anthropophagi, or Man-eaters, that have been found in
those, parts, and the Slaves that are daily transported from thence, do also
very much contribute to the rendering it desert.

The Africans, to consider them in general, are no great Soldiers, and their
Armies are more numerous, than good. Their Combats are performed on Horseback,
with the Lance, and confusedly. The Arabians, who have taken up their
Habitations in Africa, trust in their dexterity and Address: their being
hardened and enured to labor, and their long habit of fighting, renders 'em
formidable to their Neighbors. Some say, there is no Nation, but has some good
and evil, but that the Africans have nothing that is good.

As concerning Religion, there are Idolaters, Cafres without Law, Mahometans,
Jews, and Christians of several sorts. The Portuguese have some Bishoprics in
those places, where they have made any Establishments.

We may consider Africa under a treble respect; the Country of the Whites;
that of the Blacks, and Ethiopians; the Islands make a fourth.

The Country of the Whites, comprehends Barbary, Egypt, Biledulgerid, and the
Zaara, or Desert. The Country of the Blacks has three parts, Nigritia, Nubia,
and Guiney. Ethiopia is of two sorts, Higher and Lower. Ethiopia Superior, is
much of Abyssinia, in the inward part of the Country. Ethiopia Inferior,
contains Congo, Cafreria, with Monomotapa and Zanguebar. The Islands attributed
to Africa, are either in the Ocean, as the Tercera's, Madera, the Canaries, the
Isles of Cap-verd, Madagascar, and others; or in the Mediterranean Sea, as
Maltha. We are not acquainted with those of the Red Sea. The Island Gueguere is
within the Arms of the Nile.

Egypt, and almost all Barbary, belongs to the Turk; with exception to the
Kingdoms of Morocco and Fez, which have a Prince of their own; and to the
Cities of the Corsairs; and some Towns of the Christians upon the Coast.
Abissinia, Nubia, Congo, and Mono-motapa, have their peculiar Kings. There are
Arabian Cheiques in Numidia, and in Libya. The rest of Africa belongs to
several little, petty Sovereigns; some of whose Dominions extend no farther
than the compass of one Town or Borough. But, to speak the truth, we have but
little knowledge of the inward part of the Country. The Monarchs of England,
Spain, and Portugal, and the States General of the United Provinces, have some
Places upon the Coast, which furnish 'em with the means of carrying on the
Commerce with the inland parts of the Country. The French have some places of
Traffic in Barbary in Guiney, and in the Isle of Madagascar, which they have
called the Isle Dauphine. The Great Master of the Order of St. John of
Jerusalem, is Prince of the Isle of Maltha.

Barbary.
THe Ancients knew in Africa, under the Name of Barbary, what we call
Zanguebar, whereas the Modern Barbary is all along the Mediterranean-Sea, where
it comprehends the best Country of all Africa, and the most populous, by
reason of the convenience of trade. Some Seamen call Barbary, the Coast of
Africa, from the Straight of Gibraltar, as far as Cap-Blanc, which is at twenty
Degrees of Northern Latitude. The Romans, Sarazens, Vandals, Arabians, Moors,
and Turks, who have been consecutively the Lords of the Barbary we treat of,
have given very different Names to its Towns. The Turkish Emperor sways over
the greatest portion of it. The Kings of Fez and Morocco, possess what is most
toward the West. The Spaniards, Portuguese, and English, have Towns upon the
Coast, which elsewhere shall be enumerated. Susaon, Couco, Labes, are little
States, which maintain themselves in the Mountains. Salley, Tituan, Algier,
Tunis, and Tripoli, are Towns belonging to Corsairs; the three last under the
Protection of the Grand Seignior, who sends Bashaws thither; but they have not
much authority. The French have the Bastion of France, and Genoveses the Isle
of Tabarca, which they keep for the bringing thence the Merchandise of the
Country, which consists in Barks, Corn, Hides, Corral, which is of three
sorts, red, white and black.

The Portuguese were the first that made Conquests in Africa, and had it not
been for the design they entertained of carrying their Arms into the
East Indies, from which they expected more advantage, they would undoubtedly
have made Progresses there much more considerable, by reason of the Divisions
which were at that time in the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco.

There are chiefly seen in Barbary, Africans, or Bereberes, who are called
Barbaresques, and most commonly Moors. Also there are Arabians, who came
thither about the Year 999, of three Broods. These last live in the open Field
by Adarous, which are Communities composed of several Families, called
Baraques, where they have commonly a hundred, or two hundred Tents disposed
around; they esteem themselves much more Noble than those, who inhabit the
Towns, and cultivate the Earth; nor do they take any care but of their Herds
and Flocks, or to make Incursions into the Mountains: the Moors apply
themselves particularly to Commerce. Amongst some of their Customs it is
observed, they are at excessive charges in their Nuptials, as the Christians
are in their Lawsuits, and the Jews in their Passeovers. They cause themselves
to be buried in those places, where no Body was enterred before, that when they
rise again, they may not be puzzled to know and distinguish their Members from
those of others. They were used to crucify their Criminals, but since they
took notice, that the Christians have a respect for Crosses, and that a great
Drought once happened during some Executions, which nevertheless was followed
with some Rains, after that the Crosses were taken away; they attributed this
blessing to Mahomet, and ordered that, for the future, Criminals should either
be Hanged or Beheaded. They make five Quarters of their Sheep, by reason of
their extraordinary large Tails; nevertheless they often cause them to be
roasted whole, nay, and served so upon the Table too.

Barbary comprehends several Kiugdoms, which have Cities of the same Name,
Marocco, Fez, Tremisen, Algier, Tunis, Tripoli, and Barcar.

The Kingdom of Morocco, is upon the Ocean, which goes under the Name of the
Atlantic Sea. It Is full of Mountains, excessive high, and always covered with
Snow. Its King styles himself Emperor of Barbary and Morocco, King of Fez, of
Suz, and Tafilet; Lord of Dara, of Gago, etc. He takes also the Title of Grand
Cherif, of Mahomet, and Successor of his Family. This Name of Cherif shows,
That his Predecessors made use of the pretense of Religion in their
Establishment; they were also called Amiiel-Momins, and by corruption
Miramomoulins, that is to say, Emperors of the Faithful. The City of Morocco,
formerly longer and more populous than it is at present, has upon its Royal
Palace, three or four Golden Apples, esteemed at more than two hundred thousand
Crowns, which are said to be Enchanted, because they cannot be taken from the
place where they are. The Land about it affords Grapes, as big as Pullets Eggs,
and Goats hair, which serves to make fine Chamlets. Morocco and Safi, have
Consuls of Europeans, for the maintaining the Privileges there of their
several Nations. Mazagan is a Fortress of which the Portuguese have made use
for the bringing the open Country under Contribution, after the examples of the
Arabians. The little Island of Mogodor, five miles from the Continent, has a
Castle with a Garrison for the security of some Mines of Gold and Silver, which
are in its Neighborhood.

The Kingdom of Fez is fruitful, by reason of its Rivers: It has four sorts of
Land, Mountains, Valleys, Plains, and Seacoasts: the City of Fez, which passes
in Africa for the seat of the Western Court, is the best, the finest, and and
most populous of all Barbary, with a Famous University and a Library, in which
there are above two thousand Manuscripts. It Is said to have above fourscore
Gates, a hundred thousand Houses, two hundred Hospitals, thirty two Suburbs,
and a great number of Temples and Mosques, whereof one alone is half a Mile
round. There is the Old and New Fez, this the abode of the Prince, and the
other accompanied with a Fortress. It is near the River of Cebu, which has
toward its source a very extraordinary Bridge, for it is raised a hundred and
fifty Fathoms out of the Water, and is only a kind of Pannier of Sea-Rushes,
capable of holding eight or ten Persons. This same Pannier is hung up betwixt
two Ropes, which turn upon two Pulleys fastened to the two ends of two Wooden
Posts, which are upon the Rocks of each side the Valley. Salley is a Nest of
Corsairs, who have always several Pyrate Ships. Rubat opposite to Salley, was
Built after the Model of Morocco, and has an Aqueduct of above 12000 Paces.
Alcazar, is known by the Battles of 1578, wherein dyed three Kings, one of whom
was Sebastian, King of Portugal. Anafi or Anfa, a ruined Town with a Castle of
the Arabians, is thought by the Moors, to be an Enchanted Place, where are
still, as they say, the Treasures of their first Emperor.

Tremisen, or Telensin, is a great City, belonging to the Turk, seven or eight
Leagues distant from the Sea.

The Town of Argiers, is one of the best Inhabited, and the Richest of all
Africa, by means of the Pyracies, which the Inhabitants Exercise upon the Ocean
and Mediterranean Sea. It has full fifteen thousand Houses, twelve or fifteen
thousand Gardens in its Neighborhood; the Christian Slaves are there, to the
number of thirty or forty thousand. Cardinal Ximenes said, That if Argiers
could be taken, Money enough might be found there to Conquer all Africa.
Amongst the Tents which are out of the Town, there is that of the beautiful
Cava, the Daughter of Count Julian de la Betica, who first caused the Moors to
pass over into Spain, to revenge himself by their means of King Roderic. The
Emperor Charles the Fifth, had the disatisfaction of seeing the finest Fleet
he ever had, lost before Argiers.

The Kingdom of Tunis can pride it self in the Birth of Hannibal, Asdrubal,
Terence, and other great Men: and Christianity is obliged to it for the Birth
of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and St. Augustine. The City of Tunis has increased
it self from the Ruins of Carthage the Great, formerly the Rival of Rome, and
the Capital City of a very considerable State. At present it obeys a Prince
whom they call the Dey. Bizerta and Souza, are two places, where those of Tunis
do often keep their Pyrate Ships. Souza is composed of the High and Low Town.
Mahometa, is the ancient Adrumetum or Adrumyssus, near which some have been
pleased to say, that formerly thirty Gaulish Cavaliers, repulsed above two
thousand Moors. Caraan has been the Seat of a Calif, that is to say, of a
Mohammedan Pontiffe. It is the Ancient Thisdrus, where Massinissa gained, over
Asdrubal, the Battle, which Scipio was spectator of. Beja is in a soil, so
fertile in Corn, that it is a saying of that Country, That if there were two
Beja's, there would be as much Corn, as there are grains of sand in the Sea.
Guadibarbar, makes so many turnings and windings, that it is passed full five
and twenty times in the way, from Bone to Tunis. Between the Kingdom of Tunis,
and the Isle of Maltha, there are some small Islands: Pantalaria, belonging to
the King of Spain, with a Gulf, where the vapor, which clings to the Rock
above, distills as much Water, as is necessary for the use of the Inhabitants.
Lampadosa, and Linosa, depends on the Order of Maltha. There is in Lampadosa a
Chapel, famous for the Offerings both of Christians and Turks: And it has been
observed, that the Sacrilegious have never been able to carry any thing away
from thence with impunity.

The Kingdom of Tripoly, is a barren Land, considerable only for Pyracies, and
the Commerce of its City, called Tripoly of Barbary, that it may be
distinguished from those others of Souria, and Natolia, which go under the same
Name. Upon the Coasts of that Kingdom, is the Island Zerbi, where in the Year
1560, the Spaniards were defeated by the Infidels. In this Island was it also,
that the Corsair Dragut, escaped from the famous Doria; this last held him
there so narrowly Besieged, that he could not stir out; the other bethought
himself of making a Channel, without the Christians perceiving it, and so, in a
clear night, he had the means of Transporting his Galleys into another part of
the Island, and of retiring to open Sea, where he came and presented himself
before his Enemy, who was in no small surprise.

The Land of Barca begins at the place, where stood formerly the Altars of the
Philenians, which had also served for Bounds to the States of Carthage, and
Cyrene, and since, to the Empires of the West, and East. It Is only a meager,
and desert Plain, where stands the City of Caruenna, formerly Cirene, the
Capital of a small State, which was given by Cirus, for a retreat to King
Croesus. In this Country did the Psilloe inhabit, who had the reputation of
making Serpents die only by their presence.

Egypt.
FEw Countries have had so many ancient Names as Egypt; the Hebrews and Jews
called it Mesraim, and the Egyptians at present call it Chibet. Its length,
that is to say, its extent from the North to the South, is two hundred Leagues;
and its breadth, which is what it contains from the West to the East, is
confined by the Mountains, which bound the Valley of the Nile. It is the only
Region of Africa, which touches Asia, and the Country the most populous in the
World, though the Air be somewhat bad. Its Women do often bring forth two or
three Children at a time, which is attributed to the Water of the Nile. Egypt
was no less peopled formerly, if it be true, that under Amasis, one of its
ancient Kings, it had full twenty thousand Cities. The plenty of Corn it
affords, made the Ancients call it the Public Granary of the World. The
abundance or famine of the Roman Empire, depended on the good or ill Harvest in
Egypt. The Nile, by the inundation of its Waters, which are full of Nitre, (as
we said before) gives it this advantage; not by wholly covering the Lands, as
several have imagined, but being brought into several Channels, after the
Inhabitants have broke the Dikes. That part which is on the East of the Nile,
is more fruitful than that which is on the East of the River. Its Plants grow
so abundantly, that they would stifle one another, if they did not prevent it
by casting Sand in the field. Thus it is somewhat surprising, that the
Egyptians make their Lands lean with Sand, whereas other Nations endeavor to
fatten theirs with Dung. Besides Corn, they transport out of this Country,
Rice, Sugar, Dates, Sena, Cassia, excellent Balm, Skins, Linen, and Cloth.
They are but ill informed, who say, that it never Rains there, whereas there
are frequent Showers, during the Months of November, December, and January,
principally on the Mountains, and in the lower parts.

Still are there at this day to be seen in Egypt, Pyramids, Obelisques,
Labyrinths, and other Works which its ancient Kings caused to be made at an
extraordinary charge, to show their Power, and to give Employment to their
People. The Statue of Memnon was formerly very considerable there, as well as
the Pharos near Alexandria: But among all these several Works, it has been
observed, that the Pyramid is the most solid Monument Antiquity has left us.
There remains nothing more in the Lake Meris than the place of the Labyrinth,
which is said to have had above three thousand three hundred Chambers. The
Mummys, which are very frequent in this Region, and which Travelers take
delight to bring into Europe, are Humane Bodies pitched and embalmed, that have
been preserved above two or three thousand years in Caverns, whither the
ancient Egyptians took care to carry them. They passed for that purpose a Lake
in a Bark; and so first gave occasion to the Fable of Charon. Fiction has made
Gods, Heroes, and Men reign in Egypt. History gives an account of several of
its Kings before Alexander the Great: It says that, among those Kings,
Sesostris was the greatest Conqueror: that Memnon having dedicated his Statue
to the Sun, it saluted that Star at its rising: that Busiris passed there for a
Tyrant, by reason of the Cruelties he exercised over the Hebrews: that Cencres
is the Pharaoh, who was drowned in the Red Sea: that Protcus had the repute of
changing his Form, because he had diverse sorts of Head-array: that Chemnis
employed three hundred and sixty thousand Men, for twenty years together in
building the first and greatest Pyramid: that Sesonchis, with an Army of four
hundred thousand Foot, and sixty thousand Horse, took Jerusalem; and that
Sennacherib, King of the Assyrians, being come against him, wild Rats gnawed
the Bow-strings in the Assyrian Army: that Necaus began the Channel for the
joining the Nile and the Red Sea, and made all Africa to be traveled round
about.

Under Amasis the Kingdom of Egypt fell into the hands of the Persians;
afterward into those of the Greeks, and then to the Romans; and after the
Romans it was swayed by the Califes, whose abode was first of all at Medina,
then at Bagdad, at Damas, and at Caire. The Sultans succeeded the Califes. The
Turks have had it in possession since the year 1518. They reckon there 18
Cassilifs or Governments, where they are commanded by the Bashaw of Caire; and
the standing Soldiery there, are the bravest and the most esteemed of all the
Ottoman Empire. And indeed this Government is the most honorable of all those
that are out of the Port, and the Grand Seignior receives every year from
hence, above a hundred and fifty thousand Piasters, a Turkish Coin worth about
4 s. sterling.

The Egyptians are the best Swimmers in the World, gay, pleasant, brisk, and
very ingenious. The Invention of Astrology, Arithmetic, and Physic, is
attributed to 'em; Wherefore Egypt is often called the Mother of Arts: They
say, it was Ptolomey Philadelphus, who took care to have the Version of the
Bible out of Hebrew into Greek, done by the serenty Interpreters; and to make a
Collection of above two hundred thousand Volumes. There was also a prodigious
number of Books in the Library of Alexandria, which was unluckily burnt, when
Julius Caesar there made War. The Natives of the Country have a peculiar way
of hatching Chickens, by means of Furnaces, or Ovens, wherein they put
sometimes three or four thousand Eggs together, and when they are hatched, they
sell them by the Bushel. They are for the most part Mahometans, but have
amongst them Jews too, and Christians, known under the Name of Copties. These
Copties are Natives of Egypt; they have a Tongue wholly peculiar, and a way of
Writing little different from that of the ancient Greeks. The ancient Egyptians
were so very superstitious, that they had almost as many Gods as Animals and
Plants, whose Names they gave to their Cities. Some Authors attribute this
great number of their false Divinities, to the Resolution they had taken of
making and adoring the Figures of what had hindered them from following Pharaoh,
when he was drowned in the Red Sea.

Egypt is commonly divided into four parts, Sahid, or High Egypt; Bechria,
otherwise Demesor, or Middle Egypt; Erriff, or Low Egypt; and the Coast of the
Red Sea. Some make only two of it, the one High, and the other Low, according
to the Course of the Nile, and say that the Hebrews inhabited the Higher; which
they pretend to prove, by the coming of the Locusts from toward the East, for
the punishment of Pharaoh, and by the way that Prince took when he pursued
those same Hebrews. Some Ancients have divided Egypt into Libyca, or Africana;
and into Arabica, or Asiatica; in regard of the same River.

Amongst the Cities, Cairo is called Great, by reason of the advantages it has
over all the other Cities of Africa. It is on the other side the place, where
was the ancient Memphis, and three Leagues lower to the East of the Nile. Those
who reckon in it sixty thousand Mosquees, comprehend in that number several
heaps of stones: They say also, there are above twenty four thousand
Contradoes, or Quarters, and about seven Millions of Persons, whereof sixteen
hundred thousand are Jews. It Is certain, there are full three and twenty
thousand Mosquees, but some of 'em are not ten paces square. Its Castle, which
stands upon a rising Hill, has the rarest Prospect and the best Air in the
World: It is one of the finest and strongest that is seen, though it be much
impaired from its ancient splendor. It Is not of marble, as some Relations
averr; there are only several Mosaique Works. The Water of the Nile is conveyed
thither by an Aqueduct of three hundred and fifty Arches. The People of Cairo
must questionless be very numerous, since we are assured, that in three Months
of the Year 1618, they buried there above six hundred thousand Persons that
died of the Pestilence; and that this sickness is not perceivable, when it only
sweeps away two hundred thousand in a year. In short, Cairo is said to have
full two hundred thousand Houses, eighteen thousand considerable Streets, and
twenty five or thirty Leagues in circumference. But I speak this comprehending
therein the old and new Cairo, and the Boulac, which are near it; If new Cairo
was only meant in this Account, its bigness does not equal that of London. They
ride through the Streets upon Asses, as People go here in Chairs and Coaches; not
but that there are Horses in Egypt: but the Turks have introduced this Custom,
that they may keep them for their own use. The Inhabitants of Cairo make those
excellent Tapistries, which we call Turkey Carpets.

Besides the Pyramids, that are three Leagues, and the Mummys, which are six,
from Caire, the curious Travelers go to see the Granaries and Pits of Joseph.
(Now it is to be observed, that what ever is beautiful and good of the Ancients
in Egypt, is attributed to Joseph; and what is vilainous and infamous, to
Pharaoh.) They go also to see Matarea, two Leagues from Cairo, which served for
a retreat to the Virgin, with the Fountain, which, with that of Caire, is the
only Spring Water in all the Country. Here is no longer to be seen the Plant
of the true Balm, which was brought thither from the Holy Land, by the Cares of
Cleopatra, and the permission of Anthony.

Sahid, formerly Thebes, with an hundred Gates, was the abode of the Kings of
Egypt, which was afterward transferred to Alexandria, then to Memphis, and at
last to Cairo; It gives its name to the Thebaid, which served for a retreat to
several Hermits. The most modern Relations call this City Gergio, and make it
the Residence of a Bashaw.

Alexandria, the Work of Alexander the Great, formerly the best Town of all
Africa after Carthage was the abode of the Ptolomeys and Cleopatra. When it was
subject to the Romans, it contributed more in one Month alone, than Jerusalem
did in a whole Year. It had in its Neighborhood the Tower of Pharos, one of
the Seven Wonders of the World: It drives some trade, by means of its two
Havens; It is the chief of a Patriarchate of the same Name. St. Mark has made
it renowned in Holy History. The Deserts of Macaire, where were reckoned above
three hundred Monasteries were on the West of it. Damietta is one of the Keys
of the Country, by reason of its Situation and its Haven upon the
Mediterranean-Sea, which made the French King, Lewis, (entitled, the Saint)
resolve, in his Expedition into the Holy Land, to make himself Master of it.
Rosetta, a modern City, and pretty well built, is the resort of several Ships
upon the most frequented Channel of the Nile.

Sues, which has not much above two hundred Houses, with a sorry Port, is
nevertheless the Arsenal of the Turks, upon the Red Sea. The Governor keeps
two small Galleys, and some Ships, to make himself considerable upon the Red
Sea. The Merchandises of the East Indies, bound for Europe, came thither
formerly; for which reason the Turks have, not without regret, seen the
Establishment of the Europeans in those Indies. But they still bring Spices, to
truck with the Inhabitants for Corral. Cossir, formerly Berenice, was the
Resort of the Commodities which the Romans fetched from the East Indies, and
which from thence were carried to the nearest part of the Nile, in the City of
Coptos, now called Cana. Buge, in the most Southern part of Egypt, is a Kingdom
tributary to the Abyssins, according to the Relations of 1657.

Biledulgerid, and Zaara.
BIledulgerid is the Numidia of the Moderns, and more Southern than the ancient
Numidia. The Name of Biledulgerid, speaks a Land fruitful in Dates; A Fruit
which the Numidians gather, though they be short-sighted, by reason of the Sand,
which the Wind brings in their Eyes. This part of Africa extends from the West
to the East, almost as far as Barbary. Some Kings there are of the Mohammedan
Religion, whose power is but very inconsiderable. The Arabians, under their
Cheiques, or Chiefs, are strong in Cavalry, and capable of great Enterprises,
if they had not War amongst themselves. They sometimes assist the Turks, and at
other times the Kings of Morocco and Fez; the changes of Sovereigns, and the
diversity of Tongues, have often caused the Names of Cities to be changed. The
Arabians in these parts hunt after Ostriches, because they make great
advantages of 'em: they sell their Feathers, eat their Flesh, and order their
Skins for their Baggage; they make their Witchcrafts and Incantations of the
Heart, their Medicaments of the Fat, and their Ear-Pendants of the Horn or Beak.

Suz, the best peopled Country of all Biledulgerid, has the City of Tarudante,
where the greatest Traffic is of Sugar, and where began the Dominion of the
Cherifs. The River of Suz renders the Land fruitful by its inundation. The
Sea-Towns are Cartguessem, of the Conquests of Portugal, and Messa, with a
Temple; near which the Inhabitants believe, that Jonas was cast up out of the
Whales belly. They say, that all the Whales, approaching it, die immediately,
and that from this Temple must come forth a great Pontif. The Cape of Guer,
which is not very far distant from it, has near it the City of the Holy Cross,
formerly called Agades and Darrumia. It was built by the Portugals, but the
Moors have it in possession, and the Christians have nothing more remaining
there, than some Magazines in its neighborhood. Tesset is a Country of small
product, and thinly inhabited. Daru has some fortified Places, and amongst
others, that of Tigumedet, the native Country of the Cherifs; who having first
of all obtained from the King of Fez, a Drum and an Ensign, under pretext of
making War against the Christians, dethroned at length the King of the
Country: which happened toward the beginning of the last Age. Segelmessa
abounds in hurtful Animals. Tegorarina has plenty of Dates. Zeb wants Water;
and those who inhabit it, in Summer yield their abode to the Scorpions.
Biledulgerid communicates its Name to all the Country. Fessen has a Town of
the same Name. The Desert of Barca consists in Plains of Sand, where was
formerly seen the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, notorious for its Oracles, for the
Fountain of the Sun, for the loss of the Army of Cambyses King of Persia, and
for the happy Journey of that of Alexander the Great. Bacchus, Perseus, and
Hercules, are said to have been there before this Conqueror; and three
Highways are reported to have led thither, the first from Memphis, the second
from Paretonium, and the third from Cyrene. Mount Atlas advances several of its
Branches into Biledulgerid. The Cap of Non, upon the Ocean, was for a long
while the limit of the Navigations of the Portugueses, who called it in that
manner, for that they at that time passed no farther.

The Name of Zaara, signifies Desert, and that of Libya, which is also given to
this Country, is a Greek word, which was first of all attributed to Africa.
Little is to be seen in the Zaara, but Sand, Monsters, and Scorpions; for which
reason the Inhabitants wear Boots, for a defense against the stings and bitings
of those Creatures. The Air is healthful, and the sick of the neighboring
Countries are brought thither for the Recovery of their health. The Arabians
consider there three sorts of Countries; the Cehel, where is small Sand,
without any Verdure; the Zaara, where is Gravel, and a little Verdure; and the
Asgar, where are Marshes, Herbs, and Bushes. Travelers beforehand make
provision of all things necessary for the Life of Man: for the Houses and Wells
are at such a distance from one another, that they go often a hundred Leagues
without finding either Abode, or Water. A Merchant formerly endured there so
much thirst, that he gave ten thousand Ducats for a Cup of Water; and yet he
di'd, as well as the person, who received his Money for the giving him Drink.
People are sometimes constrained to bury themselves in the Sand, to avoid
meeting with Lions, and other wild Beasts, which make a horrible noise every
night. The Inhabitants are, for the most part, Shepherds, and the best Hunters
in the World, but very miserable. Some amongst 'em follow the Religion of
Mahomet, and the greatest number lead a libertine kind of life. Several small
Sovereigns receive the Tribute of the Caravans, which pass through their
Dominions. Their other Revenues consist in Cattle; and when mention is made of
their Riches, they ask how many Camels they have?

Five principal Deserts are reckoned, Zanhaga, Zuenziga, where are Salt Pits,
Targa, Lempta, and Berdoa. The Ghir, which is the greatest River of it, forms
some pretty considerable Lakes, and loses its self in the Sand in several
places of its course, and comes out again presently after the Rio Ouro, which
is emptied into the Ocean, and was so called by the Portuguese, by reason of
the Gold they found there, when they made their first Voyages along that Coast.
This River runs under the Tropic, through desert Countries, with ten or twelve
fathom water toward its entrance into the Sea. The Coast, as far as Cape
Boiador, has high, white, and gray Hills, or Downs, with a desert Country,
o'rspred with Sand and wild Rushes.

Nigritia.
NIgritia is so called from its ancient People, the Nigritae, who reciprocally
seem to have had their Name from their black Color, or from that of their
Land, which in some places is all burnt by the excessive heat, which
contributes to the blackning both the Sand and the Inhabitants. They who
attribute this blackness to the Race of Cham, say, that people of other
Countries preserve their whiteness in Nigritia, and that the Asiaticks, and the
Americans, who are in the same Zone with the Negroes, are not naturally black.
The Niger does somewhat temper the Country, by means of its Waters, but the
Rains which fall there, occasion several Diseases. As Commerce is now in high
consideration amongst the European Nations, it is not improper to say somewhat
of the Coast of Nigritia. Cap Blanc is a tongue of Land as hard as a Rock, ten
or twelve fathom high, with a very spacious Haven, where Ships are safe against
most Winds. Arguin, a Castle in a little Island, belongs to the Hollanders. The
Barks may enter into the River of St. John, and treat with the Negroes for
Ostridge-Feathers, Gums, Amber, and some small Gold. Senega, one of the
principal Branches of the Niger, is not a League in breadth, at its
disemboguing it self into the Sea. The Coast on the North of Senega is very
low, and hardly to be kenn'd by those that are twelve Leagues distant at Sea.
The Road of Cape-Verd, has twelve or thirteen fathom water, upon a bottom of
gray Sand. The Island belonging to the Flemmings, called Gorea, has a
Platform, flanked by four Bastions of Earth, with a Dungeon of Bricks, which
did not hinder it from being insulted in the late Wars. The entrance into it is
on the West of the Island, where Ships of a hundred Tun may touch and ride. The
Road is good, but no fresh water to be had. Rufisca is a retreat commodious
enough. Gambia is about five Leagues broad at its influx into the Sea, but it
is not Navigable for Barks above sixty Leagues. It Is said, that the Portugals
have remounted the Niger sometimes as far as the Kingdom of Benin, in the space
of above eighteen hundred Leagues; that the Danes have formerly possessed
Cantozi, toward the place where the Niger divides it self; and that this Niger
forms great Lakes, upon the Banks of which there are several good Cities, from
whence go Caravans as far as Tripoli of Barbary. The English, in hopes of
getting some of the Gold of the Country, had a design to go up the Senega with
several light Ships; but the excessive heats, the insults of the Negroes
accompanied with some Portugueses, made them lay aside the thoughts of their
Enterprise. The Negroes are commonly simple and candid, Idolaters toward the
Sea, Mahometans in the inland Country. They have three pretty considerable
Kingdoms, Tombut, Borno, and Gaoga. Most of their Cities are not to be compared
with our Towns, the Houses being only built of Wood, Chalk, and Straw; and
often one of these Cities makes a Kingdom. The last Kings of Tombut, whom they
call Tombouctou, have had the reputation of possessing a great quantity of Gold
in Bars and Ingots. They are said to have this Gold from the Kingdom of Gago;
and that from the Kingdoms of Morocco and Sus, there go often several Cafiles,
or Caravans, for the bringing it thence. The Kingdom of Gualata produces Milet.
That of Agades has a City indifferently well built. Borno, formerly the abode
of the Garamantes, is inhabited by a People who live in common; private persons
there, acknowledge for their Children, those who resemble them, and the
flattest nosed are the handsomest and greatest Beauties. Several Nations are
between the branches of the Niger, where some Authors place the Gardens of the
Hesperides. Those of Senega send abroad Slaves, Gold in dust, Hides, Gums and
Civit Cats. The Negroes are very strong, and are more sought after, and bought
up by the Europeans, than those of other Countries. They of Guiney are docible,
for which reason they are commonly made domestic servants. Those of Angola are
employed in cultivating of Land, by reason of their strength. It Is a saying,
That he who expects to have any service from his Negro, must give him Food
enough, a great deal of Work, and many Blows. On the South of the Niger are
several other small Kingdoms^ that of Melli, with a City of six thousand
Houses; Gago, rich in Gold, as we have said. Zegzeg, considerable for its
Commerce; Zanfara, fertile in Corn. The enumeration of the other places would
be here as tedious, as it is unnecessary, since they are neither strong, nor
well peopled, and but a very little trade is driven by 'em. The Portugals have
yielded up to the English some Fortresses, which they had toward the Mouths of
the Niger, which has given our Nation the means of trafficking here, and making
Enterprises, as do also the Hollanders.

Nubia.
NVbia, is three hundred and fifty Leagues in length, and two hundred in
breadth. It retains some remnants of Christianity in its old Churches, and in
the Ceremonies of Baptism, that is there administered. The Nubians obey a King,
who commonly keeps Cavalry upon the Frontiers of his Dominions, because he has
potent Enemies, for his Neighbors, the Abissin, and the Turk. Histories
affirm, That an Army of a hundred thousand Horse, was formerly Levied, and led
by a King of Nubia, against the Governor of Egypt. Gold, Civet, Sandal-Wood,
Ivory, Arms, and Linen, are Transported from this Country. The Commerce of the
Nubians is, most especially, with those of Cairo, and the other Cities of
Egypt, They have a strong, subtle, and penetrating Poison in this Country,
the tenth part of a Grain of which, will kill a man in a quarter of an hour,
and the Ounce, is valued at a hundred Ducats. One of the King's principal
Revenues, consists in the Receipt of the Right of Exportation. It Is sold to
Strangers, but upon condition of not making use of it, but out of the Kingdom.
The Inhabitants have Sugarcanes, but they know not how to improve them. They
have amongst them Bereberes, of the Mohammedan Religion, who go in Troops to
Cairo, and return from thence, when they have gotten ten, or twelve Piasters.
The capital Cities are, Nubia, and Dancala, near the Nile: the others are but
little known to us. A Relation of the Year 1657, affirms, That the King of
Dancala, pays a Tribute in Cloths, to the King of the Abissins. Geography, in
some sort is, indebted to this Country, since it presented the World with the
Author of the famous Geography of Nubia, the Cherif-Alderisi.

Guiney.
GViney is subject to such great Heats, that were it not for the Rains, and the
coolness of the Night, it would be uninhabitable. It sends abroad Parrots,
Apes, White-Salt, Ivory, Skins, Wax, Ambergris, Gold, and Slaves. Its
Inhabitants have the repute of being presumptuous, thievish, Idolatrous, and
extremely superstitious. Its best Town is St. George de la Mina, now in
Possession of the Hollanders. The English have amongst others, Cabo Corso, and
the Danes, Fredericksbourg. Most of the Portugals, who succeeded the French in
that Colony, have been compelled by reason of their small numbers, to retire
into the Inlands, during the Wars with Spain. The Castle of La Mina, having
been so called from the Mines of Gold which are in its Neighborhood; the name
of St. George, was given it by John the Second, King of Portugal, who after
having made the Conquest of it, concealed the Commerce thereof, as long as he
could. Benin is a particular Kingdom, with the best City of all Nigritia.
Ardre, toward the Coast, has its King, from whom there was an Ambassador to
the French King at Paris, toward the latter end of the Year 1670, for the
establishment of Traffic in its Dominions. The Coast of Maleguetta, is so
called from a kind of Pepper which it produces, and which is said to be better
than that of the Indies. Apes do them great service in Guinca. Those that are
called Barris, fetch Water, turn the Spit, and serve too at Table.

Abissinia, or, Aethiopia.
THis Country is otherwise called Abech, Abassia, Abassinia; the Empire of the
Negus, the Kingdom of Prester John, the Middle-Indies, the Southern-Indies, the
High, or Great Aethiopia. Those of the Country, give their King the Name of
Belulgian, by reason of the Ring, which the Queen of Sheba received from
Solomon, and which, since that time, has been Hereditary in that Royal Family.
Those who call him Prester-John, do it upon this foundation, that he sometimes
carries a Cross in his hand. The Popish Missionaries boast that some of the
late Kings have been Catholics: But since the Jesuits, who had been powerfully
established in that Country, have been Banished thence; the Papists complain of
the Persecution, their followers have suffered in those parts. The Abissins
have a great number of Churches, where Divine Service is performed much after
the same manner it is here. This Land is temperate, unless in the Valleys,
where it is very hot, and upon some Mountains, where it is cold. The
Aethiopians, are the most ancient People in the World, and boast of having
never been driven from their Country. They are dexterous, active, blithe, and
perform better than other people in great Employments: The Mahometans are used
to Spirit away the Abissin Children, and go sell them to Indian Princes. They
are so-so Soldiers for Africans; but they have not the Art of Building, nor of
Grinding their Corn; and they often eat Cows flesh all raw, with Salt and
Pepper, which they look upon as a peculiar Delicacy. They have Civet-Cats, and
make use of Cloth, Stones, Salt; and little pieces of Iron, instead of money;
for which purpose, they also use Gold, which they give by weight. They do not
work in their Mines of Gold, and Silver of Narea, which has given occasion to
say of their Prince, That he might, with his Treasures, purchase whole Worlds.
The King of Abissinia, to whom is also given the title of Emperor, is Absolute
in all the Territories of his Dominions; And this it is that makes his
principal Revenue; He commonly keeps his Court in the open Field, sometimes in
one place, sometimes an other: He has few Cities, but a great number of
Villages. Several places upon the Frontier of the Galls, have been fortified,
for the security of the Inhabitants, against the incursions of those people,
the capital Enemies of the Abissins. The Turks hold the City of Suaquem, upon
the Red Sea, whither the Viceroy of Barnagasse has commonly sent a Tribute of
a thousand Ounces of Gold. There are several Relations of Aethiopia, and for
the most part fabulous: But the Jesuits pretend, that the late ones, they have
published, to be the most certain.

According to the Account of an Abissin Ambassador, sent to the Grand Seignior
in the Year 1657, Gonthar was the abode of the Emperor. Four Kings were
tributary to him: The King of Sennar, which is a hot Country, paid him his
Tribute in Horses; the King of Narea, paid it him in Gold; The Kings of Bugia,
and Doncala, paid it him in Linen and Cloth. These Dominions are not of so
great an extent, nor of the same situation, they have hitherto been shown us.
The Galls on one side, have subdued several great Provinces in the Southern
part, and the Moors have rendered themselves Masters of several places all
along upon the Red Sea, upon the Coast of Abex. According to the late
Relations, the Sources of the Nile, are placed in the Province of the Agaux, at
twelve Degrees of Northern Latitude, which shows in the Cart, the difference of
above thirty of those Degrees. That famous River goes first of all toward the
North, and then toward the East, across the Lake of Bardambea: from thence
toward the South, and toward the West, so to return to take its Course pretty
near its Sources toward the North, and to continue it through Egypt.

Twenty four small Kingdoms have been commonly accounted in Abissinia; that of
Amara, has a Fortress upon a Mountain, called Amba Guexem, where formerly were
kept the Princes of the Royal Blood. Goyama, is almost environed with the Nile:
Which has given some occasion to say, that it is the Island Meroe. There is in
that of Tigermahon, the City of Caxumo, or Aceum, which is said to have been
the Residence of the Queen of Sheba; several of the Abissin Kings, have held
their Coronation in that Town. Dambea has the famous Lake, Bar-Dambea, and's
not very far off the City of Gorgora, one of the last Residences of the Kings.
The Coast of Abex upon the Red Sea, is full of Woods. The tongue of the ancient
Troglodites, who inhabited it, had this peculiarity, that it resembled
whistling. Some have endeavored to persuade the World, that the King of the
Abissins might very much incommode the Grand Seignior, if he diverted the
Waters of the Nile into the Red Sea, and so render Egypt dry: This proposition
has rendered them ridiculous, because there are Mountains, that must of
necessity be cut through, for the bringing this about, and that these
Mountains, which have the Sources of several great Rivers, make Aethiopia one
of the highest Countries of all Africa. Albuquerque Viceroy of the
East Indies, for the King of Portugal, seems to have had the same design, but
he did not pursue the putting it into execution. He it was, who would have
caused the Body of Mahomet to be stolen away, and have pillaged Mocha with
three hundred Horse, which he had sent from Ormus, upon Ships made on purpose
for this Design.

Congo.
COngo is a temperate Country; the Rains, and Winds, moderating the Heat,
which is insupportable in the adjacent parts. Africa has no Regions, that
abound more in Rivers. The Zaire, which is the principal one of this Country,
is considerable for its rapidity, and for the abundance of its Waters. The
Congolans know not how to make use of the Commodities of their Land, and though
they have Mines of Gold, they have none but shells for Money. Several amongst
them, have been converted to Christianity, after the example of some of their
Kings. The Portugueses bring from thence Ivory, and Slaves: They have their
establishment in the Royal City, called San-Salvador, and in that of St. Paul,
in the small Island of Loanda, where they get fresh Water, out of the holes
they make in the sand. They keep a Garrison in the Forts of Massagan, and
Cambambo, in the Kingdom of Angola, for the security of their Silver-Mines, in
which they work, and here it is, they assemble their Negroes, appointed for
Brasile. The Males alone, have Right of succeeding in this Kingdom, and all
Lands belong to the King, who is called Mani. The Inhabitants have Horses of
Wood, the use of which is mighty pleasant; They lay a piece of an Oxes Hide, of
the bigness of a Saddle, upon a Post near twelve inches thick, and he who
travels, is seated thereon, with his legs on each side; all this is carried by
two strong men, who find others in the way to relieve them. Learning is amongst
them in so little estimation, that when Emanuel, King of Portugal, had sent to
their King all the excellent Books of Law, that he could meet with, with a
considerable number of Civilians: This Prince sent the Doctors back, and caused
the Books to be burnt, saying, They would but puzzle the Brains of his
Subjects, who stood in need of nothing but honest, reasonable old fashioned
Thinking, and common Sense. That nevertheless, he should be no less a friend of
the King of Portugal.

They still reckon under the notion of Congo, the Kingdoms of Angola, Cacongo,
and Malemba. The Ansicain people who have the Qualities of the Basques in
France; And lastly, the Bramas, and Loanghi. Those Kingdoms and People no
longer acknowledge the Sovereignty of the King of Congo, as they did formerly.
The King of Angola, calls himself the Soba. His Subjects love Dogs flesh to
that degree, that they bring up whole Herds, or Packs of them, and one Dog
alone well sed, is sometimes sold amongst them for above two hundred Crowns.
They have nothing recommendable but their Dexterity in shooting with the Bow:
They will let fly a dozen Arrows, before the first be fallen upon the ground.
They say, the Sun is a Man, the Moon a Woman, and the Stars, the Children of
that Man and that Woman.

Cafreria, and Mono-Motapa.
THe Land of Cafreria is the most Southern of all Africa; nay, of all our
Continent, reaching along the Aethiopick-Sea, with an extent of Coasts, for
about twelve hundred Leagues, part in the Torrid, and part in the temperate
Southern Zone. It Is full of Mountains, subject to great Colds, and under
several petty Kings, who for the most part pay tribute to the Emperor of
Mono-Motapa. The King of Sofala pays it to the King of Portugal, who has a
Garrison in the Castle of Sofala, and who, by the means of this Garrison, draws
abundance of Gold from the Mines, which are in the inland Country. This Gold
is accounted as good as any in the World; they gather it likewise in the
Rivers, with Nets, after there has been Rain. Solomon might possibly have had
his come from hence, which he employed in the building of the Temple. The Coast
of Cafreria is low, and full of Woods: the Soil produces Flowers of an grateful
smell, and the Trees make a curious prospect. Three great Rivers discharge
'emselves into the Indian Seas, through Cafreria, all three known in the
beginning, under the name of Zambera, Cuama, Spirito Santo, les Infantes.

The Cafres live without Law, so as their Name speaks them. They often furnish
the Seamen, who come thither, with their Cattle: But the Mariners now cause the
Oxen they buy to betied to great Posts, and shut up the Sheep before they pay
'em, because the Cafres, after having sold 'em, were used to make 'em return
home with the Call of a Whistle, which is wholly peculiar to 'em. We may say of
'em, in seeing their color, that they resemble our Chimney-sweepers; Besides,
that they have big Heads, flat Noses; whether they take care to break them in
their infancy; or that this happens, because when they are little, their
Mothers carry them continually upon the Back: Be it how it will, they look upon
it as one of the Beauties of the Country, to have them in that manner. They
have frizl'd Hair, Lips extraordinary big, the Chine of the Back sticking out
sharp, and very large Hips, insomuch, that nothing can be seen more terrible:
So that we are not to wonder if Pirard calls 'em, those Devils of Cafres.

The Cape of Good Hope, which lies toward the most Southern part of this
Country, is by much the longest; the most famous and the most dangerous Cape
in the World. 'Twas called so, in hopes of arriving suddenly at the
East Indies, when it was veered in the year 1498. Before, it had the Name of
the Tempestuous Cape, from the storms that are frequent thereabouts. Some have
called it the Lion of the Sea, others the Head of Africa: There are Signs by
which the Sailers know when they are near it; fifty or sixty Leagues off they
find the Bodies of great Reeds, called Trombes, floating on the Sea; and they
see flying a number of white Birds, marked with black spots. They who return
from the East Indies, see Troops of Sea Wolves, made like Bears, and then they
are continually sounding. This Cape serves for bounds to the East and
West-India-Companies: As they go to the East Indies, and return from thence,
they must of necessity come in ken of it. The Land enjovs a temperate Air;
several Valleys have Herbs and Flowers in abundance. There are Rivers full of
Fish, and Woods full of Deer and Cattle. The Inhabitants, who make their
Garments of Beasts-skins, are very good at running, but very villainous in their
Diet, and when they speak, you would think you heard Turkey-Cocks.

Mono-Motapa, which is entirely in the Terra firma, is almost environed with
Cafreria. It goes under the Name of its King, whereas Kings commonly go under
the Names of the Countries, that are subject to 'em. It is fertile, abounding
in Ivory, and so rich in Gold, that the King of it is called the Golden
Emperor. The Inhabitants (who are very superstitious) have Pikes, Bows and
Arrows, for their Arms; several of 'em are so swift of foot, that they equal
Horses in running. The Common People only wear Garments below their middle. A
Relation, that was published in the year 1631, tells us, That the King then
reigning, was baptized, with all his Court, by the Jesuits. This Prince is
commonly adorned with Chains and Jewels, like a Bride: He is said to have, for
his usual Guard, a Regiment of Women, and another of Dogs; and that in the
Armies those Women do not less service than the Men. The Princes, who pay him
Tribute, receive every Year firing from him, for a Mark of the Fealty they owe
him; the City, which is the most considerable, has the same Name with the
Kingdom; Zimbaoe is a square Fortress, and the abode of the Court. Mono-Emugi
is a State on the North of Mono-Motapa. The Giaques, otherwise called Galls
and Chava, border upon it, and are illustrious for their Valor, and for their
Conquests which they have made, in our time, over Abissinia, in the upper
Aethiopia.

Zanguebar.
ZAnguebar of Barbary, is a great Coast in the Oriental part of Africa, along
the Indian-Sea, on each side the Equinoctial. It Is a low, fenny, woody
Country, which by the extremity of the moisture, causes the Air to be
unhealthy and intemperate. The Inhabitants are Idolaters, and are swayed by
several Sovereigns: they addict 'emfelves to trade, as well as the Arabians,
and Mahometans, who are among 'em. What is toward the South, bears principally
the Name of Zanguebar, wherein are the little Kingdoms of Mozambique, Quiloa,
Mombaze, and Melinde. What is toward the North, is called Again, and sometimes
New Arabia: It comprehends the Territories of Brava, Magadoxo, Adea, and Adel.
There is in Mozambique the best Government, and the best Town, which the
Portugals have in those parts. They have there a strong Castle, in the Island
of the same Name, which is half a League in length. This is the place where
their Ships wait for a fair Wind and Weather in their East India Voyages. The
Inhabitants would be much more numerous, if the Air was not so distemperate.
Quiloa is in a Peninsula. Its King was the first amongst those of Zanguebar,
who became a tributary of the Portuguese. There are very delicate Hens in and
about Quiloa, though their Feathers, their Flesh, their Blood and their Bones be
black. Mombaze is in an Island upon a Rock. The Portuguese go often thither to
winter in the later season, because that Victuals are cheap and in great plenty
in this Country: the entrance of the Haven is so narrow, and so full of Rocks,
that in several places there is only passage for a Ship. Melinde does often
give its Name to all the Coast; Where are found several Parks of above a League
round, enclosed with Elephants Teeth. Brava is a small Republic, with a City,
built after the manner of those of the Moors. The King, and Inhabitants of
Magadoxo, are Mahometans. Adea has a good Harbor, called Barraboa. Adel,
wherein is the City of Arat; it obeys a King, who is a great Enemy of the
Christians. Barbora, and Zela, drive a great Trade, by reason of the
convenience of their Havens toward the entrance of the Red Sea.

The Tercera Islands.
THese Islands were thus named from that which is particularly called Tercera.
The great number of Autours, or Goss-hawks, that are seen there, has made them
go under the name of Azores. They have that of the Flemming Islands, because
they were discovered by a Flemming. They are called High, as more Northerly, in
respect of the Canaries. The Portuguese, who are Masters of 'em, export from
thence Corn, Wine, Garden-Woad, Skins, and other Commodities. There are seven
that are the principal, without reckoning those of Coreo and of Flores, where
several have placed the First Meridian. Angra, the capital City, and the abode
of a Bishop, is in Tercera. The other Islands are Gratiosa, St. George, Fayal,
Pico, St. Michael, and Santa-Maria.

The Canary Islands.
THe first discovery of these Islands, was made by one Bethen-Court, a French
Gentleman, who had the title of King of the Canaries, and facilitated the
Conquest of 'em to the Spaniards, whom they now obey. The Name of Canary, came
from the Dogs, which those Islands had formerly, and not from the Canes of
Sugar, which were not planted there, till after they had this Name. The common
opinion is, that they are the Fortunate Islands of the Ancients. They furnish
excellent Wines, Sugar abundantly, and small Birds, that are called
Canary-Birds. They are reckoned seven in number. They are all exempt from
venomous Animals, and nevertheless subject to excessive heats. The principal
Canary has a City and Bishopric of the same Name. The Isle of Fierro is known
for its Tree, which distills Water to its Inhabitants, and by the Position, that
in France is made there, of the first Meridian. The Island of Teneriffe is the
greatest of all these Islands; it has the Mountain of Pico, always covered with
Snows; Seamen esteem it the highest and the streightest in the World; and
indeed it requires three days time to mount to the top of it. It Is seen fifty
Leagues off; It Is used as a Pharos, by those who are at Sea, and some place
there the first Meridian: It is said to yield, every Year, above twenty
thousand Tuns of the most excellent Wines that the Earth produces. The other
Canary Islands are la Gomera, Palma, Fortaventura, and Lancelotta. These
Islands serve often for Rendezouz to the Spanish Fleets, which come from the
West Indies, and which there receive order to what place of the Kingdom of
Spain they must go and dis-embark their Riches. At la Palma our Ships touch, to
refresh themselves in their Voyage toward America. The makers of Romances have
taken occasion to sham us with many things, upon occasion of the Canaries.

The Islands of Cap-Verd.
THe Islands, which are in parallel with Cap-Verd, are in number ten, and go
under the Name of that Cape, which is in the most Western part of Africa. The
Ancients called them Hesperides and Gorgades. Poetry has placed those fine
Gardens therein, which it feigned to be kept by a Dragon. Christopher Columbus
says, they are ill named, because that in his third Voyage, he found they were
dry and barren. They belong, for the most part, to the Portugueses, who
transport from thence Salt and Goats-skins. Salt is made naturally there, in
Ditches along the Sea. There is so great abundance of it, principally in the
Isle of May, that the Flemmings call all these Islands, the Isles of Salt. The
chief one is that of St. James, with a small Town of the same Name; the others
are St. Anthony, St. Vincent, St. Lucy's, St. Nicholas, Insula Salis, Buen
avista, del Fogo, and de Brave; there are some of these who have no
Inhabitants, unless some Goatherds. The Ocean, which is near it, bears the Name
of the Green Sea, by reason of the great abundance of an Herb, that is found
there of a Green and Yellowish Color, which makes it resemble a Meadow, in the
double Latin sense of Aequor.

The Isle of Madagascar.
THe Isle Madagascar, in the Eastern, which we call the Indian Sea, is the
greatest of the Islands that are attributed to Africa. It is distant from it a
hundred or a hundred and twenty Leagues, and there is hardly an Island in the
World of so vast an extent. It Is in length above a thousand English Miles, and
near three hundred in breadth. The Natives of the Country call it, Madecase;
the Portuguese, St. Lawrence; and the French, the Isle Dauphine: The Ancients
called it Menuthias, and the Kernel of Aethiopia. According to our Relations,
the Air is temperate, the Soil proper for all manner of Grains and Trees, Rice,
Skins, Wax, Gums, Cristals, Steels, Copper, Ebony, and Woods of several sorts,
are transported from thence. The Inhabitants consist both of Whites and Blacks,
who are almost all Idolaters, there being very few Mahometans among 'em.

The Portugals, English, and Hollanders, have sometimes touched there: the
Portugals, in the Ance of Galion; the English, in the Bay of St. Augustine; and
the Hollanders, in that of Antongil. The French, since they have built the Fort
Dauphin, have made pretty exact Discoveries of all the Eastern and Southern
Coast of the Island.

The Isle of Bourbon, called formerly Mascharenhe, five and twenty Leagues in
length, and fourteen in breadth, is in possession of the French. It has a
Vulcano, that is to say, a Mountain that spits and casts forth fire; the rest
of its Land is by much the best and finest Country in the World; the Waters
are very healthful, and it has most of the Commodities, that are in the Isle of
Madagascar.

The Isle of Maltha.
MAltha, about the midst of the Mediterranean-Sea, was formerly called Melita,
by reason of its Honey. It Is attributed to Africa, because nearer it than the
firm Land of Europe, and because the Maltheses have great conformity with the
Africans in point of manners. Its Land and its Stones have Virtues altogether
singular: if there be Serpents, they have no venom. Some appropriate to this
Island, the particulars of the Shipwreck of St. Paul, and those of the little
Dogs, which others affirm to have been in the Isle of Melada, in the Gulf of
Venice.

The Isle of Maltha has often had the same Sovereigns with Sicily: at present
it is the abode of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, under a Prince, whom
they call the Great Master. The Patron of the Order is St. John Baptist, and,
nevertheless, the Name of St. John was given it, upon occasion of the place,
where that Order was first of all established, and by reason of a St. John,
Bishop of Alexandria, celebrated for his great and bountiful Alms. The
Emperor, Charles the Fifth, gave it to the Knights, who had no settled abode,
since the loss of Rhodes, and who before had resided at Jerusalem, at Margat,
Acre, and Limisso, in the Isle of Cyprus. The Order is composed of eight
Tongues, which are as many principal Nations; Provence, Auvergne, France,
Italy, Aragon, England, Germany, and Castile. To each of 'em belong some
considerable Dignities, Priories, and Commanderies. The three Tongues of France
have full three hundred Commanderies, and the five others together have not
many more. The Name of Knight was not in use in the beginning of the
institution of the Order. The Religious were then called Hospitallers of St.
John of Jerusalem. One of the Statutes of the Order, bears, That the Knights
ought rather to lose their Lives, than yield up the Places that are confided to
their keeping.

The Island produces several good Fruits; as it has little Corn and Wine to
nourish seventy five or eighty thousand persons: Sicily does commonly supply
that want. They make account there of fifteen thousand Men, fit for service;
and they now keep there eight good Galleys. It is but ten Leagues in length,
and five in breadth, with several Harbors and Roads, that are called Calls
and Marsa. It is the best fortified of the World, as being the principal
Rampart and Bulwark of Christendom, and its Fortresses have above three hundred
pieces of Canon. By reason of its strength, and the valor of its Knights, they
say, Maltha fior del Mondo. There are four Towns; the City, which is about the
midst of the Island; Valetta, a new City; the victorious Burg City, which
repulsed the Turks in the Year 1565; and St. Michael, which is now called the
Isle de la Sangle: the three last are near one another, and seem to make but
one.

La Goza, a small Island near that of Maltha, affords good Hawks; the Great
Master styles himself the Prince of it. They call those young Knights, whom
they mean to droll upon for their Bravading, by the Title of Prince of Forfola,
which is a Rock near the Coast.

Of some other Islands of Africa.
MAdera, eighteen Leagues in compass, in the Atlantic, and on the North of the
Canaries, belongs to the Crown of Portugal. It enjoys a pleasant Air, is not
subject to excessive Heats, but never feels any Cold. Seven or eight small
Rivers contribute much to its temperature. It is called the Queen of Islands,
by reason of its Beauty, and the fertility of its Soil, which produces
excellent Wine. Here grow also delicate Fruits, and they make the best Sugar in
the World, which furnishes the means of preparing Marmalade, Codinniack, and
other such like Preserves. It has three Towns; the principal is Funchal, the
Residence of the Governor and the Bishop: It Is at the foot of a Mountain,
which is full five Quarts of a League high, with three Fortresses, and an
Harbor in form of a Crescent, where Ships may come and lie at Anchor within
Pistol-shot of the Town.

St. Thomas, under the Equinoctial, is rich in Sugar; the Air bad for those
Foreigners, who go to dwell there; they never grow bigger than they were at
their first arrival there. The Portuguese were the first who subdued it. Its
best Town is Pavoasan, of about seven hundred Families, with a Fortress in the
Eastern part of the Island, at present belonging to the Hollanders. It has
several Trees like to that of the Island of Fierro; they have the same
circumstance of distilling Water continually, for the use of the Inhabitants.
Their Swines-flesh is more pleasant and more healthful than that of Fowl, by
reason that Creature is fed with Canes that produce Sugar.

The Prince's Island has had this Name, since that its Revenue was set apart
for the maintenance of the Prince of Portugal.

Annabon was so called, having been first discovered on the first day of the
Year. The Portuguese have an Habitation there in its Northern part.

St. Helena, of sixteen Leagues in compass, is in the Ethiopick. There is not
an Island, in the World, farther distant from the Terra firma. They call it the
Sea's Inn, because it has fresh Water in abundance, and that those who come
from the East Indies are used to touch there, to take it in. It Is high and full
of Mountains, with a very clear Coast without Rocks, where is, even near the
Rocks, above ten fathom Water. The English have found such great accommodation
here, that they have built a Fort in the Island.

Zocotora and Bebelmendel are toward the Red Sea; this last in the Straight
which receives its Name, where the passage is most commodious on the side of
Africa. Zocotora, near the Cap Guadarfu, five and twenty Leagues in length, and
ten in breadth, obeys a King that is an Arabian. It has a good Road, and Bays
very commodious, where Ships may ride safe at Anchor, even near the Rocks.
Ships may Winter there more conveniently than at Mozambique, or Mombaze; the
Air being healthful, the Entrance of the Bar without danger, and the Cattle in
great plenty.

Asia,
THis part of the World, which is called the Levant, by reason of its
situation on the East of Europe, and of Africa, is the greatest of the three,
which compose our Continent. Its Length from the West to the East, is full two
thousand, five hundred French Leagues from the Western parts of Natolia, to the
most Eastern parts of China. If we include herein the Territories of Tartary,
as far as the Channel of Piecko, and the Straight of Vries, which separate it
from the Land of Jesso, this length would contain above thirty Degrees of
Longitude more. The Breadth of Asia, without comprehending therein the Islands,
is seventy two Degrees, which make above eighteen hundred of the forementioned
Leagues, and all this in the Northern Temperate Zone, except some Peninsula's,
which are in the Torrid Zone.

Several do believe that the Terrestrial Paradise was in Asia, and so that Adam
was Created there. Asia was the Lot of Sem, the Eldest of Noah's Sons. God has
wrought herein the principal Mysteries of the ancient and new Law, and therein
Jesus Christ was born. 'Twas in Asia, that Man did first breath. From Asia came
the Customs, Religions, Manners, Laws, and Learning, which after the Universal
Deluge, spread themselves into other parts of the Earth. Asia is famous for the
Monarchies of the Assyrians, Medes, Babylonians, Persians, and Califfs; for the
Phoenician People, who first taught the Greeks, and other Nations, a good part
of the Arts and Sciences.

The four principal Religions are followed there: The Jewish, the Mohammedan,
and Idolatrous, more than the Christian: Idolatry began there among the
Assyrians; Judaism amongst the Hebrews; Christianity in the Holy Land; and
Mahometism in Arabia.

Several Missions have been established there by Christian Princes, those of
Turkey, under the Protection of France; those of the Indies, under the
Protection of Portugal; those of the Philippines, under the Protection of
Castile. There are four Archbishopricks, and seven Bishoprics, in the
East Indies, where likewise the Jesuits have three Provinces, that of Goa, that
of Malabar, and that of Japan. Since the Peace of the Year 1659, France sent
thither the Bishops of Heliopolis, Metellopolis, Berite, and Caesarea, with
design of settling Christianity, and of carrying it as far as into China. They
have made considerable progresses, notwithstanding the impositions of the
Spaniards, who would have imposed on the Bishop of Heliopolis, Intreagues of
affairs of State, and made him take a turn round the World without his desiring
it. Mahometism is received by the four principal Nations of Asia, by the Turks,
Arabians, Persians, and Tartars. The Turks in matters of Religion, are the
freest, the Arabians, the most superstitious, the Persians, the most rational,
and the Tartars, the most simple. Some make up the number of seventy two Sects
of them, which are commonly reduced to two, to that of the Turks, following the
Doctrine of Homar, and to that of the Persians, according to the Doctrine of
Hali. These last have their Patriarch at Ispahan; the Turks have theirs at
Bagdad. The Greeks have theirs, who bear the names of Antioch, and Jerusalem.
There be still other Schismatics, Jacobites, who have their Patriarch at
Caramit; Nestorians, Cophites, Georgiens; Syrians, who bear the name of their
Chief, and not of Syria; And Armenians. These last have two Patriarcks, the one
at Nassivan in Media, the other at Ciz in Cilicia. The Maronites have theirs at
Canobin in Mount Libanus. The Papists boast of having brought over several to
their Church, within a few years past.

Asia toward the West, is separated from Africa, by the Red Sea, and by the
Isthmus of Sues: It is divided from Europe, by several Seas, and Streights,
which I shall enumerate in the Article upon Europe. Toward the other Regions
of the World, Asia is environed with the Ocean, known under the Name of
Tartary, toward the North; under that of China, toward the East; and under
that of the Indies, toward the South. Some have endeavored to persuade us,
that the Hollanders have of late traded into Japan, by the Sea of Tartary; if
this be true, those people keep that Voyage very secret, and are much afraid
that other Nations should have any knowledge thereof. The principal Seas within
the Inland Country, are the Caspian, which now receives other Names from the
Provinces, and Cities which are near it. It has salt Waters, though it has the
Fish of Fresh Waters: This made the Ancients believe, in that it communicated
with the Ocean, it may well communicate with some Sea, by the subterraneous
Meatus: It receives several great Rivers, and nevertheless does not swell. The
Sea El-Catif, is that of Persia. The Dead Sea is small in respect of others,
yet it is famous by reason of the Holy Land, where it is; It has this name of
the Dead Sea given it, because its Waters have no Motion.

The principal Rivers of Asia are, the Euphrates, Tigris, Indus, Ganges, Quiam,
and Obi.

Caucasus, and Taurus, so celebrated by the Ancients, are the highest Mountains
in this part of the World; The Inhabitants of the Country have them under other
Names.

The Air, almost of all Asia, is found to be temperate. If we consider its
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Drugs, Spices, Silk, Stuffs; we must own, that
it is the richest, as well as the most temperate, part of the World. The
fishing for Pearls is in three principal places, at the Isle Baharem in the
Persian Sea, the Island Manar upon the Coast of the Indus, and that of Ainan
near China. Amongst the Products of Asia, they esteem the Diamonds of Golconda
and Narsin^a, the Pepper and Ginger of Malabar, the Stuffs of Bengala, the
Rubies and Lacca of Pegu, the Dainties and Knacks of China; the Cinnamon of
Ceilan, the Gold of Sumatra, the Camphire of Borneo, the Cloves of the
Molucco's, the Nutmegs of Banda, the Sanders of Timor.

Four of the seven Wonders of the World, were in Asia; the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Walls of Babylon, the Colossus at
Rhodes; the Statue of Jupiter Olympicus, was in Europe, the Pharos, and the
Pyramids, in Africa.

The Asiaticks have ever been a people addicted to pleasures, except some
Tartars, who by their incursions incommode their Neighbors continually; they
love fish more than flesh, wherefore Priests, in their Fasts and Lents, eat
only flesh.

Asia is under the Dominion of Potent Monarchs, who can easily bring great
Armies on foot; of whom those of the Turks are the best Disciplined. The most
considerable of those Sovereigns, are the Grand Segnior, who resides in Europe;
the King of Persia; the Great Cham of Tartary, at present, King of China in
part; and the great Mogul. Several other great Princes are in Georgia, Arabia,
Tartary, in the Indies, and in most of the Islands. Diverse people maintain
their liberty in the Mountains. The principal place of the Conquests of
Portugal, is Goa, that of the Hollandens, Jacatra, otherwise Batavia, in the
Isle of Java. The English and the French, have their chief place of Traffic at
Surat. The Spaniards possess the Philippine Islands, the Moscovites sway the
best part of the Desert of Tartary, which commonly be attributed to Asia.

In the division of this part of the World, some Authors make it to be
Inferior, and Exterior, in respect of Mount Taurus. By this same Mountain the
Greeks have made it a Citerior, or Northorn, and Vlterior, or Southern in
respect of them; we divide it into Terra-firma and Islands. The Countries of the
Terra, firma, are toward the West, the Asian Turkey, Georgia, and Arabia;
toward the middle Persia; toward the North Tartary; toward the East China;
toward the South India, divided into Terra-firma, which is the Empire of the
Mogul, and into two Peninsula's, the one on this, and the other on that, side
the Ganges. The Islands are in the Eastern Sea, that is, that of the Indies,
where are found to be the greatest Riches, and perhaps in greater number, than
in all the rest of the Universe. These Islands are the Maldives, Ceilan, those
of the Sound, and Japan, the Philippins, and the Moluccoes. There are some
Islands of Asia in the Mediterranean Sea, Cyprus, Rhodes, and others in the
Archipelago.

Turkey in Asia.
WHat belongs to the Turk in Asia, comprehends much about the same Provinces,
which the ancient Romans had in that part of the World; and besides that, those
of Armenia, and Assyria. 'Twas formerly adorned with a great number of brave
Cities; The conduct of the Turks, and the laziness of the Inhabitants, have
quite ruined most of them. One would think this Country ought to be very
populous, by reason of the freedom which Men enjoy there, of having several
Wives; yet it is certain, it has very few people, if we consider its large
extent. There seldom pass five or six years together, without several thousands
of persons being swept away by the Plague. What is considerable is, that along
the Coasts, where the Echelles, that is to say, places of Trade, enrich
themselves by the transportation of the Levantine Merchandises, which consist
in Skins, Cotton, Tapistry, Camlets, and other like Stuffs: These Echelles have
this in particular, that they have Consuls for the Nations of Europe: And in
consideration of the Christian Princes, the Knights of Maltha, do not commonly
form any enterprises thereabouts. The Merchants, who dwell there, send and
receive their Letters by a sort of Pigeons called Carriers, which they keep,
and which they send for that purpose to the places, where they have been
brought up. The Grand Seigniour, has his Bashaws there, who keep the people
under extreme subjection. The Mohammedan Religion is received in most places.
Where are also to be seen Jews, and Christians of the Greek Church. As for
manners, a Cadi, or Judge, has judiciously observed, That amongst the Nations,
who inhabit this Region, the Turks were blameable for their Whoring, the Jews
for their Superstition, and the Christians for their Litigiousness.

This Turkey is certainly in a choice situation; in the midst of our
Continent, and in the Temperate Zone; it has the Course of the Euphrates, and
Tigris, with the convenience of four Seas, the Mediterranean, the Black Sea,
the Caspian, and that of El-Catif, which open to it the Commerce of the
principal Regions of the World, and particularly, that of the East Indies. The
Euphrates having passed near the ruins of the ancient Babylon, joins it self to
the Tigris below Bagdad. Its Channel is inconsiderable in those parts by reason
of the many Islets that are made there. It has this advantage, that it joins
the Traffic of the Black Sea, which is not far distant from its Sources, with
that of the East Indies. The Tigris forms several Lakes, sometimes going under
the Earth, and after having passed by Bagdad, mixing with Euphrates. The Waters
of these two Rivers, fall into the Sea El-Catif; formerly under the name of
Euphrates, now under that of Tigris, or rather under that of Chat, which is
called the Arabic River. The Country, which they Water; is so beautiful, and
so fertile, that several place therein the Terrestrial Paradise. There are
hardly any Stone Bridges upon the Tigris; and by reason of its inundations,
they commonly make their Bridges of Boats.

Four great Provinces are in this Turkey Natolia, Turcomania, Dierbech, and
Souria. Natolia, formerly Asia Minor, is a Peninsula much more long than broad,
between the Black Sea, the Archipelago, the Mediterranean, and the River of
Euphrates. The ancient Greeks sent thither several Colonies: Cyrus the Great
thought his Empire would not be considerable, unless he had Asia Minor. Mighty
Battails have often been fought for the preserving this Province, and for the
Conquering it. There are reckoned four Beglerbeyats, or general Governments;
that of Natolia at Chioutaye; Caramania at Cogni, Amasi at Tocat, and Aladuli
at Maraz. The City of Burse, has been successively the Residence of the Kings
of Bithynia, and of some Greek Emperors, and Turkish ones too, before they
passed into Europe. The first Ottomans have their Tombs there: Soliman the
First, would needs be buried at the neck of the Dardanelles near Gallipoli:
Burse yields little but to Conscantinople, for its Riches, and its multitudes
of people. Nice is known for the holding the first General Council, and for the
Residence of the Greek Emperors, after that the French had taken
Constantinople in the Year 1201. Angoure is famous for the Victory of
Tamberlane over Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, and before, for that of Pompey
over Mithridates. Tocat is the Appennage of the Sultan-Mothers. The Country
round about it produces Saffron. Troy, Pergamus, Sardis, have been Royal
Cities. Troy, famous by reason of its being taken by the Greeks after a Siege
often Years, or rather for Homer's immortal Banter, has its ruins mingled with
the decays of some Modern works. It was called Dardania, upon the account of
Dardanus its first King, Ilium, by reason of its Castle of Priam. The City of
Pergamos, is highly renowned for the riches of King Attalus, and the invention
of Parchment. Sardis, for the Residence of the ancient Kings of Lydia. Dinobi
upon the Black Sea, has Copper Mines in its Neighborhood, which are perhaps
the only ones in Asia. It has been the abode of Mithridates, the most
formidable Enemy of the Romans; who notwithstanding his defeat, had the thought
of traversing Lacholcide, Soythia, and Illyria, to come and attack Italy.
Chalcedon is the place, where was held the Fourth General Council. As its
ancient Inhabitants were cracking, that their City was built before Bizantium;
a Persian told them judiciously, that its Founders had been blind, to choose so
incommodious a situation, in respect of that of Bizantium. Avido one of the
Castles, that are called Dardanelles upon the Hellespont, has seen the swimming
Amors of Hero and Leander, as also the passage of that prodigious Army of
Xerxes King of Persia, upon a Bridge of six hundred and seventy four Galleys.
Fogia, Smyrna, Ephesus, Milazo, and Halicarnassus, are upon the Coast of the
Archipelago. Fogia, formerly Phocee, the Mother of Marscilles, is the first
City that was taken in a formed Siege, and the taking of it was Harpagus his
Act, General under Cyrus the great. Smyrna, which is often called the Smirnes,
and which contains above ninety thousand Souls, is in a fertile ground, and
drives one of the greatest Commerces in the Mediteranean-Sea: The English,
French and Venetians, have their respective Consuls there. Alexander the great
did in vain endeavor to ditch the Peninsula that is near it; this is said to
be the only Enterprise which that Hero was unable to bring about. Ephesus has
had the Temple of Diana. Melazo, formerly Miletum, has established several
Colonies in diverse places, and held out a long while against the Kings of
Lydia. It was near some neighboring Islands of the City of Miletum, that
Julius Caesar was taken by Pirates. Halicarnassus boasts of having had the
Mausoleum built by Queen Artemisa, in memory of King Mausolus, her Husband.
Santhe prides it self in the brave resistance of its ancient Citizens, who
suffered all the Extremities imaginable, in the sieges they held out, at
several times, against Harpagus, Alexander the Great, and against Brutus.
Sattalia, otherwise Antali, gives its Name to a neighboring Gulf. Tarsus was
the place of St. Paul's Education. Tiagna is the native Country of the learned
Apollonius; Amasia, that of Mithridates and Strabo. Zela, which is not far off,
is renowned for the Victory of Julius Caesar, over Pharnaces. Trebizond has
been the capital City of an Empire of short continuance: This Empire having
been established by Isaac Comnone, who having retired from Constantinople, was
destroyed by Mahomet the Second, Emperor of the Turks; the same who rendered
himself Master of the Empire of the Greeks. Laiazza is near the passage of
Cilicia, where several Battles have been fought. The modern History sets down
that of the Sultan of Egypt against Bajazet the Second, Emperor of the Turks,
wherein the latter was defeated: Alexander the Great, gained here a memorable
Victory, over Darius, in person. Ventidius Bassus, the Roman, vanquished the
Parthians here; and the Emperor Severus discomfited Pescenninus Niger, his
Rival to the Empire. Near this Place we are shown the ancient City of
Anchialus, which is said to have been built in a day by Sardanapalus: Perhaps
the Workmen of that Age were as dexterous as the modern Muscovites, who in the
Market sell Houses whole, and ready made to be set up. Amongst the Rivers of
Asia Minor, Thermodoon, now Pormon, has had the Amazons in its neighborhood.
Lalli served for bounds to the Dominions of Cirus and Croesus; Granique toward
the Hellespont, has been witness of the first Victory of Alexander the Great
over the Persians; Pactolus, near Sardis, has been famous for its golden Sand,
which gave occasion to the great Riches of the Kings of Lydia: the Meander for
its fine Swans, and its Sinuosities. The Cidne, near Tarsus, has its Waters so
cold, that they killed the Emperor Barbarossa, who bathed himself therein:
Alexander the Great, having done the like, was abandoned by most of his
Physicians, and was only cured by the Remedy of Philip, who ordered a Potion
pretty like the modern Emetic Wine. The most renowned Mountains of Asia Minor,
are Taurus, Ida, and Micale. Taurus divides all Asia into two parts, as we have
already said. It is the most famous in the World for its length, for its
height, and its branches, Caucasus and Imaus are parts of it. Ida, near Troy,
is famous for the judgment of Paris; Micale, near Ephesus, for the Sea
Engagement, which the Greeks won over the Persians, the same day that these
were vanquished at Platees in Boeotia.

Turcomania is the Country of the Armenians, whose Tongue and Religion are
received in most places of the Levant. Those People, who had their peculiar
Kings before that the Turks subdued them, pretend, that they cannot be made
Slaves, by reason of a Privilege, which their Predecessors obtained from
Mahomet, when that they assisted him to his establishment. This consideration
has made most of the Merchants of Turkey, go under the name of Armenians. There
are still at this day, in Armonia, Curdes, who defend their Liberty. The King
of Persia has also some part of it. He is in possession of Erevan, which has in
its neighborhood the three Churches, the abode of the Patriarch of the
Armenians. The Persians draw from thence a considerable Tribute, for the
passage of the Caravans: For the better subjecting to themselves, what they
stand possessed of, they have carried thence whole Colonies, who inhabit the
City of Giulfa, near Ispaham. Cha Abas used a very rigorous Policy toward
these poor Wretches; he took away their Wives, to give them to Mahometans of
his Kingdom, and gave them the Wives of those Mahometans. It Is held to be upon
the Mountains of Armenia, and chiefly upon Ararat, that the Ark of Noah rested,
and there we place the terrestrial Paradise: Not improbably it is the middle
and the highest place of the World: Sem, Ham, and Japhet, set down there the
bounds of their Dividend; there is to be seen the Sources of four famous
Rivers, the Euphrates, Tigris, Faze, and Arais. The three first have Names
conformable to those mentioned in Holy Writ. Arais may well be the Gehun, since
Gehun in the Chaldaick Tongue, signifies a River; and Arasses in Persian,
signifies the same thing; Besides, the Etopian people are placed near its Bed.
This Arais joins to Kur, before it falls into the Caspian-Sea: it is the only
River of the Country, that bears Boats, and the Araxes of the Ancients, which
has served for bounds to the Kingdoms of Media, and Armenia, where Justin has
set down the Defeat of Cyrus the Great, by Tomiris, Queen of the Scithians.

Diarbech is the Assyria, where the Romans have often fought unhappily against
the Parthians, and where the Turks and Persians have their greatest Disputes.
Two Cities now ruined, have been very considerable there, Niniveh, and Babylon.
Niniveh, opposite to and on the East of Mosul and beyond the Euphrates, was the
abode of the Kings of Assyria, with twenty four of our Leagues in compass: The
voluntary Death of Sardanapalus, and the repentance of its Inhabitants, have
made it the labor of History. Babylon, a small days journey from Bagdad, which
is upon the Tigris, has nothing more than ruins in a place called Felougia. In
the neighborhood is shown the place where was the Tower of Babel, famous for
the confusion of Tongues. This Babylon was built by Nimrod, who is said to be
the same with Belus; Queen Semiramis, as also Nebuchadnezzar, did much augment
it: This Princess having caused Walls to be raised there, which have made it
pass for one of the Seven Wonders of the World, and its fine Gardens in Terrace
have given admiration to several persons. As it has been the object of the
greatest Conquerours of the East, it has been taken by Cirus, by Darius, by
Alexander the Great, who died there at his return from his Conquests, and by
Seleucus. The Children of Israel were there in captivity, for the space of
seventy years: the Country round about produces two sorts of Pitch, the one
dry, which is made use of in Buildings, the other liquid and very suceptible of
fire, having this particular, of not being to be extinguished, but with Dirt,
Vinegar, Alom, and Glue. The Power and Riches of Babylon have been so great,
that it alone contributed more to King Cirus, than did the third part of his
Dominions. After Babylon, Seleucia has been considerable in Assiria, Ctesiphon,
Vologe-socerta, and lastly, Bagdad, which is in the place of Ctesiphon. Bagdad,
which some call Baldac, and which is vulgarly called Babylon, is not only
resorted to by Merchants of several Nations, but also by Mahometans, who go
thither from all parts of Asia, to visit, in its neighborhood, the Sepulchers
of Omar, Ali, and other Disciples of Mahomet. It was for a long while the
Residence of the Caliphs: one of whom, named Vlit, has had the glory of being
Master of the greatest Monarchy that has ever been in the World: It extended
from the most Western parts of Barbary, to the Indus. It Is observed of another
Caliph, of this same City, that he left, at his death, eight Sons, eight
Daughters, eight Millions of Gold, eight thousand Slaves, and his Dominions
augmented by eight Kingdoms. In the Year 1638, when the Grand Seignior, Amurath
the Fourth recovered this strong and important City of Bagdad from the
Persians; he caused three Men of each Company of his Army to be cast into the
Ditch, and upon them a number of Faggots, and Sacks of Wool, for the making the
Assault with the more facility. Kufa is a Town, which the Inhabitants have in
peculiar veneration, by reason of the Sepulcher of Ali. They keep there a Horse
always ready to mount him, whom they say is to come and convert the whole World
to their Law. Bassora is a Town near the mouth of the Tigris, called Chat by
those of the Country. It Is spacious and pleasant, by reason of its Palm Trees.
By the means of its Harbor, it furnishes the Indies and Persia with Dates,
which serve for Bread and Wine, to those who know how to prepare them. Its
great Commerce of Horses, makes it often called by the Name of Mer-El-Catif.
They were used to Voyage, upon this Sea or Gulf, along the shore, and with the
lead in hand. The Barks that are made use of there, are sewed with little Cords
of Coco; insomuch, that not any Nails are to be perceived in 'em. Some few
years ago, Bassora belonged to Ali Bashaw, who called himself King of it, and
who had this state from Father to Son, and was the Dominus fac-totum, paying
only a small tribute to the Grand Seignior, who did not press him, for fear he
should take the Persians side.

Souria is divided into Souria, Phoenicia, and the Holy Land. Souria proper to
the City of Aleppo, which is reckoned for the best of all the Levant, and
contains above two hundred and fifty thousand Persons. It is really the third
of the Ottoman Empire, if we consider the resort thither of the Caravans, the
Rendezvous of the Turkish Armies in the Wars of Persia, and all its other
advantages. The Jewels, Spices, Silks, and other precious Commodities, arrive
here from the East by Sea, and by Land: They send them afterward into Barbary,
by means of the Port of Alexandretta, upon the Mediterranean Sea. They there
make use of Camels, for the going to Bir, where they might have the convenience
of the Euphrates, as far as the Neighborhood of Bagdad; but several Mills
there hinder the Navigation. It Is fine to see upon that River, the Peasants
going down the stream upon Goats-skins, which they fill with Wind, and let out
again, when they have made use of them. Antioch which, for excellency, has the
Denomination of Great, was the abode of some Roman Emperors, and the Cradle of
Christianity, St. Paul having established here the first Patriarchate of the
Church. It has had formerly a Suburb called Daphne, which passed for one of the
most delicious places in the World. Damas, the Metropolis of Phoenicia, sends
us sweet smelling Waters, Wines, pleasurable Fruits, Prunes, Raisins,
Cutlasses, Sword Blades; and other works, which keep the Name of it. They say,
that after the Battle of Issus, Alexander the Great, found in Damascus, two
hundred thousand six hundred Talents of Coined Money. This City is in so
fertile, and so agreeable a situation, that some have called it the Paradise
of the World. Said (otherwise Sidon) has a French Consul, for Trade. Sur, or
Sour, from whence came the Name of Souria, is the ancient Tire; renowned for
its fine Scarlet, for its good Mariners; for its Colonies; and for the Siege of
seven Months, which it held out against Alexander the Great, before he could
take it. In its Neighborhood, is to be seen the Castle of Tygade, the ancient
obode of Old de la Montagne, Prince of the Assassins, who executed blindly all
the Orders of their Sovereign. Saint John de Aere, otherwise Ptolemaida,
formerly the Residence of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, is accompanied
with a Sea-Haven. Mount Libanus, is remarkable for its height, for its
fertility, for the ancient Cedars, which have been found there, since the
Creation of the World. It has full sixty Leagues in compass, and forty Villages
of the Maronites. Those people who are Catholics, receive their Name from the
Monastery of Saint-Maron: They are in possession of four hundred Villages, and
can bring fifteen thousand Men in Arms. Canobin is the Residence of their
Patriarch, who bears the Title of that of Antioch. Besides the Maronites in
this Mount Libanus, are Emirs, or Princes, and the Nations of the Druses,
Nassarians, Kelbins, who maintain there their liberty. The Holy Land, where the
principal Mysteries of our Salvation were wrought; is (as it were) in the midst
of our Continent. It was first of all named the Land of Canaan, the Land of the
Promise, the Land of the Hebrews, the Land of Israelites; and afterward Judea,
Palestine; and finally the Holy Land; by reason of the Birth, and Death of the
Savior of the World, and in consideration of the abode of the Prophets. Its
principal and first Divisions have been into eleven people, who bore the Names
of the Children of Canaan; into fifty two Kingdoms, and five Satrapies: into
twelve Tribes, who went under the Names of the Children of Jacob. It Is however
to be observed, that Manasses, and Ephraim, are the Names of the Children of
Joseph, who died before the Division; and that the Tribes, who had the Lands on
the East of Jordan, had them upon condition of engaging first in the most
dangerous Actions. The other Divisions of the Holy Land, have been into twelve
Governments under Solomon: Into two Kingdoms, Israel and Judah: Into six
Provinces, after the Captivity of Babylon: Into three Roman Provinces: Into
five Tribunals or Audiences, by Gabinius: And lastly, Into three Ecclesiastical
Provinces. The Holy Land has hardly, at present, any place of Remark; and the
Turks only preserve the Towns they have there, by reason of the Money which
they exact from the Pilgrims. It had formerly Cities so rich, so powerful, and
in such great numbers, that no Country in the World was there that could be
compared to it, for that reason: there having been reckoned above five hundred
and seventy. Its extent from the South to the North, is about seventy Leagues;
Its breadth thirty, somewhere more, somewhere less, according as it is bounded,
either by the Mountains of Arabia, or by Jordan. What is there called the
Desert, is so styled, in that it has not all the fertility, that is found in
the Countries which are near it. Its modern Division is into three
Principalities, Said, Cossaria, and Gaza. Two Governments are under the Bashaw
of Damascus, Jerusalem, and Naplouse. Jerusalem, though fallen from its ancient
Luster, still preserves those places, which Jesus Christ was pleased to honor
with his presence. It has been famous for the bigness, beauty, and riches of
its Temple; for its Kings; for its Highpriests; and for other particularities.
It was ruined by Nebuchadnezzar, by Vespasian, and Titus; These two last saw
the Death of Eleven hundred thousand Persons. There are eight Nations of
Christians, who are ranked in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. The Roman
Catholics, the Maronites; the Greeks, the Armenians, the Syrians, or
Jacobites, the Copties, or Egyptians, and the Georgians. One of the Gates of
the City, called the Eye of a Needle, has given occasion to the Proverb, that a
Camel may as soon pass through the Eye of a Needle, as a Rich man enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Nazareth is the place, where the Savior of the World
was conceived; Bethlem that where he was born. There are an infinite number of
rare things to be remarked upon these Cities of the Holy Land: The misfortune
is, that they are hardly any longer to be known.

Some Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, belong to the Turks, whereof that of
Cyprus is the greatest; It has the Title of a Kingdom, and formerly contained
nine. Nicosia is the Capital City of the Island. Famagusta the Principal
Seaport. This Famagusta was the last place, which the Venetians defended there
against the Turks, who took it at last after a Siege of seventy days, and
above a hundred and forty thousand Shot made against the Town. The Grotto of
the seven Sleepers, is near the City of Baffo. In an Abbey near Limisso, they
keep Cats, brought up to the hunting of Serpents, after which they return back
thither at the ringing of a Bell. The Isle of Rhodes is famous for the ancient
abode of the Knights of the same Name, who were constrained to yield it to the
Turk in the Year 1522: For the Colossus of the Sun, which was so prodigious,
that few persons could embrace the thumb of it: Great Ships passed easily with
full Sails between its Legs: When the Sarazens caused the Copper of it to be
carried into Egypt, they found it to load above nine hundred Camels. The Isles
of Chio, and Metilin, are in the Archipelago. Chio one of the most fertile and
most delicious in the World, produces excellent Fruits, Malmsy Wine, and
particularly Mastick. It has the High and Low Town, and in both are reckoned
above twenty thousand Mortals: They are almost all Christians, Greeks, and
Latins; and there is not a place under the Turk, where the Christians have more
freedom. Metelin affords excellent Wines: And the Nightingales are said to sing
more melodiously there, than elsewhere. Its ancient Inhabitants have had the
reputation of being very expert Mariners. In the last Age, the famous
Barberossa, who is said to have been a Native of this Island, rendered himself
formidable to all Christendom. Patmos, or Palmosa, is known for the Exile, and
the Grotto of St. John the Evangelist. The Isle of Lango, under the Name of
Cos, has passed for the native Country of Hippocrates, and Appelles. The
enviers of Hippocrates, attribute all his knowledge to Medicinal Receipts,
which were brought into the Temple of Aesculapius. Apelles observed proportion
in his Pictures, whereas Zeuxis made them greater than Nature for the giving
them Majesty. The Inhabitants of Lango, are said to have found out the first
use of Silkworms. Not far from thence, there is a little Island called
Caloiero, which is almost impregnable: It is only a steep Rock, where the
Monks, and those who inhabit it, draw up their Boats after them with Ropes.

Georgia.
UNder the Name of Georgia, we bring Mingrelia, Gurgistan, Zuiria, and
Circassia. Provinces where the ancient Romans were not able to establish their
Empire, by reason of the sharpness of the Mountains, known by the Ancients
under the Name of Caucasus, celebrated in the fable of Prometheus. All these
Provinces lie between the Black and Caspian Seas, which are thought to
communicate with one another, because they have Fish of the same kinds, and
that those Territories, which lie between both, seem to have a superficies of
but little depth, principally, when they go on Horseback there. From thence
they transport Silk, Stuffs, Wax, Honey: Little Money is made use of, most of
the Georgians being so poor, that they often sell their Children to have
wherewith to subsist on. An Inhabitant has been known there to exchange his
Mother for a Turkish Horse, that was to his mind. There are in Georgia several
Christians, and some Mahometans. The true Natives have a peculiar tongue.
Several amongst them are free, some have their Kings, others acknowledge either
the Turk, or the Persian, according to the necessity of their affairs. Those
who obey the Turk, have great Privileges in his Dominions; they pay him but a
very inconsiderable Tribute, may enter armed and with displayed Ensigns into
Jerusalem. Teflis has a particular King, who owns Allegigiance to him of
Persia. Derbent often disputed by the Turks, and the Persians, is in the
Passage that is called the Port of Iron, these are the Remnants of the Caspian
Ports, that are seen upon Mount Barmach, with some Springs of Medicinal Oil.
The Tartars of Dagestan, who are near it, are commanded by the Schemkal, a
Prince, whose Dignity depends on fate; when he is dead, those who pretend to
have his Place, assemble around, and a Priest cafts a Golden Apple in the midst
of them, which makes him Prince it touches; for they don't scramble for
Sovereignty.

Mingrelia, otherwise Imereti, and Basciaciuch, lies near the Black Sea, at the
place where that Sea receives the Faze, which contrary to other Rivers, has
fresh waters above, and salt below. In the Country about Faze, Pheasants were
first of all had. There are caught several other sorts of Birds, especially
Crows, and Jackdaws. In the Year 1642, those Birds eat a prodigious quantity of
Herrings, which the Sea had cast upon the Coast; to the height of a foot and
half. There are White Bears, which prove that those Creatures form a particular
sort of Bears. Mingrelia upon the Eastern part of the Black Sea, is the ancient
Colches, famous for the Amor of Jason and Medea, and the coming thither of the
Argonautes, to sharp the Golden Fleece. This Fleece, when the Metaphor is
shorn off, is thought by the wise to have consisted in the Mines of Gold, or
else in the Commerce of Furs or Skins, which turned to great profit. Appian
says, they were Skins, that remained guilt, when the Peasants made use of them
to stop the Golden Sand, which they took in the Rivers, and which they cast
against those Fleeces. There are still at this day Mines of Gold and Silver;
but the Inhabitants of the Country keep them very secret, and moreover
endeavor to show the Envoys of the Turks, that the Country is very poor. Iron
is there in so great abundance, that the most part of Turkey is furnished
thence with that Metal. Sena, Scammony, black Hellebore, and other Herbs and
Plants grow there; but the natural Inhabitants of the Country are so ignorant
of Simples, and the art of Physic, that a Confection of Wormwood having been
prescribed some time since by an European, for the Cure of a Princess, a
Mingrelian caused the Powder of a Stone of that Name, to be dissolved in Water.
These Natives call themselves Odischi, or Guriel, from the Name of their
Prince, and pay some Tribute to the Turk, They have amongst them several
Bishops, and Ecclesiastics, who make no scruple of following their Prince to
the War, armed with a Headpiece, and a Cimiter on their sides, as well as
several Bishops of the Empire of Germany. What is particularly Imereti, is
free, the Town of Cotatis, formerly Cotyaeum, was the Country of Aetes,
farther of Medea. In the Year 1578, Amurath the Grand Seignior, had caused a
Fort to be made in the Island, which is in the Mouth of the Faze: Since that,
this Fort has been demolished by the Inhabitants of the Country. There was in
Odischi, Savatopoli, now ruined by the Floods, and formerly, as History says,
frequented by above three hundred Nations of several Tongues, upon the account
of its Commerce of Wool and Skins. There are above fifty Palaces seen in
Mingrelia, whereof the best is Zugdidi. Scalingia is the place of the Royal
Sepulture. That which we call properly Guriel has the Towns of Varthiet, and
Cultiche.

Gurgistan, known by the Ancients by the Name of Iberia, is in the midst of the
Mountains, where is great plenty of Mulberry-Trees: There are three parts of
it; Kacheti, toward the lower-end, with the City of Zagan: Carduel, toward
the middle, with the City of Teflis: And Baratralu, toward the upper part,
with the City of Cori, or Gorede.

Zuiria was formerly called Albania, by reason that its Children were born into
the World with white Hair: It is temperate, because it has several Rivers,
which empty themselves into the Caspian-Sea. The City of Tersis belongs to the
great Duke of Moscovy.

Circassia makes part of the Afiatick Sarinatia, in the midst of the Dom. Some
will have it reach from Theman, near the Cimmerian Bosphorus, to Derbent, upon
the Caspian Sea. It passes also under the Name of Comania. It has been the
dewlling place of the Amazons; and since that of the Mamalucks, who have been
the Masters of Egypt. The Turks are said to come from one of its Countries,
called Tzurkia, which signifies Shepherd. The Circassians live much after the
same manner as the Switzers; they preserve their Liberty in the Mountains, and
Woods, amidst the Turks, Persians, Muscovites, and Tartars. They choose those
places of the Woods as are the strongest, and there they entrench themselves,
for their security, against the incursions of the Tartarian Horse; One
Circassian alone in the Woods, makes head against twenty Tartars. They turn now
for the most part Mahometans, though they were generally Christians. Robbery is
not forbidden amongst them. They trade in Slaves, Skins, Furrs, and Wax; they
till their Land, and are said to receive strangers after a civil manner. They
are warlike, very ingenious, and as there is not in the World a more comely and
handsome People, the Slaves of that Nation are in very great esteem. The Turks
have there the City of Azof, otherwise Azac, at the disemboguing of the Dom
into the Palus Meotis: It is a trading Town, and one of the most important of
all the Ottoman Empire, by reason of its situation; It preserves the Alliance
of the lesser Tartary, and puts a stop to the Designs of the great Duke of
Muscovy in those parts. The Abassan People, or Abcasses, are formidable to
their neighbors. They have the best Falcons in the East. Hunting and Hawking
are their principal Exercises.

Arabia.
THe Arabians have been first of all called Ismaelites, from Ismael, and
afterward Saracens: some derive this last Name from Saara, which signifies
Desert; others from Sarake, which imports Pilfering and Robbing: those, who
make the Etymology come from Sarah Abraham's Wife, say, that these Saracens,
who were begun to be called Hagarens, chose rather to go under the Name of the
Mistress, than that of the Maid. The Arabians, who inhabit Towns and Cities,
are known under the Name of Moors: those in the Deserts, are divided into
Tribes, and each Tribe into Families, which have each a peculiar Cheique, under
the Cheique-General of the Tribe, called Sceikel-Kebir, that is to say, the
Grand Cheique. These vagabond Arabians boast themselves to be the most noble
People in the World; wherefore they do not ally themselves with any other
Nations, than their own. They could never be subdued, either by the Egyptians,
Persians, Greeks, Romans, or Turks. They have established themselves in several
parts of Africa, where they possess great Dominions. They thus stray and wander
for the better finding wherewith to feed their Cattle, and to exempt themselves
from the oppression of the Turks. The Grand Seignior's Bashaws, who are
neighbors to 'em, and the Caravans, who pass through their Territories, give
some Money to the Grand Cheiques, that they may not be molested. Under Vlit,
one of the Caliphs or Arabian Princes, their Empire extended in aright line
from Messa, upon the Atlantick-Sea, to the River Indus; this length was the
bigness of all Persia, greater than the Roman Empire. The Arabic Tongue is
received in the greatest part of Asia, because that the Alcoran, the Bible of
Mahometism, was first of all written in that Language. The continual abode
which the Arabians make in the open field, has made them the best acquainted
with Astrology and Physic. The Beduins, and Bengebres, who are the People the
most known, are so inclined to Robbery, that they make their principal Revenue
consist in stealing from Travelers; and say, that they have right to repeat
the legitimas of their Predecessor Ismael, upon the Descendants of Isaac. They
say also, that their Prophet Mahomet, has particularly left and recommended to
'em, the figure of the hand: for which reason other Nations come only among 'em
in Caravans; that is to say, in great companies. Their dexterity is wonderful
in managing a Horse, a Bow, and a Zagay, which is a Half-Pike: thirty Turks
with Muskets, make a difficulty of attacking ten of these Arabians armed after
their usual manner. Their Riches consist in Flocks, Herds, and Horses, which
are capable of going great Journeys. They set so great a value upon them, that
they keep Registers of their Race, which are from time to time approved of by
the Judges. Horses of the most noble, and commonly Mares, are sometimes sold
for three or four thousand Piasters. The Arabians eat their Meals crouching
upon their Heels, whereas the Turks eat upon Cushions cross-legg'd: the oldest
among 'em wear the finest Clothes, and the gaudiest Colors. Their
Predecessors prohibited Buildings, and the tilling of Lands; for that those
who stood possessed of great stocks, if they meant to enjoy 'em, were easily
constrained to obey them, who aimed at subduing 'em. They made also that Member
of the Noble Race, Successor of the Kingdom, who came first into the World,
after the proclaiming of the King. In the comparison of the Manners and Maxims
of the Levantine Nations, with those of Europe, the Arabians are made to
resemble the Italians; the Persians, the French; the Turks, the Spaniards.

Arabia in general, is subject to such great heats, that they are constrained
to keep the Markets by night. There is a great number of Mountains, and few
Rivers. It is divided into three parts, Petraea, Deserta, and Foelix: the two
former is almost wholly in the possession of the Turks; Arabia Foelix has
several petty Sovereigns.

Arabia Petraea was inhabited by the Madianites, Moabites, Amalekites, and
Idumeans; Nations of whom mention is often made in the Holy Oracles. Its
Inhabitants pay Tribute to the Bashaw of Cairo. Crac, otherwise Montreal,
formerly called Petra, has communicated to it its Name: Busseret is the
Country of Philip the Roman Emperor, who is said to have embraced
Christianity. Tor, upon the Red Sea, is a Port defended by a apiece
Castle. There are in the places adjacent found petrified Mushrooms, white
Corral, Chagrin, small Oysters, and sometimes Seamen, or such people as are
bred and live in the Sea. It Is said, the Red Sea is but three Leagues broad in
that place, and that the Children of Israel passed it over there dry-shod, when
they came out of Egypt; that it was one of the Ports, from whence Solomon sent
his Fleets into Ophir, to fetch Gold. Pegs of Wood are put into the Ships of
the Places, that belong to this Sea, because little Iron is to be found there.
Those, who have a mind to impose, Talk as that, if they made use of Iron Nails,
instead of Pegs, the Ships would be attacked and stopped by the Loadstone, that
is found in the neighboring Mountains. Mount Oreb is famous in the Holy Writ,
for the burning Bush wherein God appeared to Moses. Sinai is illustrious for
the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, which this Prophet received: It is
extraordinary high, and nevertheless the Mount St. Catherine, which is near it,
is much higher.

Arabia Deserta is a Country, where they often want good Water; though there be
some Wells, the Water, for the most part, is hardly worth any thing. Ana, upon
the Euphrates, has an Arabian Emir. There is a King in this Arabia, who has a
moving and portative City, which consists in Tents, and he causes it to be
carried whither he pleases. He takes this course, to avoid being surpised by
the Turks. Sumiscasac is esteemed the ancient Saba, from whence departed the
three Kings, (or rather wise Men) to come and adore the Savior of the World in
Bethlehem.

Arabia Faelix goes under that Name, as being a good Country. It has Horses
very much esteemed, Manna, Cinnamon, Myrrh, Balm, Benjamin, Incense, and other
Perfumes. There is so great a quantity of Incense, that from the Port of
Dolfar, the Inhabitants furnish the principal parts of the World. Aden is a
City of great trade, in a small Peninsula, at the foot of a Mountain, with two
Castles toward the North, and a small Fortress at the entrance of the Harbor.
The Portugals, at the time of their establishment in the East Indies, had
Orders to make themselves Masters of Aden, Ormus, and Malaca, by reason of
their important situations. The Turks prevented them at Aden, whose King they
caused to be hanged on the Mast of their Captain's Galley. Since that time,
there have been some Revolutions, those of the Country having dispossessed the
Turks. Ormus and Malaca have been in the power of the Portuguese: the Persians
have taken from them Ormus, by the help of the English; and the Hollanders,
Malaca, Mecha and Medina are famous for the Pilgrimages of the Mahometans, who
are in great esteem after such a Journey: they go particularly to Mecha, to pay
their devotion to Kiaabee, the apiece House, which they call the House of
God, as having been built by Abraham. This City, about as big as York, as
containing about six thousand Houses, is a days journey distant from the
Red Sea; the place of the Birth of Mahomet, whose body was, as some Authors
say, transferred to Medina, when Albaquerque, the Portuguese, would have
surpised the Port of Ziden, otherwise called Gidde, with design to go with
Cavalry, and fetch away that Mohammedan Relick. The Country about Mecha,
produces in abundance that sort of Berry, which serves to make the Drink,
called Coffee, so much used in the Levant, by reason of its virtue, to fortify
the Stomach, and facilitate Digestion. Medina, three days journey from the
Red Sea, is the place where that pretended Prophet lies buried. Endeavors have
been used to make his Tomb pass for a Wonder, as if it was suspended in the
Air, by the means of the Lodestone; this is not only found to be a fallacy,
but Antiquity shows us such like things: Democritus, the Athenian, by order of
Ptolomey, King of Egypt, undertook to make the Statue of Arsinoe all of Iron,
for to dispose it after the like manner; and in the Temple of Serapis in
Alexandria; they formerly hung up, the same way, a Sun made of a very delicate
Iron. The Prince of Mecha, called Sultan Scherif, is one of the most Potent of
all Arabia: His most usual Residence is in Almacharana: The Grand Seignior
makes him often Presents, and causes part of the Revenue of Egypt to be given
him, by reason that he is of the Race of Mahomet; and to oblige him to defend
the Turkish Pilgrims. The Arabians call Scherifs, the Relations of Mahomet, the
Turks call them Emirs. Fartach, Caxem, Gubel-haman, Alibinali, Amanzirifdin,
Masfa, Mascalat; Jemen, are as many Sultanies, or small Kingdoms in
Arabia-Felix. Mascate formerly belonging to the Portugals, has for a long while
carried on the trade from the Indies, to the Mecha, by the means of the Cities
El-Catif and Lehsa. Sohar in the Eastern part drove the Commerce, which has
since been to Ormus, and to Gombru. Mocha upon the Red Sea, is an open Town
with a small Castle. By reason of the goodness of its Haven, there resort
thither Ships from all parts of the East Indies with Merchandises, to take in
those of Europe, which are in like manner brought thither. There are Jews,
Persians, Armenians, Indians, Banians. It is the place, where the Pilgrims
disembark, who go from the Indies to Mecha. It Is much augmented, since the
Ships which were bound from Sues to Aden, unload there, for the avoiding the
dangerous Passages of the Straight of Bebel-Mandel.

Persia.
PErsia bears the Name of one of its ancient Provinces, that is now called
Fars. It Is one of the most considerable Kingdoms of Asia, by reason of the
Riches of its principal Towns, and the Union of its Forces; it is more fertile
and populous than Turkey; its Inhabitants the most civil, and the best polished
of all the Mahometans. There is more politickness, and more refined Wits than
in Turkey. They love good order, and justice, and favor Strangers. Its Rivers,
which have this particular of having neither Pike nor Eel, are not Navigable:
They commonly go under the Name either of their Cities, or their Colors: They
furnish the convenience for the making of Channels, for the watering the Lands;
they become smaller the nearer they come to the Sea, and sometimes are entirely
dried up by the Diversions, that are made of them. The Neighborhood of the Sea
of Bassera, and that of the Caspian, is more fertile, and more temperate, than
the Inland Countries which have Deserts, and Mountains, where it seldom rains,
for which cause the Fruit Trees receive no Water but at the Foot, and Root.
This Kingdom is one of the most Ancient Monarchies of the World; the Assyrians,
Medes, Persians, and Parthians, have begun their Empires here. The Policy of
this Kingdom is in great esteem, the Government easy, supportable to the
Persians, and to Strangers. There is no talk of Robbers; the Rights of
Hospitality are so regularly observed, that the King will have all Foreigners
to be reputed as his Guests. The Name of Scha, is bestowed on the Kings of
Persia; the Vulgar attribute to them that of Sophi; which is a proper Name.
They were formerly called Great Kings, and Kings of kings; principally when
they had Vanquished the Grecians. The Name of Sultan, which in Turkey signifies
King; in Persia, only signifies the Governor of a Town. The Persians have
always had their Sovereign in great estimation: Still at this day they think
to confirm a thing much more strongly by the name of their King, than by that
of God; perhaps after the Mode of those of Achem in the Isle of Sumatra, who
say, that God is afar off, and the King near at hand. The Riches of the ancient
Persian Kings have been immense, as may be seen by the Treasures, which
Alexander the Great found in the Coffers of Darius. Scha-Sefi, one of the late
Monarchs, had for common service 7200 Marks in Vessels of Gold. Herbert says,
that in his time, there has been seen in Asharat, for the service of
Scha-Abbas, Vessels of Gold and others, to the value of 260 Millions of Livers.

The Persians are well proportioned: have little experience in the Art of
Navigation, though they be near the Sea. When the Portugals would have drove them
from Ormus, they had recourse to the Ships of the English. Their Women are in
great esteem, through all Asia, for their Beauty; their Horses for their
agility, their Camels for strength. In the Country they have a saying, Bread
of Yesde-Kast, Wine of Schiras, Women of Yesde. Their Religion is Mohammedan, of
the Sect of Hali; the King allows, that the Carmelites, the Augustins, the
Capuchins, the Jesuits, have their Houses and Churches in this capital City
Ispahan, where the Superiors of those Houses perform the Function of
Ambassadors for Christian Princes of the Roman Communion. The Persian Tongue
is so sweet and soft, that it is in little use, but amongst the Women and
Poets; the King, and Persons of Condition, commonly make use of the Turkish
Language. Persia is as a Go-between to the Turks and Europeans, for the
Commerce of the Indies. It furnishes the finest Silk-stuffs, and the best
Tapestries that are seen, Clothes of Gold, Bezoar, Manna, Rhubarb, Rose Water,
Turquoises, which are taken at the Mountain of Phirouskou, four Leagues from
Meschet, a City renowned for the Pilgrimages of the Mahometans of Persia. The
Silk of Chorasan is very fine, that of Kilan somewhat courser. There are Fields
of Salt, some Mines of Copper, Iron, and Steel in Chorasan, of Lead in Kirman:
Gold and Silver is imported from abroad, as well as Wood. The greatest Trade is
droven to Bagdad, for Turkey; to Gombru, for the Indies. The Kings of Persia do
allow of Commerce upon their Coasts, but suffer not any Fortresses to be made
there: the Mogul, the Emperor of China, and other Eastern Kings, take the same
course in their Dominions. They have powerful Neighbors of the Turk and the
Mogul. The strength of their State consists principally in its situation, there
being high Mountains and great Deserts in its neighborhood. Ismael Sophi had
three hundred thousand Men in Arms, against Selim, Emperor of the Turks; the
ancient Kings had sometimes Armies of seven or eight hundred thousand Men. The
usual Armies nowadays are of fifty or sixty thousand Horse, besides thirty
thousand, that are kept upon the Frontiers: this number would be much greater,
if we reckoned all those who go to the Army. The Persians wear the Red Turbant,
wherefore they are called Keselbas: the Tartars of Giagatay wear it green; that
of the Turks is white, and that of the Grecians blew. Their Soldiers are of
four sorts, Fuzeliers, Slaves, Keselbas, Lifeguard-men, all Troopers. There is
a great antipathy between the Persians and Turks: Those who observe that
antipathy amongst the Nations of the World, say, that it is between the
Chinese and Japoneses, betwixt the Armenians and Nestorians, between the
Arabians and Abyssins, between the French and Spaniards, betwixt the Italians
and Greeks, between the Germans and Polanders, between the Danes and Swedes,
between the Muscovites and Tartars, between the English and Scotch, between the
Irish and Welsh, betwixt the Hurons and Iroquins Nations of Canada.

Here follows the enumeration of the Provinces of Persia, according to the most
received Relations, Arak, Fars, Chusistan, Adherbeitzan, Iran or Karabach,
Schirwan, Kilan, Teberestan or Mesanderan, Chorasan, Sablestan, Sirestan,
Kirman, Tzisire, and Diarbeck. These two last are between the Euphrates, and
Tigris, and belong to the Turk. The Governors are called Chans or Cans,
sometimes Sultans.

The City of Ispaham, the abode of the King of Persia, is one of the greatest
of all Asia, composed of four Cities; it is likewise one of the finest, if we
consider its stately Palaces, delicious Gardens, spacious Marketplace, rich
Bazars, Exchanges or public places, which make the Inhabitants call it the
half of the World. The Arabians, who have no P in their Alphabet, call it
Isfaham. There is a remarkable Tower upon the King's Stables, all built with
Goats heads, and other wild Animals, which were taken in one Royal Match of
Hunting. Caswin, or Casbin, is esteemed the ancient Ecbatana, where the King of
Media dwelt, where Parmenio was killed, and Ephestion died, whose Funerals cost
above twelve thousand Talents; that is, twelve thousand times six hundred
Crowns. Schiras is near the Ruins of the ancient Persepolis, which was burnt by
order of Alexander the Great, at the end of a Feast; It has still full ten
thousand Houses: a Proverb of the Country goes thus, That if Schiras, was
Schiras, that is to say, what it was formerly, Grand Cairo would pass but for
its Suburbs. The Ruins of this Persepolis are called Chilminar, i. e. Forty
Columns; which seem to be the remains of the Palace of Cyrus the Great, the
most beautiful of all the East. The Neighbors of those Ruins endeavor to
destroy 'em entirely to free themselves from the importunities of strangers,
who go to see them upon that account. What remains of 'em, shows a great
antiquity of habits for Personages, and an extraordinary magnificence in the
stones of the building. Those who have seen them say, that they surpass the
Antiquities of Rome, and the Wonders of Egypt. The abode of Schiras is so
agreeable, that Mahomet, according to what the Persians say, would not go
thither, for fear of being charmed with the Beauty of the Ladies: and that if
he had tasted the delights of that Town, he would have made it his request to
God, never to have died* The Government of Schiras, is the most considerable of
all Persia; it affords excellent Wines, and that Mummy, or Counter-poyson,
which serves for Medicament to all manner of Wounds. Susa was the Court of
Ahasucrus, and some other Kings. Alexander the Great married Statira there; He
gave ten thousand Talents for the acquitting the Debts of those, who had a mind
to return into Greece, and received there thirty thousand young Men of Recruits
for his Army. This is also the place where the fair Esther obtained favor for
the Jews, and where Mordecai was put into the place of Haman, who was hanged
after that he would have caused Mordecai to have undergone his own Fate. The
Palace of Susa, built by Darius, is said to have been enriched by Memnon, with
the Spoils of the great Thebes in Egypt; and it is famed, that the stones were
cemented with Gold. After Persepolis, it is reckoned amongst the magnificent
Works of the Kings of Persia, as well as the delicious Gardens of Cyrus the
younger in Lydia. Congue, Bender Congo, is a City upon the Gulf of Bassora,
much like that of Thoulon in Provence: It Is much augmented, since the ruin of
Ormus, as well as Gombru; It has a Demesne, which the Persians and the
Portugals have the Revenue of by halves. Lar communicates its Name to a sort of
silver Money that is coined there; five of those Larins make but one Piaster:
the City has full four thousand Houses, and a small Citadel. Some believe it
the ancient Passagarde, where the grand Cyrus, having overcome Astiages,
transferred the Empire of the Medes to the Persians. Calanus, the Indian
Philosopher, did voluntarily suffer death there, in the sight of all the
Macedonian Army; It has several very learned Inhabitants; the Earthquakes,
which are frequent in these parts, render it the less populous. The Frontiers
of Persia, toward Turkey, have a warlike People, called Curdes, whose Country
had been the field of several Battles: Alexander the great overcame Darius at
Arbela, and they would persuade us, that there were four hundred thousand
Persians killed, and only three hundred Macedonians; the Caliphs won there the
Battle of Moraga, which made them Masters of Persia. Near Chuy, Selim defeated
Ismael Sophi, who before had always been his Conqueror. Tabris, or Tauris,
drives an extraordinary Trade, and the first of Persia; it has Walls and Towers
of cut stone of a vast height. Ardebil is the staple of the Silks of the
Country, and the place of burial of several Kings of Persia, amongst others of
Cha-Sefi, who has a magnificent Tomb there. Bakuie gives sometimes its Name to
the Caspian-Sea; It has in its neighborhood a source of Oil, which serves to
burn throughout all Persia. Kirman, toward the Ocean, yields Wools, and very
fine Steel, whereof Arms are made that are in great vogue; a Cymeter of that
steel does easily cut a Helmet through, without striking hard. Moghostan is a
Country which contains the Amadizes and the Gauls, very warlike Nations, who
have perhaps furnished Matter to make the Fables of Amadis de Gaul. Ormus has
had the Title of a Kingdom: the Soil of this Island is subject to great heats,
and produces only Salt: it has not a drop of fresh Water, but what it borrows.
The Portuguese being Masters of it, had caused a Fort to be made in the Isle of
Kesem, for the having this convenience. The excellent situation of Ormus, gave
occasion formerly to this saying, That if the World was a Ring, Ormus was the
precious Stone in it. In the year 1622, the King Scha-Abbas, took it by help of
the English, and after having caused the Fortress of it to be razed,
transferred the Commerce to Gombru, which he caused to be called by his own
Name, Bender-Abassi. The Portuguese lost, by the taking of that Town, to the
value of seven or eight Millions: Thus Gombru grew great, from the ruins of
Ormus. The Castles, which defend Gombru, are fortified after the ancient
manner. The Road is commodious, riding safe at anchor in five or six fathom
Water. All Nations, who trade upon the Indian-Seas, except the Portuguese,
carry their Commodities thither, and bring Velvet, Taffaties, raw Silks, and
other Commodities from Persia. The English have half of the Customs, and the
right of exporting some Horses, which the Persians have granted them, in
acknowledgment of the Men and Ships, wherewith they assisted them for the
taking of Ormus. Bahrem, upon the Coast of Arabia, and of the Dependances of
Persia, is an Island known for the Springs of fresh Water, which it has at the
bottom of the Sea, and for the Pearls, that are fished there, which are the
best, the greatest, and the roundest of all the East. Giask, upon that Coast,
is a place where is droven the greatest Commerce for Silk.

Candahar, upon the Confines of the Mogul, is a Conquest of the late Kings of
Persia.

Tartary.
THis is the vastest Region of our Continent; Equals in bigness all Europe, and
possesses all the Northern part of Asia. The Name of Tartary, which has
succeeded that of Scythia, is come from the River Tatar, which the Chinese
name Tata, because they do not make use of the Letter R. The Tartars are a
warlike People, the best Archers of the World, but cruel and barbarous: they
make War almost ever to the disadvantage of those they visit, and to the
confusion of those who attack them. Cyrus at the passage of the Araxes; Darius
Histaspes in his march against the Scythians of Europe; Alexander the great,
when he was beyond the Oxus, have been constrained to yield to the Tartars: In
our time, the great Kingdom of China has been forced to own them its Masters.
Their Cavalry does most execution in their Battles, on the contrary to what is
practiced in Europe, it is it which first attacks places. The most peaceable of
the Tartars inhabit Tents of Pelts, and do nothing else than look to their
Cattle. Their Country has in all times been a Nursery of Men, who under diverse
Names have made Conquests, and established Colonies in several places: That
great Wall which the Chinese had raised for the putting a stop to their
incursions, has not been capable of effecting that purpose. They aaknowledge
several Princes, whom they call Cans. They have sundry Hurdes, that may be
called Cantons, Camps, Tribes, or Assemblies of Families. The little knowledge
we have of them, is the reason we call them all under the general Name of
Tartars. They have the Owl in great veneration, since that Cingis, one of their
Sovereigns, was saved by the means of that Bird. They will not suffer they
should be buried; some amongst 'em make choice of a Tree, and give order for
their being hanged up upon it after their death. There be still among 'em
Idolaters, but they are for the most part Mahometans: It has been observed,
that those who have conquered China, have hardly any particular Religion, though
they practice several Moral Virtues. Five great parts are commonly reckoned in
Asian Tartary; Tartaria Deserta, Giagathi, Turquestan, Northern Tartary, and
the Tartary of Kin.

Desort Tartary is so called, because that most of the Lands there are
uncultivated: It is for the most part subject to the Czars of Muscovy; who draw
fine and rich Furrs from thence, and who, with ease, subdued the Inhabitants of
it, they being only Shepherds. Its Gities of Casan and Astracan, are near the
Wolga, which empties it self into the Caspian-Sea by seventy Mouths; the Obi,
which in the same Country empties it self into the Ocean, has six. Astracan
drives a great trade in Salt, which the Inhabitants find in a neighboring
Mountain. The Calmack People are Idolaters, much like to the ancient Scythians,
by reason of their incursions, their cruelty, and their other ways of living.

Giagathai, and Mawaralnahr, have peculiar Chams. The City of Samarchand, is
that where Tamerlane the great, a Native of la Casta, a day's journey from
thence, established a famous University: There is also one at Bockora, which
passes for the Country of Avicenna, a famous Philosopher and Physician;
another at Orcange, near the Caspian-Sea. Alexandria, of Sogdiana, was formerly
famous for the death of the Philosopher Calisthenes. The Tribe of the Mogul, is
known by the rise of the Prince of the same Name, whose Successors command a
good part of India. The Inhabitants of these Parts hunt wild Horses with
Faulcons; in some of these Countries, they have such a disposition for Music,
that their little Children sing, instead of crying. Those of Giagathai and
Yousbeg do not call themselves Tartars, being of the Mohammedan Religion.

Turquestan is the Country, from whence some make the Turks to come. Thibet
which is part of it, has Musk, Cinnamon, Coral which serve for Money to it is
Inhabitants.

The Tartars of Kin, which some call Cathai, is the most Potent State of all
Tartary, very Populous, Rich, and full of Great Cities, Cambalu, or rather
Muoncheu is the Capital thereof: Several Authors have told Wonders of this
City, making it known under the Names of Quinzai, Xantum, Suntien, and Peguim.
Amongst other things, they say that in the Palace Royal there are twenty four
Pillars of fine Gold, and another much greater of the same Metal, with a Pine
Apple beset with Jewels, that are worth four Great Cities. The Voyage of Cathai
has been undertaken by several ways, in hopes of finding Gold, Musk, Rhubarb,
and other Rich Commodities there; several have gone thither by the Terra-firma,
others by the Northern Sea, some by going up the Ganges. The Tartars of this
Country invaded China in our Time; the King of Niuche called Xunchi, is the
same, who made the Conquest of it, at the Age of twelve years, assisted with
the good and faithful Councels of two of his Uncles. Besides a continual
success and happyness, a great Moderation has been observed in this young
Conqueror, who has treated a Nation newly subdued with all the Lenity
imaginable.

The old or true Tartary, which the Arabians call after a different manner, is
toward the North, and but very little known: Salmanasar, King of Assyria, is
said to have transported thither the Tribes, which he carried away Captive from
the Holy Land, and there are also said to be still at this day Hords of them,
who keep up their Names, and follow their Manners. It has Imaus, one of
greatest Mountains in the World.

China.
CHina, which received almost as many Names as it has had Royal Families, has
ever passed for one of the most Considerable Kingdoms in the World, by reason
of it is bigness, the Beauty of it is Cities, the great number, Politeness, and
Maxims of it is Inhabitants, Printing, the Manufacture of Silks, Artillery,
Gunpowder, and Chairs or Sedans, are said to have been in use with them, sooner
than with us. Besides what is necessary to the Life of Man, China produces the
most precious commodities of the East. It seems as if Nature had bestowed upon
each of it is Provinces some peculiar Gift: those who have dwelt in this Country
do aver, that all that is thought fine, dispersed in the rest of the World, is
collected in China. That there is likewise a vast number of things, which would
be in vain sought for elsewhere. So that it is no wonder, if the Tartars found
it so easy a matter to subdue a Nation, subdued in delights before, who having
forgot to wear the sabre, contented themselves with fighting at fisticuffs, and
with their Nails, which they expressly let grow for that purpose, and for
tearing away their Flabels and their hair, which was their Principal Ornament.
This obliged their Conquerours to call the Chinese, the soft and easy, and to
make them enjoy the Pleasures of the Campaign, which they had never done before
that Conquest. China is almost Quadrangular; so Populous, that there has been
sometimes reckoned above Sixty Thousand Millions of Persons, of those who might
be assessed and pay Taxes. It Is Rivers are so covered with Boats, that there
are held to be as many as in all the other Rivers of the World. The Annual
Revenue of it is King has ever been esteemed, a Hundred and Fifty Millions of
Gold, according to others, Four Hundred Millions of Ducats; The Chinese
laughed at our Maps, which placed their Kingdom at one of the ends of the
World; they say they are in the midst, (the Jews have pretended the same thing
for Jerusalem, the Greeks for Delphos, the Moors for Granada.) They say also,
that they have two Eyes, that the Europeans have but one, and other People none
at all. Learned Men are obliged to them, for that they have compiled their
History, which was brought into Europe by Martini the Jesuit: It is esteemed so
much the more faithful, in that they made it but of their own Country, and only
for themselves. They have always been so Jealous of the secrets of their
Policy, and of their other affairs, that they did not willingly allow Strangers
entrance into their Country. The great Wall, or rather the Intrenchment of
above four hundred Leagues, which they caused formerly to be made, is a Work,
that has had more Renown than Effect; the Tartars have often overrun China,
notwithstanding this Obstacle. Those who have said that China is but one City,
by reason of the Numerousness of it is People, have likewise said, that a no
less considerable Wall was required to be proportionable to the Grandeur of
such a Town. It Is hardly credible that in this Fortification the Stones be
seven Fathom high, and five broad, as they are said to be by the Chinese. If
we may believe their History, the Hostilities of the Tartars have been
exercised for above four thousand years; the Chinese Horses cannot endure the
sight of those of Tartary. The late years have caused strange Revolutions in
this Kingdom: After that the Rebels had acted as Sovereigns, the Tartars under
their Emperor Xunchi, have conquered all their Country, in less then seven
years Time, and that since the year 1643, the Militia was not very
considerable, Men of Learning domineered over Men of the Sword: From whence it
came, that the State only subsisted by Policy, by numerous Armies, and not by
the valor of it is People. The principal Chiefs, were called Mandarins; at
present the Tartar has Tartarian Officers, and Chinese Officers below his
Viceroys, of whom some are for Arms, and others for Learning. This change has
the Sword wrought over the Gown, and the poor Mandarins are no longer in a
state to do Justice, with so much Pomp and Pride as they formerly did.
Paganism is there generally received, nevertheless Virtue amongst them is in
an high esteem. The Public is more Rich proportionably, as particular Persons
are: Writing is managed from the top to the bottom: It has above sixty thousand
Letters, and has not three hundred thousand Words, which are almost all
Monosyllables; whereas the Europeans have many Words and few Letters, the
Chinese have many Letters and few Words, which they pronounce with diverse
Tones, according to their signification: So as we may say, their Speech is only
singing. It Is Great Cities are called Fu, the lesser C^u. The Chinese love
their Hair to that Degree, that several amongst them, choose rather to dye,
than to be shaved conformably to the Tartars commands. Swines Flesh is with
them a most exquisite Dish. Before the coming of the Tartars Yellow was the
Kings, and Black the Peoples usual wear.

All China is divided into sixteen Provinces, each of which are worth more than
large Kingdoms. Ten of 'em lie toward the South; Yunnan, Quansi, Canton,
Fuquiem, Chequiam, Nanxin, Kiamsi, Huquam, Suscuem and Quicheu. The six toward
the North are Xensi, Sciansi, Honan, Xantung, Pekin and Leaorung, which several
have called Cathai, whereas they give the name of Mangi to the Southern
Provinces. Canton has a Town of the greatest Trade and Riches of all the
Kingdom; from thence are transported Rice, Sugar, Varnish, which is drawn from
the Rinds of Trees, and Pearls that are fished near the Isle of Ainaon. Macao,
in an Island of the same Name, surrounded with several other small Islands and
Rocks, is peopled with Portugals, who have fortified it after an extraordinary
manner, since they were attacked by the Hollanders, in the Year 1622. This City
entertains a great Commerce between China and Europe; this Commerce is much
diminish't; they have no longer two hundred, for a hundred profit, as they had
formerly; and now the Hollanders have got footing in the Kingdom, whereas they
were formerly excluded from thence, because the Chinese had a Prophecy, that
they should be subdued by people who have blue Eyes: This has been verified by
the coming of the Tartars. The Right alone, for the Trade of Salt, is worth
every Year above fifteen hundred thousand Livers to the King of China. The
small Isle of Sanchoan is known for the death of the Popish Saint Xavier.
Fuquiem produces pure Gold, Pepper, Sugar, and Calamint. The Gold and Silver of
China, is not so good as that we have: they esteem the Pistols and Rials of
Spain.

The Island Formosa has a Mine of Gold, which the Hollanders had in possession
for a long while. In the Year 1661, they were drove thence by a Chinese, called
Coceinga, a Taylor's Son. The Isle of Tayouan, half a League from Formosa, is
an Island, whither People resort in all Seasons of the Year, without being
obliged to wait for the Monzoon: In the Year 1632, the Hollanders made a Fort
there of four Bastions, faced with hewed stone; which served them to take the
Isle of Formosa.

Chequiam has Temples, wherein are rich Idols. Nankin has a Town of the same
Name, formerly the abode of the Court, the most esteemed of China, upon the
account of its Beauty, the fertility of its Soil, its fine Edifices, its great
Commerce, the River Kiang, which we call the River Blew, and the Chinese, the
Son of the Sea, because that its common breadth exceeds two of our Leagues.
With the River Jaune, and the Royal Channel, it affords the means of going to
Pekin by Boat, and of trading to Pekin by Rivers, disembarking only at the
Mountain Muilin. There is near Nankin, a Tower of Porcelain nine Stories, or
Vaults, above one another, with a hundred and fourscore and four steps.
Schanchay is the most usual station of the King's Fleets. Kiamzi passes for the
most populous Province; It alone has Water proper for the perfection of
Porcelain, when they apply to it the Tincture of Azure, Vermilion, or Yellow.
The late Voyages, that have been made into the Inlands of China, have informed
us, that Porcelain-Ware is not made of the shells of the Sea, nor of Egg-shells
pounded, as several have believed; it is made by the means of Sand or Earth,
peculiar to certain Cantons of the Country, where it is found in Rocks; for
the making it, it is not necessary, that this Earth remain buried an Age, as
some have thought fit to affirm. The Chinese knead this Sand, and make Cups of
it, which they set a baking in Ovens, for the space of fifteen days, and give
them several Figures. The application of Colors is one of the principal
Secrets which the Chinese have thought fit to keep concealed from strangers.
Huquam yields so much Rice and Oil, that the Chinese have it in a Proverb,
That they draw but one Collation from each of the other Provinces of China, but
from Huquam they have wherewith to live on a whole Year. Xensi does
particularly furnish Musk; Its City of Cancheu has a great confluence of
Caravans. Siganfu has very ancient Remnants of Christianity. Sciansi has
Vineyards, from whence the Jesuits had the Wine they stood in need of, for the
celebrating the Mass, before they were driven thence, in the Year 1665. Honan
produces the best Fruits in the World, and in great quantity. Pekin, otherwise
Peguin, has a City of the same Name, the Capital of all the State, with a
Castle-Royal. It is probably the City, which several Authors call Cambalu; what
those Authors call Cathai, is nothing else than Northern China. In the Year
1644. This City was surpised, and pillaged, by a Rebel, who dissipated, in a
few days, all the Riches which sixteen Kings had heaped up, during two hundred
and fourscore Years. Since that, the Tartars of Niuche, whom they call Kin,
have rendered themselves Masters of it; and by the taking of Nakin, and Canton,
have settled their Conquests in the great Kingdom of China.

India.
THe Name of India, and that of Indostan, is given to the Empire of the Mogul,
and has two great Peninsula's on this, and on the other side the Ganges. They
call by the Name of Indies, the Islands of the Oriental Sea, the Coasts of
Persia, and Arabia, and those of Africa toward the East: The Coasts of Africa,
upon the Ocean, on this side the Cape of Good Hope, and of America, are known
under Name of the West Indies, by those who frequent the Sea. The principal
Tongues, that have any vogue in the East Indies, are the Canarine in and about
Goa; the Malabar, in the Country of the same Name; the Guzerate in Cambaia,
Coromondel, Bisnagar, and Bengala; the Malaize in Malucca, Sumatra, the Java's,
and the Moluccoes; that of the Maldive Isles is wholly peculiar: Arabic is
employed only for Religion and the Sciences, just as Latin is in Europe.
Portuguese is spoken in all the places, which were first conquered by the Crown
of Portugal, though some of those places be at present possessed by other Nations
of Europe.

The Empire of the Mogul.
THis Empire comprehends the greatest part of the firm land of India between
Persia, Tartary and China. The Mogul is the Sovereign thereof; He has his Name
and his Rise from a Tribe come from Giagathai, a Country of Great Tartary: He
passes for the richest Prince in the World, as to Jewels; besides those of his
Crown, he has those of several Princes, his Neighbors, whose Predecessors had
for a long while lived in and entertained the curiosity of having 'em: Besides,
he inherits the Jewels of the Grandees of his Court. He is Universal Heir to
those he gives Pensions to: all Houses before which he passes, owe him a
Present; the Lands belong to him; his Will serves for Law in the decision of
Matters. In this State, People go under the Name of the Employment they
possess, and not of the Lands they enjoy. Some Relations assert, that this
Monarch is every day shown part of his Treasures; sometimes his Elephants,
sometimes his Jewels, another day somewhat else; and that he commonly sees
every thing but once a Year, all the Treasure being divided into as many parts,
as there are days in the Year. The day of his birth he is weighed, and the
feasting upon that occasion lasts five days; then he receives sometimes the
value of above thirty Millions, and always something very rare. The Civil War,
which arose between the four Sons of Scha-Jehan, did not allow Aureng-zebe, who
rendered himself Master of 'em all, to observe punctually these Diversions. One
of the Temples of this State is paved and imbowed with Plates of pure Gold. In
the Palace of Agra, there are two Towers covered with sheets of massy Gold, and
a Throne enriched with Jewels, with four Lions of silver Vermilion guilt,
supporting a Canopy of massy Gold. People talk at a much higher rate: He is
said to have two Bushels of Carbuncles, five Bushels of Emeralds, twelve
Bushels of diverse sorts of Precious Stones, twelve hundred Cutlasses, whose
Scabbards are of Gold, and covered with Jewels. They say, moreover, that the
Treasure of Scha-Choram, one of the late Moguls, was of fifteen hundred
Millions of Crowns. What is certain, is, that Scha-Jehan, who reigned near
forty Years, left above five Millions of Crowns; that the Throne, which he
caused to be made in his City of Jehan-Abad, which is that of Delli, came to
above sixty Millions of Livers. There are seven magnificent Thrones, whereof
the greatest was begun by Tamerlain. The Money of this State is of good alloy;
great Justice is done; the Europeans are in great consideration, being by them
called Francs. They reckon the ways by Cosses, each of which is a Mile and a
half. No Oats are allowed their Horses; they give 'em Pease, and a sort of
Paste made of Sugar, Flour, and Butter. They bathe themselves in Cysterns,
which they call Tanques; in the Rivers there are Tuberons, which eat Men. The
Mogul; upon occasion, can arm two hundred thousand Horse; He has but little
Infantry, and that too but bad. He has a considerable number of Elephants; of
which Creatures he commonly keeps five or six hundred. He draws great Services
from these Creatures; they are surefooted, rise and lie down easily, though there
be of 'em thirteen and fifteen foot high. This Prince is of the Mohammedan
Religion, of the Turkish Sect: Most of his Vassals are Pagans. The
Gymnosophists, and the Brachmans, have formerly been esteemed for Wisdom in
India, just as are the Bramins at this day: The former were very cruel, they
caused old people, and the diseased, to be killed, out of an opinion, that they
did them good service. The Bramins exercise surprising Abstinences, and
Mortifications; some amongst 'em will remain standing with their Arms up for
ten or twelve Years. They are as the Priests of the Country. The Troopers and
Soldiers are called Rezbutes. There are several Mahometans in the Empire of the
Mogul; Above two thirds there are Gentiles, or Banians, or Persces. The Banians
are almost all Merchants, sharp, cunning, and as sagacious as possible,
Hucksters, by reason of their acquaintance in the Country, where they live
amongst the Mahometans, as the Jews do among the Christians; they make
profession of doing no hurt to any Creature living; of pardoning the injuries
that are done them; they believe the transmigration of Souls; have Hospitals
for Brutes more than for Men. One amongst 'em, spent in one day above twelve
thousand Ducats, for the making the Nuptials of his Friend's Bull: They have a
Cow in great veneration. They dare not eat of any thing that has had life, not
so much as Radishes, for fear of eating the Soul of some of their Friends. They
do not willingly light Candles, for the preventing the Gnats from burning
themselves in 'em: When the Portugueses, who dwell there, have no Money, they
endeavor to catch some Bird, which they show in the Streets, saying, they are
going to have it roasted for their Supper: and immediately the Banians do not
fail to give them Money, to redeem it out of their hands. Marriage is with them
in such consideration, that when a young man is dead, without having been
married, they cause some Maiden or other to lie with the Body, to whom they
give for that purpose a Dowry, or Portion. The Persees are descended from the
ancient Persians, who retired into those parts: Never any of 'em are Farriers,
or Locksmiths, for fear of being sometimes obliged to put out the Fire, which
they esteem their God; They have such a reverence for Wood, as the Fuel and
Nourishment of that God, that, not to profane it by touching of the dead, they
make their Coffins of Iron. The Indians in general are tawny, Olive-colour'd,
with lank, black Hair; If there be any Whites, their whiteness is a mark of
Leprosy. They drink from on high, or pour it in without touching the Cup with
their lips: they affect white in their Buildings; they ride on Oxen, instead of
Horses: Persons of quality, who travel in these Countries, cause a kind of
Cornet, or Ensign, to be carried before them. Their way of salutation, is to
take one another by the Beard. If they be distant from Court, they suffer their
hair to grow, as a token of their discontent, in that they are deprived of the
happiness of seeing their Prince.

India is very fertile and populous in those parts, that confine upon its great
Rivers; It has some Countries, where you must go in good company, if you mean
to save your self from Robbers, whom they call Koulis. It is fine to see the
Highways of two hundred Leagues in length, which resemble Walks or Alleys;
they are planted with Cocoes, Dates, and Palmtrees. This Country ministers
excellent Bread, there being Corn and Rice in abundance. Victuals in general
are mighty cheap in these parts, and nevertheless the Inhabitants are naturally
very sober. The neighborhood of Tartary is full of Mountains and Forests,
where the Moguldoes often take the divertisement of Hunting: there is a great
number of wild Beasts, and Rats too, who attack Men in their Beds. Here it was,
that Alexander made Timber to be cut for the building of Ships, which he caused
to descend down the Indus, and upon the Ocean, whose ebbing and flowing did
extraordinarily surprise his Pilots. As for the remains of Antiquity in this
State, there are very few, the Moguls having made it their business to ruin the
ancient Towns. The Indus is navigable from the Lahor, as far as Sind. The
People of the Country call it Pang-ab, by reason of the five Rivers, which
assemble in the highest part of its course. The Ganges, which is small and low,
when there is no Rain, was formerly famous for its Gold; it is so at present
for its Water, which is very light. The Natives of the Country say, that this
Water sanctifies them, whether they drink of it, or wash in it; they go in
Pilgrimage to the places where it passes: the Moguls always cause some of it to
be carried with them. It is fine to see sometimes four or five hundred thousand
Indians in one and the same season round this Ganges, wherein several go to
cast Gold and Silver. The Custom of some is to hide it under ground, in the
opinion they have, it may serve them after their death.

There are full forty Kingdoms in this Empire, whereof all the Names are almost
the same with those of the capital Cities. Likewise some small Territories
there are, whose Lords, who call themselves Rajas, are of a very ancient Race,
and maintain themselves in Fortresses and Mountains inaccessible. The greatest
mischief they do, is to rob and make incursions upon the Mogul's Subjects: The
Names of some Cities, terminating in Pore, seem to show, that they still
preserve the Memory of Porus; as well as others in Scander, that of Alexander.
The Dominions of the Mogul are much larger than those of the Persian, and equal
those of the Turk. The Mogul prevails by the number of his Subjects, by the
vastness of his Riches, by the extent of his Empire: His Revenue exceeds those
both of the Grand Seignior and Sophi together. The Sophi surpasses him in Arms,
in Horses, and Soldiers. The Mogul keeps good correspondence with the Turk, in
consideration both of State and Religion. Guzaratta yields every year about
eight Millions of Gold, and its Merchants pass for the ablest and most
sagacious of all India. This Province has three stately Cities, Amad-abad,
Cambaya, and Surat, with thirty other considerable Towns. Amad-abad, the
Capital, is esteemed by the English, as much as London. Cambaia was called the
Cairo of the Indies, by reason of its bigness, which is two Leagues in circuit;
by reason of its Commerce, and the fertility of its Soil, which furnishes,
amongst other things, Cotton, Anir, Opium, Agates, whereof there is a Mine at
Baroche: Since the losses of the Portugals, Cambaya is much decayed; besides,
that its Haven is very bad. Surat, forty six days journey from the Royal City
of Agra, is one of the Asiatic Cities, which drives the greatest Trade, though
the coming to it be dangerous, the Houses low, and covered with Palm Trees. Its
River abates much, which is four Leagues below the Town, can hardly carry
Vessels of seventy or eighty Ton; they being obliged to unlade the Merchandises
at Sohali: This is the principal Scene of the English Commerce in the
East Indies: the French have settled a Consul there for the same purpose. It is
now about thirteen years ago, that this City was plundered by a Raja of the
Country, a Rebel of the Mogul, called Siva-Gi, the loss arising to above
thirty-Millions. This Siva-Gi has, since that, taken several Towns to the South
of Surat. Diu is a Fortress in an Island, which the Portugals have been forced
to abandon, after having gloriously defended it in the years 1539, and 1546.
One of their Soldiers is said to have shown such bravery there, that wanting
Lead, he pulled out his great Teeth for the charging his Musket: on the other
side, an Indian being struck with the Pike of a Portuguese, advanced and thrust
it on so far into his own body, until that he came up to his enemy, and slashed
his hamms for him with his short Sword. There is mention made, in the War of
Flanders, of somewhat the like bravery: A Soldier, hidden in a Boats of Turffs,
for the surprising of Breda, having received a Wound from the Pike of those who
searched it, had the resolution and cunning, to wipe the Iron and end of the
Pike, for fear his blood should discover the Enterprise. Cabul, with a Town of
the same Name, is fruitful in Myrobalan Plums. Candahar was conquered and taken
from the Persian, but restored to him in the year 1650, and the Moguls have not
been able to retake it. Agra has the capital City of all the Dominions, where
might be raised, upon occasion, two hundred thousand Men, capable of bearing
Arms: it is likewise the greatest City of the Indies. The Prince draws a great
Revenue, from eight hundred Stoves that are there. It Is twice as large as
Ispahan, but ill built, and without Walls; It Is much augmented since the year
1566: That Ecbar made it his Residence, after having caused there a stately
Castle to be raised. Delli was the abode of the Mogul, before Agra, and is so
still, since that Cha-Jean has built the City of Jean-Abad in its
neighborhood. Gualeor is a Fortress, where the Mogul confines such of the
Princes of his Blood, as give him any umbrage. Lahor, resorted to by the
Caravans, is the ancient Bucephalea, and is said to be twenty four Leagues in
compass. Naugracut has a famous Idol; those who go thither, out of devotion,
cut a piece of their Tongue off. Kachmire, otherwise Cassimere, is esteemed the
little Paradise of India, upon the account of its beauty. Chitor, a ruined
City, was the Capital of Ruana, the Successor of Porus. Bengala is renowned
for the temprature of its Air, its fruitful Soil, the abundance of its Rice,
which most parts of the Indies furnish themselves with, for its fine Canes or
Reeds, its Silks, and its excellent Wood of Calamba, the rarest and of the most
agreeable scent in the World. It likewise gives name to the greatest and most
famous Gulf of Asia. One of the late Histories of the Indies, does affirm,
that a Man of Bengala has lived three hundred and five years. The capital City
is Bengala, otherwise Satigan.

The Peninsula of India, intra Gangem.
THis Peninsula is the Country which is particularly called India. It has two
Parts, separated by the Mountains of Guate, which advance from the North to the
South, with several delicate Plains on their top, and which cause diverse
Seasons at the same time toward the East and West; Summer being on the one
side, and Winter on the other. It has above fifty Kings, the most powerful of
whom, do, by little and little, encroach upon the Dominions of the others. The
Portugals, English, and particularly the Hollanders, have Towns near the Sea,
with Fortresses, for the security of Trade, which is commonly of Spices,
Jewels, Pearls, and Cotton-Cloth. It has the convenience of several Woods for
the building of Ships: the Portugals, making use of this advantage, cause
several Carracks to be made at Bazaim. The Towns of the Europeans are upon the
Sea; farther in the Land there are others of the same Name, which belong to the
Natives of the Country, and are only distinguished from one another by their
high situation. The Fig Tree Leaves are in those parts so great, that they
serve those of the Country for Coverlets and Table-Cloths. Amongst the several
Religions, there is that of certain Christians, whose Predecessors were
instructed by St. Thomas.

Decan has Visapor for its Capital, five Leagues in circuit, the abode of
Idalcan, or Idal-Schach, a Mohammedan King. He still defends himself against the
Mogul, who had taken from him several places, and no longer pays him any
Tribute. Goa is the Residence of the Portugal Viceroy, and the Arsenal of that
Crown for the East Indies. Some esteem the Hospital of Goa, finer, richer, and
better served, than that of the Holy Ghost at Rome, or the Infirmery of Maltha.
It is a spacious City, but the excessive heats are mortal to many persons:
those who are bound hither, touch at two small Islands, five Leagues from the
Town, and there they take in Pilots, who commonly bring them into the Port of
Mormogan, one of the best of Asia.

Malabar is a very level Country, with a good pleasant Coast, and inhabited by
people, who know no other Trade, than that of Piracy. There blows, in Winter, a
Wind which so moves the neighboring Sea, that it rouls a vast quantity of the
Sand into the Entrance of the Harbors, so as then small Barks cannot come in:
In Summer, another Wind, quite contrary, is so violent, that it carries away
the Sand clearly, and lays open the Navigation. The great number of Rivers
there, renders Horses of little use, principally for War. Those Rivers fatten
the Land, nourish Crocodiles, whose flesh is good to eat, and serve for the
transportation of Victuals and Spiceries. The Malabarians pass a whole day
without eating, by taking two Grains of a Paste, called Anfian, which they have
come from Cambaia: they are obliged to continue this nourishment, and if they
once left it off, they could not live four days to an end. The Children in this
Country do not succeed their Fathers; those of their Sisters inherit, as being
certainly the next of Blood. The Wives burn themselves after the death of their
Husbands, to show, that they will not survive them. A few years ago, two
hundred of these Women took this course, after the death of the Naique of
Madura, a small Territory bordering upon Malabar; since which, that Law has
been moderated, in favor of the Widows. The greatest Ears are the most
beautiful, because they have room to fasten more Jewels than the small. Calecut
is a trading Town, whither the Portuguese resorted with a less favorable
success than at Cochim, where they obtained leave for the making a Citadel,
the first Fortress they had in the East Indies. The Hollanders took it from
them in the Year 1662. The Prince of Calecut calls himself Zamorin: He pretends
a Tribute from the Kings of Malabar. Besides this Prince, there are in this
Country the Kings of Cananor, of Tanor, of Cranganor, of Cochim, of Coulan, of
Travancor, and ten or twelve others of small consideration. Tamul gives its
name to a particular Language; besides the Malaize Tongue, there are others,
which they call the Bagadan and the Grandonique. Cochim, which comes near the
bigness of Goa, pays a Tribute to the Hollanders, who stand possessed of its
Fortress, as we have already said: The Haven of it is not good by reason of the
Rocks and Shelves which are at its entrance. Coulan is now neither so rich nor
so populous, as it was when it had above a hundred thousand Inhabitants.
Zamorin considered it for its Situation, its Harbor, and Loyalty. The Sand of
the Sea having stopped up its Haven, Goa and Calecut have taken from it all its
Commerce. Onor has Pepper very heavy, and black Rice, which is better than the
White.

After Malabar, and toward the East, is the Coast of Fishing, otherwise called
Manar, where they Fish for Pearls, where the Market is held at Tuticorin. This
Country, wherein are about thirty small Cities, is dry and burnt. It obeys, for
the most part, a Naique of Madura; the Hollanders stand possessed of the small
Island of the Kings with some Fortresses, which render them Masters of the
Passages of the Banks of Manar. They gather Amber-grease on this Coast; near
Cape Comorrin was formerly found a piece of Amber-grease, which is said to have
weighed thirty Quintals.

Coromandel, or Corobander, is so called from the Rice, which it produces in
abundance: It has the Havens of Meliapour and St. Thomas, where that Apostle
foretold, that White People would arrive in their Country, which was verified
by the coming of the Portugals. By some it is observed, in the Descendents of
those who put that Holy Apostle to death, that they have one Leg much greater
than the other. The Sea being here high and rough at all times, the small
Vessels choose rather to retire to Pallecate, and the great to Negapatan.

Narsinga and Bisnagar, otherwise Karnatek, have Amethists, Saphirs, and other
precious Stones. The King of Narsinga, who is the Raja of Velou, whose
Territories advance toward Cape Comorin, styles himself the King of Kings, and
the Husband of a thousand Wives. The City of Bisnagar is upon a Mountain with a
Citadel. There are on this Coast the Naiques or Princes of Madura, Tanaior,
and Gingi; and, in their Dominions, Inhabitants, who have pleasant
Imaginations: they make the number of their Gods mount to thirty three
Millions. They say, that the Globe of the Earth is supported with a Serpent,
armed with a thousand Heads, on which all the World is poised; that this
Serpent is born by eight Elephants, who stand upon the Backbone of a Tortoise,
which of its self remains firm and motionless even with the Water. They also
multiply the Seas, and make seven different ones of them; the one of Water, the
other of Milk, the third of Cream, the fourth of Butter, the fifth of Salt, the
sixth of Sugar, and the seventh of Wine. These small States have rose out of
the ruins of that of Narsinga. The late Relations make mention of the Kingdom
of Messur, bordering upon that of Madura, of the Moravan People being very
Warlike, and of the Land of Thieves. There are several Apes in the Woods of
this Country, where People take the Diversion of making them fight to get Rice.

Golconda belongs to a Mohammedan King, of the Sect of the Persiaens; there is a
Mine of Diamonds, so abounding, that in the Year 1622. the King caused it to be
stopped up for some time, for fear that the too great quantity would render
them common, or that the Mogul might have a desire to possess it. This Mine is
at the foot of a Mountain, where are sometimes a hundred thousand Workmen.
There are also Mines of Iron and Steel, the Steel that is drawn from thence
passes for the best of all the Levant. The Inhabitants of this Country are
very much addicted to Traffic; though the Country be Mountainous and Sandy,
yet it produces great plenty of Rice. The King has so many Customs and Imposts,
that there accrue to him from thence above twenty Millions. They speak Talenga
in this Kingdom, and reckon by Gauts, each of which comes to six thousand
paces. The City of Golconda is one of the most beautiful and strongest of all
India; it is also one of the greatest, being divided into three Citites.
Badnaguar, otherwise Hidraband, where is the King's Palace, though it be
without Walls; Golconda, where is the Citadel; Emanjour, upon a River which
separates it from the former. The King's Palace is the most magnificent of all
those of India, it is twelve Miles compass: Gold is there employed to such uses
as we employ Iron for. Mazalpatan, an unwalled Town, has narrow Streets and low
Houses; it is strong by Situation, in a marshy place, where it has a Bridge of
fifteen thousand paces in length. Its Harbor or Road is half a League from the
City, commodious for all sorts of Ships: most Europeans have their Factors
here. The Inhabitants of the Town drive a great Trade in Stained or Painted
Clothes, and other Works of Cotton, so delicately wrought, and with such lively
Colors, that they are more esteemed than those of Silk. The Fortress of
Condapoli has six Fortifications one upon another, each with its convenience,
and Lands capable of nourishing its Garrison. There are sixty other places of
defense in the Kingdom of Golconda.

The Peninsula of India, extra Gangem.
IN this part of India is a great number of good and great Rivers, which render
it fertile by their Inundations, and which afford the means of Transporting
thence the same Merchandises as from the Neighboring Countries. The Elephants
do great service, principally when Fire has seized on any place, for then they
pull down, with a wonderful dispatch and dexterity, the Houses neighboring on
those which are burning; upon a certain signal from him who governs them, they
take away with their Trunk the Roof of the House that is showed them, and Butt
down the Walls that remain, without going beyond the Order that is given them.
The Inhabitants of these Countries are for the most part Pagans, and live in a
state of War under diverse Kings, in whose Dominions are daily wrought some
Changes or other, the most powerful still becoming Masters of the weakest.

Aracan is fertile in Grains and Silver-Mines.

Pegu was very considerable, when it comprehended two Emperors and twenty six
Kingdoms: It is much decayed and fallen from its grandeur, through the Wars it
sustained against the King of Siam, for the maintaining itself in the
possession of a White Elephant. This Elephant was in so much the greater esteem
amongst the Indians, in that they firmly believed, that their Xaca, or Prophet,
was Metamorphosed into such an Animal. In the Year 1661. the Tartar, Victorious
over China, pushed on his Conquests thither, in pursuing Constantin the last
King of the Chinese. The Glasses of the Pagods, which are the Churches of the
City of Pegu, are of Tortoise-shells, so as those of Goa are of Mother of Pearl.

The City of Siam (which is otherwise called Odia, or India) is twenty Leagues
from the Sea, upon the Menan River, which overflows every six Months; the
Indians call it in this manner, as if it was the Mother of Waters. This River
has three Mouths, whereof the most Eastern is the most commodious. Several
Ships come to the City of Bankok, six Leagues from the Sea; from thence their
Boats and Pinnaces go twenty Leagues, as far as the City of Siam. The King of
Siam has been very absolute; has had several small Tributary Princes; but has
since owned Homage to the Tartar, Master of China. He is an Idolater, and
nevertheless allows of the Building of some Christian Churches in his Capital
Cities; nay, he himself has caused some to be Built at his own cost. He himself
Trades; out of his Dominons are Transported Buck-skins, Benjamin, and all other
precious Merchandises of India. The Siamois, contrary to other Orientals,
dispose their Writing after the same manner as do the other Orientals.
Tanacerin near an Isthmus, Ligor and Patane drive a great Trade. This Country
is fertile, temperate, and brings forth Fruits every Month of the Year. Hens,
Geese and Ducks, lay often their Eggs twice a day; insomuch, that Victuals are
in abundance, and at easy rates.

Malaca, with a strong Castle, is as the Center of the East Indies, where you
may wait for Winds, fair for the Navigation you intend to make. Barks may enter
into it by the River, but great Ships cast anchor between the two Islands that
are in the mouth of the River. The City ows its rise to Fishermen of Pegu,
Siam, and Bengala, who frequented it, establishing there, at the same time, a
new Tongue, which is at present received in several parts of India. The
Portugals gave out, that the Air hereof was unwholesome; which was to prevent
all desire in other Nations of settling themselves here. In the Year 1641, the
Hollanders made themselves Masters of it. People observe there, for a rarity,
the doleful Tree, whose Flowers only come by Night, and fall at the sight of
the Sun. Ihor in the most Southern part of India, is built upon Posts, near a
River, which divides it into two Ports.

Cambodia, whose King is a Vassal of that of China, drives a great Trade: The
City of the same Name, is sixty Leagues from the Sea, built in length, upon a
rising ground, to exempt it self from the Inundation of its River. The Mecon,
which passes by it, has two principal Mouths, which separate themselves
afterward into two others. It is Navigable; In the Year 1644, four Holland
Ships entered it, and got out again, notwithstanding the endeavors and
oppositions of the King of that Country, who would have hindered them from so
doing.

Cochinchina is one of the best Kingdoms of all India: A great number of
Galleys are kept there, where the Office of Rower is more sought after than in
Europe; the French Bishops have been busy there to promote the Catholic
Religion.

Tunquim, or Tonkin, has its peculiar King, as well as Cochinchina and
Cambodia. Upon the Confines of China and India there are People called Maug,
Timocoves, Gueyes, and others. The Tunquiners are the best Fire arms-men of all
Asia; instead of Purses, they have little Strings, whereon they file their
Copper Money, which are round pieces, pierced through the middle, distinguished
from sixty to sixty, by certain marks; they carry them upon their shoulders, or
else around their arms. The Country of Tunquim is boggish, watery, and
interlaced with above thirty Rivers, which fall into the Sea: the Air is
nevertheless very pure. They recko^ they have aobut twenty thousand Villages,
and six great Provinces, wherein are said to be two hundred thousand
Christians. The capital City is esteemed twenty Miles in circuit, wherein it
contains above a Million of Persons. There are upon the Frontiers, Forests full
of Apes, who go sometimes to the number of three or four hundred, and ravage
the fields; from whence they carry a prodigious quantity of Rice, which they
fasten between their skin, and a girdle of straw, which they make for that
purpose. This Country has no walled Towns or Fortresses. The King of Tunquim
has above fifty thousand Soldiers for this guard; and keeps above sixty
thousand upon the Frontiers of Cachinchina, with whose Prince he is often at
Dagger's drawing. He is said to have above five hundred Elephants, about as
many Galleys, most of em well fitted, and finely guilt. It is by the means of
the Elephants, that the Tunquiners have maintained themselves against the
Chinese, who did domineer over 'em, for somewhile. The most modern Relations
make seven Kingdoms pass under the Name of Tunquim, Tunquim, Cochinchina,
Ciucanghe, or Caubang, the small Bao, the little Lao, and the Mountains of
Rumoy, or Kemois, where there is a little King of Fire, and another of Water.
They likewise make mention of the great Kingdom of Lao, which extends from
fourteen Degrees, to two and twenty and a half of Northern Latitude, upon a
breadth of fifty Miles, along a River of same Name; where Langione, at eighteen
Degrees of Latitude, is the capital City. They likewise mention, that its King
has for Tributaries, those of Bao, Ciocangue, Ava; and that there are full five
hundred thousand Men capable of Service in his Dominions.

The Maldive Islands.
THe Maldive's Islands, situate on the South of India, both on this and the
other side the Equinoctial, have this Name from their City, called Male, and
from Dive, which signifies Island, in the Language of the Country. They are
said to be twelve thousand in all; which is spoke at hazard, and an uncertain
number is taken for a certain. These Islands are dispersed from the North-East,
to the South-East, into thirteen Provinces, which the Inhabitants call
Atollons, whereof each has a Bank for its Ramparts. Some of 'em are only Rocks,
or heaps of Sand, and all are very small. That of Male, which is the Principal,
is not a League in compass. They are interlaced with several Arms of the Sea,
environed with Rocks, which render 'em of very difficult access. It has been
the good pleasure of Divine Providence, that there are four Ports, or four
Openings to the Issues of each Atollon, that, those Ports corresponding to one
another, the Inhabitants might communicate together: Without this help, the
Ships would be hurried away, by the great Currents of the Sea, for above seven
or eight hundred Leagues from the Maldives: These Currents go six Months
toward the East, six Months toward the West, sometimes more, sometimes less.
The Channels, through which the Ships may pass most easily, are, those of
Malos-Madou, of Adou, and Sovadou, this is twenty Leagues broad. As the Sea is
but shallow in these parts, and there are commonly high Winds, and few
Commodities, few Europeans resort to these Islands. The King of Maldives is
called Rascan; His Revenue consists in the Misfortunes of others; that is to
say, it accrews from the Shipwracks of Vessels, that are cast away in those
parts: Certain it is, there is no trust to be put in the Pilots of those
Islands: they often cause the Ships to be cast away, that are left to their
conduct, that so the profit thereof may redound to their King. This Prince has
a Custom to Caress strangers, and invite them into his Island, that so by their
dwelling there for some while, they may die of the Disease, that reigns in
those parts. The Insularies are of a low Stature, of a tawny Complexion, of the
Mohammedan Religion, subject to several Evils, by reason of the excessive heats,
which reign there, and Fevers, which seldom abandon their Islands. They shave
themselves with cold water; catch Fish by swimming; go easily to the bottom of
the Sea; choose a convenient place for the Anchors of their Ships; will, with
an incredible facility, weigh up from thence burdens of a hundred thousand
pounds weight, by the means of a Cable, and some pieces of their Woods of
Condou. Their Cocoes furnish them with great Conveniences; they make of 'em
Wine, Honey, Sugar, Milk, and Butter: they eat Almonds, instead of Bread, with
all sorts of Meats: they place each Trade in a particular Island; Now, to
exempt 'emselves from the Vermin, which might spoil and destroy their
Commodities, they have their Ware houses and Magazines set up in the Sea, upon
Posts and Pillars, at two or three hundred Paces from their Islands.

The Isle of Ceylan.
CEylan is said, by the Insularies, to have been much greater formerly than it
is at this day; of four hundred Miles, which it was then in compass, it is not
now above three hundred. It Is made to resemble a Pearl, and several do believe
that it is the Taprobana of the Ancients. Its Air is the purest and most
healthful that is in all India: Some call it the Land of Delights; and say,
that it is the place where was the Terrestrial Paradise; that the Pico of Adam,
whither the Pagan Priests go in Devotion, is a Testimony thereof, as well as
the Crystal Mountains, the Forests of Cinnamon, and the Rivers of precious
Stones, which are all to be found there, except the Diamond. Doubtless, the
Cinnamon which is gathered in this Island, is by much the best in the World. It
affords excellent Ivory: The fishing for Pearls is performed in its
neighborhood, upon the Coast of the Isle of Manar. This Island abounds so with
Rice, that they give it their Horses, instead of Oats. The Pike of Adam,
afore-mentioned, is a high, sharp Mountain: The Fables of the Country say,
that Adam was there bred and buried; that the Lake of Salt Water, which is at
the top of it, is a Flood of the Tears Eve shed during a hundred years, for the
death of her Son Abel. The Inhabitants of Ceylan, are of diverse Religions;
active, well shaped, black and very ugly. Their Forces consist in Elephants,
which are reckoned the most courageous and docible of all India, from whence it
comes they are called Noble. They say, moreover, that the Elephants of other
Countries, seeing them, do them Reverence, and that the Ivory of their Teeth
does never turn yellow. There was formerly a white Ape in Ceylan, in such
veneration amongst the Inhabitants, that this Ape falling into the hands of the
Portugals, they offered to the King of Portugal, though in vain, three hundred
thousand Crowns, to purchase him again. The Bannians, who reckon, amongst their
false Divinities, Ramo one of their Heroes, say, amongst other follies, that he
desiring to pass, from the Western Peninsula of India, into this Island, all
the Scale-fish joined together, upon the surface of the Sea, to make him a
Bridge. The Straight of Manar is but a Musket Shot broad, by reason of the
small Islands which are daily made, by the stones that are cast in there, that
they may approach the nearer to a Pagod, or Temple of Idolaters, which is in
the Terra firma of India, upon the Coast of the Fishery. There are none but
small Vessels, which can pass through this Straight: So narrow a space of Sea,
makes it believed, that the Island was formerly joined to the firm Continent.
The Portugals have nothing more in Ceylan; the Hollanders stand now possessed
of most of the Places upon the Sea. There are in this Island several Cities,
with the Title of Kingdom, Candea, Das sette-Corolas, Ceitavaca, Galle,
Colombo, Chialo, Jaffanatapan, Trinquilemale, Baticala, Jala. The King of
Candea is the most powerful of the Country, and a sworn Enemy of the
Hollanders. He commonly causes his Blacks to burn the Cinnamon, that he may
render it useless to his Enemies. The best Town of Ceylan is Candea, toward
the midst of the Island.

The Islands of Sunda.
THe Straight of Sunda gives it Name to the Isles of Sumatra, and Borneo: It is
the common passage of the Ships which go to China, and in the most Oriental
Seas. The Air of these three Islands is unwholesome, and they do not furnish
those Provisions for the Mouth, that are to be got in the Terra firma of India.
Their Inhabitants are Pagans in the Inland-Countrey, Mahometans upon the
Seacoasts. They have several Kings, who, besides their Armies by Land, have
considerable Forces by Sea. They furnish rich Merchandises, and chiefly
Spiceries, which the English, Portugals, Hollanders, and most other Nations
fetch from thence.

Sumatra is the most renowned Island of the East, by reason of its spaciousness
and riches; It is seven hundred Miles in length, and two hundred in breadth,
with several Mines of Gold. It is ten Leagues distant from the Terra firma; the
Ancients thought it a Peninsula, by reason of the great number of small
Islands, which seemed to join it to the Continent. It has five or six Kings, of
whom that of Achem is best known to us: the others remain at Camper, Jambi,
Menancabo, and Palimban. They have maintained themselves so well in their
Islands, that the Europeans have not yet been able to hold there any
Fortresses. There is a Mountain which casts forth fire and flames, in like
manner with Mount Gibel in Sicily. The Pepper, which grows in this Island, is
better than that of the Coast of Malabar, because the Soil is here more humid.
The Gold is gathered in grain and small pieces, in little Ditches, by the means
of floods of Water. In the Inlands of this Isle there are still barbarous
Inhabitants, who make no difficulty of eating the raw flesh of their Enemies
with Salt and Pepper, which they always carry about them for that purpose. The
City of Achem, the most considerable of all the Island, was much better than it
is at this day. It is half a League from the Sea, in a Plain, with a Fortress
upon the Banks of a River, which is as broad as the Thames, but so shallow,
that it cannot bear ordinary Vessels.

Java has several small Kings, each City having often its own; the knowledge of
whom is of no great use to us. There are, amongst others, those of Japara,
Tuban, Jortan, Panarvan, Panarucan, and Palambuam. Several are Pagans, some
Mahometans; Most own homage to the Grand Materau, who resides either at
Materau, or Japara, and who formerly pretended to the Sovereignty of the whole
Island. There are Oysters taken upon this Coast, some of which are said to
weigh full three hundred pounds. The Island produces such large Reeds, that one
of these Reeds alone is sufficient to make a small Boat. It likewise furnishes
excellent Calamba, which is the Wood of the Aigle, or Aloes, Salt, which is
taken near Jortan; Gold and Silver in abundance. Its Southern Coast is not yet
known. Java is one of the greatest Islands of Asia, and, by reason of its
abundance, some call it the Compendium of the whole World. Its City of Bantam
is at the foot of a Hill, environed with two Hills, and cut through by a third.
The Walls of the City are of Brick, flanck'd with several Cannons, without full
Earth, only three foot thick: Its Haven is the most spacious, and most
frequented, that is in all the Islands of Sonde: There is all manner of Spices,
Gums, and other Commodities of the East Indies. It is the Staple of the
English, though our last advice from thence tell us of great changes, and that
the King of Bantam's Son, assisted by the Hollanders, had drove both the Right
King and English from thence. The French have, of late years, drove some small
Trade in this Town. Some Spaniards call Bantam, the Geneva of the East.
Jacatra, or Batavia, has, since the Year 1669. been the Residence of the
Council of the Hollander's East India Company, and the Magazine General of all
the rich Merchandises, which they draw from the Countries of the East, to send
into Europe. It has a good Citadel, with four regular Bastions, Half-Moons,
and other Works. It is in a Bay, which being covered by some Islands toward the
Sea, forms the best Road in all the Indies. After this, Jortam is one of the
best and most frequented Havens of the Isle of Java.

Borneo is the greatest Island of all Asia, fertile in Merabolans and Camphire.
It has several good Roads, but few good Towns. Some say, it is the Java Major
of Marc-Pol of Venice, and Java Minor is that we have just before made mention
of. The City of Borneo is built upon Posts in the Sea, at the Mouth of a River,
where is a Great and Commodious Haven. It has its particular King as well as
Bender-Massin. Sabas is the Capital of a Kingdom which affords Diamonds.

The Isles of Japan.
THere be several Islands known under this name. The three most considerable,
are Niphon, Ximo and Xicoco. Niphon, much larger than the rest, is separated
from the firm Land, by an Arm of the Sea, about ten Leagues in breadth; some
say, that it is joined to it, but that, by the difficulties of the ways, the
Japans choose rather to go thither by Sea.

All these Islands have a temperate Air; abound in Rice, Pearls, and Mines of
Silver, very much esteemed. Their Pearls are large, but are found to have too
much of Red in them. In this Country is a very extraordinary Tree; it becomes
dry when they wet it, and to nourish it, they must put into a hole they make in
it, filings of Iron, with Sand very dry: and to make its Branches green, and
gain and exert its Leaves, they are to be fastened with a Nail.

The Japaneses are Idolaters, good Soldiers, and very patient: Notwithstanding
the dangers of the neighboring Sea, they have sometimes taken the Peninsula of
Corca from the Chinese. They have the most happy memories in the World, and a
very abounding Tongue; for each thing they have several names, some for
Contempt, others of Honor: some for the Princes, others for the People. Their
Customs and Manners are wholly contrary to ours: They drink Warm water, and
they give this reason for their so doing, that the Cold is binding, provokes
Coughing, and the Distempers of the Stomach; but that the Warm nourishes the
Natural heat of the Body, that the passages are opened by it, and that the
thirst is the more easily quenched. They give such Potions to the Sick, as are
very sweet and odoriferous: They never let Blood, because they would spare
their Blood as the Vehicle of Life: They esteem black Teeth the finest: They
mount on Horseback on the right side: Salute by a shaking of the Feet. To treat
the King of Japan, who calls himself Cube or Caesar, three Years are said to be
required for Preparations, and that the Feasts last full three Months.

The Jesuits, Cordeliers, Jacobites and Augustines, have been very busy here,
and are said to have considerably promoted their Religion; In the Year 1596.
there were reckoned to be six hundred thousand Christians: since the Year 1614.
they have been extraordinarily persecuted, and none dare make Profession of
Christianity, now there, but in private. In the Year 1636. the Jesuits, the
Spaniards and Portugals, were entirely driven thence; where the Hollanders
alone have had the Liberty of Commerce, because, when they came into those
Parts, they forbid their Men, above all things, speaking of Religion.

They have several particular Tones, or Princes, the most part of whom, confine
their Power within the Circle of a Town. This Custom is generally received,
that when one of those Tones loses his Dominions, his Subjects lose likewise
their Estates. The Capital City is Meaco, which is said to contain sixty
thousand Households. Yendo is a Royal Castle, Sazay a famous Seaport. In the
Year 1658. a Fire happened at Yendo, which occasioned the loss of above forty
eight Millions of Gold. The Spaniards Sail along these Islands, when they
return from the Philippines to Mexico and Peru. The Hollanders are said to go
now to Japan by the North, passing West of the Land of Jeso.

The Philippine Islands.
THe King of Spain, Philip the Second, has given his Name to these Islands,
which are to the number of forty or fifty: this is to be understood of the
greatest, for if we reckoned all the small ones, they would be found to be
above eleven thousand. Most of these Isles are fruitful; furnish Gold,
wherewith the Inhabitants pay their Tribute. The Council of Spain, for the
Indies, has often proposed to abandon them, by reason of the too great expense
of the Garrisons, that are necessary to be kept there: because they contribute
to the Commerce that is driven with China and the Molucco's, his Catholic
Majesty has thought fit to keep them. The Islanders are valiant, and defend
their Freedoms in several places.

Lusson (otherwise New Castile) is the greatest of all the Philippine Islands.
The City of Manilhe, which gives its Name to the whole body of these Islands,
is the abode of a Governor and an Archbishop. It Is small, but beautiful, and
well fortified; the two thirds of its compass are along a River, which carries
Barks, and the third part toward the Sea. Besides the Spaniards and Indians,
it has many Chinese, who have taken refuge there, as in a Town where is the
Magazine of one of the richest Commerces in the World. Cavite, two Leagues from
the Town, is the principal Haven, secure from great winds, and defended by two
Forts: The Bay is forty Leagues in compass; where they have the convenience of
building great Galeons, but it is beaten by the Northern Winds; the bottom is
bad, and the entrance difficult. Here did the Spaniards detain a French Bishop,
Titular of Heliopolis, to make him afterward take a turn round the World,
before that he returned into Europe: from whence that Prelate is departed for
the third time with the Apostolical Missions of the Sea of Rome. The Isle of
Mindanao, was not subdued by the Spaniards, till a long while after that of
Lusson: that of Paragoya obeys still their own Kings; that of Tendaye, bears
the Name of Philippine, as having been first discovered; Cebu and Matan are
known, the first for Magellan's arrival there, in the Year 1520; the last, for
the death of the said Magellan. This was the first time, that the Voyage had
been performed round the World; which was done in the Ship of this Captain, who
had put himself into the Service of the King of Castile; for that the King of
Portugal, whose Subject he was, had refused half a Ducate a Month, above his
constant Pay. The Spaniards, who sail to the Philippines, do not go through our
Hemisphere: They go thither by Mexico, and the South Sea: For which reason they
would fain comprehend these Islands, as well as the Moluccoes, in the bounds of
their West Indies, which they extend for that reason as far as Malacca.

The Moluccoe Islands.
THere are five of these Isles, with the particular Name of the Moluccoes, in
the head of several others, much greater, which receive from them their Name.
These five Isles are very small, and in a situation near the Equinoctial Line,
where it is unwholsom living, for those who go to settle themselves there. They
have several peculiar Kings; the Hollanders have some Fortresses. In the last
Age, Charles the Fifth, Emperor, sent Magellan to discover 'em; who, to arrive
there, steered the Western Course, quite contrary to that which the Kings of
Portugal had caused to be taken. since they were engaged to the Portugals, who
laid claim to 'em, as having been there by the common way, which was that of
the East. The Government of these Islands, after that, was joined to the
Manilhes, and the Commerce of 'em was left to the Portugals. From hence are
transported Nutmegs, Cloves, and Ginger. Ternate, the greatest of the five
small Islands, is eight Leagues in circuit, and has a Mountain which casts
forth fire: the others are Tider, very considerable, Motir, Machian, and
Bachian.

The Moluccoes are good Soldiers, commonly of the Mohammedan Religion. Besides
the Kings of Ternate, Tidor, and Bachian, there are several others in the
Celebes Islands, and in Gilolo. The King of Macassar, in the Celebes, has
lately caused his City to be fortified. He has always given free entrance in
his Ports to the Ships of strangers. In the Year 1661, he treated with the
Hollanders East India Company, and abandoned the Portugals. In the Year 1668,
the Hollanders obliged him to trade with none but them, with exclusion to other
Nations. The state of this Prince would be pretty temperate, if the heats were
not insupportable in the day time. Formerly the Inhabitants of Macassar are
humane flesh; for which reason the Kings of the Moluccoes, and others of their
neighborhood, sent their Criminals thither. Celebes fertile in Rice, and the
Land of Papous affords Gold, Ambergreese, and the Birds of Paradise.

Banda, the only Island in the World, which produces Nutmegs and Mace, is an
Island toward the South of the Moluccoes, on the East of that of Amboyna, with
five or six other smaller Islands. It has a Volcan, or Mountain, which casts
forth flames; which, in the Year 1615, spoiled all the Artillery in the Island.

Amboyna, fruitful in Cloves, likewise on the South of the Moluccoes, gives it
Name to some other small neighboring Islands. It was taken in the Year 1603,
from the Portugals, by the Hollanders, who have at this day several Fortresses
there. It Is their best Establishment, next that of Batavia: They have treated
with the Inhabitants of the Island, so as these last are obliged to receive no
Commerce, but with the Hollanders.

Europe,
EVROPE, one of the four great Parts of the World, is also one of the most
considerable, if we respect either the Potency of its States, the great Number,
Beauty, and excellent Polity of its Cities; its great Commerce, the goodness of
its Air, and its prodigious Fertility. 'Twas Europe, that gave Alexanders and
Caesar's to the Universe; that has had within its Boundaries, the principal part
of the Roman and Grecian Monarchies, and which at this day does send Colonies
into other parts of the World. For this reason, it seems to be represented with
a Crown on its Head, when it is shown under the form of a Woman. It lies in the
North-West of our Continent, all in the Northern temperate Zone: This exempts
it from the insupportable heats, which reign in Africa, and which the most
Southern parts of Asia undergo. Its Air is equally mild, unless it be in its
most Northern Countries. The Ground affords all manner of Grains and Fruits.
Its length, to take it from the Cape St. Vincent, toward the West of Spain,
unto the Parts of Muscovy, bordering upon the Mouths of the River Obi, exceeds
twelve hundred Leagues, or is about 3800 Miles. Its Breadth, that is to say,
its Extent from the South to the North, from Cape Mapatan, in Morea, to the
most Northern Promontory of Norway, is full eight hundred.

Toward the North, Europe has the Northern Ocean, called Frozen, by reason of
its Ice; the Western, or Atlantic Ocean, toward the West; the Mediterranean
Sea, toward the South; and beyond that Sea, Africa. Now the Bounds, which
toward the Levant separate it from Asia, in remounting the Mediterranean-Sea,
toward the North, are as follows: 1. The Archipelago, or the White, otherwise
Aegean Sea. 2. The Straight of Gallipoli, called the Dardanelloes, and an Arm
of St. George, otherwise named the Hellespont, two Miles broad. 3. The Sea of
Marmora, otherwise Propontis. 4. The Straight of Constantinople, or the Chanel
of the greater Sea, otherwise the Thracian-Bosphorus. 5. The Black or Major
Sea, otherwise Euxinus. 6. The Straight of Caffa, or Vospero, otherwise the
Mouth of St. John, formerly the Cimmerian Bosphorus. 7. The Limen, or the Sea
of Zabaca and Tana, formerly Palus Mcotides. 8. The River of Dom, or Tana,
formerly Tanais. 9. A Line drawn from the most Eastern winding of the Dom, unto
the Northern Ocean, near Obi. Some draw this Line more toward the West, from
the Sources of the Dom, unto the White Sea, which is in Muscovy, and make
Europe very small: Others contain the Conquests of the Great Duke of Muscovy,
which he made in the Asiatick Tartary. Not to confound the true Limits of Asia
and Europe together, we may say, that both the Czar, and the Grand Seignior,
have Territories in each of those Great Parts of the World.

Europe is to be considered both in Terra firma, and in Islands, if we make the
Numeration of its Parts according to their situation, 1. We find, toward the
West, France, Spain, Portugal, three Hereditary Kingdoms. 2. Toward the South,
three Regions belonging to diverse Sovereigns; the first comprehends the
Countries bordering upon France, which were almost all formerly part of Gaul,
and whereof the greatest part has been reunited in our time in France, the
Low Countries, that is to say, Holland and Flanders, La Franche Compte,
Suisserland, and Savoy: The second of these Regions is Italy, and the third
Germany. 3. Toward the North of Europe, there is Denmark and Sueden,
Hereditary Kingdoms: Norway is added to the Crown of Denmark, as belonging to
the same King. 4. Toward the East, are Poland, Muscovy, Turkey, three the
Greatest States of Europe. Under the Name of European Turkey, is comprehended
Turkey, properly so taken, Greece, Hungary, Transylvania, Walachia, Moldavia,
lesser Tartary, the Republic of Ragusa. The Isles of Europe are in the Ocean,
in the Mediterranean, in the Baltick-Sea. The Isles of the Ocean are Great
Britain, which comprehends England and Scotland, Ireland and other that are
smaller, all under the Name Britanick, Sicily, Sardaigna, Corsica, and Candia,
are the greatest of the Mediterranean-Sea. The Isles of the Baltic are not
considerable, in respect of us.

The most renowned Mountains of Europe, are the Pyrenees and the Alps toward
the Confines, the Cevennes about the midst of France; Sierra-Morena in Spain,
the Apennine in Italy, Parnassus in Greece, Crapax between Poland and Hungary,
the Riphees in Moscovy, Mount-Gibel, otherwise called Aetna, in Sicily. Amongst
the most considerable Rivers, there are the Tage, the Guadiana, the
Guadalquivir, the Eber in Spain: The Po, the Tyber in Italy: The Seine, Loire,
Garone, Rhosne in France: The Danube, Rhine, Elbe, Oder in Germany: The Vistule
and Nieper in Poland: The Volga and Dom in Moscovy. The Thames, Trent, Severn
in England: The Tay in Scotland: The Shennon in Ireland.

We may consider the State of Europe according to their Titles, without having
regard to their Rank; and say, that there is the Patrimony of the Church: Two
Empires, Germany and Turkey: Seven Kingdoms, each with its King, who
acknowledged yet no Superiors, England, France, Spain, Portugal, Suedeland,
Denmark, Poland, this Elective: Eight Electorates, Mayence, Treves, Cologne,
Bohemia, Bavaria, Saxony, Brandenbourg, the Palatinate: One Arch-Dutchy, which
is Austria: Two Great Dutchies, Moscovy, Tuscany: Six Dutchies, besides those
in the Empire, Lorrain, Savoy, Mantua, Modena, Parma, Courland: Four
Principalities, which pay Homage to the Turks, Transylvania, Walachia,
Moldavia, lesser Tartary: Seven Republics, Holland, Suisserland, Venice,
Genoa, Lucca, St. Marin, Ragusa. A great number of Principalities, and Imperial
Cities in Germany, enjoy Sovereignty in their States, but owe Fealty to the
Emperor.

The Christian Religion is the most received in Europe; for which reason, some
give it the Name of Christendom. By the Cares of the Europeans, the Faith has
been Preached and Established in America, Africa and Asia. Besides the Roman
Catholics, the Protestants, and the Reformed, there are in Europe several
Sectaries, Mahometans, and Idolaters in some Countries of the North. The Roman
Catholic Religion is, for the most part, where is used the Latin Tongue. The
Schisms, where they speak the Sclavonian. Protestanism, where the Teutonick is
in use. Judaism, wandering in most parts of the World, is tolerated in some
Cities: It has been particularly banished out of France, Spain and Portugal.
Some who have undertaken to make the supputation of the Parts of the Earth
Discovered, according to the Religions that are received up and down, have
said, that if those Parts were divided into thirty, Christianity would have
five of them, Mahometism six, and Paganism nineteen.

In Europe are reckoned four Principal Tongues, the Teutonick, the Latin, the
Greek, and the Sclavonian. The Teutonick is of three sorts, German, in Germany;
Saxon, in England and Scotland; Danish, in Denmark, in Sueden, Norway and
Ireland. The Latin Tongue is received in Italy, France and Spain. The Greek was
formerly of four sorts, Attick, Ionick, Dorick, Aeolick. The Sclavonian is
current amongst the Sclavonians, Bohemians, Polanders, Moscovites. There are
seven other less considerable Tongues, the Albanese, Cossack, Hungarian,
Finlandish, Irish, British and Bask. The Cossack has affinity with that of the
lesser Tartary; the Finlandish is received in Finland and Lapland; the British
in the Principality of Wales, and in Brittany of France.

Amongst the Ancient People of Europe, the Greeks have won the Prize for
Sciences, and the Roman for Arms: In the last Ages, its Western Nations have
excelled in Navigation.

The Present State of the Countries, Fortresses and other Places, which the
Europeans stand Possessed of in the East and West Indies.
EVrope at first had but two Nations, who in the last Age, and toward the end
of the Age before, undertook, with success, Voyages of a long course, and who
afterward sent Colonies into those Lands they had Discovered, the Spaniards
toward the West, the Portugals toward the East. They obtained from Pope
Alexander VI. a Donative of all the undiscovered Lands. The other Europeans
were not satisfied with the over-Prodigal Liberality of this Sovereign Pontiff;
the English share therein; the French and Hollanders were willing to have their
share therein: Since which, there have been diverse changes in several places of
those Countries; the rigor, which the Spaniards and Portugals have used to
exclude other Nations, having only promoted their own Destruction.

The French have in Canada, 1. Mont-real, the three Rivers, Quebec, Tadousac,
upon the Great River of St. Laurence: Accadia, Port Royal, St. John, Pemtagoet,
near the Sea; the Isle of Cap-Breton in the Isle of Terra-Nova, Plaisance, the
Bay of little Niort. 2. In the Antilles Islands, St. Christopher's in part,
(the other part belonging to the English, St. Bartholomew, St. Croix, St.
Martin, Guadaloupe, la Desirce, Mary-Galant, the Saints; Martinick, St.
Alousie, Grenade, the Grenadins: The Tortuse and several Colonies in the
Western Part of the Islands of Hispaniola, called San-Domingo. 3. In the
Terra-firma of Southern America upon the Coast of Guayana, the Isle of Cayene:
The Colony of Corou, Coonama, Comaribo. 4. The Commerce of the Coast of Africa
upon the Rivers of Senega, of Gambia, at Rufisque near CapVerd, at
Grand-Sestre, at Ardre, in several places of Guinea. 5. The Fort Dauphin in the
Isle of Madagascar. The Isles of St. Mary; of Bourbon, of Diege-Rois. Countoirs
or Staples at Suratte, at Souali, and other Places of the Mogul; Near
Nazul-Patan, at Rezapour, at Siam, in the Kingdom of Tunquim; at Bantam in the
Isle of Java and other Places.

The Spaniards possess the greatest and best part of America, where they have a
great number of Towns. 1. In the Northern America, New-Spain, the Isles of
Cuba, Hispaniola, (the French have settled themselves in the Western part of
Hispaniola) Porto-rico: St. Augustine, St. Matthew in Florida, a part of new
Mexico. 2. In Southern America, la Castille d'or, otherwise called Terra-firma,
Peru, Chili, Paraguay, which comprehends the Countries of Tucuman and la Plata:
The Isles of. Solomon in the South Sea. 3. In the Coast of Africa upon the
Ocean, Larache, the Canary Islands. 4. Toward the East, most of the Philippine
Island, called Manilhes. They have a part of the Molucco Islands; which they
have abandoned, and the Hollanders have not failed to make advantage of their
so doing.

The Portuguese have, 1. All the Coasts of Brasile, in Southern America, where
are the Capitanias of Peru, Maranhaon, Ciara, Riogrande, Paraibe, Tamaraca,
Pernambuco, Seregippe, Baia de Todos-os-Santos, los-Isleos, Porto-Seguro,
Spiritu-Santo, Rio-Janeiro, and San-Vincente: Toward the Mouth of the Amazon,
the Places of Estero, Corduba, Cogemine. 2. In Africa, Mazagan upon the Coast
of the Kingdom of Morocca: Some Forts upon the River St. Dominick, a Branch of
the Niger, upon the Coasts of Guinea, of Congo, of Angola; Habitations in the
Isle of St. Thomas: The Isles Terceres, Madera, Porto-Santo, Cap-Verd, of the
Prince, of Fernando Pao, of Annabon. 3. Several Places in the East Indies; in
Cafreria, the Castle of Cofala, the Village of Sena, a Factory with a small
Fort at the Cape of Corientes, strong Houses of Cuama, and on the Rivers of the
Coast. In Zanguchar, the City and Castle of Mozambick, with the Fort of St.
Mark: Factories and small Forts of Angoxa and Quilimane. The Castle of Quiloa,
a Factory in the Isle Monfia. The Town and Castle of Mombaze, the Castle of
Melinde, with the Villages and Factories of Pata and Ampaze. The Traffic in
all the Coast of Africa, from the Cape of Good-Hope to the Red Sea; in the Isle
Zoeotora: at Aden, at Fartach, at Bassora. In Persia, half of the Revenue of
the Isle of Baharem, of Congue, the Traffic to Bender-Rich, to the Cape de
Jasques. In the India of the Mogul, Damaon with the Forts of St. Jeronimo, St.
John, Kielme, Mahi, Tarampor: Bazaim with the Isle Salsete, the Fort Bandera,
called Manora, the Village of Tana Fortified with three Bastions, the Rock of
Asserim. Ougeli-bourg, upon the Ganges: the Traffic to Agra, Amedabat,
Cambaya, Suratte, Baroche, in Bengala. They have in Decan Chaul, the Forts of
Morro, of Caranga, the Village of Massagan. Goa with its Fortresses and
Dependencies in the Land of the Bardes, and in the Isle Salsete. Upon the Coast
of China, Macao. In the Isle of Solor, the Village and Fort of Larentock. The
Traffic into Persia, Golconda, Aracan, Pegu; at Tanazerin, Ligor, Odia,
Cambodia; in the Isle of Timor.

The English have extraordinarily augmented their Dominions in America; they
have in Northern America, New England, Trinity-Bay, Chinchet, little Plaisance,
in the Isle of Terra-Nova: Virginia, the Bermudoes Island; New York; the Fort
of Orange. Some Colonies in Florida, at Cap-faire; la Ciguatee, and other
Lucca-Islands. At the Antilles Isles, the Barbados, which are Barbada,
Barboudu, Anguille, St. Christophers in part, (the other part belonging to the
French) Montserrat, Nieves, otherwise Meuvis, Antego, la Dominique, St. Vincent
in part; the Isle of St. Catharine, called Providence: the Isle of Jamaica,
that of Trinity; St. Point, and other Colonies at Surinam, at Maroni, at
Sinamari, with some Forts upon the Coast of Guayana. In Africa, Tangier, near
the Streights; the Fort of S. Andre, in the River of Gambia; San-Felippe,
toward the River St. Dominique; Tagrin, Madrebomba, Takorari, Cabo-Corso,
Eniacham, or Naschange, and other Places of Guinea. A Fort in the Isle of St.
Helena; Maderaspatan, upon the Coast of Coromondel; the Isles Bambain,
Angedive, Pouleron: A Hall, or Lodge, wherein they have a President at Suratte,
at Bantam. Factories at Ispaham, at Gombru, where they have half the Revenue;
At Agra, at Amedabat, at Cambaya, at Brodra, at Baroche, at Surat, at Dabul, at
Pettapoli, at Masulipatan, at Balazor in Bengala, at Ougeli: In Siam, at
Camboia; at Tunkin, in the Island Formosa.

The Hollanders have been dispossessed of their New-Holland in America, where
they have still the Isles of St. Eustache, of Saba, of Curasao, of Tobago; the
City of Coro, in Terra firma; the Colonies of Boron, Esquib, Brebice,
Aperwaqul, and others upon the Coast of Guayana. In Africa, Arquin, Gorea
toward Cap-Verde, where they have a Fort, with Factories at Rufifque, at
Porto-d' Ale, at Joal: St. George de la Mine, the Fort of Nassau, or Moure,
Cormentin, Axime, Botrou, in Guinea, upon the Golden Coast: several Forts in
Congo. Near the Cape of Good Hope, at Tafel-bay, or Table-bay, two Forts. On
the East of the Isle of Madagascar, the Island Mauritius. In the Coast of
Malabar, Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulan. In the
Coast of Coromandel, Tuticorin, Negapatan, Karkalle, Guelderland, near
Pallecate. In the Peninsula of India Extra Gangem, Malacca, with the Ports, the
Isles, and Fortresses, which depend on it. In the Isle of Ceylan, Negombo,
Colombo, Galle, Baticale, Trinquilemale, Jaffanatapan; a Fortress in the Isle
of Manar. In the Isle Java, Jacatra, called Batavia, with its Dependences: the
Island Bima; part of the Moluccoe Islands; namely, in Ternate, Tacomma,
Talucco, Malaya: In Motir, the Fort of Nassau: In Mach^an, Taffaso, Tabillola,
Naffaquia, otherwise Nahaca, Maurice; In Bachian, Grammadoure, Loboua: In
Gilolo, Sabou, Coma: In the Isle of Amboina, Coubella, Lovio: In the Isles of
Banda, Nassau; Belgique, in that of Nera: Revenge, in that of Powleway. In the
Isle of Solor, the Fort Henry, the Fort Joupandam, otherwise called Rotterdam,
in the City of Macassar: The Isles Savo and Boton, near Macassar: A Fort in
that of Timor. Part of the Terra Australis, which they have called New Holland,
where are the Carpentaria, the Lands of Arnems, of Witz, of Endracht, otherwise
called Concord, of Edels, Leuvin, of Nuitz. Several Factories in Persia, at
Gombru, at Congue, at Ispaham; in the Dominions of the Mogul, at Agra,
Amedabat, Cambaia, Ba^che, Surate, Ougeli, Cayumbasar, Deca, Patena,
Pipilipatan. In Decan, at Fingerla. In Coromondel, at Tenegapatan. In Golconda,
at Golconda, Mazulipatan, Palicot, Datscheron, and Bincola-patan. In Pegu, at
Ava, and Siriam. In Siam, at Odia. In the Isle of Sumatra, at Ticou, Piaman,
Indapour, Cellebar, Jambi, and Palimbam. In the Isle of Java, at Bantam, and
Japara; In the Isle of Celebes, at Manado: At Macasar. The Traffic in the Isle
Zocotora. On the Coast of Arabia, at Mocha, Aden, and Fortach. In the Isles of
Larck, of Kesem near Ormus. At Porca, and in most of the places of Malabar. In
Bisnagar, at Ornixa; in Aracan; in Pegu: at Tanasserim, Pera, Ihor, Paham,
Patane, Singora, Bordelong, and Ligor; in Tunquim, at Chincheo, and other
places of China; at Rima, in the Isle of Borneo. To the exclusion of other
Nations, they pretend to the Traffic on the Eastern Coast of Sumatra, of
Japan, in the Isles of Amboina, and Balli, and Bima in the Isle Camboua. They
stand no longer possessed of the Island of Formosa, which favored them in
their Commerce of Japan; the Chinese having expelled them thence.

The Suedes have established in Northern America, Colonies under the Name of
New-Sueden, Christiana, Gothembourg, Ensimbourg.

The Danes have some Territories in each of the Indies. They have New-Denmark,
toward the North of America; the Fortress of Fredericksbourg, of three
Bastions, which Commands at Cabo-Corso, and the Castle of Christiansbourg, in
Guinea. Krankebar, called Trango-bay, and Dansbourg, on the Coast of Coromondel.

The Courses the Europeans steer toward the West Indies.
MAriners, that sail upon the Ocean, teach us, that the Winds, which commonly
blow in the Torrid Zone, are called Brizes, and General Winds; that those Winds
are from the East to the West, according to the Motion of the Primum Mobile,
which (as some are pleased to say) makes the Sea to move after the same manner.
The Winds they have commonly, from thirty Degrees of Northern Latitude, are
Winds from West South-West to East. Upon the Seas, toward the Poles, the Winds
are not regular. It is the business of Pilots, to choose Seasons fit for
Navigation; to know, by Experience, the Flats, the Currents, or Ledges, of the
Places where they are to go; to know the Quality and the Condition of their
Ships; to observe the Wind well, that they may shorten their Course, when they
point their Chart; finally, to have regard to the Variation of the Compass,
which is not always the same in one and the same place.

We call America the West Indies; the Spaniards have made the most Voyages
thither. Their ancient Course was to go first of all into Great Canary, or into
Gomera; to sail toward the South or the South-East, there to take advantage of
Monzoons, or General Winds of the Torrid Zone, which carried them to
Guadaloupe, where they met with good Water. Now adays, because they have two
Fleets, the one for New Spain, the other, which is called the Gallions, for the
Terra firma, after having steered much the same Course, these Fleets divide
themselves at their departure from the most Eastern of the Antille's Islands:
that of New-Spain makes for the Cape St. Anthony, in the Western part of the
Isle of Cuba, and then gets to the Port of Vera Cruz, by a Northernly Course in
Winter, by a Southern Course in Summer. From thence the Merchants go by Land to
the City de los Angelos, and to Mexico. The Port of Vera Cruz is defended by a
Fortress, it is much more so by the Flats and Rocks which are at its entrance.
About three Months time is spent in the way from Spain to Vera Cruz. The Ships,
which are bound for the Honduras and Guatimala, after having sailed South of
the Isle of Hispaniola, steer to the North of Jamaica, and disembark at
Truxillo, or at the Golfo Dulce, which are places of the Province of Honduras.
Those who go to the Manilhes, after being arrived in the City of Mexico, go and
embark at the Port of Acapulco, or in that of Natividad, both upon the
South Sea. They bring from the Manilhes much Riches, and far more precious
Merchandises, than those which are carried from Europe to Mexico. The Port of
Acapulco is spacious, sheltered from Winds, defended with a Castle, and about
fourscore Leagues distant from the City of Mexico, which sends its Merchandises
upon Mules.

The Fleet of Cartagena, after having passed in fight of the Islands, steers it
Course toward Cartagena, where it disembarks for the new Kingdom of Granada.
The Ships destined for Peru, go to Porto Belo, where they discharge the
Merchandises of Europe, that are carried by land to Panama; or else, for a good
space of the way, by the River of Charge, which lies in the Isthmus of the two
America's. At Panama those Merchandises are embarked for Lima, or Arica, the
nearest Sea Port to Potosi. This rich Commerce has been much endammaged for
these late years by the Free-booters and Boucaniers, Corsairs of the American
Islands.

To return into Europe, these Fleets assemble all at the Havana, in the Isle of
Cuba, the best Harbor of the West Indies: It Is very Commodious, and defended
with three Castles. From thence they steer along the Chanel of Bahama, and
after, having ranged the Coasts, they pass by the South of the Tercera's in
Winter, by the North of the same Islands in Summer, for the kenning either the
Cape of Finisterre, or that of St. Vincent, and after that, make for the Port
of Cadiz, or that of St. Mary, as they did formerly to that of St. Lucar. The
ancient way they took in their return was, at the departure from Cartagena, and
from St. Martha, to pass to the West of the Isle Hispaniola, to the East of
Jamaica and Cuba, to get loose from all the Antilles, by the Chanel between
Mayaguana and the Caiques, for the getting into the main Ocean, and have there
the convenience of the East Winds. The Spaniards can no longer, with safety,
steer this Course; the English remaining Masters of Jamaica, the French of
Tortue, and several Colonies in the Western part of Hispaniola.

The French, who are bound for the West Indies, steer their Course either
toward Canada, or toward the Antilles, or toward Cayene and the Terra firma,
which is near it. When they go to Canada, they make a Traverse of about seven
hundred Leagues through the Ocean, pass to the North, or to the South, of
New Foundland, and so to the great River. If they go to the Antilles, or to
Cayene, they go and ken the Canaries, and then steer their way Southwards,
until that in the Torrid Zone they have the convenience of the Eastern Winds,
which they fail not to meet with there.

The Courses which the Europeans Steer in their Way to the East Indies.
UNder the Name of the East Indies, we understand the Coasts of Africa and
Asia, with all the Islands and Peninsula's of our Hemisphere, which are in the
Indian-Sea, beyond the Cape of Good Hope. The several Companies of Europe,
established for Commerce, have extended or drawn back, suitably to their
interest, the Lines of the Meridians, which include the Lands contained in that
space, and have, for that purpose, Charts to their advantage, enlarging thereby
the Countries which fell to their share.

Most of the Countries of the East Indies are the finest, the most delicious,
and, without contradiction, the richest of the whole World. The Europeans, who
go by Sea, have sought out all imaginable ways to get thither with ease, which
the Portugals happily effected in the foregoing Age: the Hollanders have
rendered themselves so powerful in those Parts, in our time, that they would
fain play there the Masters of Commerce: But the English thought fitting to
share with 'em in it: And the French have shown, what a willing mind they have
that way, if they had but all the Qualities necessary for such like Enterprises.

The Portugal Tongue is in use upon the Coasts of the East Indies: When that
People return into the East Indies, through the Dominions of the Turk, they lay
aside that Tongue at Bagdad, to make use of Lingua Franca, which is Turkish,
and a corrupted Italian.

The French, at their going out of the Ports of France, steer toward the
South-East, unto the height of Cape Finisterre in Spain. Thence they go
Southerly, passing into the East, and in sight of the Isle of Madera, or much
rather to the East of that of Porto-Santo. They come in ken of the Isle of
Palma, one of the Canaries, when they are about ten Leagues Westward. They pass
also sometimes between Teneriff, and the great Canary; then they must carefully
avoid the Flat of the Savages, to the South of Porto-Santo: there are several
small Islands considered as a Bank, because they are environed with Rocks.
Afterward they still steer their Course toward the South, and pass between
the Isles of Cap-Verd, and the Terra firma of Africa, about thirty or forty
Leagues East of those Islands. They do not approach nearer than a hundred
Leagues to the Coast of Guinea, by reason the Currents of the Sea bear thither,
and that there are troublesome Calms; nor do they come nearer the Coast of
Brasil, than they do that of Guinea, for the avoiding the Abrolhes, which begin
toward the Isle St. Catherina; if they did otherwise, they would find
themselves obliged to return into Europe. They steer a middle Course between
the Isle of Ascension, and that of Trinity, which are at twenty Degrees of
Southern Latitude. After which, they go toward the South-East, until that in
thirty two Degrees of the same Southern Latitude, they be on the North of the
Isles of Tristan de Cunha, which they dare not come near, because the Sea is
commonly very high there: these Islands are seven in number, and one of 'em is
much greater than the rest. By steering after that, East South-East, they meet
with the signs of the Cape of Good Hope, which are of a green Herb, called
Sargass, and of Trombes, which are pieces of Reeds, of three or four Foot in
length, as thick as a Man's arm, lying upon the Water with their Roots. They
are used to pass to such a distance to the Cape des Aiguilles, that they can
sound the Bank, which is in the South of it. From thence they go Eastward, and
then North-East, to arrive at Madagascar. In the abovementioned Course, they
stay some time at the Canary Islands, or in those of Cape Verd; formerly at
Cape Blanck, Rufisque, in the Isles of the Idols, at Tagrin, or in the Bay of
Saldaign^^, upon the Coast of Africa, according to their Occasions and
Occurrences. The Bay of Saldaigna, which is seven or eight Leagues in length,
and two or three in breadth, has good anchorage; it looks like a Lake, and it
has good shelter about, from five or six small Islands which are there.

The return into France, is performed after another manner than the way they go
from thence, by reason of the General Winds which reign from the East
West-wardly in the Torrid Zone, as we have said. After having doubled the Cape
of Good-Hope, and been some hundred Leagues to the East, they pursue the Course
North North-East, unto the sixteenth Degree of Southern Latitude; from whence,
they go directly West to ken the Island of St. Helena, where they are used to
refresh themselves: the English have made there a Fort some few years since.
From the Isle of St. Helena, they go to the Isle of Ascension, where they have
the convenience of Fishing for Tortoise; and then still toward the North-East,
until they come to the height of France. In their return, when they are
somewhat on this side the Line, they leave the Panedo of St. Peter on the left:
After that, they leave the Isles of Cape-Verd on the right, as well as the
Tercera's, and are very cautious of approaching the Abrolhes, which lie on the
West of those Islands.

The Portugals go to the East Indies, by the South of the Cape of Good-Hope;
their Navigation into the Indian Sea is regulated by certain Seasons, and the
Winds they call Muessons. After having doubled that famous Cape, they bend
their Course for Goa, between the firm Land of Africa, and the Island
Madagascar, to the East or to the West of the Shores of India. They go to
refresh themselves at Mozambick, and pass between the Isles Comorro, and
Juan-Miz; then, still to the North-East, unto the sixteenth Degree of Northern
Latitude, in the distance of about a hundred Leagues from the Desert Coast. At
length they steer directly East for Goa.

When they go from Goa to Macao, they they make Sail along Malabar toward the
Cape of Comorin; South of Ceilan, and of all the Southern Islands: They pass
through the Streights which are near the Island Galli, and Sail along Macasar
and the Manilhes, unto Macao. This they do not without great inconveniences;
and they take that great Circuit, because the Hollanders hinder them from
passing between the Streights of Malacca and Sunda, nay, and often scout 'em
toward Cochim, and at the Point of Galle upon the Coast of the Isle of Ceilan.
The Navigation from Macao to Japan is about twenty days.

In their return, at their departure from Goa, they pass by the Cape to the
West, about a hundred and fifty Leagues, and come in ken of the Desert Coast of
Africa, and in sight of Land, and get to Mozambick, making Sail between the
Isle of Madagascar and the Shores of India: they Coast along the Land of Natal,
where the Currents are commonly from the North-East to the South-West, and
where the Navigation is very dangerous. After which, they return into Portugal
by the Cape of Good-Hope, following the abovementioned Course.

The Course the Hollanders often take to the East Indies is by the South of the
Cape of Good-Hope. They go thither sometimes through the Streights of le Maire
and Brovers. They take that way by reason of the Winds motion of the Water,
which they have then favorable in Sailing toward the West, and because
commonly they spend less time, and lose fewer Men in this than in the other
way. When by the South of Africa, they go and double the Cape of Good-Hope,
they after touch at the Bay they call Tafel-Bay. This Bay is a commodious
Retreat for Ships, they can Anchor there, with all safety, at six or eight
Fathom Water, and shelter themselves from the Storms, which are very frequent
in those parts. The Air is healthful; they find all sorts of refreshments,
excellent Water; the access to it is so easy, that they can take in fresh
Water without any trouble. For these considerations, the Hollanders made an
Establishment there some years since, and no longer content themselves, as they
formerly did, with leaving Letters there for their Countrymen, that might come
to pass that way. The Mountain of Tafel-Bay is esteemed thirteen hundred and
fifty Foot high. Those Hollanders, who do not stop at Tafel-Bay, make for
Mauritius-Island, otherwise Swan-Island. This Island has, in its Southern part,
a Port between the Flats, wherein above fifty great Ships may ride safe under
the shelter of a Fort built in the Year 1640. From thence, between diverse
Flats, they make for the Chanel of Mamale, or that of Malique; and in this last
Course, they have favorable Currents.

For their way toward Malacca; whether that they go from Mauritius Island, or
from Cochim, they pass by the Islands of Nicubar, North of the Isle of Sumatra,
and leave the Isle of Pulo-Lada on the left, otherwise called the Isle of
Pepper, of about twenty Leagues in compass. They return into Holland after the
same manner as do other Europeans.

Other Tracts and Ways to the East Indies.
THE People, who inhabit along the Mediterranean Sea, designing for the
East Indies, go to Alexandretta, to Aleppo and Bir, which is four small days
Journey from thence. There are Caravans from Aleppo to Erzerum, to Erivan, to
Tauris. At Bir, they Embark upon the Euphrates to go in ten days to Rousvania,
from thence, by Camels, to Bagdad, and then by the Tigris to Bassora. They may
go by Water from Rousvania to Bassora in small Barks, from Bassora to El-Catif
in eight days: the Navigation is not very commodious upon the Euphrates and the
Tigris, by reason of the numbers of Mills they meet with upon those Rivers.
Sometimes they go through the Desert to go to those two Cities, from whence
they go to Ispaham and to Agra by Caravans; or else, after being Embarked upon
the Tigris, they go to Congue and Gombru near Ormus, by the Sea El-Catif; and
into the East Indies by the Ocean. The Customs of the Turk and Persian gain
very much by the Merchandises, which take this way. The Carriage from Bagdad to
Bassora is very easy and pleasant; in the Barks, which go that way, they
sometimes make use of Sails, and sometimes Oars; often do they let themselves
be carried along by the Current and Stream of the Water, so as they only Steer.
The River, which the Arabians of the Neighborhood call Chat or Xat, as they do
the other Great Rivers, is two Miles in breadth, and about six Fathom deep. It
is something like the Rhosne in France, less rapid, and more abounding in Fish;
its Water, though somewhat brackish, is nevertheless mighty good to drink: It
forms several Branches, because that the Land is low there, and sandy.

In the Way they take to China, through the Territories of the Levant, they are
to be at Aleppo toward the end of the Month August, for to take there, in
September, the convenience of the Caravans, which bring them, in November, to
Bagdad. From Bagdad they are ten days in going to Bassora: twelve in going from
Bassora to Gombru, where they almost daily meet with conveniences in Barks
called Tranquins. In January and February the Muesson stands right for Surat,
where they commonly Embark upon English Ships or Moorish Vessels, which go that
Voyage in five and twenty days. This way is looked upon as much the same with
that from Marseilles to Alexandretta. At Surat they take their Way by Land,
spend therein forty small days Journies, as far as Mazulpatan, a City upon the
Gulf of Bengala, and this about the Month of March. From Mazulpatan they go to
Tanazarin by Sea: from thence to Sian, from Sian to China in all Seasons. This
way did the three French Bishops go, who were Missionaries into China.

They make mention of another way to China, through Candahar, Agra, Pathna,
Niepal, Pitan, etc. this way is gone by Land; no Inn to be found, few Villages,
great Deserts, hideous Mountains, where they make use of great Goats to carry
their things. There are also some of those Mountains so steep, that to pass
them, they are forced to wrap themselves up in Carpets, and put themselves into
the hands of certain People, who lay you upon their Shoulders to carry you
through those difficult places.

Those, who dwell upon the Shore of the Black-Sea, remount the Faze, get to
Arais, the Caspian-Sea, Albiamu; from whence they go by Land to the Indus, or
the Ganges: those Rivers carry them to the Ocean. Nicanor, King of Syria, had
projected to join Pontus Euxinus and the Caspian-Sea. The Genoueses have, a
long while, held the City of Caffa for the maintaining this Commerce. There is,
for those of those parts, another way by Trebrizond, Erzerum and the Euphrates,
which lead to Bir; from thence, as we have said, into the Sea of the Indies.
The Moscovites have the convenience of the Volga, the Caspian-Sea, Albiamu, and
the Indies: For to return into the City of Mosco, they go up the Volga, Ocea,
and the Mosca.

These are the common ways, that are taken for the going to the East Indies,
and which now render that Country as famous, as did formerly the Military
Expeditions of Bacchus and Alexander the Great. Now follow those which have
since, with great care, been sought out for the same design.

The Romans went to Alexandria of Egypt, ascended the Nile as far as Coptos,
now Cana; and by Land went to Berenice, which is Cossir, where they had the
convenience of the Red Sea and the Ocean. Under the Soldans of Egypt, Sues and
Arden, were the Magazines of the Indian Merchandises, which were Transported to
Cairo by means of the Nile; then they had in Europe fresher Spices than they
have now, the Venetians and Genoueses brought them thither by the
Mediterranean-Sea.

France.
TThe Kingdom of France is, at this day, one of the most flourishing States of
Christendom, in the midst of the Northern temperate Zone, where its People
breath a very favorable Air. The French call it the Eye and Pearl of the
World; and say, that it is to Europe what Europe is to other parts of the
Earth: it is Rich, Fertile, very Populous, there being reckoned above four
thousand good Towns in it. It Is above two hundred and twenty Leagues in length,
and full as many in breadth. The Frenchmen value most of their Towns to be
worth Provinces, their Provinces to be worth Kingdoms. Their Corn, Wine, Salt
and Linen, do very much enrich the Inhabitants.

France was formerly known under the name of Gaul, which was carried into
several places of Europe, nay, into Asia, when the Gauls made War in that part
of the World. The extent of Gaul has been diverse. The French may well boast,
that this King's Conquests have not been bounded neither by the Rhine, nor the
Ocean, nor the Pyrenees, nor the Alps. The Crown is Hereditary; and, according
to the Salick Law, the Female never succeeds upon the Throne. The French King's
eldest Son is called Dauphin. This Monarchy is said to have subsisted since the
Year 420. The three Royal Races of Merovers, Charlemaigne, Hugh Capet, have
furnished it with sixty five Kings. Amongst other Titles, its Princes take upon
them that of Most Christian, and Eldest Son of the Church. They pretend to
Precedence before all other Kings, upon a pretext of being the most Noble and
the Most Ancient of Europe. Their Arms are Azure, with three Flower-de-luces d'
Or, since Charles the Ninth.

The Kingdom is composed of three Orders or States, the Clergy, the Nobility,
and the third Estate. There are reckoned seventeen Arch-Bishopricks, a hundred
and six Bishoprics, besides the Arch-Bishopricks of Cambray, Besanzon, the
Bishoprics of Arras, St. Omar, Tournay, Ipres, Perpignan; sixteen Abbayes,
Heads of the Order, or of the Congregation: about fifty thousand Curates,
besides other Ecclesiastical Dignities: several General and Particular
Governments: Thirty two great Provinces: Twelve ancient Peerages, several of
new Creation. A great number of Principalities, Dutchies, Marquisates,
Counties, Baronies, and other Lordships; Eleven Parliaments, besides those of
the Conquered Countries, eight Chambers of Accounts, twenty two Generalities.

There are four Principal Rivers, the Seine, whose Water is esteemed the
strongest in the World, and more healthful to drink than that of Fountains; the
Loire, the King of the French Rivers; la Garonne, the most Navigable; the
Rhosne, the most Rapid.

Several Divisions are made of France, which regard the Church, the Nobility,
the Justice, and the Finances. It is sufficient to say here, that the
States General of the Kingdom were held in the Year 1614. that then all the
Provinces appeared under twelve Great Governments; four of those Governments
are toward the North, the Seine, and the Rivers which fall into it, Picardy,
Normandy, the Isle of France and Champaign. Four toward the midst, near the
Loire, Brittany, Orleanois, Burgundy, and Lyonnois. The four others, toward
the South, and near the Garonne or the Rosne, Guyenne, Languedoc, Dauphine,
Provence. With Orleanois they then conjoined le Mains, le Perch, la Beauce, on
this side the River of Loire; Nivernois, Tourain, Anjoy, above the said River;
beyond it, Poictou, Angoumois, Berri. Burgundy had la Bresse, as it has still
at present. Under Lyonnois, were Lyonnois, Avergne, Bourbonnois, la March. In
Guyenne was Bearne, Gascogne, true Guyenne beyond the Garonne; and on this side
Saintogne, Perigort, Limosin, Querci, Rouergue. Then, as well as now, Languedoc
comprehended Cevenes. The other great Governments are not subdivided into great
Provinces. Now follow the capital Cities, according to that distribution,
Amiens, Rouen, Paris, Troyes, Rennes, Man's, No-gent-le-Retrou, Orleans, Nevers,
Tours, Angers, Poictiers, Angoulesme, Bourges, Dijon, Bourg-en-Bresse, Lion,
Clermont, Moulins, Gueret, Pau, Auch, Bourdeaux, Saints, Perigueux, Limoges,
Cahors, Rodes, Toulouse, Viviers, Grenoble, and Aix.

Spain.
SPain is a Great Peninsula, two hundred Leagues in length, and the same in
breadth, in the most Western part of Europe, betwixt the ninth and twenty
fourth Degree of Longitude, and between thirty five Degrees and a half, and
forty Degrees and a half of Northern Latitude. This Peninsula is upon the
Ocean, and upon the Mediterranean-Sea; toward the North-East, it borders upon
France, for the space of above a hundred Leagues, the Pyrenean Mountains
between both.

Several things concur to the making Spain thinly inhabited; its Fertility,
Mountains, the barrenness of its Women, the banishment of the Moors, of whom
above eight hundred thousand were constrained to depart thence, in the Year
1610, the great number of persons that are sent to Colonies, and the Wars
abroad. From whence it proceeds, that never above seven thousand natural
Spaniards were ever seen together in any Army. The Heat reigns there more than
the Cold; those Provinces which lie South-East, are more fertile than the rest.
The Mountains without Trees, and the mighty Rocks are there called Sierra. This
Country has but scarcity of Corn, but abounds with the strongest Wines, the
most delicious Fruits, and the sweetest Oils of Europe. The Gold and Silver,
which is brought into Spain from America, is very capable of purchasing it all
the other Conveniences of Life. In the Year 1618. it was verified, that since
the first discovery of this New World by Columbus, the Spaniards had drawn from
thence above fifteen hundred thirty six Millions of Gold. These are immense
Sums, but, as the Traders of Europe have the best share in them, they have not
enriched Spain, proportionably to what it has been weakened by the Colonies,
that have been sent thither. Moreover, the necessity of having foreign
Commodities drains and exhausts the better part of those Riches. This made
Henry the Fourth of France say, That the Spanish Pistolls spoke their Riches in
their own Dominions, but, carried elsewhere, did but show their Poverty. Mines
there are of Copper, Quicksilver, Lead, Iron, and Salt, in Spain: those of
Gold and Silver have been spared, since they have had the convenience of those
of America. The Horses of this Region are generally in esteem, those of
Andalousia above all others; yet they travel commonly in this Country upon
Mules and Asses, by reason of the Mountains.

No Prince whatsoever has so much Land, as the King of Spain: He may, with
justice, style himself the greatest Territorian of the Universe, if I may use
that Term. True it is, that his Dominions lie separated from one another, and
dispersed in the four parts of the World. Some of his Predecessors have
boasted, that the Sun never set in their Dominions, and that the extent of
their Territories was only to be measured by the Course of that Planet. In some
Letters, which the Kings of Persia have addressed to them in the foregoing Age,
there is, To the King, who has the Sun for a Hat. Among other Titles, they wear
that of Catholic, particularly since Ferdinand the Fifth, and that of the King
of Spains; they have taken up this last but of late years. These following are
those which Philip the Fourth took in the Pleinpouvoir, which he gave in the
Year 1659, to Don Lewis de Haro, for the treating of a Peace between France and
Spain. Dom Philip, by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, (this Title was left out in the Plein-pouvoirs,
of the Peace of Nimmeghen) Navarre, Grenada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Maillorca, Seville, Sardaigna, Cordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, the Algarbes,
Algezire, Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the East and West Indies, the Islands
and Terra firma of the Ocean-Sea, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy,
(which is no longer allowed him by the French King, since the Cession of the
Franche Compte) Brabant, Milan, Count of Hapsbourg, Flanders, Tirol,
Barcellonna, Lord of Biscay, and Malines.

The principal Order of Knighthood, in Spain, is that of the Golden Fleece, the
others are those of St. James, of Calatrava, of Alcantara, and Montese: the
Kings of Spain have attributed to themselves great Masterships and
Jurisdictions of 'em, under the Name of Perpetual Administrators. There are,
moreover, above fourscore Grandees, who are much the same with the Dukes and
Peers of England; this Dignity of Grandee is settled upon Lands, and falls to
Females.

The Spaniards esteem Arts as disnonourable; upon which account most of their
Artificers are strangers. They have always maintained the reputation, of being
Faithful and Loyal to their Prince; they are slow in their Resolutions, and
their Tediousness and Procrastination makes them often lose good Occasions.
Some of 'em have the vanity to say, That their Country furnishes the World with
Generals of Armies; That God spoke to Moses, upon Mount Sinai, in the
Castillian Tongue; That the Lord of the Universe must be a Spaniard born, and
other such great Words.

Spain, sometimes called Iberia, Hesperia, Mus-Arabia, was subject to strangers
during a long while: the Celtae, Rhodiots, Phenicians, Carthaginians, Romans,
Vandals, Swabians, Goths, and the Moors, have commanded and domineered there,
over all, or in some parts. Its first Division was into two parts; the one on
this side, the other on that side the Ebre, which then bounded the Empires of
Rome and Carthage; since, what has been called Vlterior Hispania has only
comprehended Betica and Lusitania. In each part the Romans established fourteen
Convents or Benches of Justice. During the decay and fall of the Domination of
the Moors, there arose five Kingdoms, Leon with Castile, Aragon, Navarre,
Portugal, and Grenada. After which, the whole Country fell under the sway of
the King of Castile, the King of Portugal, and the King of Arragon. It is
principally by these three Titles, that the King of Spain has possessed all his
States, wherein are eight Vice-Roy-ships. In our time the King of Castile has
been a peaceable Possessour of all these Kingdoms, though, that since Pelagius,
the Succession of these Kingdoms has fallen ten times upon Females: In the Year
1640, Portugal proclaimed the Duke of Braganza King.

The principal Rivers of Spain, are the Douere, abounding in Fish; the Tagus,
renowned for its golden Sands; Guadiana, which is said to run under Ground;
Guadalquiber is the deepest; Iberus, famous for its Name: All of them have
their Source in Castile, and are not Navigable, like many Rivers in other
Countries. Guadiana has given the Spaniards occasion to say, That their Land
affords the richest Bridge upon Earth; that it daily feeds above ten thousand
Cattle, and that a great Army may march over it in Battalia: the Ancients seem
to have admirably well called this River Anas, by reason that it enters and
rises out of the Earth, as a Duck does in the water. Some Moderns say, this
River is hidden by the Mountains; others do assure us, that these are Breakings
up of the Ground, which are made for the watering the neighboring Lands, that
are very lean and hungry: Certain it is, that this happens toward the Sources
of Guadiana, and not toward Merida, as the old Carts represent it. This is one
of the Wonders of Spain; the two others are, a City incircled with Fire by
Walls of Flint, which is Madrid; a Bridge, over which Water is seen to run;
which is the Aqueduct of Segovia. One may say of the Cities of this State, that
they have some appellation for Excellence; Sevil the trading, Grenada the
great, Valencia the fair, Barcellonna the rich, Saragossa the satisfied, Valle
dolid the Genteel, Toledo the ancient, Madrid the Royal City. There are eight
Arch-Bishopricks, forty five Bishoprics: the Arch-Bishopricks are Toledo,
Burgos, Compostella, Sevil, Grenada, Valencia, Saragossa, and Taragonna. King
Richard the First established there the Roman Catholic Religion, which is the
only one allowed of in the Kingdoms, the Inquisition having been introduced
against all other Beliefs. Some Churches are at Toledo, where they still
perform the Mus-Arabick Office, which is that which the Christians, who lived
amongst the Arabians, used. Several of their Seaports are very considerable,
the Passage, Saint Andre, la Corune, Cadiz, Cartagena, Alicant, etc.

There are reckoned in Spain fifteen great Parts, most of which had the Title
of Kingdoms in the times of the Moors: Five upon the Ocean, Biscaya, Asturia,
Galicia, Portugal, that has its King, Andalousia: Five upon the
Mediterranean-Sea, Granada, Murcia, Valencia, Catalonia, the Isles of Majorca
and Minorca; Five within the Inland of the Country, Aragon, Navarre, the two
Castiles, Leon.

Biscay has Woods which furnish it with the convenience of building Ships. It
has so great a quantity of Mines, and Iron-Forges, that the Spaniards call it
the Defense of Castile. It is separated from France by the small River of
Bidassoa, which forms a little Island, Celebrated for the conclusion of the
Peace in the Year 1659. between the Crown of Spain and France. The Biscayans,
who are the ancient Cantabrians, have great Privileges, and boast of never
having been subdued. The Land (as well as in the Kingdom of Navarre) is well
Cultivated, because there is neither Tax, nor Tithes, nor Right of Importation.
Its Capital Cities are Bilbao, St. Sebastian, both driving a great Trade,
especially in Wool: Great Ships cannot come up to Bilbao but at High Water.
The Port of Saint Sebastian is of easy access, its entrance is defended with
two Castles, that of the East upon a Height, that of the West on a Level upon a
Rock. Saint Andero, and le Passage, are two excellent Seaports in this
Country, Fonterabia the strongest place, Guatari the Country of Sebastian Can,
he who first went round the World in the Ship called the Victory.

Asturia breeds Horses much esteemed for their strength; it is the Title of the
Prince of Spain, whose younger Brothers are called Infants since the Reign of
King John the First. It has served for a retreat to the Gothic Kings, and to
several Bishops, during the irruption of the Moors, wherefore Oviedo, its
Capital City, is called the City of Kings and Bishops.

Galicia is more Populous than Fertile; Compostella is known for the
Pilgrimages of those who go thither to visit the Relick of Saint James, the
Patron of the Spaniards; la Corune for the goodness and spaciousness of its
Harbor. The Silver Fleet, rich above thirty Millions, arrived there in the
Year 1661. to avoid meeting with the English, who, for the surprising it, lay
at watch upon all the Avenues of Cadiz. They reckon in this Country above forty
other Havens, whereof that of Vigo is the most considerable.

Andalousia is so beautiful, so abounding in Wines, Corn, Olives, that it
passes for the Granary and Store-house-of the Kingdom. Sevil is the Magazine of
the Riches of the New-World: It Is a Town so well Built, that there is a Spanish
Proverb which runs, Qui en no ha visto Sevilla, no ha visto maravilla. It still
keeps the remains of the City Italica, the Native Town of Adrian.

Corduba, which gave Lucan and the two Seneca's to Antiquity, was much more
considerable under the Moors than it is at present. Its principal Church was
formerly the greatest Mosque of the Mahometans after that of Mecca. San-Lucar,
at the Mouth of Guadalquivir, is a Town of great Trade. The Ships, which bring
Gold and Silver from the West Indies, have sometimes cast Anchor near the Tower
of the Port, which is sometimes called the Tower of Gold: This casting Anchor
is more commonly performed at Cadiz, and the Port Saint Mary, which is near it.
Xeres de la Fontera is in the Neighborhood of the Place where the Moors
entirely defeated the Goths, in the Year 712. After which, they had the means
of Ravaging all Spain as they did. The Spaniards have been observed to have
made no scruple of having Alliance with those Infidels, because some of their
Divines have maintained, that they might be made use of as of Horses and
Elephants. Gibraltar gives its Name to the famous Straight, which communicates
the Ocean and Mediterranean-Seas, and which separates Europe from Africa. Palos
is the Haven, where Columbus embarked for the first Discovery of the New-World;
Cadiz, as we have said, is the most usual place of Resort for the Fleets, which
come from the West Indies, by reason of the convenience of its Harbor. It is
of such importance, that the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, recommended the
preservation of it above all things to his Son, Philip the Second, with that of
Flushing and la Goulete. Antiquity shows here a Temple, dedicated to Hercules,
with two Pillars, either of Brass or Silver, which are said to be the Pillars
of that Hero, as well as the two Mountains of the Streights of Gibraltar.
Julius Caesar is said to have wept in this Temple, at the remembrance of the
Prodigious Conquests, which Alexander the Great had made at the Age of thirty
three Years, and whereof the consideration carried him to such high
Enterprises, as that of Xenophon's Cyrus had done Scipio. The Name of
Andalusians was given to the Moriscoes, who were driven out of Andalousia and
Granada; that of Tagarins to those of Aragon and Catalonia.

The Kingdom of Granada under its last Moorish Kings, who lost it in the Year
1421. was much Richer, and more Populous, than it is at present; it was also
much more fertile: The Moors had a thousand Inventions to Water their Lands
with Rivulets and Trenches, by causing Water to be brought thither from great
Ponds, which they made in the Mountain^ which are at the foot of la
Sierra-Navada. The Situation of this Kingdom, and the Disposition of its Towns,
are conformable to the Description Julius Caesar gives thereof. The City of the
same Name is the greatest of Spain: The abode in it is so pleasant, by reason
of the pureness of its Air, and its admirable Fountains, that the Moors placed
Paradise in that part part of Heaven which is upon its Zenith. Malgus is known
for the excellent Wines which it furnishes the World withal. Almeria for its
Commerce and its Harbor. Monde for the Victory of Julius Caesar over Pompey's
Sons: He killed upon the place thirty thousand of his Enemies, and afterward
made the Circumvallation of the Town, with the Arms and Bodies of the Dead.

Murcia is called the Garden of Spain, by reason of its excellent Fruits. Its
Town of the same Name drives a great Trade in Silk. Carthagena is a good
Seaport.

Valentia is the most agreeable Country of all Spain. The City of the same Name
has also those of Beautiful, Great, of Valencia del-Cid, since its being taken
by Rodrigo from the Moors. Alicant is known for the Transportation of its good
Wines. Upon the Coast are seen, in a place called Morvedre, the Ruins of the
ancient Sagonte, the destruction whereof, by Hannibal, gave occasion to the
second Punick War.

The Principality of Catalonia, the most important Province of Spain, produces
Wine, Oil, Corn, and Fruits in abundance. The Neighborhood of the Pyrenees
furnish it with very fine Marble, Jaspar and Azure. Those who make Spain the
Head of the Catholic King's Dominions, say, Catalonia is one of its Ears, and
Portugal the other. Ten Cities are reckoned in this Province, seventeen
Vigueries, or great Baily-wicks, with above a hundred Walled Towns, whereof the
most part were taken and re-taken in the late Wars. Barcelona, the Capital
City, has good Edifices, by reason of the convenience it has of being furnished
with Stone from Mount-Juy. Tarragona, whereof the greatest part of Spain has
born formerly the Name, is more Ancient and Strong than it is Beautiful.
Tortosa upon the end of the Ebre. The French gained, near this Town, a famous
Victory over the Sarazens in the time of Charlemain. Larida has sustained
several Sieges, and seen several Battles fought in our time; Caesar formerly
defeated, near this place, Aframius and Petreius of Pompey's Party. Gironne is
a Principality, whereof the Eldest Sons of the Kings of Aragon bore the Title.
Cordene, a famous Duchy, has a Mountain of Salt, which seems of all sorts of
Colors, but becomes white when it is pounded. Problet, a rich Monastery, was
the Sepulcher of the King's of Aragon: That of our Lady, at Montferrat, is
known for its great Solitude, for its Pilgrimages, and the Presents that are
made there. Roses, the strongest and most important of the Sea-Towns.

The Isles of Majorca and Minorca, are the ancient Baleares, where the
Inhabitants were heretofore as good Slingers, and great Pirates, as it this day.
They obliged their Children to fight for their Breakfast with their Slings;
notwithstanding their activity, they were constrained to demand help of
Augustus against the Rabbets, which harassed their Country. The Books of
Raymundus Lullius are read and studied in the University of Majorca, as
Aristotle's, Des-Cartes's are in other places. The Isle of Minorca has good
Havens, whereof the most considerable is that of Mahon, with Avenues, well
Fortified. The Territory of Yvica has this particularity of killing Serpents,
which are in great numbers in the Isle Formentera.

Aragon has no good Towns but Saragossa. Ainsa and Benavari have been the
Capita^s of two small Kingdoms, Sobrarbe and Ribagorce: Monzon is a place where
the States of Aragon did formerly assemble.

Navarre consists in six Merindades or Governments, whereof the Capital is
Pamplune. There is, on this side the Pyrenees, one of those Governments, which
is called of Low-Navarre, in the hands of the French King. The French say, That
the Genealogy-Table shows the Rights, which his most Christian Majesty has over
the Kingdom of Navarre, which was Usurped from his Predecessors about the Year
1512. without any other ground than that of Vis and Arma.

Old-Castile has received its Name from a Castle, whose Figure is seen in the
first Quarter of the Arms of the King of Spain. Burgos is the Metropolitan City
thereof, with a strong Castle and a fine Church. Valladolid has been the abode
of the Kings: the Ruins of the ancient Numantia are still seen toward the
Sources of the Donere near Soria, where is kept the Great Standard of the
Kingdom. The Inhabitants of Calahorre were formerly in such esteem for their
Fidelity and Loyalty, that the Emperor Augustus Caesar chose his Lifeguard out
of those People. Both Castiles, as well as all the other Inland Provinces, are
extraordinary full of Mountains.

New-Castile has the Capital Cities of the Kingdom, Madrid and Toledo. Madrid
is adorned with beautiful Fabrics, as being the most usual Seat of the King.
Toledo is very ancient, in the midst of Spain, where some Gothic Kings had
then their abode. Its Clergy is reckoned the richest of Christendom; the
Swordblades which are made in this Town are in very great esteem. The Escurial,
standing seven or eight Leagues from Madrid, passes, amongst the Spaniards, for
an eighth Wonder of the World; it costing, King Philip the Second, above twenty
Millions of Gold; but it is true, that this expense was not extraordinay for a
Prince, who is said to have spent above seven hundred Millions of Gold during
his Reign. In the Year 1671. this admirable House was very much endamaged by a
Fire. Badajox is upon the Frontier of Portugal in Estramadura. The small
Territory of la Manche is made the Native Country of Don Quixot.

The Kingdom of Leon was the first, which the Christians did establish after
the Invasion of the Moors. Its Town, of the same Name, has a Cathedral Church
renowned for its Beauty: That of Toledo is esteemed for its Riches, of Sevil
for its Bigness, of Salamanca for its Strength. The City of Salamanca has a
Celebrated University, which has the Privilege of Teaching the Hebrew, Greek,
Arabic and Chaldean Tongues. Mention is made of the Valleys of Vatuegas,
Inhabited by a kind of Patoacas, or Savage People, never heard of in Spain
before the late discovery of 'em in the Mountains of the Kingdom of Leon. The
occasion this: An Hawk of the Duke of Alva's, which he very much valued, flew
over those Mountains, and his Man not being able to find her at first, they
were sent back by the Duke to seek her. Clambring from one Hill to another,
they happened, at last, upon a large and pleasant Valley, where they spied a
Company of Naked, Savage People, hemmed about amongst many Craggy Rocks; the
Savages, gazing a while upon them, ran into their Caves, made in the hollows of
the Rocks, the best Houses they had; which being observed by the Falconers,
they return again to their Lord, telling him, that instead of a Falcon, they
had brought him news of a new World in the midst of Spain, and of a Race of
People which came in with Tubal, so strongly affirming what they said, that
they obtained belief. And the Duke, shortly after, went with a parcel of
Musketeers, and subdued them easily, they having no offensive Weapons but only
Slings. They Worshipped the Son and Moon, fed upon nothing that had life, but
had good store of excellent Fruits, Roots, and Springs of Water, wherewith
Nature was well contented. And though their Language was not altogether
understood, yet many of their Words were purely Basquish. Reduced in this
Discovery to Christianity, but easily discernable from all other Spaniards, by
their tawny Complexions, occasioned by the reverberation of the Sunbeams from
the Rocky Mountains, wherewith on all sides they are encompassed. The People
must necessarily have been some remnant of the ancient Spaniards, who hid
themselves amongst the Mountains for fear of the Romans: Their Language and
Idolatry speak them to be such. For had they either fled from the Goths or
Moors, there had been found some Cross, or other Monument of Christianity, as
in other places; or some such mixture in their Speech, as would have savoured
somewhat of the ancient Romans. The Duke of Alva, by whose means this Valley
was discovered, was the same, who, out of Vanity, had himself called an whole
Army, composed of one sole Person.

The other States of the King of Spain are near France, part of Flanders. In
Italy, the Duchy of Milan, Final, Orbitelle, the protection of Piombin, of
Portolongon: The Kingdoms of Naples, of Sicily, of Sardinia: Oran,
Marsalquivir, Melille, Pennon de Velez, Ceuta, along the Coasts of Barbary upon
the Mediterranean, the Isle of Pantaralee. The greatest part of America:
Several Islands and Places in the East and West Indies.

Portugal.
POrtugal is a Kingdom, ancient for above five hundred years in the Western
part of Spain, where was formerly Lusitania. In all probability, this Name of
Portugal came from that of Porto, a Town considerable for its Commerce, and
from that of Cale a small Place near it. It is, from the South to the North,
about a hundred and twenty Leagues in length; in breadth five and twenty,
thirty, and sometimes fifty. Its Situation upon the Ocean, and the experience
of its Inhabitants in point of Navigation, has given occasion to them to make
Conquests in the four parts of the World, and principally in the East Indies.
Their Conquests have been in above five thousand Leagues of Coast, in Brasil,
in Africa and Asia: All their Places were near the Sea, for they had no other
design than that of rendering themselves Masters of Commerce. True it is, that,
during the War, they were obliged to sustain against Spain for eight and twenty
years together, and by reason of the great Garrisons they were obliged to keep,
in those parts against the Hollanders, whom they have nevertheless drove
entirely out of Brasil, they made but small profit, and this moved them to give
some places to the English, by the Marriage of the Infanta of Portugal with
Charles the Second, King of England.

The Portugal Provinces have all their peculiar Commodities: they afford, among
other things, Lemons, and excellent Oranges. They have Mines; the Greeks and
Romans went to seek in Portugal, the Gold which the Portuguese go to seek in
the Indies. They are so populous, principally toward the Sea, as that there
are reckoned above six hundred Cities, or privileged Buroughs, and above four
thousand Parishes. The Roman Catholic Religion is only received in this
Kingdom; those, who are of the Jewish Race, have been constrained to be
baptized, and are now known under the Name of New Christians. There are three
Arch-bishopricks, Lisbon, Braga, and Evora; ten Bishoprics. The
Arch-bishopricks of Lisbon, and Evora, have each of 'em full two hundred
thousand Livers yearly Income. Inquisitions are at Lisbon, at Coimbre, at
Evora; the Assembly of the Cortes, or Parliaments, at Lisbon, at Porto. Twenty
seven Places have Generalities, which they call Comarques, and Almoxarifats.
The Order of Christ, which resides at Tomar, is the most considerable of the
Kingdom: the Kings are the Masters and Heads of it; for on this Order depend
all the Foreign Conquests: Its Knights wear the Red and White Cross in the
Middle, whereas those of Avis wear it green, those of St. James red. These have
their Residence at Palmella, near Setuval. The Revenue of the Kingdom, without
reckoning that of the Indies, is said to exceed ten Millions of Livers: I can
hardly believe what the Portugals say, that their King, Don Sebastian, was at
the Charge of a Million of Gold upon the Harness of a Horse; that the Trappings
of the European Ladies, were only the remains of those of Portugal. In the Year
1640. this Kingdom withdrew it self from its Obedience to the King of Spain:
Then was admired the Great Secrecy that was kept in that Affair, among above
two hundred persons, for above a Year together. The principal Motives of this
Resolution, were, the Permission which his Catholic Majesty gave to others,
than to the Portugals, of trading to the East Indies; the Tribute of the fifth,
that was proclaimed in the Year 1636. by which the Government exacted five in
the hundred, of all the Revenues and Merchandises in the Kingdom. The Duke of
Braganza was proclaimed King, under the Name of John the Fourth. This Prince
reigned sixteen Years, and had for his Successor, Alphonso the Sixth; who was
deposed in 1667. His Marriage having been declared null, Pedro, his Brother,
married the Queen, was made Regent of the Kingdom, and made Peace with Spain.
The Conspiracy, in the Year 1673. against this Prince, obliged him to have the
King fetched back from the Terzera, and put into the Fortress of Sintra, near
Lisbon: About two Years since, a Marriage was concerted betwixt the Infanta,
and Victor Ame, Duke of Savoy; but that Match is now wholly broke off, and a
new Treaty now on foot, for the same purpose, with the Prince of Tuscany. This
Kingdom contains six Provinces, which are as many general Governments. Enter
Doaro and Minho, Tralos-Montes, Beyra, Estremadura, Alen-Teyo and Algarve.
Enter Douro and Minho, is the most delicious, and so populous, that in the
space of eighteen Leagues in length, and twelve in breadth, it has above a
hundred and thirty Monasteries, well rented; fourteen hundred and sixteen
Parishes; five thousand Fountains of Spring Water; two hundred Bridges of
Stone, and six Seaports. Some call it the Marrow and the Delight of Spain.
Porto, a City of four thousand Households, drives a great Trade; Bragra is
renowned for the holding of several Councils, by the Pretension of its
Archbishop, who styles himself Primate of the Spains. Tralos-Montes has
Minerals, with the City of Braganza, the Capital of a Duchy of forty thousand
Ducates Revenue, wherein there are full fifty small Cities, and other Lands,
which make the Duke of Braganza thrice Marquis, seven times a Count, and
several times a Lord. The Princes of that Name, now in possession of the Crown,
remained commonly at Villa Viciosa, and had the Prerogative, to the Exclusion
of the Grandees of Spain, to sit in public, under the Royal Canopy of the King
of Spain. Beira is fertile in Rye, Millet, Apples, and Chestnuts. Its City of
Coimbra, formerly the abode of Alphonso, the first King of Portugal, is famous
for its University, for its Bishopric, which is said to be worth above a
hundred and fifty thousand Livres yearly Rent. Estremadura, another than that
of Castile, produces Wine, Oil, Salt, Honey, which the Bees make there of the
Flowers of Lemmons and of Roses. Its City of Lisbon is the Capital of all the
Kingdom, one of the richest, greatest, most beautiful, and most populous Towns
of all Europe: It has above thirty thousand Houses, and an admirable Port, with
the convenience of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea: It particularly drives
the trade of Brasile, and of the East Indies. The small City of Belem, which is
near it, is the Mausoleum, or the place of burial of several Kings of Portugal.
Santaren has so great a number of Olive Trees in its Dependencies, that the
Inhabitants boast of being able to make of their Oil, a River as great as the
Tagus. Setuval, which the Flemmings call St. Hubes, is well situated, well
built, and of great trade: It has the best Harbor in all the Kingdom, thirty
Miles in length, three in breadth. Its Salt Pits and Fishery, according to what
the Portuguese say, raise a greater Revenue to their King, than all Arragon
does to the King of Spain. Alen-Teyo, by reason of its Corn, is reckoned for
the Granary of Portugal: Its City of Evora pretends to the first rank after
Lisbon. In the Year 1663. the Portuguese gained a famous Battle over the
Spaniards in its neighborhood. Elvas is known for its excellent Oils; for the
Sieges which it has happily sustained against the Castillians. Ourques, in the
Year 1139. saw that famous Battle fought, which gave occasion to the
proclaiming the first King of Portugal. Algarve, though of small extent, has the
Title of a Kingdom; It was reunited to the Crown, by the Marriage of Alphonso
the Third, with Beatrix of Castile. it affords Figs, Olives, Almonds, and Wines
very much esteemed: the Name of Algerbia, in the Moorish Tongue, signifies a
fertile field.

The Seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries.
THese Provinces are made to pass under the number of Seventeen, because that
formerly, though at diverse times, they have each had their peculiar Lord. The
Name of the Low Countries is given them, as a Country situated in the lower
part of the Rhine. The situation of the Low Countries is so much the more
considerable, as that it lies between England, France and Germany. These
Seventeen Provinces touch France and Germany, and are separated from England by
the Sea. There are four Dutchies, Brabant, Limbourg, Luxembourg, Guelderland:
Seven Counties, Holland, Zealand, Zutphen, Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Namur; a
Marquisate of the Holy Empire, which has only the City of Antwerp; five
Lordships, Malines, Vtrecht, Over-Issel or Trans-Isalane, Friesland, Groninghen.

This Region is small, but one of the richest and most populous in the World.
Its Air is temperate; its Winter is more long than cold; its Summer resembles
the Spring of the Southern Provinces of France. Its Soil is generally fertile,
full of good Pasturages, which furnish Cattle, Milk, Butter, Cheese, and other
Commodities abundantly. Its principal Rivers are the Rhine, Maes, Scheld. The
Rhine has its Sources in Suisserland, most of its Course in Germany: after
having divided it self upon its entrance into the low Countries at
Skinckensckons, it communicates most of its Waters to other Rivers; those it
keeps, lose their Name in the Sand, a little below Leyden in Holland. The Maes,
which comes from France and from Lorrain, has this advantage over the Rhine,
that it carries its Name and Waters to the very Ocean, wherein it forms several
good Harbors. The Scheld served for bounds to France, and to the Empire, in
the time of the Emperor Charles the Bold. It receives, at Gaunt, the Lis, or
Ley, a navigable River: and before it entirely loses its Name, it makes two
principal Branches, the left, called Hont; the right, whose Chanel passes by
Tolen, falls into the Meuse. Besides these Rivers, and those which fall into
them, there are Canals; great store of Lakes, Pools, and Marshes, which
fortify the Country, provide it with Fish, and afford the convenience of
passage and the more easy transport of their Commodities.

The Emperor, Charles the Fifth, saw himself Master of all these Provinces: In
the Year 1581. they re^us'd, for the most part, Obedience to King Philip his
Son, taking for a Pretext of their Revolt, the cruel Treatments of their
Governors, the Infraction of their Privileges, the Introduction of the
Council of Trent, and the Imposition of the Tenth Penny upon all the
Commodities that were sold in that Country. We may say, that the two Real
Causes of this Revolution, were, the Change of Religion, and the Ambition of
some Lords, joined to the Aversion of the People, to a foreign Government. Two
Years before, these Revolted Provinces had made the Union at Vtrecht, for which
reason the Duke of Alva, who made War in those Provinces for the King of Spain,
did maintain, that he ought not to treat them as the Patrimony of his Master,
but as his own Conquest. There are in the Low Countries two States, very
different from one another; the one is a Republic, or rather several
Republics, and is called for that reason the United Provinces, otherwise
Holland; the other belongs, in part, to the King of Spain, and goes under the
Name of the Catbolick Provinces, or that of Flanders. The Christian King has
Conquered the best of these Provinces, and the strongest Towns, which have been
confirmed to him by the Treaties of the Pyrenees, of Aix la Chapelle, and of
Ni^^meghen, or else possessed by him, under color of Dependencies. The Hague
is the Residence of the Council of the States General of the United Provinces;
Bruxels, that of the Princes, or of the Governors established by the King of
Spain: Lisle, Tournay, Doway, Ypres, Dunkirk, Arras, St. Omar, Cambray,
Valenciennes, Luxembourg, are Cities the most considerable of the Acquisition
of France. The Roman Catholic Religion is only received in Flanders. All sorts
of Sects are tolerated in Holland. Each person is allowed to follow his own
Opinion, though not Preach it in Public: The Sect of Calvin is there principally
exercised. The National Synod, held at Dort, in the Year 1619. has regulated
the principal Points of that Religion.

The Humors of the People of Flanders, and Holland, are as different from one
another, as are their Governments and Religions: The Flemmings do much affect
those fine Titles of Honor, which the Kings of Spain have not been sparing of
to them. The Emperor, Charles the Fifth, had a design of making a Kingdom of
this State, so as would have done before him Charles the Bold, Duke of
Burgundy, who meant to have it called, the Kingdom of the Lion. The Hollanders
are more popular than the Flemmings; wedded to Commerce, to Manufacture, and
Navigation: Both People are industrious in making Handy-craft-Works. They have
two sorts of Tongues; the Walloon, which is a corrupted French, and which
becomes purer, since the French King's Conquests; and the Flemming, or Low
Dutch: The first is particularly in Artois, in French-Flanders, and in Haynault.

The United Provinces, and the Provinces of the King of Spain, were in War
until the Year 1609. when they made a Truce of Twelve Years. His Catholic
Majesty did then treat with the States General of the United Provinces, in
quality, and as holding them for Free-Countrys, Provinces, and States, to whom
he had no Pretension. In the Year 1648. the Peace was made there, before that
of the Empire, which was concluded at Munster, in the same Year. And since, the
Spaniards of Flanders, and the Hollanders, have thought fit to live neighbourly
and in good intelligence, nay, to confederate together for their mutual
defense. The War having been declared by the French King, upon the Hollanders,
in the Year 1672. the Spaniards failed not to take part in it, for the
traversing the Conquests of his Christian Majesty, which cost them very
considerable Cities and Provinces, whereas the Hollanders recovered what they
had lost. The Princes of Orange, of the House of Nassau, have almost ever had
the Military and Civil Government in the United Provinces.

The United Provinces of the Low Countries.
THe United Provinces are so called, from their Union at Vtrecht, in the Year
1579. They are commonly called Holland, that being the richest and most
populous Province of 'em all. Their situation is toward the end of the Rivers
Rhine and Meuse, in the Northern part of the Low Countries, between the
Dominions of the King of Spain in Flanders, England, which is separated from
'em by the Sea, and several Principalities of the Empire. The Princes of the
Empire, who are their Neighbors, are the Duke of Newbourg, in his Duchy of
Juliers, and his Barony of Ravestein; the Elector of Brandenbourg, in his
Duchy of Cleves; the Elector of Cologn, the Bishop of Munster, the Count de
Bentheim, the Prince of East-Friesland, in the Territories of the same Name.
The United Provinces, which before owed subjection to the King of Spain, have
since been independent of one another, or to say rather, as many Republics;
which, altogether, make now but one, under the Name of the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries. The Dignity of this State residing
in the States General, the Absolute authority over things reserved by reason of
the alliance, has remained in the States of each Province. The Seal of the
Republic, is a Lion, holding a Bundle of Seven bound Arrows, with allusion to
as many confederated Provinces; these Provinces, as the Politicians say, have
not always been so well united, but that they resembled a Body, which has
several Heads, some of which would draw it on one side, while the others
endeavor to tug it on the other. There is no State in the World of so small an
Extent, which has so great a number of Fortresses, and which seems better
defended by the Nature of the Places than this: It has the Sea, and several
Rivers, which defend it; the Rhine, the Meuse, the Waal, the Issel.
Notwithstanding all these Defenses, the French King made surprising Conquests
in the Year 1672. by the reduction of three Provinces, and sixty considerable
Towns, which proceeded from raw, unexpert, mere Citizens sons, being imploid in
the Soldiery.

Besides the United Previnces, and the Places that are in them, the States
General have in Flanders, the Cities of Sluyce, Middlebourg, Ardembourg, Sasvan
Gaunt, Axel, Hulst: in Brabant, Lisle, Bergen-ap-Zoom, Breda, Boisleduc, Grave:
and they have Maestricht in the Bishopric of Liege; Dalem, Fauquemont, Bolduc,
in the Land of Outre Meuse. These Places were taken by the French King, but
restored to them by his Majesty, in consideration of the Peace of 1678. In
Germany, they had upon the Rhine, Orsoy, Wesel, Reez, Emerik, Genep, in the
Duchy of Cleves; Rhineberg in the Electorate of Cologn; these are returned
into the hands of its true Masters, in consideration of the aforesaid Peace.
Toward Westphalia, the States General have Garrisons in the City of Embden, in
the Forts of Eideler and Leer-ort, which belong to the Prince of East-Friesland.

There are in Holland two Companies of Merchants, the one for the East Indies,
the other for the West. The first of these Companies seems it self to be a
Potent Republic: It boasts of having subdued more Leagues of Country, than
there are Acres of Land in all Holland: Of having fourteen or fifteen thousand
Soldiers, and a Number of Ships in its Service: Of employing commonly above
fourscore thousand Men. It had long since above twenty very considerable
Fortresses, as many Magazines upon the Coasts of the Indian-Sea, where it has
endeavored to constrain several Petty Kings, not to receive, into their
States, any other Nations of Europe than their own. The West India Company is
weak and feeble in respect of the other, whether that the Portugals have had
more right and more strength than the Hollanders in Brazil: Or the term of the
Concession of Privilege, obtained by these from their Sovereign, be expired:
Or, in short, that the Company of the East Indies has used all its efforts to
ruin the other. The Hollanders have hitherto been Powerful at Sea, have often
beaten the French, the Spanish Fleets; nay, made Head against the English, who
are Sovereigns of the Sea: The Number of their Ships is so great, that, if we
may believe their Partisans, it equals that of the rest of Europe. They have
always, in their own Country, wherewith to Equip a great Number, though their
Land neither produces Wood nor other things necessary for that purpose: They
are able to Arm out above a hundred to Sea, if they had but the Mariners and
Soldiers they had formerly. At their first Establishment, they only pretended
to Fishing, and Trading from Port to Port; since they have drove the richest
Commerce that is carried on at Sea.

Amongst the United Provinces, there are four toward the West; Holland,
Zealand, Vtrecht, Guelderland: Four toward the East, Zutphen, Over-Yssel, or
Trans-Isalane, Friesland, Groninghen. Those who reckon but seven, make but one
of that of Guelderland and Zutphen. In the Assemblies, these Provinces have
ever given their Votes in the following Order, Guelderland with Zutphen first
of all; then Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssel; finally,
Groninghen with the Ommelands. Each of 'em sends its Deputies to the Hague,
where are formed three Colleges or Assemblies of them, the States General, the
Council of State, and the Chamber of Accounts. In the Assembly of the
States General, all the Provinces abovementioned must consent, in General and
in Particular, to the Resolutions that are taken therein, and do not follow the
plurality of Voices. Each Province may send thither one, two, three, four or
five Deputies; but all these Deputies have, together, but one Voice, and have
right to Preside therein but one Week: That of Guelderland begins, because it
is the most Ancient, and its Plenipotentiaries were the first who proposed the
Union. It is the same Province, which, in the Year 1674. had offered the
Sovereignty to the Prince of Orange. The Admiralty has five Sessions, and as
many Magazines, which are those of Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Horn or Enkuysan,
Middlebourg, Harlingen; the three former in Holland, the fourth in Zealand, the
fifth in Friesland. As touching Religion, all sorts of Sects are tolerated in
this State, as we have said, but Calvinism is principally followed.

The Province of Holland, taken by it self, is a great Peninsula, which
maintains it self against the Assaults of the Sea by the means of its Dikes,
where a careful Watch is kept both Day and Night. It alone has always
Contributed more than all the other Provinces have done together: Of a hundred
Livres, it furnishes fifty nine and a half. It has still some Nobility, the
Brederodes, the Wassenaers, the Egmonts; this Nobility has ever Voted there the
first, though it has but one Voice together, whereas, that eighteen Cities of the
same Provinces had there each their own, with the Sovereignty bound by
Alliance. Most of the Towns, in this Province, are beautiful and pleasant, as
having been built in the last Age. Six of them are reckoned Principal, that are
called Great, Dort, Haerlem, Delf, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude.

Dort, whose Situation is upon four Rivers, has the first Voice, as that where
the Counts of Holland, and their Subjects, gave reciprocally the Oath to one
another: It is the Place where Money is Coined, its Inhabitants have the
Privilege of Marching with Guards. In the Year 1421. of a Town upon the
Continent, it became an Island by a terrible Inundation, which drowned above
ten thousand Persons and twelve Villages. Haerlem is the Place where the finest
and whitest Linen is made of the Province. Delf is the Place of the Sepulcher
of the Princes of Orange, and where Porcelain Ware is made. Leyden is the Eye,
or, according to others, the Garden of Holland, by reason of the Cleanness of
its Streets, and the Beauty of its Houses: It Is Celebrated for its Antiquity,
for its University and its excellent Impressions, for the Rhine's losing it
self in the Sand, where endeavors have been, to no purpose, used to make a
Seaport, in a word, for an entire Defeat of the Spanish Army in the last Age,
after that the Hollanders had broken all the Neighboring Dikes. A Native of
this Town was the Tailor, who, to his own bane, made himself King of the
Anabaptists in Munster.

Amsterdam Vyes with the best Cities of the World, in the great Number of its
Ships, and the convenience it has of sitting them out; it now drives the
greatest part of the Commerce that was formerly carried on by Antwerp, Sevil
and Lisbon: It alone Contributes as much, or more, than all the other Cities of
the Province. The Inhabitants of the Country call it the Market and the Shop of
the Rarities of the Universe, by reason of the various Merchandises wherewith
it is filled, and say, it has so much Gold and Silver, that there are sometimes
found several Millions of Tuns of Gold in its Banck, each of those Tuns being
esteemed at near ten thousand Pounds, the Expense for its Stadt-House, or
Townhouse, was Prodigious; finally, Amsterdam contains so many Riches, that
they have been constrained to enlarge the Circuit of it. Gouda has this
advantage, as being in a Place where the Waters are running, and where
Inhabitants enjoy the purest Ait that is in all Holland. Rotterdam, the
Birthplace of Erasmus, is the best of the twelve Cities they call petty, by
reason of its great Traffic with England, and upon the Meuse. The Hague is the
Residence of the Council of the States General, but a Town the best Built, and
the most Delicious in all Europe, where the Ambassadors of the Neighboring
Princes make their usual Residence. The Texel is a Harbor toward the North,
famous for a Retreat of Ships. The Brill has the same advantage toward the
South; the rest of the Coast is full of Downs or Hills of Sands, with some
Retreats for Fisher Boats and Busses.

Zealand is the Province, which first of all set it self at Liberty, and
consented last to the Peace with Spain; the Prince of Orange possesses most of
its particular Lordships and Baronies: those who compare the States General to
a Ship, say, that Zealand is the Pinnace. It consists of eight Principal
Islands, whereof there are four great ones: that of Walcheren is the most
beautiful of all those of the Low Countries, with the Cities of Middlebourg and
Flushing, both well fortified. Middlebourg, the chief of the Province, is the
general Staple of the Country for Wines, Flushing a commodious Harbor for many
Ships; the Duke of Alva had a design of causing a Citadel to be built there,
as well as at Antwerp. The small Isle of Duveland is known in the History of
1575. for the bold and hardy passage of the Spaniards, across the Sea under
Mondragon.

The Barony of Vtrecht has a Capital City of the same Name, where dwell most of
the Nobility of the Country: They reckon above fifty six Cities, to which one
may go by Boat from Vtrecht in less than a day.

Guelderland has four Quarters; that of the same Name, which is toward the
South, called the High-Quarter of Guelderland, belongs to the Spaniards, who,
in the Year 1627. did [to no purpose at all] endeavor to bring the Rhine to
the City of Gueldres, and into the Meuse, for the depriving the
United Provinces of its Commerce with Germany. Nimmeghen, famous for the
Conclusions of the Treaties of Peace, in the the Years 1678, and 1679. is the
Capital of Holland's Guelderland, in the Quarter of the Betuve, the abode of
the ancient Batavians. Arnheim is in that of the Veluve.

The Province of Zutphen bears the same Name with its Capital City, and passes
sometimes for a fourth Quarter of the Duchy of Guelderland, having no Vote in
the Assemblies of the States General, but conjoyntly with this Duchy; besides
this Capital, at the Siege thereof, ^ell that Ornament of our Nation, Sir
Philip Sidney, as great a Wit, Courtier, Soldier and Statesman, perhaps, as
ever was: There is in this Province Groll, and eight or nine small Cities.

Over-Yssel, otherwise Trans-Isaline, is so called from its Situation beyond
the Yssel, where the Rhine communicates part of its Waters, by the means of a
Trench or Chanel, which Drusus caused formerly to be made: There are three
Countries, Salande, Tuvente, Drente, where, they would persuade us, were
formerly the Salians, Tubantes and Tencterians. Saland has Deventer the Capital
of the Province, a famous passage over the Yssel, Drente has Coeworden, one of
the most regular Pentagones of Europe.

Friesland affords special strong Horses, and Beeves of an excessive bigness.
It has had, at diverse times, Princes, Dukes, and [according to some] Kings, who
have resided at Staveren. Leuvarden has the States or Parliament: Dokum the
Admiralty of the Province. Schelling is an Island upon the Coast, where are
some Towns which serve to give signal to the Ships They Hunt the Sea-Dogs there
after a pleasing manner: The Men, who mean to take them, disguise themselves
like Drummers, and, with a thousand Apish Tricks, do insensibly attract,
toward the midst of the Island, those poor Creatures who are overjoyed to see
them; but, in the mean while, Nets are laid, which hinder their returning to
the Sea. The Passage between this Island and that of the Vlie is much
frequented; out there go thence Ships, which are bound for the North and the
Baltick-Sea.

Groninghen, which has the last Voice in the Assemblies of the States General,
has but two Cities, Groninghen and Dam. Groninghen is in so important a
Situation, by reason of the Frontier, that the Duke of Alva projected the.
making a Citadel there. In the Year 1672 after the taking of several Places,
the Bishop of Munster had the displeasure of not being able to compass his
Design upon this. The Province has Pasturages, wherein Turfs are made, which
serve for Fuel. It has several Navigable Channels, the Key whereof seems to be
contained in the Fortress of Delfzil at the Mouth of the Ems. The Ommelands,
which make a part of it toward the East, have frequent Disputes with this
Province, and would willingly pretend to make the eighth of the
United Provinces.

The Provinces of the Spanish-Netherlands.
THese Provinces are called Catholic, because the Roman Catholic Religion
only is exercised therein. They have often the Name of Flanders given them,
which is the most Beautiful, the Richest, and most Populous part of 'em: Those
People have been called Walloons, who border upon France. The Provinces which
these People Inhabit, being, at present, possessed by the most Christian King,
the French call 'em the New-Conquests. Amongst the Catholic Provinces, there
are four Frontiers of France; the Counties of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, the
Duchy of Luxembourg: Five within the Lands, the Duchy of Brabant, the
Marquisate of the Holy-Empire round about Antwerp, the Barony of Mechelen, the
County of Namur, the Duchy of Limbourg: There is also the Bishopric of Liege,
which is of the Empire, and Cambresis. The French King, and the King of Spain,
are, at present, Masters of these Provinces, for the preservation of which, the
Spaniards have employed a good part of the Gold and Silver of their Indies: The
Hollanders possess also some Towns in 'em.

The County of Flanders is so full of People, that we may say, it is but one
City, and the finest County of Christendom. Its Coast has Downs of Sand, which
cover the rich Plains. Formerly Flanders was divided into Gallican, Flemming,
and Imperial; now into three parts, one French, one Spanish, and the other
Holland, which is of small extent. The principal Towns of all the Country, are
Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, Lille; the two former belonging to Spain, and the two
others possessed by France, as well as Tournay, Doway, and Dunkirk Gaunt is one
of the greatest Cities of Europe; though it has several Rivers, which still
maintain its Commerce, it has not now the thirty five thousand Houses, which it
had when it was able to have put fourscore thousand Men in Arms. The French
King, who had possessed himself of it, was obliged to restore it, in
consideration of the Peace. The Spaniards, who saw the Chanel of this Town
stopped up, by the taking of Sluice, have made there a new one, which can
receive stopped Ships, after they are come to Ostend, a Town whose Port could
not be stopped up, when when it was the stage of War, and that it sustained a
Siege of above three Years together. Ypres has several Channels and Conduits of
Water under Earth. Lille is one of the best of the Low Countries, both for its
Commerce and its Riches. In the Year 1667. the French King made it his
Principal Conquest; since which, he has caused a strong Citadel to be made in
it. All the other Places of Flanders are generally considerable, either for
their Beauty, or their Fortresses, or the Sieges and Battles. Tournay is very
ancient, beautiful, spacious, strong, rich, and populous. It is the first City
of the Low Countries, which in the Year 1667. submitted to the French Monarch.
His Majesty established a Parliament there, and caused a Citadel to be made.
It is observed of Tournay, that it was taken four several times, on the very
day of St. Andrew: 1. By Henry the Seventh, King of England. 2. By the Emperor
Maximilian. 3. By the Emperor Charles the Fifth: And 4. By the Duke of Parma.
Doway, upon the Scharp on the Confines of Artois and Haynault, is meanly
fortified. The Church of Our Lady is there twelve hundred Years old. There is a
Staple of Corn, an University, and lately Navigation, by sailing up the Scharp
as far as Arras. Dunkrk, a very trading Town by reason of its Haven, is one of
the most considerable Possessions of France. Graveling is an extraordinary
strong place. Furnes was the abode of the French King, Lewis the Eleventh,
during his retreat to the Duke of Burgundy.

Artois, now reunited to the Crown of France, from which, the French say, it
was dismembered, is a Province extraordinary fertile in Corn. Arras, its
Metropolis, is composed of a high and low Town, both well fortified. Hesdin is
a regular Hexagone, and its River has been lately rendered Navigable, as far as
Montreuil. Bapaume is an advantageous situation. Lens is known for the Victory
of the French, in the Year 1648. Bethune for its good Cheeses; Terouenne for
its Ruins. St. Omar is environed with Marshes, where are floating Islands. Air
is important for the Navigation of the Lys.

Hainault, according to the Archives of the Province, owns none but God and the
Sun for ruling Lords. Nevertheless it has two other Masters, the Kings of
France and Spain. Mons, the capital City, defended by three good Ditches, has a
Sovereign Council independent of that of the Parliament of Mechelin; It has
also Chanoinesses, who make proof of Nobility of Eight Races, and who have the
liberty to Marry. Valenciennes is large, sumptuous, well fortified upon the
Scheld: It was taken by force, in the Year 1677. by the French King's Army,
commanded in person by that Prince. Quesnoy, Landrecy, Avesne, Philippeville,
Mariembourg, Conde, Bouchain, are strong places, in the hands of the French
King.

Luxembourg has its capital City of the same Name. Thionville, Montmedi,
Damvilliers, are possessed by the French. Some Lands there are, in the Forest
of Ardennes, belonging to the Bishopric of Liege; Bouillon, with the Title of
a Duchy, and a strong Castle upon the Rock St. Hubert, where the Hunters have
a peculiar Devotion; Rochefort, which saw the Battle of Avein, in the Year
1675. between the Spaniards and French. By the Peace of Nimmeghen, the Duchy
of Bouillon was restored to France, who has put the Prince of that Name into
possesion of it.

Brabant, which is about the midst of the Low Countries, has four Cities, the
Capitals of as many Quarters; Bruxels, Louvain, Breda, Boisleduc. Bruxels is
very populous, the abode of a Prince or Governor, whose Palace is very
spacious: Its Chanel, which leads to Antwerp, is one of the finest Works of the
Country, with prodigious Sluices which have cost immens Sums. As well as at
Avignon, some of its Public Edifices are to the number of seven. The Church of
St. Gudule, is one of the finest of the Country.

The Neighborhood of the Forest of Soignes furnishes its Inhabitants with Game
for hunting. Louvain, which some make to pass for the Capital of Brabant, is
one of the greatest Cities of Europe, with a famous University, which gives
occasion to the Byword, That it is a City of Scholars, as Bruxels is a City of
Courtiers, Antwerp a City of Merchants, Mechelin a City of Advocates and
Lawyers, by reason of its Parliament. Tillemont was taken by force, in the Year
1655. by the French and Hollanders. Breda belongs to the Prince of Orange, and
Hertoghen-Bosch, or Bois-le-Duc, to the States General of the United Provinces,
as do also Berghen-op-Zoom, and the Grave. All these Places are well fortified;
Bois-le-Duc is so extraordinary strong, by reason of its Marshes, that it
passed for Impregnable, before it was taken; upon which account, they were used
to say in Holland out of Raillery; I will pay you, when Bois-le-Duc is became a
Beggar; that is to say, never. The Brabanzon pretends the Privilege of
deliberating nothing out of the Limits of their Country.

The Marquisate of the Holy Empire has this Name from its Site, upon the
ancient bounds of France and the Empire; whither the Emperor sent Governors,
who were called Marquesses. There is only the City of Antwerp, one of the best
and most pleasant of the Netherlands; the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, called
it his Sunday, or Holy Day Town: the importance of its Situation has occasioned
the making sumptuous Fortifications, which consist of ten great Bastions, and
one of the strongest Cittadels of Europe, flanked with five regular Bastions,
faced with Brick and hewed Stones. This Citadel was built toward the higher
part of the River, rather than toward the lower, that it might command the
Town, and receive Succors from the Country subject to its Prince: the Duke of
Alva, who had made it, placed his Statue therein, which has since been taken
away. The Jesuits in Antwerp have a Church all of Marble, looked upon as one of
the finest in the World. Formerly above two hundred thousand persons were
reckoned in this Town, and about two thousand five hundred Ships upon the
Scheld: But the Inhabitants of this place do not now drive that great Trade
they did, since the Hollanders have seized upon the Avenues of their River.

The City of Mechelin is the Residence of the States, or Parliament of the
Catholic Provinces of the King of Spain. Its Barony is very small; the Women
of Mechlin, being ready to lie in, are said to cause themselves to be carried
upon the Lands of Brabant, that so their Children may enjoy the Privilege of
the Brabantins.

Namur is a Town of importance, by reason of its passage over the Meuse, at the
place where it receives the Sambre: from hence they transport Marble, Ardoise,
Pit-Coal. Charle-Roy, upon the Sambre, is one of the best Fortresses in the
Netherlands.

Limbourg has only the Town of the same Name which is in any consideration,
with a strong Castle upon a Rock. The French King made the Conquest of it in
the Year 1675. but was bound to restore it to the King of Spain, by the Peace
of Nimmeghen.

The Bishopric of Liege owes subjection to its Bishop, as well in Spirituals
as Temporals: the Inhabitants gave it formerly the Name of Grace. He is Elected
by the Chapter; his Residence was formerly at Tongres and Mastricht. This
Country is of a great Extent, with several places lying within the Marches of
the neighboring Provinces. Liege is a trading Town, and, as they say, the
Paradise of the Ecclesiastics. It was observed, in the Year 1131. that there
were, amongst the Canons of its Cathedral Church, nine Sons of Kings, fourteen
Sons of Dukes, nine and twenty Sons of Counts, and seven Sons of Barons. It Is
very populous, notwithstanding it was ruined by the last Duke of Burgundy. When
the ancient Privileges subsisted there, it had thirty two Trades, and a Body
of two and twenty Burgesses, composed of Ecclesiastics, of Nobles, and of the
third Estate, or Commonalty; these twenty two were called most Honored Lords,
and had the principal direction of Affairs. The Elector of Cologn, its Prince,
caused a Citadel to be built here, which was demolished by the French, in the
time of the late Wars. The Town of Spa is known to us for its Medicinal Water;
Mastricht for its Fortifications, and for the famous Sieges it has sustained.
It is made up of two Towns; Mastricht, reckoned to belong to the Duke of
Brabant; Wick, of the Appurtenances to the Bishopric of Liege. The Peace of
Nimmeghen has resetled the Hollanders in possession of Mastricht.

Cambresis is near France. The City of Cambray has a good Citadel, the guard
whereof was only confided to natural Spaniards, when their King was Master
thereof. It has a Clock singularly wrought by the hand of a Shepherd, and
furnishes extraordinary fine Linen, or Cambrick. Since the Year 1595. the
Kings of Spain have attributed to themselves the Tempoporal Jurisdiction of
Cambray; the Emperors did not contradict them in this matter, because they are
of the same Family, and the Archbishops had, to no purpose, solicited the
re-establishment of their Right: those Prelates style themselves Arch bishops
and Dukes of Cambray, Counts of Cambresis, Princes of the Holy Empire, though
commonly they have neither Session nor Voice in the Diets. In the Year 1677.
the French King, commanding his Army in person, made himself Master of the Town
and Citadel of Cambray, which were confirmed to him by the Peace of Nimmeghen.

Lorrain.
LOrrain is a Country, with the Title of Duchy, considerable for several
advantages, particularly for its situation between Champagne,
French-Luxembourg, the Palatinate of the Rhine, Franche-Comte: all these
Provinces are possessed by the French, except the Palatinate. It brings forth
plentifully all the Conveniences of Life, unless it be Oil: It has Jasper, and
stuff for the making of Drinking and Lookingglasses. The Lorrainers are
bigoted Catholics. There are reckoned three Bailiwicks, that of Nancy,
Vaudrevange, and Vauge, where is Mirecourt. Under the general Name of Lorrain,
may be comprehended the Duchy of Bar, which is of a double kind; there is
Barrois Royal, on this side the Meuse; and Barrois Ducal, beyond the same
River: several Territories adjacent: the Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, Verdun,
formerly Principalities of the Empire; Imperial Towns of the same Name, which,
since the Reign of French Henry the Second, have owned Subjection to the Crown
of France. It is to be noted, that these Bishops are only Temporal Princes, and
that the Diocesses of the same Name, which acknowledge their Bishop for
Spirituals, have very different bounds. In the Year 1680. several places
depending on these Bishoprics, and which had been dismembered from 'em at
diverse times, have been adjoined to the Crown of France. The Rivers of Meuse,
Moselle, Saone, and Sare, have their beginning in Lorrain. Under the Emperor
Nero, they had a design of communicating the Ocean and the Mediterranean-Sea,
by a Chanel drawn from the Moselle into the Soan, which is but very little
distant from it, and which falls into the Rhosne. The Sare is navigable, and
gives its Name to several places by and through which it passes. The French
King has caused Sar-Louis, and other Fortresses, to be built there, for the
securing the Frontiers of his Dominions. Nancy, the Capital of the whole
Duchy, has had the best Fortifications and Works that were ever seen in
Europe. Without all these Defenses, it did gloriously resist Charles, Duke of
Burgundy, who lost the Battle and his Life near the Walls, in the Year 1477. In
the Battle of Morat, in the Year 1476. which followed that of Granson, and
preceded that of Nancy, the Diamond of this warlike and unfortunate Prince,
fell into the hands of a Suiss, who thought himself well paid, in having for
it a Florin of Gold, though this Diamond was one of the finest things of the kind
in Europe. Another Suiss was so lucky in the same Battle, as to find the Collar
of the Golden Fleece, of an inestimable value, which the Duke of Burgundy was
wont to wear, and contented himself with two Crowns, that were given him for it
in Milan, whither he went to sell it at the dearest rate he could. Now Nancy is
in possession of the French King, who offers to yield up Toul to the Duke of
Lorrain, in case he will sign the Treaty of Nimmeghen. The Borough of St.
Nicholas keeps the Relick of its Patron, which occasions a great concourse of
people to that Town, as well as its Fair. Rozieres and Dieuse have Salt Pits of
a great Revenue, as have also Marsal, Chasteau-Salins, and Moyenvik. The Annual
Revenue of the Salt Pits of Marsal has commonly been three hundred thousand
Livres. Luneville has a fine House, Remiremont a famous Abbey of Ladies,
Plombieres, which is not walled, is known for its Baths. The Duchy of Bar has
the Cities of Barleduc, St. Mihel, and Pont-a-Mousson. Vaucouleurs, one of the
adjacent Territories, is noted for the Birth of the Maid of Orleans, in a
neighboring Borough, called Arques. Mets, Toul, and Verdun, have been more
strictly united to the Crown of France, by the Treaty of Munster, by that of
the Pyrences, and by good Cittadels. Metz had formerly the Title of a Kingdom,
which was that of Austrasia, with the right of coining Money: it is now the
Residence of a Parliament. It Is of a large circuit, and nevertheless in the
Year 1552. it gloriously repulsed the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who besieged
it with an Army of a hundred thousand men: from thence came the Proverb amongst
those of the Country, when any one undertakes any difficult matter, they say,
He will do even as much as the Emperor before Metz. This Disgrace stuck so
sensibly close to that glorious Prince's heart, that there happening presently
after the insult he received from Duke Maurice of Saxony; it is said to have
obliged him to resign his Dominions to his Son and his Brother, and make the
retreat he did in the Monastery of St. Just, in Castille, to the amazement of
the whole World.

The Dukes of Lorrain have hitherto styled themselves Princes of the Empire,
and the Empire has pretended Right of Sovereignty over their Duchy of Lorrain.
Nevertheless, they pretend to be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Imperial
Chamber of Spire, and from all the Contributions by the Empire. They have
neglected to assist at the Dyets of the Empire, that so they might not be bound
to give place to such Princes, as they esteemed less than themselves. The
Duchy of Bar is a Fief depending on the Crown of France, and chiefly what is
on this side the Meuse; as for what is beyond it, he pretends its dependence on
him, under the Title of Marquisate of Pont, or Ponta-Mousson. From whence it
comes, that the Inhabitants Barrois are esteemed Natural Frenchmen. Anthony,
Francis, Charles the Third, Dukes of Lorrain, did Homage for it to the French
Kings. The War of Lorrain, which followed that of Italy, was made upon the
account of this Homage not being paid: The Duchy of Bar was afterward united
to the Crown of France. Since which, there have been several Treaties between
the French Kings and the Dukes of Lorrain.

The Franche-County.
THis Country, which made part of Great-Burgundy, is known under the Name of
High-Burgundy, by reason of the Course of its Rivers; and under that of
Franche-Comte, by reason its Inhabitants have pretended several exemptions, and
that in possessing those Lands, they might dispose of them, without having any
regard to Wife, Children, or any other Relatiions. It is a Province very
Populous, and wholly Roman Catholic, whereof most of the Inhabitants are very
rich by reason of Corn, Wine, and particularly by Salt, which made them formely
be called, The Salted or Pickled Burgundians. The Woods raise 'em also a good
Revenue, and we may say, That their Land is no less good now, than in the time
of Julius Caesar. In the Year 1668. the French King, pretending the Right of
the Queen his Wife, made the Conquest with a surprising Success, it being then
under the Protection of the Crown of Spain, but was bound to restore this
Province, in consideration of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle. The Spaniards kept
it until the Year 1674. when having declared War upon France, the French
rendered themselves Masters of it again, and were confirmed in their possession
of it by the Peace of Nimmeghen.

This Province is divided into three parts, the High-County of Amont, the
Middle one of Dole, and the Lower one of Aval; Gray is in the Upper part, Dole
or Besanzon is in the Middle, Salins in the Nether. Gray is very strong upon
the River Saon. Dole was the Capital of all the County, the Seat of a
Parliament, wherefore the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, made it be Fortified with
seven Bastions. Besanzon is both ancient and strong, now with a Citadel: The
Fertility of the Lands about it have given occasion to the calling it the
Granary of the Country. Its Archbishop styles himself a Prince of the
Holy-Empire, but the Germans do not grant him Session in the Imperial Diets.
The City was Imperial unto the Year 1652. when it became Spanish, in exchange
for the City of Frankendael, which the Spaniards restored in executing the
Treaty of Munster: the French King has caused the Parliament of the Province to
be transferred thither. Salins, so called from its Salt Pits, is defended by
two Castles: Its Salt-Garner is a very remarkable Building. Amongst other Towns
of the Province, Chastel-Challon has the Title of Principality; Arley has
sometimes served for an abode to the Duke of Burgundy: Luxeul has Medicinal
Waters, and Alabaster: Bleterans, the Castle of Joux, and and of Saint Anne,
have been considerable for their Situation. Arbois affords delicious Wines, and
which keep a long time. Saint Claud is visited by those who bear a Devotion to
that Saint. Noseret has fine Fairs, and a Castle whose Terrasses are Leaded.

Near this Province, and upon the German Confines, are two Seigniories, the
County of Monbelliard and the Abbey of Lure, with Towns of the same Name.
Monbelliard, which is defended by a strong Citadel, belongs to a Prince of the
House of Wirtembourg, which depend thereupon. The French King is now the Chief
Sovereign of it.

Suisserland.
SVisserland had its Name from Switz, one of its most ancient Cantons, whether
this Canton was the most considerable of the three, who began the Alliance in
the Year 1308. or that in the Year 1315. they first of all fought then for the
Liberty of the Country, in the Battle of Morgarten, wherein fifty of the
Switzers defeated an Army of twenty thousand Austrians. When Suisserland made a
part of Gaul, it was divided into four Quarters, which seem to correspond with
the modern Countries of Zurichgow, Argow, Turgow, Wiflispurgergow. Since it has
had two parts separated by the River of Russ, the one belonging to the Germans,
the other to the Burgundians, who called it their Lesser-Burgundy, or Burgundia
Trans-Jurana, as being beyond Mount-Jura. The Rhine, Rhosne, Aar, Russ, Inn,
Tesin, and other Rivers, have their Sources in Suisserland, for which reason
this Country is esteemed the highest of Europe. The Tesin and Russ furnish them
with the convenience of Trading into Germany and Italy. Several Lakes there
are, the most considerable of which, are those of Geneva and Constance. All
these Waters produce Fish in abundance, and the Mountains in this Tract afford
the means of Hunting Bucks, Shamoies, or Wild-Goats and Boors. The Switzers are
well shaped and proportioned, and very strong and robust for the most part.
Their best Revenue comes from the Pensions they receive from the French King,
and the King of Spain: Their Cattle afford them Butter, Cheese and Milk: Their
Interest is to maintain Peace, and to remain united among themselves. They
speak both French and German in this Country, but have corrupted several terms
of both Tongues. It Is held, that, upon occasion, they are able to bring into
the Field sixty thousand fighting Men; the Canton of Bearn alone being capable
of raising eighteen thousand. It is an Infantry which renders good service to
the Prince who imploys it, as numerous as it was in the time of Julius Caesar.
It seems to pawn its own Liberty by engaging it self under the pay of others;
but by so doing, it preserves the freedom of its Country. The Valor and
Fidelity of the Switzers have invited the French Kings, the Popes of Rome, and
the Dukes of Genoa, to conside in them for the Guard of their proper Persons,
and the greatest Families of Europe do not disdain their Alliance. True it is,
they have not so many Nobles as formerly; but those they have are very
considerable, and a mistake it is to believe that they were wholly
exterminated. Several Castles were there razed, when they cast off the Yoke of
the House of Austria, by reason of the ill treatments of its Lieutenants.

Under the Name of Suisserland are known thirteen Cantons of the Country, which
are subject to them, and of their Allies. The Cantons, as well as the Allies,
are as many Republics governed by their Magistrates, whom they call
Burgher-Masters, or Avoyers, or Landames. This Name is given to the chief of
the Cantons, where are no Cities. The Cantons and the Allies have Ordinances
independent on one another; nevertheless they Govern sometimes several
Provinces together, and they have Laws almost a-like with a strict Union, they
have often given them the Name of the Republic of the Switzers, or of the
Lords of the Leagues. In this Commonwealth are two sorts of Religion the
Protestant and Roman Catholic. When mention is made of the Catholic Cantons,
they reckon either five or seven of them: The five are Vri, Switz, Vndervald,
Lucerne, Zug: The two others, Fribourg and Soleurre. Zurich, Bern, Basle,
Schafouse are Protestants: Glaris and Appenzel have both Papists and
Protestants. This diversity of Religion does often cause their affairs to be
embroiled, and sometimes occasions their Assembling separately. Commonly the
five Popish Cantons hold their Assembly at Lucerne, the four Protestant Cities
at Aran. The General Assemblies are held every Year at Baden, so called from
its Baths. Each Canton is free to engage it self with whom it thinks
convenient, so that the Switzers are found in different Parties; nevertheless
the Switzers sharing in almost all the Wars that are made in Europe, have none
themselves, and live in Peace in their own Country. As concerning succors, the
Cantons have certain Treaties, they can call and summon one another: Some have
no right but of calling three or five, but those who summon succors, may also
cause others to come, who are allied to them; thus most commonly they all join
therein, each according to its Forces. They have not all an equal Authority
over their subject Countries, they have it only according to the Associations
which they have made in diverse times: And those who entered last into the
Leagues have not any Right over the Countries, which have been subjected before
the times of their Leagues. Amongst all these Cantons, Zurich has the
Presidence: Bern is the most powerful; Basle has the finest City, the abode and
the Rendezvous of several Learned Men: The Canton of Schafouse, has its City of
great Trade: Soleurre has one too of the same Name, where Resides the French
Ambassador. Vri, Swits, Vnderwald, Glaris, Appenzel have only Buroughs. Hence
follows the order of the thirteen Cantons, according to their Ranks. Zurich,
Bern, Vri, Switz, Vnderwald, Zug, Glaris, Fribourg, Soleurre, Schafouse,
Appenzel.

The Countries, subjected to the Cantons, have either been Conquered by Arms,
or submitted voluntarily. There is about a score of them, which, for the most
part, have the Title of Bailywicks, as Baden and those which lie in Italy.

Among the Allies of the Cantons, the Grisons are the most powerful. They are
so called from one of their Ligues, whose Inhabitants were used to wear Gray
Scarfes. Their City of Coire is the Place whither are brought the Merchandises
of Italy and Germany, by reason of the convenience of the Rhine, which begins
to bear Boats thereabouts. One of their Countries is the Valtoline, the most
Beautiful and Important Valley of Europe. Wallais lies along the Rhosne. There
are moreover, in the number of the Allies, four Bishops, that of Sion at Saint
Maurice, Basle at Porentru, Constance at Mersbourg, and Coire at Marsoila.
There is likewise the Abbot of Saint Gall, who dwells at Weil; seven Cities,
Saint Gall, Neuchatel, Wallangery, Biel, Geneva, Mulhausen, Rotweil. The six
first Protestants, and Rotweil Catholic. Geneva is the best Fortified of all,
the Burghers, or Citizens, keep a very exact Guard for the preservation of
their Liberty, and that of Religion, which is Reformed. In the Year 1663. the
French King obtained freedom for the Catholics to say Mass in that Town, where
it had not been Celebrated in this Age. The Lake of Geneva is crossed by the
Rhosne, which mixeth not with its Waters; there sometimes arise Tempests even
in clear fair Weather, because it abutts at the foot of the Mountains. In the
Country its said, that Julius Caesar caused his Treasures to be cast into this
Lake, when he was pursued by the Switzers; hitherto they have been sought for
to no purpose.

Savoy.
THis Country, formerly the abode of the Allobroges, is said to have been
called Savoy, after one of its Princes had drove away the Robbers. It is full
of Mountains, which we generally call the Alps, though several Branches there
have their peculiar Names. Mount Cenis, and the lesser St. Bernard, make the
two principal Passages for Italy. It Is very cold in these parts; the
Inhabitants, by reason of their drinking the Snow-water, are subject to the
Goitre, which is a swelling of the Throat, proceeding from the crudity of that
Water. Nevertheless there are several Places in this Country both very pleasant
and very fertile. The Mountains have Marmotes, which are seldom seen elsewhere:
they are great Rats, who have short Legs, rugged Hair, the Mouth and Ears of a
Squirrel, four Teeth long and cutting; they sleep full six Months of the Year,
without taking in any Food or Nourishment.

Savoy is reckoned for the Principal and most Noble Duchy of Christendom; It Is
certain, that its Dukes have had Alliances with all that is Royal in Europe.
After the Houses of England and France, that of Savoy is one of the most
ancient: Ame the eighth had reason to say, that he had Princes to his Vassals:
Most of the Gentlemen of his Dominions come from the Emperors of the East and
West, from the Kings of Italy, from the Princes of Morea, from the Counts of
Geneva. The Power of the Dukes of Savoy is so much the more considerable, in
that they are Masters of several Passages from France into Italy, by the
possession of Piedmont, of the County of Niece, and other Seigneuries.

Under Savoy is comprehended Genevois, Choblais, Faussigni, Tarentaise,
Maurienne, part of Bugey. Chambri is the Capital of the Duchy and the Seat of
a Parliament. Montmelion is the strongest in it, with a Citadel, which covers
the head of almost an inaccessible Mountain, where the Keys of Savoy are said
to be kept. Anneci is the Residence of the Bishop of Geneva. Ripaille was the
retreat of Felix the Fourth, before and after his Pontificate. This Prince
lived there with his Friends in such a disapplication from Affairs, that since
People say Fair Ripaille, when they are merry, and without disquiet.

Italy.
AMong the Authors, who have written concerning Italy, few there are but
represent it as the most beautiful, best and most delicious Country in the
World. Its situation, toward the midst of the temperate Zone, affords it all
these advantages. It is commonly compared to a Boot, the figure whereof it does
really resemble, lying between the Mediterranean-Sea and the Gulf of Venice.
The Alps, which Livy calls the Walls of Italy and Rome, are at those places
where it touches France, Savoy, Suisserland, Germany; the Appennine Mountain
runs quite through it. The Po, Adige, Tiber, and Arne, are the greatest Rivers
of this Country. There is not one in the World observed, in so short a course,
to have so much increase as the Po, and which is so inconvenient by its
over-flowings, notwithstanding the Dikes that have been raised for prevention.

The People of Italy are polite, dextrous, subtle, and prudent; extreme in
their Manners: they were formerly Masters of the most considerable Empire, that
has been seen since the Creation of the World; And now stand possessed of the
chiefest Dignity of the Roman Catholic Church. They obey diverse Princes, who
are all Papists, but very different in Power and Interests. We are obliged to
the Italians for the Discovery of the New World; Columbus was a Genouese,
Americus Vespucius a Florentine. The Cities of Italy are so much the more
beautiful and better built, in that the Nobility have commonly their abode in
'em. Their Churches and other Edifices are adorned with excellent Pictures; for
which reason the Men and Houses are said to be all painted. The Italian Tongue
is derived from the Latin: Tuscan is received in the Court of Rome, and amongst
the well-bred people.

Their way, of reckoning the Hours, is very different from ours; they
regulating it according to the Sun's setting; then they count four and twenty
Hours; and at the entrance of the Night, they begin to reckon the Hours of a
New Day: Insomuch that the number of the Hours at Noon rises and falls,
according to the Seasons, though there are always four and twenty Hours for the
Civil Day, that is, for the Day and Night together. For Example: On the twelfth
day of August at Noon, which we reckon twelve a Clock, the Italians reckon
seventeen; and so what remains, to finish the Civil Day of four and twenty
Hours, comprehends seven Hours, which make up just the time which the Sun
employs that day, the twelfth of August, since the Hour of Noon unto its
setting.

The Sovereign Princes of Italy are the Pope, the King of Spain, who possess
almost half of it, the Duke of Savoy, the great Duke of Florence, the Republic
of Genoa, the Duke of Mantua, the Duke of Modena, the Duke of Parma, the Bishop
of Trent, the Republic of Lucca. The other Princes are called Petty, by reason
of the small extent of their Dominions. The Republic of Venice is independent;
most of the other States depend either on the Church, or the Empire, for some
Fiefs. The Quality of Duke is in Italy more considerable than of Prince, bating
in the Territories of the King of Spain. There are so many Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, that the Kingdom of Naples alone has more than all France has;
the truth is, most of 'em have not so good a Revenue, as our Country Curates.

Italy is divided into three great parts; the High, which may be called
Lombardy; the Middle, and the Low: According to this division, there is found
in the High, Piemont, Montferrat, Milantz, the Coast of Genoa, Parmezan,
Modenois, Mantouan, the Domain of Venice, Trentin: The State of the Church,
Tuscany, Lucquois, are in the Middle; the Kingdom of Naples possesses the rest.
There is a fourth part, if we may add the Isles thereto.

Piemont, according to the saying of a Piemontin, is a City of three hundred
Miles in compass: One and the same Land produces Corn, Wine, and Fruits. Turin,
the abode of the Dukes of Savoy, is a lovely Town, accompanied with a strong
Citadel. It keeps in its Metropolitan Church, called the Dome, the Relick of
St. Suaire, wherein the Face of our Lord is imprinted, with most of his Body;
It boasts of having, of all the Cities of Italy, brought the Press into use.
Nice, near the Sea, has several Roman Antiquities, and a Citadel, which seems
inaccessible by reason of its situation upon a Rock.

Montferrat has most of its Towns upon Hills, very fertile in Corn and Wine. By
the Peace of Quieras, a part of that Country was yielded to the Duke of Savoy,
the other remaining the Duke of Mantua's, who possesses Casal, near the Po.
This Town is fortified with several Bulwarks and Half-moons, with a Castle and
a strong Citadel, composed of six great Bastions.

The Land of Milan is the most beautiful Country of all Lombardy, and the
finest Duchy of Christendom, now possessed by the King of Spain. The Ways are
pleasant, almost all in a direct line, with Channels of Spring Water on both
sides, and rows and plantations of Trees, which make them resemble Alleys and
Walks. The Champain of Milan is so fertile, that there is not an Inch of Land,
but brings forth twice a Year. The Nobility, as well as in the Kingdom of
Naples, does not meddle with Commerce, as does that of the other neighboring
States. The City of Milan is called Great, because it is full ten Miles in
compass, wherein it contains above two hundred and thirty Churches, ninety six
Parishes, as many Convents, and above a hundred Fraternities. It is a general
Mart of the Merchandises of France, of Spain, of Italy, of Germany; so great a
number of Artizans it has of all sorts, that the Italians have it for a
Proverb, That Milan must be ruined, if they would accommodate Italy with them.
It has ever passed for a second Rome, though it has been besieged forty times,
and taken two and twenty: Its strength consists rather in its Men, than in its
Walls, it being reckoned to contain above three hundred thousand persons. Its
Castle is one of the finest Fortresses of Europe, of six great Bastions Royal,
invested with Brick, with Grafts and Ditches full of running Water.

The Coast of Genoa, formerly called Liguria, produces Muscate-Wines, Olives in
abundance, all manner of good Fruits; the Western part particularly is full of
Lemmon, Orange, Fig, Palm, and Cedar-trees: the Inland of the Country is
mountainous, full of Woods, which furnish Materials for the making of Ships and
Galleys. The Situation of Genoa is upon the Seashore, part in Plains, part in
Hills. The City is full five Miles round, and has Fortifications, which are yet
much greater in circuit; for which reason, it is the greatest, the most
trading, and the most important of all Italy, toward the West. The Buildings
and Structures of this Town are so magnificent and so beautiful, that it is
called the Stately, though very much endamag'd by the late Batteries of the
French. One of the principal Revenues of its Inhabitants consists in the
transportation of Silk-stuffs.

Parma, the Capital of Parmezan, is the common abode of the Duke of that Name,
of the House of the Farnezes, a Feudatory of the Church. It has a Citadel,
whereon Money has not been sparing, for the rendering it good and a fair Palace
for its Princes dwelling.

Modena is the Capital of the Duchy of the same Name, fortified with Bulwarks,
after the ancient manner, inhabited by above thirty five thousand Souls. In
Modena it was, that Brutus was in vain besieged by Mark Anthony, after the
Murder of Julius Caesar, Octavius having happily defeated the Army of him, who
would by this Siege have renewed the Civil Wars.

Mantua is seated in the Waters of a Lake of twenty Miles in circuit, which
only affords entrance by Causeys into the Town. Its Mills do raise a good
Revenue to this Duke; the Jews, who are there very numerous, pay him a great
Tribute. The Ducal Palace is one of the finest and best furnished in all Italy.

The Demesne of Venice has so many Rivers, Canals, and Navigable Lakes, that
Merchandises are easily conveyed into all its places. The Republic is
independent, above twelve hundred Years standing, the Bulwark of Christendom
against the Turks. The City of Venice is one of the greatest of Europe; so
populous, that there are reckoned above three hundred thousand persons. Those
who have seen it, may boast of having seen one of the Wonders of the World. Its
Arcenal is the finest, the greatest, and the best furnished upon Earth. The
Isles, whereof the City is composed, are separated from one another by Channels,
wherein there be above fifteen thousand Boats, which they call Gondoles. The
Church and Palace of St. Mark are very fine Structures; the Treasury of St.
Mark contains immense Riches.

The Bishopric of Trent, which belongs to its Bishop, is under the Protection
of the House of Austria. The City of Trent is ancient, inhabited both by
Italians and Germans, renowned for-holding the last General Council.

The state of the Church is looked upon as so much the more considerable, in
that the Pope, who is the Temporal and Spiritual Prince of it, pretends to be
the Chief and Sovereign Pontife of all Christendom, the Patriarch of Rome, and
of the West; Primate and Exarch of Italy, Metropolitan of the Suffragan Bishops
of Rome, Bishop of St. John de Lateran. Rome, formerly the Capital of the
finest, greatest, and most considerable Empire of the Universe, was once the
Mistress of the better part of the World, famous for excellent Men, who have
surpassed others in Valor, in Piety, in Justice and Temperance. It has had in
its beginning Kings, Consuls and Emperors: the Papists call it Rome the Holy,
by reason of the Residence of the Popes. We may say, it has few Equals, if we
consider its Antiquities, Churches, Palaces, and Curiosities.

Tuscany has three principal Cities, Florence; Siena, Pisa, formerly as many
Republics. Florence, the Capital of this State, renowned upon the account of
its Beauty, is large and very populous. The Palace of the Great Duke has fine
Pictures, Jewels of great value, several Rarities.

Lucca, fortified with eleven regular Bastions, is famous for its Silks and
Olives. The Head of this Republic is a Gonfalonier, or Chief-Standard-Bearer,
whose Charge lasts but two Months.

The Kingdom of Naples is the greatest State of Italy, it belongs to the King
of Spain, who pays for it, every Year, a white Hobbey to the Pope, with seven
thousand Ducats. The Spring is there so long, and so full of Flowers, the
Autumn so loaded with Fruits, that it is esteemed a Paradise. The City of
Naples is the abode of several Gentlemen, which makes it be called the Gentile.
It is situated so advantagiously, that it seems an abridgment of all the
Beauties of Italy. There are few Cities in Europe, who have so many Churches,
and so many Cittadels, as has Naples.

Germany.
GErmany has very fertile Provinces, and a great number of fine Cities. The
Corn, Fruits, Salt, and other Commodities, afford a very considerable Revenue.
It is now an Elective Empire, wherein is a vast number of Sovereign States, of
which the Emperor is the chief. The Laws of this Empire do allow of three
Religions, the Roman Catholic, the Lutheran and Evangelical, and the Calvinist
or Reformed. Nevertheless, there be several other Sects, though the Germans do
almost all follow the belief of their Princes.

Germany has this advantage, that it is in the midst of Europe, and serves for
the Seat of the Empire: the Emperor governs it by the means of Diets, which are
much like Parliaments. The principal Articles of the Government are contained
in the Golden Bull, which treats of the Election of the King of the Romans, of
the Duty of Electors, of their Privileges, of the Authority of the Emperor, of
the means of preserving the Repose and Peace in the Empire. This Bull is a
small Book, whose Original, written in Parchment, contains four and twenty
Leaves, and thirty Chapters. It has a great round Seal of pure Gold, fastened
to strings of yellow and red Silk. It has on the one side the Portrait of
Charles the Fourth, on the other a Castle with two Towers, with these Words,
Aurea Roma. The Election of the Emperor ought to be made at Francfort upon the
Mein, but this was not observed in the late Elections. Besides the Assemblies
which concern the Affairs of the Empire in general, there be three sorts of
'em, those of the Electors for the choosing of the Emperor; those of the
Deputies, whereto the Emperor sends his Commissioner; those of the Circles,
like to the Assemblies of the States of our great Provinces. There be ten
Circles in the Empire, those of Austria, of Bavaria, of Suabia, of Alsatia, or
of the High Rhine, the Electoral, or of the Low Rhine, of Westphalia, of High
Saxony, of Low Saxony, of Franconia, of Burgundy; this last is no longer
Convened. Each Circle has an Ecclesiastic and a Secular Director, who preside
together in the Assemblies: two or three Circles may assemble, when one of 'em
is attacked from abroad, or disturbed with intestine troubles.

The Empire is much the same with that of the Romans, though it does not
comprehend so great an extent of Land: the Princes or States, whereof it is
composed, are of five forts, the Emperor, now of the House of Austria, the
Electors, the Ecclesiastic Princes, the Secular Princes, and the Free Towns.
In the General Dyets, there be three Bodies, that of the Electors, that of the
Princes, that of the Imperial Cities. There are reckoned to be above three
hundred Sovereignties in Germany, who acknowledge the Emperor no farther than
homage, and in Resort.

The Dominions of the House of Austria be of three sorts, those of Austria
which are Hereditary to it; those of Bohemia, where it has the same Right;
those of Hungary, which it has by Election. The Emperor does commonly obtain
either his Son, or his Brother, or his nearest Relation, to be chosen King of
Hungary in his Lifetime; afterward has him Crowned King of Bohemia; and, if
he finds any disposition, has him Elected King of the Romans, that is to say,
his perpetual Vicar and presumptive Successor to the Empire. Without the
Revenue of his Hereditary Countries, the Emperor would not have wherewith to
maintain a very considerable Train; he does not possess any Land under the
Title of Imperial Majesty. His Principal Rights are the Erection and
Investiture of Fiefs, the granting of Privileges, the Right of Legitimation:
He may make Laws, give Safe-Guards, establish Posts, make Parliaments, compose
Universities, erect Buroughs into Cities, create Offices, puts Towns into the
Ban of the Empire: In short, he may make Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, and has the
Superiority over all the Princes of the Empire, who, upon this account, pay him
a great respect.

The Electors are to the number of eight, the Archbishop of Mayence, the
Archbishop of Treves, the Archbishop of Cologne, the King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Bavaria, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenbourg, the Prince
Palatine. These Electors Choose and Crown the Emperor; the Pope confirms this
Election and Coronation. Four Voices are sufficient to raise any one to the
Imperial Dignity, and at present the King of Bohemia has only his Session in
the Election. The Secular Electors may nominate themselves: The Lands or their
Electorates cannot be dismembered: In the House of Saxony, the Electorate is for
the eldest alone, who shares the other Seigniories with his Brothers. The
Elector of Brandenboug is the most Potent, and possesses the most Land of all
those Princes; his States are above two hundred German Leagues in length, for
the most part separated from one another, yet a Courier may go from one end to
another, and always lie upon this Electors Land.

The Ecclesiastic Princes are of several sorts, the Archbishop of Salzbourg,
the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, several Bishops and other great
Prelates; Abbots, Abbesses, who have no Voice but in Body. These Princes are
almost all absolute over the Temporality of their Benefices, and Christendom
has no Prelates so Potent as they are. The Election of most of their Dignities
belongs to the Chapters, without the Popes or Emperors being to concern
themselves therein. As Germany is divided for Religion, there remain some
Lutheran Bishops, who have the Title of Bishops, until that they have
Contracted Marriage; and when they are Married, they are called Administrators.

Among the secular Princes, are the Archduke of Austria, the Princes of the
Electoral Houses, some Dukes, Marquesses and Land-Graves. There be also Counts
and Barons, who differ little but in Name, and who have immediate Dependency on
the Empire. They have Session in Body, which has four Voices in the States of
the Empire; they have each their own in their particular Assemblies; several
amongst them Coin Moneys. Nobles there be in Suevia or Schwaben in Franconia,
in the Land of the Rhine, who are absolute over their Lands, as the greatest
Lords of the Empire are over theirs. Several Principalities of Germany are
often possessed by one sole Prince; and sometimes one Principality alone
belongs there to several. The youngest Brothers have almost the same Titles
with the eldest.

The Free Towns, which are as many small Republics, be principally of two
sorts, Imperial and Anseatick. The Imperial have the Eagle of the Empire in
their Arms, either whole or divided; have Right to send to the Diet, where
their Body has two Voices, they are considered upon the Bank of Suevia and upon
the Bank of the Rhine: Thus are they divided, by reason of the Benches where
the Deputies of those Cities have their Seats: The Deputy of the City of
Cologne holds the first Rank of the Bench of the Rhine, that of Ratisbon has
the first place of that of Suevia. Some have Noble Families, by which they are
Governed, others have a Popular Government.

The Hans-Towns are Confederated together for the mutually succouring one
another, upon occasion, against their Enemies, for maintaining the Liberty of
the Commerce, for the not being burdened with any Impositions by Foreign
Princes; the consideration of this League is now of little use to several of
those Towns, each of them endeavoring to do its own business by it self. They
were reckoned to be sixty six. Lubeck, Cologne, Brunswick, Dantzick are the
Capitals of them, with as many Colleges. Lubeck may Convene all the rest, with
the advice of five of those Towns, which are nearest it.

The most renowned Rivers of Germany, are the Rhine, the Danube, the Elbe, the
Oder, the Weser: The Rhine, the greatest of Rivers which goes toward the
Ocean, has its Source in Suisserland, and its end in Holland, where it loses
its Name in the Sand: It is so broad below Strasbourg, that Bridges cannot be
made over it. There is not one in the World, that Waters so many Sovereign
States. The finest Cities, by which it passes, are on this side its Bed or
Chanel, most of 'em built by the Romans, who made it the bound of their Empire.
It formerly separated Gaul from Germany; during the first Race of the French
Kings, it passed through some part of their Territories. The Danube, which
begins in Suevia, has a Course of above seven hundred Leagues.

The most easy Division of Germany is, that which has made it into two parts,
the one High, and the other Low, according to the Course of the Rhine, of the
Elbe, and of the Oder. Each of those parts has several Provinces: The High has
four toward the West, Alsatia, the Palatinate of the Rhine, Franconia, Suevia:
And four great States toward the East, Tirol, Bavaria, which is of two sorts,
Duchy and Palatinate; Bohemia, which also comprehends Silesia with Moravia;
and Austria, which has other Herereditary Lands, namely, Carinthia, Carniola
and Stiria. Low-Germany has as many parts as the High, four toward the West,
the Electoral Arch-Bishopricks, the Succession of Cleves and of Juliers,
Westphalia and Hesse: Four toward the East, known under the Name of Saxony,
Saxony Electoral, which comprehends Turingia, Misnia, Lusacia, High-Saxony upon
the Elbe; Saxony has other Princes, wherein we reckon Brunswick, Low-Saxony
upon the Elbe, Meckelbourg; Brandenbourg and Pomerania, which for the most part
belongs to the Crown of Sueden, with some other Seigniories.

Alsatia is indeed small, but the most fertile of all Germany in Corn and in
Wines; Strasbourg there is rich, strong, and very populous by reason of its
Commerce: Its Arcenal, the Tower, and the Clock of the Church, deserves to be
seen by those who Travel. Heidelberg is the Capital of the Palatinate of the
Rhine: Its fine Library was Transported to Rome, after that the Town had been
taken in the Year 1622. by Tilly the Emperors General. Franconia was the abode
of the ancient French, who called it Eastern France, after that they had
carried their Name and settled their abode in Gaul. Francfort, upon the Mein, is
known for its Fairs, and for the Elections of Emperors which have been made in
that Town. Nuremberg has fine Manufactures, and furnishes Europe with abundance
of Gew-gaws. Suevia has so many Sovereignties, that there is not a Country that
has so great a number; its two best Cities are Augsbourg and Vlm: The first
Celebrated by the Confession of the Faith of the Protestants in the Year 1530.
by the Enemies it has raised against the King of Spain, and by its Goldsmiths
Work: Its Townhouse is one of the finest Fabrics of Germany: The Catholics
and Lutherans are received Magistrates indifferently in this Place. Vlm is one
of the best fortified, and the richest of the Empire in Land; the Danube begins
to carry Boats there. The Duchy of Bavaria is not to be dismembered as are some
other States; the youngest Brothers there do ever reverence the eldest: Munich,
the Residence of the Elector, is a fine Town, accompanied with a stately
Castle, wherein there is a Library full of curious Manuscripts. Ratisbon,
renowned for its Diets, has five Principalities of the Empire, the Bishopric,
the City, three Abbeys, with the finest Bridges in Germany. Bohemia is esteemed
one of the Highest Countries in Europe, by reason there enters no Rivers
therein, and several go out from thence. It has its particular States, its
Customs and its Tongue, different from those of the Neighborhood, though its
King be one of the Electors of the Empire. The Inheritance of this Custom has
been confirmed to the House of Austria by the Peace of Munster. Prague, the
Capital, is composed of three Cities, and so populous, that under the Emperor
Charles the Fourth, there are said to have gone from thence above forty
thousand Foreign Scholars, for that their Privileges were retrenched: The
great Battle in the Year 1620. which was fought near its Walls, decided, in
less than an Hours time, the Quarrels of the Kingdom, in favor of the Emperor
Ferdinand the Second, against Frederick Elector Palatine. Austria, the only
Arch-Dutchy in the World, is not subject to the Justice of the Empire, and does
not Contribute to its necessity. The Piety of that Family, and the Situation of
its great Dominions near those of the Infidels, have made the Germans continue
the Empire in that Family for some time past. Vienna, the Residence of the
Empire, is the best Fortified of Germany: In the Year 1529. it sustained
generously twenty Assaults, against the Great Turk Soliman the Second, who
Besieged it in vain with three hundred Thousand Men.

Cologne, an Imperial City, one of the four Hans-Towns, is called the Rome of
Germany, by reason of its bigness, and the beauty of its Benefices: The Papists
call it Holy, because it has in keeping several Bodies of their Saints, has
three hundred sixty five Churches, and that amongst the free Cities, it alone
is exemped from Heresy. Westphalia furnishes Gammons and Hams. Munster is the
place where the General-Peace of the Empire was concluded, in the Year 1648. It
was known in the Year 1535. for the Rebellion of the Anabaptists, whose
pretended King John of Leyden was there punished according to his merit. In the
Year 1661. its Bishop caused a Citadel to be there made, for the maintaining
his Authority against the pretensions of the Citizens. Hosse is the Province
where hitherto most care has been taken to instruct the Inhabitants in the
Trade of War. The Name of Saxony was more famous when its People Conquered the
better part of England. The House of Saxony is one of the most ancient of
Europe. Erfort, in Turingia, is esteemed the greatest City of Germany. Dresden,
the Residence of the Elector of Saxony, has sine Fortifications, and an Arcenal
well provided. Low-Saxony has several good Cities, Brunswick, Lubeck, Hambourg,
Vismar, Bremen. Hambourg is spacious, rich, strong, besides its being able to
put fifteen thousand Citizens in Arms: Its Situation facilitates to it the
Commerce of the Ocean and of the Baltick-Sea. Brandenbourg is the only
Marquisate of all the Empire, with that of Baden: Berlin is there the Residence
of the Elector. Stetin is the most considerable of Pomerania possessed by the
Crown of Sueden.

Of Denmark.
THE Danes make the Name of their Country come from Dan, one of the Successors
of Noah. They make all their Kings to descend from him to Christian the Fifth,
now Reigning, Grandson of Christian the Fourth, who had the happiness to sway
the Scepter above sixty Years. The King of Denmark commands Countries of vast
extent, which for the most part are cold, by reason of their Situation toward
the North, full of Mountains and Woods, and Ice and Snow. Of this Number are
the Kingdom of Norway, Greenland, the Isles of Island and of Fero. Toward the
North of America, there be some Lands which bear the Name of New-Denmark: Some
Fortresses in Guinea, Krankebar in Coromandel, in the East Indies, acknowledge
subjection to his Majesty of Denmark. What is particularly comprehended under
the Name of Denmark, is the best inhabited, the finest and the most fertile. It
is an Hereditary Kingdom since the Year 1660. before, it was Elective; the
Nobility being now stripped of the Prerogative it formerly possessed. The King of
Denmark styles himself Count of Oldembourg and Delmenhorst, as the Eighth King
of that Family, into which the Crown of Denmark came in the Year 1448. by the
Election of Christian I. He is now in possession of it, and caused to be built
there, in the Year 1681. a new City, with a Seaport, under the Name of
Christiana. The Opinion of Luther is followed in Denmark since the Reign of
King Frederiek, Elected in the Year 1523. There is no great Trade drove in
Denmark, but there is a fine Revenue arising from the Customs which the
Merchandises pay, that pass through the Straight of the Sound, the Key of the
Baltick-Sea. This Straight is a Mile in breadth, and the Course which the Ships
there steer, with the most safety and convenience, is nearer Cronembourg, than
Elsenbourg, which belongs to the Crown of Sueden. This Revenue is no longer so
considerable, since the Suedes do not pay there now what they did formerly: and
it would be less, if the design was brought about, that has been entertained,
of joining the Baltic Sea to the Elve, by the Lake of Swerin, if the
transportation of Commodities be continued by Land from Hambourg to Lubeck, and
if the Elector of Brandenbourg brings to perfection the Chanel, which he has
begun at Mulras, for the transporting the Merchandises of Poland and Silesia,
from the Oder into the Elve. Ships of ordinary Bulk, which take their way
through the Straight of the Belt, cast Anchor before Nibourg, and there pay the
Impost. This Straight is broader, but not so deep as that of the Sound, by
which means the Sea is there very rough: the great Ships meet with several
Islands there, and do not willingly steer their Course that way, which they
take more directly and more conveniently through the Sound. The King of Denmark
raises also a great Revenue from the Cattle of his Dominions, which afford 'em
both very fat and in great plenty. The Germans carry away from thence every
Year above fifty thousand Oxen into their own Country; Other Foreigners go into
Denmark to buy Horses. Such abundance is there of Deer, that three or four
hundred are sometimes killed, in one Chase alone; the Danes are used to salt
and barrel 'em up, for the victualling, as they say, the King's Ships: the
hunting of those Creatures is commonly performed in Chariots, or a sort of
running Wagons, by reason these Machines do not fright away the Deer.

The Ports of Denmark are the Peninsula of Jutland, and the Islands near the
Straight of the Belt: Schonen was yielded up to the Crown of Sueden by the late
Treaties of Peace. Jutland was the abode of Cimbres, who have made Conquest in
most of the Regions of Europe, and who, before they were defeated by Marius,
gave furious Alarums to the Romans. There is somewhat Martial found at this day
in the Danish Ladies; they love Hunting, and receive at Table, rather than in
their Chambers, those persons who make 'em visits.

In Jutland there be four Diocesses toward the North, Ripen, Arhusen, Alborg,
Viborg; two Dutchies toward the South, Sleswick and Holstein. Those who
inhabit near the Coast are at small Charges in making their Houses, for that
the Wind does often carry there such drifts of Sand, as to constrain 'em to get
out at the top of their Houses. Kolding is the place of Custom for the Cattle:
Frederic-Ode, which is now called Frederic, for the rendering the termination of
it the more different from that of Frederick-Ohrt in Holstein, is in so
important a situation, that Charles Gustavus, King of Sueden, having taken it
in the late Wars, had then the means of making his Army pass over the Ice, into
all the Neighboring Islands, and go give the Alarm to Copenhagen; which was
an Action as bold as that never the like was heard of; this Prince made the
Cavalry march and lead the Artillery over great Arms of the Sea, where before a
Man on foot would have been afraid of venturing himself: True it is, that
formerly some Battles have been fought there upon the Ice, but commonly the War
was made, in those Parts, by Land in Winter, and by Sea in Summer.

The Duchy of Sleswick was the ancient abode of the English: It belongs to the
Duke of Holstein, who has his Residence at Gottorp, and holds of the Crown of
Denmark. The City of Sleswick has the remains of the Re-intrenchments which
were made there, at diverse times, to hinder entrance into the Peninsula. One of
the late Dukes of Holstein, caused Frederickstadt to be built upon the Eider,
with design of settling there the Guild-Trade: He sent, in the Year 1633. for
that purpose, a signal Embassy into Russia and Persia; whereof we have both a
fine and an exact Relation, drawn up by Olearius, Secretary of the Embassy.
Holstein, otherwise Holsatia, belongs to the King of Denmark, and to the Duke
of Holstein, who have hitherto done Homage for it to the Emperor, as Fief of
the Empire, and have had alternately the administration of Justice, the Session
in the Assemblies of the Empire, and in all the Rights of Regality. By the
Peace of the Empire with Sueden, Protection is granted the Duke against the
King of Denmark, which was of no use to him in the late Wars; and he was only
re-established in his Dominions by the Peace of Nimmighen. His Riches consist
in the Fishery, and in the Transportation of Swine, which are fatned in the
Woods. Some Lands, in this Country, bring forth for three years together, the
three years following they are covered with Water, by the means of Ponds that
are made to overflow: The Principal Town is Riel, which is near the Port of
Christianpreis, which was Fortified, and, near which, has lately been built the
Fortress of Frederick-Ohrt.

The greatest Isles of Denmark are Zealand and Fionia. Copenhagen, in Zealand,
is a Town of great Commerce, the usual abode of the King. It has a fine
Castle-Royal, good Fortifications, which afforded its Inhabitants the means of
repulsing the Suedes in the late Wars. It has also one of the finest Arsenals
of Europe, wherein is kept a Celestial Globe, of six foot Diameter, made by
Tycho-Brahe, the famous Mathematician, who made curious observations in the
Castle of Vranibourg, in the Isle of Vren. Vranibourg is really the pleasantest
Situated in the World. Besides the Prospect they have from thence, of the
Royal-City, of the two Coasts of Zealand, and of Schonen, they have a full view
of all the Ships which pass and repass the Sound from the one Sea to the other.
Roskild is the Mausoleum of the Kings. Elsenour is near the strong Castle of
Cronembourg, whose Fortifications have lately been augmented.

The Isle of Fionia is the Appennage of the Prince of Denmark. Its City of
Ottensec was the place of holding the General Assemblies of the Kingdom, which,
since the Year 1660. are to be held at Copenhagen.

The Isle of Bornholm was yielded to the Crown of Sueden by the last Treaty of
Peace; since which, the Danes have given, in Exchange of that Island, an
equivalent, by the Propriety of several Lords in Schonen.

Norway possesses the Western part of the great Peninsula of Scandinovia,
whereof Sueden makes the Eastern: A long ledg of Hills, which divide 'em into
two, leaving Norway toward the Ocean, Sueden toward the Baltick-Sea. From
hence they Transport Whale-Oyl, dried Fish, called Stock Fish, abundance of
Timber for the building of Ships, for the making of Masts and Sail-Yards. Its
Coast, though of a vast extent, has few good Harbors, by reason of the small
Islands, Rocks and Shelves, wherewith they are environed. The Gulf of
Maclstroon is also said to swallow up the Ships which approach it. What is
toward the Pole, is full of Forests and of Mountains, which have some Mines of
Iron and of Copper. In the Year 1646. near Opslo, was a Mine of Gold
discovered, which gave the Inhabitants occasion to Publish abroad, That they
had the Northern-Indies; this advantage lasted but as long as the Mine, which
was afterward quickly at an end, by overmuch working.

This Kingdom has five Governments, with as many Castles, Bahus, Aggerhus,
Barghenhus, Dronthem, Vardhus. That of Bahus, with a Castle of the same Name,
upon a Rock, was yielded to the Suedes by the late Peace. Berghen is the best
City, the Residence of the Viceroy, with the new Fortress Bourg, and a
Seaport, where the Ships do easily touch, and are safe from all Winds, by the
means of high Mountains wherewith it is surrounded. The Merchants of the
Anseatick Towns have their Magazines. Dronthem, the abode of the ancient Kings
of Norway, is very much decayed: It has still the Title of an Arch-Bisho prick,
with the remains of one of the Finest and most Magnificent Churches in the
North. Ships are secure in that Harbor, but have occasion for good Pilots to
bring 'em in. The other Principal Havens, of this Kingdom, are in the Western
part. In some Countries of this Region, is Bread made of the flower of Barley
and Oats, which they bake between two hollow Flints; this Bread will keep, as
they say, thirty or forty years. The Norwegians are little subject to
discourses, of such a constitution, that when they are in a Fever, a slice of
a Gammon of Bacon does 'em more good than a new-laid Egg; the inclination of
several of them to Sorcery, makes 'em have the reputation of selling Winds to
Saylors.

Finmarck, which makes part of Lapland, advances into the cold Zone, so as the
day and night last there seven Months together: The Inhabitants of this Country
have nothing in property, they accomodate themselves with the first place they
like, now in one place, to morrow in another. They live on their Fishing and
their Hunting, and only pay the Tribute of some Skins to the King of Denmark;
they carry their Fish to sell at Berg. The Castle of Wardhus, with a Burough of
three hundred Houses, the most Northern of all our Continent, is in the midst
of a small Island, where it serves to exact some Customs, from those who go to
Trade by the Ocean, at Archangel in Muscovy. Its Port is in the Western part
of the Island, which is separated from the Continent by a Straight of a quarter
of a League in breadth, where there is passage for Ships. Its Neighborhood is
not subject to Ice, so as are the other parts of that Sea.

Of Sueden.
THe Monarchy of Sueden is the most ancient of Europe, if it be true that it
has had above a hundred and fifty Kings; and that the first of 'em was the Son
of Japhet, one of the Sons of Noah. Upon this foundation perhaps it was, that
in the Council of Basle, a Bishop of Sueden demanded of the Presidents of the
Assembly, the Precedence for his King over other Christian Princes. The most
authentic Historians begin the enumeration of the Kings of Sueden at Biorno,
who was Crowned toward the year eight hundred; and show, that the Kingdom was
Elective til the Reign of Gustavus de Vaga, who rendered it Hereditary in his
Family in the year 1544. and who at the same time abolished there the Roman
Catholic Religion to follow the Sect of Luther. This pretext of Religion did
likewise very much serve his Son Charles the 9th. called of Sudermania, when he
deprived his Nephew Sigismond of the Crown, who had been Elected King of Poland
the third of that name; and whose Successors unto Casimir the third, did keep
the Title of Sueden. The King of Sueden styles himself King of the Suedes, of
the Goths and Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Schonen, Estonia,
Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, Verden, Stein, Pomerania, Gassubia, Vandalia, Prince,
and Lord of Ingria. He bears in his Arms three Crowns, which sometimes have
been Contested with him by the Kings of Denmark; the present King is Charles
the 11th. of the Palatine, House of Deux Ponts, or Twee-brugge. The Goths and
Vandales are noted in History for their Conquests; the modern Suedes for the
Valor of their late Kings, and for their acquisitions over their Neighbors,
which render 'em very Potent on the Baltic Sea; where they have more Coasts
than all the Princes together who confine upon it.

The Peace of Bromsbroo in the year 1645. obliges the King of Denmark to
restore Jempterland and Herendal to Sueden; to yield to it the Isles of Gotland
and of Oeland to perpetuity, with the Province of Halland for thirty years.

The Peace of Rotschil in the year 1658. does entirely cede to Sueden, Halland,
Schonen, wherein Landscroon is become a very considerable Town, Bleking,
wherein is the new Port of Carlscroon, the Isle of Bornholme, which is since
returned to Denmark by the exchange of other Lands, the Fortress of Bahus, and
the Bayliwick of Dronthem.

That of Copenhagen in the year 1660. confirms the Treaty of Roschild with
reserve of the Bayliwick of Drontheim, and purchases the Isle of Ween.

The acquisitions of Sueden over the Empire by the Peace of Osnabrug are, the
Duchy of Pomerania Citerior: and in the Ulterior Stetin, Gartz, Dam, Golnau.
The Isle and Principality of Rugen; the Isles and the Mouths of the Oder; the
Dutchies of Bremen and of Verden; the City, the Seigniory and the Port of
Wismar; Wildhusen in Westphalia; certain Customs in the Rest of Pomerania, and
in the new Marquisate of Brandenbourg. The War declared in the year 1675, by
the King of Denmark, and several Princes of the Empire, deprived Sueden of many
of these acquisitions; which it was restored to by the Peace of Nimeguen in the
year 1679.

The Treaty of Oliva in the year 1660. was so advantageous to Sueden, that the
King of Poland did there make renunciation of the Title of King of Sueden for
the future, reserving only to himself the Title during his life to other
Princes; and likewise consented that Lifeland should henceforward be Hereditary
to the Crown of Sueden. This is to be understood of Lifeland on the North of
the Duna, where the only place of Dunembourg was reserved to the Crown of
Poland, conformable to the Truce made at Stumsdorf for twenty six years, in the
year 1635.

The Peace with the Muscovites procured restitution to Sueden of all the Grand
Duke or Zar had taken in Lifeland.

The King of Sueden has lately very much augmented his Revenue, by the reunion
to his Demesne of several Lands which had been Alienated from it. He pretends
to the Succession of Gleves, and of Juliers, by the means of his great
Grandfather John, Duke of Deux-Ponts, who married Magdelain the third Sister of
the Duke of John William.

In the States of the Kingdom the Peasants make a Body, as well as the other
Orders.

Sueden possesses part of Scandinavia, which is the best of it, as being
toward the East. The Cold is somewhat long in this Country, often very sharp;
to provide themselves against it, the Inhabitants do not make use of Furs as
they do in Germany: they have only Night-Caps, Gloves of Wool, Waist-Coats, and
make great Fires of the Fuel they have plenty of. They have so few sick People
in their Country, that the Physicians and Apothecaries have hardly practice
among 'em, whereas Barbers are there in great request. The Ministers and
Officers of Justice do there keep Inns. The Inhabitants of this Province are
all equally rich; their greatest Revenues consist in Mines of Copper, from
whence most of the Europeans are furnished wherewith to make money, their
Canons, and their Bells. The City of Stockholme alone has in its Castle above a
hundred pieces of great Artillery; and there are held to be above eight
Thousand in the Kingdom. In the review of the Militia which was made in the
year 1661. there were reckoned above Fourscore Thousand Men in Arms.

This Country, being full of Woods and Mountains, affords very little Corn; in
time of scarcity, the Poor eat often very bad Bread. It furnishes Butter, Suet,
Hides, Skins, Pitch, Rosin, Masts, Posts and Planks. The Towns are subject to
Fire, the Houses being only built of Wood. The Lakes and Gulphs are there more
considerable than the Rivers. Trade being only drove upon the Coasts; neither
dare the Ships venture upon that without a Pylot, by reason of the number of
Rockswith which it is beset. The Ice is here so strong and firm in Winter, that
when it is but two Inches thick, it is said to be able to bear a Man on Foot:
Wagons go on it with safety when it is half a foot thick. The Snow does there
afford the means of traveling in Sledges. The Horses in this Country are
proper for War; they are very easily reared and rarely sick; they see as well
almost by night as by day, they carry their man swimming, with ease they leap
great Ditches; they have so much courage and agility, that they attack with
their Feet and Teeth the Enemies of those who mount them.

Six great Regions are principally known under the name of Sueden; Gotia,
Sueden, Lapland, Finland, Ingria, Lifeland; the three former toward the West,
the three other toward the East, the Gulf of Finland between both, and
besides these the modern acquisitions before specified.

Gotia is divided into Ostro-Gotia and Westro-Gotia, this last toward the
Ocean, the former upon the Baltic Sea. According to the like division, the
Goths who subdued Italy, were called Ostro-Goths, and those who rendered
themselves Masters of Spain, Visi-Goths. Calmar is a strong Town, and the place
where the Suedes until now, did embark for Germany. Its Citadel was esteemed
in the Northern Countries as much as that of Milan in Italy; Norkoping has
works and forges of Copper which afford the Europeans the convenience of coming
to load Cannon there. Lindkoping the Country of the Historian Olaus-Magnus is
remarkable for the Victory of Charles of Sudermania, since King of Sueden.
There be several Cities in these parts whose names be thus terminated in
Koping, which signifies the places where the market is kept. Gottembourg a new
Town, and has its Seaport upon the Ocean.

Sueden properly taken communicates its name to the other Provinces of this
State. Stockholme is the Capital City of all the Kingdom, accompanied with a
Royal Castle and a Seaport at the disgorging of the Lake of Meler, whereof was
formerly the conjunction proposed with that of Wener, for the communicating the
Ocean and Baltic Seas, and thus be exempted from the passage of the Sound.
This Town is now better built, and much richer than it was before the War of
the Suedes in Germany. In the year 1641. they began to make the Streets in
Right Lines, and to build their Houses of one and the same Structure. It is a
safe Harbor for Ships, which may ride there in security without Anchor. There
be three Channels which lead thither between several Isles and Rocks. The Kings
Ships remain at Elsnappen. The Country round about is beautified with several
fine Houses, which the Sovereigns and most of the Senators have caused to be
built. Upsal, accompanied with a great Castle, is the Metropolitan, and
formerly the place of the Coronation of their Kings, whose abode it formerly
was. When in Sueden were several Kingdoms, that of Upsal was ever the most
considerable of 'em This City has an University, and the most renowned Fairs of
all those parts. Its principal Church was a stately Building and is said to
have been embelish'd and wainscoted with Gold, now it is covered with Copper.

Lapland has no Towns, only some Habitations divided into five Countries, which
bear the name of their Rivers. The Laplanders are very low of Stature, the
tallest among them not exceeding four Foot in height. They have no other
Clothes than of Skins; and when they are young, they are so hardened to the
cold, that they afterward undergo it with ease, when without habilliments.
They have neither Wool, nor Flax, nor Hemp; they have blades of Copper which
they call Cipons, which they exchange for what they stand in need of: they have
neither Bread, nor Corn, nor Fruits, nor Herbs, nor Wines, nor Beer, nor
Cattle, nor Eggs, nor Milk, nor any other Commodity; but they do not want
Water: and they have Rain-Deers; which are a kind of a Stag extraordinary
swift, whose flesh is their Food: and whom they also make use of in their
Travels. The great and swift Journies they go by their means, having given
occasion to the believing them Witches. But to proceed, there is one part of
Lapland belonging to the Crown of Denmark, and another to the Muscovite. Mount
Enarby has three Lodges for the Deputies of the three Nations, and there the
Suedes administer Instice.

Finland is a Duchy which some Kings of Sueden have given for Appanage for
their Brothers. The principal Towns are Abbo and Nibourg. There is in this
Province a place near Ratzebourg, where Needles touched with the Loadstone are
said to turn continually.

Ingria was taken from the Muscovites by a Treaty in the Year 1617. It is
small, but considerable for the hunting of Elks and for the Situation of the
Fortress of Notebourg in the midst of a great River, and at the disgorging of
the Lake Ladoga. This Fortress was taken miraculously by the Suede, all the
Muscovite Garrison, except two Persons, having been swept away by a Disease
which took them in the Mouth, and hindered them from eating.

Lifeland was ceded entirely by Poland, as we have said, except Dunembourg. It
was formerly the order of the Knights Sword-Bearers; but under Pope Gregory the
9th this Order was united to that of the Teutons, or Cross-Bearers. The
Polanders and Muscovites had it afterward in possession. The Duchy of
Courland, has its Duke of the Family of Ketler, who does Homage to Poland. It
is a remnant of the great Mastership of the above mentioned order. Riga is the
Capital Town of Lifeland. The Germans, English and Hollanders, trade much to
that Town in Summertime, while the Sea is navigable. In the Winter its
Inhabitants traffic into Muscovy by means of their t^aineaux. It is in a Plain
upon the River de Dune, which in that place is a quarter of a League in
breadth: Its Fortifications consist in six regular Bastions, in several half
Moons freezed, and in Counterscarps pallisadoed. The Dune has so rapid a Stream
and often whirles along so much Ice, that it sometimes changes its course from
Riga as far as Dunemund. In the Year 1656. I saw an Army of an hundred thousand
Muscovites wast and moulder away before that Town, which gloriously repulsed
their efforts. Revel has the Direction of the Commerce from Lifeland unto
Muscovy. Nerva is a strong place which bestows its Name upon a neighboring
River, wherein the brave Pontus de la Gardie was drowned, after Sueden was
obliged to him for many of its best Conquests. By the late Treaties between the
Crowns of Sueden and of Poland, the exercise of both the Catholic and
Protestant Religion is allowed of in Lifeland, as well as in Curland and
Prussia.

The Isle of Gotland, the greatest of the Isles of the Baltic Sea, accompanied
with five or six Havens, belongs to the Crown of Sueden. Several of its Rocks
have ancient Gothic Characters. Its City of Wisby still preserves Marbles and
Houses which have Doors of Iron and Brass, either washed with Silver, or guilt
with Gold; which speaks its ancient Grandeur. This Town did formerly establish
Laws for the Navigation of the Baltic Sea, and gave beginning to Sea Maps.

Of Poland.
POland, which was formerly but a part of Sarmatia, is now the Kingdom of
Europe, of the greatest extent. It is in length, comprehending therein
Lithuania, above three hundred Leagues; and almost as large in breadth. It is
fertile in Rye, Wax and Honey, rich in Furrs, whereof the finest are brought
thither from Hungary. They digg salt near Cracow in famous Salt Pits, which
form under ground a kind of City. They bake it in little Russia, and the Sun
makes it in Podolia. This Kingdom has the convenience both of the Baltic and
Black Sea; but the neighboring Princes hinder the Polanders from making use of
them to any great purpose. The Rivers of Vistula, Niemen and Dune fall into the
Baltic Sea; the Boristenes, the Bog, the Niester into the Black Sea. The
Vistula passes by the noblest City of this Kingdom. The Mouths of the
Boristhenes are possessed by the Turk, who in the Year 1672 received the Ukrain
into his protection, after having subdued Podolia by the sacking of Caminiec.
The Kingdom of Poland is Elective the only one of Europe, where the Inhabitants
have kept the right of choosing a Prince. The government is that of an
Aristocratical Monarchy, wherein the Senators have so much Authority, that when
they mention the State, they say the Kingdom and Republic of Poland. The
Senate is composed of Archbishhops, Bishops, Pallatines, Principal Castellins,
and the great Officers of the Kingdom. The King, like that of Bees, can do no
mischief to his Subjects; that is to say, he cannot in any wise act against any
of the Nobility without the consent of the Senators, and he can do 'em a great
deal of good on his own part; by bestowing on them vacant places. His Person
and his Dignity are so considered, that it has not been known that ever any
attempt was made upon any Kings Life of his Predecessors. Before the Emperor
Otho the 3d. there were only Princes in this State, that Emperor recalled the
Tribute which Poland paid the Empire. Warsaw is the usual place of election,
and of the general Dyets; Cracow that of the Coronation of the Kings. The
Archbishop of Gnesne Primate of the Kingdom, performs this Coronation, and has
almost the whole Authority during the Interregnum; for then he presides in the
Senate, and gives Audience to Ambassadors. He contests the Presidence with
Cardinals; for which reason there are three Orders; the Church, the Nobility,
and the third Estate, which comprehends all those which are not Noble. The
Nobility is so numerous in this Realm, that Poland is called the Kingdom of the
Nobles. In the Dyets the Nuncio's, who are the Deputies of the lesser Nobility,
or Gentry of the Provinces, do often oversway the rest of the Diet. But one
amongst 'em has sometimes the Authority to cause a whole general Diet to be
broke up by a Protestation. As the Catholic Religion is observed in this
Realm, so the Bishops have the first rank after the King, then the Palatines
and the Castellains. The Castellains of Cracow is above the Palaine of the same
name, because that formerly the Chastellain behaved himself more valiantly than
did the Palatine, in defense of the Kingdom: also does he wear a Royal Crown at
the anointing of his Majesty; at which Ceremony he precedes all the other
Secular Senators: The Palatine of Cracow carries the Scepter. The Archbishop of
Gnesne and of Leopold, have under them sixteen or seventeeen Bishops, as well
within as without the Kingdom. There be three other Schismatics in black
Russia, who first of all acknowledge him of Kiou, and then the Greek Patriarch
of Constantinople. There is in this State several other Sects. Here Gentlemen
are equal, the distinction, and precedence proceeding only from the public
Offices they stand possessed of: they serve at their own costs in time of Wars,
but do not stay long in the Campaign. Their infantry is commonly composed of
Foreigners. The Garments of the Polanders are long, have their Beards shaved
off their Chins, only one Tuff of Hair upon their Heads, upon the occasion of
Casimir the first, one of their Kings, whom they took out of a Cloister he was
in in France, to place him upon their Throne. They are almost all handsome,
well shaped, well proportioned, knowing for the most part the Latin Tongue. The
use of Spices is very common, and with them in great request; they misuse their
Peasants, in consequence, of the absolute Power they have over them; which
certainly did occasion the revolt of the Cossaques, and afterward all the
disorders of the Kingdom. Their Cavalary is so considerable, that if they were
well united, they might bring into the Field a hundred thousand Horse: The
confidence they have therein, and the fear of rendering a King or Citizens too
powerful, have inclined them in all times to neglect their Fortresses. Their
usual Arms are their Cimiter, the Sword, the Battle Ax, Carabine and Arrows.
The Cossaques have ever formed a Militia, and not a particular Nation. At the
first they were Volunteers, making incursions upon the Turks and the lesser
Tartars; these last call them by the Name of Roux, because their Country makes
a part of Russia. King Battori reduced them into a Body, and joined thereto two
thousand Horse, to whom he appointed the fourth part of the Revenue of his
Demesne, for which reasons they were called Quartians. They have power of
choosing and of deposing their General, who takes an Oath of Fidelity to their
King. Their number was first of all six thousand, afterward forty thoufull
sand, and now since twenty thousand. Their abode is in the lower parts of
Volhinia, and of Podolia, which is called Ukrain, that is to say Frontier. This
Country is by much the most fertile, and the best inhabited of all Poland; so
many fortified Buroughs have been there made since the beginning of this Age,
and so full is it of Inhabitants, that in the late Wars there were reckoned at
the same time two hundred thousand Cossaques, besides a hundred and fourscore
thousand Tartars, and as many Polanders in Arms. There be Cossaques who have
their retreats in some Isles of the Boristhenes, which is not Navigable by
reason of the Cataracts or falls, which they call Porowis. Their Custom was
formerly to put to Sea with several light Ships, and to go plunder the Coasts
of the Grand Seignior upon the Black Sea. Since they confederated with the
lesser Tartars, and have likewise courted the Protection of the Muscovite, and
that of the Grand Seignior, who gave them in his name a Prince for the Ukrain,
insomuch that we may say that the Felony of the Cossaques, the Irruption of the
Suedes under Carolus Gustavus, the Tumults and Irresoluon of the Muscovites,
the continual harassings of the lesser Tartars, the Invasion of Ragotski Prince
of Transylvania, the defection of several Provinces, the Insurrections of the
whole Armies of Poland and Lithuania, the different Factions of the Kingdom,
and the Caballs of the Neighboring Nations to have a King Elected, have given
a rude shock to this Crown. And this was what really moved the Grand Seignior
to make war upon this Realm after the taking of Candia.

Poland has ten great parts, four toward the West, upon the Vistula, Poland,
Mazovia, Gujavia, Royal Prussia; six toward the East on the West of the
Boristhenes, Lithuania, Samogitia, Polachia, Lesser Russia, Volhinia, Podolia.
These Provinces have been acquired for the most part either by Arms, or
Allyances. They are divided into Palatinates, the Palatinates into
Chastellenies, the Chastellenies into Capitanies. The Government of the Places
are called Starostyes. Besides these Provinces, there is a part of Muscovy
which has been yielded to Poland in the year 1634. after that King Ladislaus
the 4th, being yet but Prince, had the year foregoing gloriously relieved the
City of Smolensko, and reduced to extremity an Army of an hundred thousand
Muscovites, who were all constrained to ask his pardon as their Prince, to save
their Lives. This Treaty which is called of Viasma, acquired to Poland,
Smolensko, Novogrodeck, Sovierski, Gzernihou, and other places; and by that
same Treaty the King of Poland renounced his pretensions upon Muscovy. The
Truce of 13 years concluded on the 14th of February in the year 1667. left the
Grand Duke of Muscovy in possession of Smolensko, until a certain term, as well
as in part of the Ukrain on the East of the Boristhenes, and procured the
restoration of Dunembourg, Polosk and Vitepski to the Crown of Poland.

Poland, the most populous of all the Provinces, is divided into High and Low;
In the former is Cracow, where the Coronations of the Kings and Queens are
performed, and where is a great number of Germans, Italians and Jews. Of Cracow
was the Popish Bishop, St. Stanislaus, who was killed by order of King
Bogislaus. Upon the Confines of Silesia, stands the City of Czentochow, with
the Cloister of our Lady of Clermount, a place extraordinary strong, which the
Suedes did twice besiege in vain in the year 1655 and 1656. Low Poland, though
much smaller than the Higher, is called Great, because it makes part of the
Kingdom rather than the other. Its City of Gnesne is ancient, the abode of the
first Princes. It was so called upon the account of an Eagles Nest that was
there found when it was built; and which gave occasion to the Arms of Poland
which art Gules, an Eagle-Argent Crowned, beaked and Armed, Or, bound under the
Wings with a Ribbon of the same. The Province of Mazovia alone has full thirty
thousand Gentlemen. Narsan is the Capital thereof, and of all the Kingdom too,
with a Castle, the Kings usual abode, Gujavia has the City of Uladislau, where
the Houses are built of Brick, which is somewhat extraordinary in Poland. It
has also the Lake of Goblo, from whence issued the Rats that eat King Popiel.
Prussia which is of two sorts, Regal and Ducal, has a great number of Cities,
which were built by the Knights of the Teutonique Order. Its Lakes and Sea
Coast furnish abundance of Amber. Nariembourg is strong; Toren the Birthplace
of the Copernicus, drives a great Trade, with a fine Bridge of Wood over the
Vistule. Dantzick one of the four Capital Hanse-Towns, drives all the Trade of
Poland, and has not its like upon all the Baltic Sea; It is free, and has
right of sending to the States of the Kingdom. The King of Poland has there
some Rights. The City of Elbiens disputes with it the Precedence in the States
of Prussia. The generous resolution of its Citizens to maintain the Authority
of their King against the Suedes, without being prevailed with to accept the
Neutrality, was the cause of the preservation of the whole Realm under King
Gasimir.

Lithuania is the greatest Province of those which compose the States of the
Crown of Poland. It has the title of the Great Duchy, wherein there is still
at this day as many Chief Officers, as in the Kingdom of Poland, and of three
General Dyets of the States, one is to be held in Lithuania. This Country is
so full of Marshes and of Boggs, that there is no traveling there but in
Winter, and that by means of the Ice. Vilna its Capital City contains so many
sorts of Religions, that there is not a City in the World where God is praised
in more several manners. There be reckoned three Sabbaths, that of ours, that
of the Turks, which is Friday, that of the Jews which is Saturday. Samogitia is
a Country where the Inhabitants live very poorly. Polachia communicates its
name to the Polanders, who call themselves Polaques, as being descended from
Lechus their first Prince. Lesser Russia has several other names. It is called
Black by reason of its Woods; Red by reason of the Color of its Earth:
Southern by reason of its situation toward the South. Leopold which put a
stop to the progresses of the Turks, is the principal City thereof, Samoski the
strongest. Volhinia has for its Capital Kiou, an ancient City upon the
Boristhenes, where the Cossaques have had often their Retreats. It is now in
the hands of the Muscovite, who makes a scruple of restoring it to the
Polanders. Podolia has Gaminiec, a Fortress which formerly resisted the Armies
of the Turks, of the lesser Tartars, of the Transilvanians, of the Walachians,
and which at length submitted to the Armies of the Grand Seignior in the year
1672.

Ducal Prussia, wherein stands Konigsberg, belongs to the Elector of
Brandenburg, who now possesses its Sovereignty, and independantly on Poland.
This City is so much the greater, in that it contains two others in one and the
same compass of Walls. Pilau and Memel are two Maritime Fortresses, the most
important of this State. There it was the Elector caused Frigates four years ago
to be fitted out, which have very much incommoded the Commerce of the Subjects
of Spain. Gourland is a Duchy whose Duke of the House of Ketler, does Homage
to the Crown of Poland. His Residence is at Mitaw.

Of Muscovy.
THis is the vastest Country of all Europe, styled formerly Sarmatia, now
Muscovy. It is called Great and White Russia, from the name of the ancient
Roxolan People, and upon the account of its great extent, and of the Snow,
which so covers the Ground near two thirds of the year, that to Travel there at
that time, one would have occasion to veil ones Eyes with black Crape, so as
formerly Xenophon made his Soldiers do in the retreat of the ten thousand
Greeks. The Soil of Muscovy is cold, humid, full of Woods and Bogs, which make
it little inhabited.

What makes it believed that it is better populated than it really is, is that
the Country People by express order, go to the avenues of the Cities, through
which the Ambassadors of foreign Princes pass. The cold there does often
hinder the Corn from coming to its perfection. It is there sometimes so
violent, that the Earth is wholly opened by it; the Inhabitants find it no
extraordinary matter to see their Nose, Ears and Feet frozen; they only sow in
them parts in the Month of June; the heats of July and of August do visibly
forward the Harvest. The Muscovites do not willingly afford the entrance of
their Country to other Nations; they care not to know any other Tongues than
their own; they only have their Children taught to write and read, that is
sufficient to be a Doctor. They take for their Surname the proper Name of their
Father; they write upon Roles of Paper cut into Welts and glued together, to
the length of twenty or five and twenty Yards; they reckon the first day of the
Month of September for the first of the Year: they wear long Garments, and put
their Girdle below their Belly. Their Collations are performed with the Bread
of Spices, of Brandy and of Honey. The Peasants have recourse to somewhat an
extraordinary means for the securing themselves from the quartering of
Soldiers; they provoke and set upon them their Bees. The Office of Executioner
is not dishonorable amongst the Muscovites. od, ^ir Armies are offten of a
hundred and two hundred thousand Men. They are divided into five Bodies, as
ours are into three. Boris Foederowits Great Duke of Muscovy, toward the
beginning of this age, saw himself in the Head of an Army of three hundred
thousand Men. Alexis Michaelowits after the defeat of Stepan Radzin, had no
less considerable Army, when the Desiign was to hinder the Progress of the
Turks. The Infantry is there in more esteem than the Cavalry; It sustains well
a Siege, and suffers patiently all imaginable hardship rather than yield; which
it did in our time in the Castle of Vilna, and in the Fortress of Noteburg. As
for besieging of a Town, the Muscovites understand nothing at all of that Art,
which they have made evident before Smolensko in 1633. before Riga in the year
1656. before Azac in the year 1673. Their Forts are commonly of Wood and of
Earth upon the sinuosities of Rivers or else in Lakes. The greatest strength of
the State consists in foreign Troops; and good pay and Pensions are given to
the Officers when they have occasion for them. The Prince has the Title of the
Great Duke, says he is descended from Augustus; styles himself Grand Tzaar or
Gzar, that is to say, Gaesar and Emperor. The Habiliments he is bound to wear,
make him appear like a Prelate. When the Ministers of Foreign Princes are to
treat with his Ambassadors, they have all the pain imaginable to agree upon
his Titles by reason of his extraordinary Pretensions. In the year 1654. for
the making war in Poland, and for supporting the Rebel Gosaques; thener at Duke
took for Pretext, that some Polisheek ^ords had not given him his due Titles,
and that they had caused to be printed in Poland Books to his disadvantage. One
of the two present Zars Predecessors, was so cruel, as to cause an Italian
Ambassadors Hat to be nailed to his Head, for that he had put it on in his
Presence. His Government is Despotick; the Muscovites call themselves Slaves,
and he calls them out of conrempt, by a diminutive Name, little John, little
Peter; his will alone is the Rule of his Subjects, who hold themselves certain
that the will of God and of the Grand Duke, are immutable. The Zarrs Treasures
are said to be great, he shuts up the most he can of Gold and Silver in his
Fortresses of Bioliczero and Vologde, and only makes his Presents and his
Payments in Skins and Fish, or in giving some Hides or Clothes of Gold. They
have in esteem the Corn of Resan and of Volodimere, the Hides of Jaroslau, the
Wax and Honey of Plescou, the Suet of Vologde, The Oil of the Country about the
Wolga, the Flax and Hemp of great Novogorod, the Pitch of Duvine, the Salt of
Astracan, the Sables and other Furrs of Siberia, where the Hunters have the
dexterity to hit the Beast upon its Nose, for the having the Spoils entire. The
Country bordering upon the lesser Tartars is wholly Desert by the incursions of
those People who go thither to make Slaves to sell them in the Crim, from,
whence they are led to Constantinople; as there are very handsome Women amongst
those slaves, they ever meet with Chapmen who take them off their hands. The
Palisado'd Hedges of Wood, and the Ditch that was made a hundred Leagues in
length, have not been capable to stop those Incursions. They have treated the
Russians with so many indignities in the foregoing ages, that besides the
Tribute, the Prince of Muscovy was bound to light off his Horse before the
Ambassador of Tartary, to offer him a Dish of Milck, to lick up what by chance
might fall upon the Horses Crest, to keep standing and bare headed, the Tartar
being seated. The Religion of the Muscovite is little different from that of
the Greeks, all their Images are in Board Pictures; St. Nicholas is the
Protector of their Nation, they have seldom any Festivals but on the day of
the Blessed Virgins Anunciation; they have at Mosco a Patriarch the head of
their Religion, three Archbishops and Metropolitans at Rosthou, at Susdal, and
at Great Novogorode, Bishop of Wologda, Resan, Susdal, Tuvere, Tobelesca,
Astracan, Casan, Plescou, Colomna and almost in all the Provinces of the Great
Duke, where they are chosen out of the Body of the Monks. The Muscovites have
this good property, as they do not constrain any body for Religion: they hate
the Roman Catholics, because of the excesses committed by the Polanders, when
they rendered themselves Masters of Moscow in the year 1611. There be still some
Idolaters toward the North.

Muscovy is divided into two parts Southern and Northern, the former toward
the Wolga, the latter towares the Duvine, which Wolga the greatest River of
Europe, falls into the Caspian Sea, after having run a course of about seven
hundred Leagues. The Duvine which waters the most trading Towns of Muscovy,
empties it self by six or seven Mouths into the Gulf of St. Nicholas, which is
called the White Sea, by reason of the Snow of the Country thereabouts. The Dom
which seperates Europe from Asia has its beginning a hundred Leagues from its
end; its Course is about six hundred Leagues, first toward the East,
afterward toward the West; the conjunction of these three Rivers was formerly
proposed for the communication of the principal Seas of our Continent, that is
to say for the facillitating the Commerce of the Ocean, Mediterranean and
Caspian Seas. But this design did not succeed by reason of the diverse Interests
of the Neighboring Princes. The Rivers of Muscovy have this in particular,
that they have not any Carps. There be few good Towns in all those Parts, they
are not paved, some that are boarded with Wood, nor walled for the most part,
the Lands being tilled and plowed between the streets: the Houses below made of
Wood and Mud; in the Markets their Houses are to be sold, wholly prepared, and
ready to be set up. There often happen Fires by reason of that combustible
matter, which is easily lighted and enflamed by the number of Candles that are
lighted before the Images, and which the Muscovites, who are commonly drunk, do
not take care to extinguish.

Mosco the Capital City, and the Residence of the Great Duke seems rather a
heap of several Boroughs, than a good City. It has had forty thousand Houses,
but has less since, it has been pillaged at diverse times by the lesser Tartars,
by the Polanders, and since the late burning down of most part of its Houses.
Its two Castles were built by Italian Ingeniers after the Model of that of
Milan. Volodimere the Residence of the Prince before that of Moscow, is in the
most fertile part of all Muscovy, accompanied with a Castle. The Rivers of
Moscow and of Occa furnish the Inhabitants of Moscow with the means of making
their Merchandise descend upon the Volga. The lesser Novogorod is the last City
of Europe toward the East. Plescou is well fortifyed, as being a Bulwark
against the Polanders and the Suedes. Great Novogorod was one of the four
Magazines of the Hanse-Towns, and a Town so rich and puissant, that it was
formerly a saying of its Citizens, that nothing could oppose God or great
Novogorod. In the year 1577. the Great Duke took it, and is said to have
carried away from thence three hundred Wagons loaded with Gold and Silver. It
is still at this day a Town of great Commerce. Archangel or St. Michael the
Archangel is the staple of all Muscovy, by reason of its Seaport. The Customs
there mount to above six hundred thousand Crowns a year. This place was both
first discovered and first frequented by the English Ships, but have been
followed by other Nations of Europe. Before, the Commerce of Muscovy was
carried on by passing through the Sound, and resorting to Nerva; the great
Impositions laid upon Merchandise by the Princes through whose Territories they
were to pass, have made Merchants abandon that way. St. Nicholas drives also a
great Trade at the entrance of the Duvin these are the only good. Places of the
Grea Duke upon the Ocean. Colmogorod is noted for the faires that are held
there in Winter. The Duvine there receives great Ships. Oustioug is in the
Center of the Country, where its traffic is pretty considerable by means of
its Situation at the meeting of two Rivers. The Interest of the Great Duke of
Muscovy would be to have a place upon the Baltic Sea, for the Cannons, Muskets
and other ammunition of War which he has brought him from Hamburgh and Lubeck,
are conveyed by the North of Norway with extraordinary pain and trouble.
Besides, the White Sea has Banks and Rocks at its entrance; the Snow thawed and
melted, and the Torrents which augment it in the Spring, carry its Waters with
such impetuosity, that the Ships can hardly enter therein: true it is that
abundance of Salmon are taken there. Kola and Pitzora in Lapland receive
Merchants Ships.

As concerning the Conquest of the Great Duke in Asiatick Tartary, there is
principally Astracan and Casan with Titles of Kingdoms, and the Hurdes of
Zavolha and Nagaia: Astracan toward the Mouth of the Wolga drives a great
traffic upon the Caspian Sea. In this Country is the Plant Zoophite which
resembles a Lamb; it eats the Herbs round about its Root, and if it be cut it
casts forth a red Liquor like to blood; the Wolves devour it with as much
greediness and avidity as if it were a Sheep. Locomoria toward the Obi, has
Inhabitants which be said to be frozen up six months of the year, because that
during a that time they dwell in Tents environed and covered with Snow, and do
not stir out from thence until it be thawed and melted away. The Samoiedes are
seldom above four foot tall: they are said to have a very broad Face, little
Eyes, the head on one side is much greater than the proportion of the Body does
require it, short Legs, extraordinary great Feet, because they seem so in the
Skins of Animals they cloth themselves with, and the stuff whereof they make
their shoes; they wear those Skins in such manner, that in Winter they turn the
hairy side inwards, and wear it outward in Summer: to sow them they have the
bones of Fish, and the Nerves of Animals instead of Needles and thread; they
have the best Archers in the World. The Tingoeses express their thoughts better
with their Throats than with their Tongues. Those People inhabit Siberia a
Province which furnishes the finest and richest Furrs; the Malefactors of
Moscovy are transported thither, and such Noble Men as are out of Favor with
the Prince. The River Pesida is the bound of it toward the East; they have not
yet ventured to go beyond it, though they have seen there several Horses and
other things, which make some believe that it is a Country as considerable as
Cathai, which cannot be very far distance from it.

Of the Empire of the Turks.
ALl the Territories of the Emperor of the Turks, otherwise called the
Grand-Seignior, are generally known under the Name of Turkey. This Name is made
to come from that of Turchestan one of the Regions of great Tartary, from
whence they went out Shepherds, who settled themselves first of all in Natolia,
and afterward divided themselves into several Cantons under diverse Chiefs.
Ottoman one of those Chiefs governed so prudently, and was accompanied with
such success, that after the death of Aladin one of the Princes of the Country,
he remained Master of Bithinia, of Cappadocia, and gave beginning to that great
Empire about the year 1300. His Successors have been to the number of twenty
two, their Residence was first of all at Burse in Natolia, at Adrianople, and
at last at Constantinople in Romania. They have caused to be built in those
Cities their stately Palaces, which they call Serraglios. Most of the Turkish
Emperors hitherto have seldom stirred out from thence but to the Army, or on
Progress; they commonly spend their days with Children, Women, Eunuchs, Mutes
and Dwarfs: their finest Sultanesses are Captives, or those who proceed from
the most Beautiful Persons which are kept at Constantinople as breeding Horses,
after that the lesser Tartars, who are the Turks Hunters have brought them
thither. These Emperors make a Conscience of spending what they exact from the
People otherwise than in War; they have a particular Treasury wherein they keep
this Revenue; for the subsistence of their Family several of them choose a
Trade, which they actually work in.

In less than three hundred years the Turks have made Conquests in Europe, Asia
and Africa, as considerable as those of the Romans, which took them up about
eight hundred years; they keep so well what they acquire, that it is hardly
possible to dislodge them from thence. True it is their Provinces are not
Populous like those of Christendom; War and Pestilence sweeping away a great
number of their Men; their Lands do not afford such great Productions as
formerly, the Turks being extraordinary lazy, and too presumptuous to cultivate
it; their Custom is to ruin the Citys, and to keep only the most important
Places of that Frontier: from whence it comes, that most of the Cities of
Turkey are without Walls, and much smaller than their Suburbs The Turks have it
for a Proverb, that their grows no more grass where there Horses have once fet
footing. The Countries of their Empire have their Quality very different, by
reason of their diverse Scituations; those of Europe are the best and most
Beautiful, though one may take whole days Journeys there without meeting with
either Buroughs or Villages; those of Asia are still more desert. What is in
Africa is only inhabited toward the Coast, and near the great Cities. The
Grand Seignior is so called by reason of the absolute Power he has generally in
all his Dominions, and over all His Subjects, and not upon the account of the
extent of his Empire, for there be Sovereigns which possess much more Land than
he does; their Lands pass from the Father to the Children, these only enjoy
them as usufructuaries and not as Proprietors. There be some Provinces, as
Turcomania and Curdistan, where the Inhabitants have them in propriety. There
be no other Gentlemen in Turkey than the Princes Officers, who are obeyed by
the rest of the People. His Higness takes upon him very extraordinary Titles:
Soliman the 2d. said, that one of his smallest Territories was the Empire of
Alexander the Great.

The Religion of the Turks is that of Mahomet, a Native of Mecca. There goes
every year to that Town a great Number of Mahometans in Caravans, each of
thirty or forty thousand Persons. The Places of their Assemblies are Damascus,
for those of Turkey in Asia, Cairo for those of Egypt and of Constantinople,
Zibith, or Aden, or Mocca, for the Indians; Bagdad for the Persians. A fifth
Caravan there is, which is that of Barbaresques and the Western of Fez and
Morocco. Amongst other things which Mahomet settled by his Law, he prohibited
those of his Sect Wine and gaming, for to take away all occasion of Duels and
of quarrel which might have arose amongst them. Nevertheless, though during the
encampments there be abstinence from Wine, yet amongst ten Turks there is
seldom found one but who is a Drunkard. He would not that any Mahometans shoud
be Slaves, for he who first received his Instructions was one of his Slaves
called Zeidin, whom he made a Freeman for that reason. He ordered that Prayers
should be said five times in the day, and that for a Month should be kept a
Lent called Ramedan; fasting is there observed all the day long by some Turks
with so much scruple, that going along the streets they wear a Crape before
their Faces, for fear that in breathing they should swallow a Fly or a drop of
Rain, Water or Dust. They shut their Teeth on the same score, and dare not so
much as swallow their Spittle; they take each day for diverse intentions, Friday
for the Musulmans who are those of their Law, Saturday for the conversion of
the Jews, Sunday for that of the Christians, Monday for the Prophets, Tuesday
for the Priests and Cheiques, Wednesday for the Dead, for the sick, and for the
Slaves, Thursday for all the World. There be Jews in Turkey and several other
Sect a great number of Catholics, of the Religious of several of the Roman
Orders, who have there their establishment.

The common liquor of the Turks is Sorbet, which is very delicious to drink;
their Coffee warms and fortifies the Stomach: When they make their greatest
Regale, they give Coffee, Sorbet and Perfumes. It is the custom of presenting
the Person they go to see, this custom is practiced almost through all the
Levant: their Zizi or Purses are each worth eight hundred Piasters, The Grand
Seignior takes a Pride in clothing those who come near his Person, to whom
they are led by holding them under the Arms, since the assassination of Amurath
the 1. The Arabic and Persian Tongues are there in esteem, though the Turks
hold it for an Honor to understand no other than their own.

All Turkey contains thirty Beglierbyats, which are as many general
Governments, on which depend several Sangiacats, or particular Governments,
with several Castles. Natolea at Chioutaie, Caramania at Cogni, Diarbekir,
Damaseus, Sivas at Amasie, Erzerum, Van, Tehilder, Scheherezul, Aleppo, Maras,
Cyprus, Tripoli of Souria, Trebizonde, Kars, Mosul or Ninevah, Rika: all this
in Asia. In Europe there is Rumeli at Sophia, that of the Sea at Gallipoli,
Budah, Temesvar, Bosna, Caffa, Candia. Each Beglerbyat has its Revenue affected
upon its Government. Those of Kairo, of Bagdat, of Lazac, of Yaman, or of Aden,
of Abex, of Bassora have theirs out of the Grand Seigniors fund; those three
last Governments have been taken from the Turks. Most of the Governors are
called Bashaws, that is to say, Chiefs. They have Rank according to the
ancientness of the Conquests, and of the places whereof they are Governors. A
Beglierbey has three Tougs, a Toug is a Horses Tail at the end of a half Pike
that is carried before Him. A Bashaw has two, and a Sangiac has but one.
Besides the Prime Vizier who is all mighty, there be five Visiers or
Chancellours of State, those of Natolia, of Bagdad, of Cairo, of Rumeli, and of
Buda. The Grand Seignior gives no considerable Government to his eldest Son,
for fear it should prove of ill consequence as it has done to some of his
Predecessors. The coming of him to the Empire, is often the Sentence of Death
to the other Brothers, who are in the mean time kept like poor Victims in the
Seraglio. It has been observed in this Family of the Ottomans, that the
youngest Brothers have often attained to the Empire, to the exclusion of their
Eldest; when the Grand Seignior means to humble any of his Bashaws, he makes
him marry one of his Sisters, or some other of his Relations. The Court of the
Prince is called the Port, because all must dance attendance at the door; the
Rank of the left hand which is the side of the Sword, is in Turkey the most
honorable, whether in Council or in the march of Armies: Such Turks as are
learned say that they imitate Grand Cyrus herein. I say the Learned Turks, for
some of them are so little versed in Histories and Chronology, that they say
Job was the Judge of the Court of King Solomon, that Alexander the Great was
General of the Armies of the same King. The People of the Law esteem the Right
Side, which is willingly granted them by the Soldiers.

The Forces of the Turks are great, but his Neighbors are puissant, and in
possession of doing him a great deal of mischief. The House of Austria, the
King of Poland, the Great Duke of Muscovy, the Republic of Venice, are the
most considerable of them in Europe: The King of Persia in Asia. As the
Interests of these Princes are diverse, and that they have not any great
Correspondence with one another, it comes to pass that the Grand Seignior
enlarges the bounds of his Empire to their cost. As concerning Forces by Sea,
the Turks have none that are considerable, and they have a saying. that if the
Sea be for the Christians, the Land is for them. The Turkish Armies are well
disciplined; the belief of Predestination, besides the use of Opium, renders
them capable of all manner of attempts. Their principal Forces consist in the
Janissaries, who compose the Infantry; the Horsemen are known under the Name of
Spahis. These Spahis have Lands called Timars, and furnish as many men as their
Revenue has six and twenty Livers a year. To avoid the hurry and trouble of
Movables; they eat on the ground on a Leathern Carpet: a piece of Tapistry
which they carry upon the Crupper of their Horse, serves them for quilt or
mattress, for Bolster or for Cloak. They laugh at the Franks who are used to
walk alone in Rooms, and go very fast in the Street. On the contrary to this,
they repose in their Houses on Velvet Cusheons, and when they walk, they still
keep up their gravity. The Officers and the Guards being in the Court of the
Divan, which is the Council, are such observers of Silence, that not so much as
one word is to be heard, though there be often above eight thousand together.
When the Soldiers are punished for any Crimes, they give 'em several blows
with a Cudgel; to the Janissaries upon their Buttocks, to the Spahies under the
Sole of the Foot. The Principal Maxims of the Turks are to give Offices to
Persons of Merit, not to consider their Birth; to ruin most of the Cities for
the sparing the charge of a Garrison; and to keep only as long as they please
Treaties made in other Tongues than their own; not to restore the good places
they have once taken, no longer to make their Armies so numerous that they may
the better subsist, not to allow of Gentlemen, nor suffer Mohammedan to remain
Slaves; to make use of the Tartars in their greatest expeditions for the better
harassing and laying wast their Enemies Countries, to render the Insularies
responsible for the Turks, they give them for Governors: to give Military
Offices to Children, who are born Christians, and those of the Law to natural
Turks.

Of Turkey in Europe.
THis Turkey consists in three sorts of Countries, those which the
Grand-Seignior shares in with Christian Princes, Hungary, Sclavonia, Croatia,
Dalmatia: those which his Highness possesses entirely on the South of the
Danube, Bosnia, Servia, Bulgaria, Romania: those which were formerly known
under the name of Greece.

Hungary is a considerable Kingdom, and likely to be the Stage of the greatest
War that has been for some Ages, and has a peculiar discourse in the following
Leaves Sclavonia properly taken is between the Drove and the Save; sometimes
most of those Countries are attributed to it which are on the South of the
Danube. The Sclavonians have such a passion to be thought Warriors, that they
beg of God in their Prayers to dye armed in War, and that their Enemies may dye
in their Beds. Croatia is the Country of the Croats, where there be Horses of
a mean size, but very fleet. Dabnatia is along the Gulf of Venice, where the
Turk possesses little besides some part of the Inlands of the Country: He
possesses only Narenca upon the Coast, which place formerly pretended to the
Dominion of the Neighboring Sea. Zara the best place of the Venetians in those
parts, is upon a Rock which buts out into the Sea, and is only joined to the
Terra Firma by the space of six and twenty paces. Spalato is there the Town of
greatest Traffic since the late Peace. Fiume belonging to the House of
Austria, has in its Neighborhood the place called Tersacs, where the Papists
say the Chapel of the Virgin was three years and some Months, before it was
transported to Loretto in Italy.

Bosnia has had the Title of a Kingdom. Servia has the City of Belgrade very
considerable, and as advantagiously situated as any City of Turkey, near the
place where the Danube receives the Teyss and the Save. Bulgaria, whose ancient
Inhabitants were formidable to some Roman Emperors, has Sophia for the
Capital, a great passage from Hungary to Constantinople. This Province extends
as far as the Black Sea, where the Ruins are to be seen of the wall which the
Emperor of Constantinople caused to be set up from Silistria upon the Danube
as far as Tomi, noted in antiquity for the Banishment of Ovid. There dwell the
Dobruck Tartars, which the Turks make use of in their greatest expeditions,
because this Militia is no great charge to the Grand Seigniours; who by the
ancient conventions, only pay these Tartars at the end of the Campaign, a
certain quantity of Clothes and a Sultanin a Head; besides the Booty they may
have taken in their Enemies Country: There is to be seen upon the Coast, the
City of Varne, renowned for the Victory of Amurath the 2d. over the Hungarians:
that of Nigeboli upon the Danube, where the Christians were also defeated by
the Infidels under Bajazet the 1. in the year 1396.

Romania has for principal Cities Constantinople, Adrianople, Gallipoli. It was
formerly Thrace; Constantine the great called it Romania, not to abolish
entirely the Name of Rome, after having given his own to the City of Bizance.

Constantinople is the Head of the Turkish Empire, so as it was of the Eastern
Empire, when it served for abode to the Roman and Greek Emperors. Its
Situation is the most curious imaginable, having the convenience of one of the
finest and best Harbors of Europe, which may receive a thousand or twelve
hundred great Ships; it is full thirteen Miles in compass. The Houses are low,
whether that they are built after that manner to avoid the incoveniency of the
Winds, or that the Turks think not fitting to raise them high as they do those
of God and of their Princes, or that they have no design to build for others,
since most commonly their Children do not succeed them in their Estates, which
the Grand Seignior gives to whom he thinks fitting. The Church of Saint Sophia
is the most stately Building of all that City, and has served for a Model to
most of the Turskish Moskees. Constantinople is very subject to Fires, by
reason that most of its Houses are built of Wood. In the year 452. besides a
great number of Houses; six and twenty thousand Volumes were burtn with the Gut
of a Serpent, six and twenty foot in length, wherein the Iliads and Odysses of
Homer were written in Letters of Gold. The Preservation of this City depends on
that of Gallipoli, of the Castles of the Dardanelles, and of the Towers of the
Black Sea; at the entrance of the Bosphorus, where formerly a chain was made
use of to bar entrance to Enemies Ships: The Channel of Constantinople is so
narrow, that in some parts of the Town the Cocks may be heard, who crow on the
nearest Shore of Asia. This Channel has to Currents at the same time; that
which is nearest Europe carries away the Ships toward the Black Sea, and that
which is on the side of Asia carries them toward the Mediterranean Sea. The
seven Towers make a Fortress, where Prisoners of State be confined. Galatia a
small City beyond the Port wherein are the Franks. Above Galatia is the
Borough of Pera, the Residence of some Christian Ambassadors. Formerly a Wall
was raised two days Journey in length, from the Black Sea as far as Selivrea,
to hinder the Incursions of the Scythians and of the Bulgarians. Osman had a
design of transferring his Seat from Constantinople to Grand Cairo: Constantine
left Rome for Bisance: Julius Caesar had also the Thoughts of making his abode
at Troy, or in Alexandria. Adrianople is now one of the Principal Abodes of the
Grand Seignior. Chiorlick a small Town where Bajazet the 2d. vanquished his Son
Selim, the same who boasted that he wore not a great Beard as his Father did,
for fear the Janissaries should catch hold of it, and lead him where they
pleased. Asperosa seems to be the ancient Abdera, whose Inhabitants were looked
upon as the most stupid in the World; near this place stood the Stable of cruel
Diomedes, who gave his Guests to his Horses instead of Oats.

Greece was formerly the most famous Country of Europe; its inhabitants had
for a long time the advantage of excellence of Wit, and Grandeur of Courage,
over other Nations; they have added to, and brought to perfection most of the
Arts and Sciences; they build their Cities at some distance from the Shore, for
fear of being exposed to the plunder of Pirates, who were very rife at that
time; and that the the Civility of the Citizens might not be corrupted by
conversing with Terpawlins. They sent several Collonies into Italy, into Asia
Minor, and left their Names in most of the Regions which be upon the
Mediterranean Sea. Athens, Sparta, Argos, Gorinth, Thebes, Megalopoli were the
most powerful Cities of Greece. In some of these Towns the Sovereign Power was
in the hands of the People, in others it was given to the most conspicuous. The
principal People of Greece, who affected the Dominion of it, and who sometimes
interessed others in their party, were the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, the
Thebans, the Etolians, the Acheans, the Boeotians, the Phoceans, Megara,
Corinth, Sicion, Argos, Micoene, Elide, Arcadia, Messenia have also formed
considerable States. Macedonia, Thessalia, Cyprus have had the Titles of
Kingdoms. Most of the other States were Realms, then Commonwealths, and
afterward obeyed the Macedonians in part, the Romans some patticular Lords,
and finally the Turks.

The Greeks are now almost all the Greek Church; their Country is much changed
since in the hands of the Turks; almost all the Towns being ruined and without
defense. If there be some considerable for their Strength, they are kept for
the maintenance of Commerce, and for resisting the Christian Galleys. There be
six Provinces in Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Epirus, Thessalia, Achaia,
Peloponesus; these two last having particularly been called Greece. All these
Names, except that of Albania are ancient, and more known to us, than those
which be given them by the Turks. Macedonia which Alexander the Great made one
of the greatest Monarchies in the World, was a Kingdom which ended in Perseus;
after whom the Romans swayed there, as did also some petty Kings unto Amurath
the 2d. Emperor of the Turks. Pella was the Birthplace of that ancient
Conqueror. Edissa the abode of King Philip his Father, who was there
assassinated. Philippi is famous for the defeat of Cassius and Brutus.
Monte-Santo otherwise Athos, for the great number of its Caloyers, religious
Greeks, who chose it for the Place of their abiding, by reason of the goodness
of the Air. Its shadow reaches to the Isle of Lemnos, which is seen from Mount
Ida in Asia. Xerxes had the satisfaction to make it his Island. Stesicrates a
Sculpturean, proposed to Alexander the Great to make of it a very extraordianry
Statue; with one hand it should have poured a great River into the Sea, with
the other it should have held a considerable City. Thessalonica or Saloniki,
has had Kings of its own. Albania is renowned for its good Cavalry; where
Valone is accompanied with good harbor, from whence the passage is easy into
Italy. Pyrrhus King of Epirus had a thought of making a Bridge of Boats from
that Coast to Otranto in Italy. During the War against the Pirates, Terentius
Varro Pompeys Lieutenant, had the same design. Durazzo is noted for the
encampments of Gaesar and of Pompey; Groye for being the brave Scanderbegs
Native Place, that Flail of the Ottoman Empire, whose Armies he defeated in two
and twenty set Battails. Scutari was a long while besieged by the Forces of
Mahomet the 2d. who shot therein so many Arrows, that they furnished the
Garrison with Wood sufficient to warm themselves with all the Winter. Epirus
has had the Title of a Kingdom, Prevesa was the best Town; it was formerly
Nicopolis built by order of Augustus in memory of the Naval Victory which he
gained over Marc-Antony and Cleopatra near Actium. Larta is the ancient
Ambracia which served for Residence to King Pyrrhus. Near that place dwells the
Acarnanes, the best Slingers of Greece, the only People which did not assist
the Greeks in their Trojan War. The Epirots were the first People of Greece,
who made War upon the Romans, and who made use of Elephants against them,
unknown before to Italy. Thessalia has had several Tyrants, amongst others
Jason of Pheres. There be the Cities of Larisse, the Native place of Achilles,
where Mahomet the 4th. for some time made his Abode, during the last War of
Candia; Armira, Volo, with their Sea Ports. Tricca the Episcopal Title of
Heliodorus, who chose rather to lose his Bishoprirk thandisown his Romance of
Theagenes and Chariclea. Achaia has two Cities, Setines and Stives, the former
was the most flourishing Republic of the World, the Abridgment of all Greece;
the other, as we have said, has dared to aspire to the general Dominion of the
Country. Sparta is famous for the signal Victory of the Christians over the
Turks in the year 1671. In that engagement a hundred and eighty nine Turkish
Galleys were lost, five and twenty thousand Turks killed, four thousand made
Prisoners, twelve thousand Christians freed. This City is in the Country of
the ancient Aetolians, who despised the orders of Alexander the Great, during
his greatest Conquests. Negrepont formerly Euboae, is only separated from
Achaia by a Strait called otherwise Euripe. This Euripe has given a good deal
of Exercise to Philosophers, who have sought out the cause of its ebbing and
flowing; those who seem to have examined it best, say that it is regular
toward the days of the New and Full Moon, that is to say, in twenty four or
twenty five hours it has twice its ebbing and flowing as the Ocean, and that it
is irregular toward the days of the first and last quarter of the Moon, that
is to say, that in twenty four or in twenty five hours, it has 11, 12, 13 or 14
times Flood, and as often an Ebb. The Peloponesus, the most renowned Peninsula
in the World, is joined to the rest of Greece, by a Neck of Land of about six
thousand paces in breadth, which several Kings and Emperors have in vain
endeavored to dig through. It was a saying fodere Isthmum, when they meant to
express nenterprize which had no probability of being effected. The Christians
who called it Morea, upon the account of its Mulberries, have made there
retrenchments in diverse times against the Turks, who won them under Amurath the
2d. and under Mahomet the 2d. The midst of that Peninsula was formerly
inhabited by the Arcadians, who had in their Country the finest Asses in the
World; and who neglected to learn Astrology, when the other Greeks received it,
because they esteemed themselves more ancient than the Moon. Patras, where St.
Andrew was put upon the Cross, is one of its best Towns. Modon the abode of the
Sangiacbey or Governor of the Province. Maina gives its Name to a Petty
Country, which has no longer the Liberty it a long time maintained against the
Turks, by favor of the Sea, and the sharpness and steepness of the Mountains.
Napoli of Romania and Malvasia are peopled on the score of their Seaports,
where a great Trade is droven. Corinth now ruined, was formerly named the Rich;
the convenience of its Situation made it be called the Market of Greece: Its
Inhabitants invented the Greek Galleys; after that it was burnt by the Romans,
there came a mixture of its melted Metals, which has retained the Name of
Corinthian Brass. Philip King of Macedon esteemed three places in Greece for
strength, the Castle of Corinth, Demetrias and Calcis. The Castle of Corinth,
named the Acrocorinth, and Ithoma near Messena, by reason of their Scituations,
were called the two Horns of the Peloponesus. Mesitra is the ancient Sparta,
otherwise called Lacedemon, whose power was particularly upon Land, whereas
that of Athens was upon the Sea. Its most Noble Citizens were called
Spartiates; the others, Lacedaemonians, perhaps with the same difference that is
put between the Castillans and the Spaniards. The Government of this State
consisted in few persons, they observed there a style in speaking and writing,
which expressed much in few Words. Olympies was noted for the Temple, and
Oracle and Statue of Jupiter the Olympian, one of the seven Wonders of the
World; for the Olympyads, which were reckoned from four to four years after the
celebration of the Olimpick Games. The Ceremonies where of were kept until the
Country was subdued by the Romans. Sicion had its Kings almost as soon as the
Assyrians. The Ancients did affirm that the River Alpheus which passes in the
Peloponesus, went under the Sea to the Fountain Arethusa in Sicily.

Besides the Dominions of the Grand Seignior, which we have mentioned in
Africa, in Asia and Europe, His Highness possesses Suaquem upon the Red Sea,
Teflis in Georgia, Asoph at the Mouth of the Dom. Themon and Temroch near the
Palus Maeotides on the side of Asia, Arabia Petrea part of desert Arabia. The
Kingdoms of Zibit and Ziden in Arabiafoelix, with the Towns of Dolfar and
El-catif: In Europe Bessarabia, Ocziacou, Dassain toward the Mouths of the
Nieper; Gaffa and other places in lesser Tartary. The Isle of Gandia, Waradin
in Transylvania: The Scituations of these Countries and places, is to be seen
in the Map, to know the importance of them. Transylvania, Valachia, Moldavia,
lesser Tartary, the Republic of Ragusa, the Corsairs of Barbary and others
hold of the Turks.

Of Hungary.
Hungary seems to have been so called from the Huns, a People noted for the
Devastations they have made in several Regions of Europe, principally under
Attila one of their Kings. Most of the Towns of this Country have Names that
have very little affinity one with another, because the Nations who gave them
at their settling themselves there, had very different Tongues. Hungary is
commonly divided into High and Low, the last toward the South is almost wholly
in possession of the Turks, the former toward the North for the most part in
the hands of the House of Austria, unless it be such places as have been lately
seized or revolted with Count Teckley. Two parts of it have been sometimes
made, separated from one another by the Danube, the one to the West, known
under the Name of Pannonia, the other to the East making part of ancient Dacia.
There be several Countries, the enumeration whereof is not here very material.
The House of Austria has there four General Ships, the Turks four Bachalics or
great Governments. When the Realm of Hungary was in its Splendor, it extended
to the very Adriatic Sea, as far as Greece, and comprehended Transylvania,
Walachia and Moldavia; from whence it came that the Emperor, as King of
Hungary pretends that the Princes of those three States be allowed of by him.
The Grand Seignior has maintained his pretension better in that point. The Soil
of Hungary is fertile, the Plains are beautiful and afford plenty of Corn, the
Hills Wine, which is transported into Poland, and other places, where it is
accounted excellent; that of Tokay is in most esteem. It also affords Salt, and
other Conveniences of Life. Several Great Rivers contribute to this abundance,
the Danube, Drove, Save which have their Sources in Germany, the Teyss which is
entirely Hungarian. The Danube leads its Waters from the West to the East
through the midst of the Country, with less swiftnes toward Noon, than
toward the Evening and the Morning: after a course of above six hundred
Leagues, it falls into the Black Sea by several Mouths. The Teyss can carry
Boats four Leagues from its Source. It abounds so in Fish, that they are said
to make the third part of its Bed; for which reason it often casts abundance of
them upon the Neighboring Plains; and that in the public Markets of the
Towns, those who retire into the Country have order to take them away.
Formerly the Hungarians put the Figure of the above mentioned Rivers in their
Ensigns or Colors, and since they have carried the Cross therein, having
embraced Christianity under their Prince Esthienne, who for that consideration
obtained of Pope Silvester the 2d. the Title of King, and was crowned in the
year 1001. The highest Mountains of Hungary are toward Poland and
Transylvania; the Richest between Buda and Strigonia.

The Hungarians are Warlike, neither their Garments nor their Manners be very
different from those of the Turks. Their Tongues is almost wholly peculiar to
themselves, and nevertheless the Latin, Sclavonian, German and Turkish, are in
use among them. The Emperor Ferdinand the 2d. allowed the liberty of Religion
in this Realm in the year 1622. The Revocation of that Toleration has
occasioned perpetual Revolts, and is the source of that great War it is now the
Scene of. This Realm has two Archbishopricks, Strigonia or Gran, and ^olo^^a
with ten Bishoprics, the half of which is in the Infidels hands. Four orders
of Persons have Sessions in the States, the Prelates, the Barons, the Nobles
and the Burgesses of Free and Royal Cities. The Dignity of Palatine is there
the most considerable after that of King, who if he acts in any wise against
their Privileges, may be opposed by force, if the Palatine consent thereto.
The Hungarians will not suffer to have any Palatines but of their own Nation.
The Archbishop of Strigonia is Prince and perpetual Chancellor of the Kingdom;
he Crowns the King after his election. These two Officers have almost all the
Authority. Hungary has had eight Kings of the House of Austria, from Ferdinand
the ^. Brother of the Emperor Charles the 5th. unto Leopold-Ignace. Though the
Hungarian Nobility do not love the Germans, yet they have not opposed this
Election, for the sheltering themselves against the oppression of the Turks,
who respect a Peasant as much as they do a Gentleman. The greatest strength of
the Country consists in light Horse; the Troopers be called Hussars, the Foot
Soldiers Heidukes. Besides extraordinaries, the Emperor draws from what he
possesses in Hungary about a million of Livers every year. He raises this Money
from the Mines, by an imposition on each Horse, and by the exportation of
Cattle. The Grand Seignior has there his Caraz, which is four Livers a Head of
those under his Sway: This is so small a matter for either of those Princes,
that for the preservation of what they hold there, they are obliged to employ
their other Revenues. The Turk pretends to all Hungary, and the States which
depend thereon by virtue of a Cession, which was made thereof to Soliman the
2d. by John Sigismond, Son of King John Count de Cepuse, and by the Queen his
Mother. In Upper Hungary there be several Free Towns, which form thirteen
Communities. The King of Poland holds half of Cepuse, with a dozen of Cities.
Most of the Frontiers are untilled and overgrown with Shrubs and Weeds. Tho
there be a Truce between the Austrians and the Ottomans, yet they fail not of
making incursions upon one another. In the year 1642. the Truce was made
between the two Empires for twenty-years. In the year 1664. after two years War
it was renewed, the Turk remaining Master of the Fortress of Waradin and
Newheusel; this last in the very middle of all Europe.

The most considerable Cities of Hungary are Presbourg, Cassovia, Esperies,
Buda, Agria, Temesvar, Kanise. Presbourg is the Capital of all the House of
Austria possesses in this Realm. Since the loss of Albe Royale, it has been the
place of Election and Coronation of their Kings. Cassovia is toward the
Mountains, with the finest Arcenal of the Country. Esperies has Fairs which
render it very populous.

The strongest places of the House of Austria are Javarin and Komorra, the
Bulwarks of Christendom. Javarin is in a vast Plain, environed with the Danube
and the Raab, which sometimes gives it its Name; defended with several Bastions
faced with Brick, with Ravelins between both: Having formerly been taken by the
Turks, it was petarded and retaken with as much happiness as boldness by a
French Gentleman called Vaubecour. Komorra has the Danube for its Moat or
Ditch, and cannot be besieged but by three Bodies of Armies. The Isle of the
same Name, otherwise called of Schut, where the Turks were routed by the
Imperialists, in a late Action, to the loss of many of their Men; has above
three hundred Villages or Boroughs, above fifteen thousand Inhabitants, with
the convenience of hunting and fishing, Leopolstad, Fillek, Tokay, Zatmar and
Kalo have likewise been fortified by order from the Emperor.

Buda is divided into High and Low Town, the Germans call it Offen, that is to
say, Court, because it was the abode of the Kings, and the Capital of all the
Kingdom; it has the most honorable Beglerbyat of all Turkey, though it be not
the most gainful; its Bashaw has more Authority than others: Its usual Garrison
is of eight or ten thousand Men. Agria, Temesvar, Kanisa, have in like manner
Bashaws, as being upon the Frontier. The Turks call Temesvar the invincible.
The Emperor Ferdinand the 2d. besieged Kanise, being then but Archduke, and
could not take it. Leopold-Ignace was not more happy in the year 1664. The
Retreat from Kanise by the Duke of Mercoeur, is one of the the finest Actions
of our Age. People also esteem that from Mayence by the Cardinal de la Valette,
that from Torgow by the Suedish General Banier, that from Dundee by the
Marquess of Montross. Five Churches is the place where Solomon the Great dyed,
during the Siege he laid to Zygeth in the year 1566. Mogacz is noted for the
defeat of the Christians in the year 1526. The Bridge of Esseck for the exploit
of Count Peter de Serin, who burnt it in sight of the Turks Armies.

Of Transylvania, Walaciha and Moldavia.
Transylvania is so called because it is seated beyond the Woods which separate
it from Hungary. It is sometimes called Sevenburgen, because of the Cities
which the Saxons built therein, to the number of seven; Hermanstat, Cronstat,
Nosenstat, Medwish, Scespurg, Clausembourg, Weissembourg. The People of this
State are of three sorts, Cicules or Zeckels, Saxons, Hungarians, who give each
different Names to each City of the Country. The Zeckels are come from
Tartary, or rather are the remains of the Huns, who laid aside their Name, that
they might not be odious to their Neighbors. They have settled themselves
principally in seven places, at Sepsi, at Orbay, at Kisdi, at Czick, at Girgio,
at Marcos, at Aranias; their Capital City is Newmark. The Saxons are
Originaries of Germany; the Hungarians style themselves the Nobles of the
Country. Hermanstad, the residence of the Prince, is a strong Town. Waradin was
fortifyed by the Turks, who usurped it in the year 1660. One of the Principal
Revenues of Transylvania consists in Salt, which is principally got at Torda;
it is sent into Hungary by the River of Marish. There be Mines of Gold and
Silver, and sometimes Pieces of pure Gold are found in the Rivers, which weigh
above half a pound. So as the Hungarians being Masters of Transylvania, called
it their Treasure. There be several sorts of Religion: the Catholics,
Lutherans, Calvinists, have had there the free exercise of theirs, toward the
beginning of this Age. The Families of Bathori and of Ragotski have bestowed
several Princes upon this Country, which was made a Sovereignty in the year
1512. for John Zapolia, upon condition of holding of Hungary. The last
Ragotski, who was killed in Battle against the Turks in the year 1659. was the
fourteenth Prince thereof, he styled himself, By the Grace of God Prince of the
Kingdom of Transylvania, Lord of a part of Hungary, and Count of the Siculi. He
paid the Grand Seignior annually a Tribute of fifty thousand Livers; the
Ministers of the Port have made it mount to a hundred thousand Rixdollers. The
Emperor, as King of Hungary pretends to have right to the installation of the
Prince of Transylvania; the Emperor Rodolphus II. having established there
Botskai, upon condition of Return upon the Males failing.

Walachia, which offers it self on the North East of Transylvania, along and on
the North of the Danube, was called petty and Transalpina, for the
distinguishing it from Moldavia. It is watered with a great number of Rivers;
some of its Mountains have great Mines of Gold; its Horses are by many
accounted the best in Europe. Its Prince called Hospodar, sometimes Vaivode,
that is to say, Head of the Troops, resides at Tergowis, and pays the Grand
Seignior a hundred and twenty thousand Livers of annual Tribute.

Moldavia has been sometimes known under the Name of Great Walachia, and of
Walachia Cis-Alpina. It is rich in Wax and in Honey, out of which it raises
every year about 2 hundred thousand Crowns, only for the tenths of the Prince.
There are several Heaps of Stones which are said to have been set up by order
of Darius King of Persia, who made war upon the Scithians. Its capital Cities
are Yasi and Sockou. Choczin near the Niester, is the place where a Polish Army
was defeated under King Sigismond-Augustus; and where King John Sobieski a
little before his election, gained over the Turks a Victory, the most memorable
of our age. The Eastern part, called Bessarabia, butts upon the Black Sea, and
belongs to the Grand Seignior, who is Master of the Mouths of the Danube and of
the Niester, and who takes all possible means to subdue those of the Nieper,
and subject entirely the rich Province of the Ukrain. The Champaign of Budziac
is twelve Leagues in length, ten in breadth, is possessed by the Dobruck
Tartars, who are the greatest Robbers of all those parts. They are said to
amount to above 15000. They inhabit the Country round about Bialigrod. About
the year 1500. a Governor of Moldavia, called Estienne, rendered himself the
Sovereign thereof, and at several times vanquished the Turks, the Lesser
Tartars, and the Polanders. His Successors have played there as it were, at
Bo-peep, and several of them have been massacred by their Subjects, upon the
account of their Cruelties. Of a score of its Princes, which be there called
Waivodes, not two of them succeeded their Fathers. They did for sometime hold
of Poland, now of the Turk at disposal. The ordinary Tribute was a hundred and
fourscore thousand Livers. The Port augments from time to time the Tribute of
the Moldavians, as well as that of the Walachians, for the rendering them poor
and obedient; if it protects in appearance their Princes, who are commonly of
low Birth, it imitates those who defend Sheep, and suffer Bees to live, upon
the account of the Wool and the Honey they afford.

Of Lesser Tartary.
LEsser Tartary, which lies in Europe, is so called for distinction sake from
the Great, which makes part of Asia. It is also named Percopense and Crimee
from its principal Cities situated in the Peninsula, called formerly Taurica.
The Nogay Tartars may be there comprehended between the Tanais and the
Boristhenes, the Tartars of Ocziakou, between the Mouths of the Boristhenes and
the Niester, and also the Tartars of Budziack above mentioned on the East of
Moldavia, between the Mouths of the Niester and of the Danube: Besides all
these Tartars, there be those who inhabit in Lithuania and the Ukrain. This
Region with Commania, which is in Asia, made up the Kingdom of the Bosphorus,
possessed by Mithridates. Lesser Tartary is a plain Country, very cold by
reason of the Winds. Its Peninsula is so advantagiously situated, that several
States had formerly a design of sending Collonies thither. Besides seven or
eight good Cities, it has full fourscore thousand Koys, that is to say Wells or
Villages. Its Neck is half a League broad, its Circumference seven hundred
Miles. There be some salt Marshes, where any man takes as much salt as he has
occasion for. The Inhabitants boast of never having been subdued. Though they be
descended of the Great Tartars, they do not hold of them; they only assist the
Turks in such expeditions they think to get booty in. Their Tongue comes near
the Turkish, but they gabble it out faster. It was their Predecessors, known
under the name of Scythians, who sent formerly to Darius, who would have
subdued them, a Rat, a Frog, a Bird and five Arrows, for to declare to him,
that he would find it a hard matter to retire out of their Country, wherein he
had imprudently engaged himself. Yet they could not then draw any great
advantage from their Cavalry, wherein now consists their principal strength, by
reason of the braying of the Asses, which were in the Persian Army.

The Lesser Tartars have in all times made incursions upon their Neighbors,
for which reason all their Frontiers is a desert. After they have made a great
number of Slaves, they go to sell them in the Seaports, from whence they are
commonly transported to Constantinople. Their Country is very populous; several
of the Inhabitants have often there each forty or fifty Children in a year:
they go almost all to the War: principally the Nogays, from the age of seven
years, that they go out of their Gantares, which are Huts or Portative Houses,
they always remain in the field. These Huts are of Ozier, of a round form, two
Fathoms in Diameter, they put them upon Wheels, and use them in Summer more
than in Winter. Few Houses in Lesser Tartary are built with Stone and Mortar,
most of them are only of Wood, covered with Planks, upheld with Posts fixed in
the Earth, and interlaced with Branches of Trees. Robbery is there tolerated,
and there needs no more for any ones justification upon that account, than to
say they stood in need of what they stole. The Inhabitants do not much care for
the Sciences, they learn what they know by common Sense; it is said of them,
they have eaten their Books and carry them in their Stomachs. They have several
Horses very swift, small, lean, who live commonly on Roots and Leaves of Trees;
the greatest Lords have of them very good, they take so much care of their
Horses, that it is become a Proverb amongst them, That to lose ones Horse is to
lose ones Head. They make sometimes up a hundred thousand Horse, and go easily
Marches of four Months without Baggage; the Bow of their Saddle serves them for
a Pillow, the Horse-Cloth which is of Pressed Wool or of Felt, serves them for
a Coverlet, their Cloak for a Tent: each Trouper carries a Pickax; their
Servants sleep in the open air, let it be never so cold. The know no other
Trade than that of War, the long experience they have had therein has taught
them all the Secrets and Stratagems of that Art. Some of them pass, without any
inconveniency, for three or four Days together without eating, after which they
glut themselves like Hogs, to sleep as long as they have fasted. Their
Provision is a little flower, steeped in Water, the use of Bread goes against
their Stomachs. When they regal and treat one another, they roast a whole Colt.
They have so much of the Beast, that they are born blind, and do not see clear
until five days end. Their eyes are but little open, very black, with long
lashes, and so piercing, that they always discover their Enemies soone^ than
they are perceived by them; they are much shorter than tall, have large
Members; they have a high and big Breast, a short Neck, huge Head and Cheeks,
their Face almost round, a flat and Saddle Nose, a small Mouth, white Teeth,
tawny Complexion, very black and harsh Hair, like the main of a Horse. When
they are Children their Mothers take care to bath them once a day in Water,
wherein Salt is dissolved, to harden their Skin, and render them less sensible
of the cold, when in Winter they are obliged to pass Rivers by swimming. Each
Tartar has a Whistle, a Gamelle, which is a Porrenger of Wood or of Copper, a
Whip, a Knife, an Awl, Packthread, Thread, Points and little Cords of Leather,
a Mariners compass; every ten have a Chaldron and a little Drum. Their King is
called Kan, and his Successor Galga. The Residence of the Kan is at
Baccassaraium, otherwise Boston-Seraglio, sometimes at Crim. Mancup is his
strongest Town, and the place where his Treasures be kept. He says himself
allied to the Grand Seignior, who gives him a Pension, and deposes him when he
thinks fitting, or rather when he has the Power so to do; and who for that
purpose seizes often on the Kans Relations, for the having him elected of that
Family who is most his Creature. The Confederacy between the Turks and the
Lesser Tartars bears among other things, that the Race of the Ottomans coming
to fail, that of the Kans of the Lesser Tartars shall succed to the Turkish
Empire. The Grand Seignior did this to engage those Princes to the maintaining
their Dominions, as expecting to possess them one day themselves. The Turk is
master of the City of Caffa, the best and most important of this State. His
Predecessors took it from the Janissaries in the year 1475.

The Lesser Tartars assisted the Polanders in some of their late Wars, but to
the cost of their Guests; besides some Money those gave them annually, some
Rouls or Sheepskins to cloth themselves with. Though their Shape makes them
resemble Apes when they are on Horseback with very short Stirrups, yet they
fail not of having the advantage of their Enemies in the Campaign. The Cossacks
fight 'em when they can go in Tabort, that is to say when they can march
between two rows of their Wagons, having eight or ten in the Front, and as
many in the Rear, with Fuzils, Half Pikes, and long handed Scyths, while that
the best mounted go round about with Sentinels on all sides for a Quarter of a
League distance. The Lesser Tartars are so cruel, that they give Axes and
Knives to their little Children for the killing those Prisoners outright, whom
they mean not to carry away. They have themselves sometimes filled great Sacks
with the ears of Christians, to show the greatness of their Victory.

Of the State of Ragusa.
THis is a small Republic, which has its Territories in Dalmatia, near those
of the Turks, and upon the Gulf of Venice. It pays eighteen thousand Sequins
of annual Tribute to the Grand Seignior for liberty of Commerce in the Levant.
The City which seems to have succeeded to the ancient Epidaure, is pretty well
fortified, and very populous. It has the Title of an Archbishopric; its
Inhabitants, who addict themselves for the most part to trade, are Roman
Catholics. In the year 1667. it received a great loss by an Earthquake. Its
Principal Harbor is that of St. Croix, which is three Leagues distant from it.
Its Ships are pretty numerous, well known in the Seas of the Levant, as its
Caravans be in the Dominions of the Turks in Europe. He who commands the
Republic of Ragusa, is called Doge or Rectour; he is assisted with the Council
of a hundred Senators, his Government lasts only a Month. The Governor of the
Castle is changed every day, wherein one of the Nobles enters to command in his
turn. Their Gentlemen must marry Gentlewomen, if they mean their Children
should be acknowledged to be of the Ragusian Nobility. The Revenue of the
Republic is five and twenty thousand Crowns. The Country above the Town is not
over fertile, full of Rocks and Stones; if it bring forth any thing, it is by
the means of the Foreign Earth which they cause to be brought thither, which
is done with such care and such success, that the Coast makes a Beautiful
Prospect of Vineyards, Orange Trees, Lemon Trees and Pomegranates. The
Neighboring Islands which are of the dependence of Ragusa, are also very
pleasant. The Turks have some sort of inclination for the Ragusians, by reason
they pay punctually their Tribute, and that by their means they are provided
with all the Commodities of Europe, which they stand in need of. They give them
Priveledges which they seldom grant to other Christians.

Of the British Islands.
THese Islands consist in two great, and several small ones. Great Britain and
Ireland are the two great; the small are all in the Neighborhood of Great
Britain, the Hebrides, Orcades, Shetland which depends on the Crown of Denmark
in the sea of Scotland; Man; Anglesey, the Sorlingues in the Irish Sea, Wight,
Guernsey, Jersey in the Channel.

Formerly Great Britain went under the Name of Albion, by reason of its Rocks
all along the Sea, which seem white. It now comprehends two Kingdoms, that of
England, and that of Scotland, the union whereof gave occasion to King James to
style himself King of Great Britain, and at the same time the design of
stifling the partialities which were between the two Nations. The English were
not very well satisfied with this change, since thereby their Name became the
less famous. The British Islands had to the number of Nineteen Kingdoms.
England had seven of them, Wales three, Scotland two, Ireland five, the Isle of
Man made one, the Isles near Scotland another. All this now is under the Crown
of England. Several places and Islands in the East and West Indies are also
subject to it, whereof we have made mention in the Article of Europe.

Of England.
ENgland was so called by the English, an ancient People, who dwelt on the
confines of Germany and of Denmark; the Name of Saxony Trans-marine was given
it by the Saxons. Before, it was called Lhoegria, and then Scotland went under
the Name of Albania, and Wales that of Cambria. During the decay of the Roman
Empire, the Saxons and English invaded Great Britain with main force, and near
Bedford gained a signal Victory over the Insularies, who were constrained to
abandon their Country. Several Brittons retired into Wales, others passed into
Brittany in France, where they settled the British Tongues by the help of their
Country Men, whom the Romans had already lead thither to support their
pretensions to the Empire. King Arthur, one of the last British Kings, who
dyed in the year 542. is the same whom so many Fables be told of, and to whom
is attributed the institution of the Knights of the round Table. The Victors,
that is to say, the Saxons and the English, raised a Wall toward the West of
England, to mark the Bounds of their Conquests, and at the same time made a
Law, by which all the Brittons should have a hand cut off, who were found with
a Sword on this side the Wall. In the year 450. and the following, there were
formed seven Kingdoms, Kent, Sussex, Essex, West-Sex, East-Anglia, Mercia,
North-Humbria. A little after that Charlemagne was acknowledged Emperor of the
West, all these Monarchies were reduced into one by King Egbert, who dyed in
the year 837. The Successors of this Egbert having been troubled by the Danes,
the last of them declared his Heir William Duke of Normandy, to whom the
Conquest of England brought the Name of Conqueror. Thus England has had
Sovereigns of six several Nations, of the Brittons, Romans, Saxons, English,
Danes and Normans. These last have established there the Principal Laws, the
King who now reigns is James the 2. England is a greater Kingdom, more fertile
and populous than is either Scotland or Ireland. It is the most considerable of
any State in the Ocean: It produces Corn and Fruits in abundance: the best Tin
in the World is transported thence; Wool, Clothes, Hides and other Commodities
both excellent and in great plenty; neither is it wanting in excellent Liquors.
The English Horses, Dogs and Cocks are in high esteem all over the World. No
Wolves have been seen there since the general hunting, which destroyed them
almost all, by the means of permission Criminals had of redeeming their Lives
with the Heads of those Animals. Gunners and Dogs were for sometime kept upon
Frontiers of Scotland, to hinder the Wolves' which were hunted out, from
returning into England. The great respect that is paid to Ladys in this Realm,
has given occasion to the saying; that England is the Paradise of Women, the
Purgatory of Servants, and the Hell of Horses. The English for the most part
are well proportioned, and of a generous Nature. They have had so great an
Antipathy to the Scots, that Edward the 1. the same who was preferred before
his Eldest Brother, by reason of the Beauty of his Body, recommended, that
after his Death, they should boil him until they parted his Flesh and his
Bones, that they should bury his Flesh, and carry his Bones along to the War
against the Scots. The English are owned Sovereigns of the Ocean, and have made
those States and Potentates to repent, who have dared to dispute their Right to
that Title. Their Country is compared to the Tortoise in the shell, who has
all his Defenses collected. The acquisition of some Places by the alliance with
Portugal, has obliged them to extraordinary expenses. The Spaniards have a
Proverb, with all War, and Peace with England. The general Religion of the
English, is the reformed, the King of England is the Head of the Anglican
Church, where of the Principal Members are the Bishops, who compose the House
of Lords with the other Peers. This Parliament is very different from those of
France; besides the House of Lords, there is that of the Commons, called the
Lower House. The principal Rivers of England are, the Thames, Severn and
Humber, which do not increase by the Rains, the neighboring Lands being sandy.
There be reckoned one and fifty Counties called Shires; each of those Counties
is distributed into hundreds, into Tithings or Tenths. They may be considered
according to the four Regions of the World; and this division is much the same
with that the Romans made, when they were Masters of the Country.

The Southern part of England is along the Channel, where be the best Harbors
of the Kingdom. Canterbury and Bristow be there considerable, the first upon
the account of its Archbishopwrick and of its Primacy; the second for its
Commerce, Ships arriving there at full Sail. Rochester is the usual Station of
the Kings Ships, which are called men of War, Frigates, Yachts. Salisbury has a
Metropolitan Church, wherein are reckoned as many Doors as there be Months, and
as many Windows as there be days in the year. Windsor is a Royal Castle near
the Thames, where the Ceremonies of the order of the Garter are generally
performed. Dover is known for its strong Castle, for Peoples embarking there
for Calice, Dunkirk and Ostend; for the Neighborhood of the Downs, under whose
shelter, the Ships that are bound toward the East and toward the South, may
wait safely for Winds, fair for their Voyage. Hastings is a place where in the
year 1066. William the Conqueror gained a full Victory over Herald the 2d. the
last Danish King, who was killed upon the spot with above sixty thousand of his
Men. Portsmouth, Southampton, Plymouth have very good Ports.

The Eastern part has this advantage, of having London, the Capital of all the
Realm, one of the Greatest, Richest and most Populous Cities in the World, by
the means of its greatest traffic. Its Situation is upon the River of Thames,
where it receives the noblest Ships of the Universe; its Bridge is three
hundred and thirty Paces in length. The Pastures and Meads round about would
make a most pleasant Prospect and Landscape, if the Smoke of Coals which is
commonly burnt there, did not raise a continual Cloud. Norwich is one of the
best Cities, and most populous of all the Kingdom. Yarmouth sees the fishing of
Herrings performed in its Neighborhood, where at Michaelmas is held a fair for
that purpose. Cambridge one of the most famous Universities in the World.
Harwich a famous Port. The Country round about was the abode of the Icenians,
whose Queen Bodicea put to Death a great number of Romans in the time of Nero,
and preferred a glorious Death before an Ignominious Slavery.

Toward the midst of the Realm is Oxford, with one of the four most famous
Universities of Europe, wherein there is thirty three Colleges, that of the
University has a Library full of very curious Manuscripts; unless it be that of
the Vatican, there be few in the World that have any so fine. Gloucester is
commonly the appanage of the third Son of the King of Great Britain: It is
near the Severn, near the Isle of Aldney, where was formerly fought a singular
Combat between Edmond Ironside King of the English Saxons; and Canute the Dane,
who at length divided the Kingdom between them, after having fought a long
while without being able to have any advantage over one another. Chester is
accompanied with a Seaport, where People embark for Ireland. At Worcester was
the Defeat of the Kings Army in the year 1651. by the Rebels.

York in the Northern part is the second City of the Kingdom, and the Title of
the Kings second Son. Lancaster is a County Palatin, famous for its ancient
Family. The two Houses of York and Lancaster gave a great deal of trouble to
England, during above a hundred years, by the fatal Faction of the White and
Red Rose. New Castle and Hull have the convenience of the Sea: The Country
about New Castle is full of Mines, which afford Coals, so necessary to the
Inhabitants of the City of London, and the best Crayons of Europe. The refusal
that was made at Hull of receiving King Charles the 1. was one of the Principal
Motives of the War between his Majesty and the Parliamentaryes. Barwick and
Carlisle have some Fortifications. Penrith keeps the round Terrass, which is
said to have been King Arthurs Table. Between Hull and Newcastle there be the
Ports of Brilington and Scarborough.

The Principality of Wales is the Title of the Kings Eldest Son; it has few
good Cities: Bangor was there formerly a famous Abbey, where above twelve
hundred Monks lived on what they earned by working. Milford is reckoned one of
the finest Havens of Europe, by reason of its Sinuosities, which form as many
good Ports. The Isle of Anglesey which is near it, was the abode of some
Druids, and the retreat of those, who in Great Britain would not submit to the
Romans. It is called the Nursing Mother of Wales, by reason of its fertility.
Its City of Aberfrau served formerly for abode to the Kings of North Wales.

Of Scotland.
THis Kingdom is the ancient Caledonia, which was called Scotland from the
Scots, a People who made a sharp War upon the Romans, and obliged them to make
entrenchments against their Incursions, principally under Adrian and under
Severus. The Name of Albany has been sometimes given to all this Kingdom,
whereas it is now peculiar to one of its Countys, which the Inhabitants call
Broad Albiny. Some Scotch Authors, make the Name of Scotch come from the
ancient Scythians, for the showing their Predecessors in the Higher Antiquity.
Scotland is of a cold Temperature; its Gulphs, Lakes and Mountains hinder its
Provinces from being over Fertile. The Inhabitants are of the reformed
Religion, Popery having been there abolished under King James the 6th. But the
many Scots which Sprung up with the Reformation, produced there many Troubles,
and occasioned most of the disorders, which in our time we have seen in the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. There be still at this day
Phanaticks, who call themselves the Sweet Singers of Israel, and are retire
into the Mountains and into the Woods, though they be hardly able to subsist
there. The Southern Scots live much after the same way as the English, the
Northern are wedded to the ancient Customs, and not over careful of neatness in
their Repasts. The Scotch Nation has for a long while been in esteem for Valor
and Fidelity; the most Christiam King St. Lewis, and his Successors the French
Kings have trusted them with the Guard of their Royal Persons, and made
alliance with Scotland. This Kingdom is now the most ancient in the World, it
is said to have been above two thousand years hereditary, with a Succession of
about a hundred and ten Kings. The Power and Revenues of the King of Scotland
are rendered much more considerabbe since his Majesty's Restoration, and his
re-stablishment in the Power of raising Forces by Sea and Land; of making Peace
or War, with the command of the Castles, of the Cittadels and Garrisons of the
Kingdom. The richness of the Country consists in Wool, in Cattle, and
Salt-Fish. Its Land has several Mines of Lead, Iron, Sulphur, Azure, and Coal.
Its principal Rivers have a prodigious Quantity of Salmon.

All Scotland is divided into two great parts by the River of Tay, the one
Northern, the other Southern. Northern Scotland, contained under the name of
High-lands, is that where the Romans could not carry their Armies, and where in
our times the English Parliamentaries had not all the Success they had promised
to themselves. It was the abode of the ancient Scots, whose Kings had their
residence at Dunstafag. The Robberies of the Inhabitants have been there
formerly so frequent, principally in the Province of Albania, that if by the
Law any one of the Province had committed a Robbery, he amongst them whom a man
could seize of, was obliged to repair the loss, or to lose his Life. Aberdeen
is the most considerable City of this Country, by reason of its University, and
of its Pearls which are found in its little River, and of the Salmons that are
taken in its Neighborhood, where three hundred are said to be sometimes taken
at one Cast of the Net.

The Southern part of Scotland, which is called Lower, is a better Country than
the upper. There is to be seen Edenborough, the Capital of the Kingdom, the
abode of the late Kings. St. Andrew and Glascow have the Title of
Archbishopricks. St. Andrew has also a famous University, I say, famous for
such a Kingdom as that of Scotland, where Glascow passes for a Paradise.
Abernethi was the abode of the King of the Picts. Duns upon the Marches of
England, is the place of Birth of the subtle Doctor Scotus. Leith the Seaport
of Edinborough. St. John's Town a new City, near the ruins of the ancient Perth,
which the Sea has ruined. It is defended with good Walls, whereas most of the
other Cities of the Kingdom have none at all. The Coronation of the Kings of
Scotland is performed at Scone, near St. Johns-Town. There was in this Abbey a
Marble Chair, from which the Royalty of Scotland was esteemed inseparable; but
the King of England, Edward the 4th having transferred it to London, it looks
as if King James the 6th. was as it were forced to go thither. That Chair had
been before in the Country of Argyle. Dunbar is an old Castle, the
Fortifications whereof have been destroyed The English Parliamentaries won a
Battle there in the year 1650. Dunbarton is a Fortress upon a Rock near a
Lake, where the Fish are said to have no bones. The Isles of May and Bass have
Castles situated upon inaccessible Rocks. The Garrison of that of Bass receives
great conveniencyes from the Geese, Sea Coots or Moorhens, which go there to
make their Nests; these Fowls furnish abundance of Wood for Fuel.

Among the Islands which depend on Scotland: The Hebrides are on the West, the
Orcades on the North of that Kingdom. The Inhabitants of the Orcades keep
carefully the Cup of St. Magnus, whom they name their Apostle. With this Cup
they try their Bishops, and hope for abundance of good from 'em, when those
Prelates empty it quite. They are of so good a complexion, that they never take
Physic. Toward the North of the Orcades, there be the Isles of Scetland,
which we have said to depend on the Crown of Denmark. The Insularies there are
so healthful and so vigorous, that they make no scruple of marrying when they
are a hundred years old: Nay they go a fishing at the age of a hundred and
thirty and a hundred and forty. Zeal, one of these Islands, suffers no Foreign
Animals: they dye as soon as they come there.

Ireland.
IReland formerly called Ivernia and Hibernia, is on the West of Great
Britain, from which it is separated by a Sea full of Shelves and Rocks, where
there is a concourse of several Rivers, which fall in there with great
Rapidity. There is little sailing there, but with Ships of a middle Bulk, yet
Ireland has the finest Harbors, and the greatest number in the World. The
Irish are tall and well proportioned; love Repose and Liberty; most of them are
Catholics. During the usurpation of the Royal Authority in England, by the two
Houses, and by Cromwell, most of the Papists were brought to condign Punishment,
for their execrable Massacres and Bloodshed, and the Irish Nobility penned up in
a corner of the Kingdom; between the River of Shennon and the Sea. The
Physicians there are received by Succession. The Riches of this Realm consists
in Butter, Suet, Wool, Hides, Frizes, Coverlets, Cheeses and Salmon. The
English who reside there, drive almost all the Trade. Though this Island be
full of Lakes, Ponds, Marshes, Mountains, it is nevertheless very healthful,
and is said neither to produce or suffer any thing that is venomous. The Wood or
Timber that is cut there engenders neither Worms nor Spiders. Of this Nature is
the Timber Work of the Palace of Westminster, and that of the Townhouse of
the Hague, in Holland. Of late time several of its Marshes have been drained
and dried up, and the Country which was formerly only Forests is at present
so disgarnished of Woods, that they are constrained to make use of Turfe
instead of it, for Firing. All along the Coast is great plenty of those Fowl we
call Soland-Geese they are produced of the Wood of the Ships which rot in the
Sea. There be also Pearls which float in company, as Bees follow their King;
but are not of a fine Water.

Ireland is divided according to the Dispositions of the Regions of the World,
into four parts; Leinster, Ulster, Cannaught and Munster; formerly Meeth was
reckoned for a fifth, but is now accounted a Member of Leinster. There is still
another Division which divides all Ireland into two parts, whereof the one is
the Province of the English, the other the Country of the true Irish, though
the whole Country has been subdued, and there is almost every where English and
Scotch Collonies. The Province of the English has in like manner four
Countries, Lease, Meth, Dublin, Kildare-Monmouth is the best Country, with the
finest Havens of the Kingdom. Leinster drives the greatest Trade, the two other
Ports are not so considerable. Mead passes for the Granary of Ireland, by
reason of its Corn.

There be few good Towns. Armagh in Ulster, which was formerly the principal in
all the Island, has now nothing more than the Ruins, with the Title of the
Primary, and the Archbishops See. Londonderry is much more considerable.
Drogday is strong and trading: a Proverb runs that Wexford was in vogue, that
Dublin is so, and that Drogdah shall be. The Hole of St. Patrick has
Circumstances which have furnished matter to the making of Books. Amongst other
Fables which be told thereof, is the descent of Souls into Purgatory, and into
Hell through that Strait. Galloway in Connaught, the most considerable after
Dublin, trafficks principally into Spain. Altone an important passage upon the
Shennon, was fortified by Queen Elizabeth, who intended to have made it the
Residence of her Lord Lieutenant. Waterford in Munster is esteemed the third in
the Kingdom, near the meeting of the three Rivers, which are called the three
Sisters Limerick and Cork are considerable. Dublin: in Leinster is the Capital
of all Ireland, the Residence of the Lord Leiutenant and of the principal
Officers of Justice, with an University, the only one of the Kingdom. Kilkenni
is esteemed the finest of the Cities in the Inlands of the Country.

Sicily.
SIcily is the greatest and best of all the Islands of the Mediterranane Sea;
its fertility occasioned it formerly to be called the Granary of Rome. It was
first of all inhabited by the Cyclops; afterward, most of the Cities were
swayed by some Princes or other, and the Republic of Syracuse was very
considerable. The Carthaginians, Greeks and Romans made War there, during a
long while; these last made it their first Conquest, when they began to stir
out of Italy. The Sarazins, Normans, Swabians, French and Spaniards, have been
successively Masters of it. It has bore the Name of Trinacria, by reason of its
triangular Figure, which makes three great Promontories at equal distance. From
the most Western called Lilybee, may be discovered Cap Bon in Africa, though it
be a hundred Miles off. Mount Aetna, now called Mount Gibel, casts forth Fire
and Flames continually in the midst of Snow, sometimes more, sometimes less,
and some years since it vomited Water in a bundance. The Emperor Adrian had
one day the curiosity to mount it, to see those Fires, and consider the Sun
rising, which is said to appear from that Mountain like a Rainbow, painted
with several colors. In Sicily did the Ancients place the Birthplace of
Ceres, and the Rape of Proserpine.

The whole Island is divided into three great Valleys; Val di Demona, Val di
Mazara, Val di Noto. The places which are not upon the Coast, are almost all
built upon Mountains. Messina the greatest and richest of all, has had great
Privileges, and ever drove a great Trade of Corn and Silk. The Spaniards
remembering the ill Treatments they received there in 1674. have taken from it
all the advantages which it had kept, during several Ages. It is near the
Pharos, or Straight of the same Name, where the Ancients placed the two
Mountains of Scylla and Charybdis, the former in Italy, the latter near Sicily.
The Fable runs that Charybdis was a Thief, who stole away Hercules his Heifers,
and for that reason was changed into a Sea Monster. The Port of Messina seemed
to have been made of the Compass. The Younger Pompey assembled there his Fleet;
the Christians Fleet before the Battle of Lepanto, had there its Rendezvous.
Palermo is the Capital of the Island, formerly the abode of the Kings, and the
usual Residence of the Viceroy for the King of Spain, who does Homage to the
Pope for his Kingdom. Augusta is considerable for its Situation and for its
Port; all defended by three Fortresses. Syragousa, or rather Saracousa,
formerly Syracusa, one of the best Cities of the Roman Empire, is noted in
History for its Wars, for its Tyrants, for its Fountain Arethusa, for the brave
resistance which it made against the Romans under Marcellus, by the help of the
Machines, which the famous Archimedes had raised there for the defense of his
Country: It had before showed its Puissance against the Athenians, who, at the
Solicitation of the Segestains, had besieged it. The Tyranny of Phalaris, and
the invention of the Brazen Bull by Perillus has made Gergenti renowned. Noto
has in its Neighborhood a River, where there are said to have been tame Fish,
which eat out of Men's Hands. Comarana is near that ancient Moor or Lake, the
draining whereof (contrary to the advice of the Oracle) brought upon its
Inhabitants a Pestilence, and the Invasion of their Enemies. Trapano
accompanied with its Port, was noted by the Ancients for the Death of Anchises
the Father of Aeneas; it is known by the Moderns for its Salt Pits, for the
fishing of Corail and of tunny-fishies, which is performed there. Mont-real an
Archbishops See, has a fine Cathedral Church built by the Normans. Melazzo
still preserves the first Monastery of the Fathers Minims, whom the Popish
Saint Francis de Paula caused to be built. The Spaniards did particularly make
use of this place for the Reduction of Messina. Near Melazzo was Sextus
Pompeius defeated by Augustus. On the North, or rather on the West of Sicily,
are the Islands of Lapari, renowned for the Fable of Aeolus, for the first
Naval Victory of the ancient Romans, and some Mountains which by their Fires
and Flames gave Means to the Inhabitants to foretell Tempests. Toward the West
are the ancient Aegades, where Catullus defeated the Carthaginians at Sea,
during the first Punique War.

Sardinia as well as Sicily belongs to the King of Spain, it lies in the same
Sea, which is the Mediterranean, but more toward the West. Its Capital City is
Gallari, the Residence of a Viceroy and an Archbishops See, and there is
gathered that Sardonique Herb, which makes People dye laughing, because that it
contracts the Nerves and Muscles, particularly those of the Mouth. When the
Ionians were subdued by the Persians, Bias one of the seven Sages of Greece
proposed to them the Inhabiting of Sardinia, because of the Convenience of its
Situation.

The Isle of Corsica is on the South of the Seigneury of Genoa, the Mistress of
it. An Italian Proverb runs, that a Corsican is not to be trusted alive or
dead. The Corsicans, as their Enemies say, have so great an inclination to
thievery, that if they do not steal in their lifetime, they willingly rise out
of their Tombs to steal after their death; they also say that their ancient
Pyracies did occasion the name of Corsaires to Pirates and Sea-Robbers. In this
Island is found the Stone Catochite, which sticks to Peoples hands like glue,
when they touch it. The City of Bastia is the abode of the Governor, whom the
Genoeses call Viceroy. The Ancients reckoned in this Island above thirty good
Cities, which have been for the most part ruined. Boniface is now the most
commodious Haven with a Fortress, esteemed one of the best of Europe, by reason
of its advantageous Situation in the Peninsula.

The Isle of Candia.
CAndia formerly Crete, is one of the greatest Islands of the Mediterranean
Sea, with the Title of Kingdom, at the entrance of the Archipelago, in the
sight of Europe, of Asia and Africa: Upon the consideration of so advantageous
a Situation, Aristotle was persuaded that it might be made the Seat of the
universal Empire. It is above two hundred Miles in length, about forty five or
fifty in breadth: It has had full a hundred Cities, though it has now more than
four, which be any thing eminent. It was renowned in antiquity for its
excellent Archers, for the Ship called the Bull, which served to carry away the
Beautiful Europa, for the Amors of Pasiphae, for those of Ariadne, for the
Cruelty of the Minotaur, for the Birth, Abode and Funeral of Jupiter, for the
Judgments of Minos, for the Labyrinth, whereof the invention is attributed to
Daedalus. Its ancient Inhabitants said, that most of the Gods were born in
their Country: But little Credit is to be given to people who have always
passed for great Liars. Except the Sfaciotes, who pass for Bravos, the Candiots
have the reputation of flying from Toil, of trustiing in the goodness of their
Soil, which furnishes them with Malmsies, Wine, several good Fruits and other
Commodities. Mount Ida is its highest Mountain, from its peak or top both Seas
may easily be seen. Several Plains and Valleys are fertile in Candy; but few
are watered otherwise than with Torrents. The Cretes were so succesful in
Navigation, that they rendered themselves Masters of the Seas under Minos one of
their Kings. This Prince made Laws for them, and that they might be the better
established, feigned he had concerted them, during the space of nine years,
with Jupiter. Afterward this Island was governed by a Republic, and toward
the time of Pompey the Great was subdued by the Romans. The Emperors of
Constantinople were also Masters of it; after which it was given to Boniface,
Prince of Monferrat, who sold it to the Venetians in the year 1194. The Turks
seeing this Island in the midst of their Dominions, thought it was for their
convenience to dislodge the Venetians from thence; which they accordingly did
in the year 1669. after a War of four and twenty years.

This Island is divided into four Territories, which bear the Names of so many
principal Cities. Candia which is Capital thereof, and the Metropolitan, Canea,
Rettimo and Sittia. The principal Fortresses of the Island are upon the Coast,
either in Islands or Peninsula's, the Grabuses, Suda and Spinalonga which
remained to the Venetians by the last peace between the Republic and the Port.

The City of Candia is in the Northern part of the Island, in an advantageous
Situation, as strong by Art as by Nature, the Venetians did all that was
humanly possible, before they yielded it to the Infidels. The Christian Princes
for the most part sent Succors thither, by which means it sustained the
efforts of a Siege the most memorable that ever was recorded in any History.

An Index Alphabetical of the several Countries Described in this Universal
Geography.
ABissinia, page 90 Egypt, page 73 Aethiopia, page 90 Africa, page 59 America,
page 10 Antartick lands, page 7 Arabia, page 137 Arobic Region, page 2 Asia,
page 110 Barbary, page 66 Biledulgerid, page 81 Brasile, page 54 Cafreria, page
96 Canada, page 19 Candia, page 426 Gastella Aurea, page 40 Chili, page 49
China, page 155 Congo, page 94 Denmark, page 299 England, page 410 Europe, page
196 Flanders, page 256 Florida, page 24 France, page 220 Franche-County, page
267 Georgia, page 132 Germany, page 283 Guyana, page 43 Guiney, page 89
Holland, page 246 Hungary, page 395 India, page 162 India intra Gangem, page
171 India extra Gangem, page 177 Ireland, page 420 Iseland, page 4 Isles
Antilles, page 32 Isles British, page 409 Isles Canaries, page 101 Isles du
Cap-Verd, page 103 Isles of Crylon, page 184 Isles of Japan, page 189 Island of
Madagascax, page 104 Isles Maldive, page 182 Island of Maltha, page 105 Isles
Moluccoe, page 193 Isles Philippine page 191 Isles of Sunda, page 186 Isles
Tercera, page 101 Italy, page 275 Lorrain, page 263 Low Countries, page 242
Magellanica, page 59 Mexico, page 28 Mexico nova, page 27 Mogul's Empire, page
163 Mono-motapa, page 96 Muscovy, page 369 Nigritia, page 94 Nova Hispania,
page 28 Nubia, page 88 Peru, page 45 Persia, page 143 Plata, page 53 Poland,
page 361 Portugal, page 237 Provinces Catholic, page 256 Provinces United, page
247 Ragusa Commonwealth, page 408 Savoy, page 274 Scotland, page 416 Sicily,
page 422 Spain, page 223 Sueden, page 353 Suisser-land, page 269 Tartary, page
152 Tartaria Minor, page 403 Transylvania, etc. page 400 Tucuman, page 52
Turkish Empire, page 378 Turkei in Asia, page 117 Turkei in Europe, page 385
Virginia, page 22 Zaara, page 83 Zanguebar, page 99
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is lately published a Book, entitled the Honorable State of Matrimony
made comfortable, or an Antidote against Discord betwixt Man and Wife, etc.
Wherein is showed, 1. From whence the Discord betwixt Man and Wife do arise. 2.
The great Evil of these Discords notably discovered. 3. Whether the Fault be
principally in the Man or the Wife, curiously enquired into. 4. The never
failing Remedies for the cure of these unkind Breaches, faithfully discovered.
5. The Pretenses, and Plea's, and Excuses they have for these Discords, fully
confuted and answered. 6. The Superiority of the Husband asserted and proved,
and the Subjection of the Wife clearly demonstrated. 7. How Men and their Wives
should carry it toward their Children and Servants: together with the
Stepmothers Duty fully declared.

Sold by Francis Pearse at the Blew Anchor, at the West End of St. Paul's. 1685.


