A NEW ACCOUNT Of the present Condition of the TVRKISH Affairs, With the Causes
of the Decay of the OTTOMAN POWER; Of their Wars with the present Emperor, etc,
And the Facility the Christian Princes now have of retaking Constantinople,
according to a Prophecy of the Turks themselves.

Together with several Notable Remarks upon the late Insolence of the Army; of
their deposing Mahomet IV. (who had Reigned Eight and forty Years) and setting
his younger Brother in his Seat.

To which is prefixed, the Effigies of this New Emperor, Solomon the Third.

By a Person of Quality, who long resided amongst them, and is lately returned
Home.

LONDON, Printed and sold by Randal Tailor, MDCLXXXVIII.

TO HIS SERENE HIGHNESS, THE GREAT DUKE OF TUSCANY.
By the Sieur Du Vignau, Secretary of the French Ambassador to the Port, etc.
A. D. 1687/8.
My Lord;
IMagining my self obliged to give an Account to the Public, of whatever I
could learn of the Ottoman Policy, and different Manners of Government, during
Nine Years Abode at Constantinople, and several other Parts of their Empire,
which I have passed over; I have therefore laid hold on this Conjuncture of
their Downfall, to show the Christian World, that this great Coloss, which has
been hitherto respected as Impregnable, stands on Foundations easily moved and
overthrown, as subsisting by such Prejudices, and false Descriptions, as have
been made of its Greatness.

I acknowledge, my Lord, that this Imagination might pass for a Chimera, had it
come into my Head, whilst Mahomet the Conqueror, Selim II. and Solomon the
Magnificent, equaled the Number of their Victories to that of their
Enterprises; and whilst Fortune made Kingdoms and Empires stoop to the Turkish
Yoke. But these valiant Conquerors, heretofore so Redoutable, are only heard of
now by the sorry Enterprises of a piteous Defense; and I do not doubt, but
every body will enter into the Sentiments which I have of the Weakness of their
Empire, especially in comparing what they see, with what I shall say: Whence
they will judge, that a Power, which, maugre the Fierceness of its first
Maxims, stoops to such supplicating Expressions for Peace, is not such as has
been always described, and is only capable of sustaining a War, to bring
greater Honor to those who attack Her.

What Occasion soever I might have of flattering my self, my Lord, that this
Reflection will dispose Men's Minds to accept of my Design, yet I shall fear to
expose my self to the Public, should your serene Highness refuse the Grace of
bringing it into the World under the Patronage of your great Name.

In effect, my Lord, under whose more efficacious and happy Protection, can I
shelter it from the Severity of Men's Censures, than in a Family where so many
great Princes have always appeared, and where the Christian Hatred against the
Despotick Grandeur of the Ottomans, has signalized it self by so many heroic
Actions on Sea and Land, making continual War against them, for the Glory and
Advantage of Religion, the Benefit of Commerce, and Safety of Italy?

Let a Man run over the Coasts of Africa, the Hellespont, the Archipelago,
Adriatic Sea, the Gulfs, Havens, and all the Isles of the Mediterranean, and is
there any Part which is not Witness of the Exploits, and great Actions, which
the Valor of Princes, or Captains of the August House of the Medici's, have
there performed?

I shall leave this Elogium to the Justice and Fidelity of History, which will
be far from forgetting one of her most precious Ornaments, the glorious
Particulars of whatever your serene Highness does every day, and whatever your
Illustrious Predecessors have done in Defense of the Christian Name, against
the Mohammedan Superstitions. I leave to public Fame, the care of finding more
eloquent Expressions, and more proportionable than mine can be, to the Merit
and Majesty of so August a Subject; whilst following my Undertaking, of
entering into the Penetralia of the Government of the Port, I shall endeavor
to make it known, that its Greatness subsists only on the Prejudices of those
who never truly understood it.

This is indeed a considerable Design, but it is a Design, my Lord, which does
not astonish me, and which will meet with Applauses, even amongst those who
take Pleasure in censuring all Men's Works, when it shall be seen, I have
produced this under the Patronage of one of the most glorious Princes of the
World, to whom I esteem it my greatest Glory to be

A most Humble and devoted Servant, Du Vignau.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT IS well known, how formidable the Ottoman Power has made it self to all the
Earth, and what a great Part of Christendom groans under the Yoke of its
Tyranny. The Terror of its Arms had taken such deep Root, that there seemed no
present Means of Defense, but by Prayers and Tears, the Churches Weapons. But
it is now time to show the groundlesness of this Fear, by serious Reflections on
the present Conjuncture of Affairs, and by just and well grounded Observations,
which are sufficient to discover perfectly the Power and Weakness of a
Dominiation so malign and pernicious to the Christian Name.

If we consider its Original, we shall find, according to the Relation of most
Writers, that it is owing to a deformed Power, which not having the means of
increasing, or subsisting in the vast Campaigns of Turcomania, where it took
its Birth, has extended its self with Precipitation in the Three best Parts of
the Universe, where it has formed its Greatness, of as many Empires, Kingdoms
and Principalities, as there are Relations in History. It has moreover reduced
the so great Diversity of Laws, Customs and Sciences, which reigned in the
Countries of its Conquests, almost all to one certain Principle of a Sovereign
Will and Absolute Power, such as they bragg of their acknowledging in God, to
the Exclusion of Christians and Pagans.

This Power has made it self so considerable, both by Sea and Land, that he who
considers it in the gross, must needs be affrighted at it. It moreover seems,
that in all which has been hitherto written on this Subject, there is no one has
dared to undeceive Men's false Imaginations, but rather to heighten and increase
them; and rather, to entertain the Readers with what they take Pleasure to
believe, than to inform them of what they be desirous to know.

And, as we cannot better undeceive Men's Minds, and obliterate the strong
Impressions which are had of a thing, than by Facts, and Instances of the
contrary; I shall therefore in the Course of this Relation, lay down nothing,
but what shall be grounded on sensible Proofs, especially on what has passed in
these latter times, and what actually happens, not only between the Grand
Seignior and his Neighbors, but in the Grand seignior's own Armies; whose
Insolence has aspired as high as his Throne, to the Deposing of him, and
setting his younger Brother in his Seat; Whence it will appear without any
Disguise, that there needs no Miracle, for the effecting those things which
depend wholly on our selves, and are in our own Power.

A Catalogue of the Turkish Kings and Emperors from their first Original, and
of the Kings of England, Cotemporary with them.
Turkish Kings. Kings of England 1. Othoman, First King of the Turks, began his
Reign An. Dom. 1300. Edward I. Edward II. Edward III. 2. Orchanes. Edward III.
3. Amurath. I. Edward III. Richard II. 4. Bajazet. I. Richard II. Henry IV. 5.
Isa Zebelis Henry IV. 6. Solomon I. Henry IV. 7. Musa. Henry IV. 8. Mahomet I.
Henry IV. Henry V. 9. Amurath II. Henry V. Henry VI. Turkish Emperors. Kings of
England. 1. Mahomet II. who taking Constantinople, was made Emperor of the East
May 29th. Anno Dom. 1453. Henry VI. Edward IV. 2. Bajazet II. Edward IV. Edward
V. Richard III. Henry VII. Henry VIII. 3. Selymus I. Henry VIII. 4. Solomon II.
Henry VIII. Edward VI. Q. Mary. Q. Eliz. 5. Selymus II. Q. Eliz. 6. Amurath
III. Q. Eliz. 7. Mahomet III. Q. Eliz. 8. Achmat. James I. 9. Mustapha. James
I. 10. Osman. James I. Mustapha again James I. 11. Amurath IV. Charles I. 12.
Ibrahim. Charles I. 13. Mahomet IV. Charles II. James II. 14. Solomon III. whom
the Army (after their ill Success this last Campaign) seated in the Throne,
having first deposed his elder Brother, Mahomet IV. who had reigned 48 Years.
James II.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Strength and Weakness of the Turks in general. page 1. CHAP.
II. Of the Two Principal Means of the Growth of the Ottoman Power. With an
Historical Abridgment of the Ancient Revolutions of the Turks, from which
Christendom never drew any Advantage. page 11. CHAP. III. Several other Reasons
of the Increase of the Ottoman Power, and particular Observations on the Last
War, with the Emperor, the Venetians, Poles, and Moscovites. page 54. CHAP. IV.
Of the principal Causes of the Decay of the Ottoman Power, with a Description
of the Passage of the Dardanello's, and a Relation of the Facility the
Christian Princes have at present of retaking Constantinople. page 80. CHAP. V.
Proofs of the last Weakness of the Turks at Sea, with a Relation of the Affair
at Chio. page 129. CHAP. VI. Some Politic Reflections on the present ill
Condition of the Ottoman Affairs, since the raising the Siege of Vienna. p.
151. CHAP. VII. A Recapitulation of several Reasons of the approacking
Overthrow of the Turkish Empire: With several Remarks upon the late Revolutions
at Constantinople. page 180.
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE OTTOMAN POWER: With the CAUSES OF ITS INCREASE and
DECAY.
CHAP. I. Of the Strength and Weakness of the Turks in General.
THE Rest which the Ottoman Empire has almost time out of Mind enjoyed on the
side of Persia, by reason of the effeminate, and unwarlike Humor of the
Sophies, especially since Sultan Murat retook from them the important and
famous City of Bagdat or Babylon; has given her the Opportunity of bending all
her Forces against the Christians, and extending them both by Sea and Land.
Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Asia minor, the Two Empires of Constantinople and
Trebizond, the Coast of the Red Sea, all the Black Sea, the greatest Part of
the Mediterranean, the whole Coast of Africa, Greece, Hungary, Georgia, lesser
Tartary, and the best Portion of Poland; are Proofs as convincing, as costly to
Christ endom.

But if on one hand it has appeared Great, Majestical and Formidable, and is
maintained by several Troops always in a readiness, by their blind Obedience to
their Emperor, and by a great Number of malign, and industrious Constitutions,
which have conduced to so terrible an Aggrandisement, and rendered it to this
present Invincible; there will be on the other part, so many Defects, as will
be of themselves capable of overthrowing and destroying it.

It Is in the First manner, whereby the Turk has ever attackt the Princes his
Neighbors, and astonished them by the boldness of his Enterprises. He has always
been the Aggressor, even to the Prejudice of Treaties, surprising his Enemies
with numerous Armies; whilst he has had no regard to the inward Parts of his
Empire, which he has stripped and reduced to extreme Weakness, by depriving it of
the greatest and best part of the People, to gather its Forces to the out-Parts
and Frontiers.

Most Strangers dazzled with the greatness of this Empire, have never truly
known the Weak Sides of it, applying themselves only to the outward Appearance,
without penetrating to the Bottom. But, to clear up the Truth, we are to
consider in what manner the Ottoman Policy has extended to Excess, the Maxim of
not letting its Subjects be too Rich, to avoid Softness, and all other
Accidents thereunto belonging.

The People, which is the last of the Three Orders or Estates of this Empire,
is tyrannized over by the Two others, which is the Military, and that of the
Law. They are almost beggared, and employed in the vilest and meanest Services;
and the Tyranny goes so far, that the Ministry of Religion and Justice (of
which the Second Rank or Order consists) serves for a means to the continual
and incredible Persecutions, which are exercised by the First, which is the
Military, against the Third; which, when it should compose the Body of the
Empire, is in a manner lost, and every day manifestly decaying.

It Is a radicated Mischief, and as ancient as the Original of the Ottomans,
That the Turkish Emperors have not begun to conquer with Facility so vast an
Extent of Land, but by entirely destroying the People, as fast as they subdued
them. This Destruction was authorized by them of the Law, who have continued to
be the Ministers of it; and 'twas executed by the Soldiers, commanded by the
Grand Seigniors themselves, whose Vizirs were the Lieutenants, and the Bassa's
filled the other Offices.

All the Officers which applied themselves to the Execution of these great
Designs, and the pursuit of so many Conquests, shared the Profits and Honors.
And if it be true, that this Distribution of Military Dignities and
Governments, is now no other than a kind of Rent or Farming, which falls on the
People; hence may be conjectured, what will become in the End of this Third
Estate, which the Martial People continue to desolate, by a Custom to which all
contribute with such Force and Violence, that even the very Janissaries, which
are taken from amongst the People, are weakened and destroyed every Day, in
ruining it.

We may add to this ill Conduct, the Application of the latter Sultans to
destroy this Militia, or at least to diminish its Authority, and overthrow the
Bassa's and other Officers; which always falling on the People, shows, that
even the Head, as well, as the rest, who are the Members of the Empire, labor
at their Destruction.

The People have scarcely any part in the Privileges or Honors. The Commerce
which should belong to them in great Towns, is divided by the Soldiers, and
especially by the Janissaries, who set up for Merchants at Constantinople. They
do the same in other Places of their Abode, and moreover with more Impunity, as
well as in their Courses and Passages; entering into Gardens, to take the
Fruits, and what they find there, for nothing, or at a pitiful Price, they sell
at an excessive Rate, in Towns, Burghs and Villages, to the Exclusion of other
People, whom they hinder by their Authority or Address, from concerning
themselves. How little soever their Traffic is, they draw thence a
considerable Gain, because they are exempt from all the Charges and
Impositions, which are laid on the Lands and People; and have Bread, Meat, a
Vest, and a Turbant as a Gift, besides their Pay.

Hence is seen, that the People is the Patient, on which the Military State
works; and 'twill be granted, that that of the Law, no less oppresses them, by
authorizing the Injustices of the Bassa's, and other Officers, who practice
incredible Extortions. These are the principal Causes, which have depopulated,
and reduced into Solitude, the greatest Part of this Empire. If in these latter
times, the Sultans have extended considerably their Limits, by the Conquest of
several Provinces; this Augmentation has not been sufficient, to make amends
for the Diminution of one Third of the People, and their Habitations; which is
visible by the Registers of Chancery of the Two Cadileskiers of Europe and
Asia, who are the Two chief Judges of the Empire. The Cadiliks, or
Jurisdictions of the First, were reduced before the present War, to Three
hundred and ten, from more than Five hundred, which they were at first; and
those of the Second, are not more than Four hundred and thirty, instead of
about Seven hundred. Whence may be concluded, that the Troops of the Bassa's,
Timars, and others, are diminished proportionably, and even farther, by the
Diminution and Ruin of several Places, which contributed to their Subsistence.

Whence may be inferred, that the last Conquests of these Infidels, have
yielded no other Advantage, than the hiding from the Christians their extreme
Weakness, and the Misery of Turkey; which, in fine, begins to discover it self,
and that the Efforts which they have used for this, have only served to augment
the Desolation of the inward Parts of their Empire.

Whatever there is of Augmentation and Greatness, in the Center and Capital of
the Ottoman Empire, serves only to give further Proof of its Ruin and Decay.
And, if it be almost impossible to believe the great Number there are of Towns,
Burghs, and Villages, where there remains only bare Walls, and desolate Houses,
wherein no Body inhabits; one may moreover consider, how many Burghs about
Constantinople are formed on the Sides of the Port of Bosphorus, and the White
Sea. Every day new Buildings are there raised: The People who are here at
present, far surpass the ancient Number of those, who inhabited it before; and
this Concourse proceeds from the great Quantity of People, who flying the
Persecutions in the Provinces, find only Ease and Security in the Vicinity of
their Emperor.

Abandoning as they do, against their Wills, the Country of their Birth, it is
easy to judge by what Violence they are constrained to it. And, because this
Tyranny still continues, as may be observed by the Isles which are almost
depopulated, and by the Deserts, and Ruins on the main Land; it is certain, that
the Neighborhood of Constantinople would arise into a Province on little
Spaces of Ground, and on Mountains rough and barren enough, had not the
Imperial Edicts sometimes obliged these new Inhabitants, to return to their own
Countries. The Expedient is also practiced in respect of those, who have left
their Country after they have been written in the Book of Taxes, to make them
contribute to the Charges of their Compatriots, when these require it; and many
consent, and pay moreover the Impositions on their new Habitations, rather than
return into their Country. All these People, who filled considerable Provinces,
and the farthest distant of the Empire, being driven thence by the Violence and
Tyranny of the Government, run to the Borders of great Towns, and especially of
Constantinople, and leave all these Countries, which were heretofore the
richest, and most abounding, desert, and abandoned.

What I now come from saying, may serve as a general Idea of the Strength and
Weakness of the Ottomans. But to make a more exact Description, 'twill be
necessary to insist on Two principal Causes, which seem the most natural
Foundation of this Dominion, which has extended it self so far. We shall
afterward exhibit several others, which will appear no less, to be those of
its Ruin and Decay; and come to particular Instances, both of Sea and Land; by
which having proved the Weakness of this Empire, we shall undeceive Men's Minds
in their favorable Preconceits of the Turkish Power.

CHAP. II. Of the Two Principal Means of the Growth of the Ottoman Power. With
an Historical Abridgment of the Ancient Revolutions of the Turks, from which
Christendom never drew any Advantage.
THE Distributions and Share of the Conquests, which the Officers and Turkish
Militia received from the First Ottoman Emperors in the Beginning of their
Progress; has obliged them to consider the Grand Seignior, who granted them
those Favors, not only as their Benefactor, but also as him who drew them from
Nothing, and out of Deserts, to distribute to them the Grandures and Riches of
the most plentiful Countries, as fast as they made him the Master of them. This
Hope flattered them in such sort, as to oblige them to fear no Dangers and
Combats, where the Glory and Prosperity of their Emperor were concerned. But,
the most part dying in these Occasions, and leaving their Recompenses for
others; it was thence easy for those who remained successively one after
another, to leave the First Benefices of their Sovereign, to pass on
continually by new Victories to new and greater Recompenses: And, hence it may
be believed, that this Absolute Power of the Grand Seignior's, of disposing of
the Estates and Lives of his Subjects as he pleases, has taken its Rise.

The Ministers of their Religion, who received their Establishment from the
same Power, have not been wanting to contribute to his Greatness and Authority;
teaching, That an entire Submission should be paid him, seeing it came from
God, for the Establishment of the true Faith, and this Power which they
preached extended to themselves; for, they were the First in obeying him,
flattered by the great Advantages which their Emperors bestowed on them, who
hereby engaged them to be inviolably faithful to them, and submit Religion to
their Pleasure.

We need not search elsewhere the Cause of those profound and respectful
Submissions, with which all the Turks, of either Sex, Age, and Profession,
humble themselves in the Presence, and to the Orders of their Emperors. They
consider him as the Vicar and Lieutenant of God on Earth. They render him,
after God and after Mahomet, all possible Honors. When they adore the Divine
Majesty, they fall on their Knees, and touch the Ground with their Heads, to
signify they are as Nothing, before his Almighty Power. When they pray to
Mahomet, and in pronouncing his Name and Quality of Prophet, they fall on their
Knees, and bow only the Head: And when they will render their Veneration to the
Grand Seignior, they stoop very low, and touch the Earth with one Hand, which
they reach up afterward to their Mouth to kiss it, and then to their Head; to
show, That this Emperor being the greatest Man on Earth, they are but Dust in
his Sight. They would also show, that being not worthy to approach him, they
think themselves happy to kiss the Hand, which has touched the Earth which his
Imperial Grandeur has trod on: And they take care, never to fix their Eyes on
those of his Highness, nor on his Countenance; because, that having, as they
say, Majesty, Prudence, Valor, and Boldnefs in his Front, they deserve not,
neither ought to be so bold to look on him; it being sufficient that they are
beheld by him.

The Respect they bear him, is so well established, that when he passes by,
there is not the least Noise heard, how great and numerous soever his Train may
be, and those that behold it. The Turks accompany these Submissions, with a
punctual Obedience. They all, as well the greatest as the smallest, do glory in
being the Grand Seignior's Slaves; the Term of which being taken in the strict
Signification of their Law, as was that of the Romans, comprehends at least an
absolute Power of his Highness over the Estates of his Subjects, such as a
Patron may have over those of his Slaves; which is to say, that a Turk can
enjoy nothing which he has but at the Emperor's Pleasure. The great Ambassador
of Poland, John Guinski, being come to Constantinople in the year 1677. with a
Train of Six hundred Persons, for the completing the Treaty of Zouravuno; and
the Grand Vizir, Cara Mustapha Bassa, treating him at Dinner in one of his
Gardens on the Canal of the Black Sea, where this Polish Lord Complementing him
on the Beauty of the Place, and especially on the Honor of being near one of
the Seraglio's of the Grand Seignior, the Vizir replied to him, Being all of us
his Highnesses Slaves, and our Estates belonging to him, he sometimes
vouchsafes to come and walk in the Gardens which we make ready for him.

This Law of Slavery is confirmed by the proper Interest of particular Turks,
who have Christian Slaves, over which they have all Power, excepting that of
putting them to Death, as not being invested with the Public Authority. It Is
not so with the Grand Seignior, who, by his Absolute Power, is Master not only
of the Estates, but also of the Lives of his Subjects. And this Power, without
any Reserve or Restriction, having been originally established by Conquests, as
has been observed; their Religion has farther authorized it, and so solidly
confirmed it, that it has been scarcely ever seen opposed or contradicted to
any Purpose.

Their Religion gives the Grand Seignior the right of being his Subjects Heir
when they die, and of peeling them in their Life-times, to the Exclusion and
Prejudice of their Kindred and Children, because all are his Slaves. This Maxim
seems something hard, even according to the Sense of the most able Lawyers of
the Empire; but it is salv'd by some seeming Reason, in that the Successions
which the Emperor seizes on being the richest, seeing otherwise he would
despise them; they must then be of those who have had the Administration of his
Treasures, who have been Governors, or born other considerable Offices; or
being accused of Injustice, afford a plausible Pretense for the Seizure of
their Estates.

This Imperial Privilege is so greatly in Use, that the Heirs of a rich Bassa,
or other principal Officer, although they never fail to hide what they can, will
not undertake to divide the Succession which belongs to them, without the
Permission of his Highness, who gives it entirely, or without reserve, but
seldom. He causes the Imperial Seal to be set on their Goods, whether by an
express Messenger, or the Officers on the Place do it by their Authority; and,
taking what seems good to him out of all their Riches, he distributes commonly
some Portion to the Children of him who is stripped, whether alive or dead; and,
he thinks he does them a great Favor, in allowing them the Honor of being
called his Coheirs. The Grand Seignior possesses moreover this Right, which
makes him Master and Owner of the Estates of his Subjects, especially of the
Richest, with so absolute an Authority, that besides the Persons which he
deprives at once of their Estates when he puts them to Death, his Highness
gives from time to time to those whom he lets enjoy their Estates, certain
Advertisements, which should persuade them, that this Enjoyment is only an
Effect of his Imperial Benignity on Sufferance. He often visits them, not so
much to honor them, as to draw Presents from them, which may pass for the
Redemption of the rest he leaves them; and he makes no Difficulty to explain
himself so, as has been several times known, especially when having been
entertained with a splendid Banquet, and a considerable Present by Cara
Hassanoglouson, Aga of the Janissaries, in a Garden adjoining to the Black Sea,
he said to him at departure, I leave thee thy House, I do not take that, but
remember that all thou possessest, to the very Fruits of the Garden, belong to
me.

His Highness has also often gone on Friday to say his Prayers at a certain
Mosque, because 'twas near some fine Seraglio; of which having advertised the
Master, that he should entertain him, and that he would do him the honor of
visiting his House, this was only to receive a Present: This Conduct is so
generally known, that they are not very willing to have Palaces near the Places
where the Grand Seignior passes and usually walks. And a certain Turkish
Usurer, extremely Rich, became once sick with Fear, that the Reputation of his
Riches would draw a Visit to him from his Highness.

The Bassa's or Governors of Provinces, who return to the Grand Seignior, after
the Term of their Administration, pass not over to other Dignities without well
paying for them, and giving in Presents whatever they have gathered in the
Employ they come out of. And to show in what manner this Emperor attends these
sort of Spoils, we may observe an History which happened on the Occasion of one
of his Gentlemen, named Osman Aga.

He having cast himself at the Grand Seignior's Feet, to entreat him to grant
him a Government; his Highness bad him think on what he asked, and that he
might repent of it. But on Osman's Perseverance, and most humble Supplication
to the Grand Seignior, that it would please him not only to grant him the
Government for Three Years, but also to write the Order with his own Hand,
which would take away all Fear from him during the Prosperity of his Highness
he consented to this: And, as he still held the Pen in his Hand, he demanded
whether any other would have the like Grace; but no body answered to this
Invitation, except another of his Gentlemen, who was a Renegado of Malta, who
running away as fast as he could, cried out, God preserve me from it; which
made the Grand Seignior laugh exceedingly.

The Presents which the Grand Visir makes him at Bairam or Easter (which is the
beginning of their Year) and those of the Bassa's, and other Officers of the
Empire; though they rise very high, yet are reckoned as nothing, as being
Rights of Obligation. But, there are a great many other occasions, wherein must
be continued these Presents, which are a kind of Tribute, proper to conserve
the rank and credit of each of these Ministers. Oftentimes the Grand Seignior
visits them, on purpose to receive at the same time their personal Submissions
and ready Money; and here 'twill not be impertinent to set forth, in what
manner this Visit is made.

The Grand Visir being advertised that the Emperor comes to visit him, goes out
to meet him, about an hundred Paces from the Gate of his Palace in the Street;
where apperceiving his Highness, he makes three profound Reverences, bending
very low; and kisses, and brings to his forehead, the hand with which he comes
from touching the Ground. He places himself, after these respects, before the
Grand Seignior's Horse, and marches thus on foot to the second Court of his
House, and near a kind of Horseblock, on which his Highness descends from his
Horse.

During this time, and whilst he begins to ascend the Stairs, led under the arm
by his Selictar or Sword Bearer, and by the Capi Aga, Captain of the Port; the
Visir runs up immediately before, and enters into his Chamber, whence he goes
out at the same time the Grand Seignior appears at the Door of the Divan, which
is a great Parlour. This Minister shows himself with his hands cross his
Stomach; he renews his three Reverences down to the Ground, in three measured
Intervals, according to the largeness of the place; and at the third, he lets
his Hands go, and conducts his Master on the Sofa, marching before him.

The Sofa is a kind of Way or Elevation of a Foot high, which takes up
generally half or two thirds of the Chamber, covered with rich Tapistry during
the Winter, and the Summer time with curious Mats of Rushes, neatly wrought, or
some light, fine Stuff; and all about is spread a Quilt to sit on, there being
long Cushions laid on the side to the Wall, all covered with rich Persia
Stuffs, and the place of Honor is in the Corner, which regards the entrance of
the Chamber.

When his Imperial Highness is sat, the Visir puts himself into the posture of
a Courtier, out of the Sofa, standing up with his Hands cross. When the Grand
Seignior, by a sign of his Head or Hand, orders him to sit down, it is commonly
on a little white Blanket, which is spread two foot distant from the Sofa;
where the Minister sits kneeling on his Heels, observing this posture in great
respect; whereas otherwise they sit flat cross-legged.

Whether the Grand Seignior dines at the Visir's or not, there is usually
placed, before he arrives, behind one of the Cushions on which he leans, five
Purses, which make two thousand five hundred Crowns, and sometimes more; and
his Officers must take care to carry them away after him. He is moreover
presented with two Bokchas or Toylets, in each of which, is contained a Vest of
Martre Zibelin, and a Magnificent Suit of Cloths, accompanied with a Poniard
and Girdle, set out with Precious Stones, with three Horses, two of which be
richly harnessed. The Whole may be valued at twelve or fifteen thousand Crowns.

As often as the Bassa's and other great Men, and even private Persons, receive
the Honor in being visited by the Emperor; they are obliged to make
considerable Presents, according to their Rank, and exigency of Affairs.
Hussein Aga was much in his Highness's Mind, who for one while came almost
every Week into a very fine House he had on the Sea side. But finding himself
tired with this two great Honor, by reason of the frequent Disbursment of his
Money, which he loved as well as any of his Employ; he thought on a Trick which
did him a Kindness, and which much pleased the Grand Seignior. One Day when his
Highness came to visit him according to Custom, he went to meet him farther
than he was wont; and carrying him all the Keys of his Chambers, prayed him to
accept of them with his whole House, which he made bold to offer him. His
Highness well understanding the Meaning of this, told him laughing, Well, well,
I know thou art a poor Fellow, and I am not willing to eat thee out of House
and Home. Thus Hussein Aga was exempt from parting with ready Money, but was
forced to continue his other Expenses.

Not only the Vizir and the Bassa's never fail in their Respects, and Presents
to their Emperor; but moreover, when his Highness sends them an Hatcherif
(which is, an Order under his Hand) accompanied with a Vest of Martre, for
which they are obliged to pay the Bearer by extraordinary Liberalities. The
Grand Seignior is pleased also, in another manner, to require Presents from
those that are about him. Commonly all the Ottoman Emperors are skilful in some
Trade, or Handy-craft, wherein they spend their Time. This last Emperor was a
great Artist at making horn-Tooth-pickers; and, when he intends to honor any
Bassa, or some other Person with Tokens of his Remembrance, he sends him one
these Tooth-pickers, or some Flower out of a Garden where his Highness walks,
which must be dearly paid for by considerable Gratifications to him that brings
them.

These Particulars plainly confirm the Grand Seignior's absolute Power over his
Subjects Estates, which he siezes on if he thinks good, in their Life time, as
well as after their Deaths. It Is farther to be observed, that all the chief
Military Officers, as the Janizary Aga, the Seimen Bachi, General of the
Cavalry, the Bostangi Bachi, Intendant over the Gardeners, and the Topchi
Bachi, great Master of the Artillery; are Heirs of those Persons who depend,
and are in Office under them, when they have no Children. Whence it follows,
That the Emperor may with greater pretense of Right, be his Subjects Heir, when
they die without Children, because they are all his Slaves.

The Turks are so far from discovering their Estates, that excepting certain
Expenses to which their Employs oblige them, they forget no Artifice to
dissemble their Riches; and therefore they make supposed Debts, to be thought
poor, to be thereby exempted from the Envy of the Imperial Authority.

This Artifice becomes oftentimes useless, it being too Customary, and the
Grand Seignior not paying the Debts of those, whose Estates he seizes on; for;
supposing the Cause was to be brought to Justice, which never happens when the
Imperial Name is interested, there would not be wanting pretenses to baffle all
Creditors, seeing the Effects cannot be sufficient to the satisfying his
Highness's demands.

It Is certain, that the Grand Seignior when he will possess himself of the
Estates of any of his Subjects, especially of the Richest, may easily do it,
excepting what cannot be discovered. They are commonly very obedient in
consigning them according to his Order, and it is more easy for him to put them
to death, for they may conceal some of their Effects; but it is not the same
with their Persons, which they cannot conceal, but for a time, and whose
disobedience has ever been imperfectly upheld by Military Rebellions, so that
they must yield at last.

It should moreover be considered, that the Grand Seignior knows when to take
his time, as well as those who are the carriers of his Orders, whose Execution
is never attempted in vain. The Emperor's Will serves for a sufficient form of
a Process. If heretofore the Fetfa of the Mufti was taken in important
occasions, that is to say, his judgdment, or sense on such or such a Fact, and
what Punishment for Example, the Criminal might deserve; this Formality is not
now observed, only in important occasions, in which the Mohammedan Religion
finds it necessary to join to the Authority of the Prince an appearance of
Justice; to the end the Soldiery and People having knowledge of it, may concur
in the making his Highness obeyed, if need be, or at least not resist his
Orders.

It Is then commonly on the inability of resisting, that the Turks yield their
Heads. When a Capidgi Bachi, or the Hasseki Aga, having pronounced to them from
the Grand Seignior's part these or the like words, The most High Lord commands
you to die; if they answer, his Will be done; or, if answering nothing, they
ask only time to say their Prayers, it is because there is no avoiding the
stroke, and therefore they make a Virtue in submitting to Necessity. Perhaps
then they draw some consolation from what several of their Divines affirm, That
the Grand Seignior must be so obeyed, that if one refuses him his Head, they
fall into the crime of Infidelity and Apostasy from the Mohammedan Religion;
whereas, he is Crowned with Martyrdom, that obeys and embraces Death at the
least of his Sovereigns Orders.

Yet there are few Vizirs, Bassa's, or other Officers, who in virtue of this
Maxim, have voluntarily yielded their Heads every time they could save it; but
there have been several, who disguising themselves, and doing what they could
to avoid Death, yet have fell into the Precipice; and others who have saved
themselves, have been seen to die in the Employ, of their natural death. A
Vizir named Cara Mustapha Bassa, was killed flying travested; he of the same
Name that was Strangled after the Siege of Vienna, would not have been engaged
as he was after his Defeat, had he been persuaded there were Orders to put him
to Death. Firari Bassa of Cair avoided death by concealing himself under the
Habit of a Dervis or Religious, and he died a natural death, being Bassa of
Bagdat. Hassan Aga was strangled in the very place where he had hid himself.
There are several others who have taken, or would take the same course,
endeavoring to avoid the Choler of the Grand Seignior, as being suggested by
their Enemies, without having recourse to an open Rebellion. And they have also
Lawyers who maintain, they ought not to yield their Heads, but on the contrary,
defend themselves to the last, and not render themselves criminal before God,
by suffering his Image to be so easily defaced.

Whence appears, with how little foundation we attribute to the Turks, this
blind Obedience of embracing voluntarily death on the first Orders from the
Grand Seignior, although they be persuaded they do not deserve it; and we have
more regarded, in advancing this Proposition, the great number of those that
die, than the manner in which they receive this punishment. It Is usually urged,
that the Turks say they are all ready to give their Heads at the first sign
from their Emperor; but this ought to be considered as mere ostentation, never
putting this in practice, but when they cannot avoid it. In fine, though the
obedience be blind and voluntary, or forced and violent, yet it produces its
effect; and thus rendering the Grand Seignior Absolute over the Lives and
Estates of his Subjects, it is the first foundation of his Greatness and Power.

The second foundation of the Authority, and Power of the Grand Seignior,
arises from the Ascendant he has over the Politic and Civil Laws, of which he
is so much Master, that he has no obligation to follow them. He can Interpret
them, and even Abolish them when he pleases, or make new ones, without
receiving any kind of opposition, provided that they thwart not the Doctrine of
the Alcoran, which they regard as Divine, and descended from Heaven.

Yet there be found Reconciliations and Mitigations with the Maxims of their
Religion; and when the Grand Seignior, engaged to do any thing by the interest
of his Authority, shall be obliged to carry himself contrary to any Article of
the Alcoran, provided it be not a Capital point, he finds means enough to
surmount all the difficulties. It Is sufficient he does it by the advice of the
Mufti, without whom he ordinarily undertakes nothing in what concerns Religion;
being moreover certain, he will never fail to be favorable to him, because a
Successor which his Highness might substitute to him, would soon repair the
defect of his complacency.

The Alcoran does not prohibit the Christians the use of Churches, which they
have always had, as long as they can subsist, and till they fall to ruin; but
it forbids the reparations and the building of new ones. Yet a Church being
burnt, and the Ground redeemed, they will permit it to be rebuilt as it was; on
the Principle, That the Law is not broke, seeing it is the same Church as
before, and not a new one; that it is not a Reparation, but an entire Structure.
This is a gross subtilty, yet is Authorized, because the Ottoman Policy finds
its Reckoning in it, in that, this is chiefly used in Capitulations, and to
facilitate the Treaties of Peace; where the Turks acquiring so many Churches,
which they prostitute into Mosques, may well assure themselves of the peaceable
possession of them, provided they grant some one; as is seen, for example, at
Galata, in respect of that of St. Francis; the re-establishment of which in
recompense of the loss of Candia, has been obtained by the Republic of Venice
on its ancient Foundations, Redeemed by the Christians Money.

That of S. George's belonging to the Capucins, has also been rebuilt by virtue
of the Capitulations renewed in the year 1673. between France and the Grand
Seignior, which confirm to the French King's Ambassadors the Protection of
bishops, and Religious of the Latin Rite, the peaceable possession of the
Churches, and Exercises of Religion, especially in favor of the Jesuits and
Capucins.

There are other Examples, which prove, that the Mufti and the Mohammedan Law,
do not only bound the Grand Seignior's Authority, but moreover serve to deliver
it from the Yoke, and Constraint, which it might lay on it self; and which by a
Principle of Religion she might think, she could not be disengaged from,
although the Execution might procure notable prejudices to it. There has been
seen one very remarkable, in the Person of Mahomet III. Great Grandfather of
him who is now deposed. He had sworn, on some extraordinary occasion, to put to
death all the Ambassadors, and Christians which were to be found in his Empire,
the Execution of which was to be begun in Constantinople.

His Grand Vizir foreseeing the Consequences of so barbarous and impolitic a
Cruelty, which would not have failed to draw along with it the Ruin of the
Empire, and to procure to the Christian Princes, an opportunity of revenging
themselves; opposed himself by his Remonstrances, and Entreaties to this
Resolution. But, seeing the Emperor stuck to his Oath, he had Recourse to the
Mufti, who found out an Expedient to satisfy his Highnesses Conscience, in
putting to death all the Dogs of the Christians, he having Sworn the Death of
all the Christian Dogs; and the Execution was done with Pomp on these Animals,
which the Christians furnished; and which perhaps they accompanied with some
Sums of Money to the Mufti, the Vizir, and the Emperor himself.

After these Proofs, and several others, which will be needless to relate, we
need not doubt of the Grand Seignior's Power in his States, and over his
People. If it has been seen sometimes agitated by great Disorders, attended by
the Death of some Sultans, it is because there are no Rules so well established,
but are subject to some Revolutions: And it is surprising, that the Conduct
which has induced the Turks to put to Death several of their Emperors, and
which deserves no Commendation, has visibly served to preserve and re-establish
the Ottoman Power and Authority.

Sultan Osman would have destroyed the Janisaries, and transferred to Damascus
the Seat of the Empire, in favor of the Arabians. This was to abandon Europe,
and restore it to the Christians; but the Death of this Emperor, hindered their
receiving this advantage.

Sultan Mustapha had twice raised Disturbance in the Order of the Imperial
Succession, having been preferred to his Nephews, Osman and Murat, to whom it
belonged to succeed; whence must have happened great and Advantageous
Revolutions to Christendom, had they taken hold of the Opportunity; but 'twas
neglected. Sultan Ibrahim was respected a long time, as the Object of the
Complacency of the Turks; for, his Ministers and Subjects to show him their
punctual Obedience, became the Instruments of a thousand Disorders, to which he
abandoned himself, only minding to satisfy his Sensuality and Dislolutions.
The Treasures of the Seraglio (which are esteemed Sacred Pledges, and which are
only touched in great Extremities) were exhausted, and the Consumption of the
Imperial Revenues was anticipated by seven years; so that the Empire seemed to
stand on the Precipice of its Ruin.

Hence appears, That the Tarkish Monarchy has found its safety in the Death of
these Three Emperors; the First of which, tho brave and enterprising, yet very
young, knew no Politics; seeing, to satisfy his Revenge on the Janisaries, who
would not obey him in Poland, he hazarded, in translating to Damascus the
Imperial Seat, the losing of Constantinople (the best Flower in his Crown) with
the rest of Europe. The Second, was an Usurper, to the prejudice of the true
Heirs; and the Third, such a Prodigal, as was likely to destroy the State.

It seems, as if such Events could not happen, without extraordinary
Revolutions, and even without Rebellions against the Emperor. But it is
observable, that in the time of the greatest Disorders and Revolt, the
Malcontents have not failed to show their Respect and Veneration, to the
Imperial Blood they were to shed. They durst not undertake it of their own
Authority, withheld by the August Quality of Emperor: but yet believing the
thing necessary for the Preservation of the State, they have dispossessed their
Emperor; and putting the Lawful Successor in his Place, they have obliged him
with pretenses of Religion, to Pronounce and Write with his own Hand the
Sentence of the others Death, who came from being dispossessed of his Throne.

In this manner Sultan Osman had Imprisoned his Uncle Sultan Mustapha; which
was just, seeing it did not belong to him to possess the Throne, to the
prejudice of the other. The Uncle was revenged by the Death of this Nephew, not
through any Principle of Justice, but because he would destroy the Janisaries,
and go and live at Damascus. The same Uncle fell himself at last, to the
Hereditary Right of his other Nephew, Sultan Murat, Osman's Brother. And
Mahomet IV. (who is now deposed) was obliged to Condemn his Father, Sultan
Ibrahim, to lose his Life; the Janisaries having been the Causes, and Executors
of these Sentences, which they have at last Expiated themselves by their own
Blood, seeing the greatest part of them have been strangled in different
occasions, and with all necessary Secrecy.

Bajazet I. their Fourth Sultan, was beaten by Tamerlin, a Vagabond Prince, who
came from far to make himself Master of this Emperor; who found Means to raise
himself from this Fall, and to re-establish his Affairs without the Christians
making any Advantage of it. His Son Mahomet I. was constrained to destroy his
Brethren; whose Number, and different Dominations, although they were not
Emperors, were on the Point of destroying the Ottomans. He subdued them without
receiving any considerable Traverses from the Christians; and he passes among
the Turks for the Restorer of the Empire, but for the perfecting of the
Affliction of Christendom. It was the Grandfather of Mahomet II. Surnamed the
Conqueror, the Thunderer.

The Conquest of Constantinople by the same Mahomet II. was preserved in its
Beginning, notwithstanding the Troubles and Civil Wars which should make it be
retaken by the Christians: For, Bajazet II. Son of Mahomet, and Second Emperor
of this City, received no Prejudice from the Diversion which he might apprehend
by his Brother Dgem, or Zidgim; whom Discontent, after the Death of Mahomet,
made withdraw to Rhodes, Rome, and France, to Charles VIII. for Assistance, to
dispute the Throne with his Brother. This most Christian Monarch, was on the
Point of carrying Dgem into the East, and to make use of him to make War with
Bajazet, and to repair at the same time the Miseries which Mahomet II. came
from bringing to Christendom. But by a sad and wretched Example of the
Blindness of the Christians, Dgem died empoison'd; whilst, on the other hand,
the Christian States began a War amongst themselves, and made such Leagues, as
hindered Charles VIII. from undertaking any thing against the Infidels.

The same Bajazet, though he had won the Battle of Chiourlou against his Son
Selim, let him escape by Compassion, and was afterward forced to yield him the
Empire in Constantinople; and, if for a Recompense this ungrateful Son made him
lose his Life, we have seen the Turks comforting themselves in all these
Agitations, in that the Christians have not known to draw Advantage thence.
They qualify the Emperor Bajazet as a Martyr; they acknowledge him to be a
great Conqueror and Saint, making Elogium's of his Piety. But, to denote how
far their Exaggeration reaches in his Respect, they attribute to him by a kind
of Superstition, That having himself gathered up from his Cloths, his Feet,
Hands and Face, all the Dust and Sweat mingled together, gotten in Combats
wherein he was; he preciously conserved them, and ordered a Composition to be
made of them, to put into his Tomb on his right Cheek, to profit by the Advice
which the Alcoran gives them, in these Terms, He whose Feet shall be filled
with Dust in the Lord's Battles, shall be by his Bounty and Divine Mercy exempt
from the Pains of Hell.

Selim, Bajazet's eldest Son, notwithstanding his Parricide, passes also
amongst the Turks for one of the most holy Conquerors of this Empire; having
thereunto joined the Domination of Mecha, Medina, Egypt, Damascus, Jerusalem,
and all Syria, without the Christians of his Time attempting to oppose the
Aggrandisement of this Infidel Prince, the Father of the Great Solomon. It Is
known whereto this same Prince extended the Ottoman Power; but to whatever
Excess of Grandeur 'twas raised, he began to leave his Residence of
Constantinople, fearing it should prove ominous to him, contenting himself with
giving this great Town the Marks of his Magnificence, by the stately Mosque
which bears his Name, and other Edifices which he caused to be built; and, his
Successors Selim, Murat, Mahomet, Ahmet, Mustapha, Osman, and the last Murat,
have been for the most part Prisoners, who never went out of this Capital.

Murat IV. would have left the Empire in great Disorders, having designed
before he died to have had his Brother Ibrahim put to Death, and this same
Ibrahim was strangled in Consequence of the Judgment pronounced by his Son
Mahomet IV. whom the Army has now dethroned. The Revolutions at the beginning
of his Reign, which had almost overthrown it, are sufficiently known, and so
considerable, that he was forced to put to Death his Grandmother. It was
customary in those times, to change often the Chief Vizirs, which hindered them
from taking any just Measures in the Enterprises against the Christians; and
these had an easy Means, not only to defend themselves against those Infidels,
but moreover to destroy them.

It has happened otherwise. The Ottoman Power raised it self from the Danger
wherein it was. It had for this, (by an Effect perhaps of the continuation of
the Wrath of God on the Christians) a Vizir named Mehemmet Kupruli. He was a
Christian by Birth, and the Son of a Papas, or Greek Priest, of a Village in
Albany near Beigrade; and, though he ought to have been an Enemy to the
Mahometans, yet he became their Protector, and the Restorer of their Empire. An
Uncle by his Mother's side (who was chief of the Kitchen in the Seraglio, in
the time of Sultan Ahmet) was considered as the Object, and Instrument of his
Fortune. He was sent to this Officer, who made him immediately embrace the
Mohammedan Religion, and procured him Admission into one of the Chambers of the
Seraglio; whence he came to the Office of Chief Vizir by different Degrees,
during the Reigns of Five Sultans, Ahmet, Mustapha, Osman, Murat, Ibrahim, and
during the Disorders of the Beginning of the Reign of the Sixth Sultan,
Mahomet. And when this latter being but Sixteen Years old, remitted the
Government of the Affairs of the Empire to him, Kupruli would not accept of it,
till he had taken an Oath, That he would hearken to no Proposition which
directed against his Counsels, and that he would leave him in the Exercise of
his Office during his whole Life.

If Mahomet IV. kept his Word, Kupruli has not been wanting for his part in
re-establishing the Affairs of the Empire, in whatever ill Condition they then
lay. It cannot enough be admired, that a Man, who knew neither towrite nor
read, the Son of a Greek-Priest, and come by chance from the Depths of Albania
to Constantinople, there to make Advantage of the Fortune of a mean Officer,
who had never commanded nor served in the Troops; who knew not the Sea, and was
Poor; could raise himself to such a Degree as Mehemmet Kupruli has done: For,
not to mention that he quelled the Domestic Enemies; he has been seen at the
Head of Armies, combating foreign Forces, and taking from them whole Provinces.

If this Minister has on one hand remedi'd the Misfortunes of the Ottoman
Empire, he has introduced other Miseries which are no less dangerous; for, he
has destroyed most of the Militia, especially the Janisaries; taken off the
chief Men in the Empire; made the Grand Seignior leave his Residence at
Constantinople. He has desolated and depopulated whole Provinces by his
Covetousness. If he has corrected any Abuses in the Revenues, he has set on
Foot Pretenses to levy, several times in one Year, the same Taxes, and to load
the People with them to an intolerable Excess. And, it is very surprising, that
having reduced so many Countries of this Empire into so great Weakness, the
Christians have not attempted to finish the Destruction, which the ill Policy
of this Minister had so well begun; and, which was the more feasible, on
account of the Rebellions which happened during his governing: But, on the
contrary, the Christians gave Leisure to the Ottoman Ministry, to chastise and
bring down the Rebels, to destroy those who aspired to the Government, and to
change no more the Vizirs; which served not only to reestablish the absolute
Authority of his Highness, but moreover occasioned the Christians to lose
afterward Neuheusel, Candia, and Caminiec, whose Conquest has not a little
contributed to the upholding the Reputation of these Infidels.

It Is no less extraordinary, that the Revolts, which have caused the Ruin of
so many Monarchies, have not to this time brought any Damage to the Ottoman
Empire, although several have happened: And one may say, they have only served,
to show the more the profound Respect and Obedience to the Grand Seignior
(which is imprinted on the Hearts of the Turks, and the Rebels themselves) and
what Effect the Imperial Authority produces, though loosed from the greatest
part of its external Forces, and directed against those within, which through
Rebeilion have risen up against it.

There have been several Examples, during the Minority of this last Grand
Seignior: One of the most considerable of which, was that of the Odgiack of the
Janisaries (which is an Assembly of chief Officers in Office and out of
Office.) Tcheleby Kiahia Bey, Cara Tchiaous, and Bektach Aga, were the Heads,
and put the Janisaries into Commotions according to their Capricio's, and
Passions they had against the Officers in the Seraglio; against whom they
pretended to have Reason to complain, especially on occasion of the
Distribution of Offices, and the ill Management of the Treasury; with several
other Pretenses which they had to authorize their Factions.

These Three Commanders found, amongst the Janisaries, great Dispositions in
their Favor, and Obedience in all things. The City of Constantinople was
submitted to them, and the Grand Seignior himself obeyed them, in sending them
the Heads of those of his Palace, which they demanded with Arms in their Hands;
assembling for this purpose in the Hippodrom of Constantinople, named
At-Meidam, which is the most spacious place in the Town, and nearest the
Seraglio. The Grand Seignior's Dignity began to shake; no Force upheld it; so
that he was constrained to act purely by himself, making use of Two Orders,
contained in Two Pages of Paper, and confirmed by one or Two Lines writ by his
Highness's own Hand. By Virtue of the one, the Office of Janisary Aga was given
to Hussein Aga, and Cara Tchiaous was deprived; and the Second put out Tcheleby
from the Office of Kiahia Bey, and put in Cassoum Aga in his Room.

These Two Orders of the Emperor, which in Appearance seemed of little
Authority, were carried by Two Capidgi's, and read in full Assembly of the
Odgiack. They produced an astonishing and suddam Effect; for, at the same
Moment, all the Janisaries ran to the Obedience of their new Officers,
abandoning the Heads of the Rebellion; one of which, Tcheleby Kiahia Bay,
intending to express his Discontent, Cassoum Aga, who came from being
substituted in his Room, mildly said to him; Be satisfied, this Office is not
for Life, the Emperor bestows it on whom he pleases, I possess it now instead
of you, and after me the Zagardgibachi, which is here, will be raised thereto.
The Seditious seeing themselves thus abandoned, were obliged to go to the
Execution of the Offices given them, but they were all strangled in their Way.

The Power of the Grand Seignior, or rather his Happiness, has moreover
appeared at Adrianople, in a manner which is no less considerable, in respect
of the Spahi's; who revolting almost for the same Causes as the Janisaries,
assembled out of the Town in Arms, being resolved to make no small Noise. The
Vizir, who was Kupruli, was so greatly disturbed, that he knew not which way to
turn himself; but, Solomon Aga, Captain of the Janisaries (who was since made
Kiahia, or Superintendant under the Vizir, and lately possessed the place of
Grand Vizir himself) drew him out of this Perplexity. He went into the midst of
the Rebels, attended only with Ten Janissaries, with a Paper in his Hand,
wherein there was nothing written; and, feigning that this Paper which was
folded was a Hatcherif, he drew near to the chief of the Seditious, where he
lifted up the Hand which held the Paper, and with the other took hold of him by
the Collar, in saying to him, The Emperor commands this; and without any
Attempt to rescue him, he led him to the Grand Vizir, who caused him to be put
to Death. This appeased the Tumult, and imprinted such Terror on the Minds of
the Malcontents, who were then very numerous, that they have had time since
that, to change and put to Death the Principals amongst them; so that the Rest
have not had the Boldness to form any Enterprise.

There are many other Instances of the Virtue, which the only Name of the Grand
Seignior has made to appear, in occasions wherein his Authority seemed to be
attacked more nearly; but here is one which will show in what manner the
Veneration which is paid him, is effectual in far distant Provinces.

Hassan Bassa, the last of the Rebels which made a Noise out of Constantinople,
formed a Rebellion, which he covered under pretense of opposing the Tyranny of
Mehemmet Kupruli; and having found means to draw to his Party Eight Bassas, and
several Bey's of Anatolia, he saw himself in a small time at the Head of an
Army of Fourscore thousand men, threatening even the City of Constantinople. He
was greatly feared when he besieged Bursa, before which raising nevertheless
the siege, and being gone some distance for Money, Kupruli promised himself
good Fortune from his Retreat; and, for the more speedy Riddance of him, he
dispatched an Hatcherif containing the Sentence of his Death.

He to whom it was entrusted, named Mourtaza Bassa, did not believe he could
execute it, by showing immediately the Orders of the Grand Seignior. He also
knew, That his Forces were not sufficient to destroy this Rebellion; for which
Reasons he had recourse to Artifices, which probably had been suggested to him
by Kupruli. He feigned himself to be of the Rebels Party, and pretended great
zeal to serve him; and having invited him one day to a Collation, he rose up at
the end of it, and read the Hatcherif of the Death of Hassan Bassa, in the
hearing of all the other Bassa's, who were at the Banquet; who finding
themselves not comprehended in this dreadful Decree, and considering that one
of their Associates, who was the Bearer of it, forsook them, thought it their
best Course to abandon the Condemned Party, whose Head, after he was strangled,
was sent to Constantinople; and this Revolt was appeased, the Soldiers
disbanding themselves.

There are who would conclude from this Example, that the Rebels in the Ottoman
Army, how far soever they may extend their Rebellion, do not believe themselves
disobedient, nor criminal, but when the Hatcherif (which contains an Order,
approved by the Hand of the Grand Seignior) is signified to them; because,
otherwise, they suppose that all things are managed by the Authority of the
Vizir; who satisfying his own particular Passion, dares not communicate any
thing of what passes to the Grand Seignior; and so that when his Highness by
one or two Lines from his own Hand, confirms their Condemnation, they believe
they have no further reason to doubt of it; and that they shall become
unfaithful to their Religion, should they hesitate to submit to the Imperial
Commands. But to be ignorant of it, all the Precaution consists, in hindering
him, who is the Bearer, from entering into the Camp; because that by the reading
of this Command in the Presence of the Army, they are sure not to escape Death.

These Arguings are overthrown by the very Instance on which they seem
grounded; seeing it is apparent that Mourtaza Bassa, used the greatest subtilty
to compass his Design. He was far from trying the Execution of it at the Head
of the Army. He had for to facilitate it, taken the Form of a Traitor; and,
it is very likely, he was Master in the Place where the Feast was made; and
'twas from these Motives, rather than on any Maxim of Religion, that Hassan
Bassa was constrained to lose his Life. Not but that a Hatcherif is extremely
reverenced, and produces great Effects, especially amongst the People; but when
they are intended to allay Seditions, it is sent against the Head of it. He
that is the Bearer, manages himself with the greatest Secrecy; and, trusting
rather to his Dexterity, than to the Criminal's submission, he executes his
Order rather on the former Account, than the latter. In fine, notwithstanding
the Criminal obeys by Force, without rendering himself to the Reasons of the
Casuists of his Law (who respect him as an Infidel that does not willingly part
with his Head, as has been already obferved) the Fetfas of the Mufti, and the
Hatcherifs of the Grand Seignior, do always produce mavelous Effects, and
have ever been the two Principal Means, to conserve the Ottoman Authority;
seeing a Leaf of Paper, with five or six Words writ with his Highness's Hand,
does more than confiderable Armies could do.

CHAP. III. Several other Reasons of the Increase of the Ottoman Power, and
particular Observations on the Last War, which the Turks had with the Emperor,
the Venetians, Poles, and Moscovites.
THE Turks pretend, that their Ministers and Officers, cannot neglect their
Duty, by confiding in the Protection, and familiar Access they may have to the
Grand Seignior, by the trusting to their Merits, through the Number of their
Partisans, or Creatures; and by the Quantity of their Riches, which are all
Motives; which together, or separately, have many times engaged several
Ministers of Christian Princes to neglect their Duty, or to prefer their
Passion to the Interest of their Prince. For, how rich soever an Aga, Bassa, or
Vizir may be; whatever Merit may be universally acknowledged in them, and how
great soever the Number of their Vassals may be; it is certain, that if they
come to be guilty of a Fault, all their Advantages are of no Value; they save
them not from Death, or at least from running a great Risque; but on the
contrary, the more Powerful he becomes, the more reason is there for hastening
his Destruction, if he has not the Dexterity to manage himself very
circumspectly.

It Is to be observed, that whatever Familiarity the Grand Seignior may have
with any one, no body ever takes the Liberty to make Answers, unless they be
Dwarfs, Fools, or the Mutes of his Seraglio; who, under pretense of diverting
him, have great Liberty. The rest (whatever Familiarity they may have with his
Highness, who called the two Vizirs, Kupruli's, Lala, which is to say, Father)
always keep themselves in their Distance, without emancipating themselves, or
departing, in any sort, from the respectful Terms, in which they appear
continually before him.

If sometimes the Grand Vizirs would effectually set before the Sultans, the
necessity of putting some Person to Death, or, the placing another in a great
Office, against the Cabals within the Seraglio, whch hinder the Execution; they
have remonstrated it, as a thing absolutely necessary to the Conservation, or
Welfare of the State. They declare, that the Emperor not doing it, they will
deliver up to him the Imperial Seal, which is the Token of the Dispossession of
their Office; and also offer their Heads, which they humbly entreat his
Highness to accept of, if he will not yield to their Remonstrances. And it has
been seen in the Time of the Grand Vizir Kupruli, that the Grand Seignior now
Reigning, would accept of neither one, nor the other; choosing rather to
consent to the Death of a Bassa, whom this Minister had Condemned, although his
Highness had a great Kindness for him, and was perhaps grieved at his Loss.

Cara Mustapha Bassa, before he left the Grand Seignior, to pass the Danube, at
the Head of the Army, and march against the Moscovites, then in the Campain of
Cheherim (of which mention shall be made hereafter) seeing his Highness would
have the Moussaip, his Favorite, to supply the place of Caimacam (or,
Lieutenant of the Grand Vizir) delivered up the Seal to him, and besought him
rather to take off his Head, if he persisted in this Design. He Remonstrated to
him, that the Moussaip being his Enemy (as indeed he was) would not fail to
forsake him, and not send him such things as his Enterprise required, to the
end the bad Success, might fall on him his Chief Vizir; and for this reason,
another, named Cara Ibrahim Bassa, was made Caimacam.

Thus the Grand Seignior's Power, cannot appear truly diminished; seeing, that
on the contrary, the better to establish his Imperial Authority, those who may
be thought able to lessen it, are always ready to offer him their Heads. It Is
certain, that the Assurance which the Grand Vizirs take from the Dignity of
their Office, to speak to the Grand Seignior, seldom proceeds farther than this
Remonstrance. They have done thus, as well for their own Advantage, as for that
of his Highness; which has been particularly observable of late Times, since
Mehemmet Kupruli has overthrown the Intrigues of the Seraglio. This is all the
Effect which the Grand Seignior's familiarity may produce, and the
Condescendance which he sometimes uses toward his Chief Ministers; and, in
respect of those I now mentioned, Kupruli, Cara Mustapha Bassa, and the
Moussaip Couloglou, its said, that the Grand Seignior respected the first,
feared the second, and loved the third.

The Doctrine of Predestination, has mightily served to establish and extend
the Limits of this Empire. Most of the Turks, and especially the Soldiery,
firmly believe, That the Bounds of Human Life being determined by the Power of
God, its impossible to die, though a Man throws himself into the Fire, if the
Hour of his Decease be not come. And, on the contrary, That another does in
vain endeavor to preserve himself from Dangers, seeing all the Cares, and
Pre-cautions, cannot rescue him from the End put to his Days, and that we must
obey the absolute Power of Fate, which has regulated both the Time, and Manner.
These Maxims have imprinted in the Minds and Actions of the Soldiery such a
Boldness, which without this would pass for Rashness; and therefore it is, that
the Turks, with but a few Men, made in the Beginning such considerable
Progresses.

This Belief of Predestination, was the same to them as a numerous Army, seeing
it inspired them with Courage, which does more than Multitudes of Soldiers.
It Is true, that this Intrepidity is much diminished, in Comparison of what it
was heretofore; but there are still some Remains, especially amongst the
Janissaries, and the Serden Guetchti, or, Forlorn Hope. These, as well as the
other Military People, do now use some Precautions; and there are several, who
on the Reproaches made them touching their Flight, and small Courage in certain
Rencounters, ingenuously answer, Dgian Tateli, Life is sweet; and allege, they
are in these Latter Times, Predestined to run away, and be worsted; as they
were heretofore to vanquish or die. In fine, if the Turks be persuaded (as they
are for the most part) that we must die according as Fate has Decreed; yet they
believe, their good or bad Actions, (touching which they hold Free Will) will
obtain the Glory of Paradise, or the Pains of Hell.

They also hold for an unquestionable Maxim of the Alcoran, That he who dies in
War, in the Emperor's Service, is a Martyr, and, if he returns Victorious, he
is Mahomet 's Champion. To this purpose, they have often in their Mouths these
Words, If I die in Battle I am a Martyr; and if I return alive, having slain
the Enemies, I shall be a Champion. This Conceit, at first produced great
Effects; it engaged the Turks, with great satisfaction, to undertake all
Military Expeditions, though never so hazardous, from the Assurance they had of
losing nothing; and, that in dying, they should obtain the Remission of all
their Sins, except ill-gotten Goods.

Mahomet made not this Exception without Design, but that his Followers might
behave themselves with more Courage, in Rencounters wherein are great Dangers;
as, in Naval Combats, where usually there is no flying away, the Prophet has
declared, That those Turks who should die therein, all their Sins, none
excepted, even that of ill-gotten Goods, shall be forgiven. Thus, the Fortune
of Temporal, and Eternal Life, being an infallible Motive to those who perish
in the Wars, both by Sea and Land, or who return Victorious; it is no wonder, if
the Enterprises of the Turkish Emperors, have been attended with such
prosperous Successes.

We may also say, the exact Discipline and Rule, which has been heretofore
amongst the Ottoman Troops, and especially amongst the Janissaries, has been a
considerable Means for the Aggrandizement of the Empire: And, the Method of
Educating Young People, chosen for the most part, out of those that are taken
Captive, (who are carefully instructed in Seminaries, or particular Seraglio's,
each according as his Genius and Disposition seems to incline) is an excellent
way of furnishing the State with Persons capable for all Employs.

Besides what we have now mentioned, which appears sufficient to establish a
powerful Government, it is further to be observed, That most of the Ministers
and Turkish Officers, have been always of Opinion, that the Enemies of the Port
would esteem themselves happy, should they let them enjoy their States without
disturbing them; and when they have done it, being always the first to begin
the War, they see no deliverance, but by the loss of some Place, and granting
them always their Demands, believing it impossible for them, long to resist so
formidable a Power; and they cannot do better, than to gain time, and not to
provoke them too much; to the neglecting, on this reason, the making Profit of
those great Advantages, which they have often obtained against them, and to the
carrying them on as far as they could.

It Is not likely, the present War should have the same Success; but this has
been too often seen in all others, which these Infidels have many times had with
their Neighbors; as, in that of Candia, which the Republic of Venice
sustained for so long a time, and during which the Turks have in all Combats
been worsted; so that their Naval Forces, which were in the beginning near
Three hundred Sail, were reduced to Forty Galleys, ill equipt, and some few
Vessels of Barbary: Yet, this War ended in the Loss of an entire Kingdom, and,
in such a Treaty, as became far more favorable to the Turks, than they could
dare to hope.

The winning the Battle of Cotzim, which could procure the Poles nothing less
than the taking of Bialogrod, the Passage of the Danube, and Conquest of
Constantinople (according as they themselves owned) did not yield them so much
as the retaking of Caminiec, nor to secure Vkrania and Podolia, which they have
since yielded by the Treaty of Zourawno.

The Moscovites had (according to their General Kamadanowski's Expressions)
innumerable and terrible Legions of Soldiers, when the Grand Seignior
denounced War against them in the Year 1677. on the Difference which was
between his Highness and the Moscovites, touching the Protection given to
Prince Dorozensko, and the Cossacks. They had brought into inevitable Danger,
the Great Vizir, Cara Mustapha, and all the Ottoman Army, near the Boristhenes;
where, according to the Confession of the Turks themselves, they might have
past this River, of which they were Masters, cut them in pieces, or destroy
them with Hunger: Yet, however this happened, they hindered not the taking and
Ruin of the Town and Fortress of Cheherim by the Infidels, nor the triumphant
Return of the Vizir with his broken Troops, having been as Fortunate in this
Rencounter, as he had showed himself rash and ignorant.

The Victory of the Germans in the Battle of St. Godard, was immediately
followed by a Truce prejudicial to the Emperor, by the yielding of one of his
best Places, and Articles stipulated against the Interests of his Subjects;
whose following Discontents have procured to his Imperial Majesty as much
Trouble, as it has drawn Submissions to the Grand Seignior from these Peoples
part. And one may admire, in this Occasion, the manner of most Events, which by
a certain Chain of Contingencies and different Affairs, are often found contrary
to the First Cause producing them. The Emperor having made a Peace with the
Turks, the Hungarians have showed themselves discontented, and demanded a War
against the Infidels, to recover the Country yielded to them, and to drive them
entirely out of Hungary. But this great Desire, which put them on fighting the
Infidels, has at last termin'd, in submitting themselves and Part of the
Kingdom to them. Here are Movements, and Engagements very opposite; and, we
must not wonder after this, if the Turks have so resolutely exposed their Party.

Mehemmet Kupruli, the Grand Vizir, thought himself much mistaken in this Maxim
at the Battle of Raab. He began with a kind of Raillery; for, seeing the
Christians March, he asked, Who are these Wenches? by reason of the Officers
Periwigs. But when he saw these People whom he despised, were not astonished at
the dreadful Cries, thrice reiterated, of the Name of God, Allah, allah, allah,
with which the Turks do always, with great Impetuosity, begin their Attacks;
these Infidels imagining to draw a great Advantage, by the Confidence which
they show in God, and the Belief that the surprising Noise with which they
pronounce his Name all together, is sufficient to discourage and overthrow
their Enemies; when, I say, the Vizir heard, that far from being affrighted,
these pretended Wenches cried, Come charge through them, which was followed by
a speedy Execution, he perceived he had not to do with Enemies who were afraid
of him, but with such as were resolved to exterminate him by the Defeat of all
the Troops that had passed the River, of which those who had escaped the Edge
of the Sword, were drowned in their Attempts of a Passage.

He clapped his Hand at the same time to his Scimitar, to oppose the Flight of
his Soldiers, some of which he killed; and being not able to gain his Point,
he fell into such an excess of Fury, as to weep, and attempt the killing
himself. He thought there was no Remedy, and that the Christians whom he
derided, were coming to finish their Victory on his Person, and the rest of his
Army: But, he came to himself, on the Remonstrance which was made him, That the
Germans, who commanded, would be contented with the granting a Peace from the
Port.

The Vizir being thus reassured, was glad to find his Maxim true, which he
began to distrust, seeing himself attacked with such Success. The German
Resident was discoursed, who attended the Ottoman Army; Deputies came from the
Emperor, and the Peace was concluded with the Surrender of Neuheusel, and the
Demolishment of the Fort Serini. To which it is not hard for the Germans to find
a sufficient Excuse for being tired with the length of the War: It Is no marvel,
if they desired to be delivered from it, on Conditions disadvantageous,
reserving their being revenged to some fitter Opportunity, which they now do
not want.

The Polanders might, according to all Probabilities, not have neglected the
Advantage Heaven offered them at the Battle of Cotzim, in the Facility of
retaking Caminiec, which was pressed with Famine, and which seemed an inevitable
Sequel of this Victory. But they chose rather to set to the Pillaging of
Moldavia, and to feed themselves with the Praises which all Christendom gave
them. A just Title, and of which they must have been more worthy, had they not
stopped in so fair a Way. But, instead of hastening to the infallible
Consummation of the Triumph, by pursuing the Remains which had escaped from
their Victory; in securing Two considerable Provinces from the Invasion of the
Turks, and in retaking Caminiec, they returned into Poland: and have been since
seen to enter into an Engagement so void of Precautions, that they saw no means
of getting out of it, but by a vexatious Treaty, which they were forced to
conclude at Zourawno, with a Precipitation not usual in such Occasions, and
which stripped the Poles of the Remainders of Vkrania and Podolia. Here Is an
Opposition very much contrary to the Custom they have, of vaunting their
Bravery, their Intrepidity, and Irreconcilable Hatred against the Turks. What
may one not say on this so large a Subject, and on the Cause of so deplorable a
Disgrace, which has afflicted one of the most valorous Nations in the World;
and which is so interested to sustain this great Reputation, which she had
obtained in the Opinion of the Turks, wherein there remain still very strong
Impressions of it?

Of the Two Peaces we now mentioned, one was too voluntary and hasty from the
Germans Part, and the other seems to have been concluded too generously from
the Poles Part. It was not the same in respect of that of Candia, which is a
most solid Proof of the admirable Conduct of a most ancient Republic, which
having always past in the World for a real Example of Wisdom, by the just
Effects of its Policy, must have also continued the Greatness of her Victories,
and Conquests, if the terrible Aggrandizement of the House of Austria, had not
obliged them to unfurnish their Places in the Levant and Islands, the better to
assure the Conservation of those in the Terra firma; which has given the
Ottoman Emperors an extreme Facility, since one Century, to usurp a great Part
of them.

These out-Parts of Christendom, have been defended, to the Glory and Advantage
of Religion. They have served to blunt the greatest Effort of the Ottoman
Power. And it is evident, we owe to the Republic of Venice, the weakening and
dissipation of the Turkish Naval Armies; which being so puissant, and numerous
in the Beginning, are not lessened, or (to speak better) destroyed, but by the
vigorous Resistance of the Galleys, Galeasses, and other Venetian Vessels. We
must then grant, that it is to their Forces and Intelligence on the Sea, that is
due this so valuable an Effect to Christendom, That the Turks have never yet
reached to Rome, but are reduced to that Condition wherein we see them.

As to the last War, which the Turks had with the Moscovites on account of the
Cossacks, which caused the Siege and Ruin of the Town and Fortress of Cheherim
by these Infidels; its certain, that the Vizir, Cara Mustapha, who commanded in
Person in this Expedition, lost therein more than half of his Army, which was
about Fourscore thousand Man, and those who escaped were reduced to extreme
Misery. But to comfort himself in this Disgrace, and to make his Peace with his
Master, it was enough that he had extricated himself out of this Difficulty,
and carried away Cheherim.

If after the Place had been taken, the Moscovites had remained firm camped on
the side of the Boristhenes, which they had happily passed, to the Number of
above an Hundred and seventy thousand Men, whilst the Turks were busied in
taking and burning Cheherim (which, a Man may say, was no more than one and the
same thing) these Infidels who were before them, and dared not attack them, nor
retire for fear of being charged, must have certainly perished by the Rigor of
the Winter, the Bogs, and Want of Provisions, by reason of their Distance from
their own Country. For so great an Advantage, the Moscovites needed only have
sat still, profiting by the Facility they have of enduring Cold, to which they
are accustomed, and in that they were in their own Territories, where they
wanted nothing, through the commodiousness of a great River, of which they were
wholly Masters. In fine, they were fenced on the Land side, by their
Retrenchment, which they call Tabour, so formidable to the Turks. But instead
of receiving the Fortune which presented her self to them, they forsake her, by
repassing the Boristhenes, and constrain her to return to the Infidels, whom
she seemed to be willing to forsake.

Certainly these Mahometans must mightily value themselves, seeing their
Enemies grow impatient on the very point of Triumphing, and give themselves the
trouble of repassing a great River, to avoid a glorious Victory, which might
have been gained by sitting still. They were in so low a Condition, that it is
scarce credible; and, their Policy would not have upheld them so long, had not
the Christians been so prejudiced (as they have always been) in their Favor,
and high Esteem of the Power of these Infidels.

It has been to this time believed, that this Empire is another Peru for Men
and Money; they have been all taken for Soldiers, Captains, and Generals of a
Consummate Experience. The Grand Seignior and his Vizir, have the same Belief;
for, by their Authority, they raise Men, lay continual Taxes, and place in
Governments of Provinces, and at the Head of Armies and particular Troops,
Gardiners, Barbers, and other such like People of Quality, who never saw the
Face of an Enemy. It Is sufficient a Man be Grand Vizir, to be Generalissimo;
and, that Soldiers know how to shoot, to fight, and overthrow their Enemies.

To which we may add, those Soldiers who are wont often to purchase an Exemption
from going to War, and others who in so great Numbers exercise Trades. A man
makes himself a Soldier on Foot or Horseback, to live on pillaging and robbing
the People. The Officers do the same, they be all Thieves by Necessity; for,
they are peeled from time to time. There are Thousands of Soldiers, who having
either Credit or Money, obtain their Pay, and are excused from all manner of
Duty. And false Musters are no where more practiced, it being the Interest of
the Grand Seignior himself, that his Companies should not be complete; this
being so much Money saved in his Coffers.

It appears from these real Observations, and others, which the Sequel of this
Discourse will furnish us withal; That, if the Christians have had hitherto the
Mishap to judge so ill of the Grand Seignior's Power, which has caused them
considerable Losses; his Highness himself has fallen into the like Fauit, in
such a manner, which is no less prejudicial to him: For, if he could heretofore
vaunt of filling his Treasuries, and raising as many People as he would; he
begins now to perceive, that his so vast Domination ending in Solitude and
Deserts, all the Money he may have will signify little, not finding any body to
whom he may part with it, to any useful Purpose.

A Man may be convinced of his Covetousness, by considering his Conduct toward
Cara Mustapha, when he returned from his first Enterpize, since he was raised
to the Supreme Vizirship; I mean, from the Campaign of Cheherim, we now
mentioned; I was then at Constantinople. His Highness did not set himself on
reproaching him, that in so important an Occasion as that was, he had so little
Care and Foresight, that instead of managing the Officers in exciting them by
some Liberality, he had discouraged them in exacting Money from each of them,
to the very lowest, to keep them in their Posts; whilst on the other hand, he
reduced them to Famine, making himself the Master of the Provisions, which he
sold them at what rate he pleased. Perhaps this Irregularity, which was
sufficient to overturn all, never came to the Grand Seignior's Notice, and
should he have been informed of it, 'twas sufficient there was no ill Effect;
and the Profit the Grand Vizir had drawn hence, would have served him as a
Means, to press him the more to deliver into the Imperial Treasury the Tribute
he owed, by putting therein a considerable Sum of the Remains of the Expense
of the Campaign, after the Pay of the Militia was acquitted.

His Highness pretended, that the Vizir ought to do it, according to the
Example of the other Vizir's, his Predecessors; it not being possible,
according to his Expression, that such extraordinary Sums of Money, as those
which were raised, could be entirely consumed; although this Chief Minister,
represented they were, and that he would give a good Account of them. In the
mean time, the Soldiers Pay was deferred; but his Highness intending not to
let it be taken out of his Treasury, and his Minister constantly affirming, he
could not acquit it; the Expedient was, That the Treasurer should furnish the
Sums required, and the Vizir and Superintendant of the Exchequer, should be
bound to make them good.

A Man may easily judge of the Consequences of these Examples, and how a War
well ordered is capable of overthrowing these Infidels; seeing, that besides
the Ruin, which may be caused by the respective Armies, the Covetousness of the
Master and the Minister, may produce a Desolation more effective than that of
Arms.

It Is also further to be observed, in favor of the Ottoman Power, that the
Turks seldom travel, and go not into strange Countries, unless they be
Domestics, and belong to some Envoy, or on some other extraordinary Occasion;
That most of those Persons, as well as those who are in the Service of the
Grand Seignior or Bassa's, and in the Troops, are Men chosen for their Size and
Shapes, being taken out of the Children of Tribute, or Slaves which are bought
and picked according to Fancy. This has given Occasion to believe, especially
when no other Turks have been seen than those I now mentioned, that all in
general are of this kind; whereas it is certain, that in Turkey there are Persons
of small Stature, and as ill Shaped as elsewhere; they have only more
Ostentation and Vanity, and are, as much as possible, filled with their own
Conceits. And I have observed, that the Turks in general esteem themselves very
Rich with a mean Estate, as they believe themselves very knowing with a small
stock of Learning.

It has also been of singular Advantage to this Empire, that most of those who
have traveled thither, have out of a vain foolish Humor, disguised, in Favor
of the Turks, the most considerable Truths, of which they pretend to be the
faithful Relaters. This Carriage is exceeding unjust; the Truth ought to be
made public, that People may not be prepossessed with these false Notions.

But on the contrary, if some do relate Things clearly according to what they
are, how many are there of those who have traveled thither, and even lived long
in Turkey, who have only minded their Employs, their Pleasure or Profit, and are
at their Departure less informed of Particulars which relate to the essential
Part of this Empire, than of Divertisements, which are taken very disagreeably?
Instead of a Description in general of what every one may say in Geography;
instead of Relations of the Beauty or Ugliness of the Levantine Women; instead
of entertaining the World with the Terror of the Ottoman Arms; instead of
writing Letters, which have made Impressions on Peoples Minds, by representing
their Abode in Turkey as in a Paradise, and the Turks as extraordinary People;
they should have instructed the Public with what is necessary, for an exact
Information of the Ottoman Power, and of the Hatred and Oppression of these
Infidels against the Christians of the Defects of their Government and their
great Weakness, of which it is time we show the principal Causes.

CHAP. IV. Of the principal Causes of the Decay of the Ottoman Power, with a
Description of the Passage of the Dardanels, and a Relation of the Facility the
Christian Princes have at present, of retaking Constantinople.
THE First Cause of the Ruin of the Turkish Empire, comes from the Largesses
and Magnificences, which Sultan Solomon I. exercised during his Reign. He did
it with such Profusion, that having exhausted all the Treasures of the Empire,
his Descendants were constrained to engage their Domains, especially Sultan
Ibrahim, under whom the Revenues were found alienated for several Years. This
obliged the Grand Vizir Mehemmet Kupruli (of whom we have spoke) to impose new
Taxes, which were very hard; not so much by reason of the considerable Sums,
as from the Severity of those who received them, in extorting much more than
was their Due, and requiring them to make Declarations that they had paid no
more than they ought. This Disorder proceeded from the Number of Aga's or
Officers, whom the Chief Vizir and, Tefterdar, send for the Service of the
Port, and for the Exaction of these Rights, which serve for a Pretense of
taking whatever they can lay hands on, and to enrich themselves, without Fear
of any Punishment; because the Superior Ministers sacrificing the Public
Interest to their Particular, do hereby ordinarily satisfy their Officers, and
only give them these sort of Commissions, by way of Recompense, and Indemnity
of Charges, which they are forced to make by their Attendance.

Money being the Prop and Maintenance of all States, when it flows freely from
the Subjects to the Prince, and from the Prince to the Subjects, as well as by
the good Order of Moneys, and Purity of its Kinds; one may believe in this
Respect, that the Ottoman Empire is fallen, and falls every Day into a great
Disorder. The Sums which have once entered into the Grand Seignior's Coffers,
never come out thence, but on Account of an extraordinary War, or the Structure
of some Mosque; far from being employed in continual Gratifications, and
innumerable Pensions, and glorious and surprising Expenses, which maintain and
enrich so many Thousands of poor People, as there are seen authentic Examples
of this in Christendom. And, the Current Money of Turkey, is almost all false,
or extremely debased. They suffer great Quantities to come from strange
Countries, and permit it to be here current; and those who bring this Money,
change it for better, especially the Piasters Sevillanes, or else they lay it
out in Merchandise: Thus they carry away whatever is good in the Empire,
leaving nothing but Brass, which would have been to this present a real Means
of insensibly exhausting the Turkish Empire of all its good Silver or Gold, had
it not been for the great Avidity of Gain of some of those who carry thither
these Moneys, which have been often cried down; as, the Osmani's, the Temins,
or Five Penny Pieces of France, and the Quarto's of Poland; the Loss of which
amounted to incredible Sums, especially in Reference to the Five Penny Pieces,
which the Merchants paid here at Twelve for Five Shillings, at Twenty and
Eight only in the Beginning, whilst that for Five Shillings, they had Thirty,
Thirty six, and to Forty; so much were they changed. This Money was made in the
States of Genoa, under the Coin of the Principality of Dombes; and, had the
Merchants been contented with the Gain of Cent. pro Cent. they might have past
as much as they would: But, the Alteration becoming too excessive, which well
proves the Sottishness of the Turks; they at last opened their Eyes, and cried
down this Money, which caused the Ruin of a World of People.

It Is not to be imagined what Fines are tolerated in the Turkish Empire. All
those who are Justices, do search for occasions of seizing on other Peoples
Estates; and, when there is no Murder, or Robbery committed within the Extent
of their Jurisdiction, (which are commonly the Two Principal Means to excite
them) they know how to suppose them. They cause Blood to be spilt in a Quarter;
they have Thieves at their devotion, or else they make the Door of some Shop to
be broke open, and they require for the Blood Forty thousand Aspers; which they
force those of that Preeinct to pay, in giving the most apparent Strokes on the
Soals of their Feet, or throwing them into Prison. They do the same in respect
of Robbery, obliging them to produce the Thief, which is impossible, seeing he
is the Judges Confident; or else condemning them to great Fines, which not
being determined as the price of Blood, these poor people cannot get quit, but
by delivering up all they are worth.

False Witnesses, which are very common in the Empire, cause therein much
Disorder; there are for all sorts of Affairs, and at all Prizes. They have
their Agents or Cursiters, who assist at Pleadings, and fail not of supplying
Evidences to those who have been remitted to make proof by this way; and,
according to the Consequence of the Affair, they furnish more or less
considerable, whose apparent Virtue may give Weight to the Testimony.

Fires have often ruined, and do ruin every day several Persons; they often
happen by the Wickedness of certain People, who fire Houses on purpose, to make
advantage of the Disorder caused thereby; for, they being only of Wood, and
full of Painting, and besmeared with Oily Stuff, after their manner; there are
many burnt in a small time. The Rapidity of this Element is sometimes so
violent, that the Inhabitants can only save themselves; and a Man that is rich,
and at his Ease, is, in the space of two hours time, reduced to a state of
Beggary. Not only in Constantinople, but also in several other places, there
are Testimonies of this Desolation; and they look upon it as nothing, if there
are not above four or five hundred Houses burnt at a time. It Is not long since
the Town of Galata was wholly burnt down in the space of two days; in the year
following, Constantinople received also the same Disgrace, there being only one
of the Ends of the Town which could be saved from the Fire; and, of more than
forty Fires which I saw, during seven Years continual Residence in this Capital
of the Empire, there have been five or fix Fires, which have consumed Fifteen,
Sixteen, and Twenty Thousand Houses.

The Cause of the loss of several Empires, and which has destroyed that of the
Romans in Rome, and the Greeks in Constantinople, I mean, Luxury; is now in
Excess amongst the Turks. They be not like those Ancient Turcomans, who lay in
the Fields, who never never eat but when necessitated, who flept on the bare
Ground, who drank only Water, and clothed themselves with Beasts Skins. These,
on the contrary, are very commodious and rich in their Houses, eat delicious
Meats, drink Liquors mixed with Amber and Musk, and very often Wine and strong
Waters. The Grand Vizir, Ahmet Kupruli, was so accustomed to it, that he could
not meet with Drinks strong enough; which set him on making Compositions of
Essences, and most violent Liquors, of which he at last drank so great a
Quantity, that he dyed three Days after. They sleep on Beds of of Swans
Feathers; and to promote sleep, cause the Soals of their Feet, to be gently
tickled by young Boys. They Cloth themselves with the finest Cloth, and Stuffs
of Silver and Gold, especially the Women, who are wholly covered with them.
They make use of precious Furrs, and Silken Shifts; and when they go to the
Army, carry along with them so many Persons, Horses, and so much Baggage, that
besides the delays which this causes, the great number of useless Mouths
starves the rest.

A most grievous Abuse to the Grand Seignior, and which falls always on his
Christian Subjects, is, the bad Use, or the Cheat offered his Highness, in the
gathering the Children of Tribute. This Usage is not now so considerable as it
was heretofore, although it ought to have been much increased, seeing they were
not wont to be taken but once in thirty Years, and now they are Collected every
Tenth Year. The fault of this, besides that the Countries continue every day to
be dispeopled, is from hence, in that the Officers entrusted with this
Commission, designing their own Profit, sell the Children very dear to their
Fathers and Mothers, who furnish them with others, whom they buy of poor Turks,
without being Circumcised. Thus is his Highness's Intention deceived, who
thinking to do an Action of Piety and Religion, by increasing the Number of the
Mussulmen, locks up in his Seraglio's, Turks instead of Christians. The
Villages are hereby ruined; for, a Father impoverishes himself, to save his
Child; and only the Exacters make their advantage of these Disorders, which
beggars the Christians, and does not enrich the Grand Seignior. It Is certain,
in proof of what I now say, that the Seraglio which stands above the Vineyards
of Perce, named Galata of Sarai, (which was one of the most considerable Places
for Education of these Children, of which there were great numbers) serves only
now for a Dog-House, and the entertainment of some Gardiners.

The Turks know not now the Order of the least Battle. They content themselves
with being swift in seizing on some Posts, in making a great Noise, and
imprinting Fear, by running out of Order, and the dreadful Cries with which
they fall to Action; and, when they carry away any advantage, it is by Terror,
by the little Resistance they find, by the number of Renegadoes they have
always with them, and by the greatness of their Numbers, rather than by any
true Skill in matters of War, or true Bravery.

The Janissaries, who were a Militia of the most Warlike Persons, brought up
under most exact Discipline, trained up by the constant Experience of Combats
and Victories; are not now the least shadow of what they have been: This was
such a dreadful, and well ordered Body of Troops, that the Grand Seignior
himself had not the liberty of disposing of Offices, without the participation
of the Janizary Aga, or Chief of the Janissaries. But, the Policy of the two
Vizirs, Kupruli's, (...) so greatly exhausted them, during the late Wars of
Candia, and by reason of some other Accidents which have since happened; that
they are reduced to so low an estate, that the Grand Vizir, Cara Mustapha
Bassa, of his only Authority, did, during the Siege of Cheherim, deprive of his
Office, the General of this Militia, for not entirely submitting to his
Humors. Peace has notably contributed to the Decay of this Empire. Here is
excercised, during this time, an universal pillaging, of which the People is
the Source; where all the Thieves, in what number soever they be, come and
store themselves, and apparently they will take so much, that all will be found
consumed at last, which is palpably seen by the Desertion of all the People,
who forsake the Country, to retire into Towns. From Constantinople to
Adrianople, which are about Fifty Leagues distance, the most populous Place,
and which ought to be the most commodious of the Empire, a man must carry along
with him what he needs; Passengers lie in Hans, or Public Places destined for
Travelers, and excepting seven or eight Villages which he in the Roau, a Man
sees in all this Space not above Three or Four Hamlets on the right or left of
this great Road. The best half of the Empire is deserted, by reason of the
Robberies committed by the Ministers of Justice and of the Sword, as well as by
those of Religion, (as has been amply Remarked, and to which I shall add the
following Observations.)

The Turks buy their Employs very dear, not by the Price and Value of each
Office, for there is no set Tax on that, but by the Intrigues, and Presents they
must make to come thereto. And when once they be entered, they are obliged,
tarrying in it but a short time, to Rob and Tyrannize over the People, to
reimburse themselves of their Expenses, and to get some thing over, to pass to
other Dignities, where they pillage and commit their Rapines as before. By this
means, there are seen an endless company of Thieves; and who taking all the
Estates and Riches of the People, makes them pass from the lowest Offices to
the greatest. This is a perpetual Flux, which never descending, causes general
Ruins. And this Disorder proceeds from this, that the Grand Vizir, the primum
mobile of this Empire, making continually, either by Duty or Policy, Presents
to his Master, is obliged to procure others from the Bassa's and
Underofficers, and these from others, who are under them; and so of the rest
to the mean people, who are found to be a Sacrifice to the Covetousness of both
one and the other.

The rapacious humor of Cara Mastapha Bassa, transported him to that Excess,
as cannot be expressed; putting him on all kinds of Extortions and Violences,
which might bring him in Money. He often sold Licenses for such things as were
forbidden, to have a pretense to seize on men's Persons, and the Effects of poor
people, who thought themselves sheltered from these Violences; which he ceased
not to make them feel, under pretense that it was contrary to his knowledge
they had granted them these Licenses, but that his Kiahia, or Superintendant,
had done it. There were seen several Examples of this Perfidiousness, which he
knew how to dissemble to the Grand Seignior, or discover them to him in such a
manner as should excuse him from blame, and lay the fault on others; especially
once, when the Boza was forbidden.

This Boza, is a Drink made of Honey and Turkish Corn, which inebriates after
much drinking of it; and, notwithstanding the Prohibitions which the Grand
Seignior had ordered the Grand Vizir to issue out, there were still some part
of Constantinople where the Turks went to regal themselves with it. His
Highness coming one day out of a Mosque, found a man who was dead drunk with
this Liquor; which gave him to understand, as well from his own Observations,
as what he was told by some attending on him, that his Commands were not
observed. The Grand Seignior spoke with great heat about it to the Vizir, who
excused himself, saying, That he was ignorant they sold any more since his
Highness's Order: And, having maliciously thrown the blame on his Kiahia, he
went in the same Moment to his House, where he immediately caused his Head to
be cut off, which he sent to the Grand Seignior, to prove the better to him, by
this severe treatment of one of his own Creatures, his Zeal and Fidelity for
the Execution of his Highness's Orders; who apear'd so satisfied with this,
that he gave him a great part of the deceased's Estate, which amounted to above
a Million of Crowns, gathered only in Four Years time, wherein he had exercised
this Office.

It was muttered in Constantinople, that Cara Mustapha was far from sending his
Kiahia to the Grand Seignior before he took off his Head, because he would have
informed his Highness of several Things concerning his Masters Conduct, against
which all the World exclaimed. He was very careful to appropriate to himself
those Parts of the Town where the Houses had been burned, to build Shops; which
he hired out to his own private Advantage, to the Prejudice of particular
Persons to whom the Houses before belonged; and without considering, that
besides the Fire which came from ruining these poor People, they were farther
more unhappy, in not having a Place to set up in.

There happened in my time an Occasion of his Covetousness; a Business as
ridiculous, as it had been then little Customary. The Bey of Moldavia, being to
send the usual Tribute to the Grand Seignior of Money, proposed to the Vizir,
to send him instead of Money, certain Herds of Cattle, which he might easily
dispose of, and put a considerable Sum into his own Coffers. The Bargain was
struck, so that for some time after there was scarcely any thing seen in the
Streets of Constantinople, Galata, Pera, and those Parts, but Herds of He and
She-Goats, of an extraordinary Strength and Stature, having each of the Males
Four Horns Two Foot long, which put the Turks on fastening them together, to
hinder them from doing Mischief. The Turks were constrained for Fifteen Days
together to eat no other Meat, there being no other in the Butcheries; but the
foreign Ministers and chief of the Town, having had the Liberty to store
themselves with Beef and Mutton for that time, only the common People suffered,
which was not without great Imprecations against the Vizir, to whom was wished,
that the Fire which happened Three Months after, and burned the neighboring
Parts, might have consumed the magnificent Palace, which he had in a fine part
of Constantinople; but this happened not, by reason of his causing such vast
Numbers of Houses to be pulled down which stood near his, to which Loss he
would not contribute a Penny, saying, That if he had not done it, the Fire would
have consumed them.

If the base Birth of the Officers of this State, and their Education, serve to
keep them in an absolute Dependence on the Grand Seignior, it also shows them,
that they have nothing, and that they must use all the Means imaginable to get
Money. Their Justice, of which People are pleased to recite Examples, to blame
the Lengths and Chican'ries of that which is exercised in the greatest part of
Christendom, is for the most part, and at bottom, mere Violence; which, with
the Avarice of the Military Officers, depopulating such a great many Countries,
has made of Constantinople, and circumjacent Parts along the Chanal, a kind of
Province, where several people are gathered together, and do still flock; which
has made, as I have elsewhere observed, most of the other Parts abandoned, and
reduced this Empire to eminent ruin.

It Is probable this may happen ere long, at least, in the Europaean parts, if
the Enemies of the Turks profiting by these Disorders, and those which it has
fallen into within these three or four years, do strike home, and follow their
blow. The City of Constantinople, which is Triangular, and without question the
finest Prospect the Imagination can desire; is to be considered, as the Heart,
and noblest part of this Empire, on which depend all the rest. It lies wholly
open like an Amphitheatre, on little Mounts and Hillocks, to the Brinks of the
Sea. It Is true, she has very neat high and double Walls, with good Towers at
the face of its Triangle, on the side which looks to the Land, where she is
passing well secured: but, as a considerable Person amongst the Turks told me,
with whom I had a long discourse; it is not so easy for the Enemy to enter
there, as by the two other sides, which lie exposed to the Sea, and in several
places without the Walls, by reason the Water, Storms, and Time, have ruined
them, and the Turks have never minded to repair them.

All thereabouts, and what is at the Entrance of the Port Town of Scutari in
Asia, Tower of Leander, Galata, Topana, Fondukli, Bechi, Ktache, the Point of
the Seraglio, and above two Thirds of the Town, are of like Situation. If it
should chance that four or five good Vessels, as this same Turk observed,
should come here, they would make sad work with Bombs amongst the Seraglio's
and Mosques; and as for the rest of the Town, your Fire-Pots, and other such
Inventions, would cause an universal Terror and Desolation. To which would not
a little contribute, a great number of Christian Slaves, and other people, who
always are desirous of these Disorders; and the Combustion would be the more
easy, by means of the Wind which continually reigns there, and that the Houses
which are one above another, by reason of the disposition of the Ground, are
only of Timber, having several Balconies, and great Tops of thin and fine Wood,
dawbed over with Oil and Paintings, after their manner.

The Turk I now spoke of, who discoursed with this freedom to me, was a
Circassian Renegado, named Bekir Bey. He had been taken a Slave at the Age of
ten Years, and brought up by a Captain Bassa, who had gotten him the Preferment
of commanding a Galley; but, escaping from a Wrack, which he suffered with Five
or Six other Galleys, which were lost in the Black Sea, he made a Vow never to
leave the Land, by reason (said he to me) that having conceived the Design of
returning if he could this Campaign into his own Country, to re-imbrace the
Christian Religion, on occasion of an Inspiration which he thought he had felt
for that; God had showed him by this Misfortune, that he was mistaken, and that
he could not die more happily than in the Mohammedan Religion, seeing that was
the best. How should one doubt it? added he, considering the blindness and
folly wherein God suffered the Christians to lie, in letting the Turks
continually invade their Countries, and biting and devouring one another like
Dogs, and not to have the sense, not only not to defend themselves from the
true Believers, but to leave unattempted two simple Fortresses, meaning the
Dardanels, and the ruining entirely Constantinople; seeing its so easy; it
being plainly apparent, God preserved this great Town, being the Zoar of the
Faithful.

I remember, that being with Mr. du Queen, at the first Bombarding of Algiers,
these Barbarians complained at their being Surpised in the Night, and that the
French did not do well to War against them with Infernal Fires, which fell from
the Clouds, and with Pottage-Pots full of Powder and Fury, speaking of the
Carcasses and Bombs. No Star bono (said they in the Moresco Language) Francesi
Venir a Ka di notte come ladri. They threw the Bombs by Night, to shun the
Enemies Cannon, they being not then made to carry so far as now. If then these
Pirates, who are used to Fire and Combats, were so afrighted at them; and if
the French reduced Algiers, which is undoubtedly one of the strongest Maritim
Towns in the Mediterranean, and the best defended by its Situation, by reason
of a dangerous Road, and its numerous and great Artillery; what would become of
Constantinople in the Condition it now is, even of the Dardanels, and all the
Towns of the Ottoman Empire, which are situated on the Sea, of which Three
Quarters of the Merchant-Inhabitants, Greeks, Armenians, Jews, or Slaves, do
not know what Color, nor even what kind of thing Power is?

We have already said, how the Houses of Constantinople are built. The great
Commodiousness of its Port, the Depth and Goodness of the Shore, unto which all
forts of Vessels may come to the very Doors; the Tower of Leander, which is
almost in the midst of the Water, and a little on the Coast of Asia between
Scutari, the Point of the Seraglio, and Topana, is more considerable for its
Name, than any thing else; seeing it is only a kind of Dungeon surrounded by a
piteous Wall, in which there is for all the Garrison, only a poor Fisherman and
Three pieces of Cannon without Stocks. The Turks call it Kizcoulaci, the
Maids-Tower, which answers the History of Leander and Hero, which we attribute
to it.

The Town of Scutari, which lies a little higher toward the Black Sea, is not
much better stored with Artillery, there being not above Five or six Pieces,
which are near the Custom-house, to salute the Vessels; and these Cannons (no
more than those which might be planted on the side of the Sea at Topana) do not
deserve the least Consideration, lying uncovered on the Shore. There Is only the
Artissery lying from the Point of the Seraglio, which are about Four score
Pieces, amongst which we may reckon Forty of the best; which being taken from
the Christians, may indeed pass for very good ones; but then their ill
Situation is to be considered, lying also open out of Walls, without any
Retrenchment, and the small Experience, joined to the Poltronry of some sorry
Gardiners, with their great Sugar-loaf-Bonnets, who attend them, and which
serve rather for an Ornament to the Entrance of the Port and the Seraglio, than
any thing which ought to imprint the least Sentiments of Carefulness or dread
to Vessels of War, who can fire their Cannon as fast as their Muskets, and
which insult over Fortresses and best fenced Towns.

All this is undoubtedly certain, and cannot by any one be gainsaid. But it
may be answered what the Turks say, That for the Execution of an Enterprise of
this Consequence, Ships with Mortar-Pieces cannot fall down from the Clouds,
neither can they be transported over the Land: In a Word, That besides the New
Castles which stand at the Mouth of the Chanel of the Dardanello's, they must
moreover pass between the Two Castles which bear this Name, which have been
judged hitherto insurmountable, as well by reason of the Straitness of the
Chanel, and Current, which is very rapid, as also because there are in each
about Thirty Pieces of Cannon of Twenty and Twenty five Foot long, and of Two
and Three Foot Diameter in the Mouth, which carry Stone-bullets weighing Seven
or eight hundred Pound, and which being pointed just above the Water, traverse
the Chanel with mavelous Exactness, making Rebounds like a Shell, glancing on
the Water from one Shore to another, where they may be taken up, to serve again
the Fortress on the other side. That no one has hitherto tried this Passage,
unless the Venetian General Lazaro Mocenigo, who (victorious in the great
Combat of the Dardanello's in the Year 1657, of which he pursued the Remains of
the Naval Army of the Turks, whom he came from defeating) unfortunately
perished in the Passage between these Castles; a Mishap which oblished the rest
of the Army to desist from the Design which they had, of going to
Constantinople: All this may be true, yet hence cannot be inferred the
Impossibility of the Passage.

One may find, on the contrary, the Enterprise very easy, when the Matter shall
be sincerely considered; for, not to speak of the New Castles, which are at too
great Distance from one another, to do any great Execution, should one pass
through the midst of the Mouth of the Chanel, having been built since the War
of Candia, to guard the Roads which lie on both Sides, and to hinder the Stay
or Descents of an Army, without thinking on the Measures which those who have
Wars with the Turks may take, to make themselves Masters of the Old Castles, by
Storm, by applying the Petard, or in some other manner, seeing they have only a
simple Wall without a Ditch, Towers, or Pallisado's: I had the Leisure to
observe them in this Condition, especially that of Asia, which is the less
strong, the last time I saw it in the Year 1682. when I went with the Captain
of the French King's Vessel, to interpret the Discourse he had with the Captain
Bassa, anchoring with all his Galleys above the Castles; where the said French
Commander was sent, by the Marquis du Queen, who lay at Anchor between the Isle
of Tenedos and the Coast of Troyes, without considering that great Vessels
firing fiercely from both Sides, in the Conjuncture of a fresh Wind, may easily
pass these Castles, which after the first Discharge of their Cannon, can fire
no more, by reason of the great Flashes of Light, which perfectly discover
those that attend them, and that these Vessels with their Sailing would
surmount the Stream with more Swiftness than Mocenigo's Galley had done, which
had already passed, and gone through all the Batteries of the Castles, when he
was killed by a Sail-yard which fell on his Head; without using the Expedient
so often proposed, of making the Ships of War pass with Two other Vessels, which
on both Sides should be crammed with Wool or Earth, to deaden the Blow, and
hereby be secured from the Shot of these great Pieces in the Castles. There Is
no need of all these Preparations, now that with the mavelous Invention of
Bombs, and the way of making them fly so far as they do, Two Galleys with
Mortar-Pieces might beat down these Castles in Twelve Hours Time, the Weather
being almost always favorable, by reason of the Shelter of the Capes; there
being moreover in all Places very good Anchoring. This might be done with
greater Facility, than Algiers was reduced, and other places far better
provided with Artillery, and skilful Gunners, than all the Fortresses together
of the Turks.

These great Cannons of Sestos and Ahydos, which we call Dardanello's, are
retained and stopped by the hinder part, with Beams and Free-stones on the
Ground; so that having no Stocks, they never suffer the least Movement. So that
to use them, it is only observed, whether the Vessel they would shoot at lies
between both, or right against a Mark or Place, which is known on the other
Side of the Chanel, in which time they Fire such or such a Cannon, which
carries not directly over against, to avoid damnifying the opposite Castle, but
a little slooping higher and lower on the Chanel, each of these Castles
observing the other's Motions.

There has not been heard of any Example, since the last Venetian War, of these
Fortresses having fired any otherwise than to salute; excepting against a Bark,
either of Genoa or Venice (if I be not mistaken.)

It Is the Custom for all Merchantmen who leave Constantinople, to stop at these
Castles two Days to be searched, to hinder the escapings of Slaves, the
Non-payment of Customs, and counterband Goods. This Bark having here cast
Anchor, it did not go to the Bottom of the Sea; so that being carried away by
the Stream, it was judged on either Shore that she shifted away, although all
her Sails were folded. I was told for certain; that both Castles fired all
their Guns at her, without any effect, or any other Hurt, save the sending her
a great deal of Water, cast up by the Rebounds of the Bullets. It Is true, this
was toward the Evening; and the Fear which those on Board conceived, was so
great, that some Seamen leaped overboard, to get to Shore by swimming;
dreading to be drowned with the Bark; which having at length got near the Shore
some Miles off, and the Master having some time before come down into the
Castles to give an Account of his Lading, this justified his Innocence.

It Is in truth very Fine, to see these Fortresses all in Fire, and to hear at
the same time the dreadful Roaring of these Cannons, and the Echo's in all the
Chanel, which is bordered with Mounts: The Sea, which skips up, and becomes
white with Froth, by reason of the Rebounds which these. Bullets make on the
Water, and the prodigious Smoke mixed with Fire accompanying all this, forms a
Spectacle very astonishing. I had the Pleasure of observing it, and telling
Twenty five Rebounds of one Bullet, when I was just between these Castles with
the forementioned French Commander, in the time when the Captain Bassa weighing
Anchor to continue his Course to the White Sea, was saluted by several
Discharges of all the Guns of these Fortresses. Which may be imputed to another
Motive, than that of pure Civility or Duty to the Captain Bassa, as knowing
there was a Christian Officer, who was Spectator; seeing, when the Turkish
Admiral passes, the Castles are wont to salute him but by a single Discharge of
their Cannon; whereas then, they made several Discharges, which we could not
distinguish, by reason of the great Noise and Smoke.

The Enemies of the Ottoman Empire, may elude these Fortresses so much the
easier, in that their Cannons are not pointed the length of the Chanel, which
cannot be done without a new Construction of the whole Fabric of the Castles;
and should this be, it is observable that their Bullets go not so far by much,
as an Iron Bullet of Twelve Pound would do, by reason of their extreme
Grossness and Weight; several of them also are subject to be broke, by the
strength of the Powder. Thus Galleys with Mortar-Pieces, lying above the
Castles at a reasonable Distance, may easily insult over, and beat down these
Fortresses, mistakenly reputed so formidable. And, is it not known by every
Body, since the Examples which have happened, that whoever shall be Master of
the Sea, and without Apprehension of a Naval Army on the Enemies Parts coming
to disturb him, may now by means of Eombs (which fly farther and almost as
swift as the Cannon) make every Maritim Town submit, however strong it be?

Only Four good Vessels between Tenedos, Troyes, the Janissaries Cape, and the
Passage to the New Castles (where it is every where good Anchoring) would be
sufficient to hinder any Vessel from coming out or into Constantinople, which
they might destroy with Famine, or by means of Rebellions. To hinder then the
Execution of these Projects (which seem to be equally easy and necessary to
Christian Princes) there must be Politic Reasons, which God only can
dissipate, when he pleases; for, its impossible to believe, as several pretend,
that the Consideration of interrupting Commerce, has been hitherto the real
Hinderance.

Yet it seems, that Trade is such a delicious Morsel, as makes it hard to be
denied; however, it is deplorable, that those who are most interess'd to hinder
the Aggrandisment of the Turks, have under the specious Pretense of Commerce,
sacrificed the Interests of States, the Honor of Kings, and the Advantage and
Increase of true Religion. The Spaniards also have not a little profited the
Ottoman Empire by driving out the Moors and Jews from their Conquests, who have
in great Numbers peopled the Grand Seignior's Countries, in supplying the
Defect of natural Turks, and entertaining Commerce with the Franck Nations. We
may also affirm, that Rome (as Holy as it is) has contributed to the Grandeur
of the Turks, by the Greeks instructed in Italy, of which there are public
Colleges; who return Home after they have got Learning, where they are
Physicians, and Interpreters to Vizirs, and instruct the Turks in all Affairs,
though never so disadvantageous and pernicious to the Christians.

These Reflections will exclude the Complaints of so great an Evil; for, in
fine, those over whom the Turks have made such considerable Progresses, being
themselves the Causes of them, it belongs to them to procure the necessary
Remedy, and whatever Means they may have for this; yet it seemed as if they
never ought to have thought of them, without the Occasion which God now puts
into their Hands in the present War against the Infidels, and the Liberty all
Christendom now has, by Enjoyment of Peace among themselves, to unite their
Arms against these Infidels.

And if this present Expedition does not procure the entire Ruin of the Turks,
yet will it put their Empire into such a great Disorder, out of which they will
never be able to raise themselves; and the Arrogance of these Infidels will be
confounded, especially that of Vanli Effendi, Preacher in Ordinary to the Grand
Seignior. This false Prophet preaching, in his Highness's Hearing, in the City
of Caminiec, two Days after it was taken, and congratulating him for this new
Conquest; foretold him with great Assurance, the Conquest of Rome, seeing that
according to some of their Prophecies, the Mussulmen must take Spain, and in
sine, predominate over the Red Apple; for thus do they call the City of Rome,
Kizil Alma.

He enlarged himself much on this matter, but took care not to fall in his
Discourse on another Prophecy, received by several of the most able Persons
amongst them, which says, They shall be driven from Rome, afterward from
Constantinople, and the whole Empire; That this which had been subdued, and
re-established by Constantine the Great, was to he snatched from the Christians
under the Reign of another Constantine, by a Turkish Emperor named Mahomet;
but, that the Christians also should retake it, during the Reign of another
Ottoman Emperor of the same Name.

It may be, that this taking of the City of Rome, Prophesied by the Turks, has
been accomplished by Mahamet II. in the same time he became Master of
Constantinople, where Constantine the Great, who was the Restorer of it, and
who gave it its Name, having transferred the Imperial Seat from Rome, Enacted,
it should be called New Rome: For being desirous to Erect it as a Capital of
the Roman Empire, he endeavored to equalize it to Ancient Rome, by the
Magnificence of its Buildings, Number of its Inhabitants, and the rich Spoils,
which he took from other Cities of his Obedience, to make up the Glory and
Splendour of this; and, in consequence of this, the Grand Seigniors at this day
call themselves Koum Padichahi, Emperors of Rome, which is one of their finest
Titles. In fine, if the Christians have lost this Capital of the Eastern
Empire, which was also that of the Roman Empire, under the Reign of Constantine
Paleologus; surnamed Dracosez; and if, for the Accomplishment of the Turks
Prophecy, he that took it was called Mahomet, the Emperor who was so lately
Master of this famous City, and against whom the Christians have had such
wonderful success, is also called Mahomet, and consequently may well be he, who
according to the same Prophecy, shall restore it to the Christians. But if this
Explication be not sufficient, although it appears clear enough; may one not
fancy after the manner of the Eastern People, That the Turks being obliged to
eat of the Apple of Discord, and to make it Red by the effusion of their own
Blood, shall see on themselves the Accomplishment of their Prophecy?

It is very vexatious, that their Enemies have not moreover made them
experience this Justice, and let slip so many occasions, making no advantage of
the Rebellions, and considerable Commotions, which often, and almost in all
times have shaken this Ottoman Colossus. It has advanced in its Original,
leaving many Enemies behind it; past from Asia into Europe, without finishing
the Conquests of the Countries, which lay on either side; it is Children and
Brethren, became so many Usurpers; the Son became the Assassin of the Father;
Brethren Fratricides, and the lawful Heir, which was in the greatest
Possession, passed no sooner into one of the two Parts of the World, but he was
called back into the other.

The Christian Princes have never drawn the least advantage from their
Disorders (as has been observed) and those of the Christians have been always
profitable to them. What satisfaction was it not to them, to see themselves
sought to, as they have always been, and to see their signal faults, the losses
of Battles, and their frequent Rebellions, to be of no Value to the Christians?
Their Enemies must not excuse themselves, on the innumerable Land and
Sea-Forces, which their Imaginations disturbed with a pannic Fear, has made
them attribute to these Infidels. The weakness of the Turks on the Sea, cannot
be greater than it is now; and their Landforces, far less than believed, are so
ill ordered, and led by so few Officers, most of them without Experience,
especially the Chief Commanders; that assuredly, how little soever we reflect
hereon, and profit by these reflections, we may soon find Means, not only to
free our selves from the Invasions of this Enemy, but to retake with justice
each for his part, in a short time, what he has Usurped since many Ages.

Could it be comprehended, that amongst the Turks, most of the Generals,
Colonels of Foot, and Commanders of Horse, are drawn from the Wardrobe, the
Gardens, or, Custom-Houses? that a Body of seven thousand Horse, has no more
Officers, than another of three hundred, and that a Chamber, or Company of two
hundred Janissaries, have no more than one of an hundred and fifty? They are
most certainly, very able to make a great Noise, to express themselves in their
Discourses and Writings, with emphatick and swelling Terms, big with Vanity and
Ostentation, extending themselves in Campaigns, to appear more numerous than
they are, and in showing themselves desperate on Breaches, the Scimitar in
their Hands, themselves half naked, bawlling and roaring out like possessed
People, to imprint Terror, and to cut off men's Heads when they have first
struck them with this foolish Fear. But those who are concerned and interested,
should know how to deal with them, by the Examples which all the World has seen
of St. Godard, Cochim, Cheherim, and lately of Vienna, Gran, Buda, etc. and
whatever has passed, and still passes in Poland, the Morea, Hungary, Dalmatia,
even in the least Rencounters, both by Sea and Land.

Cannot Christendom now undeceive her self in this Subject? If we would express
the Force and Bravery of a Man, we compare him to a Turk, fierce as a Turk. In
a word, this Name is a mere Phantasm, to afright Children, with which we take
pleasure to feed them, and educate them in this Fear.

It Is quite otherwise with the Turks, who begin in their very Infancy, and are
exactly instructed to despise the Christians, and to have only for them
Sentiments of Hatred and Indignation. They never write, or speak of us,
(whatever Amity and Familiarity you have with them, even in speaking to us in
common Conversation), but by treating us with Ghiaour, Infidel. It seems as if
this Hatred was Hereditary to them; and it is certain, it is increased by
Education, and takes its greatest strength, from the adhesion of these Infidels
to Mahometanism, and the great respect they have generally for whatever
concerns their false Religion; whereas, there are but too many Christians, who
show a great Indifferency for theirs.

The Christians have been dismayed at the least shock the Ottoman Power has
given them. They have considered the Conquests whereby that Empire has
aggrandised her self, as an insurmountable Bar; and all their Consolation lies
in saying, That the Turks never lose, or part with any thing they are once
possessed of.

On these Principles they would always be at Peace with them, which is not a
likely means to make them lose, or return any thing. They have not profited by
Peace, to instruct themselves rightly of their Forces, Politics, and Conduct
as well within, as without their Empire; whereof those who are interested,
should be fully informed, to excite in themselves the Motions of a
proportionable Zeal, for the destruction of this Enemy, to which they are
obliged by the two most powerful Means in the World, Religion and Liberty; and
by the Glory of destroying so barbarous and Tyrannick a Government.

We should greatly endeavor, to discover perfectly the Turkish Affairs, by a
search and penetration into their Policy; seeing that in the sight and habit,
which the Christians have of making much of their weaknesses, in respect of
these Infidels, they are so ingenious in representing them to themselves
otherwise than they are.

The Turks are so addicted to an abominable Filthiness, which hinders
Generation, that notwithstanding the Plurality of Women, there are few of them
who have above four or five Children, excepting Sultan Murat, and some others,
of whom there are mentioned extraordinary Stories. There Is no doubt, but this
reason joined to the Plague (which is almost continually in Turkey, much or
little, according to the Seasons, and which sometimes makes horrible Ravages)
have been to this time capable to reduce this Empire into Deserts, without the
Number of Slaves, which are incessantly brought from the Frontiers, where the
Turks have always Wars. The Truth of this appears, in that there are very few
Turkish Men or Women, who have not been taken young from the Christians, or
that are not the Sons or Grandsons of Renegadoes, or Slaves; who for the most
part change their Religion, through Necessity or Ignorance, without a distinct
knowledge of any. So neither is there any House, where there is not for Men and
Maidservants several Slaves, especially Russians; and one needs only to read
History to know, That the Turks have ever transported to the inward parts of
their Empire, and especially to Constantinople; the chief Inhabitants of the
Places of their Conquests, as fast as they have enlarged their Frontiers; which
they will no more do, if the Christians have but the Will to hinder them.

Predestination has little effect, now adays, in the Minds of the Turks; for
though they believe it, they also give some ear to what they call Prudence,
which consists in the not exposing themselves in small Numbers to great Forces;
and, as I have already said elsewhere, most believe now themselves to be
predestined to fly, and be worsted, just as they were before to vanquish or
be slain. They are only seen not to withdraw from the Plague, which sweeps away
every year incredible Numbers of them. And, if they appear obstinate and
resolute in sustaining a Siege to the last Extremity, or, in any other
occasion; this is less by an effect of Predestination, or true Bravery
(although it is certain, there are people of great Courage amongst them) than
out of Despair, to which they are forced, by the well grounded fear of
perishing more ignominiously, if they have bad Success. They come to this
extremity, because ordinarily the greatest Officers amongst them seldom miss of
being put to Death, even when they are not in Fault; unless they use
precautions to avoid it, by keeping themselves from Court, or withdrawing
wholly from the Empire, as has been lately done by the Bassa of Napoli de
Romania, who retired to Venice with all his Family, and some Commanders in
other places taken in the Morea, who have desired to be transported into
Africa. And the Grand Vizir, Solomon Bassa, after his ill success in the loss
of Buda, would not return to Adrianople, to the Grand Seignior, by reason of
the uncertainty of the manner wherein he should be received.

One may infer then from all these Reasons, That it is only the ill Conduct of
the Christians, which has made the Turks so Powerful; it being that which made
the Venetian Fleet miscarry, which consisted of Fourscore and fifteen Galleys,
seven Galeasses, and fifty Vessels, with which they might not only have
preserved Candia, but attempted Constantinople.

The extreme Ignorance of the Turks, and their Contempt of whatever has not
relation to their Manners, or Needs, is to them also a notable Prejudice. It
may easily be discerned, by what has been already said; but I remember one
Encounter, which for the singularity of the Fact, I must relate here, as a
remarkable Instance of their Ignorance, on occasion of the Grand Vizir, Cara
Mustapha Bassa, who was strangled for raising the Siege of Vienna.

As he gave first Audiences (in the time he was made Grand Vizir, after the
death of Ahmet Kupruli) to Ambassadors, and other Ministers of Foreign States,
who paid their Visits of Congratulation, on account of this new Dignity; the
Sieur Colier, Resident for the States of Holland, in his Turn, made his Visit.
I happened on that day to be at the Vizir's House, where, seeing the Resident
enter in Ceremony, I took my place in his Train and Attendance, consisting of
those of his Nation, of whom I was known, which commonly is far from being
refused, it adding to the Ministers Credit. I assisted at this Audience,
because Monsieur the Ambassador had privately desired it, to avoid all
suspicion, and the better to understand what passed; this was in the time of
the great Dispute of the Sofa, which has made such a great noise. I understood
all that the Vizir and Resident said on each hand. And because the Interpreter
of this Chief Minister, the famous Greek Maurocordato, knew not Dutch, the
Resident delivered himself in Italian, which was explained to the Vizir in the
Turkish Language; which is not done with the French Ambassadors, who always
speak their own Tongue, and only use their own Interpreters, unless on some
extraordinary Occasion.

After the Complements, and accustomed Civilities, the Vizir demanded of the
Resident, What News he had from Christendom; he enquired, Whether the King of
France had restored to the States of Holland, what he had taken from them: The
Resident Replied, His Masters had recovered their Losses; and that at last, his
Majesty had restored them Maestrich, a considerable Place, which was the only
one remaining in his hands. The Vizir being well skilled in Geography, and as
well instructed in the Rights of Princes, drew immediately this Conclusion to
the Resident, with a Tone extremely confident, thinking he spoke something very
considerable; You have now then Sicily and Messina? But the Reis-Effendi, of
Secretary of State, who stood at his Elbow, having whispered him, That they
belonged to the Spaniards; the Conversation stuck at the clearing up of this
wonderful Discovery, and the Audience ended as is usual, with Coffee, Sherbet,
sweet Waters, and Perfumes.

It Is about three years since, That the Governor of Neuheusel, as (learned as
Cara Mustapha was in Geography, and Affairs of his time) made absurd Reproaches
to a French Gentleman, named the Sieur Dalera, who was one of the King of
Poland's Gentlemen. After the Battle, and raising of the Siege of Vienna,
wherein he was, His Majesty of Poland sent him to his Queen, to carry her the
News, but having been met with by a party of Turks, he was taken and carried to
Neuheusel, where he was kept a Prisoner of War. In expectation of his
Redemption (which was long first, by reason the Turks took him for the Queens
Brother) the Bassa, or Governor of the Town, often diverted himself in trifling
Discourses with him. Seeing the Shoes he wore since seven or eight Months of
Imprisonment, were much decayed, he asked him Whether he could not sow and mend
his Shoes: The Gentleman having answered, It was never his Profession; What an
Animal art thou, replied the Bassa? What art thou good for, seeing thou can
not mend thy things? And at the end of the detention of the Sieur Dalera, after
his Ransom was agreed on, which was thirty Turks, whom the King of Poland sent
in Exchange; the Bassa told him, He was well persuaded of the Bravery and
Courage of this Monarch, but he could never have thought the Christians so
honest, as to give thirty Mussulmen, the least of which he valued as a
Treasure, for an helpless Creature, who knew not so much as to sow. But that
which is more particular, and comes to my Subject, is, That one day the Bassa
argued seriously with the Sieur Dalera, on Affairs of his Time. He affirmed to
him, that of all the Disgraces which then happened to the Grand Seignior his
Master, and to the Mussulmen, there was not one more sensible to him, than that
which the French caused them; who not being their Enemies, yet gave passage to
the King of Poland through France, to join the Imperial Army, and to succor
Vienna, without which the Vizir had certainly become Master of the Place.

The same Cara Mustapha, was made Admiral at Sea, when he never had made a
Voyage, or knew any thing of that Profession. And it is not to be imagined, that
these Instances are rare and extraordinary; the Ottoman Empire is full of them,
as may be judged from those I come from relating, and others which follow.

CHAP. V. Proofs of the last Weakness of the Turks at Sea, with a Relation of
the Affair at Chio.
THE Ottoman strength being found much decayed, by what we have recited in the
preceding Chapter, one may farther easily discover to what degree it is
diminished by examining its Naval Forces, which only consist in some Galleys,
which are not capable of making the least Resistance.

There are few Persons, who have not heard several Relations of this; whence
plainly appears, that these Galleys of the Grand Seignior, serve scarcely for
any thing else, especially since the Peace of Candia, but only for the
Collecting the Kharatch or Tribute from the Isles, and Coasts of the
Archipelago. Yet are they destined to clear the White Sea of Christian Pirates,
who disturb the Commerce of his Higness's Subjects. The small Experience and
Courage of their Commanders, have always appeared by the refusal of Fighting,
in avoiding the least Vessels in Rencounters, unless their Galleys be all
together, or assisted by the Barbary Cossairs.

It was never heard, but they have been beaten, every time they have been
concerned, not only with the Venetian Army, or Galleys of Malta, but with two
or three Vessels only well united, and acting in Consort. Instances are very
numerous; but the World having been sufficiently informed of all the great
Fights with the Infidels, I shall content my self with Relating only some
particular ones, under the Officers of greatest Reputation, who have commanded
in Chief their Naval Army, and which will make it easily judged what the rest
are capable of doing. And we may premise, that whatever Advantage they may have
obtained, it has been always by Chance, through Surprise; and without deserving
the least Praise.

When Cara Mustapha Bassa, of whom we have spoke, Commanded the Ottoman Fleet,
consisting of fifty six Galleys, he was in the Archipelago, at the Port of St.
Georges of Skiri, when the Galley which made the Rounds, came and gave him
Notice of the Discovery of a Christian Vessel that was very near. He dispatched
at the same time Twelve Galleys, the chief Commanders of which were Dourack
Bey, Massammam, and Memmi Bassa Oglou, to take this Vessel, which was a
Venetian Bark, armed with Twenty two Pieces of Cannon, Fifty four Candiot
Soldiers, and Twenty eight Seamen, and commanded by one Barban. This was
during the War of Candia.

This Vessel long withstood these Twelve Galleys, and having vigorously kept
them from coming on Board, she disgusted them from continuing the Fight. The
Captain Bassa, which was not pleased in seeing this Spectacle, resolved to
Advance with his whole Fleet; which having done, Drums beating, and Trumpets
sounding, the Bark was boarded, and carried away by as many Galleys as could
fasten themselves to her, and was thus towed along by this valiant Armado.

After this glorious Expedition, this brave General steered his Course near
Mount Athos, commonly called Monte Santo, in design of searching after
Galliots, or some other such Prey as this Bark; but met with Four Vessels of
Majorca, which leaving the Port of Cassandria, at the Entrance of the Gulf of
Salonica, steered the same Course as he. He at first showed great Resolution to
attack them, and effectually made ready for that Purpose. They soon drew near
the Enemies; but this General, with greater Speed commanded the Retreat, which
he thought absolutely necessary to his Preservation, by reason of some Volleys
of Cannon, which the chief Vessel of Majorca made him hear very near. And he
judged it more expedient to go and refresh himself at Chio, than to engage in a
perilous Combat, likely to lessen the Reputation which he came from obtaining,
by the taking of one Venetian Bark with his Fifty six Galleys.

Memmi Bassa Oglou being in the Port of Chio with Forty Galleys, had notice,
that in the Port of Cardumila of the same Isle toward Tramontane, there was a
Pirate-Vessel; he determined to take the Opportunity of the fair Weather to
attack him, with all his Army. This was the Chevalier of Hoquincourt under the
Flagg of Malta, who being informed of the Neighborhood of his Enemies, and
having unloaded a small Cargo of Coffee and Linen-Cloth, which he had taken, he
hoped to have still time to get out to have Sea-room to receive them. He was on
the Point of compassing his End, when the Turkish Galleys being arrived, those
of Dourak Bey, and Issouf Bassa singling from the rest, struck against this
Vessel with that Strength, as did not a little help to clear it off the Port,
without which it could not have been defended without extreme Danger.

The Knight, vigorously answered his Enemies Discharge of all their Cannon;
and, his Soldiers and Seamen, animated by his Example, and the Preservation
of their Liberty, so stoutly seconded him, that Dourak Bey, and Issouf Bassa
were obliged to cut the grapling Irons, with which their Galleys had fastened
his Vessel, to get themselves Sea-room, and conserve the Remainders of their
Rowers, leaving their grapling Irons fastened to the Stern of his Vessel. The
great Number of Shot from the other Galleys, had extremely damaged the whole
Vessel, and especially the Masts, which made the Turks apprehend, that with a
little Wind which began to rise, they would fall on their Galleys, and take
them into their Ruin; wherefore they thought it fit, to get at a greater
Distance.

This Distance gave Liberty to the Christians, to put their Ropes, Sails, Masts
and Vessel into some Order. The Christians had defended themselves from Ten
a-Clock in the Morning till Two in the Afternoon, and then being clear of the
Fire and Smoke, with which they were covered, and profiting by the Wind which
began to blow; they pursued their Aggressors, showring down upon them Storms of
Chainshot and Bullets rained in with that Violence, that the Turkish Galleys
were soon dispersed to avoid such a Tempest, and did not rejoin but to gain the
Port of Scio, where they entered with such Precipitation, that they grievously
battered one another.

Captain Bassa, who had such a great Reputation for Bravery, that the Grand
Seignior had given him the Name of Caplan (which signifies, a Tiger) thought to
signalize himself very much by passing with Forty Galleys into the Port of the
Isle of Nio, to attack the Knight of Binanville, who there took in Refreshments
with Three Vessels which he commanded; one of which being on the Stocks, and
consequently useless, the Knight turned the Sides of the Two others toward the
Enemy, without having time to weigh Anchor, as being surprised, and fired so
hot upon them, that the Turkish General with his whole Navy durst not approach
him, but was forced to retire with Loss.

The same Captain Bassa, in the Year following, thought it necessary to join to
his Forty Galleys Six Tripoly Vessels, and took all imaginable Precautions to
attack in one of the Ports of the Isle of Metelin, Captain George's Maria, who
was there with his Vessel of Forty Pieces of Cannon; attended only with an
other Vessel far less, of which he was the Convoy. It Is true this was sunk
after Eight or nine Hours Fight, but George's Maria held out fighting Two Days,
and apparently would not have yielded notwithstanding the continuance of the
Calm, had not a Cannon-shot took him off. His Soldiers and Seamen fought Two
Hours after, with such Resolution and Courage, as was worthy of the Revenge
which they would take for the venge which they would take for the Death of
their Captain, even to the charging their Cannons with Baggs of Piasters,
having no more Bullets; but, in fine, they were obliged to render on
Composition, which (according to the usual Custom of the Turks) was not
observed. News was immediately sent of this important Victory to the Grand
Seignior, who was at Salonica, for which he made public Rejoicings, which were
by so much the more agreeable to the People, as George's Maria had the
Reputation of being the most dangerous Enemy, which the Turks had among the
Corsarys. And his Highness, in Recompense of so heroic an Exploit, confirmed
this Captain in his Office of Generalissimo of the Seas.

The Campaign following, Captain Bassa met in the Port of the Isle of Eginus in
the Gulf of Athens, Five Pirate Vessels which were at Anchor, and which he
went in Pursuit of, being informed of them by a Genoese Bark; the Master of
which had thought, in giving this News to the Captain Bassa, to be exempted
from making him a Present, as is usual, because the Admiral and other Turkish
Commanders, never fail to exact something of all the Vessels they meet at Sea.
Captain Bassa prepared himself to fight these Corsary's, profiting by the
favorable Conjuncture of the Weather. These were the Nephew of the Chevalier
of Binanville, Cruvillier, Daniel, and Two others; each of which Vessels,
according to the Order of the Combat, was to be attacked by Eight Galleys, the
Turkish Admiral having thus disposed the Forty, of which his Navy consisted.

He set forward in good Order against the Enemies, and he was still Two
Cannon-shot distance, when Massammam, the most intelligent and courageous Bey
of his Army, whether he thought his Artillery carried farthest, or by some
other Motive, fired on the Corsary's. Caplan observing this Have (for the Shot
reached not half way) fell into a Fit of Anger, and cried out to Massammam;
Hitherto I held thee for a Man, and a good Servant of the Grand Seignior, now I
have lost all Esteem for thee, and only Shame remains to thee. After this first
Discharge (to which the Vessels answered only by a Salute of Muskets out of a
Bravado) the Captain Bassa being advanced with all his Calleys, began to
thunder upon the Corsary's for about Seven or Eight Hours.

The Vessess appeared always unmovable and in the same Condition, when a small
fresh Wind which began to blow, joined to the approaching of the Night, made
the Galleys apprehend a too rude Engagement, and the rather, as judging the
great firing they had made was useless, not knowing they had killed Four Men on
Cruvillier's Vessel. It was judged then expedient to suspend the Combat, to
reflect on the Approaches of the Night, and the Accidents which might happen,
if the Wind should increase. And these prudent Considerations, were followed by
a speedy Retreat into the Port of Termis, whence the Captain Bassa removed into
that of Napoli de Romania, where herested Thirty seven Days, for Seven or eight
Hours of fruitless Combat; and required of the Governor of the Fort, a good
Sum of Money, to deliver himself from the Punishment of being drowned, to
which he had condemned him, because in saluting his Army, one of the Bullets
had done some Damage to a Galley, and carried away Two Banks with Five Slaves.

It Is to be observed, that if since this time till the Year 1683, the Wars
which the Turks have had against Poland and Moscovy, has obliged them at
different Times to a great Diversion of their Sea-Forces on the side of the
Euxine Sea, sending for the most part to the White Sea, only Serdars, or
Lieutenant Generals, with far less Galleys; so is it true, that most of the
Forces of the Christian Princes are dissipated, excepting the Six Frigates of
which Mr. de la Breteche was the chief Commander, which in the Courses they
have steered under the Flagg of Portugal, have much incommoded the Grand
Seignior's Galleys, and damnified his Subjects tradeing.

I saw (being in the Year 1682, with M. du Queen in the Port of Milo) Captain
Manetti bring in thither a Turkish Vessel of Eight Guns, which he had taken
only with his Galliot of Twelve or fourteen Banks. In fine, it is certain, that
all those Galleys whereof the Naval Army of the Turks consists, have for these
Twenty five Years made no other Expedition, than on some wretched Petache of
Five or six Guns, which they have surpised in a Calm, or in some Port, the Men
being many times at Land.

But, to relate other Instances of their want of Courage and Strength, it is
apparent, that even the French King's Vessels, have been lately seen in the
midst of the Ottoman Empire, before Constantinople, daring all the Naval Forces
which came in or went out of the Port, and refuse the Salute; had they not
Hostages given, they should have the same again. Never, by the same Reason, do
they salute this Imperial City, neither in going in nor coming out, nor the
Grand Seignior's Seraglio, which is guarded with this Artillery heretofore
mentioned, and to which all sorts of Mohammedan or Christian Vessels, of what
Nation soever (excepting those of the French King) cannot be dispensed from
doing Homage, by firing several Guns, according to what they be, to which the
Seraglio or Town disdain to answer, even to the Ottoman Admiral's Flagg.

This obliges the other States of Europe (who cannot endure this Distinction,
and will not have their Vessels salute, without being saluted again) not to
permit their Vessels of War which carry any Ambassador, or serve for Convoys,
to enter into the Port of Constantinople, making them tarry in the Isles of
Princes, which are at Five or six Leagues thence, or in the Chanel of the Black
Sea, a little above or below Constantinople; which those of France are resolved
never to do, no more than the saluting the Turkish Commanders, and the Grand
Seignior himself, who have sometimes in vain showed their Dissatisfaction, yet
passed under Silence this Pretention, rather than to engage in the maintaining
it, in the uncertainty of the Event.

In the Time of Mr. Aplemont's Commanding a Squadron, which had carried to
Constantinople the Marquis de Nointel Olier, the King of France's Ambassador to
the Grand Seignior, there was a Seaman who left one of the Vessels to turn
Turk. It was judged requisite to demand him; but as the Turks neither could nor
would surrender him, under pretense he had already changed his Religion, the
Officer who had landed to bring him back, affirmed, that this ought not to be
an Hindrance to the obtaining of this Fellow; and invited at the same time in
his Highness's Arsenal, and in the Presence of above Two hundred Turks, the
Lieutenant of the Admiralty to come and see the Reparation which was going to
be made to the Christian Church, by other Renegado's, in one of the King of
France's Vessels named the Princess.

This Squadron of M. Aplemont (on which were every day performed the Exercises
of Religion, as well as those of War, and whence the Noise of Bells, Drums and
Trumpets, with that of the Cannons made Constantinople and all the Bosphorus
resound) attempted to force open the Passage of the Dardanello's, which was
disputed them; pretending to retake the Chevalier de Beaujeu, who had escaped
out of the Seven Towers into the King's Vessels, with Three or four other
Slaves of Consideration, belonging to Cara Mustapha Bassa.

These Observations caused by diverse Events in all the Campaigns of this
present War, and by the Detention for above a Month (which Twelve Venetian
Vessels and Two Fireships have made in the Port of Rhodes) of the Turkish
Naval Army, who dared not come out, though consisting of Forty eight Galleys
and Twenty seven Vessels of War, to wit, Ten great ones newly built at
Constantinople, seven Tripolines, and Ten or twelve Algerines; Tunis not being
able to furnish any, by reason of its own Intestin Troubles: All this Fleet
must have been famished, or necessitated to accept of Combat, had not the
Venetian Vessels left their Post to join the Body of their Army, to continue
the Expeditions of the Morea.

We were told at Constantinople that the Siege of Coron obliged the Turks for
the succouring of the Place, to unlade whatever they had on their Galleys; and
the same Advice also informed us, that of all the Ottoman Army, there were not
above Five or six Galleys, which returned fit for Service; and, since that, we
have heard that all this Fleet was moreover in a piteous Condition, having
neither Powder nor Bullets; that Divisions and Revolts were common amongst the
Soldiers, and that they had scarcely and Seamen; that the Ten great Vessels
of Constantinople were good for nothing, being built of green Wood, and by bad
Workmen, which had occasioned the Loss of one of the greatest, being sunk
without one Man's saving himself who was thereon. They also parted in such Have,
that there were Two of them, which could not take in their Guns, but in passing
by the Castles, and at Tenedos, where the other Vessels gave them some Pieces.

The Plague and Scarcity (which have been extraordinary great this Year at
Constantinople, as well as amongst the Troops) causes amongst the People an
horrible Consternation; and so much the more, that flattering themselves with
the retaking of the Places conquered by the Venetians, as well as the raising
the Imperialists to Flight, for which they made Bonfires; they have felt the
Falsity of all this News, by their want of Corn and other Provisions, which
Greece, and the White Sea yielded this Capital City; and that the Christians,
on the contrary, continued still to advance by new and more important
Conquests, and by the taking of their Vessels at Sea. They also write, That
Constantinople is in an extreme Apprehension, lest the Cossacks should come by
the Black Sea to ravage the Chanel, and even the Suburbs of the Town, as has
been seen heretofore; and its feared, for the completing their Miseries, lest
the Venetians should block up the Chanel of the Dardanello's to come and fire
all thereabouts, and famish the Town, by seizing Tenedos, and keeping the Roads
which lie near the first Castles.

In fine, several People in Constantinople have long ago begun to prepare
themselves to leave that City, to pass into Asia: The Grand Seignior's Treasure
is exhausted, and there are great Desertions, and Mutinies amongst the
Soldiers, who pillage and use the Inhabitants as they list. And who knows what
Confusions and Insurrections this late Action of the Army (of deposing their
Emperor, Sultan Mahomet, who had reigned Eight and forty Years, and setting up
his Brother Sultan Solomon in his place) may produce? But what will they do,
and what will become of them, if their Enemies act as powerfully as they are
able; and if it be true, that Rebellions begin to arise in Egypt and other
Parts? In a word, however great and formidable Armies they are said to have, to
defend or succor a Place; could they hinder the Loss of Buda? Has there been
any general or particular Battle in Hungary, Greece and Poland, which they have
not lost? Has there been any Vessel seen to hinder the Conquest of Coron,
Navarrin, St. Maure, Modon, Napoli de Romania, and other Pl^es, where the
Venetians behave themselves so bravely both by Sea and Land? Where is then this
great Power?

Troops and whole Armies have indeed presented themselves to hinder these
Exploits; but has not this been rather to increase the Reputation of the
Christian Arms, and the better to prove the Proposition which we have asserted,
of the Invalidity at present of the Ottoman Troops, and the extreme Weakness of
these Infidels? Besides what has passed in the Conquest of Buda, in the
Presence of a fresh Army, which was the Witness of it (an Action really Worthy
the Blood of so many Princes, who, in Imitation of their Head, have so
valiantly showed their Courage and Resolution) one may also remark a like state
of Affairs in the taking of Coron, where General Morosini, having only Eight
thousand Men when he besieged this Place, finds himself invested and hemmed in
by the Ser asquier at the Head of Ten thousand Turks, who hold him besieged,
and in great likelihood of destroying him with all his Army: But,
notwithstanding the Danger, and the Fatigues of above Thirty Days vigorous
Siege; notwithstanding the Obstinacy of the Garrison of the Place, and the Loss
of near Two thousand Soldiers; Morosini does not only defend his
Countervallation, but cuts on one hand all the Turks in pieces, and on the
other carries away the Town by Assault.

What happened at the taking of Napoli de Romania, and which well deserves the
extraordinary Rejoicings which have been made, does appear still more
honorable to the Venetians, seeing that at the end of a Campaign, after
several Places already subdued by Sieges, and fierce Combats; we see these
Infidels beaten on their own Ground, as often as they offer themselves, by an
Army which comes from far, which is obliged to disembark, and which the Sick
alone have weakened to an half part: And it is on this Account, as well as on
others, that the Bravery and Conduct of Morosini, render him worthy of immortal
Reputation, and of the Honors which the serene Republic of Venice (in
acknowledgment of the great Services done to Christendom, and to her self in
particular) has taken pleasure to heap on the Person and Family of this General.

The Illustrious Venier had only Three Vessels, with which he came from
transporting to Tenedos the Garrison of Napoli de Romania, in pursuance of the
Capitulation granted to this Place: And, having been expected at his Return by
Twenty Galleys of Beigs, and Seven or eight Turkish Vessels, which would have
fallen on him against all Justice and Rules of War; he fought them so
vigorously, that he sunk several of their Vessels, and the Galleys needed much
their Oars and Swiftness, to save themselves from an entire Ruin.

It Is not then necessary, after what has been mentioned, to relate any thing
else, to show the Extremity and wretched State whereto the Turks are reduced in
all Parts and in all Manners. These are not the Armies, nor powerful Fleets,
which have appeared under Mahomet II. under the Solymans and Selims. In fine,
all the World being sufficiently instructed of what actually passes against
these Infidels, we ought no longer to insist on the sad Experiences, which had
plunged almost all Christendom in a lethargick Benumm'dness, seeing there are
at present so many others, which ought to inipire contrary Sentiments.

CHAP. VI. Some Politic Reflections, on the present ill Condition of the
Ottoman Affairs, since the raising the Siege of Vienna.
THE Christian Princes were wont to think themselves Happy, when they were not
attacked by such powerful Enemies as the Turks; and, if they were, 'twas
always thought the best Course, to endeavor a Peace, and not to do their
utmost against them. We have recited sufficient Examples, but may we not with
Grief still say, that what passed last at Ratisbon, when the Turks invaded
Hungary, and during the Siege of Vienna, was an Effect of this pernicious Maxim?

They disputed at the Diet on Preliminaries, and sought the Security of Germany
on the side of the Rhine, where there were no Enemies, whilst it was pressed on
the Danube, by those who were said to be so formidable. One might infer, That
they were afraid of disobliging the Grand Seignior, in only thinking of Means
to oppose the Ottoman Army, which threatened Germany, and all Christendom; and
if they besieged immediately Neuheusel, would it not seem that it was an
Enterprise of pure Hazard, and to acquire Reputation (in showing they were
ready to act against these Infidels, who were thought as yet far distant) were
one not otherwise extraordinary well convinced, of the Bravery, wise and
vigilant Conduct of Prince Charles de Lorrain?

One might also say, That if the taking of Vienna had not been of so great
Importance they would have given to the Turks this Conquest. There was an
absolute necessity of rowsing on this occasion; but, no sooner were these
Infidels retreated, but the fear (perhaps) of irritating them too much, made
them not be pursued; yet this might having easily been, according to all
appearances; and the Victuals and Munitions, which they left in their Camp,
facilitated this happy and necessary sequel, of the raising of a Siege, and of
a Defeat; which without doubt might have had from this Campaign a greater
Success; the Pope's Intentions might have been better seconded, and the
Christians Affairs might have been a great deal forwarder than they are now.
But the Ceremonials which were to be observed in the Town delivered, between
the Emperor and the King of Poland, and the fear the Army had of the flying
Enemies returning, occasioned the Loss of several Measures, and much time: And
this was it which produced the Safety and Preservation of the rest of the
Ottoman Troops.

How could they have escaped amongst so many difficult Passes, Turnings,
Rivers, and Mountains; seeing, that having had the Means of reassuring
themselves, yet fell they, for all this, into great Confusion, and that
Disorder, which commonly attends an Army cut in pieces? Its certain, that the
Soldiers of both Horse and Foot, arrived at Belgrade, and other Places, most of
them quite naked, and killed one another for a bit of Bread; and that they
pillaged, and wasted their own Masters Country. What great Advantages might not
have been drawn from such a Flight; and why did not the Christians immediately
take hold of it?

The Turks believed for a great while, That the Christians followed them and
would soon be on their Backs; there were Rebellions amongst them at this very
time. But if they abandoned Vienna very briskly, it must also be granted, That
the Christians who contributed to this good Fortune, as well by their Presence,
as force of their Arms, remained themselves in a kind of Enchantment at so
great a Success, and had not (as one may say) the Liberty of reflecting, That
People who fled so fast, and in so great Disorder, although they had suffered
but small Efforts, were not so redoubtable as they were fancied.

They had neither, in effect, the Number of Troops, nor Conduct, nor Officers,
as was imagined. But if notwithstanding all this, the Christians did not take
the advantage of their Victory; so its certain, that if the Turks had taken
Vienna, they would not have fallen into the same fault, but have desolated all
Germany, or set it under Tribute, and even Italy too.

They are now far from so high a point of Glory, and do every day more decline;
but that which ought to increase their Consternation and Trouble wherein they
are, is, that they neither do, nor can blame any but themselves; and that it
cannot be said, it is the Christians to whom belongs the Honor of beginning so
great a Work, seeing the first Circumstance, and Origin which has caused such
dreadful Effects for these Infidels, comes precisely from the Grand Vizir, Cara
Mustapha Bassa.

It was of Advantage to Christendom, that the Ignorance, Pride, and Avarice of
this Chief Minister (which I have sufficiently denoted) should make him lose
all rational Measures. It was likely the Fines and Persecutions, which he was
wont to offer the Ministers of the Neighboring States, which resided at the
Port, would be at length capable of exciting their Masters, to resent them at a
fitting time; and, perhaps he would have been continued in these Excesses, had
not his Brutishness transported him beyond all Measure.

He had seen the Empire of Germany, willing to purchase his Friendship at any
rate, to the Honor and Advantage of the Port. This Ottoman Minister might have
easily perceived, That in favoring thus the Germans with his Masters good
Will, he might have had the Pleasure of seeing all the Christians bent one
against another, which would have yielded him an advantageous Opportunity of
attacking them, when he pleased. He might have contented himself, with giving
directly some Assistance to the Hungarian Malcontents, who implored the
Protection of the Port, without openly declaring himself against the Germans.
He might have kept himself quiet, and renewed the Truce with the Emperor to the
Advantage of his Master; but, by a singular Grace of God, in favor of the
Christians, he passed over all these Considerations; and one may say, that in
making War with the Emperor, and putting all Hungary and Austria into
Confusion, he could not have procured a greater advantage to the Empire. He has
unblinded Christerdom, and made her know what kind of People the Turks are, and
that there is no reason to fear them.

But apparently this Experience had been neglected, had not the Pope by his
Entreaties, Liberalities, and zealous Care, opposed himself to the Inclination
which the Christians (who are Neighbors to the Turks) always have, of entering
into his Favor again.

Here Is a great Obligation, for which Christianity is indebted to Innocent XI.
and at the same time to Cara Mustapha Bassa. But if it be true, that the Death
of this latter, may be regarded as disadvantageous to Christendom, seeing he
was a Man who would have repaired one Extreme by another that is worse; yet it
must be granted on another Regard, that it is advantageous to the Christians,
that the Custom of strangling the Grand Vizirs is come again in Fashion. It was
the Grand Vizir, Mehemmet Kupruli, who Remonstrated to the Grand Seignior (that
is now deposed) when he would raise him to this First Place in the Empire, That
he could not act therein with Success, in re-establishing the Authority of his
Highness, which was a Prey at the frequent Changes of the Vizirs, if he let him
not enjoy this Supreme Dignity to his Natural Death. The Sultan, who saw
himself every day exposed to Seditions, and in danger of losing his Life, stuck
not to receive a Proposition, in which he was no less interessed than Mehemmet
Kupruli; and his Highness found hereby such benefit in a few Years, that he
ever maintained this Minister, and his Son (who Succeeded him in the same Post,
though then but twenty seven years of Age) during their whole Lives. But we
need say no more of Mehemmet Kupruli, of whom we have largely spoken elsewhere;
and we have only mentioned thus much now, to show, That if the Conservation of
this First Minister, and his Son likewise to their Deaths in the Government,
had been so advantageous to the Ottoman Empire, it is very probable, That
Mahomet IV. putting Cara Mustapha Bassa to Death, terrified the succeeding
Vizirs; as is effectually seen from the taking of Buda, in suffering modestly a
Place of that consequence to be taken before their Eyes, without daring to
hazard a Fight to hinder it, though they had a considerable fresh Army, and
come expressly for this against another that was very weak, and diminished by a
three Months Siege.

This Custom of getting rid of the Vizirs, having been suspended for twenty
Years, has been reestablished, as a mark of the happy preparation, which has
fallen out on both sides, by the Hand of God, in favor of the Christians. There
never was a more wished for Overture, to regain on the Turks what they took
from the Christians, at least in Europe; and it is certain, they may effect it
in one Campaign more, if they attack these Infidels as vigorously as they ought
to do.

All the Neighbors of the Turks may expect great Progresses, if each one on
his side does his endeavor: And, if the Moscovites and the King of Poland
enter into Turkey and Crimea, will they not then give a notable Opportunity to
the Germans, to push on vigorously on their side, and to subdue all Bulgaria,
and the rest of the Country as far as Constantinople, now it lies open by the
taking of Buda, Esseck and all Hungary? It is certain, (not to speak of Persia,
and the Intestine Rebellions which may happen) that if these Christian States,
to wit, the Germans, Venetians, Polanders, and Moscovites, advance against the
Turks separately, and with Vigor, they will mutually aid one another, and do
him more Prejudice, than if they acted together, and only on one side.

To Crown the enterprise, its certain, That if the King of Poland does once
advance to the Banks of the Danube, as he has almost already done, leaving
behind him Caminiec, and some other Place of small consequence, carefully
observed by flying Camps; there is not the least Obstacle, which can hinder his
Armies always triumphing, especially over the Turks, from going to
Constantinople.

If heretofore the Cossacks have come by Sea and Land, ravaging and pillaging
all along the Chanel, even Suburbs of the Imperial City, though the Port had
Land and Sea-Armies against Poland; though she had no Diversion otherwise, nor
any inward Agitation; and though she was, in fine, in her highest point of
Splendour, Power, and Riches; what may not the Poles do now by Land, and the
Cossacks at Sea, now the Turks are exhausted of Men and Money, having almost
none on this side, no more than elsewhere; and that the Tartars, who are the
Bulwark and Prop, are employed in defending their own Country against the
Moscovites?

But after all, should the Venetians go directly to Constantinople, whether
during these Projects were executed on the side of Poland, and the Black Sea,
or even without this; its certain, that the only Fame of the march of either of
these, and yet better of all at once, would cause an universal Desolation, and
be sufficient to put the Land-Armies in Disorder; whence may be concluded, what
would happen, should they destroy this great Town, as it is easy to do, as I
have already showed. They might find their reckoning here; for, besides the
Booty, they might assure the Domination of the Mediterraneari and Archipelago,
and consequently, the retaking of Candia, Negropont, and all the Isles.

The Grand Seignior would fall under such a rude and fatal Blow. He puts all
his Strength in Constantinople; and if it be not really there, one may say,
it is there by Reputation. This Capital of the East, is esteemed so important in
all the Empire, and there is thought such a great impossibility to set on it,
that all would seem lost, should it be ruined. The Sultan could not escape; for
should he steal away from the Victories of the Germans, Poles, Venetians, and
Moscovites, this must be by Flight, which would be traversed by his own
Subjects, by the Morlaques, Sclavonians, and so many others, who expect only
the occasion and assurance, that their Insurrections should be upheld. The
Turks would repass the Sea, and abandon Constantinople with greater have than
they took it; and his Highness would think himself happy were he permitted to
make Bursa (the Capital of Asia Minor) the Seat of his Empire; and, if in this
other part of the World, he could be freed from Rebellions and Disorders.

It is well known, that Mahomet IV. (the deposed Emperor) was much beloved by
his People, as a Prince of great Goodness; and without Controversy, the
gentlest of all who have preceded him. And who can tell what will be the Fate
of his Brother Solomon now Reigning? For, the Turks persuade themselves, that
the good or bad success of Affairs, depend on the good or bad Planet of him who
manages them, therefore it is, that they willingly incline to the change of
their Emperor.

These great and solid Considerations, would have passed for Chimera's in
another time, and one must have supposed for the executing of them, That the
Grand Seignior must have been attacked in several Parts; That there being a
firm League of all the Neighboring States to his Countries, he will not have
innumerable Armies, nor could oppose Two hundred thousand men to each Prince
who should attack him; and that, on the contrary, being obliged to divide his
Forces, he would have but mean ones against each of his Enemies. But; O good
God! These Suppositions, are they not now certain and clear Truths as the day?

If he was obliged to withdraw at the Siege of Vienna, although he had all his
Forces joined together, which yet amounted not to what was imagined; and, if
since he has lost his best Troops, Places, and all the Battles which have been
fought; what will it be now; when he must still more divide his Forces by
reason of the Moscovites? And it is apparently this Reason, which has obliged
the sage Policy of Venice, to carry her Arms to the end of the Peloponnese, and
as far she can, to divert as much as may be, the Enemy from the Neighborhood
of her Estates.

There could not happen to the Grand Seignior a greater Good, than to see the
King of Poland return again into Hungary; for, his Highness keepinging himself
on this side on the defensive, and the Germans relying on the Poles, whom they
might have employed in the difficult Rencounters, the Ottoman Army might have
ravaged Poland, which would have lain open.

It will be demanded perhaps, Why the Turk sent not Forces into this Kingdom,
the first Campaign, and during the Siege of Vienna? but it is to be considered,
that the King of Poland did not declare himself against the Turks till late,
and though he had Signed the League with the Emperor, these Infidels were still
in hopes he would not execute it. Yet one may be persuaded, they would not have
done much Hurt to Poland, nor have overprofited by the absence of this Prince,
especially if the Moscovites did their Duty; but it is probable, that his
Majesty of Poland, would omit the opportunity of doing them much damage, and
procuring himself as much advantage on his side, as he has obtained for his
Allies.

If, in fine, the Port, which might have easily foreseen the Engagement of his
Polish Majesty to succor the Emperor, could not spare Forces to oppose him; If
the Turks (so Powerful, according to the vulgar Opinion) could not make the
least Detachment, to hinder the Passage of this Prince, and his joining the
Imperial Troops; If they find themselves under a Necessity of seeking now Peace
from their Enemies, by reiterated Supplications, in such a manner as still
shall be prescribed them; and if again once more, they cannot show any Body of
an Army small or great, which is not always beaten, whether in Hungary, the
Morea, Daimatia, or in Poland, and on Sea; it is certain, that in opening only
ones eyes, without great Penetration, a man may more and more discover the
Weakness and Ignorance of this Enemy which must be thought so formidable.

Not to mention the advantage from the Moldavians, Walachians, Transylvanians,
which are Subsidiary Advantages, from whom there is no Benefit to be expected,
but when the Christians shall be strongest. One may also in good Policy, not
rely much without great Precaution, on these Christians, who are half
Mahometans; who readily submit when they see a Power falling on them, which
they cannot avold by Artifices; and who, if they be interested that the
Infidels should be mortified, seeing this suspends the Fines which are wont to
be laid on them, and procures them good Treatments from the Christians; yet are
they more interested in the main, That the Ottoman Power be not overthrown, by
reason their particular Interest would be soon lost in the Emperor, or King of
Poland.

It seems, as if the Turks had ordered their Affairs politickly enough, in
leaving these Christian Princes on their Frontiers, and contenting themselves
with drawing a Tribute from 'em, and their Assistance. They indeed could not do
otherwise in the beginning of their Conquests, but in the Sequel they might
have erected these Provinces into Bassa-ships, or Governments. But they chose
rather, to raise particular Persons to these Principalities, or keep those who
were in Possession of them; and they fail not to make known to those Princes,
when by grieving them they give them occasion to complain, that without the
Authority of the Port, they would not be in the Rank they are. The Grand Vizir,
Cara Mustapha Bassa, could say to the Ragusians; What do you complain of? Would
you not have been long before now incorporated into the Venetian Territories,
without the Protection of my Master? and instead of that You are Sovereigns,
equal to other States of the Nations of the Messiah.

It Is not thus with the Morlaques, Sclavonians, and Bulgarians. They ought to
be held for Warlike People, which find no Opposition contrary to their Liberty,
by the Interest of a particular Prince, and who for the most part are Exercised
in the Art Military during the Venetian Wars. It remains now to speak of the
Cossacks, who are a bold, Warlike People, that can endure Labors; great
Enemies of the Turks, but very much for their own Interest; They are to be
considered as real Thieves, fit for Courses and Pillages: These are the
Christian Tartars, and consequently very incapable of making Conquests; yet
they may act profitably, whilst the Moscovites and Poles, shall apply
themselves to any important Enterprise, if they can be trusted.

What comes from being denoted, lays open the disadvantageous Circumstances of
the Infidels; but though they themselves are persuaded of this, yet they have
still hopes that the Christians will weary themselves at length, and give over
their Undertaking. They considered as a great Advantage for them, what passed
after the raising of the Siege of Vienna; for, to confirm what has been already
observed, they well conceived, that they had been lost at that Bout, had they
been pursued; and consequently, whatever Disposition, or Custom they have of
thanking God, as well in bad as good Fortune, yet were they in a manner certain
of this Inference, That the Christians are incapable of profiting from the good
Successes which happen to them against the Ottomans, seeing they then failed in
that which was so essential to them, and, in all Probability, so easy.

They also beheld the Conduct of the Emperor toward the King of Poland, with
great Consolation: for, although they acknowledge the Bravery of this latter,
and that they fear him, for having felt considerable Effects of it; they
persuaded themselves, that the Jealousies between these two Crowned Heads,
during their Enterview at Vienna, and since, would produce some good Effect.
They believed, that without this it would have been easy for the King of
Poland to exterminate Count Teckely; and that according to the Vigilance,
Activity, and indefatigable Cares, which all the World acknowledges in his
Majesty, to his Glory, he would without Controversy have preferred the
Fatigues and Labors of remaining in the Winter season, to the sweet Pleasures
of returning into his own Country; and, that this Monarch would have profited
by the Rigor of a Season, which the Poles suffer so easily, to retake the
Course of the Victory, and extend his Advantage of the raising of the Siege of
Vienna.

The Turks ingenuously acknowledge their Fear in this Occasion; but that on the
Advice of Teckley, and on their own Knowledge, they flattered themselves, that
these beginnings of Division among their Enemies would proceed farther. They
also thought, That the Emperor might engage the King of Poland to return into
Hungary; and that to oblige him the more, the Council of Vienna did not much
matter the Weakness of the German Troops on that side, nor the Diversion which
they imagined he would make elsewhere. The Turks, in fine, whatever they had
suffered from his Polish Majesty at the Defeat of Vienna, hoped and chose
rather to see him return into Hungary, for the Reasons already mentioned, than
to remain in Poland.

These Infidels learned moreover with Pleasure, the Misintelligence which
reigned between the Emperor, and some of the Electors, and even amongst the
Princes, and Generals of the Christian Army. They built much on the small Stock
of Money his Imperial Majesty had: They could never imagine that the
Moscovites, who are naturally sworn Enemies of the Poles, could ally themselves
with them against the Port; being persuaded on the contrary, that they should
profit by their Engagement to attack them, and war against them on their
ancient Differences. As to the Persian, notwithstanding the Report which ran of
his March against them, they hold themselves at present in Safety, by reason of
his small Experience in War, by a Peace of near Fifty Years; and the sensual
Pleasures in which the Sofi is plunged, which he may color over with a Motive
of his Religion. And as to the Venetians, the Turks were in a manner assured
they would be modest, and not undertake any important Enterprise; That most of
their Officers would think only of continuing the War, and raise Distasts and
Misintelligences between the Auxiliary Tioops, and those of the Republic,
which would cause great Disorders, as have several times happened; and, that at
least in the Isles of which they should be the Masters, they would permit (as
was practiced during the War of Candia) the Tribute to be raised for the Grand
Seignior.

If it be to be presumed, that these Infidels flatter themselves too much by
these Imaginations, yet is it to be feared on the other hand, that some of them
may be true. But in what manner soever this is, it cannot be enough repeated,
That if the Turks are not constrained to forsake entirely what they possess in
Europe, before a Peace be granted them, it is purely the Christians Fault: And
after so many Proofs which we have showed, let us consider a little, before we
finish this Discourse, what Circumstance of Affairs is necessary, to procure us
so happy an Overture.

The Grand Seignior undertakes a War against his own Interest, and the more
Advantageous to the Christians, as it hinders them from entering into a War
against one another. But a Man cannot enough reflect on the Dispositions which
the Council of Vienna seemed to have had, of renewing the Truce with the Port,
even of a long time. The Appearances were so great, that I saw come, in less
than Two Years, to Constantinople and Adrianople, Four Agents from the Emperor,
one after another, because they died as soon as ever they arrived, on which the
Policy of the Turks was suspected, who would hereby retard this Negotiation,
and terminate first the Affairs they had elsewhere; and the Sieur Caparara, who
in the last place was sent extraordinarily for this to the Port, gathered no
other Fruit from this, than that of seeing himself obliged to follow the Grand
Vizir, and be Witness of the Ravages of Hungary and Austria, where the Germans
have been necessitated to blunt the Ottoman Arms. The one begins the War though
he ought not to have undertook it, the other sees himself engaged thereto
maugre his Policy.

The King of Poland comes to their Assistance with few Men, not having time to
raise many, and the Turks fly, although they have more than an Hundred and
thirty thousand. It seemed also, according to the natural Presumptions which
the Christians had in favor of these Infidels, that they might have returned
to the following Campaign the more powerful by some great Effort, and more
filled with Fury and Vengeance.

The King of Poland to succor them, engages himself in the War against the
Infidels, in favor of those who had been suspected to have intended his
hinderance to the Throne. This Generous Monarch forsakes his own Interests, and
exposes his Sacred Person. He appears ill satisfied with Teckely, and he
becomes his Protector, to procure him an Accommodation. Germany cannot reduce
this Malecontent, and she will not receive him. She falls into Misintelligence
on this Account with his Majesty of Poland. This Hungarian Lord becomes in a
manner a Catholic, writing to the Pope in a most judicious manner, and very
vindicative of his Proceedings.

The Venetians engage in the League against the Turks with a Vigilance, and
Address so extraordinary, that they have as soon began Expeditions, as declared
the War against these Infidels; though their sage Politics and Reasons of
State, might have alleged some Difficulties, and caused some Delays. The
Ottoman Empire thinks not of augmenting his Naval Army, but at the last
Extremity; and yet, no less dreads the Maritime Force of this most ancient and
illustrious Republic, than it admires with all the rest of the Universe, the
solid and prudent Deliberations which flow from their Councils and unimitable
Policy.

Spain, notwithstanding the Disgraces and Weaknesses of its Monarchy, yet gives
all possible Demonstrations of its Good Will, by remitting of Money, and
raising of Troops; which she permits to be done in her States, for the
Assistance of Christendom, and the Oppression of the common Enemy.

The Pope spares not the Churches Revenues, his own particular, and is imitated
in his Zeal by several Princes. His Holiness has no other Nephews, nor other
Family, than the Destruction of the common Enemy. Yet he sees, that all this
Money cannot be employed as he would have it; that, the more he gives the more
is required, though he devises all possible Means to remedy this Inconvenience,
and sends his Galleys.

The great Duke of Tuscany joins his Vessels with them: He sends a Regiment of
a Thousand Men, and a considerable Number of Knights of St. Stephen, and other
illustrious Volunteers, to make Descents; with great quantity of Bombs, Powder,
Bullets, and other Munitions of War, at his own Charge. In a word, his serene
Highness forgets nothing which is possible to prove his Zeal against the
Infidels. I saw he held in the Grand Seignior's Family a Physician, whose
Advices were equally good, profitable, and important.

The great Master of Malta, has offered himself, by a Bravery and Generosity
worthy of him, to come in Person against the Infidels. He has set out, with all
speed, the Galleys of the Religion. He has thereunto added Vessels, and a most
important super-Addition of Knights and Soldiers, whose Valor and undaunted
Resolutions are so terrible to the Turks in all Occasions, and particularly at
the Siege of Coron, and Napoli de Romania, and in all the Defeats of the
Serasquier.

The Elector of Bavaria, by the heroic Virtues hereditary to him, and which he
has extended so far these last Campaigns, does not deferr the abandoning his
own States, to transport himself in Person with all his Troops to this War. He
contents not himself with sending several times a prodigious Quantity of Bombs,
Bullets, Powder, and all sorts of necessary Ammunitions, and to entertain, at
his own Charge, a most considerable Army; but moreover, exposes his Person in
all Occasions and Perils, where Honor is to be obtained.

All concurs; in fine, to the Ruin of the Infidels. The Republic of Genoa,
notwithstanding her Losses, lends Two Galleys; and furnishes proportionably
what she can, to denote her Piety and Zeal in this Encounter.

The astonished Turks place now their Confidence in the Custom of the
Christians, who usually make little Profit of the good Successes they obtain
against them. They hoped also they could make Peace to their Advantage, when
the War was not favorable to them. But they are so mistaken in this last Hope,
that though some bad Politicians (which seemed to desire only Trouble in
Christendom, and Confusion of Germany) would have heretofore induced the
Emperor to accommodate himself with the Port; we ought to presume, that the
Justice and Interest of his Imperial Majesty, will not suffer him to adhere to
Counsels of this Nature, nor to agree to any thing which may hinder the
continuation of the glorious Exploits performed under his Standards.

CHAP. VII. A Recapitulation of several Reasons of the approaching Overthrow of
the Turkish Empire: With several Remarks upon the late Revolutions at
Constantinople.
THE satal Error of the Turks in this last Age, seems to have been their
undermining the very Foundation of their own Government. It appears from all
Accounts of the Rise and Progress of Mahometanism, that much Power, but little
Policy at first acquired, and till of late maintained their Dominion; that
strength of Arm and not of Reason, was their Excellency; and that what the
Sword got them, the Sword kept for them. They have been the only Left Handed
Men in Government, whose Play, so long as they kept to it, was never well known
to any Adversary; but now at last, that they are fallen to shifting of Hands,
every body beats them. For in short, the true state of their Case is this;
their Security as well as Glory, lay wholly in their ability for Military
Achievements: But the unfortunate Mahomet the last, (by the Advice of his
Creature Kupruli, who carried Candy by his Conduct from the Venetians) did what
in him lay, to keep under the mutinous Order of the Janissaries, by taking care
that their old severe Discipline should be neglected, and raw unexperienced
Fellows should be listed into their Order; to the end, the Insolence of that
Order might never more be able to wrest the Scepter out of their Sovereign's
Hand, not dreaming they were the Glory and Support of his Throne, till the
Defeat before Vienna showed him his Mistake. Had the Port, instead of refining
its Politics, insisted on keeping stricter to its old military Discipline: Had
it, I say, not effeminated and disarmed the Janissaries; but inspired them with
a glorious Courage for the enlarging the Bounds of their Empire, and so kept
them employed, Mahomet might in this last War have advanced his Frontiers as
far on this side Vienna, as now they are retrenched on the other. Their little
Skill in Affairs showed its self remarkably this last Year, in hindering the
Duke of Lorrain's Retreat from Esseck; for whom, as a flying Enemy, they ought
to have built a Bridge of Gold, and not, when the Flight came to their own
turn, break down the Bridge, as they did, and so expose the shattered Army to
the Fury of the Conqueror. But into what a Panick, but impolitick Fear, did
their Fate put them, when they so cowardly abandoned Esseck, without daring
first to spring those Mines, which might have laid the whole Town in Ruins,
when all was in readiness, but a Hand to give fire to the Train. And, after all
this, that the remainder of a broken Army should set up a new General, Osman
Hirsy, instead of the Grand Vizir; and that to save himself, and stop the
Mutineers, the Grand Vizir should order the Bridge on the Save to be broken
down, is an unparalleled Instance of ill Conduct; Unless the Failure in
Management appear more in these Mutineers sawsy Behavior to their Sovereign,
in butchering most of his great Officers of State, and in completing their
Villainy in deposing him, notwithstanding he had at their Instance, retrenched
his Expenses, dismissed many of his Domestics, sacrificed most of his Friends
and Favorites to their Rage, and then given their Estates to satisfy these
Mutineers; which evidently makes appear, how little safe it is for a Prince to
comply with the unreasonable Expectations of factious Subjects. And to add to
the Weaknesses of the Ottoman Government, there appears a great Backwardness in
the People to furnish their Prince either with Men or Money; so that
Constantinople seems in a fair way to be retaken by the Christians, as it was
first taken from them: For would, but the Citizens of Constantinople, who were
very Rich, have contributed any thing to the Greek Emperor, their Sovereign,
toward the keeping of that important Metropolis, when besieged by the Turks, it
might perhaps have been in Christian Hands to this day: So, had the great
Officers of the Port voluntarily given but a Third of those Purses which were
by the mutinous Army taken from them, with their own Heads; the Army, in all
likelihood, might have been kept in Discipline and Obedience; and as many Towns
won, as now, for want of Pay, and through their ungovernable Temper, they have
quitted to the Christians. But how can it be expected that a Kingdom divided
against it self can stand? How fatal Jealousies between Prince and People are,
the sinking of this huge Empire proves.

There is one thing more, which has been a great Abatement to the Turkish
Power; which is, their Averseness to Arts, or to any thing that is Polite. For,
let any one consider what Greece did, while she was Mistress of the Arts; this
one small Part now of the Turkish Empire, once achieved more than all the
Ottoman Force was ever able to perform. The Persians are at this day (in spite
of the Turks) a potent Kingdom, who when they were Emperors of the Earth,
submitted to a Grecian Youth; and the whole Bravery of these new Inhabitants of
Greece, with all their enlarged Territories, cannot equal the Actions of either
Sparta, Athens, or Macedon, much less the united Glory of all learned Greece.
Consider, I pray, their Weakness on this Account; whereas, it was the Happiness
of former barbarous Ages, to be the Conquest of either Civil Greece or Rome,
insomuch that their Skill in Arts and all manner of Learning, invited Men to be
their Subjects. I never yet heard any Man glory, that he was a Citizen of
Constantinople; but have often read, that the Freedom of the City of Rome was
an invaluable Donation; so far has Learning the Pre-eminence of Barbarism.

Nor is the Weakness of the Turkish Government less Conspicuous in the
Corruption of its Administrators: All Interests are measured by Profit, nor is
it much matter, whom the Prince puts into Places of Trust, since himself will
be their Heir, saving, that there such generally are pitched on, as know the
best how to pillage the People; which has also taught the People how to take
the like Measures; for, they never brook their Emperor's Commands, much longer
than his Measures are successful in gratifying them with the Spoils of their
Neighbors; so that all mutual Obligation between Prince and People, is there
purely founded on Profit. As to Royal Goodness, or Subjects Duty, how little
they are known now at Constantinople, let this last Revolution witness. No
question, but the Sultan's greatest Favorites led his Arms in this last, as
well as in other more fortunate Wars; yet not one Miscarriage by a General from
the running from before Vienna, till this last Years return of the Rebels to
Constantinople, cost any thing less than loss of Life and All. Who but an
impotent Tyrant, would have abandoned his Bosom-Friends to the heady Humor of
the Multitude? He must certainly have been very regardless of his Interests,
who would quit them so slightly to the Pretensions of his Slaves. And the
People showed their Prince the like Duty and Gratitude, in deposing him, who in
the former part of his Reign had brought under the Crescent, Candia, Caminiec,
and so many Places in Hungary. Thus, when every body became greater than his
Prince, as he had spared many of his Favorites Lives no longer than to tell
where their Treasures lay, the Anarchites bestowed as many Bastinado's on the
Survivers, as did complete the Ruin of the Old Court. But, what a strange
Impotence in the Management of the Reins of his Government showed it self, when
the very Eunuchs could venture to oppose his Indignation; and the Bostangi, or
Gardener, durst refuse to acknowledge his lawful Sovereign, and bid him look to
his own Head, who demanded his for Rebellion.

Their Divinity likewise is of equal Consideration with their Politics, which
allows, that the Lawful Sovereign may, for the good of the Empire, be deposed,
and an Usurper (for he can be no other) placed in the Throne: And this solemn
Decision was passed, by no less Man than the Mufti.

Their Inconstancy likewise to their old severe Maxims, in taking off all that
might in any probability pretend to the Throne, shows the Instability of their
Counsels, and the tottering Condition of the Government. Mahomet, it is true,
showed some weak Efforts of the old Policy, when he would have concluded his
Butcheries with his own Relations; but it proved too late: Yet (which is still
more strange) the Mufti, who set up an Usurper, durst pronounce, that the
lawful Prince, after he had denounced the Sentence of Deposition upon him,
ought to live. But, whether he may not live to give some of his Rebellious
Subjects their Deserts, Time, and Solyman's Successes against the Christians,
must show.

One great Mistake in this barbarous Polity, is, that all Men and their
Undertakings are measured altogether by their Success, and not by the Rules of
Prudence and Counsel. Whereas in Rome once a General punished his Son, who had
purchased a Victory by the Transgression of his Orders: In this rough-hewen
Government, the most unpolitick Actions, if but crowned with Success, are
accounted Brave and Glorious. Nor dare a Generalissimo for the wise Venetians,
at this day pursue a Victory beyond his Masters Instructions; for, should he
thereby gain Constantinople it self, he would be so far from meriting by it,
that the Action would very much want a Pardon; such a Value have all wise Men
for a prudent Conduct in Affairs above the utmost Efforts of Courage and
Bravery. If the Reason of things swaied in Turkey, little cause had that People
to blame Mahomet IV. for undertaking a War against the German Emperor, when
Factions were so strong on their Side in Hungary, and the Germans were brought
so low on the other by the Power of France. It is very strange, that a People
should be so violently persuaded of their Fate; and yet act as if there were no
Providence. For, whoever drives on without prudential Conduct, must depend on a
fortuitous Hit, and can scarce do well without a Miracle; whereas, he that
steers by Council, seems guided by the Clew of Providence, whither Fate has
determined him. Certainly it is a strange Defect in these Peoples Policy, to be
so much swayed by Fortune, and so little by Counsel: For, grant but an Army to
judge of their General by the Success of a Battle; it must be left to their
Discretion, whether they will beled by him to a second Engagement: Just thus
has it fared with the Turks in this last War; it has not been the Indiscretion
of Mahomet IV. that has brought things to so low an Ebb, but it was the false
Maxims of Policy, on which the Turkish Government was founded. Where Arms are
managed with a steady Hand, let the Success be what it will, the Attempt is
good; but once allow an Army to act beyond Commission, though for the public
Good, that same Army, by virtue of the same Liberty, may act for the Subversion
of the Sovereign and Government; of which this last Revolution at
Constantinople is a pregnant Instance.

FINIS.

