A SOBER and TEMPERATE DISCOURSE, Concerning the Interest of Words in Prayer.
The just Antiquity and Pedigree of LITURGIES, OR Forms of Prayer in Churches:
With a View of the State of the Church, when they were first composed, or
imposed. Together with A Discovery of the weakness of the grounds upon which
they were first brought in, or upon which Bishop Gawden has lately Discoursed,
the nec^ssity of a Liturgy, or the inconven^ency of altering the English
Liturgy, the utility of Church Music, and the lawfulness of Ceremonies: in
which are mixed Reasons justifying those Godly Ministers, who forbear the use
of the Common prayer, against the late Outcries of the said Bishop.

By H. D. M. A.

1 Pet. 3.9. Not rending evil for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing, knowing that you are thereunto called, that you should
inherit a blessing.

LONDON, Printed for W.A. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and in
Paul's Church yard, 1661.

HE (who had reported to Master Williams, Whittingham, Gilby, and others, that
Cranmer Bishop of Canterbury, had drawn up a Book of Prayer, an hundred times
more perfect then ^his that we now have; the same could not take place, for
that he was matched with such a wicked Clergy and Convocation, with other
enemies) even he, I say stood in this, that Master Bullinger did like well of
the English order, and had it in his Study. But when Whittingham had demanded
that question, Bullinger told him, that indeed Master H. and Master C. asked
his judgment concerning certain points of that Book, as Surplice, Private
Baptism, Churching of Women, the Ring in Marriage, with such like, which (as he
said) he allowed not, and that he neither could if he would, neither would if
he might use the same in his Church, whatsoever had been reported. History of
the troubles at Frankeford first published 1575. in the 42. 43. page

A Discourse of Lyturgies, or Forms of Prayer in Churches, etc.
CHAP. I. The Interest of Words in Prayer considered, both as to private and
public Prayer; The Necessity of them considered, as the Homage of our Lips, as
they restrain mental extravagancies, and are Interpreters of our Conceptions
to others: Consequences from this Consideration.
I. SO transcendent is the privilege of coming to the Holy of Holies, by the
new and living way in the most sublime and spiritual duty of Prayer, where the
soul talks with its Creator, as it were face to face. Such is the nature of
that spiritual performance, considered in it self, so momentous the Concerns,
for which in it we wait upon the Throne of Grace; so many the directions which
our Holy Father has given us in his Word for the acceptable performance of it,
that we must needs be concluded unthankful to God, who has indulged so
glorious a Liberty to us, unjust and unreasonable to our selves, who are by the
Law of Nature taught to remit or intend our minds in all performances,
according to the moment of them, and unfaithful to that Word, which we own as
the square of all our Conversations, if we should not warily attend our Souls
in so Sacred an Homage, in which so much of our Interest lies, not offering a
Female, when we have a Male in our Plock; though we knew of no such Malediction
as that, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently.

II. Whilst we view this sacred thing Prayer, as our Privilege, we can
consider it no otherwise than as a Liberty, to ask of the Father of mercies,
what we or others stand in need of, under the encouragements of many precious
Promises, nor short of his who said, Ask what thou will, even to the half of my
Kingdom, I will give it thee; yea far beyond; for the Lord will give Grace and
^lory, Psalm. 84. When we respect it as our duty, we find it is expressed in
Scripture under the many notions of Seeking God, Calling upon him, wrestling
with him, pouring out our souls before him, etc. As our view of it in the
notion of a privilege, forbids us any limitations, as to the matter of our
Prayers, other than what God has set us; so the latter obliges us to a
performance of it under such Circumstances, as shall neither divert the
intention of our mind, nor cool the fervor of our Spirits, which two things
are most essentially necessary to the acceptable performance of our duty in it,
and so excellently becomes that most sacred performance; and without which our
performance is but lip-labor, and lost labor; yea no other than a most gross
Hypocrisy, and mocking of him who cannot be mocked.

III. Prayer being the souls Colloquy with God, who is a Spirit, and our Tongue
(which is the Organ of speech) with all the faculty belonging to it, and the
issues of it, serving chiefly (if not only) for intercourse with men (Spirit
having another way to communicate their sense each to other) It is rationally
apparent that there is no absolute necessity of any words at all in Prayer.
(Haunch can pray acceptably, and yet her voice not be heard, 1 Samuel 1.) for
such necessity must either be on the Souls part or on Gods: On the Soul part
they are not necessary, for it can long and desire without the Tongue; nor yet
on Gods part are they so, for he not only knows what things we have need of,
but also what we would have before we ask them; how else can he answer before
we call, and (as be promises) hear before we speak.

IV. But he who made all things for himself, did not in that general design
except the Tongue of man, which being his creature, is naturally obliged, and
ex Institute, is otherwise obliged to his Service, and as his Word has
directed its service in other things, so also in the duty of Prayer, commanding
us to take unto us words, and say, etc. And calling to his Spouse, Let me hear
thy voice, for it is comely; And his Providence has for this end (amongst
others) disposed reasonable souls into humane bodies, that they should animate
the tongues of men to this sacred Service: Besides that, experience teaches
the Sons of men that the use of the lively voice is of excellent use to fix the
mind, and to restrain that wild thing from such wanton diversions, as it is
most prone to, in its exercises upon God: Whence it is that there is not only
Mental, but Vocal Prayer, and both the unquestionable duty of Christians; and
an use of words in Prayer is, if not at all times, yet at some times, and for
all Christians, necessary by a necessity of Precept, and highly expedient
generally even in the Souls privatest converses with God.

V. But in Public Prayer, the use of words is most unquestionably necessary:
God has not only allowed us a liberty to pray for our selves, and in our
Closets, but also to pray one with and for another, and also enjoined us it as
our duty, and encouraged us to it by many gracious Promises. It is his revealed
will, that in such public devotions, some particular persons should be the
mouth of the rest unto him, whose Prayer (according to divine Institution) is
made the common performance of the whole Society (whether it be that of a whole
Family, or that of a greater or lesser Congregation) by their concurrence in
spirit with him that speaks, and their rational and fiducial assent to what
he speaks, as well on theirs, as his own behalf. Now there being no other
ordinary way of correspondence which God has allowed rational souls each with
other (in their united estate) but by the tongues of men, animated by the souls
to that very purpose, that they might be their Interpreters. It is impossible
that public Prayer should be performed without words, and those both audibly
and intelligibly pronounced, which is also conformable to the will of God, who
has taught us when we pray, to say Our Father: Whence it appears, that both
the silent, mute Meetings of Quakers, and the Latin Service of Papists, and
the Prayers of any others said or sang, so that People cannot hear or
understand what is said, are all of them abominable in the sight of God, and to
be abhorred of every reasonable Christian.

VI. But seeing words are no more than the desires of our souls interpreted.
And there being no further use of them in the duty of Prayer, than that by them
we might sacrifice unto God the devotion of our hearts by the Calves our lips.
2. And by the help of them we might interpret the (otherwise not intelligible)
desires of our souls unto others. And 3. Restrain the extravagancies of our own
Spirits: A Curiosity of phrase in Prayer, seems neither necessary nor
reasonable. Not necessary, because as our holy Father who understands the
thoughts of our hearts, before they be brought forth into words, has no need
of well turned Language to affect his sacred ears, nor has required more than
according to the ability, which he has given to several souls: So the plainest
phrase is best intelligible to the most of those that hear us, who are to give
a rational assent, and say a fiduciary Amen to what we speak.

VII. Nor are the Prayers of the poorest Rustic (who ordinarily salutes his
neighbor and expresses his mind to him in terms which the Critic calls
Nonsense) for their Grammatical incongruities or defects in Rhetoric, less
acceptable unto God than the softy strains and luxuriant issue of wanton
Rhetoric in the prayers of others are, whose great study possibly is to put
their prayers into handsome Language. Who knows not that many Idiomes in other
Languages are perfect nonsense in English? Yet who doubts but God accepts in
every Nation pious souls, pouring out their hearts unto him in Prayer, by their
mouths, according to the Dialects of their several Countries.

VIII. In very deed, the only Nonsense that can attend Prayer, is the
incongruity of the tongue of him that speaks with his mind and heart, or with
the understandings of those who join with him. Let but the tongue be the true
interpreter of the heart toward God, and the expressions of it be commensurate
with the capacity and understanding of those that hear, and the Prayer shall be
discharged from any guilt of Nonsense in the sight of God, accruing from a want
of Grammatical order in words (unless such want proceed from the Speakers
non-attention and carelesseness of his Spirit) Yea the Prayer which the wanton
Orator, the curious observer of words, and Pryer into the proprieties of them,
may call Nonsense, may be most admirable sense in the ears and judgment of God
and good men, whose eye is upon higher things in spiritual duties, than a well
tuned esse posse videatur.

IX. Yea there may be in him that speaks, such an affectation of nitid words
and curious phrases, such a superlative care, that Noun Substantives and
Adjectives may stand in due places, and Verbs be put in right Moods and Tenses,
that too many monosillables or pollysillables may not hobble or rumble after
one another, such a study for paranomasia's and other Fooleries of phrase, as
may make the Prayer abominable both to God and to all good men: Whilst not the
holy Omniscient God only, but even sober men easily discern the heart of him
that speaks, as to its secret intention, gone a whoring from God (to whom it
should be united in Prayer) after that Strumpet Rhetoric in which he never
took any delight. Nor is the Prayer (thus patched and painted and disguised by
this Taylor-like art of words) understood by those who would better know it,
and to whom it would appear far more lovely in the morning-dress, of a
homebred, natural inaffected phrase.

X. Yet in regard that it cannot be reasonably presumed, that any public
Congregation should be made up of persons equally intelligent, in the mysteries
of Godliness, nor equally intelligent of words and phrases, nor equally
considering that words are but the shell and skin of Prayer. Nor so, but that
there will be many amongst them of carnal hearts; it is very reasonable that he
who speaks in public Prayer, should so speak, that whilst he humbles his
phrase to the meanest capacity and understanding (that his Prayer may not lose
their Amen) he also elevates his words, above the nauseam and just reproach, of
the most sqeamishears, even of those who far more regard the starching of the
Prayer, that it be pulled right in every corner, and round about, than the
matter of which it is composed, or the fervency of heart with which it is
uttered.

XI. And doubtless who so in this thing keeps a due mediocrity, in the public
performance of the duty of Prayer, neither by too much curiosity of phrase, and
attention to that, diverting his soul from the more serious and fixed
contemplation of God, nor by mixing too much of man's d^ing, as Luther calls it
(alluding to that of Ezechiel) with spiritual bread, makes the duty a loathing
to spiritual souls: Not yet by too much rudeness, and carelessness of phrase,
shall either give a just suspicion to others, that his heart attends not what
his Tongue speaks, or offers a temptation to the more carnal part of his
Hearers, to loath and contemn the Service, has sufficiently discharged his
duty, and needs be no further careful of words in Prayer, unless (which it may
be is not impossible) he can find out or invent some modes and forms of
expressions, which upon the evidence of experience shall appear to be more
proper means, than the use of other words, to warm the hearts of those that are
to join with him, and to boil them up to a greater degree of fervency in
spirit, whilst they are in that duty serving the Lord. To which purpose,
handsome cadencies of periods, a lofty rouling style, affected Paranomasia's,
pedantick quiblings of words and phrases, (fine Knacks to please childish ears
with) are so far from signifying any thing, that they are cusus contrarium's in
the business, good for nothing but to loath pious souls. And indeed, those
phrases which do this excellent deed, are experimentally found to be such as
the inwardly affected heart of the Speaker immediately dictates to his Tongue.
It being most undoubtedly truth, That words coming from the heart of the
Speaker, find the nearest and readiest way to the heart of the Hearer; and the
Souls of the hearers shall acknowledge themselves most affected, when the
Speaker finds his heart most warmed and enlarged, as if there were a Sympathy
of devout Souls, which is indeed from the mighty secret working of the same
spirit of Prayer acting both and at the same time preparing the Speakers heart
and tongue to dictate and speak, and the Hearers souls to hear, sigh, groan,
and to give a fiducial assent, Romans 8.26.

CHAP. II. The Gift of Prayer is partly Natural, partly by Industry acquirable.
That it is promised by God, denied to none that will duly use means to attain
it; but they may so far attain it, as in public to pray without forms, so as
God shall accept it, and none have just cause of Scandal. That none worthy of
the office of the Ministry, need to want it, nor do, but through their own Sin
and Negligence.
I. THE Gift and Grace of Prayer are two things: The Grace of Prayer is a
spiritual ability in the Soul, from which it is enabled from the Spirit of
Adoption to go unto God saying Abba, Father, with an holy boldness, fiducial
confidence, fervency of spirit, begging of him things according to his Will:
This Nature does not teach, Industry will not necessarily bring us to; for this
God must send forth the spirit of his Son into peoples hearts, crying Abba
Father, Gal. 4.6. And none can do this but those who have received the Spirit
of Adoption, Romans 8.15. But the gift of Prayer is nothing else, but an ability
of mind to form words, expressive of such desires of our hearts, as are
according to the will of God, conjoined with a faculty of memory, and of
expression and elocution.

II. Hence it appears, that the gift of Prayer is partly natural; for from
nature is the faculty of Meditation and Speech: partly by Industry attainable;
For let us duly consider, what he has to do that prays, more than to speak
(that is in reference to the external part of Prayer, performable by the gift
of Prayer) Prayer consists of a Confession of all sins, Supplications for
supply of wants for our selves and others, and a thanksgiving for Mercies
received. Sin is either Original or Actual: Actual sin is a transgression of
the Law of God. This Law of God is contained in his Word; all violations of it
in thought, word or deed are sins. Supposing a man in a capacity to meditate
and speak what is wanting to any, save Industry only, why he should not compose
a Confession of Sins? If he knows what the Scripture says of the imputed guilt
of Adams sin, of our being conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity.
What the Law of God requires and forbids, and considers his own and other
men's words and actions, and his own heart, to which other men's hearts answer in
a great measure, why should he not be able to form a Confession in his heart,
and (if he have any elocution) to speak it with his Lips? And if he has any
habit of knowledge of the Scriptures as to these things, why should he not be
able to speak this Confession to God ex tempore, as well as a Lawyer shall
speak in matter of Law, or a knowing Philosopher discourse Philosophical
Learning rationally, many times to the admiration of his Hearers?

It is further reasonable, that to a Confession of sins, should be added, an
acknowledgment of the Justice of God in case of any Judgments already brought
upon us or others, or upon supposition if God should bring upon us any. Surely
every Christian knows, or should know, that the wages of sin is death, that
the least sin exposes us to the wrath of God here and hereafter, etc. And if
he has a tongue to speak, can say so to God in Prayer. In the supplicatory
part of Prayer, we deprecate Judgment, we implore Mercy, for our selves, for
others, for souls, for bodies, all according to the Will of God; whosoever knows he
has a Body and a soul, and knows the wants of both, knows what to ask for; and
he that knows the Scriptures, is advantaged in that knowledge, and further is
by them directed, what to ask for absolutely, what conditionally, what Promises
to urge upon God in Prayer, what Judgments to deprecate, and in what manner:
Nor is any so ignorant, as not to know what is good for himself or others in a
natural sense; the Scripture tells him what is so spiritually and truly, and if
he has a tongue, he can surely say, O God, I thank thee for, etc. Does he want
Expressions? The Scripture is full of Expressions directive of him.

III. In short, (setting Elocution aside) now that the Word of God is in our
own Language, there can be nothing but particular Christians horrible neglect
of acquainting themselves with it, or their non-observing their own hearts, or
not using themselves to the exercise of Prayer, that can hinder any private
Christian from being able to speak unto God in Prayer, fully, profitably
acceptably, and so as none but profane hearts shall be scandalized. And this
Assertion is demonstrable.

Romans 8 26. Luke 21. Mark 13.11.
IV. Besides this, God has promised the help of his Spirit as to words and
matter (in the use of means) the Spirit shall teach us what to pray for; nor is
this beneath the Holy Spirit any more than to give unto suffering Saints what
to speak in the very hour they shall be called before men for Christ's sake; for
which there is a Promise, and they allowed therefore to take no care what to
speak beforehand. We acknowledge that the Gift of Prayer is no special
distinguishing Gift, but a common Gift; but by no means can allow our selves in
the suppressing of it.

V. Hence it is that many a person whose constant employment is not in the work
of the Ministry, is able to pour out his soul in Prayer before God, in proper
and apt expressions, without any further premeditation than is necessary, to
take the noise of his worldly business out of his head, so orderly and
methodically, and in such handsome expressions, that any godly sober Divine,
though never so Learned, shall approve his performance, and bless God on his
behalf.

VI. That any owning the Name of a Minister of the Gospel, should not be so
able, is a great reproach to our Church, considering that this disability must
proceed, 1. From a want of knowledge in the Scriptures, (which every Minister
ought to know exactly.) Or, 2. From a want of a due observance to, and a
watchfulness upon his own heart and ways (whereas he ought to excel others in
the practical part of Holiness) Or, 3. From want of Elocution or freedom of
speech, or such other natural gifts, without which none can judge himself
called of God to that holy Employment. Or, 4. From want of exercising himself
in the duty of Prayer: All which are lamentable things for any professing
himself a Minister, so much as to be suspected of.

VII. Yet that de facto, there have been such called by the name of Ministers,
amongst us, and that there are many such amongst us still, cannot be reasonably
denied: But we dare to assert, That all such are either such as for want of
Natural Parts, are by all Scriptural Rules determined insufficient, and not fit
for the Ministry, or such, as according to all Scriptural and Ecclesiastical
Rules ought to be removed from the Ministry, as neglecting to use the Gift of
God bestowed on them, or neglecting to study the Scriptures, or such as live in
open and known courses of Debauchery, or finally, such as have so used
themselves to the lazy Devotion of Book Prayers, that they have choked their
abilities, or provoked God in righteous Judgment to deprive them of them.

VIII. It yet remains a most demonstrable truth, that the work of Prayer is not
such, as to the use of words in it, but that any Minister of any competent
abilities, (as all Ministers ought to be) and who is in any reasonable degree
acquainted with the holy Scriptures, and with any Christian diligence, either
observes his own heart, or peoples converses, and watches over his Flock but
with half an eye, may so perform, as neither God shall be offended with his
performance, nor any sober Auditor scandalized and made to nauseate the Duty.
And it will (upon experience) be found impossible for any State or Church to
maintain (by imposing Forms of Prayer) the credit of any Ministry, whom the
people shall discern so woefully neglective of their duty, and defective in so
noble a performance, in which they are excelled by the meanest of the Vulgar.
There being no other way (when all is tried) to maintain the Authority of the
Ministry, than the employment of such, and only such persons in that work, who
shall evidently appear to People, as to the Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit
bestowed upon them, to be taller by the Head and Shoulders than those are, over
whom God has set them. Other Devices may be tried; this only in the end will
be found efficacious.

CHAP. III. The Original of Lyturgical Forms of Prayer. None for 400 years
after Christ. None imposed upon any considerable Part of the Church, till 800
years after Christ, when all manner of Superstitious Usages had defiled the
Church.
I. Which being premised, it is no wonder at all, that neither Christ nor his
Purer Church ever imposed upon the Church any Books of Lyturgies. Duranti
rationale, l. 5. c. 2.
Durantus indeed tells us, That Christ himself (who certainly had an infallible
Spirit, and a proportion of it without measure, if that may be called a
proportion) yet used that excellent Form of Prayer, called the Lords Prayer (by
which he taught his Disciples to pray; And that the Apostles used the Creed,
called (but never yet proved) theirs: But he confesses, that in Primitiva
Ecclesia diversi diversa quisque pro suo velle cantabant, dummodo quod
cantabant ad Dei Gloriam pertinebat. In the Primitive Church every one sung or
prayed (for that he called singing) as they pleased, so what they all did,
related to the Glory of God. When Christ sent out his Disciples to preach, he
was so particular in directing them, that he takes care to direct them to
provide a Purse and a Scrip, but none for a Service Book: Nor did the Apostle
Paul in his particular directions to Timothy or Titus (whether they were
Evangelists or Bishops) though he ordered them to ordain Ministers, and charge
them to fulfill their Office, by putting up Prayers and Supplications for all
men, etc. so much as mention any Missal or Lyturgy for their directions; which
it is strange they should have omitted, had Lyturgies been so necessary, as we
are now told they be, that Religion without them cannot be preserved, nor
Heresies without them restrained.

II. Those holy Servants of God knew, that the Spirit of Prayer was powered out
in the world, and that the gift of Prayer was one of those gifts, which their
Master when he ascended up on high did give unto men; and were tender of
delivering ought to the Church, which they had not received from the Lord: And
(which Tertullian said afterward) were willing that Ministers should pray sine
Monitore, quia de pectore, without a Monitor (not a Mummer, as some would have
it) because it was their duty to pray from their hearts; they therefore even in
the Confession of our Adversaries, and the greatest Masters of the Ceremonies,
left no Lyturgies for the Church of God.

III. Indeed Claudius de Saints and Pamelius (two Popish Divines) have
discovered to the world the Terra incognita of certain Lyturgies, fathered upon
St. James, St. Peter and St. Mark; De Missae apparatu, l. 7. c. 21.
which Josephus Vicecomes takes notice of (but does not think fit to insist
upon them.) Cardinal Bellarmine in his Book de Scriptor. Eccles. neither
mentions that of Peter nor Mark, but brands all Books (not mentioned by him,
attributed to St. Peter) with the names of spurii and supposititii. That of St.
James indeed he mentions, Bellarm. De Script. Eccl de Jac. Apostol.
but tells us that it is so basely augmented, that none can determine what of it
was St. James's. But the Learned Mornay has said enough to prove that these
pretended Lyturgies of the Apostles were all Fictions, and it will be no hard
matter to evince every sober Reader the truth of it. Who knows not how hard a
thing the Bishops in the Councils of Ephesus and Calcedon found it to find a
place or two in the Writings of the Ancients, where the Virgin Mary was called
(...)? Where had the difficulty been if these Lyturgies had been in the world,
and in Proclus his hand too (who was present in the Council of Ephesus) who
they say, transmitted that of St. James to the world (for in that Lyturgy it is
5 or 6 times over: Nor certainly would the Members of the Synod of
Constantinople have been at a loss to have proved out of this, the calling of
the Holy Spirit consubstantial with the Father, had they ever seen this new
invented Toy. Both in this, and St. Marks Lyturgy Christ is again and again
called (...) with his Father, which certainly would have determined that great
Question about that Word in the Nicene and other Councils. Both in St. James's
and St. Marks Lyturgies we have the (...) invented by Felix 480. To say nothing
of the Notions of Altars, Temples, burning Frankincense, Censers, such as lived
in Monasteries, Confessors, the Prayer for the Pope, In St. Marks Lyturgy, the
Prayers for Subdeacons, Readers, Singers. All which things have made them
^ustly rejected by all sober Writers, and accounted of no better authority than
the Epistles of Christ and Abagarus; for the very mention of which, Gelasius of
old, called Eusebius his History Apochrypal. Nor are those pretended to be St.
Peter's and St. Mathews of better authority. The same things are to be objected
against the first, and surely if St. Peter's Vicar thought better of it, the
Church of Rome would have used it before that made by Gregory the Pope (which
is that they use.) In that pretended to be St. Matthews, there is mention of
the Epact and Golden Number (knacks invented long since) Prayers for Popes,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, (persons St. Matthew never knew) Nay Basil,
Chrysostom, Gregory the Great, the Nicene Council have their honorable mention
in it, which were all 3, 4, 5 or 600 years after St. Matthews time. So that
Baronius himself is ashamed of all, but that called St. James's, nor does
Saints mention more. To say some things might be added, (...) Paris. 15^0.
yet they might make Lyturgies of no value; it is that which Bellarm. and
Baronius have said, and some Semi-Protestants have taken up after them: For
which they have no further proof than the Title of a Book set by a Popish
Priest, which proves all as well as some.

IV. Nor is there any thing more clear to us than this, both from that of
Tertullian (mentioned before) who lived Anno 200 after Christ, and from that
long since quoted by Smectymnuus, out of Eusebius, That Constantine the Emperor
made Prayers for his Army, which unquestionably he would not have done, had
there been then any Lyturgies (especially any known by the Reverend authorities
or Names of Matthew, Mark, Peter, or James. Besides that, Bishop Hall could
pretend no higher authority than the Canon of the Council of Laodicea. (of
which more by and by) For any Pretenses of any in the Jewish Church, they are
perfect Apochryphals. Jos. Vicecomes de Missae appas ^atu, l. 7. c. 21.
What truth there may be in what Vicecomes says, that the Pagans had their
Service-Books, to direct them in their idolatrous Service; which he proves out
of Cicero, Festus, Clem. Alexandr. and Lactantius: We are not at leisure to
enquire, nor think it much material; for surely Christians are to take no
Copies from them.

V. The highest pretended Authority then for public Lyturgies, is from the
18th Can. of the Council of Laodicea: What time that Council was celebrated, is
not agreed. Caranza says it was Anno 364. toward the latter end of the time
of Liberius the Pope. Longus and Baronius (from whom he had it) dates it 315.
under Pope Sylvester; which he proves, because it was before the time of Basil
and Theodoret, which are no Arguments (for Basil wrote not till near 380. nor
Theodoret till Anno 420.) Balsamon (a man well enough skilled in the Chronology
of the Gr. Councils) sets it after the Synod of Antioch, and next before that
of Sardis. This Synod decrees (...), (says Balsamon) that the same Lyturgy of
Prayers should be used in the Morning and Evening: Suppose his a true Copy,
every one knows, that (...) does not necessarily signify a Form of words in
Prayer, but merely an Order of Prayers: But besides this, Caranza gives this
Canon another title, and phase too: The Title, De Orationibus quotidianis. The
Canon, De eo quod semper supplicationes orationum, and ad horam nonam and
vesperam oportet celebrari. According to him, (in which were but 22 Bishops,
Longus says 32.) This Synod only decreed that there should be constant Prayers
at Nine in the Morning and in the Evening; not that they should be the same
Forms.

VI. Nor can we believe there were at this time any Forms of Prayer made, for
all Ministers to use; because we find the Council of Carthage only imposing
this, Can. 23.
That if any Minister made any Prayers for his use, her should not use them,
till he had communicated them to his more able Brethren: Whence we gather, that
at that time, which was about 395. there were no Forms of Prayer imposed upon
Ministers.

VII. In which we are the more confirmed by the 12th, Canon of the Council of
Mela, (commonly called the Milevitane Council) held in Africa, under Aurelius
the Archbishop, where (so far as their Jurisdiction reached) they restrain
Ministers, to the use of such Prayers, as should be approved by the Synod, ne
forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit
compositum: least any thing through ignorance or negligence should be vented
against the Faith, the Doctrine of which was then woefully shaken by Pelagius,
to condemn whose Errors, that Council (which was but a Provincial Synod of 60
Bishops) were convened.

VIII. We are not ignorant of the Lyturgies fathered upon Basil Chrysostom,
and Ambrose, a little before this time. Basil was made Bishop about the year
372. Chrysostom about the year 382. Ambrose about 381. But he must have more
Faith to spare, than we have, who can either believe, that the Lyturgies
published under their names, are indeed theirs; or that they indeed imposed
any. There are two fathered upon Basil, one printed 1569. translated by Masius.
The Greek Copy is far more large than the Latin, and so differing one from
another, that it is no hard thing to determine of their authority, as the
Learned Morney has done. For that of Ambrose, Morneus de Missa, l. 1. c. 6.
we have it not in his works, Erasmus, Perkins, and others condemn, those two
Prayers (which are found in his works, preparing the Priest to celebrate Mass)
as none of his; in which censure, Robertus Cocus, yea and some Papists agree
with him. What Vouchers therefore the Papists have for that Officium
Ambrosianum, which Jacobus de Voragine, in the Golden Legend, and Durantus in
his Rationale, tell us a Tale about, we cannot tell. For that fathered upon
Chrysostom, there are diverse Copies of it, scarce any of them agreeing with
one another. Let those who can think that so grave a man as Chrysostom could
direct the Church to pray for Pope Nicholas who lived almost 500 years after
Chrysostom was dead) or for the Victory of Alexius, (which was in a Battle
fought 700 years after he was dead) or who can believe that such a confused
Fardel of stuff could be made by so worthy a person, believe it was his if
they will. We are the more confirmed in the contrary, by the latter craft of
Lyturgy-mongers, in leaving out the Names of Alexius and Nicholas, in their
latter printed Latin Copies, Erasm. Epist. in Paraph. in 1 Cor.
the Translation of which, they yet unwarily father upon Erasmus, who tells us,
he did not think it like to be true that ever Chrysostom made it.

IX. To be short, When we find that Josephus Vicecomes (as superstitious as he
was) can fetch no higher authority for Lyturgies, than Arnobius, who lived 306.
Athanasius who flourished 330. Hierom, who lived 385. Victor Uticensis, who
lived 480. nor any plain proof from any of these: Only some of these spoke of
Books of the Christians, ubi summons oratur Deus, (so Arnobius) Sacros
Scripturarum Libros (so Athanasius) Liber Hymnorum and Mysteriorum, so Hierom.
Libros cunctos Domini, (so Uticensis) We cannot but conclude, that at this time
there were no Service-Books made, directing Forms of Prayer, though possibly
Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and others might write some Prayers to help some
weak Christians which they might transcribe.

Duranti Rationale, c. 2. l. 5.
X. But what need we any further Testimony than is given, by one as zealous for
Lyturgies, Rituals and other Ceremonies, as ever lived in the world? it is that
of Durantus in his Rationale Divinorum Officiorum, l. 5. c. 1. Durantus having
ingeniously confessed (what none can without great impudence deny) that neither
Christ nor his Apostles used any prescribed Forms but the Lords Prayer and the
Creed (nor does or can he or any other say a word to prove they used them) tells
us that in suceeding times because the Church was rent by Heresies, Theodosius
(who lived about the year 380) entreated Pope Damasus, That some Ecclesiastical
Office (or Lyturgy as we call it) might be made by some Eccelsiastical
Catholic person, upon which Pope Damasus commanded Hierom, who was then in
Bethlehem with Paula Eustochium, and other Virgins, to abide there, and make a
Lyturgy for the Churches, because he was well skilled in Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee
and Latin; which he obediently did. He appointed how much of the Psalms
should be read each day in the week, he also ordered the reading of the Gaspels
and Epistles out of the Old and New Testament: When he had done it, he sent it
to Rome; it was approved by Pope Damasus, and made a Rule; and Damasus had the
honor of the work, because it was done at his Command. Gelasius (who lived
490. and was Pope) and Gregorius Magnus (who lived 600 years after Christ)
added Prayers and Songs, the Lessons and the Gospels. Ambrose, Gelasius and
Gregory (says he) added the Gradualia, Tractus, Allelujah, other Doctors of
the Church added other parts. -- Thus far Durantus.

XI. He fetches the Original of Lyturgies from Theodosius; but how probably,
let the Reader judge, who shall consider, that this good Emperor, was Emperor
but 17 years; that in that time he convened that great and venerable Council of
Constantinople, where were 150 worthy persons: Now let any judge how probable
it was that this Emperor should never propose the business to these; (for their
Canons are only about grave and necessary things) and send to Pope Damasus
about this: He was a man too much acquianted with the efficacy of fervent
Prayer, to restrain it. Nor indeed does Durantus say, that he caused any
Prayers to be made, all that he says Hierom did, was the appointing an Order
of reading the Scriptures.

XII. We must therefore go a little further than Theodosius his time. Nuda ab
initio omnia and sompliciter, Mysteria a Christo tradita apud Apostolos erant,
De Inventor. cerum. l. 5. c. 11.
etc. (says Polydore Virgil) One Pope after this time brought in one piece of
the Lyturgy, another brought in another. Coelestinus brought in the Introitus
Missa, Damafus the Confession, Gregory the Responds; and indeed till Gregory's
time there was no considerable use of it, nor any imposing of it. This was near
upon 600 years after Christ.

XIII. Pope Gregory is usually said to be the worst of all the Bishops of Rome
that preceded him, though the best of those that followed him; a man of no
great Learning, for he confesses himself (in one of his Epistles, that he
understood no Greek) not blameless for Morals, (for he was accused before
Mauritius the Emperor for the murder of one Malchus) Indeed the Protestant
Writers make good use of him, for his Testimony, about some Points, viz. that
about the Scriptures, Images, but chiefly in the question about the Head of the
Church. Ep. l. 7. c. 194.


XIV. The truth of the Story is, Two great Councils having before determined
the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Bishop of Rome equal, only allowing to
the latter the empty Title of the Bishop of the first Seat. John, Patriarch of
Constantinople was not able to endure that, and so upon the Point, though both
refused the Title, yet both strove to act the part of an Universal Bishop: The
Patriarch had the advantage of Gregory, because (the Empire being then in the
East) the Emperors Seat was at Constantinople: Greg. ep. l 4. Ep. 75.76.
which caused diverse Epistles between Mauritius and Gregory, (yet extant in
Gregory's works) Mauritius in the heat of this Contest, was basely murdered by
Phocas (one of his Captains) who was by the Soldiers made Emperor. v. Greg.
Epist. l. 11. c. 36, 43, 44.
Gregory (tending the Interest of his Sea) writes a most unworthy Letter to the
Empress, fawning upon that vile Murderer, and beseeching him to favor Sr.
Peter's Successor, and to remember who said, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
I will build my Church: Soon after this, Gregory dies; but before he died, he
had made a Lyturgy, (if we may believe Pamelius, he made a Lectionary or
Calendar, directing Scriptures to be read in order, an Antiphonary, directing
the Responds for Priests and People, and an Order for administering the
Sacraments) Others think the two latter were made after; but however, these
reached no further than Gregory's power, the Extent of which was at this time
but short and harrow.

15. Sabinianus was Pope immediately after Gregory, he lived but six Months;
Boniface succeeded him, he also fell in with Phocas, the Murderer of his
Master: and the Patriarch of Constantinople being now out of favor with
Phocas, because he could not flatter him in his horrid wickednesses and
cruelties, Phocas deserts him, and gives Boniface (what he asked) the Title of
Universal Bishop: This was about the year 605. And now he might pretend some
authority to impose his Service Book.

XVI. But yet he did little (exept in Germany) for the Lombards continual
quarrels with the Emperors, till the year 800. much hindered the Popes power all
that time, they lay close at home, all this while increased in superstition,
and the sottishness and ignorance of their Clergy increased, but in
Jurisdiction they did little: Only taking advantages, one while favoring the
Emperors, other while the Lombards; they added (by the favor of both) to St.
Peter's Patrimony, by all wicked acts imaginable, to be read at large in
Mornayes Mysterium Iniquitatis, and in many other Books.

. XVII. But about the year 800. Charles the Great, being come to the Empire
(who was a virtuous and noble Prince, only highly addicted to the Sea of Rome)
Adrian was then Pope, the Emperor was a great Favourer of him, he confirmed to
him all the temporal Possessions which the Popes had got either from former
Emperors, or from the Commanders of the Lombards, and added much more, which
his Son Ludovicus Pius confirmed. This Emperor also settled the civil
difference; which had a long time troubled the Empire, and he had a vast
empire; it contained Italy, Germany, Hungary France, and part of Spain.

XVII. Now it grew a seasonable time to impose a Lyturgy; to which purpose,
Hadrian the Pope moved Charles the Great, that it might be by his civil
authority imposed, Duranti rationale, l. 5. c 2. Mornei Hist. Papatus, p. 141*
Fol.
Gregory's Lyturgy was it, says Durantus. Ad quod Carolus Imperator omnes
Clericos Minis and Suppliciis per diversas Provincias cogebat Libros Ambrosiani
Officii comburens, i. e. To which Charles the Great compelled all his Ministers
with threats and punishments; and burning those Books that went under the name
of St. Ambrose. The Learned Morney says the same almost, where we only
observe, That the first imposing of a Lyturgy was importuned by the Bishop of
Rome, and done in favor to him, in Adriani gratiam, (says Morney) and began
with a persecution. but the Universal Bishop must give the Catholic Church a
cast of his Office, and impose a Lyturgy as far as he could.

XIX. But after this, there was no small contest; one Eugenius comes and
complains to Pope Hadrian, concerning the imposing of Gregory's Lyturgy (it
seems he liked that of St. Ambrose, i. e. said to be his) better. Durantus
says his importunity caused some Holy Fathers newly broke up from a Council,
to meet again, who to determine this difference, reverently and unanimously
agreed that both the Service Book which was made by St. Ambrose, and that also
made by Gregory, should be laid on St. Peter's Altar, sealed up with the Seals
of many Bishops, and the Church-doors should be shut, and the Fathers should
spend the whole night in It were worth the while to know by what book they
prayed in the mean time, Jacobus de Vorag. Leg. aurea in vita Greg. Durantus
ib. Fox Martyrol. Vol. 1.
Prayer, desiring God by some sign to determine, which of those Service-Books
he would have to be used universally: It was done accordingly. In the Morning
they go in, and find that of St. Ambrose lying in its place, that of St.
Gregory torn in piece; and scattered all about. ( If it be a Lie, Reader, thou
have it as cheap as we, and may read it in the Golden Legend, Durantus and
Mr. Fox his Martyrology, and doubtless in many other places, but in those three
we have read it.)

XX. But now what do the Fathers determine upon this Miracle? We should have
concluded, That it was the Will of God that Gregory's Service Book being full
of all manner of superstitious Trash, should never be used, nor St. Ambrose's
imposed, only lie by to be used in that Church of the Parson pleased. But
(says Durantus) they concluded this a sign from Heaven, that Greg.
Service Book or Missal should be scattered abroad, and used in all Churches,
and that of St. Ambrose only used in his own Church. (The business was, Gregory
had been Pope, but Ambrose had not.) Accordingly Pope Hadrian moving the
Emperor Charles, Gregory's Service Book was now imposed upon all Churches in
France, Hungary, Italy, Germany, and in England too, for here 60 years before
this, viz. Anno 740. Ina had subjected his Kingdom to Pope Gregory.

XXI. By, or before this time, the whole Fardel of Popish ceremonies and
superstitions were brought into the Church, nothing wanting (says the Learned
Morney) but the worshipping of Images, (which Charles the Great always opposed
and wrote against, yet this also was about this time decreed by the Second
Council of Nice, which Caranza says, was celebrated, Anno 781. under Adrian
and Transubstantiation, for which the way was how prepared too; for at this
time the Lords Supper was called the Sacrifice of the Mass, (says Morney;) And
he who reads the Ecclesiastical History of the Magdeburgenser, will find, that
all the trash of Ceremonies and all manner of superstitious usages were now
come into the Church. Gregory almost 200 years before had defended Purgatory,
and was indeed (as Alstodius calls him) the Master of the ceremonies, he who
defiled the Church with all manner of gross and abominable Superstition.

XXII. Now from this time, which was about the year 800. till the beginning of
Reformation, which was about 1517. in Germany did the Church of God lie hid in
the wilderness, some witnesses to the truths of God there were, but no
considerable open Assemblies, the durst oppose the Popes power. The Popish
Mass-Books were every where used, and long before the Reformation, the
Latine-Service was universal; for to that height of folly was the Holy Father
come, that he could not think it enough for the Communion of the Church, that
they should every where pray for the same things, (which was always done) and
in the same words, phrases and forms (which he had brought in) unless they also
did it in the same language. And this imposing of Forms, did admirably comport
likewise with the ignorance and sottishness of the Clergy in the 6th, and 7th.
age, and so downward; all the world knows, in what a pickle Erasmus found the
world in as to Learning: Reuchlin, and he did much to amend it.

XXII. As the work of Reformation improved, the Masse-books were thrown our in
England, nothing considerable was done until the 2. and 3. of Edward the 6.
which was about the year 1549, and 1550. King Edward observing that Divine
Service was, throughout his Kingdom, yet used in an unknown tongue, and that in
several modes, (here was the Com. Pr. after the use of Sarum, York, Bangor,
Lincoln, etc.) appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury, ( Cranmer) and several
other Bishops and Learned men, to make one convenient order, rite and fashion
of Common Prayer for public use. Which they did, and presented it to the king,
and it was imposed by Authority of parliament, in the first year of his Reign.
Stat. 1 Ed. 6.1.
In this first Book, were many gross remains of Superstition: Stat 5 and 6. Ed.
6.^.1.^.^
The King therefore causes it to be revised again, explained and made fully
perfect, and this second Form was established by Authority of Parliament, Anno
5. and 6 Ed. 6. and annexed and joined so explained and perfected, to that
Statute, adding also a form and manner of consecrating Archbishops, etc.

XXIII. These prudent Reformers, considering they had to do with a people newly
come out of the dregs of Popery, did not think sit at once to do all that was
to do: In the first Edition of the Common Prayer Book, they left (if we
remember right) Prayer for the dead still to be used, gave directions for using
the Cross in the administering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. In the Second
Edition, these and other things were left out; neither did they think fit at
the time to make a new Lytugry, (the Common people would have thought it a new
Religion) they therefore translate the old Gregorian Missal, leaving out the
Prayers for the Pope, and to Saints, and for Saints departed, and a few such
things, as could not be used without palpable Idolatry, and translate the other
Prayers in the Mass Book out of Latin into English, and these were some of
them established by that Act, 5, 6. Ed. 6. Stat. 1. The truth of this any one
that can understand Latin may convince himself of, by comparing the Mass Book
with the Com. Pr. of Edw. 6. Where he will find betwixt 40. and 50. Collects
translated verbatim; and if he compares the other parts with the Roman
Breviary, the Roman Ritual, and the Pontificale Romanum, he will yet further
see the truth of it.

XXIV. Not indeed could it be imagined, that those first Reformers should leave
at that time all Ministers at liberty, or to their own conceived Prayers, when
most of them were Papists in their hearts and generally so sottishly ignorant,
and insufficient, that they could not have done any thing. Which very cause
held in Qu. Eliz. time, (where 1 El. c. 2. the Common Prayer was with some
further emendations specified in the Statute, 5 Eliz c 28.
again imposed) In the 5th. year of her Reign, by Act of Parliament, the Common
Prayer was ordered to be translated into Welsh, and used in Wales. And this is
the true Story both of Lyturgies in the General, and the English Lyturgy in
special.

XXV. By this time the Reader, who has not a mind to revive Pythagoras his
School again, and to sacrifice his Reason to an (...), and believe every thing
that is told him, before he has tried the truth of it, may see reason to
desire the present L. Bish. of Exeter to tell him (if he can) where those same
ancient models of Lyturgies (not Roman, Bish. Hall Remonstr. p. 13.
but Christian) and contrived by the holy Martyrs and Confessors of the blessed
Reformation of Religion, are to be found? The Remonstrant was challenged, to
make it good out of ancient Models, but thought fit to wave the business in his
Reply. It has been the old Plea, but let them prove it if they can, (says
Didoclavius.) Or if his present Lordship of Exeter does not think fit to answer
for another, yet it is reason that he should justify his own words. He has
told us, in p. 8. of his Considerations touching the Lyturgy, That, The Ancient
Churches from the very first Century did use such-publick wholesome Forms of
found words in their Sacramental celebrations especially, and afterward in
other holy Administrations or public duties as made up their solemn, devout
and public Lyturgies, which Patterns, all Modern and Reformed Churches of any
Renown, have followed according to the many Scriptural Examples and Expressions
in set Forms of Prayer, Psalms, Confessions and Benedictions, commended to us
by holy men in all ages, and by Christ himself.

XXVI. The world is grown too wary to believe any thing of this, because any
one says so; and the Doctor is too wise, to undertake to prove this: Let him
prove, That Christ prescribed the Lords Prayer for a Form, or that the Apostles
ever used it so. 2. Let him prove, that in any of the four first Centuries
there was any Stated Forms of Prayer used in the Church. 3. Let him prove, that
any Modern Reformed Churches imposed any Forms of Prayer, so that those and no
other might be used. And 4, That they did this after the Pattern of the Ancient
Churches from the first Century. All these things are to be proved; nor is it
possible to prove them.

XXVII. In the 18th. p. of that Discourse, he tells us, That, Dr. Gaudens
Consider. p. 19.
It is a Jesuitical Artifice and back-blow used by some to aver, though
falsely, That the English Lyturgy was nothing else but the Romish Missal or
Mass Book turned into English: It Is true, he says, some things (very
scriptural) devout and excellent, which the Roman Missal had taken, and
retained after the ancient Form of Lyturgies of the Church, were severed and
taken as Wheat from Chafe, and Jewels from Dross, by our wise Reformers, and
preserved in the English Lyturgy, conform to pious and unspotted Authority. We
challenge Dr. Gauden and all others of his mind, to make this good if they can.
It is true, there are some things in the English Lyturgy, that are not in the
Gregorian Missal. But let any one take Missale Romanum, both the old one, and
that established by the Council of Trent: Breviarium Romanum, Rituale Romanum,
and Pontificale Romanum. and compare them all with the printed Com. Prayer Book
of 5 and 6 E. 6. and then judge whether he can find a 6th. part of the latter,
which is in none of the former. If he finds that there is very little added,
let him the learn how to trust men talking after such a magisterial rate, and
annexing no proofs of their words.

XXVIII. If the Reader finds it true, that (whatsoever Dr. Gauden says) there
is in our English Lyturgy, as it is commonly exposed to sale, very little but
what is to be found in the Mass Book in Latin, let him then go to the Bishop
of Exeter, and desire him (for his credit sake) to show him those ancient Forms
of Lyturgy used in the Church, out of which these Forms of Prayer were
transcribed and taken, which must be immediately after the first Century; or
tell him, what that same pious and unspotted authority is, If he tells him, it
is Pope Gregory's, (which he must if he speaks truth) let him tell him, that he
has heard, that he was a vile wretch, accused for a Murderer, the Father of
most of the superstitious usages now in the Church of Rome, one who understood
not the Greek Tongue, (as himself confesses) a man of no admirable Judgment
(witness his pretented Commentaries upon Job, which might have as well been
upon the Revelation) a man very far from being either pious or unspotted, or
fit for his Seat, one that defended Purgatory, that fawned upon Phocas the
Murderer; in short, one of no deserved Name or Authority in the Church of God.

XXIX. By this Discourse it appears, that there was no Lyturgy directing Forms
of Prayers for the Church, till Pope Gregory's time Anno 600. nor any imposed
till the time of Charles the Great, Anno 800. when all manner of superstitious
usages were brought into the Church; nor was it then imposed without a
Persecution attending it. And this, Reader, is the pious and unspotted
Authority, the Bishop tells thee of. From hence thou will also conclude, the
antiquity of the English Lyturgy, the reason of its first being imposed, and no
further reformed, either by K. Edw. or by Qu. Elizabeth. In King James his
time, it received some additions, what Reformation we cannot tell.

XXX. By all this Discourse, it appears that there is no divine Prescript, no
Apostolical Tradition, no Universal Tradition, no Example of the Purer
Primitive Churches, for more than 400. yea, 700 years after Christ, which can
be pleaded for imposed Forms of Prayer, by any that make any conscience of
their words, or will undertake to prove what they say.

CHAP. IV. An Enquiry into the state of those Churches which first commended or
imposed Lyturgies, at the time when they first made such Impositions.
I. THough it may seem absurd to enquire, whether the gray hairs of Lyturgies
be found in the way of Righteousness? when we have evinced, that they have no
such pretended Antiquity and Age to glory in, and that the Assertors of such
Antiquity for them, do but impose upon the world; yet considering what we
remember we have learned out of Aristotle, That there is a youthfulness in
respect of Age, or in respect of Manners and Conditions. It may be worthy of a
further enquiry, Whether yet there may not be such a necessity of them, or such
a comeliness, beauty and gravity in them, as may not only justify Magistrates
in the imposing of them, but oblige every soul that has ought to do with
reason, to fall in with the use of them, yea passionately to desire them (even
as much as Rachel did children) which we shall the better determine, by
reviewing the first occasions of Lyturgies, and the complexion of the Church in
those ages, when they were first made, or most used.

II. I think we may say of Lyturgies, as Christ said of the Bill of Divorce,
which Moses allowed; Moses verily for the hardness of your hearts, gave you a
Bill of divorce, but from the beginning it was not so. He that had a residue of
Spirit (as the Prophet says) made one for one. The Church played Moses his
part in the business of Forms of Prayer. Christ who had a residue of Spirit,
the Spirit given him without measure, imposed no Forms of Prayer upon his
Ministers, or Church. The Apostles, who had the first and most plentiful
powrings out of the Spirit of Grace, imposed no such things. Christ indeed gave
a more general direction to his People in Prayer, to ask things according to
the Will of God, and in his Name; and more particular directions in that
excellent Form, called the Lords Prayer; but that (as Durantus idly says)
either Christ, or his Apostles used the Lords Prayer (ordinarily) as a Form of
words in Prayer, or that the Apostles used a Form of words to express their
Faith, ^r imposed the Creed (commonly called, but hardly to be proved) theirs
(which the same Author asserteth) must certainly be proved out of some such
Canonical Writings, as the Epistles of Christ to Abagarus, or to Paul and
Peter, for there is no authentic Record of any such things; but in process of
time indeed the Church began to do some such things.

III. The highest mention we can find, is, that thin Synod of the Church of
Laodicea, made up of 32 Bishops; and this (whatever Bishop Hall says according
to Longus) cannot be proved (as we said before) to have been before the year
364. (as to which time Balsamon and Caranza agree it) but truly it had been no
great wonder if this Church which many years before was grown neither hot nor
cold, Rev. 3.17.
but in such a temper, that God was ready to spue it out of his mouth (for
which we have an authentic record in the Revelation) should long before this
time have made such a Salve and prudent Provision for the Laziness of her
Ministers: He that shall read the Canons of that Synod, against the Ministers
hanting Taverns, and using Enchantments; as also the other Canons about
exorcising, and the several Officers and Offices of the Church, will see reason
enough to conclude, the woeful corruption of the Church in those parts, if not
to suspect, that it was of a far lower date than is pretended.

IV. The Synod of 40 Bishops at Carthage, (which was the 3d. Synod of Carthage)
only enjoined Ministers to communicate to their more able brethren, their
Prayers composed for their public Congregations; this was in the year 397. Yet
that the face of the Church at this time, had many spots, and much impurity
cleaving to it, may appear by this Synod, by their 6th. Can. against giving the
Lords Supper to, or Baptizing such as were dead: by their many Canons, 17,
25.27. against Clergymen hanting Taverns, and keeping scandalous company with
women, their 30. Can. against jovial Meetings in Churches. their 36 Can. about
the Chrisma or the anointing Oil, which no Presbyters must make. And that this
Synod consisted not of the most infallibly wise Fathers, appears, by their
Learned 29 Canon; where they take pains to decree that every Minister should
give the Sacrament of the Altar (so it seems they had learned to call the Lords
Supper) fasting. Yet this Synod in the business of Prayer, did not think fit to
restrain every Minister, only having so loose and insufficient a Clergy, they
order the weaker sort, having composed Prayers, to confer their Notes (before
they used them) cum fratribus instructioribus, with their more able Brethren.

V. After this, the Council of Mela, Anno 416. grew more bold; and ordain (as
to their Province, for what authority had they further?) that the Ministers
should use no Prayers, but such as that Synod had approved. They might justly
expect, that the Churches under their inspection would hardly swallow this new
Pill, if it were not lapped up in some good Reason, and therefore they give
their reason for it, lest something should be vented against the true Doctrine
of Faith, either by some Ministers negligence or ignorance. The cause of that
Synods Meeting, was the censuring of Pelagius, that great enemy of Grace.

The Errors which Pelagius had broached, were these;

1. That Adams should have died though he had never sinned.

2. That Infants were born without Original sin.

3. That there is no need of he assisting Grace of God (sin being once
pardoned.)

4. That all the need we have of Grace is, to illuminate us in the knowledge of
Gods Commandments.

5. That the Grace of God only helps us to do his will more easily and freely.

6. That the words of St. John, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, were only figuratively true, not literally.

7. That the Saints praying, Forgive us our Trespasses, was appointed them in
the behalf of others, not themselves.

Or, 8. If for themselves, only as an expression of their humility: not
concluding them to have any sins to be forgiven.

Against these Errors that Reverend Synod made their 8 first Canons. Pelagius
having used diverse Arts (the story is too long to insert) to secure his
Doctrine from a public Censure, had far diffused the poison of this Doctrine.
This Reverend Synod observing his Errors to be in such things as are the daily
matter of Ministers Confessions and Supplications, thought fit for the
prevention of the diffusing this Venom by Ministers in their public prayers,
as also that the Church might have due confessions made, as well of Original
sin as Actual, and due Petitions put up for pardoning and assisting Grace, etc.
And considering that the church was so debauched now in her Clergy, that some
through ignorance could not do it, some through Laziness would neglect a due
care in doing that to which they were able. Others possibly (though that be
concealed) through a perverse and corrupted Judgment, would not do it,
appointed Forms of Prayer to be used, and restrain the liberty of Praying to
the Ministers within that Province, obliging them to use the Forms approved by
the Synod.

VI. The reason for which (as Durantus tells us) Theodosius much about this
time, or a little before, set St. Hierom to compose a Calendar, indeed rather
than a Lyturgy (for Durantus says, he did no more than order the Scriptures to
be read, though Pamelius has transmitted to us an Antiphonary and Sacramental
Lyturgy, as well as a Lectionary of his composing) was in regard of Heresies
risen up in the Church. So that hitherto, we have had no other account given us
of the composing Forms for public worship, than 1. The Ignorance of the
Ministry which they were forced to employ. Or 2. Their Laziness and Negligence.
Or 3. Their, or the Peoples falling into Errors.

VII. But after that the Universal Bishop got up into the Saddle, it was
reasonable that he should have a power of Universal command, and to show his
authority, he must impose a complete Lyturgy (as to all parts) and enjoin
universal conformity, which yet he could never obtain, till he got a great
Interest in the Civil Magistrate; who had a civil power over what was then
almost the universal Church. Nor must this serve the turn, for this Universal
Bishop must have all Churches, not only speak the same words and phrases, but
in the same Language too; hence he brings in Latin Service. All which also
admirably comported with the sottish ignorance and debauchery of the Clergy, in
the 6th. and 7th. Century, and so downward, till the times of Reuchlin and
Erasmus, when Reformation began to dawn, and the light began to spring out of
darkness. Whether these ends were good and lawful, and the imposing of Forms of
public divine Worship were applied as just means in order to them, viz. either
to cure the ignorance or negligence of the Clergy, or to bring the Church to an
unity in Doctrine, Worship or Affection, shall be examined: For if either the
end or means be proved unlawful and against the Will of God, they talk vainly
for the continuance of them, that urge no more than Humane Prudence, Worldly
Wisdom, being no other than perfect Folly, because Enmity to God.

CHAP. V. Universal Conformity of Devotion, as to words and Syllables, no good
End. Imposing Forms of Prayer no reasonable, just or sufficient Means to
prevent Heresies, or to cure the Laziness or Insufficiency of the Church,
proved by Reason and by Experience.
I. IT cannot but be confessed, that it is a noble end for any Church to aim
at, to take care, that the people may have the truths of God asserted to them;
and not through the ignorance or laziness, or perverseness of its Ministers, be
served with an Husk in stead of bread, or a Scorpion in stead of a Fish. This
end is approveable both from the Word of God, and the light of all Christian
Reason. But that there should be an Oneness in the devotion of people, as to
Letters and Syllables, and Phrases, and Forms of Sentences, is an end so
little, and low and insignificant in it self, that we cannot expect it should
be justified from Scripture, which indeed says not a word to that purpose.

II. And although the prevention of Errors and Heresies, and the poisoning of
people with them, as also the prevention of the mischief arising to the Church
from ignorant and lazy, or erroneous Preachers or Ministers, be (as I said
before) a noble end, and well worthy of the Churches care, yet before we can
allow the same honor to the imposing of Lyturgies and stinted Forms of Prayer,
as means in order to those ends, we must both enquire, whether they be lawful
means; and also, 2. Whether they be such as Reason will evince, or experience
has proved effectual to the obtaining those ends, and that 3. Without bringing
upon the Church a mischief every way as great, as what they are pretended to
deliver us from.

III. That when Christ himself appointed no stated Forms of public Devotion
for his Church, to the use of which, and no other they should be tied; nor his
Apostles, though guided by an infallible Spirit; nor the Purer Church for some
hundred years after, it should remain yet lawful for the Church, not content to
repress and prevent Errors and Heresies, by such ways and means as the
Apostles used, but by this new device, to endeavor it, may be justly a
question to all sober Christians.

IV. Especially considering, that as a liberty in coming to the Throne of
Grace, and asking there whatsoever we will (provided it be consonant to the
Will of God, and begged in the Name of Christ) is one of the great privileges
purchased by Christ for his Church; so the Spirit of Grace and Supplication is
eminently and frequently promised for their assistance, and that not only to
teach them how to pray, but what to pray for, Romans 8.26. Nor is this promised
only to the Prelates in a Church, but to every individual Christian; and the
gift of Prayer, whence flows men's abilities to express themselves by words and
phrases, is one of the most excellent gifts which we are bound to cover, and to
improve. All which being considered, it is far from being clear, that the
restraining of Christians, especially of Ministers in the exercise of the noble
gift of Prayer in the public Assemblies of the Church, is a lawful means in
order to any end, it looking like that quenching of the Spirit, which is
forbidden to all men by the Apostle, 1 These. 5.19. and choking the coveting of
the best gifts, which is commanded all Christians, 1 Cor. 14.1. For to what
purpose should those Talents be desired, which man has authority to command to
be laid up in a Napkin? Nay which had far better be laid up in a Napkin, than
used, if the Doctrine of some be true, concerning the transcendent excellency
of Forms of Prayer, above what are conceived by Ministers, according to the
gift of God bestowed upon them.

V. Besides, it may be worthy of enquiry, whether it be possible, or at least
ordinary with men to read any Prayer, with that fixed and constant intention of
mind and fervency of spirit (the two necessary requisites of Prayer) as they
may speak unto God from the dictate of their own hearts, while their souls are
more abstracted from created Objects, than they can possibly be, while it is a
great piece of their work to look upon their Books, to see what to say next:
For what some pretend, that the diversion is greater in conceived Prayer, by
the employment of the mind in prompting the tongue what it should say next;
besides that this is a spiritual employment of the mind within it self, neither
does it require any such study, where the heart is right with God, and so
acquainted with the Word and Promises of God, as every reasonable Minister
ought to be.

VI. Nor is it out of the way to consider whether this method of Book-praying,
will not expose the Ministers of the Gospel, to a perfect contempt amongst the
people, who will certainly conclude their Parson not able to do what every
ordinary Christian does. Of which contempt we have had a plentiful experience,
nor do we believe that any thing has so contributed to our breed of
Lay-preachers as our Stinted forms of prayer; Whilst the people have
apprehended their gifts better than their Ministers, an easy temptation has
served them to usurp their Office. Nor will any Minister longer keep his
authority amongst a knowing people, then by his performances of his Office,
they shall be convinced he is higher in gifts than themselves; For rational
people will not sacrifice a blind faith to the Bish. of Exeter magnifying the
forms of prayer in the Common Prayer Book beyond all measure, but will be
enquiring, wherein their excellency lies. Are they more perfect Summaries of
things to be confessed, or to be petitioned for? Is their phrase more
scriptural? etc. or if they do see an excellency in them, it will be hard to
inform them, that the gift of reading is more admirable in their Minister at
Church, then in their servant at home.

VII. Now if the Universal imposing of any forms upon the aforementioned
considerations, appear unlawful of it self, or in regard of some necessary or
certain consequent, there needs no more be said to prove that men should have
made use of some other means in order to those good ends of preventing errors,
and the mischiefs arising, or possible to arise from a negligent and ignorant
Ministry, to the Church of Christ.

VIII. But suppose the use of this means lawful, yet if Reason might then
dictate unto them that applied this means, That it was never like to effect its
end; and Experience has since taught posterity that upon the experience of
80. years, it has proved ineffectual, certainly the very light of Nature
should have taught the first imposers, to have used some other means, and will
yet direct us (who have the advantage of experience) in this, to excel out
Forefathers.

IX. It may put the rational world into a fit of astonishment to consider that
so many Bishops should think that the imposing of forms of prayer, would ever
contribute any thing to cure the ignorance or negligence of the Clergy, when in
very deed, it was the right way to feed both, and to continue these scabs upon
the Church for ever. For a man to be able to compose a prayer fit for a
congregation, requires no less then a very competent skill in the whole body
of Divinity, and a very large knowledge of the Scriptures, which would have
engaged Ministers to study the Scriptures, and to stir up their gifts. But when
they had once thus provided for them, there needed no more skill for a Parson,
then every ordinary person had, viz. an ability to read the written prayers. It
is true, they had yet some work to do in preaching, but this was soon taken off
their shoulders, by adding still forms of prayer, the reading of which should
require such a length of time, that no room was left for Sermons, or it there
were, Homilies came quickly after, which would serve the turn: So that these
imposed Liturgies, in stead of serving their end, in curing the ignorance or
negligence of Minist^^s, did most wretchedly serve to fill the Church, with
ignorant and lazy persons yea and debaucht too, for now the Ministers work was
ready, and he might stay at the Alehouse till Saturday, and yet be as fit for
his work, or at least do as much the next day, as was required of him, which
was not only miserably exemplified in the Popish Church (til Erasmus his time
and the beginnings of reformation, when they began by the Protestants
opposition to be quickened to a little better attendance to their work) but is
at this day sufficiently evident, as to the generality of their Priests, to say
nothing of the liberal experience of it, which our own Nation has afforded.

X. Nor certainly could just reason dictate it a proper or adequate means to
prevent, or restrain Errors and Heresies: for how should this ever do it? shall
preaching by a form imposed be superadded to praying? or shall there be forms
of prayer imposed for the Pulpit as well as the Desk? These certainly had been
too gross impositions. If not; had not the Ministers as much liberty to vent
their Errors in their Pulpit-prayers, as they would have had in the Desk? or in
their Sermons as in their prayers? But then people would have apprehended, they
say, that they vented their own conceits, not the doctrine of the Church? And
would they not far better have apprehended this, if the Minister had only been
enjoined to read a perfect Systeme of the doctrine of Faith summarily drawn up.
(Such was the wisdom of the Council of Nice in the case, though indeed that
Creed be far from a perfect Systeme) This no sober Minister would have
scrupled. Besides Heresies are commonly the issue of Schisms, and experience
has told the world that nothing ever so contributed to the breeding of
Schisms in the Church, as imposed forms of prayer have done: So contrary has
it appeared to the Sensus communis of Christians in all times, that the
Ministers of the Gospel should be restrained in the gift of prayer, I say in
all times since the Reformation of the Church, nor would the Popish Church have
ever been able to have imposed theirs so long upon the people, if besides that
Fire and Sword which always attends his Holiness is commands in case of
disobedience; they had not wisely kept the people from the sight of the
Scriptures, or from the hearing of any Sermons (almost:) For nothing but the
peoples ignorance, could have secured this devotion so long. And no sooner came
the light of knowledge amongst the people, but many of them either saw, or
thought they saw, that this kind of Praying was not all that God required of
his Ministers. And in those Churches where were forms of prayer (though
translated into an intelligible tongue) there were continual Factions and
Separations from that which they called the Church, and more in England then
elsewhere, because no reformed Church had such a Liturgy, nor so imposed.

XI. But suppose the imposing forms of prayer lawful, and that it had
effected its end, done something to prevent Errors and Heresies, and some
mischiefs which from the Ignorance and Negligence of Ministers might have come
upon the Church. If yet the mischief coming by the means used has been, or is
like to be as great, as that which they are designed to prevent, (or though not
so great) if there be other more proper and regular means (not subject to the
same ill consequences) and more certain to obtain the end which may be used,
certainly all prudent men, will conclude that, these old ineffectual
mischievous means, should be no longer used, but those far better applied.

XII. The mischiefs which the imposing forms of prayer have brought upon the
Church, have been, 1. The nursing up of a notoriously ignorant and lazy Clergy,
not giving themselves to meditation and Prayer (two of those things which
Luther thought necessary to make a Divine) 2. Separation from Church
Assemblies. 3. Dreadful Persecutions upon Godly Ministers and people, who could
not judge their conformity lawful. The Admirers of these forms persuading
Princes to establish them by their civil authority, and then suggesting to
them, that the Ministers and peoples not complying with them, was out of a
principle of disloyalty to their Princes, and disaffection to their authority,
and bringing nonconformists under the crime of Laesa Magistatis, evils
certainly not much less, then what Imposed forms were pretended to prevent.

XIII. Yet were the continued use of these means in order to such ends more
tolerable, if there were no other to be found most certainly justifiable, far
more regular, and more effectual, as to the end. Would the Prelates of the
Church prevent the rise and growth of errors and heresies by the Ministers
negligence, ignorance, or perverted Judgment? Let them, 1 Take care, that none
be admitted into the Ministeral Office or trusted with the charg of Souls, but
such as shall be thoroughly examined, as to their knowledge in the body of
Divinity, and of whose gift in prayer, they shall have taken an Experiment, and
who shall not first by some open Act declare his Assent to the doctrine of
Faith. May they not withstanding this be lazy? or afterward perverted in
judgment? To what purpose serve Synods, Presbyteryes, etc. But to take a
constant account of the Ministers of several Parishes? how they use their
gifts? discharge their Office? to admonish, the irregular, suspend, deprive
them, etc. Certainly as this means is more proper and more regular, more
rational for the obtaining the aforesaid ends, so the use of it would be far
more effectual, and all good people would be satisfied, and rejoice in it.

XIV. From this discourse it appears, that the pretended necessity of a Liturgy
or imposed forms of prayer in any Church, is no other then such as the author
of Discoliminium told us merrily, Von Dosme conceived there was, when the fire
burnt his Shins, that the Chimny should be pulled down and set farther off,
when it had been more easy, and every whit as effectual for him to have removed
his Shins from the fire; yea such as (the same author tells us) was the
necessity which Simon the French Monk saw, that the poor people of a Province
of France were under (wanting clothes) to flea themselves and send their Skins
to be tanned, that they might have clothes for their backs, when as they
easily saw, the remedy would be as bad as the disease. In very deed there can
be no pretense of the necessity of imposed forms of prayer, for the obtaining
any of the Ends aforesaid, of which assertion we have a demonstration both in
the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches, where there is no such
imposed Liturgies, though possibly most of them have Lyturgies composed, to be
used at liberty.

XV. Nor would any sober persons oppose the composing of a Lyturgy, for public
Assemblies, which might by way of punishment be enjoined to those to use, whom
the Governors of the Church should suspect perverted by Error, or discern lazy
and negligent, as to the stirring up of the Gift of God bestowed upon them. But
that such Forms should be imposed upon all, cannot certainly be either lawfully
or prudently advised or wished, lest Gods Gifts given to his Ministers, should
be smothered, their desires to improve them, (according to Gods Command)
quenched, good people scandalized, and the most ignorant, negligent, and worst
of men encouraged in the highest Services of God. In fine, lest the hearts of
any Subjects by such unwelcome Impositions, should be aliened from their
Magistrates, who (except in the matters of their God) desire no other
Privileges or Liberties from them, as the reward of their daily Prayers and
Allegiance, than their own goodness shall prompt them to give them.

CHAP. VI. A particular Examination of the five late Arguments used by the
Bishop of Exeter, to evince the Necessity or high Expedience of a Lyturgy.
I. WE have hitherto considered whatsoever Antiquity could pretend for the
usefulness of imposed Forms of Prayer in the Church, and weighed them in the
Balance of Reason; Consd p. 9.
but the Reverend Bishop of Exeter improves the notion of their usefulness
higher, telling us, they have very many great, and good influence, upon true
Religion and upon every Church; which he endeavors to make good in five
Instances, which we shall crave leave modestly to examine.

II. First, He says, It conduces much to the more solemn, complete, and
august and reverent worship of the Divine Majesty, in Christian Congregations,
where otherwise the most Sacred and venerable mysteries must be exposed to that
rudeness and unpreparedness, that barrenness and superficialness, that defect
and deformity, both in matter, manner, judgment and expression, to which every
private Minister is daily subject, as late experience has taught us. It will
be very hard to find any thing in this more then words.

1. It will be granted, that the public Service of God ought to be performed
solemnly, reverently and completely; for that same august serving of God, we do
not well understand the Doctors meaning; if he means outward Pomp and Splendour,
in the habits of those that serve at the Altar, or lofty high flown phrases,
swelling words of vanity, we never read that God either required it, or
delighted in it, nor can we from any reason conclude the necessity of it or
usefulness of it, as being contrary to all the Copies of Prayers and Sermons
set us by Christ or his Apostles, and no way suited to the simplicity and
plainness of the Gospel-Devotion: God is unquestionably then served most
reverently and solemnly, when the worshippers of him approach him with most
fear, and worship him with most affection and fervency of spirit, wrestling
with God, (as Jacob did) which the Prophet interprets by weeping and making
Supplications.

2. It is true, that Minister sins, who (though ignorance or negligence)
expresses any want of Reverence of God in his heart, by impertinent and rude
expressions, (not fitting to be used in civil converse with men) or which may
make the Service of God contemptible to others.

3. But that every minister must needs be thus guilty, (with the Doctors leave)
experience has not taught us, and is very uncharitably and falsely asserted. We
have not (blessed be God) such a pitiful Church, that there are no Ministers in
it, but are liable to the charge of serving God in Prayer with rudeness,
unpreparedness, barreness, superficiality, defect, deformity, and that both in
matter, manner, judgment and expression. No Jesuit ever had the confidence so
to asperse the Ministry of England, nor could speak more sordidly to their
dishonor. Possibly there may be some, (and there have been far more than now
are) who may be too liable to this charge. But where is the fault? Is it not in
those to whom the trust is committed of taking a due cognizance of such as
offer themselves to be ordained, or admitted to the cure of souls? Should not
they take care to admit none, but such as are both able to preach and to pray?
Do they not discharge their work conscientiously, while they admit such as are
not able to pray, without such rudeness as is here complained of? or make no
more conscience of it, than to do it unpreparedly, superficially, with so much
barrenness, defect and deformity? such as neither have judgment to compose a
Prayer, as to matter, nor elocution to pray, as to manner, so, but that people
shall have just cause to nauseate the Worship of God.

4. If the Doctor means (by his phrase of every Minister being subject, etc.)
only that it is possible that the best Ministers may so be negligent, etc. as to
run upon this Rock, that is as true concerning reading Prayers: none will deny,
but he that can read very well, may read false, and if he keeps not his mind
intent, no doubt but he will perform the Service, as rudely and superficially
by reading, as by speaking; Instances might be given of this, and shall if need
be: And certainly the conceiving of a Prayer will command more attention of
mind, than reading can. All therefore said under this Head, is mere air.

III. But Secondly, He tells us, That a Lyturgy is a most excellent means to
preserve the truth of Christian and Reformed Doctrine, by the consonancy of
public Devotions, Page 10.
into which otherwise corrupt minds are apt to infuse the sour Leaven of their
own corrupt Opinions. Fine words again! But what reason? we have before showed
it to be,

1. Questionable, whether a lawful means or no.

2. If lawful, by no means effectual, except it reach to all Praying and
Preaching too.

3. Not the only means, a good Summary of Christian Faith is far more proper
and rational.

4. A means bringing a mischief as bad as what it pretends to cure, yea far
worse, fit for nothing but to breed rents and separations, the mothers of all
Heresies.

5. An Apochryphal means by which men make themselves wiser than Christ and his
Apostles, or the Purer Church. We shall only propound this Question upon this
suggestion: If this be true, how comes it to pass, that all the Arminians and
Popishly affected Clergymen of England are such Zealots for a lyturgy? The
thing is demonstrably true, that it is so; let the Doctor answer this Question
by his next.

IV. But Thirdly, A Lyturgy (he says) is necessary for the holy Harmony and
sweet communion of all Christians, as well in National, as Parochial Churches,
whilst thereby they are all kept in one mind and Spirit, praying the same
things, and cheerfully saying Amen to the same Praises and Petitions. Here is
the old Fallacy still of Verba elegancia, pro sensu simplici, That all
Christians have the same common wants, and ought to pray for the same things in
the main, is to be granted, though as particular persons, so particular
Churches may have renewing wants, not common to all (for which a Lyturgy will
not serve the turn) But is there any so simple, as not to understand, that the
same things may be prayed for in different words and phrases? The Doctor here
mistook his Mark, he should have proved, that it is the Will of God that
Christians should maintain their Communion in the use of the same phrases,
letters and syllables. And when he had done that, a Popish Priest should have
improved his Notion, and concluded that because the one body of Christ should
have but one tongue, and since the confusion at Babel, men in several nations
have spoke several languages; therefore to the perfection of the Communion of
the Church, there is not only a Liturgy necessary, but a Liturgy every where in
Latin, that being a Language most universally known. The Churches external
Communion lies in their keeping the same Sabbath, performing the same Acts of
worship (of which prayer is one) confession of Original and Actual sins,
praying for the same mercies generally, etc. not in their saying all the same
words sure.

He tells us (fourthly) That a Liturgical form is not only of great benefit,
and comfort to the more knowing, judicious, and well-bred sort of Christians,
but highly to their security, and to the holy and humble composure of their
spirit in the worship of God, who otherwise are prone not only amidst the
public devotions curiously to censure, but scoffingly to despise, (By the way
this is no Demonstration, neither of their Christianity, nor of their good
breeding) yea many times to laugh at, and at best to pity, or deplore, the
evident defects and incongruities which appear in many Ministers odd
expressions, and incongruous ways of officiating, etc.

To reduce these many words to a short sum of reason, the usefulness of imposed
Liturgies is here pleaded. 1. For the benefit of the most knowing, judicious,
and well-bred sort of Christians. 2. To avoid the censures, scoffs, and jears
of others. The Dr. has not yet told us what benefit accrues to the former from
a Liturgy, nor yet what solid grounds of comfort for them to feed upon, the
want of which it may be is the reason, that if others guess rightly, that take
all the professors of Religion that can but give any understanding account of
the Systeme of Divinity, and live in any sobriety of life and conversation, and
number them (taking their judgment as you go along) and in will be found, that
ten for one are against any imposed Forms: On the other side, it is certain,
that some others make it all their Religion: So it was of old. That Holy and
Learned Oeculampadius living in a Noble man's house, who yet was a Protestant,
and would seem a forward man in the Reformation, complains of the slender
regard the greatest part of the Family gave to him, and to his Ministry, in a
Letter to his Friend in these words, Such a man (says he) sent for me, that I
might publicly in the Church instruct his Family in the Christian Religion, or
rather feed them with the words of Christ, who were initiated already. I
counted it my chief duty to make the Evangelical Law known familiar at hand to
them, that so afterward they might of themselves proceed in the true and
sincere study of Christianity, Peace, Meekness, Modesty, Charity, Piety, Faith
and Confidence in God. All the time of Lent that I was there, nothing hindered,
but that I might every day read a piece of the Gospel to them, and expound it,
and exhort them out of it to the study of Godliness: But after Easter, it was
less convenient; for the Family was not at-leisure to spend much time at
Church, their business did so call upon them; and there are some that are sick
of the Church, if they tarry there never so little while. pierique ut form
ubique mos est, etc. Most people, as the manner is, amant quotidie audire, imo
videre Sacrum; love to hear, yea to see service every day, yea to hear those
things mumbled over, that they understand not, to see the Ceremonies, to be
present at the Blessing, to commend themselves perfunctorily unto God, and so
think they have been religious enough of all conscience in that day wherein
they have done this, quod sane exigni fructus est, and credo plerisque interim
conducibilius esset arare and texere; which truly (says he) is little worth,
and I am persuaded it were better for many to have been plowing or weaving, I.
1 Epist Oeculamp. and Zuinglii These words may be a Glass for these times.
or Riving of Logs, or doing any other work. And (if they may be believed, not
is it incredible) find more comfort in the Lyturgy than in all the Promises of
the Gospel, the reason is, Missa non mordet. For the Scoffs and Jears of such
as are possessed with a Spirit of Profaneness, it is hard to avoid them. Nor are
we further concerned, than not to give just cause to them to profane the
Worship of God; which may be done without a Lyturgy, if the Governors of the
Church take due care, that none but persons fit in respect both of Parts and
Piety be admitted to, or continued in the exercise of the Office of the
Ministry.

V. But it seems this Master of our Lyturgical Feast has kept his best wine
till the last, for he tells us, that a Lyturgy is necessary, or conduces at
least mightily -- above all -- to the edification and salvation, as well as the
unanimity and peace of the meanest sort of People. Salvation and Edification in
order to it, are great things, so also are unanimity and peace, and doubtless
by all just and lawful means to be endeavored: But how shall a Lyturgy conduce
to these? Certainly the Captain of our Salvation has directed the best and
most proper means for the Salvation and Edification of souls, and we need not
devise other than what he has appointed; yet did he never institute a Lyturgy,
nor the Apostles after him. He tells us, That a daily variety of Expressions in
Prayer or Sacraments, is much at one (to the Vulgar) with Latin Service, little
understood, Page 11.
and less remembered by them; they are still out, and to seek, when a new
Minister officiates, yea and when the same, if he affects variety of words,
where the duty is the same. For the peoples remembering, it were worth the while
to examine the Vulgar people, where a Liturgy is constantly used, how much they
remember of it? If the Doctor would do this, he might possibly be convinced,
that a Lyturgy is not such an effectual means to imprint Divinity notions in
peoples memories. As to the peoples understanding, the reading of the Lyturgy
signifies as little; if the furious Zealots for Lyturgies amongst the Vulgar,
were examined of their sense of the several phrases, they would make a wild
Interpretation. It is not the using of a Lyturgy, will bring people to such an
understanding the Body of Divinity as is necessary to him that would understand
a good Prayer (whether it be a stinted Form, or no) but their understanding of
a good Catechism to be wrought in them by a frequent exercise of Catechizing;
and when they once understand the Principles of Religion, they will easily
understand a Prayer, (though they do not always hear the same words) where the
Minister does not affect a vanity and singularity of phrase; which if he does,
the Governors of the Church ought to restrain him, by admonition and other
Censures. This is the way to make people understand Prayers, (whether the
Phrase be the same, or diverse) provided it be not fantastic and vain. By
this it appears, that the Bishop has said nothing to convince the world of any
necessity of imposed Forms, nor yet of any expediency in them. We have before
offered enough against them, so that thus much may suffice to have spoken of
Imposed Forms in the general.

CHAP. VII. Supposing Forms of Prayer Lawful, yet every Form is not. What
necessary, or reasonable to be found in public Forms. Doctor Gaudens unhandsom
and false Representations of Ministers refusing to use the Common Prayer.
I. FRom our former Discourse, every intelligent Reader will easily conclude,
that we have neither asserted it unlawful to compose a Form of Prayer, nor yet
to use it, either in private or public, no nor yet to impose it upon some: All
that we have questioned, is the lawfulness of imposing Forms of Prayer upon all
Ministers; as well those whose gifts are eminently known, and their diligence
and conscience in that duty sufficiently experimented, as those who either
through Ignorance or Laziness are not fit to be trusted, without such a guide
in the public service of God. Nor do we think it impossible that a Minister of
eminent gifts, through some bodily, or spiritual distemper, may possibly be so
out of course, that he may lawfully enough help himself with a Form: but
because a Staff may be useful for an old withered body, and for a vegete and
lively body, that has accidentally got some Vertigo in his head, or wound in
his foot, it will nor therefore follow, that it is reasonable, that it be
enacted, that none should walk without it.

II. But certainly in reason, those Forms which should be either publicly or
privately used, should be such rare Patterns of Prayer, as might justly commend
themselves to all ears, as containing full confessions of sin Original and
Actual, full Petitions for spiritual and temporal Mercies, for our selves and
others, as also proportionable Thanksgivings, and all these expressed in
Scripture phrases, so ordered and couched, that the hearers may be convinced,
that there is nothing contrary to the Will of God in them, nor any momentous
thing, by Gods Will allowed us to ask, which is omitted. It is also reasonable,
that such Forms should be so worded, so every way circumstantiated, that no
sober ear could be offended at them, all conscientious Christians might say
Amen to them, and if any should be needful to plead their cause, he might have
more to say, than that jejune commendation, Nothing can be said against them
but may be answered, nor found in them but what is capable of a very good
sense. These are lamentable commendations for Forms of Prayer to be imposed
upon a Church, full of holy, learned and godly Ministers and People, who cannot
be cheated into a blind Belief, That they are the best, because such a man said
so. And no private Minister must presume to rate his private abilities above
the Shekel of the Sanctuary: From whence will easily be concluded, that
supposing it lawful to use Forms of Prayer in public, yet it will not follow,
that it is lawful to use every Form that shall or may be tendered to us, but
such only as for matter, manner and circumstances, shall appear to us agreeable
to the Word of God.

III. We say, 1. It must appear to us that the matter of those Prayers be such
as Gods Word allows us to ask of him; otherwise we ask not according to his
Will. 2. That the mode and manner of Praying prescribed, be such as Gods Word
allows, either by express Letter of Scripture, or just consequent. 3. That no
appendant circumstance make the use of them unlawful, which as to the matter
and manner are lawful enough. For none is so ignorant, as not to know that in
matters of practice a thing may ex accidenti be unlawful, which is not so per
se, or of it self.

IV. This now brings us from our general Discourse concerning the lawfulness
or expedience of any Forms, to a more particular consideration of the
particular Forms of Prayer in the English Lyturgy, according to the Copies now
printed and sold: (For what those were that were established by Acts of
Parliament we cannot tell) and therefore must restrain our Discourse to that
English Lyturgy only, which is ordinarily to be had in Stationers shops, and at
adventures from thence transmitted to many Churches.

V. And we cannot but take our selves concerned a little to speak in this case,
when the Bishop of Exeter thinks fit to brand all those Ministers that are
willing to accept his Majesty's most Gracious Indulgence, and to forbear the
use of the Common Prayer; as also all those sober persons, that are not so fond
as his Lordship of it, with restiveness, inexcusable moroseness, an
antilyturgical humor, peevishness, ingratitude, schismatical petulancy, pride,
such as only fancy they could mend some words and phrases in it, or put some
Aliasses to it, such as sacrifice their judgments to their Credits, yea, and
(he had almost said) Consciences too; such as stand in need of it to help their
frequent infirmities, restrain their popular and desultory levity, to set
bounds of Discretion, Decency, Charity and Piety to their extravagancies: and
brands their powrings out of their souls to God, (without the
Common Prayer Book) with the ugly Notions of flat, dull and undevout, deadly
tedious, of a confused length, like a Skain of Yarn course and snarled,
sometimes so dubious, between wind and water, sense and Nonsense, faction and
sedition, boldness and blasphemy, etc. Is it not time when this Gentleman
thinks not fit to speak all this, with much more such stuff, in the Syriack
Tongue, but upon the walls, in the face of all Israel in the English tongue, to
make some reply, to let both him and the world know, That though we have not so
learned Christ, as to render reviling for reviling, nor dare pretend to an
ability to give the Bishop word for word of this nature, but shall willingly
allow him proestasie in that Art and Practice; yet we do humbly conceive our
selves able to give some reasons of our present forbearance, which may possibly
be judged good and sufficient, if the Reformed Churches my be our Judges, and
not such of our Brethren at home, whose only desire is to have an occasion
against us, and know not how to find it, in those things which concern the
Worship of our God.

VI. If, indeed, any of us have heretofore used it, and are still satisfied in
our Consciences both of the lawfulness and expediency of it, yea and were
disposed immediately to have used it, before the Declaration of his Majesty came
forth, in case we had been required to it according to Law in force, rather
than for default to have been punished (as the Bishop suggests, p. 4. Or if any
of us thought the iterated use of the Lords Prayer, the daily repeating of the
three Creeds, the ten Commandments, the Confession of sins and the
Church-Catechism not only wholesome and convenient, but also necessary (as he
hints, p. 2.) and that in the Common Prayer Book, there are only some verbal
defects, obsolete words, etc. that need emendation, and we have only forborne
the use of it, because his Majesty has had a compassionate eye to some men's
infirmity, then indeed the forbearance of it, as to such Ministers, may be
judged what does become judicious, sober men; but not knowing any such, we
cannot but look upon these as most false and unworthy suggestions, designed to
no other purpose, than to beget in his most Sacred Majesty an ill Opinion of
able and conscientious Ministers, who (as shall God willing hereafter appear)
have other more grave and momentous Reasons to assign, why they have forborne
the use of it, not only in whole but in part; yea, though possibly they
formerly have used it, it not being impossible that either something may have
intervened since their former use of it, which may have rendered the same
practice now in their judgments unlawful, or that upon the fuller disquisition
of the questions about the use of Imposed Forms in the general, or these in
particular, they may be convinced, that their former practice was their error,
not after conviction to be returned to.

VII. We shall therefore speak, that we may both free our selves, and before
the world excuse those of our Brethren, who are of the same mind with us,
either in whole or in part, leaving what we shall say to be duly considered by
all sober Christians, and submitting our selves to the candid judgment of such
persons as shall desire to make a judgment of persons and things, according to
a Rule of Righteousness and Reason.

CHAP. VIII. The first Reason of diverse Ministers not using the Common Prayer.
Their dissatisfaction as to the imposing of any forms universally. Diverse
reasons of that dissatisfaction.
I. IT is not clear unto us that it is lawful for all persons, and at all times
to limit themselves by any stinted forms of prayer. Where God has given a gift
of prayer to his Ministers, we cannot but think it is their duty to improve,
and use it, if indeed God has denied that gift unto any, or by his providence
any way hinders the exercise of it, we (as was said before) do not doubt but
such persons, or any persons at such times, may help themselves by a form; 1
Cor. 12.7.
but where God has given any that gift, we conceive it is a manifestation of
the Spirit given him to profit others by. and that he is defective to his duty,
that does not use it to that end; we are yet to learn, that it is not as lawful
to impose forms of Sermons upon Ministers, as forms of prayer; both of them,
are lamentable restraints put upon the gifts of God bestowed upon his
Ministers, to that very end, that by the use of them they might be profitable
unto his people.

II. We are sure it is the unquestionable duty of every one that prays, to do
it with the highest intention of mind imaginable, and with the greatest
fervency of Spirit, and that it is not lawful for any man in prayer, to allow
himself in any thing, which may either divert his mind, from the most fixed
contemplation of God, or intention upon his duty, or which may any way cool the
heat, and fervency of his Spirit. We cannot be induced to believe that any one
can possibly so keep his soul fixed upon God, or so intent upon God whiles he
reads a Prayer, as while he speaks it from his own conception; we find by
experience (not to determine positively of the frame of other persons Spirits)
a great difference in the intention and fervency in our Spirits, when our words
in prayer are directed, and determined, by the inward heat, fervency, and
affection of our hearts, from what is, when our words are determined for us, by
other men, yea by our selves before the time of prayer, we humbly conceive,
that every Christian stands bound, not only to look that there be an habit of
fervency in his heart, which at all times should dispose it to duties of
communion with God, but that a particular fervency should attend the act of
Prayer; If we durst boast of the former, yet we find the latter certainly
hindered by a prescribed form, and we do believe this may be experienced by any
person's speaking to a man for his life; we do not think it possible for any
man to have, or show the like affection and fervency in reading a Speech which
another has made for him, no not in what he has made for himself, before that
time; as he may by such words as the present sense of his condition in that
moment of time shall dictate to him: nor have we ever heard of any malefactor
at the bar that brought his Speech for his life in a form, if he did, we
believe there was (even by the hearers) discerned a vast difference betwixt
such speeches, and such as a person speaks at that time, to whom a lively sense
of his condition, dictates words in that hour.

III. Nor can we believe, that any Minister praying in any form uses so
rational, and experimented a means to affect his hearers hearts, as he who
uses none. As in preaching there is a certain lively efficacy of the voice
which every hearer discerns, more in the Preachers speaking ex animo, then
from his reading a Sermon, which is past denial evidenced, though it be not so
easy to say what it is. So that a Sermon, yea an ordinary Oration so spoke,
moves and affects the hearers, infinitely more, then a Sermon, or an Oration
read out of a paper (though it be never so well starcht up with Oratory, and
set out with the highest advantage of an Oratorial reading tongue) so we
believe, and find it in the matter of prayer; and in very deed, the reason of
this we conceive lies much in this, because the Speaker himself is
(discernably) not so much affected in reading, as in speaking. It Is one thing
for the heart and affections to precede the action of the tongue, and to see it
on work; another thing, for them to follow the tongue, and be commanded by it.

IV. Speaking is an immediate act of the Tongue, but commanded by the Soul; the
Tongue is but the Souls Organ, by which it exercises that power which God
has given it, and it cannot be so well performed, as when the Soul that
directs, performs its work by dictating immediately to it. So that much of the
Spirit and life of prayer is lost, in praying by forms.

V. Nay lastly (to add no more) if there were nothing else in the case, we
should think it very disputable, Whether it be lawful for us in the public
worship of God, especially as to the momentous acts, and parts of it, to do
that for which we have no command in the Word of God, no president, or example,
and we cannot but think, that the holy Psalmist's variety of prayers, and the
variety of prayers, which we find used by the several Saints, and holy penmen
of Scripture (none of which as to words and phrases agrees per omnia with
another) should rather teach us, that when we go unto God in prayer (observing
the general rules of prayer laid down in the Scripture) we should take unto us
words de novo, as God shall put them into our hearts, then borrow words from
others, hardly fitted to our hearts, or present necessities. If any have not
ability to do it, we conceive it is his own fault, and it were far more
consonant to the rule of Gods Word, that such should be removed from Gods
Altar, then that the gifts of God bestowed upon others for the benefit of his
Church, should be restrained for their sake, which we think would be something
like his act, who cut the man fit for the bed, because the bed way not fit for
him. Certainly in all congruity of reason, if the Church be pestered, and must
needs continue so, with a generation of men, who either through ignorance, or
through a woeful neglect to stir up the gift of God in them, cannot pray
without a book, and for their sake, a Liturgy. or stinted forms in prayer be
necessary, yet from hence cannot be concluded any lawfulness, much less
necessity, that those, to whom God has given other abilities, and another
spirit, should be obliged to use it, or that it should be imposed upon them.

CHAP. IX. The Ministers second Reason, drawn from the disputableness of the
lawfulness of using any Forms of humane composure, formerly defiled, by use in
an idolatrous service, conjoined with the scandal of many Christians arising
upon that account.
I. BUt suppose we were satisfied, that it were lawful for Ministers of the
Gospel to use Forms of Prayer, and that at all times, and that this were no
stifling of the gift of prayer, no diversion to the intention of our minds, nor
abatement to the fervor of our spirits, nor to the affections of our people (to
do any thing apertly tending to any of which, is simply unlawful) yet there are
particular reasons which appear to us cogent enough, as to the restraint of us
from the using of this form.

II. We cannot but have some doubts whether it be lawful for us in the worship
of God by an act of ours to offer up any thing to God (of mere humane
composition) which has been once offered in an idolatrous service, especially
when our Brethren say unto us, This has been so offered; That the worship of
the Church of Rome is idolatrous, grossly idolatrous, we hope no sober
Protestants will deny, their Veneration of Images, Adoration of the Eucharists,
Invocation of Saints are all idolatries. Some of these are done as often as their
Mass Book is used; so that their worship, toties quoties, as it is performed,
is idolatrous, though not in every part, yet in the complex.

III. We do observe how some Prelatists mince this point of the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome, they can grant (with much ado, we believe) that the worship
of the Church of Rome is in some sense idolatrous; what their sense is we
cannot tell, nor care to inquire, we believe, that, except some few Pagans
who might terminatively worship the Sun and Moon, as thinking those noble
Creatures were the very first movers and principles, That never any heathens
were guilty of more stupid sottish idolary, then the Papists are. For (let
vain persons talk what they please) it will never enter into our thoughts
that either the Jews, Jeroboam, or Michal, thought their Images the first
principles of life and being, (such as reason teaches to all that God must be)
nor yet that the Egyptians, -- quibus nascebantur in hortis
-- Numinae.
(who worshipped any plants, or any thing, from which they had good or hurt)
thought that those things were God. They only dreamt that God was Anima
mundi, the Soul of the World, informing every living thing, and worshipped an
unknown God in the creature, or by some created representation, (which is yet
gross and accursed idolatry) and such is the Popish worship.

IV. We are not so filly, as to think, that the holy Scriptures (dictated by
the Spirit of God) or any thing else of purely Divine Institution, is capable
of corruptions, and therefore cannot but with some laughter read the
argumentations of them, who argue, that if we reject the Liturgy, V. Dr.
Causabon on the Lords prayer.
because the idolatrous Papists used it, we must also refuse the Scriptures,
and the Lords Prayer; these are but toys, to blind common people, who cannot
see to the bottom of an Argument. The holy Scriptures are incapable of
pollution by any idolatrous service.

V. Their answer is as filly, who tell us, that then we must use none of our
Churches. When we offer up Churches to God by any rational act we will
consider of this frivolous answer, which indeed may concern them that dream of
a holiness in them, by reason of dedication or the like: it concerns not us,
who only use them as convenient places, in which we meet to serve God, and
believe them no more holy then any other places, though the Law of Nature
obliges us to keep, and use them decently. We do so by our parlours where we
converse with our friends.

VI. Prayer is a piece of Gospel Sacrifice, and by a rational act of our souls
to be offered unto God, now whether it be lawful for us, when the earth is
the Lord and fullness thereof, whereas God has given us an ability, to speak
words in another form; to take those very forms, and to offer them up to God
in true Gospel worship, which have been offered in an idolatrous service
(though the matter of those forms be not idolatrous) is to us a great doubt,
nor can we be satisfied in the lawfulness of it.

VII. The ground of our scruple is in that known Text 1 Cor. 10. where the
Apostle treats concerning the lawfulness of eating meats, that had been once
offered to idols. He determines as to a double case. 1. That it is not lawful
to eat such meats in an idols Temple. 2. In case it be sold in the shambles,
and we know it not, he determines, that we may buy and eat it. But in case our
Brother says unto us, this has been offered to an idol, he says, Eat it not.
So that our Brethrens scandal upon such a foundation is to be avoided by us, he
gives the reason, because there is other meat to eat. The earth is the Lords,
and the fullness thereof.

VIII. For our part, we are not able to fathom a reason, why a form of words
fitted up for use in prayer, should not be liable to the same corruption, and
pollution that a dish of meat fitted for natural use is: or why it should be
unlawful for one to eat the latter, (if once offered in an idolatrous service,
our Brother minding us of it) and it yet be lawful to use a form of words in
prayer (so formerly used) when our Brother is so scandalized.

IX. We are aware of what the Drs. of Aberdeen said of old to prove that the
scandal of brethren, weighs light, when put in the scale with the command of
Authority. There may something be said for their Assertion, where the scandal
is merely passive, and has no foundation in re, only men are offended, because
they are offended: but where the scandal is such, as is so far allowed by
Scripture, that a Negative precept is given upon it, eat it not, we are not of
so easy a faith, as to believe what they say, when Gods word says do it not.
Man cannot oblige our conscience to do it, he may oblige us to suffer, but not
to act; and that this is the case is evident. Our Brethren say to us, These
Forms have been offered up in an idolatrous service, and we know this is truth.

X. The Bishop of Exeter is mistaken therefore in suggesting, that we forbear
the using of the Liturgy out of a little point of reputation, amongst some
people (rather weak then wise, and to be pitied more then imitated, and he
shows little charity, or candor in saying we sacrifice our judgments (not to
say our consciences) to our credits, and out of a fear or lothness to offend
some people, whom we might easily convince and satisfy as well by our
examples, as by arguments, etc. This is not spoken like a tender and a good
Christian. We hope we can say, we value our reputation at a low rate in
comparison of our duty. Nor do we think nonconformity the way to credit now,
but that our peoples souls (of which we confess we are tender) are more weak
then wise, we cannot say. Wisdom lies in avoiding sin, yea the least sin, and
all appearances of evil. That here is an appearance of evil no reasonable
person can deny, it is not so clear that we may do that as to forms of prayer,
which the word expressly forbids us as to a piece of meat, not is it so clear to
us, that we may obey man in any case, where the Word of God says as to the
thing commanded, Do it not.

XI. In the mean time we think those are to be pitied, who had rather that
their brethren should be all persecuted, imprisoned, banished, together with
those thousands of godly people, (who cannot in conscience worship God with
these forms) differences in the Church perpetuated, and that so many thousands
of sober people, should have such a temptation, to entertain hard thoughts of
their Magistrate, etc. In short who had rather confound heaven and earth, and
scandalize all Christians in the world, then lay aside forms of prayer of pure
humane composition, and that in most corrupt times, and only retained upon the
reformation to quiet peoples spirits, and which (in their own confession) have
for 6. or 700 years before the reformation, run through the filthy sink of the
Romish Synagogue. When God has himself told them, That the earth is his, and
the fullness thereof. And therefore expressly charged us not to use a piece of
meat once offered to idols, when our brother tells us it has been so polluted.

XII. But it may be some of our Fathers, or Brethren (what ever a company of us
Puritans do) do not think the Church of Rome an idolatrous Church, nor her
worship idolatrous, we have heard of diverse that have lately questioned it. We
confess for those Protestants that are of that mind, our Argument upon this
head signifies little to them, but we are of another mind in the principle, and
therefore it is no wonder we have different thoughts of the Consequents. In the
mean time, those who believe the Church of Rome idolatrous, have reason to
think of this Argument: Those who judge her yet an undefiled Virgin, we suppose
may have a desire to be married to her. And we shall hardly be able to forbid
the banes.

XIII. When the Bishop of Exeter can satisfy us, That the worship of the
Church of Rome in the whole Complex is not idolatrous, Or that it is lawful for
us, to take forms of prayer of mere humane composition so used in an idolatrous
service, and yet continue them in the true worship of God. Gods Word saying to
us, as to meat so used, Eat it not. Or that it is lawful for us to tell our
people (when they come and tell us, Sirs, They say this is taken out of the
Mass Book, will you use it?) No brethren it is not taken out there, when we know
it is. I say, when his Lordship can satisfy us in these things, he may then
conclude (which as yet he does very uncharitably) That we might easily convince
and satisfy our people, as well by our Examples as Arguments. Our people are a
plain kind of Country people, that are not to be satisfied with a flaunt tant
of high words, they have their Bibles, and having so plain a Scripture by the
end as that of 1 Cor. 10.28. Eat it not, they choke us with such things as
these. Is not the Romish Church Idolatrous? have not they used the same forms
in their idolatrous devotion? how can you then use them without sin? So that we
profess we cannot answer them. We desire the Bishop of Exeter would do it
plainly and solidly.

CHAP. X. The Ministers third Reason, Because they have sworn to endeavor a
Reformation in worship, and to endeavor to Extirpate Superstition, and what
hinders the power of Godliness.
I. BUt further yet to let the Bishop know, that it is not out of a mere
Anti-Liturgical humor that some of us (taking the advantage of his Majesty's
Declaration, and laying hold of his Grace and Favor in it) do not yet meddle
with the Book of Common Prayer. We desire his Lordship to consider, That we
have taken the Covenant, and are afraid to bring upon us that vengeance, which
we are sure first or last will follow perjury. If his Lordships loosing St.
Peter's bands, could have loosed our Consciences from that, we had been a step
nearer then we are, but we observe no truth of Divinity in the Principles,
which his Lordship, and others, have laid down; from which they would conclude,
that the bond of that Covenant is dissolved; we also discern, his Lordship, and
the others abundantly answered by Mr. Crofton, and Timorcus, and could wish
that when any of them write again upon that Subject, they would not only
assert positions, but give their reasons which may evince the truth of them, or
else annex some Scriptures to prove them; or at least tell us, what Divines
were ever of their mind.

II. We have in the Covenant sworn to endeavor a Reformation of the Church of
God in England, in worship according to the Word of God, and the example of the
best Reformed Churches. We think the worship of God in England, is, as to the
Rule and Form of it, expressed in the Common Prayer Book, and the Forms of
devotion there expressed and imposed: We cannot find that either according to
the Word of God, or the example of the best Reformed Churches, it is lawful for
the Ministers of the Gospel to tie up themselves to forms of prayer, nor that
such practice is commended to us: nor can we conceive how the use of the same
forms of Worship should be a Reformation in Worship. Nor (possibly) is it clear
to every one, that there is nothing in those forms of worship savouring of
Superstition, or that the use of them is consistent with the promoving of the
power of Godliness; at least, that it is a due means to promove it, all which
we have solemnly sworn to endeavor; and surely that endeavoring to which we
are sworn, will at least oblige us not to do any thing to the contrary.

III. Into which Covenant many Ministers of the Gospel having entered, since
they used the said forms of prayer; something may be said on their behalf,
disobliging them from a return to their former practice, though in these last
20 years time they have learned nothing from the many books published to the
world, examining the said forms in special, of offering arguments against
imposed forms in the general, convincing them of a former in advisedness, and
error in practice. If they then looked upon the use of those forms as
indifferent, surely the Oath they have taken puts it into another capacity. If
they now judge the use unlawful, (it is no great wonder considering how much
light has shone upon the world in that space of time, that some of their
judgments should be altered) the Bishops charge of Schismatical petulancy,
restiveness, morosity, etc. cleaves not to them.

IV. If the Bishop says they had before subscribed to use it: According to his
Lordships doctrine, and some others of his mind, forced engagements signify
nothing. It is true the Godly Ministers of England are of another mind, they
believe, though they were under a force, (either they must subscribe, or loose
their livelyhoods, yea loose the exercise of their Ministry) yet they are
obliged by their Act, in case it does not appear to them, That it is sinful for
them to do what they inadvisedly set their hands to; but that is the Case.
Besides, though they cannot think that any Earthly power can discharge them of
an Oath made to God, yet they believe that the Parliament of England can
discharge them of an Engagement entered to an inferior Magistrate, and by Oath
again bind them to do the contrary; and that is the case again.

V. If any say, That the Ministers of England are bound by the Law of England
to use the Common Prayer Book. Besides that it is a great question how far the
Laws of a Nation can oblige the conscience in matters of Divine Worship, and
most certain, that they cannot oblige any man's conscience, to do any thing in
the worship of God, that is, either directly, or by consequence forbidden
there, we make it a great question whether the Common Prayer Book be
established by Law or no, and believe the contrary. That the Common Prayer Book
5. and 6. Edw. 6. with some alterations made 1 Eliz. 2. was so established we
know, but what that book was, or where it is, we cannot tell; it is apparent
that the books ordinarily walking up and down are not so established.

VI. Suppose it were, we do not think that this is pleadable in the Case,
against the Covenant agreed by Lords and Commons legally assembled in
Parliament, and so far ratified by the King, as unquestionably in conscience
would suffice to discharge any that shall keep it; (though contrary to some
former Act of Parliament.)

VII. Nor can it enter into our thoughts, that the Parliament, or any power
under Heaven, can by any future Act, discharge us from the obligation of an
Oath; for out parts, those Divines that talk any such things, seem to us little
acquainted, either with the word of God, or with the nature of an Oath. Not
with the former, for God expressly Numb. 30. determines the Oath established for
ever, if the husband of the wife, or father of the child, either at first
consented, or did not presently dissent but hold his peace; nor with the
latter, for all Divines determine it, in the power of men to engage men in an
Oath to God, but not in their power to discharge them again, because the Oath
makes us debtors to God, and it belongs to God alone to discharge us; which
especially holds, where the matter of the Oath is such as Gods Law required,
and for which an Oath is only a security, and certainly such is the matter of
Reformation, and the rooting out of Superstition, and the promoving the power
of Godliness. The Powers of the world in such a case may contract guilt to
themselves by forcing such as fear an Oath, to suffer, because they durst not
violate their Oath; but they can never lay hold on men's Consciences by any Act
of that nature, so as to make them sinners, if they do not actively obey: Nay
it is far better in such cases, and in all cases, to obey God rather than men.

CHAP. XI. Other Reasons why diverse Ministers are not satisfied, as to the Use
of the Book of Common Prayer.
I. CErtainly in reason, if a Lyturgy, or Form of Prayer be commended to any
Church, it should be such a well composed and completely digested Pattern of
Prayer, as should contain in it the sum of all things to be ordinarily
confessed, or begged, or for which thanks should be given; and this drawn up,
in such plain expressions, as should be obvious to every hearer, and yet so
handsomely, as should reconcile the hearers reverence and attention to it. The
Confession should be of the guilt of all Original sin, as well originans as
originatum; the guilt of Actual sins. The Petitionary part should consist of
Petitions, for a sight and sense of sin, Faith, Justification, a sense of it,
Regeneration, etc. And all these should be in such a form, as no Hearer should
have a reasonable exception to.

II. Thus we are sure it would best fit two (if not the only) ends for which
there can be any pretense of the necessity of a Lyturgy. 1. The acquainting of
people with the Doctrine of the Church, as to things necessary to be believed,
and the prevention of Errors. 2. The helping the weakness of ill accomplished
Divines, who are not able ex tempore so to pray in a Congregation, by which
means possibly their people never hear a just Confession of sins, nor put up
perfect Supplications.

III. Now it is possible that if the Bishop of Exeter (who has indeed a rare
art at words) may have liberty to comment upon our Lyturgy, he may prove, that
such as understand as much as himself, may from our Lyturgy, fancy such a
perfection of Form, and by Arguments and far-fetched consequences, make out all
these; but surely none can say, that take the ordinary Prayers appointed to be
read every Morning Prayer, or Evening Prayer, they do contain all things
requisite to be confessed or petitioned for, in so plain and familiar
expressions, that ordinary people can understand, that in those Prayers we
confess the guilt of Adams sin, Original sin, etc. or petition for such things
as are absolutely necessary: Nay we believe that if they did, some that are
great Zealots for the use of them, would not so well like them.

IV. Besides that the matter of some things in the Lyturgy is not in our
judgments so approvable; we do not understand with what truth we can say to God
eight days together that he sent his Son to redeem us, [ as on that day] nor
yet as to any one particular day. Nor yet how we can pray in Faith to be
delivered from Lightning, Tempests and sudden death; we understand how we may
pray in Faith to be delivered from the evil of these temporal judgments, and
from the judgments themselves (if it be the Lords Will, etc.)

V. We by experience find, that the Form of the Service prescribed in the
English Lyturgy, is such to which the Spirits of sober people are no ways
reconcilable; who cannot understand what foundation is either in Scripture or
right reason, for the using particular Prayers for each day, or dividing the
entire Service of God betwixt Ministers and People, or for using so many
shreds, or ends of Prayer, or repeating the Lords Prayer so often. Nor can we
our selves be more satisfied with it. Mr. Sparrowes Rationale in this case to
us seems to have as little reason in it as Durantus his Rationale has for all
the superstitious usages of the idolatrous Synagogue of Rome. -- Et canpare
pares, and respondere parati. Neither of the Barrels have in it better Herrings.

VI. Now for us (being so graciously indulged by his Majesty) to scandalize all
those people whom we must scandalize, seems to us not lawful, considering how
tender St. Paul was of giving offense to brethren (how light a matter soever be
now made of it) especially considering the observation which we make, which we
cannot say is universally true, but as to our Congregations is generally true,
and that is this; That many of the persons offended at our forbearance of the
Lyturgy, are not of the stricter, but the looser sort of Professors, such as
his Majesty has justly stigmatized in his Proclamation, as vicious, profane
and debaucht persons, Drunkards, Tavern-haunters, Health-drinkers, Swearers,
not that they are all such, but ten for one we find to be such; and we as
generally observe, That those of our Parishioners, who fear an Oath, who live
chastely, temperately and soberly, and by any Rule, are generally not desirous
of the use of the Lyturgy, where they have a Minister of any abilities: But
where we have any persons, that give up themselves to strict exercises of
Religion, that pray in their Families, exercise themselves in the Scripture,
and have any great knowledge of them, we find them generally impatient of it:
Now we cannot think it lawful for us, to scandalize the far greater number of
strict Christians, that we may gratify a few others, in whose lives we find
nothing, but what is a far juster scandal to all good men, than a godly
Ministers forbearing the use of the Lyturgy can be to them.

VII. Especially also considering, that we see, that that sort of people who
are so zealous for the Lyturgy, so dote upon it, that it is clearly become
their Idol, they think there is no serving of God without it, no need of any
serving of God but with it: With many people we see it demonstrably true, that
if a Minister should never preach the Word of God, yet if he did but read the
Common Prayer, it would be enough. The Preacher makes their heads to ache. Now
we cannot judge it lawful for us upon this view of the state of our people, to
nurse them up in these conceits, which are hardly Christian.

VIII. Yet it might go far with us, if one of forty of those people that are
so fond of the Lyturgy, could but give us a reasonable account, why they desire
we should pray by Forms, rather than without, why by these Forms rather than
others. We do not think it lawful for us to satisfy the irrational humors of
people, contrary to our light.

IX. By all this, the Bishop of Exeter may see, that we have something to say
for our selves, why we do not use the Lyturgy: Not to enter into a particular
examination of the parts of it, the woeful Translations of Scripture in it, the
irrational cutting of verses from verses, Chapters from Chapters, with 1000
other things, would we examine it in parts, which has been already done by
many: We profess our selves for these Reasons to forbear it, and to judge our
selves obliged in conscience to forbear it. We acknowledge it in his Majesty's
and Parliaments power to punish us for that forbearance: If they shall think
sit to inflict any punishment in that case, we acknowledge it our duty to
suffer patiently, comitting our souls unto God as to a faithful Creator: In the
mean time, we are humbly thankful to his Majesty for declaring, that none of us
shall be punished for the not using of it, (at least not for a time.) We do
not forbear because his Majesty gives us leave, but we forbear out of Judgment
and Conscience, and bless God, who has put it into the heart of his Most
Excellent Majesty, to forbear punishing of us for Conscience sake, as to his
matter of our God. It is therefore a spiteful and odious representation, which
Bish. Gauden has made of us, which has no foundation of Truth, nor mixture of
Charity. God grant him better Interpreters of his Actions, and requite him not
according to his dealing with his Brethren, who desire to fear the same God
which he professes to worship, and to walk by the same Rule which he
professes to own. Happy is he that condemns not himself in what he allows.

We shall shut up this Discourse with a summary Recapitulation of what Reason
are scattered in the preceding Sheets, justifying our Practice in the
forbearance of the use of the Common Prayer.

CHAP. XII. A Summary Recapitulation of the Ministers Reasons.
I. WE cannot believe that it is lawful for all of us, at all times, by
limiting our selves to a Form of Prayer, to smother the Gift of Prayer, given
(we hope) to some of us, or to cool the heat and fervency of our hearts in
Prayer, or the Affections of them that hear us.

II. Because we can find no Precept for it is Gods Word, no Pattern of it
there, but one ( pretended) Form, that made by Christ himself, although we
doubt whether ever it were intended for a Form of Prayer or no, and rather
think it a direction for the matter of Prayer; one Evangelist saying no more,
than after this manner, Christ and his Apostles leaving no Record of their
using of it; my few of the entire phrases in it to be found in other
Scriptures. (Dr. Causabon in his late Book, is miserably put to it to parallel
the phrases of it, as any indifferent Reader will judge) yet it being holy
Scripture, we doubt not but we may use it in the Form, which is so short, as we
may easily get it by heart, and not employ our souls (at our eyes in reading)
while they should he wrestling with God: And the divine authority of it is
such, as it has another manner of influence on our Spirits in using (as all
the Scripture has) than can he pretended for any other Forms: And by the
length of it, we easily understand, that it was never intended to be used
without any other Prayer, to say nothing of many other Arguments might be used
for that.

III. Because we cannot find, that there was ever any Forms of Prayer used in
the Church, in any part of it till 400 years (or very nigh) after Christ, nor
any made (for more than some single Province) till 600 years, and then by that
superstitious wretch Pope Gregory, and not imposed till 800 years after Christ,
when all manner of Corruption was brought in; and we challenge all our
Adversaries, to prove what they say to the contrary of this in any Christian
Church: For what Dr. Causabon says, of Forms of Prayer used by the Heathens to
their Idols, and by the Jews in their most corrupted, depraved estate, it
deserves no Answer.

IV. Because we cannot imagine any use at all of them, or any good they ever
did, especially when imposed. They were first invented to cure the negligent
and ignorant Clergy, to prevent Heresy and Schism; we have showed, that in
stead of this, they have made an ignorant and negligent Clergy, that they are
neither a scriptural, nor rational means to prevent Heresy, that they have
been the Mothers of Heresies, causing separations, and constantly brought forth
dreadful Persecutions, and will do so still in reason.

V. Because we cannot think it lawful in the worship of God, to use forms of
Prayer (which are compounds made by men) which have once been offered in an
Idolatrous Service (such as is that of the Church of Rome) Dr. Causabon says
nothing, in telling us, the Scriptures are in the Mass Book, they are no humane
Compositions, nor capable of defilement. Though in these Forms there be no
Idolatry, yet they have been used in a Service grossly Idolatrous. There the
Question lies; not whether we may use nothing which has been offered to Idols,
or in an Idolatrous Service? That Is a Foppery to dream: but, Whether it be
lawful for Christians in the spiritual Worship of God, by a rational act of
theirs, in devotion to offer up what is of pure humane composition, and so may
be altered, and which has been before defiled, by being offered in an
Idolatrous Service abhorred of God. Let our Brethren speak to this Question,
and leave speaking to other things, as our using the same Scriptures and
Temples: For the latter, they know so did the Primitive Churches, which yet
never used the Pagan Forms of words. This is not to speak ad idem.

VI. Because we have sworn to endeavor a Reformation in Worship, and the
extirpation of Superstition, and what is contrary to, or may hinder the power
of Godliness.

VII. Because of the infinite scandal which we must give to some of our
Brethren that durst not use it, and to thousands of our most judicious, holy,
strictly living Christians; and we durst not offend those little ones, though
we dare leave our Ministry, if Authority will command one or the other.

VIII. Because we see the number of those who are judicious, sober Christians
who desire it, is very small, but the generality of those given up to all
manner of looseness, profaneness, and debauchery, are impatient for it, and rest
in it, ('it is as the Papists Beads to them) and they care for no other worship
of God, and we conceive it far from our duty, to harden any in what we know is
their sin and wickedness.

IX. Because we are assured in our Consciences, that very many of those in our
ordinary Congregations who are earnest for it, press the use of it, upon no
other account, than from a Principle of malice against godly Ministers and
People, and desire it for nothing else, but that they may have a weapon to
destroy all religious persons by; this is evident by experience, when some
Ministers have used some part, they are yet as zealous to turn them out,
finding fault, they do not read all; then, he does not wear the Surplice; he
does not pray the Canon Prayer; he does not say later Service. Nor can we get
of them any reason why they desire we should use it, only it is established by
Law, (which we cannot believe) If it were, we think in matters of Gods worship
something else must be considered.

X. Because the Forms appear to us very short of a perfect Model of Prayer,
full of obsolete words, dubious phrases, antique responds, and such a Method
(through the whole) as is like to none in any Reformed Church in the world, nor
any where to be paralleled, but in the Roman Missal, nor any way suited to the
spirits of Christians, nor to the gravity of the duty: We do not say this is
so, but to us it appears so, and therefore it is (...).

XI. Finally, we do not conceive the Interest and concern of words in Prayer
such, that there is any need at all, that Forms should be starcht up for all to
use, those being best, which the best affected heart emitteth, and venteth, and
which best affect the hearts of others: If all Ministers be not able to pray
decently enough, (as to expressions) and sutably enough, as to the Matter, it
is because the Governors of the Church take not that due cognizance of
Ministers Abilities, which they ought to do before they ordain and admit them;
Or do not so watch over their Churches as they ought to do. Let then the Error
be mended, by the greater Care and Vigilance of Church Governors, not by the
restraining the Gifts of God bestowed on any, for the sake of some.

XII. This is the Sum of our Apology; which we humbly submit to the Judgment
of all that are concerned in the great Affairs of the Church; always reserving
to our selves further Liberty of adding any further Arguments or Exceptions,
professing our selves most heartily willing to hear any Arguments of our
Brethren, either for Forms of Prayer, to be universally imposed, or for these
Forms in particular, to which we shall give a reasonable Answer, or yield our
Cause. In the mean time, we protest against Dr. Causabons uncharitable Judgment
of us, That we do it to oppose our Brethren. We can, we dare do nothing against
the Truth, but are ready to do all for it. But we dare not resist the Light of
our Consciences. And if it be the Will of God, that for our Conscience sake in
this thing, we be laid aside as useless Vessels, we humbly submit to his
pleasure, who is able of stones to raise up Children to Abraham; and we shall
pray that our Brethren may have nothing on our behalf charged upon their souls
in the day of Christ. In the mean time, what Dr. Gauden has said, we will
further consider in a few words in the following Chapters.

CHAP. XIII. The most of Bishop Gaudens Arguments for the use of the Lyturgy,
examined, and shortly answered: Some of them retorted, proving Violentum's in
Logic.
I. DR. Gauden has so perplexed his Discourse with words, and been so careless
of Method, that we have found it no easy thing to pick out his Arguments; we
could have wished, that like a Logician and Divine, he had proposed his
Arguments strictly, and followed them closely, that we might have judged that
his Design was with a strength of Argument, in the Spirit of Meekness, to
convince us, over whom he so provocatively, insults, not merely to confound his
Reader with a non-significant Rhodomantado of Phrase.

II. So far as we can gather, he one while argues for a Lyturgy, by and by for
this Lyturgy, and no other; for which he one while argues, from the Obligation
of the Law, another while, from the Obligation of the Example of the Primitive
Churches, or of some Persons now living: By and by he urges the use of it from
Gratitude to his Majesty, and from the contrary Evidence of Ingratitude,
Morosity, Peevishness, etc. in case of Refusal. One while he pretends an
incomparable excellency in it, another while, the unblameableness of it: Anon
he runs a descant upon the Confusions of our Church since it was neglected.
After this, he tells us of the Necessity of it, the necessity of a Lyturgy for
the planting of any Church, this Lyturgy, for the defending of our Church
against Popery. One while he urges it, that we might be conformable to our
Prince, another while, that we may be Loyal. He tells us of the Authority of the
Church, as to Lyturgy, Ceremonies, what not? He justifies, not only the Forms
of Prayer, but also the Method, the Responds, yea, the Music, the Ceremonies,
the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book: One while he tells us, that men have
served God day and night in the use of the Lyturgy, yea, that he is persuaded
St. Paul himself (had he been alive) would have used it; another while, he tells
us, how some Ministers and people have bewailed the neglect of it. O quo te
teneam mutantem Protea vultu? The Dr. had made our work shorter and more
methodical if he had told us, which of these he accounts arguments in the case,
and which he looked upon as strains of Rhetoric, only as to which we needed
not have troubled our selves with an answer; he not doing this, we must examine
them all, supposing that the Dr. took all these for conclusive Arguments, in
the case able to command reasonable, and religious souls to this conformity.

III. For the pretended Antiquity of Liturgies, his Lordship may gather from
what is already said, that we do not believe any such thing, nor has he spoke
one word to prove it, we living not in Pithagoras his School, have not learned
to submit to an (...) we desire him to show us any authority for a Liturgy
within the first three Centuries.

IV. As to what he says p. 2. That his most Sacred Majesty in his Gracious
Declaration has not dispensed with the legal, moral, obediential, obligation.
We conceive he means the obligation which lies upon men's consciences to observe
the Civil Laws of the Nation, we do not else understand his meaning.

If this be it, the Dr. has two things to do; 1. To prove that the
Common Prayer Book (vulgarly to be had) is established by any Law of England.
(we heard it was openly denied in the house of Commons in the last Parliament,
and we cannot find any Law to that purpose, the Laws 1 Ed. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. and
1 El. are such, that our consciences tell us, they daily violate the Law that
read these books.) In the mean time we ingenuously confess, That his Majesty's
Declaration, as it cannot make an obliging Law, so it cannot dissolve the
obligation of it: but where is the Law? 2. If it could be found, how far does
it oblige any man's conscience? certainly not to any act of sin; if we thought
we could use these forms without sin, we should never dispute the Law in the
case, but freely obey the least intimation of his Sacred Majesty's pleasure.

V. For what he tells us p. 8. of the example of the Church since the first
Century, we can find no such thing. We have said enough to that c. 3. It is an
empty unproved Assertion, though we know nothing but Gods Word obliging our
consciences, and are to learn that any examples oblige us (but those of Christ
and his Apostles) and therefore for what he tells us p. 3. of some Ministers
that have all this time used the Liturgy: Others that lately have reassumed the
use of it: it signifies nothing to us who live by the unerring rule of
Scripture precepts and presidents. If others will sin, surely it obliges not
us to do so too: Though we dare not say they did, or do sin in it.

VI. He urges it upon us next from an ingenuous Argument, viz. Gratitude to
his Majesty for his indulgence. To which we answer, That we with all humility
acknowledge His Most Excellent Majesty's gracious indulgence in it. And in
point of gratitude, are willing to serve his Majesty with all that is dear
unto us (our souls only excepted which we know he desires not) in token of
thankfulness to his Majesty, we are ready to part with any part of our
livelyhoods, and shall in that vye with those who pretend most to his Majesty's
service, (though many of us in several places have no benefit by his Majesty's
Declaration, whiles some eager Lawyers and Justices, still give the Statutes in
charge against us, and cause us to be indicted and prosecuted, openly telling
the people that the Kings Declaration is no Law, though they also know that
there is no Law for the Common Prayer) yet we have an experiment of his
gracious Majesty's good will to us his poor Subjects; and shall be vvilling by
any way, which our consciences tell us would not be sin to us, to let his
Majesty know our gratitude. But we are sure that his Majesty is more
charitable to his peoples souls, then to desire that to express their
thankfulness to him they should commit the least sin against God. And this is
enough to excuse us from the Bishops rash charging us with Morosity,
Restiveness, Peevishness, Schismatical petulancy, etc. with none of which men
can be charged for any action which they do, or neglect, that they may avoid
the guilt of Sin before God, whether their consciences inform them rightly or
no.

VII. For the many Splendid words, which the Bishop uses p. 23.31. to dazzle
peoples eyes at the apprehension of the Excellency of the Liturgy, they are of
no use at all, for besides that if he would have made his words good, he must
have proved 1. That the Common Prayer has in it a perfect Confession of such
sins as all are guilty of. Original, Actual, of Omission, Commission, a perfect
summary of things necessary to be begged of God for all: and a perfect form of
thanksgiving for mercies received, and all this expressed in most Significant
Scriptural Language, plain, and affective expressions, and cast into a lovely,
and usual method, I say besides this, the Excellency of no form of words in
prayer, can commend it to be imposed universally, if such imposing be not
lawful. But in stead of this the Bishop gives us a parcel of fine words without
a tittle of proof, and contrary to the general apprehension of all Reformed
Churches, (who never spoke it more then tolerable) and to the judgment of
discretion; which the Protestant Religion allows to all private persons: so
that this is but (...) one Drs. opinion, which to us Protestants is not enough
to make what he says, a probable Doctrine.

VIII. What he argues for it, from the invalidity of the exceptions taken to
it, and the supposed unblameableness of it, signifies as little, for it is
blameable enough, as a form universally imposed. 2. As formerly used in an
idolatrous service; and for many things which he never so much as endeavors to
vindicate it from, though told him of old by Mr. Cartwright, V. The
Common Prayer book unmaskt.
the Abridgment; more lately by the book called Necessity of Reformation, by
Vavasor Powel, etc. besides for what he speaks to, as to the point of Baptismal
regeneration, it is so without foundation in Scripture. (for all know those two
Texts 3 Jo. 5. and in Titus have other and better senses, V. The Parallel
between the Mass Book and the Liturgy.
) So contrary to the Analogy of Faith in the point of Justification,
Perseverance in grace, etc. and the Dr. has said so little to ^lear it, that
those Exceptions will yet stand good, so will that as to the translation of the
Text in Ezech. for none is so simple to assert, that we can as infallibly give
the sense of a Text, and put it in other words with our additions, as Christ
and his Apostles; and sure we are, the Text in Ezech. in the letter of it
speaks no such thing as our Liturgy makes it to speak.

IX. For what he urges as to the disorders, and confusions in our Church since
the disuse of the Liturgy, which he much comments upon p. 7, 18, 40. It is no
argument to evince the necessity or expedience of bringing back the Liturgy
again, because not the want of it, but rather the too long having of it, was
the cause in a great measure. For 1. In what Congregations were these
confusions most ordinary? was it in those Congregations where the Liturgy was
out of choice laid aside? which were furnished with Godly Learned Ministers? we
appeal to the Citizens of London whether they took notice of any such
extravagancies in their Ministers? nor can malice it self so charge them. But
there were two other sorts of Preachers: 1. There was an old Sect who had so
used themselves to the Liturgy, that they had lost all their gifts, and being
restrained in the use of those forms, and not having a spirit or heart suited to
their work could do just nothing. 2. There was another Set of Lay-preachers,
and raw young Students got into livings, many of whom were also corrupted in
their judgments, and it is no great wonder some of them should be justly
chargeable. The question is, what such confusions there would have been, had
none been admitted into livings but such as were duly qualified.

X. Above all things we wonder, why a form of words in prayer at the
administration of the Sacraments, should be judged so highly necessary to be
prescribed; for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper as it is an Ordinance which
requires the greatest preparation, both as to him that administers, and those
that receive: so we cannot but think it very hard that any diversion should be
offered to the Ministers soul in prayer there, and unreasonable that he should
do any thing which might either abate the fervor of his own spirit, or be less
affective of his peoples hearts. For the forms of words in Consecration and
Administration, we think it no way fit the Minister should vary a tittle from
the institution, where Christ has left us words sufficient. Nor can we allow
the Liturgie's turning the words to be spoken at the delivery of the Sacrament
into a prayer, being no ways agreeable to the Institution. The same is to be
said as to the other Sacrament, only if an explicit enumeration of the chief
heads of the Doctrine of Faith, (to which the Parents assent is required) be
judged necessary, we think it warrantable, and should freely allow the Church
to prescribe a form there, and to enjoin the observation of the Scriptural form
of words in both administrations to be used, and no other.

XI. As to the desires of the most Learned and Judicious, and Godly of the
people, which the Dr. mentions p. 7. we see no such thing, but the quite
contrary, and dare almost venture it upon the vote of such in our Parishes, as
are not guilty of noted debauchery, and have any form of Religion in their
families, and can give us a rational answer why they desire it.

XII. We do freely allow that no Minister ought to oppose his private Spirit to
the Spirit of the Prophets united: but yet must maintain for every Minister a
judgment of discretion, (which when we have once disputed out of the world,
Popery will immediately succeed, and nothing remains but blind obedience) wet
do allow a due honor to some of those Reverend persons that had an hand in
composing the Liturgy, and do think they did worthily in their generation,
according to that twilight of Gospel light, which immediately after a midnight
of Popish darkness shone out upon them: we do allow them to have done
prudently, respecting the State of the English Nation at that time, ( Rome
could not be pulled down in a day) but we also know, how imperfect their
seize were, and how gradually they reformed their own judgments. It is
sufficiently known that one of the most Eminent of them, (holy Cranmer) was one
of them, who (at that time himself being a professed Protestant) condemned that
rare Martyr Lambert, for denying the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. In the
witness of which truth in Queen Mary's days himself (upon further light)
suffered Martyrdom. We believe he did both in the sincerity of his heart, and
only mention this to show, that those Eminent lights were not fitted to set a
standing and perpetual rule to the Church in so great an affair as this is.

XIII. But if as the Bishop says p. 3. Neither piety nor policy, will allow
the discomposing or dissolving the whole frame of the Liturgy. And if as he
tells us p. 12. The Reformed part of Religion cannot be well preserved in
England to any flourishing and uniform State, unless such Liturgy be
authoritatively injoined, and constantly maintained. Then unquestionably it
ought to be as he dictateth. And if as he tells us p. 23. The Liturgy of
England as to the main essentials of it in Doctrine, Devotion, Consecration,
and Celebration, for matter, order and method, be such as may not be maimed. If
(as p. 31.) nothing can ever be seen comparable to this Liturgy, if it be
nulled and destroyed, and if after it be reviewed, it be not by Law,
reestablished and authoritatively enjoined, Truth and peace can never be
established; there is all the reason in the world that we should have it, better
that those thousands of Godly Ministers and people, who cannot submit to it,
should be banished the Land, then such evils come by hearkening to them, or
such good things be hindered by their nonconformity. But let us search the
bottom of this heap of words, and see what strength of Reason there is in them.

XIV. He gives three reasons for his former assertion, That it is against piety
and policy to alter it.

1. It would reproach the wisdom, and blemish the piety of the first composers
of it.

2. It would imprudently disparage the judgment and devotion of the whole
Church of England.

3. It would much damp and discourage the present zeal and devotion of the
greatest and chiefest part of this Nation, who are much pleased and profited by
the use of it.

Ergo, The alteration is against Piety and Policy.

XV. For the first, We would be loath either to reproach the Piety, or blemish
the wisdom of the first Reformers; but we cannot understand how the one or the
other should be reproached, by not imposing a Lyturgy, or not imposing this
Lyturgy. Was the Wisdom of God reproached by the disuse of the Ceremonial Law,
which yet was an excellent Schoolmaster to bring the Jews to Christ? Or is the
wisdom or prudence of William Lilly or any other Master of Grammar reproached,
because when the Boy comes to be Master of Arts, he no longer makes Latin by
Grammar Rules, nor further uses it than at a pinch now and then? Certainly
those first Reformers did like wise and pious men, with respect to their age,
the complexion of the People, the abilities of the then-Ministers. But if that
we have not improved both in Reformation and in all Gifts, very much since that
time (now 100 years) we have woefully abused our mercies. And it is the honor
of our first Reformers, that by their means who first translated the
Service Book into English, etc. there are so many thousand Ministers to be
found now in England, who are able to speak unto God before people, as well and
orderly, as if they did read those Forms. Is it not so to the Schoolmaster, who
by dictating Forms of Theams and Epistles, and Orations, teaches his Boys to
make as good, and better than his were, in 9 or 10 years time? Surely it were
rather a reproach to the Schoolmaster, so to inure his Boys to Forms, that
when they are Masters of Art, they must still have Forms dictated to them,
without which they can do nothing.

XVI. Nor would the alteration of this Lyturgy, and not imposing any, blemish
the Judgment of our whole Church, our Kings, Princes, and Parliaments, etc.
Their Judgment was excellent as to those times. In King Edward his time, the
Clergy were generally Popish, and had they been left to Liberty, would
certainly have used the Mass, or else such persons as were of mean parts, most
of them Anglice docti, such as the necessity of those times required, because
better could not be had. In Qu. Elizabeth's time, the state of the Nation (at
least in the beginning of her Reign) was little better; witness the Record
which Archbishop Parker left, (and is yet to be seen in the Library of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge) of all the Ministers in his Province, and their
several abilities, where are 20 Anglice docti, such as understood no Latin,
for one that has a Character for any Learning see upon him; this man was
Archbishop in the Second year of Qu. Elizabeth. Undoubtedly it was an Act of
rare Judgment for the Parliament then to impose Forms of Prayer, nor was it
likely that suddenly the whole Nation would be reformed so well, that with any
security or prudence, the Ministers could be left at liberty. Since the time of
Qu. Elizabeth no Parliament meddled with it: King James indeed reformed it in
part, and declared his Judgment for it. King Charles (of Glorious Memory) in
his Meditation upon the Lyturgy, (though indeed he judges an imposed Lyturgy
lawful, and this as to the main very good) yet declares his readiness to have
consented to amend what upon free and public advice, might seem to sober men
inconvenient as to matter or manner; by which it appears, that his Majesty
judged incapable of amendment both as to Matter and Manner.

XVII. But it is a great Riddle to us, how the amending of the Lyturgy, and not
imposing any universally, should damp and discourage the zeal of the greatest
and chiefest part of the Nation, who find much pleasure and profit in the use
of it. For if it be still left at liberty to them, if they please to use the
old Forms, how is their Zeal damped or discouraged, by the liberty which others
take? It is a fiery Zeal in men certainly, that must needs have all others to
be of their humor, as to the use of Forms of words in Prayer. If by zeal, the
Bishop means the Fury of people against those who durst not use those Forms,
the God of Heaven more damp and discourage that zeal, which we are sure is not
according to knowledge. If the greatest and chiefest part of the Nation be so
zealous in this case, doubtless if they be left to liberty, people will
generally fill in with those Ministers that do use it, and there will be an
ingenuous conformity, which is always best; for a little experience will
convince the furious ones of this age, that Religion is a thing that must
instillari, not intrudi (as Beza sometimes said) a thing to be gently instilled
and commended, not bluntly and forcibly intruded and compelled. Our Bishops in
this point may give counsel effectual to the filling of Goals, undoing of many
thousands, and procuring their cries unto God against them, but never effectual
to accomplish their designs, if indeed their designs be to bring all to an
uniformity in this thing. But they very well know, that if it be left to
liberty to Ministers, to use or not use the Lyturgy, that experience will
quickly make it appear, that the greater part of more knowing and zealous
people are not so enamoured upon it, as they proclaim them to the world to be.

XVIII. In the next place, he tells us, The Reformed part of Religion cannot be
well preserved in England without it, to any flourishing and uniform estate.
Immediately before, he told us, Religion could not any where be planted without
a Lyturgy: Both of them, Propositions of equal truth. If Religion could not be
planted without a Common Prayer Book, it is a wonder that the Apostles and
Pastors of the Primitive Churches missed this only means: For what Lyturgy was
ever heard of in the Church for 400 years after Christ? (the great planting
time) if the Reformation of Religion cannot be preserved without a Lyturgy
imposed, or this Lyturgy, alas for the Churches of God in Scotland, Holland,
France, Genevah! If they have a Lyturgy, how unlike is it to this? Nor is it
imposed, nor the use of it, by penalties compelled; yet blessed be God, the
Reformation in those Churches is not less perfect than ours, not less firmly
preserved: Let their Confessions of Faith be read, or their printed Books
against the Papists be read, and compared with ours, and let all judge: What
singular thing then is there in the Constitution of men and women in England,
that Religion in its Reformed part cannot subsist without the authoritative
imposing of a Lyturgy, taken out of the Roman Missal (as to the far greater
part?) Surely none will say, it is because the Reformed Party of England, have
a more reverend opinion of Pope Gregory and the present Church of Rome, than
the Reformed Party in other Nations has: This indeed were a shameful reproach
to the Church of England. Let her Enemies lay it to her charge; but let her
true Sons spend their time in covering such nakedness. We must know the
Bishop's Reasons, before we can believe any truth in this, especially when we
know that those Ministers and people, who are most zealous against Popery, are
most averse to this Lyturgy.

XIX. The Bishop instanceth in the matter of the Sacrament, telling us, Popery
can never come in while the Form of Consecration prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer, which is most ancient and excellent is used. We must ingenuously
confess, that some Forms of Prayer prescribed to be read at the administration
of the Lords Supper, are very good and pious; but we are much of his mind, who
said, Nihil ego puto a quovis praescriptum tam exact* quin addi aliquid
possit, aut perfectius reddi, a quovis qui ministerio dignus, Altar Damasc. P.
6, 13.
ad docendum vel movendum affectus, nam facile est addere inventis and
praescriptis, and licet forte nihil exactius dari posset, tamen languet oration,
ubi non est verborum varietas, nec prorumpunt affectus interiores orantis aut
exhortantis libere in verba. Nam ut assiciat auditores, oportet ipsum assici,
non autem afficitur ut debet, qui semper eisdem verbis orat, aut exhortatur. It
is an usual saying, and may be true enough, Optimus Orator non nondum nascitur.
To say that either for matter or phrase there was never any Prayers made like
to those, and that no such can be made, are strange, extravagant, and
hyperbolical expressions, by no means either to be justified or demonstrated.
In short, those Forms of words in Prayer are undoubtedly best for the Speakers
use, which come most from the intention of his mind and fervency of his Spirit.
As to others joining with him, those are best, which most affect the Hearers
hearts. That these, or any Forms upon this account do so, is not demonstrable.
For the Form of Consecration of the Lords Supper in the English Lyturgy, we
cannot find any Form for it (which we think an high Omission) we do conceive,
that the Consecration should be by reading the words of Institution, taking,
and breaking the Bread, and then blessing it: We find only a Form of Prayer for
a Blessing upon the Elements, and not so much as a Rubric directing the
Minister at that time to read the words of Institution, or to take and break
the Bread. As for the words used in the delivery of the Sacrament, we find them
(without any warrant from Gods Word) turned into Prayers: So that the Bishop
might have spared the commending of this Part of the Lyturgy, where we think is
a more considerable Omission of what should be there, than he can instance in,
in our administrations, or then the omission of those words, Receive the Holy
Ghost in Ordination is, especially when we know no such power any Ministers
have now to give the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles had, and can easily
distinguish betwixt the Apostles ordinary Act in Ordination, and their
extraordinary Act in giving the Holy Ghost; to the latter of which, none can
now pretend. For the Ancientry of these Forms, we have showed it before, they
are not of age enough to speak for themselves, and to plead their gray hairs
for their continuance.

XX. To say, That without the authoritative imposing of this, or any other
Lyturgy, Truth and Peace can never be established, is irrationally guessed, nor
can there he any pretense for it: Certainly truth is far better preserved by a
full and sound Confession of Faith, in a Form of sound words, in which all are
agreed, and we should be content to read a short summary of it every Lords day,
to subscribe, own, defend it; that it should be subscribed and sworn by all
Commencers in Universities, by all to be ordained, or admitted into livings, by
all admitted to Sacraments; how an imposed Liturgy should do half so much, nay
how it should do any thing at all to preserve Truth, we cannot guess.

XXI. For Peace, we have had the experience of an 100. years to prove the
contrary; sure we are that we may thank the Imposing of the Liturgy in former
times, for all our Brownists, Anabaptists, Quakers, Familists, Sectaries of all
sorts. Their Leaders first separated from the Church for the Common Prayer Book
and Ceremonies, then set up for themselves, and being themselves unskilful in
the Word of Righteousness, easily perverted others. And we are sure that there
are now 100. for every one that distasted these things in 1640. both Ministers
and people; how the reimposing should bring us to Peace poseth us to prophecy.
It may bring many thousands of persons to ruin, for not conforming, driving
them into other lands, giving their malicious adversaries advantages to fill
prisons with them; but Peace it can never bring.

XXII. We observe that all Reformed Churches, where are no such imposings of
Liturgies, have more plenty of able Divines, (considering the proportion of
their ground,) more zealous defenders of Truth, fewer Heretics, and
Schismatics, then ever England had at any time when the Liturgy was most
rigorously imposed. Nor is it reasonable to imagine that we should ever have
any peace in the Church, if the former Liturgy be imposed, but continual
separations from the Church, and violent prosecutions of those whole
consciences for the reasons aforesaid, will never allow them to use it.

XXIII. So that we humbly crave leave to retort this as an Argument against the
Imposing, either this, or any other Liturgy, Its being inconsistent with the
peace of this Church. And we most humbly beseech His most Excellent Majesty,
the Noble Lords, and the Gentlemen of England, seriously to consider, Whether
there being no command in Scripture, nor particular warrant for any imposings
of this nature, no president of the primitive Church in any part for 400 years
after Christ; there being also such a plenty of Godly able Ministers in
England; So many times ten thousand of Godly Christians, who cannot allow
themselves in the worship of God by forms of prayer; and who have taken so
great a scandal at these forms in particular, and that for reasons above
mentioned: It can consist either with Piety in them to enjoin what is so highly
offensive, (when St. Paul professes so much tenderness to his weak brethren)
or with Policy, to enjoin that in which they cannot but know that many
thousands will be found who durst not actively Obey, but will think themselves
bound to suffer? So that they will be constrained in pursuance of their honor
(commanding such things) to erect Courts, direct prosecutions of persons, only
blameable in this matter of their God, and such who are ready by any Act or
Oath to secure their Allegiance to his Majesty, by any Action to express it,
paying tributes, and customs for conscience sake; daily praying for all the
blessings of heaven and earth for his Majesty, and this with far more
cordiality then others drink His healths. Or whether such proceedings be like
to produce Peace in the Church, or rather everlasting divisions, animosities,
and constant prosecutions of sober Christians, concerning the equity of which
the Just Judge of the whole earth must one day enquire? And in the mean time
these Impositions to be of no further considerable use, then to help ignorant
persons unfit for the Ministry, and such as are lazy and negligent, and make no
conscience to stir up the gift of God in them. We humbly leave this to our
Superiors to determine.

XXIV. The questions as to piety are, 1. Whether pious Magistrates, can
according to principles of piety, command and enforce those things, which Gods
Word does not command in his worship, being openly offensive to multitudes of
Godly people? 2. Whether they can acquit their souls to God in making Laws, to
fine, disturb, imprison, banish, etc. multitudes of their Subjects for no other
crime then this, that they cannot limit themselves to forms of prayer in Gods
Worship? And suppose these two things were consistent with Piety, yet whether
Policy would direct it? is another question; why should so many good Subjects
be lost to a Nation? why should they have temptations to estrange their hearts
from the ancient and excellent government thereof? But matters of policy, we
most humbly leave to the grave wisdom and deliberations of His Sacred Majesty
and His Parliaments. Only we must add a word to one or two Suggestions more,
which the Bishop has for the imposing of the Liturgy.

CHAP. XIV. Bishop Gaudens two Arguments, from the Authority of the Church, the
influence of Subjects Conformity, in devotion, to their Prince, considered. No
necessity of using the Liturgy upon these accounts.
I. THe truth is in other parts of his Book, the Bishop did but like the
Lapwing fly far about from his main design and argument, which p. 27. he
touches, and yet but very tenderly. The Authority of the Church must not be
baffled. Here indeed is the bottom of all, we must have Liturgies and
Ceremonies imposed, to maintain the Authority and pomp, and grandieur of what
they call the Church.

II. The name of the Church is a reverend name, and her Authority is reverend,
and by no means to be baffled, for Christ is in her. But, as the Name and
Authority of a rightful King, is reverend, so both the name and authority of an
Usurper is justly abominable. And as no Magistrates command is to be obeyed
where he has no right to command, so neither is any Church; nor is denial of
obedience in that case any contempt of the Authority, either of the Magistrate
or of the Church; we must therefore enquire strictly what Church this is which
is clothed with Authority, and what power she has in the things we dispute
about?

III. The Church is either Triumphant or Militant. The Militant Church is
visible or invisible. It must be the Militant visible Church; this also is an
homonimous term, and either signifies the universality of the people, or the
messengers of the people. The Universality of people baptized into the name of
Christ over all the world, make up the Catholic visible Church. The whole
Company of them in this of that Province, Nation, City, Parish, make such a
National, Provincial, or Parochial Church. But we do not think this is the
Church clothed with Authority: We understand by a Church in that sense, The
Officers of such a Church constituted according to Gods Word, whether they be
the Officers of a particular Church, or the messengers of the particular
Churches, in a Lugentile Synod, a National or Provincial Synod, or (if it were,
possible in an Ecumenical Synod. To Churches in all these political senses we
ow great reverence, and acknowledge that to their several capacities, several
degrees of authority, to admonish, suspend, excommunicate, deprive, declare the
doctrine of says in doubtful cases, appoint some things truly and properly
relating to decency or order, etc.

IV. But it is more then we know that any such Church as this, ever established
a Liturgy in England. The Papists have devised a new notion of a Church, to
them the Pope and his Cardinals make the Church; but that any such notion of
Church is justifiable from Scriptures, Protestants deny.

V. Our State has been pleased in some Acts of Parliament to take Church in
another notion, and to call the Prelacy of England, the Church of England. That
this application of the term Church is not to be justified from Scripture or
Reason, is plain; nor is it needful: they may if they please, call the Prelacy
of England the Parliament; or by what other name they please, what should
hinder? But they cannot give them that Authority, which the word of God allows
only to a Church in another notion; but may cloth them with what civil power
they please.

VI. Hence it appears, that it is all one with us in England to baffle or
despise the Church and State; for that company of men whom we call the Church
of England (by a new civil application of the term) is nothing else, Then a
company of men by a Civil Power made Bishops, and called to advise the State,
in things concerning Religion; who have no more Authority then they derive from
the King or Parliament, for whence should they have it? Not from Nature; Surely
no Ecclesiastical power is derived from thence; Not from Scripture upon any
pretense, for if when Christ gave the Keys to Peter, he intended his single
person as the Papists would have it; then St. Peter's successor only can
pretend to them, if he gave them to Peter, as an Officer of the Church; then
there must be either a full Convention of such Officers, or some persons chosen
by them to use them: If to Peter as a Christian, then the Authority is in the
Community.

VII. It remains, that according to the Constitution of English Synods, the
Churches Authority is but derivative from the Civil State; and to disobey them,
is no sin, further then it is a disobedience to the lawful Civil Magistrate, to
whom we freely grant an authority, so far as Gods word allows us, and such
an authority as none ought to resist or baffle, (as the Bishop says.) The
Church of England, which we so often hear of, is a Civil Church, not an
authoritative Church in a Scriptural notion.

VIII. We again say, Far be it from us to oppose Civil Authority, either
exercised by Lay persons, or Ecclesiastical persons. We acknowledge it our duty
to render unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. We further say, we are
bound to obey the Civil Magistrate in all things, in things lawful, Actively;
in things unlawful in themselves, or which appear so to us by suffering their
will, and pleasure, quietly and patiently. That which we insist upon, is
only a lawful means in order to our own preservation: i. e. humbly desiring
the Civil Magistrate, to forbear imposing upon us in the tender things of God.

IX. We freely allow to the Civil Magistrate a power to command us in all
civil things, and shall cheerfully obey him. 2. To command us to keep the
Statutes, and Commandments of God. 3. To command us in the Circumstances
relating to Divine Worship, to do those things, which are generally commanded
us in the word to appoint time and place, and such circumstances without
which the worship of God, in the judgment of ordinary reason, must be
indecently and disorderly performed.

X. For his power in imposing Forms of prayer, significant ceremonies, etc. we
do not dispute it, but we humbly crave leave to dissent in this, and to have
liberty to suffer his pleasure as becomes Christians, rather then do those
things which our consciences would condemn us for. And in this we appeal to
all sober Divines, and all rational Christians, whether we speak not as
becomes sober Christians.

XI. We cannot without some passion read what the Bishop says p. 28.
Doubtless Subjects cannot be so tite and firm, or so zealous and firm, or so
cheerful and constant in their Loyalty, love, and duty to their Sovereign, if
they either think themselves commanded to serve God in a way worse then their
Princes use, or that their Sovereign and Prince serve God worse and less
acceptably then they do; certainly the greatest honor, love and safety of
Kings, is from the sameness of true Religion with their Subjects, as to the
main.

XII. What an excellent Doctrine this is, if it were true, to engage the King
of France against all his Protestant Subjects from whom he differs as to
Religion in the main? yet are they as loyal to him as any other; does the
Protestant Religion teach disloyalty toward Princes, differing from their
Subjects in the main of Religion? We defy such Doctrine, and all the Assertors
of it.

XIII. Does it infer a difference in the main of Religion, because our
Sovereign thinks fit to use Forms of Prayer, and we use none? Is this a
Language worthy of a Divine? Is the Mode of Worship, and the Main of Religion
the same thing?

XIV. How shall they think themselves commanded to use a better or worse
Religion, upon whom nothing is imposed at all? which is all we beg; and against
which the Doctor argues.

XV. How does the Prince and his Subjects in this case (the first using Forms
of Prayer in public Devotion, the latter none) more differ in the main of
Religion, than the Christians of two Families in a Parish do, where the
householders so far differ each from other? Or how shall they differ more upon
this liberty, than Dr. Gauden himself allows, who would not have all persons
in their Family Duties, tied up to these Forms, which yet are the Kings daily
Service in his Household.

XVI. To be short, these Discourses are but ad populum phalera, Pretensions in
which all the judicious world sees there is nothing of Reason or Argument. Qui
vult decipi, decipiatur, If God has so far given up men, that they cannot see
it. But notwithstanding all that is, or can be said, the Servants of God who
differ from their Brethren in this thing must be brought into a suffering
estate: The Lord grant them Wisdom, and Faith and Patience, and provide for his
people, more able and faithful guides, than we have approved our selves, while
we had a liberty to work in his Vineyard; and if it be a sin in any for this
reason to forbid us to speak to poor perishing souls that they might be saved,
we shall be so charitable, as to beg of God, that it may not be laid to their
charge: But we hope, and pray for better things for the poor souls over whom
God has set us.

CHAP. XV. Bishop Gaudens Arguments for Church-Musick examined. The Novelty of
Music in Churches evinced. Not in the Primitive Church. Not in any Reformed
Church Condemned by Aquinas, Erasmus, and by the Generality of Protestant
Writers. The Jews no Pattern for Christians in it.
I. THe Bishop having spent himself much in devising reproachful terms, for
such as are not satisfied in their Consciences as to the use of the Lyturgy,
and arguing for the use of the Forms of Prayer, (that he might leave no part of
his work undone) comes to vindicate the Quiristers, Singing men and boys, and
the use of Music also in the worship of God. It is only fit (he says) for
those men's rudeness to abandon Church-Musick, who intended to fill all things
with the Alarms of war, and Cries of Confusion: How charitably this is spoken,
with reference either to the Purer Primitive Church, or the lately Reformed
Churches, or many of his Brethren, the sequent Discourse will evince. We durst
not tender reviling for reviling, but commit our case to him that judges
righteously; and offer our thoughts in this thing to all sober Readers, who
understand ought of Ecclesiastical Story, or right Reason.

II. But by what Topics will this great person prove the Lawfulness of
Church-Musick? Just. Martyr, Qu. and Resp. Resp. 107.
Did this also come from the first Century? Surely no. For Justin Martyr (who
lived in the Second Century) lets us know, that the Church then judged it a
childish Serving of God, and that it was not received in the Church in his
time: His words are these;

(...). In his time there was only plain simple singing used in the Church, and
more than that, viz. with instruments of Music, they looked upon as a puerile,
carnal Service.

III. Indeed the Bishop fetches it high enough; for he agrees with Durantus,
in making David the Author of Organs, nor pretends he any authority but that
of the Jewish Church. That there was (even by Gods Institution) musical
Instruments used in the Jewish Church, is not to be denied, whether in the
Synagogues, or only in the Temple, is doubted, the latter believed. But what
kind of Music, Pol. Virgil l. 1. de inv^rer. c. 15. Hospin de Ong. Templ.
is not certain: Both Polydore Virgil, Hospinian, and many others agree, our
Organs were not then known in the world. When they first were found out,
Polydore says is uncertain; and in his 3 Book, reckons them amongst those
things, whose first Inventers are not known. Sure we are David's Instruments
were stringed Organs, i.e. Instruments, not such as we call Organs.

IV. But may we then agree, that what David used in the worship of God, we may?
Else the Bishops Argument from David's use of Instruments, proves nothing: Let
us then have Altars and Frankincense, Calvin, Psalm. 37.
(which says Mr. Calvin, are every whit as lawful, as Musical Instruments in
Gods worship.) But surely nothing which was figurative and typical in the
Jewish Service, ought to be continued by us, which their Instruments of Music
were; they prefigured our spiritual melody to be made in our hearts to the
Lord; the sweet Music also of a Conscience justified by Faith, and at peace
with God, says Dr. Willet, and so Zepperus and others agree. But who knows
not, Willets Synops. p. 593. Quaere 2 Samuel im chapter 6. v. 9.
that the Jews had carnal Ordinances, (as the Apostle calls them) which we must
not imitate them in, who John 4.24. are obliged to worship God in Spirit and
Truth.

V. It is as uncertain when Organs were first brought into Churches, as when
they were first devised. Marianus Scotus tell sus, that they were first sent of
a Token to King Pepin in France, in which Aventinus agrees, but adds, that they
came not into any Church in France, till the year 828, when by the industry of
a Venetian Priest ( Ludovicus then King, and willing to be at the charge) they
were there set up. Balaeus tells us, Vitellianus brought them in, Anno 660.
Bellarmine says, it was very late. What Balaeus and Platina say, 22ae Aq. fum.
q. 91. art 2. resp. ad 3. and 4. arg.
that Vitellianus brought them in, cannot be true: No, nor what Almonius says,
who says, that Ludovicus Pius brought them in, for it is plain by Aquinas his
determination, (against the use of any Music in Churches, as Judaical and
carnal) that they were not come into the Church in his time, As both Cajetan
and Greg. de valentia acknowledge.
which was about 1260 years after Christ (which is also well observed by
Cajetan upon Aqu. and by Navarrus, in his Manual, etc.

VI. For the Reformed Churches, they have no Music in the worship of God: In
some of their Churches, (as Zepperus notes) they have Organs, to delight people
with at ordinary times, when the worship of God is not performed. The Bishop
might have been more charitable, both to the Apostolical Church, and the purer
Primitive Churches, and all late reformed Churches, than to have determined
them guilty of rudeness, and a design to fill all things with the Alarms of war
and Cries of Confusion.

VII. Having no Scripture, no Apostolical or Ecclesiastical Tradition (as they
pretend for Bishops and Lyturgies) to pretend for Church-Musick, the Bishop is
forced to make use of his Reason here, the depth of which, as also its Symphony
with that of the ancient Fathers, or latter Divines, comes next to be examined.

VIII. We can find but five pieces of seeming Reason in the Bishops Discourse.

1. The Angels began the Quire at Christ's Nativity: He is not in good earnest
sure to suggest to the world, that the Angels brought any Musical Instruments
down with them from Heaven: If not, his Argument must be; That it is as lawful
for us to praise God in public Acts of worship, with Instruments of Music, as
for the Angels to rejoice. But now shall that appear? We believe no more that
the Angels taught men (by that jubilation) the use of Church-Musick, than the
idle story Socrates tells us, of Ignatius his learning the Method of Responds,
by a Vision of Angels, answering one another, like so many Quiristers; which as
Hospinian, and others say, was not surely such a momentous piece of Worship, as
that God should send Angels down to exemplify it.

IX. But the Bishop tells us, we have as much cause to rejoice, as the Jews had:
True. And God forbid but we should rejoice with equal joy: But must it be in
the same carnal manner too? Have we had any Command of God (as they had) for
any such Service? Why should we not have Trumpets, and blow with them, as they
did too? Yea, and have Altars, and Censers, and Incense, and Thank-Offerings as
they had? Who is so blind, as not to see through these Paper-Arguments?

X. Thirdly, The Bishop tells us, Music is a Gift of God, The Gift of conceived
Prayer is a gift of God. Ergo, etc.
and it is fit, God (in his Service) and Church should have the use of so
Orient a Pearl. That Music is the gift of God, none can deny, nor yet, that
God ought to be served with all his Gifts; But is there no way to serve God
with the use of this his Gift, but to use it in his worship? Are there not 100
other things that are the Gifts of God, of which yet there is no use in the
Worship of God? The Bishop will say (it may be) if we may serve God with it,
why not use it in his Worship? We answer, because God has not commanded it.
And it is to set up our posts by Gods posts, and our Thresholds by his
thresholds. This is enough, but much more might be said, and shall be said by
and by.

XI. Ah! But he tells us, Fourthly, It is an exercise that fits the duty of
Praise and fitteth men's Spirits in it: We think, it fitteth some, far better
than others, and the carnal part of any, better than their spiritual part. But
we think we shall never have done, if we stand disputing (after our Saviors
perfect Rule given in the Gospel) what is sitting for his House. Our Savior
knew, that Music was a Gift of God, and fit to exhilerate persons. And surely
when one is dead, his or her relations had need of something to cheer their
spirits: Yet we find, our Savior gives no great countenance to the Musicians,
nor does any Miracle till they be gone; nor do we find him in the least
apointing or countenancing Music in any act of Worship: How well it fitteth
men's Spirits, we shall hear something by and by, from the observation of others.

XII. But he tells us, that the use of Music in Gods worship, is as lawful as
singing by Meeter and Tunes, as any Psalmody, or Hymnology: We shall believe
this at leisure, because we read of Christ's singing an Hymn, and of the
Apostles directions and Command, Ephesians. 5.19. by which we are obliged to sing
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, making Melody in our hearts to the Lord.
But never of any Command or Direction for Musical Instruments. We are mistaken
if those words, Psalms, Hymns, Songs do not imply words cast into a metrical
order. Tunes are necessary, as circumstances, without which, nature it self
would teach us, that the performance is undecent and disorderly, and apparently
so to all that should hear.

XIII. But it will not be amiss to take a view of the Judgment of Divines in
all times, concerning the use of Music in Churches; by which it will appear,
what devout, holy and good men have judged of it, or have by experience found
true concerning the use of it.

XIV. We showed before, that Justin Martyr, and the Church in his time, judged
it a puerile Service, and upon that account, allowed it not in the Church; nor
can any reasonably expect, that any of the Ancients should explicitly declare
themselves, against the use of Music in Churches, when it is apparent, that
for 900 years after Christ there was no such practice, yet much may be found in
them; from which we may judge what (had it then been come into Churches) would
have been their sense of it.

XV. Lactantius falls very foully upon the heathen, for believing, That their
Gods did love what they affected, Institut. l. 2. cap. 7.
and for coming to the worship of God to look upon the Gold of the Temple, the
fine Marble and Ivory, the brave Stones, and fine Habits, and for believing
that their Temples had so much the more Majesty, by how much they were more
gay, and adorned. So that (says he) Religion is nothing else but Cupiditas
humana, [mens lust.] men think that must needs please God, which pleases them.

XVI. It is true, Singing was early in the Eastern Church, as we learn by the
account of the Christians behavior, which Pliny gives to Trajan. But the
Western Church received singing very late, Ambrose is said first to have used
it at Millan, when with his Congregation he kept the Church against the
Arrians, that the night-watchings might be less tedious.

XVII. Let us hear St. Augustine speaking, from whence it will not be hard to
judge what that Reverend person's opinion was about the singing then used, and
its fittedness to the duty of Christians in praising God; it is in his 10th.
book of Confessions cap. 33, we will translate it for the Reader.

The pleasures of the ear had entangled, and captivated me, but thou (O Lord)
have loosed and delivered me: now I confess, I do acquiesce in those sounds,
which thy Oracles enliven, when they are sang with a sweet artificial voice.
Not so as that I stick here, but so as I may rise, when I will. But when
they come unto me in the very phrases, wherein they live, they seek in my heart
a place of dignity, and I can scarce afford them one fitting for them. For
sometimes I seem to my self to give more honor to them ( i.e. so sang) then I
ought to do, while I discern my heart to be more kindled into a flame of piety,
when those words are sang, then if they were not sang. -- etc. But the
delight of my flesh, to which I ought not to give up my mind to be enervated,
does often cheat me, while it does not so accompany my reason, that it will be
patient to come behind it; but because it is admitted for that it endeavors to
run before it, and to lead that. Thus in these things, I sin, not perceiving
it, but afterward I do perceive it. Sometimes more immoderately taking heed
of this cheat; I err, (but very seldom) with too much severity on the other
hand, I would have all the melody of those sweet songs with which David's
Psaltery is full, removed from mine and the Churches e^es, and what I remember
I have often heard told me of Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, who commanded
him (in his Church) that sang the Psalm, so to sing, that he should rather
appear to read then sing, seems safe to me. But when I again remember the
rears I powered out (at my conversion) at the Singing of the Church, and how I
am still affected, not with the singing, but with the things that are sang,
with a clear distinct voice, and a convenient tuning: I again acknowledge the
great profit of this Institution i.e. Singing. I am thus divided betwixt the
danger of pleasure, and my experiment of wholesomeness, and rather incline (yet
not pronouncing an irrevocable sentence) to the approbation of the practice of
singing in the Church, that weaker Souls may by the delight of the ears, be
raised up in pious affection. Yet when it so falls out that the Singing does
more affect me then the matter sang, I do confess that I dangerously sin, and
had rather not hear those that sing.

XVIII. See how jealous this good man was of his own, and others hearts, lest
the melody of an innocent tune should entice his heart too much from
considering the spiritual matter sang; what would he have thought if Church
music had been then in date, where he should have heard nothing but a carnal
sensual-delighting noise?

XIX. In the next place let us hear St. Hierom, (or whoever he was that wrote
those Commentaries upon the Epistles of St. Paul, bound up with St. Hierome;
Bellarmine, and Catharinus, think Pelagius was the author, Sixtus Senensis and
Victorius think it was at least a Pelagian) whoever he was, we may learn the
sense of the Church about that time. In those Commentaries on Ephesians. 5.19. D.
Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 5. v. 19.
-- Let those youths and such as sing in the Church (says he) hear this, That
we must not sing unto God with the voice, but with the heart; nor must the
jaws and throats of men be pleased with a sweet noise after the fashion of
Tragoedians theatrical tunes, and songs must not be sang in the Church, but we
must sing there in timore in opere, in scientia scripturarum, etc. -- -- Let
the servant of Christ so sing that the words which are read, may please not the
singer's tone. That the evil spirit which was in Saul, may in like manner now
be cast out of them possessed with it, not brought into them, who make a stage
of the house of God. What would this author have said had he lived in our age?
and known our Cathedrals?

XX. Bernard confesses it as his sin that he often broke his voice to sing
more loud, and was more delighted with the tune he sang, Bernardi med. cap. 11.
then regarded any cordial compunction.

XXI. Pope Gregory saw the abuses of singing crept in early, Greg. dec. did.
92.
and anathematized Deacons that should leave their office in preaching or
distributing alms, to turn singing men.

XXII. Daneus says, Danei Isag. p. 4. l. 4. cap. 16. P. Mart. in 1 Cor. 14.
Tilen. Syntag. p. 1. dis. 49. th. 47, 48, 49.
Our singing is a mere corruption of an Ordinance of God, and which has in it
nothing of piety, nor serves for any thing but to tickle the ears. Peter Martyr
says, he cannot see how it can be tolerated. Tilenus sharply damneth it.
Aquinas (though a Papist) says, the Jews Music was figurative and carnal, and
that Music serves only for sensual delight, Aq. Sum. 22 ae. q. 91. art. 2. ad
3. Tilenus says of it, what we will not English, Illis arrideat qui magna
meretrici supparasitari potius quam Christianae simplicitati studere malint.
Pareus condemns it in his Commentary on 1 Cor. 14.7. And so indeed do the
generality of Protestant Divines. But least they should be thought too much
parties; we will conclude with one who was no Puritan, for we think he lived,
and died a Papist, though not resolved to approve all he saw and heard in the
Romish Synagogue, without any further account; we will take pains to
translate what he says on 1 Cor. 14.

XXIII. Upon the 1 Cor. 14.7. I had rather speak five words, etc. he thus notes.

In this business it is admirable how the custom of the Church is altered; St.
Paul had rather speak five words to be understood, then ten thousand [ in
spiratu] not to be understood. But now in some Countries they sing all day in
spirit ( i. e. so as none understands them) there is neither measure nor end of
singing, when as scarcely in 6. months a good Sermon is heard, persuading to
true piety (that St. Paul calls speaking in understanding) to say nothing, that
in the mean time a kind of Music is brought in too, to the worship of God,
that none can clearly understand any voice. Nor have they that sing any leisure
to attend to what they sing. Only a noise of voices strikes their ears, and
pleases them with a momentany delight. And this might be born, but that the
rout of Priests and Monks place all piety in this, wonderfully differing from
St. Paul; why does the Church doubt to follow so great an Author? yea, how dare
it dissent from him? what else is heard in Colleges, Monasteries, Churches,
but a roaring of voices? But in Paul's time there was no singing but
pronuntiation merely. Singing afterward was entertained, but such as was
nothing else but a tunable and distinct pronouncing of the words. Such as we
use in rehearsing the Lords prayer, and the common people too, understood the
Language used: now what does the common people understand but noises signifying
nothing? only a sound strikes their ears? And these things being first
received under a species or show of piety, by degrees came to that, that there
was neither end, nor measure of Psalms, Songs, Anthemes, Dirges, etc. that we
might see they made proficiency. And which is yet more grievous, Priests are
more strictly tied to these things then to the commands of Christ. To hear this
the people must be constrained to leave their labor, with which they must
maintain their wives and children (what can be more sacred?) Let Churches have
their solemn singings, but moderate. But we that are employed in private
affairs, must be also compelled to these things, and carry about a quire with
us in Ships, Coaches, etc. And from the observation of these, or the neglect of
them, we are judged godly, or ungodly. Let a man be a greater worldling then
Crassus, a greater reviler then Zoilus, yet is he accounted a devout man,
because he sings service well, although he understands nothing of it. I beseech
you what do these men think of Christ, who think he is pleased with such
roarings of voice? Nor are they content with this, but we have also brought
into Churches, a laborious, and theatrical music, a tumultuous prattling of
diverse voices, such a one as I think was never heard upon any stage amongst the
Graecians or Romans. All places roar with Trumpets, Pipes, Cornets, Dulcimers,
and with these men's voices are mixed; Love songs, and other filthy songs, (to
which whores and mimicks dance) are heard. People run to Church as to a stage
to tickle their ears; and for this use are bred Organists, and Choristers, and
maintained at great charge: children's age is spent in learning such prattling,
while in the mean time they learn nothing that good is. A rabble of sorbid and
light persons is bred, and the Church is loaded with the maintenance of them,
and that too for a pestilent employment. I beseech you, do but count how many
poor people ready to famish, might be maintained with the salaries of these
Singing-men? These things do so please them, that among the Britains
(especially) the Monks do nothing else. Those whose singing should be
mourning, think God is appeased with their lascivious neighings and moveable
throats. For this purpose also, boys, and striplings, and Artists in singing
are bred up amongst the Britains, for the nonce (forsooth) to sing a
fine-tuned Song, and so play a lesson on the Organs to the holy Virgin Mother.
And the Bishops are constrained at their houses to breed up and maintain such
Choristers, And [ the Monks] wholly taken up with these things, never
understand any learning, nor any thing in which true Religion consists. Now
those that have thick-pates, and cannot learn Music, think they do not do
their duty on an holy day, if they do not use a scurvy kind of singing, which
they call Jauburdum, that neither recites any thing prescribed, nor keeps any
harmony of Art. Add to this, that whereas sober Music was brought into the
Church, that the thing Sang might more affect the hearers mind, they think it a
brave thing, if one or other of them, can roar, or bellow so loud, that none
can hear a word. In this they indulge fools affections, and provide for their
own bellies, Why should these things only please us? which Paul would have
sparingly used (according to the fancy of little ones) yea, which St. Paul
would never have endured? he speaks of Sacred reading, not of
Stage-play-singing. Let us sing in the spirit, but let us sing Christian-like,
let us sing sparingly, rather let us sing with the heart, let us speak with
tongues, but seldom, let us prophecy more studiously. Let rather be heard the
voice of the Preacher, reproving the conscience, comforting the dejected,
quickening drousie souls, opening the Sacred Spirits mysteries, and let tender
age be rather spent in these things.

Thus far that learned man, though a professed Papist, concerning the
usefulness of our Cathedral Music and singing, after he had had a large
experiment of it.

XXIV. To shut up this Discourse, We say, That Music is an excellent Gift of
God, that God under the old dispensation of the New Covenant, appointed it to
be used in his worship, as prefigurative (says Aquinas, Willet, Zepperus) of
our making Melody in our hearts to the Lord under the Gospel, or of that sweet
peace of Conscience which flows to the Soul, upon the exercise of Faith in
Christ. Or rather, as one of those Carnal Ordinances, which the Apostle says
the first Temple had, Heb. 9. as they also had terrene and earthly Promises (as
Aquinas says.) In the time of Reformation by Christ, neither he nor his
Apostles used or appointed any; nor did the Primitive Church: Justin Martyr in
his time accounted it Judaizing, so did Aquinas, within these 500 years: So
that it is a perfect Innovation, without any pretense of Institution, or any
ancient Tradition, grossly abused to wantonness and Superstition. The
Magdeburgenses tell us, Ambrose was against all Music any where, pudicitia
gratia, because he saw it served for lust, for the most part. To maintain the
use of it, the Church revenue; were consumed, in nourishing singing Boys and
singing men, Choristers, Masters of Music, Organists, and many of these were,
and are prophine, beastly persons, and no profit at all arose from it, but the
peoples understanding confounded, with insignificant noises, and their ears
only tickled with air. People came to Church, says Erasmus, as to a
Stage Play, and went away (ordinarily) says Hospinian, as soon as the Music
(for which alone they came) was over. Infinite Sums of money were spent about
Organs. Zonaras tells us, that Michael, Emperor of Constantinople, made Organs
of Gold; and Bruschius in his Discourses of the Monasteries of Germany, tells us
of an Abbot that made a pair of Organs, whose greatest Pipe was 28 Foot long,
and 4 Spans about. Upon all these considerations, and after all this
experience, and the joint Suffrage of all Protestants, and many sober Papists,
in condemning this course, what shall we say, to hear a Protestant Bishop
pleading for them, and fastening such a charge as he does, upon all those that
would have them removed out of the Church? We can say nothing, but, The Lord
lay it not to his charge.

Chrastonius Polonus, in proxi de Cerem. and car. Missa thef. 41.42.
XXV. Andreus Chrastonius, a Polonian, (who is cited by Didoclavius in Alt.
Damasc. c. 8.) thus determines in this case; It ordinarily comes to pass, that
peoples ears (once accustomed to this Music) disdain to hear the Word of God,
and those things which the Church ought to have repeated with the mouth for a
testimony of her Faith, and for Edification, are committed to dumb and
irrational Organ-pipes. With the Mouth, not with Trumpets: etc. is Confession
made to salvation. Whence it is that Divines teach, that these things hinder,
not profit Priests according to the Order of Melchisedech. That they are more
fit for the Aaronical Order, the time it self shows, wherein they first began
to be used in Sacred Offices: For Bellarmine himself confesses, that they
first began to be used in the time of Pope Vitalian, but he brings no reason
why none of them were used either in the Apostles, or in Constantines time: For
if they began to be used after the year 660. or 820. we must believe, that
humane nature had a great wrong, in that for so many years it did not apply
this Faculty to the praise of God. For we believe the Apostles loved Christ
with all their hearts. The former and more religious ages had weak ones too,
though no Organs were used to help them. I know not whether they increase or
diminish tediousness: For men seldom see those Musical Masters godly, and those
Instruments with their length, are troublesome to such as sing with the voice.
Let the matter be as it will, I affirm, that Bellar* with his distinction of
Ceremonies, could not answer P. Martyrs reason against these. For as the
offering of bloody Sacrifices, though common both to the Jews and Heathens, was
taken away by Christ's Blood on the Cross, as unsuitable to the Priesthood after
the Order of Melchizedech; so though the Heathens used these Instruments in the
Solemnities of their Idols (as Nebuchadnezzar in the Dedication of his Image)
yet these were convenient only for the Jewish, Ceremonial worship, etc.

XXVI. But the truth is, all that can be pretended for Church-Musick, is the
Authority of the Church, to add what Ceremonies she pleases to the worship of
God; which we must speak something to in the next Chapter: Though neither can
Church-Musick come under that Notion, for it is a perfect Service of it self,
not always appendant to singing, and is so used, a perfect Post set up by Gods
Posts; an Ordinance of man's added to the Ordinances of God for his Worship,
which our souls shall desire to take heed of.

CHAP. XVI. The Bishops Reasons for the English Ceremonies, considered. The
Churches Power about Ceremonies, examined. No Principle to be maintained to
death. Archbishop Parkers Opinion of humane Ceremonies. Reasons against them.
I. WE are come to the last thing which we shall take notice of in the Bishops
Book; and that is his zealous Assertion of the Churches power in appointing
Ceremonies and Circumstances of Divine Worship: This is indeed the root of all,
the Pandora's Box, the very Fountain head of all those Impositions, which have
bred so much trouble, disturbance and persecutions in the Church of God. Let us
first see how the Bishop asserts it.

II. He tells us, That the last shock of popular envy which the innocent and
excellent Lyturgy of England was wont to bear, was from the Ceremonies. For
which, the sum of his Plea is this;

1. That they are few.

2. Retained as signal marks of Faith, or Humility, or Purity, or Courage, or
Constancy.

3. Not as Sacramental Signs conferring Grace, but merely as visible Tokens,
apt by a sensible sign to affect the understanding with something worthy of its
thoughts, as signified thereby.

4. St. Augustine was no enemy to them.

5. They are established by the Laws of Church and State.

6. They fall not under the Second, but the Third, Fourth and Fifth Command.

7. They are like Clothes, fitted to our Bodies, and Perwicks to our Head, and
Tunes to our Pslams.

8. They do not burden any Conscience.

9. It is most true, and undeniably to be maintained, even unto the death. That
this National Church, as well others, has from the Word of God Liberty, Power
and Authority, within its own Polity and Bounds to judge of what seems to it
most orderly and decent, as to any Ceremony or Circumstance in the Worship of
God, which the Lord has left unconfined, free, and indifferent in its own
nature, and only to be confined, or regulated, by every such Ecclesiastical
polity within it self, etc.

III. We must in our examination of this Harangue of discourse, crave leave to
alter his Lordships method, and to begin with the last thing first; for if the
Lord has left to the Church or State, no such power at large, or if it be
bounded by some general rules to be observed in the exercise, which are not
observed in some particular impositions, all the former pleas, that they are
few, signal marks, etc. not Sacramental sign, etc. come to just nothing. Yet we
cannot but observe, how the Bishop has provided a way to light upon his legs
(say what we will.) For it cannot be denied but the Church has a full power
from the Word of God, within its own polity and bounds, to judge of what
seems to it most orderly and decent, as to any circumstance in the worship of
God, which the Lord has left unconfined, free and indifferent in its own
nature. And only to be confined or regulated by every such Ecclesiastical
Polity within it self. i.e. The Lord has left that to be regulated by the
Church, which he has left to be regulated by the Church. A most momentous, and
undoubted truth! never denied by any. But that is not the question: This is the
question; Whether it be the will of God, that the Church should regulate and
determine, all things which the Word of God has left indifferent as to his
worship; or, whether God by leaving them indifferent, has not declared his
will that the Church should so leave them too?

IV. Yet were the first part determined affirmatively, it would not reach the
mark, for it would then be queried, Whether the particular Ceremonies appointed
for us, be such, considering the letter of the Scripture, or the circumstances
of those Ceremonies, with the reason, and consequents of Scripture Text, that
they (under those circumstances considered) can be looked upon as indifferent
yea or no.

V. The Bishop is yet confounding us with the complicated notion of the
Authority of the Church and State. In England there are no Ceremonies
established by any other authority then that of the State, which having called
together some Ecclesiastical persons, heard their advice, and by a Law
established some Rites and Ceremonies, to which no soul is otherwise obliged,
then to a State-constitution.

VI. That the Word of God has left many things (not possible to be determined
by it) to the Authority of the Christian Magistrate, cannot be denied; whether
any Ceremonies or no, is a question, diverse circumstances relating to the
worship of God, are undoubtedly so left. These are such as relate to order and
decency, i. e. without which the worship of God cannot be orderly and decently
performed, and do chiefly relate to time and place, (the ordinary adjuncts of
humane actions.) Thus we freely grant that the Civil power, or the Church
(orderly assembled) may determine, at what hours on the Lords day, the
Congregation shall meet, as also it shall determine particular times for
fasting or thanksgiving, as Gods providence shall administer occasions; that
places of public worship, shall be erected, frequented, kept decent, and an
hundred things of that nature, which even reason and nature it self teaches
all sober persons to be such, as that without some order to be observed in
them, the worship of God, either would not be performed, or would be undecently
performed.

VII. But that either any Church or Civil Authority, shall be absolute judges
of order, and decency, and that whatsoever of this nature shall be commanded by
them, shall therefore be judged decent, and orderly, because they say so; and
their commands shall oblige men's consciences in things of this nature, where
the word of God is silent, will want some proof before it be credited.

VIII. Or, that they have power, to command and impose such things, under the
notion of order and decency, which have been grossly abused to idolatry and
superstition, or at which pious people have for a long time declared themselves
scandalized, or which have any remarkable appearance of evil in them; is so
grossly false, that it needs no confutation, for they themselves are commanded,
To abstain from all appearance of evil, to give no offense either to Jew or
Gentile.

IX. Nor is it true, that they have any authority to appoint significative
Ceremonies, where are sensible signs to affect the understanding. This is to
give them authority to institute Sacraments, God has appointed us Ordinances,
where by sensible signs, spiritual mysteries are represented to us. These are
his Sacraments, we know no authority men have to add to them, though they avoid
the Popish rock, of their conferring grace, which we say no true Sacrament does
ex opere operato.

X. Now for any such Ceremonies as these, we crave leave to dissent from the
Bishop, let them be never so few, imposed under what specious pretense they
will, let who will be for them, and let them be established how they will, we
believe them reducible to no command, but certainly and justly burthensom to
any tender conscience. No vvayes like clothes fitted to our bodies, (because
not any way necessary) not like tunes for Pslams, because the worship of God
might be decently enough performed without them. They may for ought we know be
as good as perukes, [or periwigs] to make a specious show of devotion for them,
the baldness of whose hearts stands in need of such things to dissemble them to
the world.

XI. If the Bishop thinks that the Churches power to establish such Ceremonies,
be a principle to death to be asserted. We dare say he is the first Confessor
that Doctrine ever had, and (which God forbid) should he ever seal such a cause
with his blood, we should think he deserved no better Epitaph, then, Hic jacet,
Protomartyr Gregorianus, cui parem Ecclesia Christiana nunquam prius habuit,
nec posthac unquam habeat. Was there ever heard of any yet that died in the
defense of a Churches right to institute in the Church what it pleased, so as
it was such as Gods Word did not forbid? Tell it not in Gath, O publish it not
in the tent of Askelon.

XII. Let us hear Archbishop Parkers opinion in this case, he lived in darker
times, then ours are, but yet is seems had more Gospel Light, or a more Gospel
Spirit; he was consecrated 1559.

Having told us of Augustine the Monk's eagerness (even beyond his Mr. Pope
Grogories directions) to bring in the Romish Liturgy and Ceremonies in England,
which yet he could not do, Antiq. Ecclas. Britan. cap. 17.
(without the blood of 1200 Monks that opposed him.) He thus bewailes that
first Prelates fury.

And truly (says he) that contention then stirred up by Augustine, about
bringing in the Popish Ceremonies or Rites, which could not then be appeased,
without the blood and slaughter of many innocent Britains, has reached unto
our times, with the like destruction and slaughter of Christians. For when men
by those pompous Ceremonies departed from the pure simplicity of the primitive
Church, they took no great care for holiness of life, for the preaching of the
Gospel, for the comforts and efficacy of the holy Spirit, but they raised new
contentions every day, about new Ceremonies added by several Popes, who thought
none worthy of any great place, who did not bring in some new Ceremonious,
(that I may not say) monstrous, unheard of, and unusual thing, and so they
filled both Schools, and Pulpits with tales, and brablings: The primitive
Church was more simple, and white, with the entire and inward worship of God,
prescribed in his word; she was not splendid with garments, nor adorned with
magnificent buildings, nor shining with gold, silver, and precious stones. --
But the Romish Church, even in that great St. Augustines time, was so overgrown
with Ceremonies, that he complained, that the condition of Christians, in
respect of the multitude of Rites, and Ceremonies, was worse then that of the
Jews, who though they acknowledged not their time of liberty, yet were
subjected only to Rites appointed by Gods Law, not to humane presumptions, for
they used fewer Ceremonies, then the Christians in Gods worship. But had he
perceived what heaps were after added by several Popes, I believe that he,
who then saw the evil of them in the Church, would have set some Christian
bound to them. For we see that the Church is nor yet free from that contention
about Ceremonies; but men otherwise learned, and pious, contend and quarrel
about Vestments and such trifles, in a more brawling, and military, then
Philosophical, or Christian manner. This worthy person would hardly have died
in defense of a power to appoint Ceremonies.

XIII. But suppose it were not per se, unlawful for the State, or Church, to
appoint some mystical and significant Ceremonies: yet may all such things be
done without any regard at all to circumstances? St. Paul says, All things are
lawful for me, but all things are not expedient, all things are lawful, but all
things edify not. And we have heard such a maxim, as, Quicquid non expedit,
in quantum non expedit, non licet. Every thing that is not expedient, so far as
it is inexpedient, is unlawful. St. Paul determined the eating of flesh, and
many other things inexpedient, by reason of the offense, and the scandal those
things would have given, supposing any Ceremonies to have been used by
idolaters; and that the former use of them has proved a continual scandal to
many good Christians, and bred a continual division in the Church, and if
restored, that the scandal will be ten times greater then ever, and the
sufferings of innocent souls for nonconformity to them, an hundred times more
than ever: Quaeritis quomodo vincuntur Pagani^ descrite eorum ritus, etc.
are they yet lawful? or desirable? or is it worth the dying to maintain the
Churches power as to the establishing such Ceremonies? The Father of old we
know thought the best way to convert the heathens, was to have nothing to do
with their Rites, etc. And is not this the likeliest way to convince the Romish
idolaters? at least to keep our souls clear of their guilt?

XIV. It Is true; The number of Ceremonies retained in our Church, pretending to
any legal authority, is but small: The Surplis, the Cross, and kneeling at
Sacrament, are (we think) all; See more of this point about Ceremonies in
Altar Damascenum. A dispute about the English Popish Ceremonies. Dr. Ames his
fresh suit against Ceremonies, in all which this point about Ceremonies is
execellently handled.
but we know how grossly all these are abused by the Papists, that none of them
have any footing in Scripture; that kneeling as Sacrament was never heard of in
the Church till 1226. in Pope Honorius his time, admirably fitted to their
idolatry of Transubstantiation. That they grossly make the Cross an Idol. That
the Surplis is made significant of many things, for which we can see no ground
at all; that all these have been strenuously opposed, by as holy and learned
men as any our Church has bred: That the pattern of all Synods Acts 15. thought
fit to impose only some few necessary things for the state of the Church at
that time. That the urging of these Ceremonies, has been the cause of sad
separations, the loss of diverse learned and holy men's ministry: The offense of
the generality of pious people. That the employment of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, was almost wholly taken up about Ministers and people not conforming to
these, instead of admonishing, suspending, excommunicating, scandalous and
debaucht Ministers and people, etc.

XV. We know further, that though there be no more Ceremonies established by
Law as yet, yet there are many probationers, such as bowing at the Name of
Jesus, bowing to the Altar, saying second Service, (much like the Popish in
Secreto's, which the people must not hear) and what not almost? And we can see
no reason, but the Churches power, if allowed to appoint any (save only such
without which the Service of God, would apparently to all rational men, be
performed indecently and disorderly) may appoint hundreds.

XVI. Nor is it prudence (could such a power he allowed to State or Church) for
either of them in such cases, to do all that they may in strictness be proved
to have a power to do. Many men think that the State has power in any civil
things by Laws, to oblige the consciences of Subjects to do any things not
forbidden in Gods Word: and doubtless the States power, in such kind of Laws*
is far less disputable, then in the case of Ceremonies relating to the worship
of God. Yet the wisdom of all States, restrains them from enjoining people by
their Laws, to do such kind of things, for the doing of which, rational persons
may not see a just reason of the Law, as either urging some Law of God, or
tending to a manifest public, or private good. No State yet ever busied
themselves, or tied their Subjects by making Laws, to command all their
Subjects to wear Turbants, or a thousand such things, which would apparently
signify nothing of profit or advantage to the State, nor yet to particular
persons, it where the way to bring their authority into contempt.

XVII. We would fain know, of what use, or profit, any of these Ceremonies are,
we look upon them as things that perish with the using, and upon that account
by no means reasonable (if otherwise lawful) for the grave Authority of a
Church, or State to interpose in. And we hope God will thus far convince the
Authority under which we are, that they will not for these husks of Ceremonies,
destroy those many thousand Souls in England (who cannot conform to them) for
whom yet Christ died. And we are most humbly thankful to His most-Excellent
Majesty. for the indulgence, as to them, which he has granted to us, through
which, we can yet speak to our people that they may be saved: how long we shall
enjoy this breathing time; the only all-knowing God can tell. We are sensible
enough how much others envy it; we shall only say (as Calvin once of Luther)
We wish they would use their heat against the known enemies of God (such as are
drunkards, blasphemers, unclean persons, cursers, swearers, etc.) rather then
against the servants of the living God, who shall one day judge betwixt them
and us; and who (as it is very probable) would more approve that zeal, then
this fury.

A Postscript. Containing a Threefold Supplement to the former Discourses. The
first, relating to the Chapter about the Antiquity of Liturgies. The Second, to
the Argument about Idolatrous Usages. The Third, to the Argument concerning
scandalizing of Brethren.
I. THere is nothing in which those we have to deal with in these Points of
Liturgies, Ceremonies, Music in Churches, Suppl. 1.
etc. will pretend more advantage against us, than in the business of
Antiquity, nothing so much in their mouths, as all Antiquity, all the Fathers,
the Church of God in all ages, has been of their minds. Our Brethren know, or
may know, that the Writings of the Ancients, for 8 or 900 years, viz. from Pope
Gregory's time, till the Reformation, were in hands, by no means to be trusted,
and that the Papists, who (for the most part of the time) had them in their
keeping,, as they had opportunity, so they neglected not their time, to correct
the Fathers, to put in, and leave out what they pleased, to suppress what of
their Writings they pleased, and to publish Canons of Councils, and
Commentaries, Witness the Indices expurgatorii.
and other Writings under specious Names, without any shadow of Truth, or any
reasonable Modesty: So that it has been a great piece of the work of our
Reformed Divines, to look over the books with which the Popish writers in that
time had filled the world, and prepared in M.S. for it (which M. Scripts they
have since published in part, and what part yet remains who knows.) He is but
meanly versed in Divinity that knows not, that Bellarmine, Sixtus Senensis,
Possevinus and Erasmus (four Popish writers) have took some pains of this
nature, and how many hundred pieces of pretended Antiquity, not only Protestant
writers, but even the Papists themselves have been forced to disclaim and
reject. And how many more our learned Cocus, Rivet, Perkins, and others have
showed them as much reason to reject. Yet we cannot but observe, how some late
writers (as if nothing had been said to disprove those spurious writings have
(with confidence enough) urged those writings so rejected, as pure and
unspotted Authority; (witness Dr. Hamonds writings, and Dr. Sparrow in his
Rationale) and indeed all those who have traded in the business of Liturgies
and Ceremonies, and for the Extravagancies of Episcopal Government, etc. we
must confess, we have (upon this account) no great value, for any Arguments
they bring us merely from Antiquity, as to matters that concern the worship of
God, because we think the word of God is a perfect and sufficient rule in the
case, and we want Vouchers, to prove those pretended pieces of Antiquity, which
they produce to have been theirs, whose names they bear; therefore we cry to
the Law, and to the Testimony, we know that the Copies of the Bible, have (as
has been by many demonstrated) been by the wonderful providence of God
(dispersing them into so many hands) so preserved, that we dare trust them, and
believe that the Scriptures which we have, are indeed the writings of holy men
inspired by God, V. Geneb. Annot. in Liturg. Pet^i Hosii confessio Baronii.
annals. 1.1. ad an. 63.
but whose the Liturgies are, (called St. Peter's, St. James, St. Basils, St.
Chrysostomes, etc.) we cannot tell, besides that (as we said before) there is
enough in them, to show they were none of theirs, who are made to father them,
even the Papists themselves being in a great measure Judges.

II. Yet as in matter of Doctrine (which our Protestant Divines have well
urged) in those abused writings of the ancients which we have, the Popish
Correctors have (unwarily) left something (and such a something as some of our
Protestant writers have judged enough) to evince many of their Doctrines
Novelties. So as to the business of Liturgies and Ceremonies, some things have
escaped their nimble eyes. Jos. Vicecomes pretends high for Liturgies, so does
Saints, Pamelius, Almarius, etc. and much for Ceremonies; but in Justin
Martyr, and Tertullian, there is enough said (which because mentioned by others
we spare to repeat) to prove the Church then was not limited to any forms of
prayer: but there is a remarkable passage in Socrates the Ecclesiastical
Historian (who lived about the year 430.) to prove there were no Liturgies in
his time. Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
-- -- (...). We cannot but wonder with what confidence any can tell us
Liturgies were from the first Centuries, when we have so clear a testimony in
the fifth Century, that amongst all Christians in that age hardly two were to
be found, that used the same words in prayer. That Chapter of Socrates is well
worthy the reading over, by which some Divines of our times, may see that as
there was then no such Uniformity of Worship and Ceremonies as is now contended
for; so neither had Socrates, such a reverend opinion, of those that were so
zealous to bring in Ceremonies, but looked upon it as a Judaizing humor in
them, without any Justifiable ground from the word of God. The Chapter is too
long, and the passages too many to transcribe, the Reader may satisfy himself
by perusal of it.

III. Having the advantage of this Supplement, Suppl. 2.
we shall crave leave of our Readers to add some few things, to advantage our
Argument against the Common Prayer Books, (ordinarily obtruded upon us,) from
what we have said before; That we find in them a mode of Worship and Forms,
which has been formerly used in idolatrous services: upon which account we are
much inclined to think it not lawful for us to use them in the service of God,
especially considering what we have said before, (from the Apostle) The Earth
is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. We may easily use other words.

We would hope, that many of our Brethren, who are zealous for Liturgies, do
believe, that the worship of the Church of Rome, is Idolatrous, and has been
so ever since the practice of praying to Saints and Angels; praying before
Images; the worshipping of Crosses and Relics, and the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation came up amongst them. If any be otherwise minded, we have
nothing to do with them, but only to commend them to that learned Treatise of
Dr. Reinolds, De Idololatria Ecclesia Romana; and the many Tracts, and pieces
of tractates wrote by Protestant Divines to prove this charge.

IV. We remember what Tertullian says, Principale crimen generis humani,
summus saeculi reatus; tota causa judicii Idololatria: Tertull. l. do idol.
cap. 1.
Of all sins, none so horrid as that of Idolatry: This is sufficiently asserted
in Scripture, and proved by Tertullian and others. Tertul. proves the idolater
a murderer, an adulterer a thief, etc. And certainly if Christians be bound to
abstain from all appearance of evil, they are much more obliged to take heed of
any thing that has the least appearance of this evil, or affinity to it.

V. That Idolatry is not only committed, by worshipping the creature
terminatively (which was an idolatry we believe very few were ever guilty of,)
but also, by the offering up any homage proper and due unto God only, Non est
auditum a soeculis, quod quit arcam vocaret Deum suum, vel ollam, vel pixidem:
Gul. Paris de leg. c. 26.
before any creature, as the medium, or as representative of God, is so
eminently proved by the instances of the Jews worshipping the golden Calf (who
yet proclaimed the feast to Jehovah) which the Apostle calls Idolatry 1 Cor.
10. By Jeroboams, and Michals idolatry, and diverse others, that it is not a
point now to be disputed, being granted by all sober Protestants. But besides
these two ways, there are others also by which we may be guilty of the sin of
Idolatry, or a Jews Idololatriae, as Tertullian speaks, accessory, if not
principals. The Apostle 1 Cor. 10. plainly determines, that to eat of meat
offered to idols (in the idols temple) was to have a fellowship with devils.

VI. Gods Eminent hatred of idolatry, was seen by diverse severe prohibitions
to his people, forbidding any fellowship with idolaters, or imitation of their
actions, or to follow their modes, and methods of worship; or to use such names
as they used to call their idols by in their speaking to God. 1. For civil
usages, Lev. 19.19. Lev. 19.19.17, 28.
Thou shall not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind; thou shall not sow
thy field with mingled seed; neither shall a garment of linen and woollen come
upon on thee. V. 27. You shall not round the corners of your heads; neither
shall thou mar the corners of thy beard, 28. you shall not make any cuttings
in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you. To this head may also
be referred the law against woman's wearing man's apparel; Gul. Paris ibid. cap.
12.
or the man wearing a woman's apparel. All these says Gul. Paris were to avoid
the imitation of Idolaters. The first (says he) was sugillatio culturae sen
idolatrae Veneris and Priapi. The garment mingled of linen and wool was
forbidden them (says he) because the Egyptian Priests did use such, Aquinas,
Liranus, Tostatus, Hugo, etc. give the same reason. Herodotus tells us, that
the Arabians were wont to shave their hair, and to cut the corners of their
beards, to bring their hair into a round figure. (which the Prophet Jeremy
confirms, describing them under the notion of such as had the corners of their
hair polled, Jer. 9.26. and again 49.32. (see the Margent in our English
Bibles.) The Syrians, Egyptians, and Arabians, were wont to pull off their
hairs to make baldnes betwixt their eyes, to make prints and marks in their
flesh, in mourning for the dead; God forbids them to his people, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
Lev. 19.28. The Hebr. Doctors give this reason for this command, as may be seen
in their 61. Neg. praec. as also 62.63. Lucian, Plutarch, Kirshmannus,
Annobius, Eusebius, Cicero, Pliny; with many more, tell us strange stories of
the heathens usages of this nature. All which God forbad his people, (as Gul.
Parisiensis well notes) to root out all the mention of idolatry from amongst
them, and to restrain them from any manner of conformity to the manners of
idolaters. Upon which account also mutual marriages were expressly forbidden
betwixt the Jews and any idolatrous Nations.

2. In a further detestation of this sin, Note, that both in 2 Hos. 15.16. and
in Zech. 13.2. two texts plainly relating to the times of the Gospel, God
forbids all mention of Idolatry, and declares his will that it should not be so
much as remembered. Now we cannot see how we should obey those precepts, in
keeping their very Rites, Modes, and Methods, of worship.
and for a further caution, God says Hos. 2.16, 17. Thou shall call me no more
Baali, thou shall call me Ishi; for I will take away the names of Baalim out of
thy mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by that name. Where we note,
that God would not allow (especially in his worship) that his people should use
a Name to him, (how good, and proper soever) which had been used in an
idolatrous service. Tarnovius and Rivet both observe that the name Baali was
not only proper enough, (signifying My Lord) but also had formerly had a
sacred use; God himself using it of himself, Is. 54.5. but it having been
afterward defiled by an Emphatical use, in an Idolatrous service; God abhors
it, and will no more be called by it. This sense St. Hierom of old gave of the
Text; and Ballester the Jesuit in his Onomatographia agrees in it. Lyranus
indeed follows R. Solomon Jarchi in another interpretation, making Baali Nomen
timoni, Ishi Nomen amoni.

But as (amongst the Heb. Dectors, Kimchi and Aben Ezra interpret it more
rightly, viz. That the reason why Baali was forbidden, was, because it was the
Name of an Idol; so the Caldee Paraphrast agrees in that sense; V. Caeld
paraph. in 2 Hos.
and Ribera (though a Jesuit) is full in it, and concludes, that Bahal and
Ishi signify the same thing, (...) (whence possibly that phrase in John 3. He
that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom) and that the sense of the Text, is
this, Seeing the Word Ishi and Baali signify the same thing, yet I so hate the
Names of Idols, that I will not have that spoken which might be well spoken, in
regard of the ambiguity and similitude of the word. Ribera makes St. Hierom his
Author, Ribera in 2 Hos. 16.
with whom also Cocceius agrees in these terms, -- Ne dum aliud loquitur,
alterius recordetur. least men speaking to God, should think of Idols. In this
sense also agrees Cyril Alexandrinus (or whoever he was who is the Author of
those Commentaries, which go under his Name, upon the Small Prophets, Printed,
Gr. Lat. Ingolstadii, 1607.) To this agrees the Learned Rivet, Zanchy, Daneus,
Sanctius, Polanus, in short, almost all creditable Authors. Let us only add
some of Zanchies and Rivets Notes, upon the Text, not impertinent to our
purpose.

Zanchius in Hos.
God declares here (says Zanchy) that the Israelites (having put all
superstitions out of their Temples, yea out of their mouths and minds) should
be content with one God alone, and with his pure Word. And accordingly he
teaches us, that a true Reformation is not in those places, nor a true Worship
or Religion there, where ANY Relics of false Religion do remain: For all the
Footsteps of Superstition must be taken away, not only out of Churches, but out
of our mouths and memories, that no door may be left open to former Idolatry:
For the very remembrance of False Worship, has an influence upon men, to
incite them to it again. We must therefore let nothing of the Popish Worship
remain, unless we would have it all in again.

Rivetus in Hos.
The Learned Rivet in his Corollaries from this Scripture, makes this for one;
That there are many Names which in themselves are good enough, and might be
used, but God abhors the use of them, because they have been abused to
Idolatry. He instanceth in the word Mass, applied to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, (to which may be added Priest and Altar) Then he infers thus.

Hence we may judge, how prudently some of the Ancients did to use the names of
Old Superstition, in opening the Sacred Services of Christians: whence arose
another superstition, and the purity of Divine worship was vitiated. And there
is reason to fear, Ibid.
least the same thing should happen in those Churches, in which (though they
pretend a Reformation) yet the very words, Ceremonies and Rites of the Papists
are preserved. -- That the restoration of Divine worship may please God, and
be proved to come from him as the author of it, it must be perfect. Let no
relics of that worship, which God rejects remain. Let them therefore who
yet keep Images in their Churches, and defend them, and other Relics of false
Religion, consider, whether they can say, that the names of Baalim are taken
away amongst them: but enough is spoken to prove our second observation.

3. But thirdly, God more expressly forbad his people, any usages in his
worship, which were used in idolatrous services. To this purpose was that
Precept, Exodus 20.26. and that v. 24. in which God forbad the people of Israel,
to go up by steps unto his altar; or to make an altar of hewn Stone. Both (as
Lyranus, Lippomannus, and many others agree,) That they might not be like
idolaters; Those filthy beasts that worshipped Priapus, were wont so to ascend
by steps. And the heathens much fancied an August Pompous serving of their
gods, and therefore made their Altars of hewn stone. God would have his Altar
of Earth, or rough stones, to let them see he regarded not that pompous
splendour, but abominated these things which were borrowed from Idolaters. We do
not understand why it is reckoned as the sin of those, Ezech. 8.16. that they
worshipped with their faces toward the East, (which was unlawful to the
Israelites) save only that the Heathens so worshipped their idols; (which
perhaps was the reason why the temple stood another way) we are sure Aquinas
assigns this as a reason, why (as he says) the Jews worshipped Westward. Aqu.
12. ae q. 12 art. 4. ad 5.
The same was the reason against Groves near Gods Altar, Deuteronomy. 16.22. Such had
the Heathens Ex. 34.13. It was laid to the Israelites charge, 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
that they made priests like the Nations: and it was Ahaz his great sin, 2 Chronicles. 16.11. that he must have his Altar like that of Damascus. There are that
think, that it was a piece of Uzzah's guilt, (for which God smote him with
death,) that he carried the Ark upon a new Cart, (as the Idolatrous Philistines
had done before) we are not ignorant that he failed in other points of order
too. But we shall shut up this with two remarkable Texts, the one Levit. 18.3.
After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein you dwelt, shall you not do, and
after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, you shall not do,
neither shall you walk in their Ordinances, you shall do my judgments, and
keep my Ordinances, and walk in them, I am the Lord your God, you shall
therefore keep my Statutes, and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live
in them.

The second Text (yet more remarkable) is that Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30. etc. When the
Lord thy God shall cut off the Nations from before thee, whither thou go to
possess them; and thou succeedest them, and dwell in their land, take heed
to thy self, that thou be not snared, by following them, after that they be
destroyed before thee, and that thou enquire not after their Gods, saying, How
did these nations serve their Gods. Even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not
do so unto the Lord thy God. -- What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Upon the first Text the
learned Dr. Willet (who surely was no Fanatique, no not in the Irish djalect,
but though he had not the honor to be a Father, may pass for a Son of the
Church) observes, That by the two Nations Egypt and Canaan, all other Nations
were understood, whose corrupt manners they were to decline, Jer. 10.2. By the
latter Text certainly in general, all humane inventions in the worship of God,
are forbidden, and more particularly, the imitation of Idolaters in their
Modes, and Methods of worship. Considering the force of all which Texts, Bish.
Andrews.
our hair almost stands right up, to read a late Prelates book (if it be his)
about Ceremonies, where with a variety of Learning he shows our Ceremonies,
are borrowed partly from the Idolatrous heathen, partly from the Idolatrous
Papists, and yet he justifies the use of them, yea could almost justify the
reduction of a great part of the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, so long since
abolished.

VII. We are the more startled at it to consider the zeal of the Ancients,
(whom when our brethren please, or rather when they are pleased by what they
find in them, they use so much to adore) in this great and momentous case.
Tertull. de Idololat. lib.
Tertullian in his admirable Book de Idololatria, charge very many
Symbolizing with Idolaters, it will not be amiss to give the Reader his heads.

1. Such as made Statues and Images, (though it were their trade) he tells
these poor tradesmen, That they sacrificed their wit, their sweat, their
labor, their art, to the Idol. Illis ingenium tuum immolas, Cap. 6.
illis sudorem tuum libas, illis prudentiam tuam accendis, plus es illis quam
sacerdos, quum per te habeant sacerdotem. He brings under this guilt, all kind
of Mechanics employed about building, or adorning Idol-temples, etc. or the
making up, or adorning the Idols.

Cap. 9.
2. His second sort are Astrologers, whom he proves deeply guilty.

Cap. 10.
3. His third sort are Schoolmasters, he says these are assines multimodae
Idololatriae, a kin to Idolatry, in naming the names of Idols, and making
honorable mention of them in their Orations, etc. Polanus on 2 Hos. also
touches this as not savouring enough of Christianity. Tertullian says, Hinc
prima diabolo fides edificatur ab initiis eruditionis.

4. A fourth sort he instanceth in, Cap. 14.
are those that keep Holy Days dedicated to Idolatrous service, where he
complains of the Christians in his time that kept Saturnalia, Januarias,
Brumas, Matronales, the Pagan Holy Days, (in stead of Saturnalia, is our
Christmas at the very same time of the year) here he cries our, O melior fides
Nationum in suam sectam! The Heathens (says he) will not keep our Sabbath Day,
nor our Pentecost, but we must keep their Festivals. How much more true to
their Religion are they, then we to ours?

In the next place he brings them under the guilt of Symbolizing with
Idolaters, who adorned their gates, and posts, and houses, Cap. 5.
after the Pagan manner at Festivals, (as we do at Christmas) with Laurel, Ivy,
etc. One would think this were an innocent usage, yet how vehemently does that
good man inveigh against it? Accendat igitur quotidie lucernas quibus lux nulla
est, adfigant postibus lauros postea arsuras quibus ignes immanent, and
testimonia tenebrarum and auspicia poenarum. Tu, lumen es mundi, and arbor
viceris semper. Si templum renunciasti ne facias templum januam tuam. Minus
dixi, si lupanaribus renunciasti, ne indueris fa^iem domi tuae, novi lupanaris.

We need proceed no further, what would this good man have said to our
Candlemas services, to our Christmas Ivyes and Bays, etc. nay to an hundred
things of higher consequence then these are? Nor do we find this primitive zeal
against appearances of Idolatry, in single persons only, but also in Councels.
v. Council. Antisrod. can. 1 Council Tolet. 4. can. 10. with diverse other Canons
made against the Calends of January, (which with us is turned to New-years-day)
Council. Tolet. would not suffer Allelujah be sang that day, because it was a
Pagan Holy Day. Other Councels for the same reason forbad Green-boughs, and
Laurels in adorning houses. St. Austin forbad Christians to fast on the Lords
day, because the Manichees did so. Ep. 86. Gul. Parisiensis says, L. de leg.
the Church would not allow fasting on Fridays, because the Turks use it. In
short Aquinas, Suarez, Bellarmine, Parisiensis, are all zealous, for avoiding
all usages of idolaters, which were not necessary. Augustine de verbis Domini
Ser. 6. calls to Christians to leave all the rites, all the solemnities of the
Pagans, and thinks this the best way to convert them. And why should such care
be used as to Heathens, but because their services were Idolatrous, they
Idolaters? We are at loss to know wherein they were greater Idolaters then the
Papists. Parisiensis says right, none of the learned of them were ever so mad
as to worship a piece of wood; yet the Papists worship a piece of bread. The
Rabbis of the Heathen were doubtless (as we said before) of Plato's mind, that
God was (they knew not well what) the Soul of the World; or of the same mind
that Trismegistus, one of their great Philosophers was, that there were certain
Spirits, which they called Gods, which came and took possession of those
Statues, when they had made them; and they only made their Statues for thrones
(as it were) for their Gods, and supposed representations, or some things to
put them in mind of God.

VIII. Now considering this we hope (how uncharitable soever the Bishop of
Exeter judges of us in our abstaining from the use of the Common Prayer Book
ordinarily sold) God will judge otherwise, and so will the generality of sober
Christians. Let his Lordship speak out, Is the Church of Rome Idolatrous yea or
no? Is her worship so in the whole complex yea or not? If he says no, he flies
in the face of all Protestant writers. If he says it is, we proceed further
with him. Is that mode or method of worship prescribed in the books of
Common Prayer, ordinarily to be sold, (as to the far greater part) the same,
which was formerly used, and is to this day used (though in another Language)
by those Idolaters? If he says no, let any one diligently compare the Collects,
Letany, etc. with the four books before mentioned, and judge whether he speaks
truth or no: If he says it is, we ask him again, Is that Service Book,
necessary to the worship of God, either by a Divine Law, or by any necessity of
nature? If he says that it is, he will need none to confute him: If he says
it is not, only a comman^d by the Church, or by the Laws of the Land; we desire
to know of him, whether the use of such things as are not necessary, ought to
be retained, when they have been once abused to Idolatry? If it were clear to
us, that the Laws of the Land did command the use of the Service Book
(ordinarily sold) under a penalty, we should take our selves bound with
patience to suffer the penalty, but (considering the premises) we could never
do the thing. But that does not yet appear to us, how soon it may, we know not,
The will of the Lord be done. Only because our Adversaries have such a delight
to whisper us into suspicions of disaffection, and disloyalty, moroseness,
perverseness, peevishness, faction; let us from the premises argue with them a
little for our selves.

IX. Can you think it lawful to use modes of worship (abused to Idolatrous
services) when God would not allow his ancient people, a civil usage, which was
peculiar to the idolatrous nations? was it unlawful for them, because the
Egytian Priests wore garments mixed of linen and woollen, to put any such on
their backs? And is it lawful for us to put on Vestments (only to be used in
the worship of God) which are confessed to have been after the manner both of
the Pagan and Romish Idolaters? See Bishop Andrews on Ceremonies. p. 52.
Might not they suffer their cattle to gender with diverse kinds, nor sow their
grounds with diverse sorts of seed, because the heathen did it? and may we in
our worship of God, serve him with diverse sorts of Ceremonies, and modes and
methods of worship, some borrowed from Pagans, some from Papists? (as Bishop
Andrews confesses and proves) though some others of a more innocent extract be
mingled with them? Might not they round their herds, because the Arabians did
so (who were Idolaters) nor make prints and marks in their flesh? because the
Heathens did so. And may we, in the worship of God, use those very postures,
figures, forms, actions, which Gods word no where requires, nor are practiced
in any other Church, but in a Synagogue of Idolaters? Would not God suffer his
people to call him Baali, (though the name be of an honest and proper
signification, and such a name as himself sometimes called himself by) when
once it was abused to Idolatry, but must the people after that call him Ishi
not Baali? And can we speak unto God in prayer, in the same forms of words,
phrases, etc. which Idolaters have profaned, and judge our selves innocent?
Might not the Jews go up by steps to Gods Altar, because the Heathen did so?
Nor make God an Altar of Stone, but of Earth, because the Idolatrous Heathen,
went up by steps to the Altars of their Gods; and made their Idols Pompous
Altars. And may we do those things while they are done by Idolatrous Papists?
Was it a guilt in Ahaz, that he would have an Altar like that of Damascus; and
shall it be no guilt to us, that we must have a mode of worship, as near that
of an Idolatrous Synagogue, as may be? Were the Jews commanded not so much as
to enquire how the Idolatrous Heathens worshipped their Gods: or to say, we
will go and do likewise. Nay were they strictly forbidden to do it, and as to
the worship of God commanded to keep strictly to the command of God, not adding
thereto, not diminishing there from; and shall it be our practice to say, We
will go and do just what the Papists do, and come as near to them as we can?
such workings as these we find in our hearts.

X. When we hear some telling of us, these were Ceremonial and Jud^cial Laws
not obliging us Christians. Others, That it is true, we ought not to choose
these things, but being commanded we ought to do and use them. And others
again, That although the Popish Idolaters, do or did use these forms, and
rites, yet these things were not Idolatrous, nor were the Papists the first
that used them, for they were used by the purer Church, (they know not when nor
where) And others, That we must not reject all words, phrases, rites, and
actions, which idolaters have used, spoke or done, and would with these things
relieve our selves.

XI. We find our consciences thus ex tempore replying, Are then the Laws of God
restraining conformity with Idolaters Ceremonial? what was there in them
typical, or carnal? The typical services, and carnal ordinances of the
Ceremonial Law, are abolished; but do these commands relate to them? There were
also diverse particular Judicial Laws, which the wisdom of God thought fit for
the Jewish polity, which in particulari do oblige no other. But does not the
equity of the Judicial Law oblige? was not the end of these Laws to bear
witness against idolatry; and that Gods people by no communion with Idolaters,
by no apish imitation of them, should defile themselves, or provoke him, or
grow again in love with them? Does not God hate Idolatry now as much as then?
is his jealousy abated? or has he since parted with his glory to graven
Images? What means the Apostle then 1 Cor. 10. in cautioning the Corinthians to
flee from Idolatry, and to take heed of eating of the Love-feast in the Idols
Temple? Are they not Gospel Times which God speaks of Hos. 2.16. when his
people should not call him Baali but Ishi? nor remember the names of Idols? and
which he speaks of Zech. 13.3.

XII. If we would relieve our selves by the command of Magistrates interposing;
besides that we can find no such thing, (and pray that we never may) Our
consciences tell us, that if after these Laws Moses had commanded the
Israelites to make round their beards, or to wear garments of linen or
woollen, or women to wear men's apparel, etc. His command could not have
justified the Israelites practice. We freely allow Magistrates, all just
Authority, but not to command people to do what the Lord has forbidden them.

XIII. When we are told, that though Idolaters used these Rites, Modes, etc.
yet these Rites and Forms were not Idolatrous, and that we hear they were used
by Christians, before there was any Popish Idolatry in the world, and that we
must not throw away all things, and abominate all Actions, Rites, Ceremonies,
which Idolaters have abused. Our consciences presently tell us, That there was
no Idolatry in the cutting of a beard, nor in sowing ground with mingled seed,
nor in an Altar of hewn stone, nor in a linsey-woolsey garment; nor in the
name Baali, nor in the Corinthians meat.

2. That though some have talked that these Rites and Modes' were used before
any Popery was in the world, yet none have proved it, or if they were, yet
they are not commanded by God, and might be borrowed from the Pagan Idolaters,
(as Bishop Andrews proves they were) That the name Baali was used lawfully,
and yet might not be used, when it had been abused in idolatrous service.

3. Our consciences further say, That things of necessary use, (whether the
necessity arose from Nature, or from a Divine Law) ought to be retained, though
abused to Idolatry. (the question is not about them) They only tell us, that
it is sin to us to use Modes, Forms, Methods of Divine Worship, which Idolaters
have used, there being no such necessity of them, either from Nature, or any
divine precept; and such Rites, Gestures, Ceremonies, as are not commanded from
the Law of Nature, nor from any Divine Laws, but have been used by Idolaters,
and distinguished their superstitious worshippings of God, from the worship of
the true Churches of Christ.

XIV. In fine. We dread the sin of Idolatry; it is the principale peccatum
Generis humani (says Tertullian) we dread any kind of conformity (not
necessary) to Idolaters; In any distinctive usages, or in modes of worship.
We believe the Papists such. And we cannot but judge, that if we should in
our worshipping of God conform to their Modes, and Forms, and Rites, we
should be more guilty of sin, then those Mechanics, that make Statues, Images,
Crucifixes, Agnus Dei, for them; (all whom yet Tertullian would have
concluded guilty.) And we cannot but admire, that any who pretend to reverence
the Fathers, to take their dictates, should think light of this Argument: what
would Tertullian have said to this? who would not endure Bays and Ivy at
Christians gates; and who determines all arts, professions, trades, which are
exercised, in making any Statues, Images, Idols, or any things for their use
and service to be (upon this, account) account) defiled. We judge not others
in this thing, let not them judge us; we shall conclude this with that
forementioned passage of Tertullian. -- O melior sides Nationum in sectam suam!
quae nullam solennitatem Christiano um sibi vendicat, nor Dominicum diem, non
Pentecosten; etiamsi nossent nossent nobiscum non communicassent, timerent
enim, ne Christiani viderentur. Nos ne Ethnici pronunciemur non veremur. Let
the Reader for Nationum and Ethnici, put in Pontisiciorum and Pontificii, and
for Christiani, Protestants, and see what sense it will make; we are
assured, the Papists would be more true to their Religion, then to borrow from
us Rites, Vestments, Modes, or Forms of Worship, or any thing of that Nature.
But enough is said upon this theme.

Suppl. 3.
We remember, that in plea for ourselves, as to our forbearance of using the
Common Prayer Books, we urged the scandal, which we are assured, that our
using of it would give to tender conscientious Christians. We are not ignorant
how much this plea is derided by some, and therefore shall take a little
further liberty here to make it good:

1. We cannot without some trembling weight those many Scriptures, by which
God has secured both the lives and souls of our brethren from our injuries.
Upon this account it was that the Israelites were not to build an house
without battlements, Deuteronomy. 22. Nor to leave a pit uncovered, Exodus 21.33. Nor
to put a stumbling stone before the blind, Levit. 19.14. And as in reason the
soul is more precious then the body, so the wise God has proportionably
forbidden us to do any things (in their own nature indifferent) by which the
souls of our brethren may be endangered by sinning against God. This is the
main business of a Christian; of more value by far, then the asserting of his
own liberty, Romans 14.13. He must judge this rather that no man lay o stumbling
block, or offense before his brother. No man must seek his own, but the good of
others, 1 Cor. 10.24. We must give no offense, etc. ibid. Our liberty must not
be used to the scandal of the weak, 1 Cor. 8.9. If our brother be offended, or
grieved with our meat, we do not walk charitably, we must not destroy him with
our meat, for whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. we must not for our meat destroy
the work of God. v. 20. It is a good thing, neither to eat flesh, nor to do any
thing at which our brother should stumble, or be offended, or made weak. Saint
Paul 1 Cor. 8.13. resolved never to eat flesh while he lived, rather then to
offend his weak brother.

2. We are not ignorant what is said to take off the edge of this Argument; we
are told first, That these precepts only concern us, where the command of our
Superiors, does not make the thing necessary. 2. That diverse are scandalized,
because of our not conforming. 3. That all our liberty will be taken away, if
we hearken to our peoples humors; there being nothing we can wear or do, at
which some or other will not take offense.

3. But we would (as to the first thing) gladly know, whether those precepts of
the Apostle, be not reducible to the Moral Law? and whether the Magistrate be
not as much obliged not to command things indifferent, where such a scandal
will arise, as the inferior not to do them? We suppose that our Brethren will
not say, that the Magistrates command, can justify any soul in violating the
express Law of God. And as they themselves would not interpret the Law of God
thus, Thou shall not steal, i. e. except thy Superior command thee; or, Thou
shall not commit adultery, i. e. unless thou beast commanded: so they must
pardon us if we cannot so interpret the Law of God in the case of Scandal. We
humbly conceive that the Magistrate himself is by the Law of God restrained
from commanding any thing by which weak Christians may be stumbled, offended,
or made weak.

4. The true notion of a scandalous action, (in the sense we are now speaking
to it) is, Any action done by us (not being required by the divine Law) by
which our brother, (whether from the nature and condition of the thing done, or
the intention of him that does it, or both) is made to sin against God: It is
true, there are a generation of men whom the doing of our duty will make to
blaspheme; but our duty does not ex condition operis, lay any such stumbling
block before them. This is what Aquinas calls Scandalum Pharisaeorum, which our
Savior has taught us to contemn. But to make a true Scandal, that which we
do must be of that nature, as may give a cause of stumbling to our brethren;
and this cannot be otherwise then in our ill use of our liberty, as to things
of their own nature indifferent, but not appearing so unto all. For if the
thing done by us, appear to our brethren a thing indifferent, there can be no
Scandal. It is but a teachy humor in any to be offended at us, for any thing
which they grant we may lawfully do; nor can the^ by our practice in such
things be possibly made to sin ex condition operis. But where a thing appears
to us in its own nature indifferent to be done, or not to be done, and does not
appear so to other conscientious Christians, (which was the case amongst the
Christians at Rome and Corinth) here we conceive our selves obliged to restrain
our own liberty out of charity to our Brethrens souls. And as we conceive it
our duty in practice to do so, so we conceive it the duty of Superiors to
restrain their (supposed) liberty in commanding; the reason is because the
liberty of a Magistrate, or a private Christian, is of far less value, then a
soul for which Christ died.

5. Now our Brethren may be made to sin by our practice in such things, many
ways, 1. When our action causes them to vilify, censure, and condemn us, and
to withdraw themselves from communion with us. 2. When our example draws on
them to do the like, while their conscience is not satisfied, which is the very
case mentioned, 1 Cor. 8.10. It Is their sin to do it, ( not fully persuaded in
their own mind) it is our sin buy our example to entice them to it. Take heed
least by any means that liberty of yours, becomes a stumbling block to them
that are weak; for if any man see thee, who have knowledge, fit at meat, in the
Idols temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak, be emboldned to
eat those things which are offered to Idols? This is plainly our case.
Supporting that we were fully satisfied, that it were lawful for us to use an
imposed form, and that it were no restraining in us the gifts of the holy
Spirit, no prejudice to our intention of mind, nor to the fervency of our
affection, not to the affections of such as hear us, nor any yielding of that
liberty, (as to the worshipping of God) with which Christ has made us free,
not any addition to the rule of worship, which God has set us in his Word, and
that (notwithstanding it be confessed that these or those Modes, Forms and
Methods, have been used by Idolaters) yet we may lawfully enough use them; yet
we plainly see that they are so abhorred of many conscientious Christians, that
as those who have returned to the use of them, have almost ruined their
ministry, by making themselves the scorn of some, and the grief of others; so
should we do the like, some would for it vilify and censute us, and condemn
us, and separate from communion with us. Now suppose this would be their sin,
yet the thing being (suppose) in its own nature indifferent, we have learned
our of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.12. That when we sin against our brethren, and
wound their weak consciences, we sin against Christ. And far be it from us to
gratify men by sinning against Christ.

6. Again, whereas the Bishop of Exeter supposes, That our example would do
much to bring over our people, to hear, etc. We do ingenuously profess, that we
believe it would prevail with some; who would at the present, seeing us (who
they think have knowledge) use those Modes of Worship, (though with some
reluctance) be imboldned in their consciences, to come and hear, ('it is no more
than the Apostle supposes 1 Cor. 8.10.) but as they in doing of it should sin,
so we by setting them an example, should directly act against the Apostles
precepts, and lay stumbling blocks before them; and when they have done it, the
temper may Triumph over them, and we be found too weak to relieve their
consciences, telling them, That to follow us they have sinned against their
light, and the rebukes of their own consciences.

7. Besides, though it be apparent that those Scriptures which mention the
precepts against scandal, 1 Cor. 8.11.10 Romans 14.20. and v. 15.
take notice of weak brethren only, such for whom Christ died, such in whom is
some work of God, which we must not destroy. And indeed in reason, these are
chiefly to be considered. For the end of the precept is to save the hazard of
the soul of our Brethren, by sin; now there are a generation in the world,
whose constant course is a course of presumptuous sinning, they drink, they
swear, they curse, they blaspheme, they wallow in beastly lusts, they will not
be stopped in a full carreare for hell, (whose offense we are not so concerned
to reg^d) yet even to the vvorst of men, we conceive our selves so far obliged
by the Law of Charity, as nor vvillfully, by our example to harden them in sin,
and make them justify themselves. We are fully convinced, that there is
nothing of more tendency to confirm the Papists in their way of worship,
(which we believe Idolatrous) then for them to see us keep much the same; nor
are we alone in this opinion; Tertullian of old, and after him Augustine, were
both of the same mind: Tertullian forbids Christians any of the Ragan usages,
or coming nigh to any of their devotions, that if they would not be ashamed of
their superstitions, they might yet be ashamed of the thin company that
attended them. Augustine cries out, Quaeritis quomodo vincantur Pagani,
deserite eorum ritut. We know how much some Papist-forreigners have triumphed,
listening at the doors of some places where they have heard Service, read and
sung, crying out, this is the same with theirs. And not to insist upon the
Papists only, we have many (called Protestants) whom we believe most
grievously to sin in their use of our Common Prayer, (be it never so lawful in
it self) they believe, that their very repeating over the words of these
prayers (because as they f^ncy) made by the Church, is devotion enough; they
are taught so, that it is no matter for the Vice, V. Dr. Sparrows Rationale. p.
10.
or Virtue of the persons praying, the prayers are the prayers of the Church,
and are acceptable to God; yea it is no matter whether they be asleep, or awake,
present or absent, (if they any just cause) nay more then this, they believe no
prayers but these of any value, but abomination to God; they are taught so
also. The public worship of God prescribed by those to whom he has given
commission (the author should have done well to have told us who they are,
ibid. p. 8.9.
and to have proved it) is the only true and right public worship, and all
other forms, and methods offered up, instead of that though never so exactly
drawn, (and put up with never so much faith and fervency too, he should have
said) are strange worship, because not commanded. Now away with all such
Atheistical doctrine! according to which all prayer before and after Sermons is
strange worship; the fervent effectual prayer of the righteous, (which Solomon
says) is Gods delight; and St. James says, avails much, is strange worship?
Is not this strange Doctrine? yet verily we find many people of this faith, for
which is not a tittle of Scripture, or found reason; and is it not time that
this Brazen Serpent should be a Nehushtan? should we that are Ministers of
Christ, do any thing to please men, to countenance such gross conceits; such
odious and abominable opinions in the hearts of people?

8. Whereas we are told that we offend many others, yea and those our Superiors
too, because we do not do it. We answer we are not willing to offend any, much
less our Superiors; but if we be brought to this strait, that we must either
offend God or Men; the choice is not difficult. We do humbly conceive, that by
enticing, or by our example encouraging others to sin, or by hardening any in
sinful opinions, or courses, we should highly offend God, we are told so by his
word: God knows our hearts, it is a grievous Election to us, when we are by the
Law of God forced to choose that part-in practice, which shall offend out
Prince, or any Magistrates, but our Souls are dear unto us; and in preserving
our own and others Souls, we hope our Gracious Sovereign will not be offended.

9. However we wonder that our Brethren, who sometimes profess to so high an
honor of St. Augustine, do not discharge us upon his credit; for we find him
thus speaking:

Sed timeo inquies; ne ^ffendant Majorem, time prorsus, ne offendas majorem,
and non offendes Deum. Quidenim times ne offendas majorem? Aug. de Verbis Dom.
Ser. 6.
vide ne forsa^ major sit iste quem times offendere? Majorem certe noli
offendere. -- Quit est inquit major eo qui me genuit? An ille qui teipsam
^reavit? -- Ille quite vidit ut faceret antequam esset, quem fecit, cerie major
est patre luo. -- And again Qui enim resistit potestati Dei ordinationi
resistit, sed quid si illud jubeat quod non debeas facere? -- Timendo
potestatem ipsos humanarum renum gradus advertite. Si aliquid jusserit Curator
no^ne faciendum estis tame^ si contra Proconsul jubeat, at non utique contemnis
potestatem sed eligis majori servire, nec hinc debet minor iraset, si major
praelata est. Rursum si aliquid ipse proconsul Jubeat, and aliud jubeat
Imperator, numquid dubitatur, in illo contemptu illi esse serviendum? Ergo si
aliud Imperator, and aliud Deus, quid indicatis? Solve tribulam: esto mihi in
obsequio, Recte! sed non in idolio, In idolio prohiber? Quis prohibet? Major
potestas Da Veniam. It Is Carcerem, ille Gehennam minatur. We presume our
Brethren will grant this; but they will tell us, it is not sinful to use the
Liturgy. That is the question, nor do we absolutely assert it; we only say, we
so apprehend it, we have given our reasons. And while we thus judge, we humbly
conceive our forbearance is our duty. For suppose consciences mistaken, yet our
Brethren will grant that even an erroneous conscience, will, and ought to tie
our hands, and oblige us ad non faciendum contra, (nor is this an error in
matter of faith, if it be an error) we are not stubborn against conviction,
our ears are open, we desire satisfaction; and certainly it is not for nothing
that we are content; by such refusal, to put our selves our of hopes of
preferment, and into the number of sheep marked out for the slaughter, if a
Gracious Sovereign, and an Honorable Parliament, does not look with a more
favorable aspect toward us, then some others do. But the will of the Lord be
done, -- Hic assume da est sides nostra, tanquam Scutum. (says Augustine) lac.
p^aed.

10. Again offending is taken in a double sense, we are said to offend others,
when we only displease them, and make them angry. 2. When we lay a stumbling
block before them, and make them sin. We acknowledge it our duty to avoid the
first, (if it may be) as to our meanest Brethren, much more to our Superiors.
But if the case be stated thus, here is a thing required to be done; if you do
not do it, the Magistrate will be offended through anger; if you do it, many
private Christians will be either hardened in sin, or, tempted to sin by your
example. What have we to do in this case? but to beg of our Superiors to be
merciful to us; if in this thing we cannot hearken to them, being ready in all
lawful things to yield them utmost active obedience, and here also a quiet
passive obedience. And that this is our case is evident to all that will not
stop their ears, and shut their eyes.

II. It is true we do hear some whispering, that by this we lay also a
stumbling block before our Fathers the Civil Magistrates, and the Bishops, yea
and many of our Brethren, who by our not using the said Modes, and Forms of
Worship, are ready to judge us disloyal, disobedient to Authority, and we tempt
them to draw out the civil sword against us, etc. Now if indeed we do
acknowledge Magistracy, and are (as we profess) ready to yield obedience, those
who otherwise judge of us, sin against God; and those who shall punish us as
disloyal (we being not so) also sin against God. But by this nonconformity,
they tell us, we give Superiors just cause so to censure us, and so to deal
with us.

12. But to this objection the answer is not difficult, for we suppose that all
sober Divines are agreed in this principle, Si de veritate scandalum sumatur,
utilius nasci permittetur scandalum, quam quod veritas relinquatur; it was an
old determination, no man ought to commit any thing against the precepts of
God, for fear of making others sin if he does not commit it. Charity in this
case certainly begins at home, we must not by sin destroy our own souls, out of
charity, to prevent the destruction of the work of God in the souls of others.
Proximus ipse sibi. It is a good thing for us to keep our souls from sin, Bona
res neminem scandalizant nisi malam mentem. Tert. de vel. Virg. c. 3.
and good things scandalize none but evil hearts, (says Tertullian) Nor must
our Brethren be scandalized, because we will not gratify them vuith the use of
our liberty, as well as others, whom they judge interior to them in knowledge,
wisdom, worldly station, etc. we can appeal to God that our hearts are
sincerely troubled, when we hear of any single person in our Parishes
scandalized, for our omissions in the case, provided they be such as are guilty
of no profaneness in their lives, (the offense of open profane and debauched
drunkards, swearers, cursers, blasphemers, unclean persons, does not so much
trouble us) and we dare not say but that there are some such, (though they be
not the fortieth part of those that are zealous against us in this case) But
what shall we, what can we do in the case for these good and sober Brethren?

13. Whiles we judge the thing in it self not lawful, cannot do it let who will
be offended, and that will be granted by all; and we have found some of our
Brethren, who wish we would do it, yet so ingenuous, as to beseech us, not for
their sakes to wound our consciences. But suppose we did think it in it self
and in all circumstances indifferent, that we might, or might not do it, we
profess we should still be at a loss as the case stands, for these of our
Brethren (whom we love and honor) how to gratify them. We (suppose it) think
the thing indifferent, it may be two or three or ten of our Brethren think it
so too, and for uniformity desire we would do it, possibly twenty, thirty,
forty others of our people, whom we see walking close with God; they think it
unlawful, and with tears beseech us not to do it. They are not humorously
offended, but they tell us, why they think it unlawful; They cannot bring their
hearts up to be equally affected with a read prayer, as with one spoken from
the immediate dictates of the heart: they cannot think it lawful for us to use
Modes of worship, formerly used in an idolatrous service; they cannot judge it
lawful for the Magistrate to command any part (in a thing indifferent, in the
worship of God) which manifestly is scandalous to any considerable number of
sober Christians; they think the Law of God concerning scandalizing the weak,
concerns Magistrates, as well as others; and that it is of the same nature
with any other Moral Law, not to be superseded by any humane power. What shall
we do in this case? Doubtless in all reason if it appear to us but indifferent,
we are bound to abstain by virtue of the command of God. And our Brethren, who
would have us do the thing, (if they acknowledge the thing indifferent) must
yield to their weaker Brethren, who are tied up from yielding to them, because
they think the thing unlawful.

14. The sum is this, God has commanded us (in things as to their own nature,
indifferent relating to his worship) to do nothing by which our Brother may be
grieved, stumbled, Romans 14.21.
or made weak. The matter for the omission of which, the Bishop of Exeter so
severely censureth us, is a thing in its own nature (at best) but indifferent;
we plainly see, that should we hearken to our Diocesan, diverse for whom (our
consciences tell us) Christ died, would be stumbled, offended, and made weak.
We conceive, that the Law of Scandal concerns the Magistrate, as well as the
Subject: And therefore supposing a command in that case (which yet we see not)
we humbly conceive our selves obliged not to disobey the Commands of the great
God of Heaven and Earth. Aquinas says, that Propter scandalum etiam bona
spiritualia, sunt pro tempore, occultanda vel differenda. And Hierom. of old
determined, Dimittendum propter scandalum omne quod potest praetermitti salva
triplici Veritate Vi^ae, Justitiae, Doctrinae.

15. We conclude, that we judge our Bre^hren very uneven in their censuring of
us for disobedience to Laws, in this case of the Common Prayer, when they do
the same thing themselves, for which they so charge us, singing Anthemes and
Songs, etc. and using Rites and Forms of Prayer in Cathedrals, expressly
contrary to the Statute, 1 Eliz. 2. and whiles the present Vice-chan. of
Cambridge, without any Law of England, or Statute of the University, or Ca^on,
or any color of Law, and expressly contrary to his Majesty's Declaration, and
contrary to all conscience and reason, could dispense with his conscience, in
usurping an arbitrary power, to the open prejudice of so many of His Majesty's
Subjects, in their children, to stop fifty commencers from commencing, because
at 24. hours warning they could not find in their consciences to subscribe to
the lawfulness of the Common prayer, and the book of Consecration, and to the
39. Articles, which none can with a good conscience subscribe, but he who has
distinctly read over the Book of Common Prayer, V. Art. 35.36.
and the Book of Consecration, who has distinctly read over both the Books of
Homilies, and is well studied in the point of Ceremonies, (how else shall be
own art. 34.) and in the controversy of Church Government, v. art. 36. yea and
indeed in the whole body of Divinity; which none can presume of bo^es of 18.
and 19. years of age, nay how many Batchelours and Drs. in Divinity never read
them?) yet all these must the Questionists subscribe, and be forced to it by
the arbitrary power of the Vice Chancellor, expressly contrary to His Majesty's
Declaration, (what Authority he has since procured as to the future, and by
what acts we know not, but we are sure, when he did this, he had no such.) Yet
Godly Ministers that dare not read the Liturgy, must be by these men,
whispered, as the only men this are disobedient to the Law; and upon that
account giving just scandal to Magistrates, and opposing their Authority. But
there is a God that judges the Earth, to whose decision we humbly leave this
matter in question, singing the 43. Psalm.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. and in many other place, r. Liturgy, Liturgies, Liturgical, for
Lyturgy. Lyturgyes. Lyturgicall.

p. 12 l. 15. r. yet they might be their Liturgies; is of no value.

p. 13. l. 14. r. This Synod (in which, etc.)

p. 24. l. 15. r. Salvo.

In the argument of the 5th. Chapter r. the insufficiency of the Ministers of the
Church.

p. 41 l. 23. r. But in those, etc. ib. l. 37. r. what does not become.

p. 46. l. 9. r. Numina*

Page 71. l. antepenuit. r. Plugentile. p. 81. l. 29. r. in spiritu. p. 83. l.
15. r. Fauburdum. p. 84. l. 30. and in the margin there, r. Chrastovius. p. 87.
l. 3. after Harangue dele of Discourse. p. 89. r. new ceremonies. p. 96. l. 8.
r. or become affines Idololatriae. p. 32. l. 2. r. Majestatis. p. 97. l. 22. r.
amoris. timoris.


