Death's Masterpiece: OR, A true Relation of that great and sudden Fire in
Towerstreet, London; which came by the fiering of Gunpowder, on Friday the 4th.
of January, 1649.

depiction of a (child's?) skeleton

Jan. 18 Printed for Francis Grove, 1649.

Death's Masterpiece: OR, A true Relation of that great and sudden Fire in
Tower-street, London, etc.
IN Tower-street London, on Friday the 4th of January, 1649. about 8 of the
clock at night hapued a lamentable and fearful Fire in a Ship-chandlers house
by Gunpowder, as follows; the said Chandler Robert Porter had in his house
27 barrels of Powder, 20 of them was brought down into his shop, which he had
sold to the Master of a Ship, and to be sent on board the next day, 7 of them
was remaining in his Warehouse above stairs; by casualty and negligence fire
came to those in the shop, by what means cannot be known, because none in the
house was left alive to report, and did blow up suddenly many houses, and
shatter and deface many more.

The Houses that were blown up toward the street were five fair houses;
Namely, 1. The house of Mr. Water Wormewell Vintner, at the sign of the Rose in
Towerstreet, over against Barkin Church, London. 2. The house of Mr. Robert
Porter, Shipchandler, in whose house the fire did begin. 3. The house of Mris.
Shaw a Midwife of good esteem and quality. 4. The house of Mr. Bradley a
Shooemaker latey come to dwell there. 5. The house of Mr. Charles Compton a
Merch. And Mr. Woods house a Merch, utterly defaced.


The houses backward from the street in an Alley called Priests Alley which was
quite blown up were these. The houses of Matthew Neeve James Gizard Nicholas
Mabb James Roberts Mary Fillett John Barsto William Higley Mris. Harrison a
Ministers Widow Edward Tapp John Lasher


The Houses that were scattered and part beaten down, so that the Inhabitants
could not keep possession, or dwell in the said houses, but were forced to seek
other habitations; were, The houses of John Norcott John Cox John Sadler Widow
Boole William Stone Robert Garrett Evan Davis John Lewis Arthur Tipper Thomas
Pinfold Mr. Higgins Abraham Durance Widow Pitts Widow Madox Widow Foster
George Gunnis Henry Warden Widow Povill Widow Brooks Widow Carter
Francis Hunt Richard Jackson John Courtesse Michael Baskaby Richard Emry Henry
Price.


All these out of Possession.

Besides these houses which were made altogether not inhabitable, there were at
least an hundred more much shattered shaken and defaced, the tiles blown off,
the glass windows broken and much hurt done to them, even as far as into
the Tower of London, also the windows of the Parish Church was wholly all
broken and blown out, thus much for the hurt done by this unhappy accident to
the houses there abouts.

Now concerning the persons that were slain, according to a just and true
relation, were as follows.

1. In Mr. Wormewells house, were 16. several companies, consisting of
Gentlemen, Merchants, Tradesmen and diverse of very good quality, of whom
diverse were slain, and many wounded; but an exact account cannot be given of
them but in the general, among the whole number; but of his own family were
slain, (the master of the house himself being abroad about business) his
wife, an apprentice, found dead together, also a maid servant.

2. In Mr. Robert Porters house was slain himself, his wife, his apprentice,
his maid servant, and a kinswoman.

3. In Mris. Shawes house was slain her Son in law Mr. Dunne, who was going
into bed, and was blown out of the house into the Church yard in his shirt,
taken up alive, but died quickly after, three of her Grandchildren, and her
maid.

4. In the house of Mr. Bradley the Shoemaker, was slain, his wife and a
servant.

5. In the house of Mr. Compton praised be God, none

In the several houses which were burnt in Priests-alley, there is missing 24.
of the Inhabitants, which is conceived to be all destroyed and burnt, of whom
there is only found some parts of their bodies, and of others bare bones, and
other quite consumed, so that no other account can be given of them, but that
they buried what parts of the bodies and bones they found among the rubbish.

So the number buried that were not so much disfigured by the fire, but they
were known, some buried at Barkin-Church, and others carried home to their own
places of abode, were 43. and 24. which were so missing and found out by piece
meal, amounts to three score and seven, which is the number that is yet known
certainly to be killed by this unhappy accident, which were all found betwixt
Friday the 4th. of January, and Wednesday the 17th.

The fire after the blow was given did much increase, for the space of two
hours, till help came, and by the endeavor and labor of those that came to
help, and by the use of the Engines for quenching of fire which did great
service, it were well overcome by morning.

Now as concerning the losses that came by the fire, it was so great that it is
not to be known, considering the loss by houses household goods, Money,
Jewels, Plate, Merchandise, wares of all sorts, is thought to be the greatest
that has happened in London this many years, and judged to be threescore
thousand pounds.

FINIS.

