A True and Full RELATION OF His MAJESTY's safe Arrival and Reception at the
HAGVE.
Sent in a Letter from a Person of Quality, to his Friend in London.
3. febr. 1690/1. SIR,
I Don't question but you have heard of His Majesty's being sixteen Hours in a
Longboat amongst the Ice, with great Hazard of His Person: He went off in a
Fog, supposing himself to be upon the Coast, when he was at least four Leagues
off: He entered the Hague privately, and yesterday made his Public Entrance,
being importuned to do it by the States; who had put themselves to a prodigious
Expense, to entertain him with Splendour and Magnificence suitable to the high
Character of so mighty a Monarch. First, His own Coaches moved, then some of
the Nobility, then some of the Nobility of Holland very well mounted; then his
own particular Coach, which was very plain, himself in a Cloak; and at his left
hand sat the Lord Overkirk, in the Back part of the Coach were the Duke of
Ormond and the Lord Scarbrough, he was followed by the Duke of Norfolk's Coach,
and the Rest of the Nobility in order, the Footmen bare, and the Pages behind
the Coaches, the Procession began without the Hague, and moved through three
Triumphal Arches; the best and last of which was before the Gates of the Court,
it is of the Dorick Order, and built after the manner of Hadrian's at Rome. I
have sent you the best of their Devices, and by them you may form to your self
a Conjecture of the rest.

In the Cornish of the last Triumphal Arch, (which as I have before signified
to you, is the best of the Three) there is the following Inscription in large
Capital Roman Letters.

Pio, Felici, Inclyto, Gulielmo Tertio, triumphanti P. C. L P.

In English thus: To the Pious, Happy, Renowned William the Third, Triumphant,
the Father of his Country, the Governor of P. C. L P. Restorer of the United
Provinces, Deliverer of England, the Preserver of Scotland, the Peacemaker of
Ireland, upon his safe Return.

Near this was another Device with three Crowns in a Scale, weighed down by a
Sword with, this Motto: Praemia non aequant. The Rewards do'nt equal his
Service.

Then another of a young Eagle soaring toward the Sun in its Glory, with this:
Tener adversis innititur alis. Tho young, he boldly soars against the Sun.

Another with a Phoenix expiring, with this: Praelucet Posthuma proles. A
Posthumous Offspring out-shines.

Another with a Galley under sail, with this: Alter erit Tiphys. There shall be
another Tiphys.

Another of a Lion and Unicorn, the latter holding his Horn over Toads and
Serpents, with this: Virusque fugant, viresque repellunt. This Poison cures,
and that does Force repel.

In one of the Atticks is this Inscription: Gulielmum Posthumum Resp.
Palladium. William the Posthumous, the third of that Name, of Britain and
Orange, the Hope of his Country, the Palladium of the Common Wealth.

Another of Europa with her Arms displayed, and the Bull near her, with this
Motto: Eripiet Miseram. He will deliver her from her Misery.

The Fireworks at Night were extremely curious, and the Burghers at the Hague
were in Arms all the day. Here are no Princes here as yet, but the Duke of
Brandenburgh; and he is at present incognito; The Dukes of Bavaria and Zell are
daily expected. Tromp is made Admiral, to the General Satisfaction of the
People here, who expect wonderful Performances from him this Summer. In short,
Sir, you may imagine what a Glorious Appearance we shall have here at the
Hague, when the rest of the Confederate Princes, who are now upon their Journey
to this Place, are arrived; since the Figure we make at present is scarce
capable of a Description. I am in haste, and must beg your Pardon for breaking
off so abruptly.

Tuesday, Feb. 6. 1690. New Style. Your most humble Servant. J. D.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Davis in Amen Corner. 1690.


