A WORD Without-Doors Concerning the BILL FOR SUCCESSION.
SIR,
I Am very sensible of the great honor you were pleased to do me in your last,
which I received immediately after our late unhappy Dissolution; but could have
wished you would have laid your Commands on some more able person, to have
given you satisfaction in the matter you there propose relating to the Duke,
who, you seem to insinuate, was like (if the Parliament had continued) to have
received hard measure. I must ingenuously confess to you, I was not long since
perfectly of your opinion, and thought it the highest injustice imaginable, for
any Prince to be debarred of his native Right of Succession upon any pretense
whatsoever. But upon a more mature deliberation and enqiry, I found my error
proceeded principally from the false notions I had took up of Government it
self, and from my ignorance of the practices of all Communities of men in all
ages, whenever self-preservation and the necessity of their affairs obliged
them to declare their opinion in cases of the like nature: To the the knowledge
of all which, the following Accident I shall relate to you, did very much
contribute.

My occasions obliging me one day to attend the coming of a Friend in a
Coffee-house near Charing Cross, there happened to sit at the same Table with me
two ingenious Gentlemen, who according to the frankness of Conversation now
used in the Town, began a Discourse on the same subject you desire to be more
particularly informed in; and having extolled the late House of Commons as the
best number of men that had ever sat within those Walls; and that no House had
ever more vigorously maintained and asserted English Liberty and Protestant
Religion than they had done, as far as the nature of the things that came
before them, and the circumstances of time would admit, (to all which I very
readily and heartily assented:) They then added, That the great Wisdom and Zeal
of that House had appeared in nothing more, than in ordering a Bill to be
brought in for debarring the Duke of Y. from inheriting the Crown. A Law they
affirmed to be the most just and reasonable in the world, and the only proper
Remedy to establish this Nation on a true and solid Interest, both in relation
to the present and future times.

To which I could not but reply, That I begged their pardon, if I differed from
them in opinion; and did believe, that how honestly soever the House of Commons
might intend in that matter, yet that the point of Succession was so sacred a
thing, and of so high a nature, that it was not subjected to their cognizance:
That Monarchy was of Divine Right: That Princes succeeded by nature and
generation only, and not by authority, admission, or approbation of the
People; and consequently, that neither the merit or demerit of their persons,
nor the different influences from thence upon the People, were to be respected
or had in consideration; but the Commonwealth ought to obey and submit to the
next Heir, without any further inquisition; and if he proved a worthy,
virtuous, and just Prince, it was a great happiness; if unjust, barbarous, and
tyrannical, there was no other remedy, but prayer, patience, and an entire
submission to so difficult a dispensation of Gods Providence.

I had no sooner ended my discourse, but one of the Gentlemen (that was the
most serious in the company) seeing me a young man, gravely replied, That he
could not but be extremely concerned to hear that such pernicious Notions
against all lawful Government had been taught in the world: That he believed
they were in me purely the effects of an University-Education; and that it had
been my misfortune to have had a very high Churchman for my Tutor, who had
endeavored (as it was their constant practice to all young Gentlemen under
their care) to debauch me with such principles as would enslave my mind to
their Hierarchy and the Monarchical part of the Government, without any regard
at all to the Aristocratical and Popular; and that fat Parsonages,
Prebendships, Deanaries, and Episcopal Sees, were the certain and constant
Rewards of such Services: That the place we were in, was a little too public
for discourses of this nature; but if I would accept of a Bottle of Wine at the
next Tavern, he would undertake to give me juster measures; adding, It was pity
so hopeful a Gentleman should be tainted with bad Principles. My Friend coming
in at the same time, proved to be one of their particular Acquaintance; and
both he and I readily complied with so generous a motion.

We had no sooner drank a Glass round, but the old Gentleman was pleased to
renew his discourse, and said, It was undoubtedly true, that the inclination of
Mankind to live in company (from whence come Towns, Cities, and Commonwealths)
did proceed of Nature, and consequently of God, the Author of Nature. So
likewise Government, and the Jurisdiction of Magistrates in general (which does
necessarily flow from the living together in society) is also of Nature, and
ordained by God for the common good of Mankind; but that the particular species
and forms of this or that Government, in this or that manner, to have many,
few, or one Governor; or that they should have this or that Authority, more or
less, for a longer or a shorter time; or whether ordinarily by Succession or by
Election, all these things (he said) are ordained and diversified by the
particular positive Laws of every Country, and are not established either by Law
Natural or Divine, but left by God unto every Nation and Country, to pitch upon
what form of Government they shall think most proper to promote the common Good
of the whole, and best adapted to the natures, constitutions, and other
circumstances of the People; which accordingly for the same reasons may be
altered or amended in any of its parts, by the mutual consent of the Governors
and governed, whenever they shall see reasonable cause so to do: all which
appears plainly, both from the diversity of Governments extant in the world,
and by the same Nations living sometimes under one sort of Government, and
sometimes under another. So we see God himself permitted his peculiar People
the Jews to live under diverse forms of Government; as first under Patriarchs,
then under Captains, then under Judges, then under Highpriests, next under
Kings, and then under Captains and Highpriests again, until they were
conquered by the Romans, who themselves also first lived under Kings, and then
Consuls, whose authority they afterward limited by a Senate, by adding
Tribunes of the people; and in extraordinary emergencies of the Commonwealth,
they were governed by Dictators, and last of all by Emperors. So that it is
plain, no Magistrate has his particular Government, or an Interest of
Succession in it, by any Institution of Nature, but only by the particular
Constitution of the Commonwealth within it self. And as the kinds of
Government are different, so also are the measures of Power and Authority in
the same kind, in different Countries.

I shall begin (said he) with that of the Roman Empire, which though it be the
first in dignity amongst Christian Princes, yet it is so restrained and limited
by the particular Laws of the Empire, that he can do much less in his State,
than other Kings in theirs. He can neither make War, nor exact any Contribution
of Men or Money, but by the consent of all the States of the German Diet: And
as for his Children and Relations, they have no interest or pretense to
succeed, but only by Election, if they shall be thought worthy. Nay, the
chiefest Article the Emperor swears to keep at his admission to that Honor,
is, That he shall never endeavor to make the Dignity of the Empire Hereditary
to his Family.

In Spain and in France the Privileges of Kings are much more eminent, both in
Power and succession; their Authority is more absolute, every Order of theirs
having the validity of a Law, and their next of blood does ordinarily inherit,
though in a different manner. In Spain the next Heir cannot succeed, but by the
approbation of the Nobility, Bishops, and States of the Realm. In France the
Women are not admitted to succeed, let them be never so lineally descended. In
England our Kings are much more limited and confined in their Power, than
either of the two former: for here no Law can be made, but by consent and
authority of Parliament; and as to the point of Succession, the next of kin is
admitted, unless in extraordinary cases, and when important Reasons of State
require an alteration: And then the Parliaments of England (according to the
ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm) have frequently directed and appointed
the succession of the Crown in other manner than in course it would have gone;
of which I shall give you some Examples in order.

But first let us look abroad, and see how things have been carried, as to this
point, in other Countries.

Amongst the Jews, the Laws of Succession did ordinarily hold; and accordingly
Rehoboam, the lawful Son and Heir of Solomon, after his Fathers decease, went
to Sichem to be crowned and admitted by the People: and the whole body of the
people of Israel being there gathered together, did (before they would admit
him their lawful King) make unto him certain Propositions for taking away some
heavy Taxes that had been imposed on them by his Father Solomon; which he
refusing to gratify them in, and following the advice of young men, ten of the
Twelve Tribes immediately chose Jeroboam, a Servant of Rehoboam's, a mere
stanger, and of mean Parentage, and made him their King; and God approved
thereof, as the Scriptures in express words do testify: for when Rehoboam had
raised an Army of One hundred and fourscore thousand men, intending by force of
Arms to have justified his Claim, God appeared unto Semajah, and commanded him
to go to Rehoboam, and to the House of Judah and Benjamin, saying, Return every
man to his house, for this thing is of me, says the Lord. So that since God
did permit and allow this in his own Commonwealth, which was to be the Pattern
for all others, no doubt he will approve the same in other Kingdoms, whenever
his service and glory, or the happiness of the Weal-publick shall require it.

The next Instance I shall give you, shall be in Spain, where Don Alonso de la
Cerda having been admitted Prince of Spain in his Father's lifetime (according
to the custom of that Realm) married Blancha, Daughter of Lewis the first King
of France, and had by her two Sons named Alonso and Hernando de la Cerda; but
their Father (who was only Prince) dying before Alonso the ninth then King, he
recommended them to the Realm as lawful Heirs apparent to the Crown: But Don
Sancho their Fathers younger Brother, who was a great Warrier, and surnamed El
Bravo, was admitted Prince, and they put by, in their Grandfathers lifetime,
by his and the States consent; and this was done at a Parliament held at
Segovia, in the year 1276: And in the year 1284, ( Alonso the ninth being dead)
Don Sancho was acknowledged King, and the two Princes imprisoned; but at the
Mediation of Philip the third, King of France, their Uncle, they were set free,
and endowed with considerable Revenues in Land; and from them do descend the
Dukes de Medina Celi at this day; and the present K. of Spain that is in
possession* descends from Don Sancho.

In France, Lewis the fourth had two Sons, Lothairin, who succeeded him, and
Charles, whom he made Duke of Lorrain. Lothairin dying, left an only Son named
Lewis, who dying without Issue after he had reigned two years, the Crown was to
have descended on his Uncle Charles Duke of Lorrain. But the States of France
did exclude him, and chose Hugo Capetus, Earl of Paris, for their King; and in
an Oration made by their Ambassador to Charles of Lorrain, did give an account
of their Reasons for so doing, as it is related by Belforest, a French
Historian, in these very words:

Every man knows ( Lord Charles) that the Succession of the Crown and Kingdom
of France, according to the ordinary Rights and Laws of the same, belongs
unto you, and not unto Hugh Capet now our King: But yet the same Laws which do
give unto you such Right of Succession, do judge you also unworthy of the same;
for that you have not endeavored hitherto to frame your life according to the
Prescript of those Laws, nor according to the use and custom of the Kingdom of
France; but rather have allied your self with the Germains, our old Enemies,
and have accustomed your self to their vile and base Manners. Wherefore since
you have abandoned and forsaken the ancient Virtue, Amity, and Sweetness of
your Country, your Country has also abandoned and forsaken you; for we have
chosen Hugh Capet for our King, and have put you by, and this without any
scruple in our Conscrences at all; esteeming it far better, and more just, to
live under Hugh Capet, the Possessor of the Crown, with enjoying the ancient
use of our Laws, Customs, Privileges, and Liberties, than under you the next
Heir, by Blood, in Oppression, strange Customs, and Cruelty. For as they who
are to make a Voyage in a Ship on a dangerous Sea, do not so much respect
whether the Pilot claims Title to the Ship or no, but rather whether he be
skilful, valiant, and like to bring them in safety to their ways end; even so
our principal care is to have a good Prince to lead and guide us happily in
this way of Civil and Politic life; which is the end for which Princes are
appointed. And with this Message ended his Succession and Life, he dying not
long after in Prison.

And now I shall come home, and give you an Instance or two in England since
the Conquest, and so conclude.

William Rufus, second Son of William the Conqueror, by the assistance of
Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, who had a great opinion of his Virtue and
Probity, was admitted King by the consent of the Realm, his elder Brother
Robert Duke of Normandy being then in the War at Jerusalem. William dying, his
younger Brother Henry, by his ingenuity and fair carriage, and by the
assistance of Henry Earl of Warwick, who had greatest interest in the Nobility;
and Maurice Bishop of London, a leading-man amongst the Clergy, obtained also
the Crown. And Robert Duke of Normandy was a second time excluded. And though
this King Henry could pretend no other Title to the Crown than the Election and
Admission of the Realm, yet he defended it so well, and God prospered him with
such success, that when his elder Brother Robert came to claim the Kingdom by
force of Arms, he beat him in a Pitched Battle, took him Prisoner, and so he
died miserably in Bonds.

King Henry had one only Daughter named Maud, or Matilda, who was married to
the Emperor; and he dying without Issue, she was afterward married to Geofrey
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou in France, by whom she had a Son named Henry, whom
his Grandfather declared Heir-apparent to the Crown in his lifetime; yet
after his death, Henry was excluded, and Stephen Earl of Bulloine, Son of
Adela, Daughter of William the Conqueror, was by the States thought more fit to
govern than Prince Henry, who was then but a Child. And this was done by the
persuasion of Henry Bishop of Winchester, and at the solicitation of the Abbot
of Glastenbury and others, who thought they might do the same lawfully, and
with a good conscience, for the public good of the Realm.

But the event did not prove so well as they intended: for this occasioned
great Factions and Divisions in the Kingdom; for the quieting of which, there
was a Parliament held at Wallingford, which passed a Law, That Stephen should
be King only during his Life, and that Prince Henry and his Offspring should
succeed him; and by the same Law debarred William Son of King Stephen from
inheriting the Crown, and only made him Earl of Norfolk.

Thus did the Parliament dispose of the Crown in those days, which was in the
year 1153. which sufficiently proves what I have asserted.

The sum of all I have said, amounts to this: That Government in general is by
the Law of Nature, and consequently the Ordinance of God; but that the
different forms of Government, whether to reside in one, few, or many; or
whether it shall be continued by Succession or by Election, together with the
different measures and limitations of Power and Authority in Governors of the
same kind in several Countries: all these things, I say, are ordained by, and
purely depend upon positive and humane Laws. From whence it will necessarily
follow, That the same humane Authority (residing in King, Lords, and Commons,
here in England) which gave being to those Laws for the good of the Community,
is superintendent over them, and both may and ought to make any addition to, or
alteration of them, when the public Good and Welfare of the Nation shall
require it; unless you will admit, That an humane Authority, establishing any
thing intentionally for the common good of the Society, which in tract of time,
by reason of unforeseen circumstances and emergencies, proves destructive of
it, has by that Act concluded it self, and made that accidental evil, moral and
unchangeable; which to affirm, is senseless and repugnant.

AND now, Sir, I hope by this time (said the old Gentleman) you begin to think
that the Bill for disabling the Duke was not so unjust and unreasonable as was
pretended; and that the course of Succession (being founded upon the same
bottom with other Civil Constitutions) might likewise as justly have been
altered by the King, Lords, and Commons, as any other Law or Custom whatever.

And here I might conclude: But because a late PENTIONARY Pen has publicly
arraigned the Wisdom, Loyalty, and Justice of the honorable House of Commons,
on the account of this Bill, I will ex abundanti add a word or two more to that
particular.

Whereupon he plucked a Paper out of his Pocket, entitled, Great and weighty
Considerations relating to the Duke, and Successor of the Crown, etc. Which as
soon as he had read unto us, You see here (said he) the true temper of those
men, of whom I first gave you caution: There never was an endeavor (though in
a Legal and Parliamentary way) after any Reformation either in Church or State,
but the Promoters of it were sure to be branded by them with the odions
imputations of Fanaticism and Faction: Nay, if the Country-Electors of
Parliament Men will not pitch upon such Rake-hells of the Nation as are usually
proposed by them, but on the contrary make use of their Freedom and Consciences
in choosing able, upright, and deserving persons; and if good men thus chosen do
but (according to their Duty in the House) enquire into public Grievances,
pursue in a legal course notorious Offenders, and consult and advise the
security of the Government and Protestant Religion, the high Churchman
immediately swells, and in passion tells you, That all this proceeds from the
old Phanatick-Leven, not yet worn out amongst the people: That we are going
back again to Forty one; and acting over afresh the sins of our Forefathers.

Thus ignorantly do they complement the Times and Persons they endeavor to
expose, by appropriating to them such Virtues as were common to good men in all
Ages. But enough of this.

In the next place, pray observe how hypocritically the CONSIDERER puts this
Question, viz.

Whether Protestant Religion was not settled in this Nation by the same mighty
hand of God that established Jeroboam in the Kingdom of Israel? [And then adds,]
Whether we (like that wicked King) should so far despair of Gods Providence in
preserving the work of his own hands, as never to think it safe, unless it be
established on the Quicksands of our own wicked Inventions? [ viz. the Bill
against the Duke.]

And throughout his whole Discourse he frequently calls all Care of preserving
our Religion, a Mistrust of God's Providence; and on that score calls out to
the Nation, O ye of little faith, etc. Now I will allow him, That the least
evil is not to be done, that the greatest and most important Good may ensue:
But that the Bill for Disabling the Duke is highly justifiable both by the Laws
of God, and Constitution of our Government, I think by my former Discourse I
have left no room to doubt; and the Considerer having scarce attempted to prove
the contrary, it is preposterously done of him to give us his Use of Reproof,
before he has cleared his Doctrine.

However, I owe him many thanks for putting me in mind how Protestant Religion
was first established here in England: It was indeed by the mighty hand of God
influencing the Public Councels of the Nation, so that all imaginable care was
taken both by Prince and People, to rescue themselves from under the Romish
Yoke; and accordingly most excellent Laws were made against the Usurpation and
Tyranny of that Man of Sin. Our Noble Ancestors in those days did not palliate
a want of zeal for their Religion with a lazy pretense of trusting in Gods
Providence; but together with their Prayers to, and Affiance in Heaven, they
joined the acts of their own Duty, without which, (they very well know) they
had no reason to expect a blessing from it.

But now be pleased to take notice of the Candor of this worthy Considerer;
Nothing less will serve his turn, than the proving all the Voters for the Bill
guilty of the highest Perjury: For (says he) they have all sworn in the Oath of
Allegiance to bear Faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors: But the Duke is Heir, Ergo, etc. A very hopeful Argument indeed!
But what if it should happen (as it is neither impossible, nor very improbable
to imagine it) that the next Heir to the Crown should commit Treason, and
conspire the death of the present Possessor, and for this Treason should not
only be Attainted by Parliament, but Executed too; pray, Mr. Considerer, would
the Parliament in this case be guilty of Murder and Perjury? I am confident you
will not say it. If therefore the next Heir become obnoxious to the Government
in a lower degree, why may not the same Authority proportion the punishment,
and leave him his Life, but debar him of the Succession? This I say only to
show the absurdity of his Argument.

My Answer is this: No man can bear Allegiance to two persons at the same time;
nor can Allegiance be ever due to a Subject, and therefore my obligation by the
word [Heir] in the Oath; does not commence till such Heir has a present Right
to, or actual possession of the Crown; which if he never attains, either by
reason of death, or any other Act that incapacitates and bars him, then can my
obligation to him by the word Heir in the Oath never have a beginning.

But besides all this, it cannot be denied but that Mr. Considerer's Doctrine
does bring great inconveniences on Succession; for the next Heir (by his way
of arguing) is let loose from all the Restrictions and Penalties of Humane
Laws; and has no other ties upon him not to snatch the Crown out of the hands
of the Possessor, than purely those of his own Conscience; which is worthy Mr.
Considerer's highest consideration.

I shall only take notice of one Objection more, and then conclude, (fearing I
have too much trespassed on your patience already.)

It Is very hard (says he) that a man should lose his Inheritance, because he is
of this or that persuasion in matters of Religion.

And truly Gentlemen, were the case only so, I should be entirely of his mind.
But alas! Popery (whatever Mr. Considerer is pleased to insinuate) is not an
harmless innocent persuasion of a number of men differing from others in
matters relating to Christian Religion; but is really and truly a different
Religion from Christianity it self. Nor is the Inheritance he there mentions,
an Inheritance only of Black Acre and White Acre, without any Office annexed,
which requires him to be par Officio: But the Government and Protection of
several Nations, the making of War and Peace for them, the Preservation of
their Religion, the disposal of public Places and Revenues, the Execution of
all Laws, together with many other things of the greatest importance, are in
this case claimed by the word Inheritance; which if you consider, and at the
same time reflect upon the enslaving and bloody Tenets of the Church of Rome,
more particularly the Hellish and Damnable Conspiracy those of that Communion
are now carrying on against our Lives, our Religion, and our Government; I am
confident you will think it as proper for a Wolf to be a shepherd, as it is for
a Papist to be the Defender of our Faith, etc.

The old Gentleman had no sooner ended his Discourse, but I returned him my
hearty thanks, for the trouble he had been pleased to give himself on this
occasion; and I could not but acknowledge he had given me great satisfaction in
that affair; what it will give thee, Charles, I know not: I am sure I parted
from him very melancholy, for having been a Fool so long. Adieu.

I am thy Affectionate, J. D.

FINIS.

