A LETTER from MOSCOW TO THE Marquess of CARMARTHEN, Relating to the Czar of
Muscovy's Forwardness in his GREAT NAVY, etc. Since His RETURN Home.
Published by His Lordship's Permission.
MY LORD, Moscow, March 8. School/9. O.S.
I Have deferred writing, till I could be able to give Your Lordship a true
Account (from my own Knowledge) of the Czar (our Master's) Navy, which being a
New Thing in the World as yet, I believe is variously talked of in England,
etc. First, At Voronize there is already in the Water and Rigged, 36, and to be
Launched in the Spring 20 more stout Ships, from 30 to 60 Guns. Next, 18 very
large Galleys (built after the Venetian manner by Italian Masters) are already
completed; and 100 smaller Galleys or Brigantines are equipt for the Sea; 7
Bomb-Ships are Launched and Rigged, and 4 Fireships are Building against the
Spring, when they are all to go down to Azoph. The Ships are chiefly built by
the Dutch and Danes.

The 25th of August last his Majesty came to Moscow, incognito; immediately he
took in hand the rewarding of General Gordon's Soldiers, that fought against
the Rebels he defeated in June last, and next day gave Orders to fetch up all
those of the Rebels who were dispersed by way of Banishment, which were in all
then left about 2700. I suppose Your Lordship has been informed by Public
News, how they are hung round the Walls of this City, some hundreds beheaded,
some broke upon the Wheel, etc. to the whole Number of them, which was in all
3000.

At my Arrival in Moscow, I fell very ill of the Bloody Flux, which made me be
in Moscow when his Majesty came home: About the latter end of October I was
somewhat recovered, his Majesty then carried me down to Voronize with him.
Voronize is about 400 English Miles South-East from Moscow. There the Czar
immediately set up a Ship of 60 Guns, where he is both Foreman and
Master Builder; and not to flatter him, I Will assure Your Lordship it will be
the best Ship among them, and it is all from his own Draught: How he framed her
together, and how he made the Mould, and in so short a time as he did, is
really wonderful: But he is able at this day to put his own Notions into
Practice, and laugh at his Dutch and Italian Builders for their Ignorance.
There are several Pieces of Workmanship, as in the Keel, Stem, and Post, which
are all purely his own Invention, and sound good Work, and would be approved of
by all the Shipwrights of England, if they saw it. She has a round Tuck, and a
narrow Floor, a good tumbling Home, and Circular Side; none are to exceed 11
Dutch Foot Draught of Water. He has not run into any Extreme, But taken the
Mediums of all good Sailing Properties, which seem best. One may, methinks,
call her an Abstract of his own private Observations whilst Abroad, strengthened
by Your Lordship's Improving Discourses to him on that Subject, and his own
extraordinary Notion of Sailing. One thing as to her Keel is, That should it
wholly be beat out, yet it is so ordered, that the Ship will be tight and safe,
and may continue so at Sea afterward.

I likewise made a Suit of Moulds for a Ship of Sixty Guns, but after some time
fell sick again; and at Christmas, when his Majesty came to Moscow, he brought
me back again for Recovery of my Health, where I am at present;
notwithstanding, both our Ships go forward, having put things in such a
posture, as that a Grecian (who has been in England) carries on the Business.
Mr. Ney is Building of a 60 Gun Ship there too; besides, there are four of that
Size (near built) upon the Done, two of 40 Guns already at Azoph, carried down
some time since, and a great many Galleys, etc.

The Rivers Vorona, at Voronitz, when I was there, was hardly so broad as the
Ships are long; but in the Spring about the latter End of April, or beginning
of May, when the Snow melts, there is 16 Foot Water in that little River, and
continues this height about 12 or 14 days, with a Rapid Torrent, with that
force, that though it be 1000 Miles down to Azoph, yet the Ships will easily be
there in 9 or 10 days. There is 30000 Soldiers at Voronize, to defend the Ships
from the Tartars, who are very mischievous, and very swift in setting a place
on Fire, and running away again. Those Ships that are Launcht lie fast in Ice
about two Foot thick, so that the River is now as firm as Land, although this
is reckoned a very mild Winter; for I remember in January one Afternoon with a
Southerly Wind it thawed and rained for 3 or 4 hours, which is rare enough for
an Almanac. The Ground is covered with Snow about a Yard deep, and it is mighty
clear, piercing cold Weather, such as in England we cannot imagine.

Looking against the Sun, one may see innumerable Atoms of congealed Snow,
flying up and down the Sky like Dust; but within Doors the Rooms are about as
warm as it is in June in England, made so by Stoves, all over of a soft familiar
heat. As to the Temper of the Climate in general, the Summers (as last was) are
excessive hot, the Winter as cold; the latter end of April, and part of May,
the Country is almost drowned by excessive overflowings of the Rivers,
occasioned by the melted Snow. The Land in Summer is pleasant all over, and
fertile, and all provisions wonderful cheap; as, a good fat Sheep for four
Shillings, Bread, Beer, etc. proportionably; and even now in Winter it is not
much dearer. I hope by this time Twelve-Months, to give Your Lordship (in
England) a particular Description of the Country by word of Mouth. His Majesty
was at my Chamber two days of last Week, with Mr. Styles as Interpreter (who
gives his humble duty to Your Lordship) You may guess what His Majesty came to
be informed in whilst he was there; I showed him a Model of a Machine to bring
up the Royal Transport to the Volga, at 17 Inches Draught of Water; he was
pleased to like it, but gave no Orders for putting it in Execution, so I
believe she will lie where she is now, and perish. Here are Three Envoys, viz.
the Emperor's, the Danes, and Brandenburgs, in this Slabado, (as it is called,)
which lies from Moscow, as Lambeth does from London. The whole place is
Inhabited by the Dutch; I believe there may be 400 Families. Last Sunday and
Monday the Strangers were invited to the Consecration of General La Fort's New
House, which is the noblest Building in Russia, and finely furnished. There were
all the Envoys, and as near as I could guess 200 Gentlemen, English, French,
and Dutch, and about as many Ladies; each Day were Dancing and Music. All the
Envoys, and all the Lords (but three in Moscow) are going to Voronize to see
the Fleet, I suppose. His Majesty went last Sunday to Voronize with Prince
Alexander, and I am to go down (being something recovered) with the
Vice Admiral about six days hence. This day was a Muster of all the Seamen and
Officers in his Majesty's Service, of which are discharged: They are to go home
by the way of Narve. Capt. Perry, who was sent to make a Communication between
the Rivers Volga and Done, near Astracan, is returned from Surveying the same;
he makes it appear Feasible enough to be done; accordingly his Majesty has
ordered 40000 Men to be raised, and Materials provided for doing the same;
which he has promised to finish in Five years, though I believe it may be done in
less. When that is performed, then the Czar may carry his Ships from the Black
Sea into the Caspian Sea, and extend his Conquest that way.

My Lord, What I have writ, I wish it may be any Satisfaction to Your Lordship,
and I have my End, who am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient Servant, John Deane.
Postscript. Since my Writing this, General La Forte is Dead of a High Fever;
and we expect his Majesty up this Night from Voronitz.



18. APRIL 1699.
THE above being a True Copy of a Letter I had from Moscow, I do permit the
same to be Printed and Published.

CARMARTHEN.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Queen's Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1699.


