A DECLARATION OF Diverse Gentlemen of WALES concerning Collonell Poyer:

And his proceedings in this and the former Engagement. His Actions stated.

AND A DECLARATION sealed by Colonel Poyer for the KING against the PARLIAMENT.

WITH The whole case Delivered upon Oath, upon the examination of several
WITNESSES.

April 19. 1648 Imprimatur G. M.

LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

A Declaration of diverse Gentlemen of Wales, concerning Collonell Poyer.
IT is an Ordinary crime amongst the vulgar discontents of these times, to lay
hold of the least hint of News which any way relates to their interest, and
instantly cry it up, as if they were assured of future contingencies, and the
success thereof, but commonly the hopes of such are built upon the deceitful
shallow grounds of revengefulnesse and malice, which are seldom* seconded with
a blessing, but success answerable to the unreasonablenesse of their wishes:
Neither can I much blame such who know not the condition of the party they so
much elevate, or his principles: if they did, sure no rational men would ever
betray their own judgments, and the cause they so much affect, as to place
their confidence upon one who will appear like a flash of lightning, soon gone
out, or an Ignis fatuis, without heat or influence, which frustrates the
expectations of the beholders. Col. John Poyer, pre^tended Governor of
Pombrook Castle, is the party herein charactered, and before we come to his
matters of fact, we shall glance on some particulars following.

We will not much insist that he is the offspring of mean parentage: Or that
his beginning was in Mr. Megrieks Kitching of Pembrook, being a turn-spit boy
there: Or that afterward he was a poor ragged boy, which was hired to run to
and fro on errands: Or that he was bound Prentice to a Glover, by which he got
a poor subsistence, until about the beginning of the late wars: Or that
about five years since he got a wench with child, and after her delivery
pretended he had been married to her, but did produce no witness to prove it,
and since that, ^a^h had two or three children more by her, she being commonly
called, and reputed his Whore, and his Children bastards.

Or that Poyers Mother is generally famed in the said Town to be worse then
etc. and in that regard Poyer by instinct of nature is possessed with more then
ordinary impudence.

Now we shall give you a clear Demonstration of part of his actions since the
beginning of the war in that County, about five years since, upon a
disagreement between the Mayor of the Town of Pembrook and the Townsmen, Poyer
with a loose rabble of the meaner sort of the Town, got into the Castle, having
some Arms kept the Castle in opposition to the Mayor and his party, the major
part made choice of Poyer, to be their Captain, and shortly after, he seized
upon two Me^chants Ships of great value, which came into Milford Haven, kept
them by force, made sale of the ships and their goods for his own use, and
likewise seized the goods of diverse Merchants, which came into Milford Haven,
and gave them the public Faith, he having no commission or power from the
Parlia. or any under them, so cheated the people of their goods, to the undoing
of several persons that came up to complain here; by these means he became
enabled to raise one other company of foot, and by force he raised a Troop of
Horse on the Inhabitants of the said County, without Commission as aforesaid,
for either Horse or Foot; with this force in a freeboting way, he oppressed all
the well-affected to the Parliament, in that part of the County, in breaking
open their houses, taking away their moneys and provisions, plundering them of
their Cattle, insomuch that Roger Lorte, and Tho. Bowen, Esquire were forced to
fortify their houses with their Servants against him, for their own
preservation, knowing the said Poyer was isntrumental with his lawless force
to execute other men's malice against them, which Poyer accordingly did, by
taking away Mr. Lorts, and Mr. Bowens Cattle, Corn, and Goods, to a great
value, he imprisoned the persons of several men in the Castle of Pembrook,
until they ransomed themselves, with moneys, or pawns to the values, seized
upon the Lands, Mills, Rents, Woods, Corn, and Cattle of Delinqu^nts, under
Sequestration of the Committee of that Association, and possessed them by strong
hand, to his own use, enforced the Soldiers in time of war to buy those
provisions sent them by the Parliament, for the Garrison of Pembrook, he
possessed himself by force of the Demesne-Lands of Carew being the Lands of Sir
Richard Phillips Barronet, a known well-affected man to the Parliament, worth
about 300 li. per annum, for several years made profits thereof, and where he
understood there were fat Cattle, in the pastures of any Gentlemen he bore a
spleen to, he instantly sent his Bullies, as he terms them, to fetch them off
into the Castle, part of this was done before the Wars, but most of all done
since the Enemy was beaten out of that County, and since all South Wales was
reduced to the obedience of the Parliament.

And it is well known, Poyer had never any commission for Horse or Foot,
during the said war, neither had he ever so much gallantry as to charge an
enemy. And its proved upon Oath before the now Judge Advocate, That Poyer is
not so little accountable to the State, Country, and Strangers, as 6000 li.
Being thus extremely accountable, and having nothing responsible but his
Carkas, at his being here in Town was served with a warrant from the Committee
of Cornhill, for stating the Accounts of the Kingdom to appear before them,
and answer to such particular Charges and Accounts as were given in there
against him; But the day he was served as aforesaid, he took Horse went
homeward out of Town, and never appeared since: Now who can pretend Poyer has
Arreares due to him, when he durst not stand to the test of an account, and
having never acted by Commission under the Parliament, and he so much
Accountable as aforesaid.

The substance of the most part of this before related lies upon record proved
by the oaths of witnesses against him, at the Headquarters at Putney about
September last, There were Articles also preferred against him to the Committee
of safety about two years and a half since, And to the Committee of Gloucester
about two years since, the remainder of those Articles which are likewise
proved, we shall in brief give you the heads of them.

1 That Poyer is a great drinker and haunter of Alehouses and seldom or never
sober in the afternoon.

2 That he is a great Swearer and Quarreller.

3 That he has been most sottishly drunk upon several Fast days.

4 That he has been beastly drunk the very day he received the communion.

5 That An. Dom. 1643 The said Poyer and some of the townes-men of Pembrook
subscribed an Instrument and fixed the town seal to it, that they would keep
the Castle for the King, against all such as should claim it, in the name of
King and Parliament.

6 That he did beat two Orthodox Ministers, namely Mr. Nathaniel Cradock, and
Mr. Evan Roberts, that the said Mr. Cradock lay afterward sick of the brusies,
and beatings he received from Poyer, about half a year, in the City of
London.

Now let the impartial Reader judge whether this wretched fellow who like a
Prodigious Comet that threatens nothing but ruin and destruction to his native
Country, raised this rebellion out of affection to any public interest now in
being, or out of a sense of his base guiltiness, which his said actions
reflects upon him, set him upon this desperate course, knowing if there should
be a settlednesse of peace in the Kingdom, he being so much accountable to the
State as well as particular persons, besides his fellonious actions, it would
inevitably bring him to condign punishment. And therefore this Viper has
endeavored rather to involve the Kingdom in a new war, That he might remain
unquestionable in such troubled waters, then otherwise undergo the sentence of
his merits.

Here let the Kings party who perhaps has through ignorance applauded him,
observe what a pure foundation they build their fond hopes on, sure by all
probability if the structure of monarchy take its rise from such a wellspring
of impiety as Poyer is, by all collections and symtomes the sequel can prove
but fatal and destructive to this Kingdom, And the next news, I am confident
you will hear that this Cattaline being invaded on all sides, both by sea and
land, and not being able to take the field, for want of a general compliance
from the neighboring Countries, he and his Sattalits will be cubd up to feed
at rack and manger upon their purloined provisions, by the Parliament Forces,
which by Gods assistance will soon bring him and his Adherents to justice.

FINIS,

