A DECLARATION From the Nothern Associated COUNTIES To the Kingdom of ENGLAND.

DECLARING Their unanimous and faithful Resolutions, touching the proceedings
of the Parliament and Army, in relation to their settling of the Kingdom without
a King; and the Protestation of the said Counties to the Kingdom of Scotland.

ALSO, The Declaration of Major General Massoy, to the Parliament of Scotland;
and the Resolution of the Marquis of Argyle, concerning the Kingdom of England.
With several Divine Solitudes, and Heavenly Meditations of a glorious King,
briefly collected out of the main principles.

L^^^WIS^ A Declaration of the Parliament of England, And a perfect List of the
Lords, Judges, Knights, and Gentlemen, appointed for a Council of State, to
govern the Commonwealths of England and Ireland.

Imprimatur,

THEODORE JENNINGS.

London, Printed for G. Laurenson, MDCXLVIII.

A DECLARATION FROM The Northern Counties, containing their cordial Resolution
and Representation touching the Parliament and Army, and their protestation
concerning the Kingdom of Scotland.
SIR,
I Received yours this post, and am glad to see things to go on so well, God
grant it may hold till the whole work be finished, and all injustice brought
down, that so Englands Commonwealth and Courts of Justice may now be purified
from the corrupted Justice that has for many years bin executed within her
Territories; for it was the saying of a learned Author, That those Laws were
most destructive to a Nation when not to every person put in equal balance
and execution; and seeing that the tallest Ceder has justly tasted of the fury
of Almighty God against him without impartiality, let the lowest shrubs
hereafter dr^^^ (...) dregs of her displeasure; that so all those who ^^e acted
contrary to the known laws of this Real^, (...) be brought to condign
punishment, and severely ^^^shed with true sentence and judgment; which (...)
done, and a clear way made unto Babels utter ruin^, (...) the people of England
then sing hallelujah, and proclaim ^eace throughout her Confines.

And although there seems great opposition to the work in hand; yet we doubt
not, but divine providence will bring to light, and in its due time discover
and ^^^strate all the machavilian combinations, now agitating and contriving by
the Spirits of Envy and Malignancy, whose inveterate apostasy, is ready to
corrupt and putrify diverse clear and undefiled Fountains in these parts, their
endeavors, actions, and designs, tending only to the alienation of the hearts
of the people from their due odedience to their Representatives, and to inflame
and involve this Kingdom in another bloody and intestine war; and to that end,
the prelatical Clergy, and the usurping Royalist leaves no means unattempted,
for stiring up the people to an engagement against the parliame^^ and army;
having had several meetings in private and o^scure places, for the gathering to
a head, and to raise the siege at Pontefract; but care is taken to suppress
their future meetings: and in order thereunto, the well affected about
Hallifax, Deeds, Bradford, Preston, Mansfield, and parts adjacent, have
declared their cordial resolutions to rise as one man, for the assistance of
the Northern Brigade, a copy whereof follows.

WHereas information is given, That there is great plottings and designs in
agitation, by the adverse party to raise forces and foment new differences, for
the involving this Kingdom in another bloody and inhumane war, and to eclipse
and obstruct the purity and tranquillity of the Commonwealth of England, by
promoting and advancing an Arbytrary Government, and infringing the Common
Rights and Liberties of the people, for improving their own interests, to the
end they may return and inflame us again to our late tyrannical and Norman
Bondage. For prevention whereof, we whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do
declare, That we will give our utmost aid and assistance to our ever honored
and faithful Patriot Major Genesis Lambert, against the common enemy of this
Nation; and that we shall with the hazard of our lives and fortunes, endeavor
the preservation of the peace of these Counties, against all foreign oy
domestique enemies, And do further unanimously declare, and enter into
protestation, to live and dye with our Representatives assembled in Parl. for
establishing of the peace of the Kingdom, and perfecting of the great and
glorious work in hand; and that we do approve of their late Totes and
Declaration for the government of this Kingdom without a supreme or legislative
power, either by King or Peers, being resolved to persevere therein, and to
stand in opposition against all those, who shall dare to propagate, or advance
the Kingly prerogative or power within this Nation.


This Declaration was subscribed to by many thousands of the Knights, Gentry,
and Comoners within the Counties of York and Lancaster and ordered to be
printed and published, and dispersed throughout the several counties on this
side Trent.

Sir, As for other intelligence, here is little varie^ ^^^ly the rising of a
Scottish Mist, which we doubt not, ^^t will soon blown over; for our
intelligence from thenc^ says, That honest Archibald Cambdell, the Marquess
of Argyle, has declared his dis-assent to a proclamation for crowning the
Prince of Wales King, and entered his protest, and published his Testimony, for
a mutual compliance and reservation of the Union between the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland; which is the conclusion of this his cordial
Representation, from

Doncaster 14. Feb. 1648. Your most obliged friend, etc. Nehemiah Reinoldson.


Other Letters of a later date, say, That the Royal party begins to take their
Spring-flight into Scotland, where (as it is reported) Major Genesis Massey i^
resident, and does negotiate with the Estates at Edinburgh, for an Engagement
against England, having declared his resolutions to join with them therein.

A Declaration of the Parliament of England, and a List of the Names of the
Council of State, who are to govern this Nation.
FOrasmuch, as the great expectation of the people of England, is to know, what
assurance they shall have, that they are not under an arbytrary power, the parl.
of England now assembled do declare, That they are fully resolved to keep,
preserve, and maintain the fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and concerning
the preservation of the lives properties, and liberties of the people; and in
order thereunto, have appointed a Council of State for the Government of this
Kingdom, a perfect List of their Names are here inserted verbatim.

A List of the Names of the Council of State, for the Commonwealth of England.
THe Earl of Denbigh. Earl of Malgrave. Earl of P^mbroke. Earl of Salisbury.
Lord General Fairfax. Lord Gray of Wark. Lord Gray of Groby, Son to the Earl
of Stamford. Lord List. Lieut. General Cr^m^ell. Major Genesis Shippon. Lord
chief Justice Roll. Lord chief Justi^^ St. John. Lord chief Baron VVild. Lord
President Bradshaw. Sir Arthar Hazlerig. Sir William Massum. Sir Gilbert
Pickering. Sir James Harrington. Sir Henry Van^, junior. Sir John Danvers. Sir
William Armyn. Sir Henry Mildmay. Sir William Constable. Alderman ^enington.
Alderman Wilson. Mr. VVhitl^ck Esquire. Mr. Scapely Esquire. Mr. Henningham Esquire.
Colonel Ludlow. Mr. Wallop Esquire. Mr. Hutchinson Esquire. Mr. ^ond Esquire. Mr. Popham
Esquire. Mr. Walton Esquire. Mr. Scot Esquire. Mr. Purefoy Esquire. Mr. Jones Esquire.
Which Council of State, are to receive Instructions from the Representatives
of this Kingdom, and to be empowered for the managing of affairs in England,
Ireland, and the Principality of Wales, and to act and determine such things,
as may be most consistent to the advancement of the public Interest of the
Commonwealth, and the liberty, freedom, and safety of the people.

Divine Solitudes, and Heavenly Meditations.

Of providence, That God still knows the hearts and designs of the wicked,
and takes continual notice of all their actions; and in his due time, will
deliver his chosen people from slavery, tyranny, and oppression.

Of the Kingly Office, That Christ, who purchased the Church by his blood, is
appointed by God, to be the King and Head of the Church, and Prince over the
people of God, that his Kingdom is not of this World, but a spiritual and
celestial Kingdom, that he fulfilled the whole Law of God perfectly in all his
actions, that he fulfilled the law not only for himself, but for his people,
their liberty and freedom; that he suffered extreme things for us, even the
most hardest usage, that could be imagined or acted by men; that judgment shall
be be pronounced against them at the last day, according to their works, and
that the glory of Heaven is unspeakable, and in respect of us here upon earth,
and our tossing to and fro, from one place to another, incomprehensible.

THE END.

