THE GREAT Duty of Communicating EXPLAINED and ENFORCED, THE Objections against
it Answered, AND THE Necessary Preparation for it Stated. WITH DEVOTIONS To be
Used Before, At, and After THE Lord's Supper.

By the Author of The Duties of the Closet.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, over against Jonathan's Coffee-house, in
Exchange-alley, Cornhil, 1700.

Price 3 d. but 20 s. a hundred to those who give them away.

TO HIS PARISHIONERS.
Dear Neighbors,
IT being my design to settle a monthly Sacrament amongst you, beginning from
Easter Day now at hand: I cannot satisfy my self, without endeavoring, by all
ways in my power, to dispose and prepare you for a constant attendance at it.
For which end I send you this little plain Book, which contains the sum of all
that is necessary for you to know, and all that I have already Preached to you
on this Subject. And I most earnestly beseech, entreat and require you, (as you
will answer it at the Great Day, when men must give a strict and severe account
how they have used those means and opportunities of being acquaint^d with their
Duty which have been offered to them, especially by the hands of their
Spiritual Teachers and Pastors) to peruse and consider it, with the same
seriousness and concern for your Souls, with which, I call God to witness, it
was written. And, if it should not reach all your Scruples, and answer all your
Difficulties, I beg of you that you will let me know wherein you shall remain
unsatisfied, that so I may give you such farther Helps and Directions, as shall
appear to be needful. This, as it will show your sincerity and honest desire of
coming to the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, so will it
likewise be the shortest and surest way of your coming at it; it being
impossible, by Writing or Preaching, to give the same exact and speedy
resolutions to the doubts and difficulties of particular Persons, as by verbal
conferences; wherein they have the satisfaction of putting their Case, and
hearing it answered in their own way. May it please God, of his Great Goodness,
so to excite, direct and bless your Endeavors, in this, as well as in all
Religious Matters, that you may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things, and by so doing, Glorify God, make your calling and election sure; and
fulfill the joy of

Your most Faithful, and most Loving Pastor.
Feb. the 20th, 1699.
THE GREAT DUTY OF Communicating, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature, End and Design of the Lords Supper, the benefits which
Christians are made partakers of by receiving it, and the obligations which
they lie under to receive it.
IN order to a full and clear understanding of the Nature of the Lord's Supper,
we shall do well seriously and particularly to consider the Account which the
Scriptures give us, of our blessed Masters Institution of it. And this, by
comparing together, Matt. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. 1 Corinthians. 11. we shall find,
in short, to be this.

Our Blessed Savior, when he was eating the Passover with his twelve Apostles,
the evening before his Passion, took Bread, and gave thanks or blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to them saying, Take, eat, This is my Body which is given
for you. This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, and
when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he
said unto them, This is my Blood of the New Testament (or the new Testament in
my Blood) which is shed for you and for many: This do in remembrance of me.

For the better explaining of which words, and ascertaining the extent of their
Obligation we will distinctly consider these three things. First, What it is
that is here commanded to be done, Do this. Secondly, Who the Persons are that
are concerned to Do this. Thirdly, The end for which it is to be done, in
remembrance of me.


First, What it is that is here commanded to be done; and this can be nothing
else than what our Savior and his Apostles had been just then doing, viz.
taking Bread, and blessing and breaking it, and likewise taking Wine and giving
thanks, and partaking of and distributing both. To this; and every part of this
action must the words do this necessarily refer; because they immediately
follow the doing of all this, and no part of this is excepted in our Saviors
command. Those who are to provide and distribute, are to provide and distribute
both Bread and Wine, for so had our Lord done; and those, who are to receive,
are to receive both Bread and Wine; for so had the Apostles received. And
therefore the Church of Rome is inexcusable, which, directly contrary to our
Lords Institution, gives the Bread only to some Receivers without the Wine.

Secondly, Who the Persons are that are concerned to do this; and they are all
Christians whatsoever. By which I mean.

First, All Successions and Generations of Christians that shall be in the
World, as long as it shall last. For they being all equally concerned in the
benefits of our Savior's Death and Passion, must according to reason be
supposed to be equally obliged to keep up this Holy Supper in commemoration of
them. So that if we had had no Direction about this matter in Scripture, the
reason of the thing it self must then have taken place, and that would have
made this Supper perpetual. But the Scriptures have not been silent in this
point, but have plainly told us, that we are thus to show the Lords Death, till
he come: That is, till his second coming to judge the World.

Secondly, All sorts of Christians, the Laity or People as well as the Clergy
or Ministers of the Gospel. For tho it is pretended by some, that because our
Lord gave the Bread and Wine only to the Apostles who were all Ministers, and
not any one Lay Disciple, therefore he designed this Supper only for the
Ministers of the Gosspel, but not at all for the People; yet I think the
contrary may very plainly be proved, both from reason and Scripture. From
reason, both because it appears most probable that the Apostles, in the
Institution of this Supper, were the representatives of the people, and not of
the Ministers, who were then much better represented by our Great High Priest
Christ Jesus, and whose Office it is plain he then alone executed; and likewise
because it is certain, that the people, who are as much partakers of the
benefits of Christ's death as the Ministers, have as great reason to
commemorate 'em as they. From Scripture, both because it is evident from
thence, that the Apostles constantly administered this Supper to the people, (as
to give one Instance for all, we read Acts 2.42. where we have no less than
three thousand Lay Converts at once receiving this Supper) and likewise,
because we there find St. Paul spending great part of a Chapter in urging and
directing the Lay Corinthians how they ought to receive. 1 Cor. 11.

It Is true indeed, that the part which our Lord had in the institution of his
Holy Supper, viz. The blessing of Bread, and breaking it, and taking Wine, and
giving thanks, and distributing both, belongs only to the Minister of the
Gospel; because these are all special Acts and Exercises of the Ministerial
Function, and as such, have been always reserved to them alone. But the
receiving of the Bread and Wine, when broken, blessed and offered to us, is the
common dut^ of all Christians, as well people as Ministers.

Thirdly, The end for which this is commanded to be done, in remembrance of me,
or rather in commemoration of me: For so the word, which we here translate
remembrance, sometimes signifies; and this indeed, seems to be the most proper
signification of it in this place. For commemoration is a solemn act of
remembrance, and such an one, no doubt, our Savior here expects from us. We
are always bound habitually to remember him, but this his Supper is
particularly designed to excite in our Souls a present and actual remembrance
of him; of him? that is, of his death and Passion, of his Body that was broken,
and his Blood which was shed for us. For the Bread and Wine, which are here
administered to us, were appointed by him as signs and representations of his
Flesh and Blood, as he himself tells us, at his Institution of this Holy
Supper. This, says he, speaking of the Bread, is my Body which is given for
you; that is, this is a sign or representation of my Body, which shall very
suddenly be offered up upon the Cross for you; and again, speaking of the Cup,
This is my Blood of the New Testament, or the new Testament in my Blood, which
is shed for you and for many; as if he had said, the Wine which you now see in
this Cup, and which I commanded ye all to drink of, is a sign or representation
of my Blood, which will be shortly shed to ratify or confirm the New Covenant,
which I have made between God and Man.

When therefore we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, we must be sure to
put both parts of our Lord's Commandment together, and to fulfill both; by doing
it in remembrance of his Body that was given, and his Blood that was shed for
us. And such a remembrance as this necessarily implies these two things.

First, An acknowledgement of Christ for our Savior and Redeemer. For what
else is it to commemorate his dying for us, but to declare that we are
sensible, that our peace is made with God, through the blood of his Cross, and
that we, who before were all under sin and liable to wrath, aliens from, and
Enemies to God, shall now not have our trespasses imputed to us, but be saved
from wrath through Christ, and in the body of his flesh through death be
reconciled unto God. To declare, I say, and show both to God and Man, that our
hope is only in the Lord Jesus, who has now appeared to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, and in whom alone we have redemption through his blood,
even forgiveness of sins. This you see is what the Scripture means by Christ's
Body being broken, and his Blood shed for us, and therefore all Christians who
sincerely remember those, must sincerely acknowledge this.

Secondly, An acknowledgement of Christ for our Lord and Master; For, besides
that, by submitting to his Rites and Institutions, we plainly declare our
selves his Disciples: besides, that by acknowledging of, and partaking in his
Sacrifice, we do, according to the sense of all Nations, own our selves members
of his Church; besides this, I say, by acknowledging Christ's dying for us, we
do manifestly acknowledge our obligations both to love and obey him: To love
him, who has so loved us, as to lay down his life for us; to obey him, whose
purchase we are, who has bought us with a price, even the inestimable price of
his Blood, and has therefore a right to us, as the Scripture tells us, as a
peculiar people to himself. And this the Primitive Christians were so sensible
of, that they looked upon every receiving of the Lords Supper to be a new tie
and obligation, a new vow and dedication of themselves to Christ. And hence it
was that the word Sacrament, which signified among the Romans, that Oath of
Fidelity which their Soldiers took, was given as a name to the Lords Supper,
because Christians were supposed to bind themselves there, as it were by an
Oath, to Christ's Service.

The ends for which our blessed Lord instituted this holy Supper seem to have
been these three.

First, His Father's and his own Glory, which could no way better be
illustrated and extolled, than by making all Christians whatsoever join in
ascribing their Redemption and Salvation to them. For this is at once to own
both their power, and wisdom, and goodness, which were so eminently displayed
in these great works; and likewise their Sovereignty and Dominion over us,
which are the natural effects of them.

Secondly, The preserving the unity of his Church, toward which nothing could
contribute more, than the frequent meeting together of its Members, to
acknowledge one hope of their calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, above all, through all, and in them all; and this is
most effectually acknowledged, by our being all partakers of that one bread;
for thus, as St. Paul teaches, we being many are one bread and one Body. And
likewise their meeting to commemorate the noblest instance of Love that ever
appeared in the world, and consequently the noblest Example for Christians to
follow, the noblest motive to excite them to love one another.

Thirdly, The good and edification of every particular Christian, and this end
will appear to be admirably well served this way, if we will give our selves
leave to reflect a little on the benefits, which every Christian is made
partaker of by receiving this Holy Supper. And

First, If we consider this Holy Supper only as a Commemorative Sign, or sign
to put us in mind of Christ's dying for us, yet even thus it will prove of vast
advantage to us. For this will naturally tend to inflame our Love and exalt our
Gratitude toward him, to confirm our Faith and strengthen our Hope in him, and
to fix and stablish our purposes of obedience to him. All this, I say, will be
the natural result even of a bare contemplation or remembrance, of Christ's
having freely given up himself to death, even the death of the Cross for us,
and of his having thereby procured remission of all our Sins, and a promise of
Eternal Life and Happiness, to all those that obey him. But

Secondly, If we consider it, as it is the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ, that is, as it is to all faithful Christians an actual participation of
the benefits of Christ's death and passion, viz. of remission of sins, of the
hope of eternal happiness upon our obedience, and of the grace of the holy
Spirit to teach and enable us to obey, we shall be abundantly convinced of the
advantage and benefit of it to us. By this means we have the same strength and
nourishment conveyed unto our Souls, which the outward Symbols Bread and Wine
convey to our Bodies. We are made one with Christ, and Christ with us, and
nothing but our own wilful disobedience shall be ever able to part us more from
him.

This is a true and faithful account of the Lord's Supper, which I think may be
fairly summed up in these few and plain words. It is a Foederal Feast, or Feast
of Covenant between God and man, instituted by Christ himself, and perpetually
to be observed by all Christians, where by partaking of Bread and Wine, in
commemoration of Christ's Body given, and his Blood shed for them, they on
their part acknowledge Christ for their Savior and Redeemer, Lord and Master;
and God on his part, grants and confirms to them, under the Symbols of Bread
and Wine, the Body and Blood of his Son Christ Jesus, that is, all the blessed
effects of his Body broken and his Blood shed, viz. pardon of past sins,
promise of eternal happiness upon future obedience of the Gospel, and Grace to
direct and enable them to perform this obedience. And this Feast is therefore
called the Lord's Supper, because it was instituted by our Lord at Supper time.

From what has been said, I think our obligations to receive this Holy Supper
do abundantly appear. For

First, We have here a plain command so to do, Do this in nomembrance of me, a
command, as has been already shown you, which reaches to all Christians, and
will oblige them, even to the end of the world. So that it is mere trifling
with God, our Savior and the World, to call our selves Christians, and yet
live in a wilful neglect of this plain command of Christ. Why call ye me Lord,
Lord, says our Savior, and do not the things which I say? to what purpose do
ye in words acknowledge me to be your Master, and yet when I call upon you to
do this, plainly declare by your actions that you do not regard me? Better had
it been for you that you had never taken my sacred name into your mouths, than
that you should thus abuse and blaspheme it. Be not deceived, I will not be
mocked; but I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, at
the day of Judgment than for you.

Secondly, This command of our Savior is attended with a multitude of
Circumstances, which do every one of them very much add to its force and
obligation, and render the neglect of it more and more unpardonable. For

First, It was his dying Command; that very same night, in which he instituted
this Holy Supper, was he betrayed into the hands of the Jews, in order to be
mocked and derided, buffeted and scourged, and at last sacrificed upon the
Cross for our sakes. And can our dying Savior require any thing of us, that we
will not do? Can he speak, and shall not his last words be minded by us? What
answer, do ye think ye should have given him, had ye heard him speaking in this
manner to you: My dearest Children who I love so well, whose miseries I am so
deeply concerned for, whose sins I am so very desirous to get a pardon for,
that behold I am just now going to dye an ignominious death upon the Cross for
you that so, by the Sacrifice of my self, I may take away all your sins, and
make you heirs of eternal Glory: My best and dearest Children, dearer to me
than my life itself. Hearken to the last words of your dying Savior. I have
but one thing more to require of you. Oh let not that be neglected by you! Let
me entreat you, with my last breath, that breath which I am contented to part
with for your sakes, to preserve this my last Commandment inviolable I would ye
not all have said, Distrust us not, O blessed Master we beseech thee, command
whatsoever thou see good, and we will cheerfully obey, tho it be even to
death itself. Our hearts are affected with the sense of thy approaching
kindness, that we can no more forget thy dying words, than we can refuse to
accept thy dying Love.

Secondly, It is a very easy Command, take Bread and Wine, bless them, and then
eat and drink of them ^n remembrance of me, is a Commanndment as little
^rievous as our hearts could wish for; so that they ^ho neglect it, have
nothing to say in excuse for themselves, but seem to sin purely for sinnings
sake, and this is the very height of wickedness. Blessed God, that ever the
Devil should so far get possession of men's ^earts, as to keep them from doing
their duty, even ^here there is no hardship in doing it. How can ^hese men in
reason expect that our Savior should ^e at any pains to save them, who are
resolved they ^ill be at none to obey him? Or rather, how can ^hey not expect
to be made the unhappy instances of ^is wrathful displeasure, who will not do
even this ^mall thing to please him?

Thirdly, This is a Command, in which our obedience to christ is more
peculiarly tried. In most other of his ^ommands, there are other obligations,
besides those ^f his Authority; as in all moral duties, obligations from
nature, reason, or the like; so that it is not ^ery easy to tell, by men's
compliance with these, ^hether they are true Servants of Christ or no; because
they may, nay, and it is plain they sometimes ^o, comply with these Duties,
upon principles of nature or reason, when yet they have no true sense ^f their
obligation from Christ's authority. But, in the ^uty before us, there being no
obligation, but Christ's ^ositive institution, they who perform it as they
^ught, must certainly act upon a true Christian prin^iple, viz. a sense of the
obedience they owe to Christ's ^ommands. This then being a plain Test of our
^eing true Christians, it is certainly our duty to let ^ll the world see, by
our compliance with it, that ^e are so; and that the obligation of Christ's
Autho^ity, when alone, is abundantly sufficient to com^and us, whithersoever it
pleases.

Fourthly, This command is a more than ordinary Trial of ^ur gratitude and Love
to Christ, because it commands nothing, but what we are bound even by the mere
^aws of Love and Gratitude, to be most ready to per^orm. For supposing Christ
had had no authority to ^ommand us any thing; but had only requested of us,
that we would perpetually observe this his Supper in commemoration of him; yet
considering wha^ great, unspeakably great things, he had done for us* we should
have been most inexcusable, if we should not have answered this his request.
The Laws o^ Love and Gratitude are founded upon reason, and therefore ought to
have a powerful influence upon reasonable creatures, and certainly all that
Love and Gratitude can oblige us to, we must be obliged to in behalf of him,
who has done more to engage our Love, and deserve our thanks, than all the
Friends that we ever had in the world put together. Base and ungrateful
wretches then must we needs be, if when he only desires any thing of us, we do
not make have to fulfill his desire; but most especially base and ungrateful, if
when he desires of us only, that we would meet together now and then, to
commemorate all his kindness toward us, we refuse to hear or regard him, as
tho he were unworthy our remembrance.

Fifthly, This is a command to do a thing vastly for our own good. So that we
must be Fools as well as Rebels, if we omit to do it. Of how much advantage the
receiving the Lords Supper, is to every faithful Christian you have already
seen, and from thence may judge how much it is your interest to receive it: And
certainly, where your duty and your interest are so closely linked together, it
must be a strange Spirit of contradiction and rebellion, or at least a strange
degree of carelessness and supineness, that can make you forget or neglect your
duty. You must have a mighty mind certainly to quarrel with our Savior, who
will rather forego your own interest, then obey his commands.

Sixthly, This is a command, in which the honor of God and our Savior are in
a very extraordinary manner concerned, and which therefore we ought to be most
particularly careful to observe. For since the Holy Supper was instituted on
purpose for the solemn commemoration of the great loving kindness of God and
our Savior in Redeeming us, and for showing forth to the World their great
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, (...) the Redemption of us, and likewise the new
Title ^ey hereby acquired to our service and obedience; ^e cannot possibly do
any thing more for their ho^our, than to attend this solemn commemoration, and
join with our fellow Christians in acknowledging ^ll Glory, service and
obedience to God, who has ^av'd us, not according to our works, but according
to his ^wn purpose and grace, and has bought us with a price, and likewise to
our Lord Jesus Christ who was slain and ^as redeemed us to God by his blood.
And the refusing to ^o this looks as if we did not really believe Christia^ity;
but counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith we ^re sanctified an unholy
thing. And how high an affront ^his must needs be to God and our Savior, your
own ^earts will tell you.

Seventhly, This is a command which tends mightily to ^rocure and promote love
and unity amongst Christians, as has ^een before proved; and upon that account,
challenges a very particular regard and respect from us. Every member of a
Society is in an extraordinary man^er obliged to pay a most exact obedience to
those Laws, which do more immediately concern the well-^eing of that Society,
of which he professes himself ^ member; and consequently every Christian must
^ye under more than ordinary obligations to obey ^his command of Christ,
concerning his Supper, because the good of the Christian Church in general is
very much concerned in it. It was designed, and is very fit to unite and bind
the members of Christ's Church closer and closer together, and so to streng^hen
the main body; and those who will not join ^n this design plainly betray the
trust reposed in them, and as far as they are able, defraud all their
fellow members of those blessings, of love, peace, mutual ^riendship, etc.
which must have been the natural effects of their obedience in this point.

Lastly, This is a command, which we are often put in mind of. We hear of our
obligations to it both from the Desk and from the Pulpit; we read of them in
the Church Catechism, and have a sensible remembrance of them, every now and
then, at the Communion Table. We are frequently exhorted, entreated, and in the
name of Christ commanded to attend his Holy Supper; we are told of the great
danger of neglecting it, and both the mercies and terrors of the Lord are made
use of to draw and compel us to it.

And now, if after all this, we still continue obstinate and undutiful, what
can we expect but a punishment answerable to our obstinacy: a punishment that
shall no more relent than we have done, but, being deaf to all our prayers and
cries for mercy, shall with the same continued torments prey upon us, and be to
us the sad remembrancers of our fatal obstinacy to all eternity.

CHAP. II. Of Preparation for the Lord's Supper.
IN discoursing on this head, it will be convenient, from the very beginning,
to distinguish betwixt necessary preparation, without which no man ought to
come to the Lords Supper, and such as is only expedient or advisable under
certain circumstances; it being plain from experience that for want of this
distinction, men have been strangely confounded in their notions about this
matter.

To the necessary preparation, no doubt those words of St Paul referred,
Corinth. 11.28. Let a man examine, try or prove himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup; because this is laid down at large, as a
general rule to all Christians, and it is here plainly supposed that no man
ought to to eat of that bread and drink of that cup, who has not first examined
himself. Examined himself as to what? Our Church tells us in few words, whither
he repents him truly of his former sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new
life; has a lively faith in Gods mercy through Christ, with a thankful
remembrance of his death; and is in charity with all Men.

In which words three things are propounded as necessary qualifications for the
worthy receiving the Lords Supper. First a sincere and complete Repentance,
which shall not only look backwards with unfeigned sorrow for our sins past,
but likewise forward with steadfast purposes of leading a new life for the time
to come. Secondly, a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ, such a firm
and hearty persuasion and assurance of God's having redeemed us from sin and
death by the death of Christ, and of his having made him our Lord and Master,
and promised eternal life to us upon condition of our obedience to him, as
shall work in us a readiness of mind to serve and obey him in all things, and
more especially shall dispose us to commemorate his death with the highest
gratitude, and most affectionate Thanksgiving. Lastly, An universal Love and
Charity, which shall extend to all men, even our very enemies, and make us not
only forgive all their trespasses against us, but likewise bless them, pray for
them, and, in one word, do them all the good we can.

Now that every of these is really a necessary qualification for the worthy
receiving the Lords Supper, will most evidently appear by considering them a
little apart. And

First, as to Repentance, it is plain, even from reason, that without this we
must needs be unfit to join in any of Gods Ordinances, it being downright
Hypocrisy, and a mere mocking of God, to declare ourselves his Servants by
communicating in these outward Rites of his Religion, when yet at the same time
we are not inwardly disposed at all to serve him, in the most important parts
of our duty, living Righteously, soberly and godlily in thi^ present world. And
therefore we find the Scriptures ^nstantly representing God, as one that
abhors and abominateth the service of the wicked, and resents their prayess
and sacrifices, their incense and solemn meeting as abomination and iniquity.

Much less can a wicked man be fit to join in this holy Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper; for the end of this being to lament and bewail those sins, which were
the occasion of our blessed Lord's death; and to rejoice in that victory, which
our Lord by his death obtained over sin; he must certainly be a very unfit man
to do this, who still takes part with sin, shows a favor and liking to it,
and instead of being Servant to Christ, is indeed the Servant of sin.

Besides, we know the Lord's Supper is a covenanting ordinance, wherein we are
to engage our selves to the service of Christ; and God upon supposition of such
our engagement, is to make over to us all the benefits of Christ's death and
passion, remission of Sins, Grace to enable us to live according to the Rules
of the Gospel, and eternal Salvation upon our so living. But now the wicked man
is utterly unqualified for both parts of this Covenant; For how shall he engage
himself to the service of Christ, who is not resolved to forsake his Sins? Or
what Title can he possibly have to the benefits of Christ's death, who will not
perform that obedience, which is a necessary condition of his coming at them?
so that such a person can have nothing to do at the Lord's Supper: he is not
concerned in the business of it, and therefore, if he does come to it, must be
looked upon as an intruder, and one that purposely designeth to provoke and
affront God. Unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou
hate to be reformed and castest my words behind thee?

Secondly, As to Faith: without this, the Scripture tells us, it is impossible
to please God. For he that comes to God, he that draws near to him in any of
his ordinances, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. God is not to be put off with outward professions and
pretenses, (...) be worshipped only with our Lips, while our hearts are far
from him: but he is a God of the Heart, a searcher of our Reins, and a tryer of
our most inward thoughts, and therefore it will be better for us not to worship
him at all, than not to worship him in earnest; never to pretend, by any
outward signs, to believe in him, than not to believe as we pretend.

And indeed can any thing possibly be more absurd and ridiculous, as well as
blasphemous and provoking, than for those to pretend to commemorate Christ's
dying for us, who do not believe one tittle of it? For those to acknowledge him
the Savior of the World, the Lord and Judge of it, who say in their hearts it
is no such thing? This is certainly either to question God's Omniscience, or
his regard to sincerity, or else to defy his Power, and therefore sure we
cannot think this an acceptable service to him.

Besides, are not all the Blessings of the Gospel, which we hope to have
confirmed to us in the Lord's Supper, promised to Believers only? or can we
think that the inestimable benefits of Christ's death, are to be had at so
cheap a rate, that there is no need either of believing any thing of them, or
so much as being thankful for them? no certainly; the Gospel is the power of
God unto Salvation, unto every one that believes, and to none else; to him
that believes with a lively Faith, (not a Faith without works, which St. James
tells us, is dead) and abounds therein with thanksgiving. To what purpose
then, but to aggravate his condemnation, shall that man dare to come to the
Lord's Supper, in expectation of the Blessings of the Gospel, who is so far
from abounding in Faith with Thanksgiving, that he has neither Faith nor
Thanksgiving.

Lastly, As to Charity, this is upon many accounts, a necessary qualification
for our worthy receiving the Lord's Supper. For First, It cannot be supposed
that any man can be fit to commemorate the great Love and kindness of our
blessed Lord in dying for us, who is not so far affected with it, as to
endeavor all he can to transcribe and imitate it. How great things soever we
may say in commendation of it, how much soever we may in words extol it, we
shall not be accepted of God, it we in our Actions blaspheme it. And it is in
truth no less than to call our Savior Fool in dying for us, when we were his
Enemies; to think that we are not obliged to love, forgive and help one
another. Either his Love to us had no good grounds and reasons for it, or if it
had and we think so, we ought to show that we do so, by letting the same
grounds and reasons influence our Love. Secondly, Without Charity one of the
great ends of our meeting at the Lord's Supper will be defeated, which is to
propagate Love and Charity amongst Christians. Thirdly, Without this the
Scripture assures us, all our Services, all our Gifts and Graces will stand for
nothing in the sight of God. Though we speak with the Tongues of Men and of
Angels, and have not Charity, we are become as sounding Brass or a tinkling
Cymbal. And though we have the Gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries
and all Knowledge, and though we have all Faith, so that we could remove
Mountains, and have not Charity, we are nothing. Fourthly, Without this we are
incapable of receiving any benefit from the Lord's Supper; for remission of
sins, which must first be obtained, before we can hope for any other mercy from
God, is promised only to the charitable. If ye forgive men their Trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if you forgive not men their
Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses. Lastly, Our
blessed Lord has commanded us not to dare to bring any ill will or enmity along
with us, when we come to his Supper; nay farther, if we are come to it, and
find that we have unawares brought any, to go away and lay them aside, before
we presume to partake of it. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee: Leave there thy Gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift.

Thus much is, I think, sufficient to prove that Repentance, Faith and Charity,
are necessary qualifications for the worthy receiving of the Lord's Supper.
That they are the only necessary ones is very plain, because, they are all that
is necessary to Salvation, all that is necessary to give a Man a Title to all
the Promises and Blessings of the Gospel; and certainly more cannot be
necessary to fit a Man for the Lord's Supper, than to fit him for Heaven; to
fit him for the seal of the Promises than for the Promises themselves.

But here I shall be asked; If this be all the preparation necessary, how comes
it to pass that we have so many Sermons preached, and Books written about
setting apart some time, suppose a week, for private Devotion and Examination,
every time before we receive the Lords Supper? How comes it to pass that many
very good men if they happen to be disturbed by any worldly business, so that
they cannot attend this their weekly preparation, look upon themselves as
unfit, for that time, to attend the holy Communion? To this I answer.

First, that I told you before that there was a preparation, tho not absolutely
necessary, yet, under some circumstances, expedient and advisable. Where men
have time and other opportunities, it is very commendable in them to do all
they can, by reading the Scriptures and other good books, and by prayer. and
other exercises of Devotion, to excite and encourage, to actuate and quicken
all their graces and virtues, that so they may appear, in their best Robes at
their Lord's Table. This is such a piece of respect to God and our Savior, as
cannot fail of being well accepted of them. But then

Secondly, We must be careful not to carry this matter too far, and make other
necessary conditions of communicating worthily, besides what God has made. He
has no where commanded us to say a certain number of prayers, to fast so many
days, and to ask our selves just so many questions before we communicate, nor
does the nature of our duty require any such thing of us. And if our Spiritual
Pastors have put us upon these things, they have done it as a matter of
prudence and good advice, and not of necessity and absolute Duty; at least, if
they have not, they have gone beyond their commission, and departed from the
Doctrine of the Church, which solemnly invites all such, as do truly and
earnestly repent them of their sins, and are in love and charity with their
neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following the commandment^ of God,
and walking from henceforth in his holy ways, t0 draw near with Faith, and take
this Holy Sacrament to their comfort; without asking them whether they have
made any farther preparation.

Lastly, As for those who refrain from coming to the Lords Supper, because they
have been hinderd frem making this particular preparation: let them be never so
good and never so wise in other things, yet in this I praise them not. For
certainly it is an argument of a weak mind, and not of a sound Judgment, for
men to make to themselves duties, which God and Reason have not made: it is
Superstition, and not Religion, for men to place their duty in little niceties
and punctilio's, and to overlook the weightier matters of the Law. And yet this
they certainly do, who excuse themselves from the great and important duty of
communicating, purely upon account of their not having performed some little
forms and exercises, which nothing but their own fancies and other men's
imprudent discourses and examples have made duties. Besides, they do by this
means debar themselves from the great and inexpressible benefits of
communicating; they omit a most happy occasion of glorifying God and their
Savior, and doing good to their brethren and themselves, only to humor
groundless scruples, and unreasonable curiosities.

Nay, even themselves at other times condemn themselves; they can readily come
to other Ordinances, as praying, hearing the word, etc. without any such
preparation as this; and yet this would be every whit as commendable here, as
for the Holy Sacrament. We may hear and pray, as well as receive unworthily,
and yet this they seem not to be much concerned about; which plainly shows that
they are guided in this matter more by example and fancy, than Reason and
Religion.

The sum of all is this. We cannot possibly, by any preparation make ourselves
too pure and devout Guests for the Lords Table; and therefore, when we have
opportunity, it will highly become us, by prayer and other such means, to trim
and deck our selves for it. But still we must always remember that the great
and only necessary preparation is Repentance, Faith and Charity: a pure
innocent mind, a firm and steadfast faith in Christ, an ardent and impartial
affection to our Brethren. Without these, all other preparations are vain and
of no account, and with these we are fit guests to receive the Lords Supper
wherever we meet it, tho never so unexpectedly, and without the least
warning. He who is possessed of these Divine Graces, is always fit, without any
further preparation, for Death and Heaven, and then undoubtedly fit for any
means and ordinances of Religion whatsoever.

But here I shall be asked how a man can know, hat he is thus prepared? I
answer his own mind must tell him, and, if he does but consult it honestly and
with sincerity it will. No body but himself can inform him, whether he be in
temper and disposition, in firm purpose and resolution to quit all his sins,
without the least reserve, and to endeavor to the utmost of his power to live
for the future, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. No body can tell him, what he
believes, what he unfeignedly acknowledges to be true, but himself; nor can
any other be able to inform him, whether he heartily forgiveth all men their
trespasses, and is ready upon all occasions to do them the most good he can. No
man knows the heart of a man but himself; and he may know it, if he be
faithful to himself. Otherwise we are in vain called upon in Scripture to
examine ourselves, to try our thoughts and consult our Consciences.

Well, but you have formerly examined your self, and thought your self rightly
disposed in all these points; but you found by your after-behaviour, that you
deceived your self, and therefore how shall you trust your self again? I
answer, the more sensible you are of any mistake you have formerly made in this
matter, the more heedful and watchful over your self ought you to be for the
future. It may be your heart was in right temper before, when you thought it
so, but you let it slide back afterward; therefore, though you think you stand
now, take heed lest you fall. It may be you were careless and remiss in
examining your self before, and then it is no wonder that you found your self
mistaken; therefore be strict and severe with thy self now, that thou may be
mistaken no more.

But may you venture to go to the Sacrament, immediately upon your conversion
from your sins? Must you not stay some considerable time to try, by your
Actions, whether your purposes of amendment are sincere or no? Yes, if you
cannot trust your self, you had best so to do; if you are in doubt of it you
must not dare to mock God. But if after a thorough search and examination of
your self, you are fully persuaded, that you are really beginning a new life,
and that you shall persevere in it, I see no reason then why you should not
come; come to him that refreshes such as are weary and heavy laden; come to
him who having wrought in thee to will, according to his good purposes, will
infallibly, if it be not thy own fault, work in thee to do likewise, and so
finish the good work, which he has happily and graciously began in thee.

We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the new Converts to Christianity,
without any time of trial, were immediately admitted to the Lord's Supper; for
so we are told Acts 2. that all, the whole three thousand new Converts there
mentioned, immediately after their conversion continued in breaking of Bread,
that is, in the Communion of the Lord's Supper. And therefore I can see no
reason, why a man that really thinks a true change of mind wrought in him,
should not presently, upon his assurance of such a change, from an honest and
impartial examination of himself, hope that he is a fit guest for our Lords
Table. Especially considering how kindly the prodigal Son in the Gospel is
received and treated by his Father, even immediately upon his return.

I shall add no more, but that I most earnestly beseech men, to be very
faithful to themselves in this weighty business of self examination. They are
the only persons that can suffer by making a false judgment of themselves, and
therefore it highly stands them in stead, so to judge themselves, that they be
not judged of the Lord; so to search and examine their own consciences (and
that not lightly, and after the manner of dissemblers with God; but so) that
they may come holy and clean to such a heavenly Feast, in the marriage garment
required by God in the holy Scripture, and be received as worthy partakers of
that holy Table.

CHAP. III. Of frequency of Communicating.
I Shall not here detain you with a long account, how the Primitive Christians
communicated at at first twice a day, then daily for a considerable time, and
at length never seldomer than once a week. The state of the Church while in its
Infancy, and under persecution, required then a more frequent performance of
this Duty, for the strengthening and comforting of its members, and for the
propagation of the Faith, than now, when it is well grown, and generally
spread, and has gotten helps and advantages from secular interest and power.
And therefore the example of the Primitive Christians in this point,
circumstances having much varied between their times and ours, cannot be an
exact Rule to us. However, thus much we may very fairly infer from it, that we
ought to be frequent in this Duty, tho not so frequent as they were.

But that which it principally concerns a private Christian to know, as the
case stands now, is how often he ought to partake of the Lord's Supper, when
administered in the Parish where he resides. I say in the Parish where he
resides, because certainly private Christians are not bound to look further;
these being the places in which the Church has commanded them to attend the
Ordinances of Religion, and to expect the administration of them.

And the answer to this is very plain and easy: That we ought not to omit any
opportunity, so offered to us, of partaking of the Lord's Supper. For,
considering how much our partaking of it is for the honor of God and our
Savior, for the credit of our Religion, the good of the Christian Society, of
which we profess our selves Members, and our own particular interest and
advantage; I cannot see how we can answer it, either to God, our Savior, our
Brethren or our selves, if we at any time neglect to partake of it. Can we
doubt whether it will not be highly displeasing to God, if when he calls us
together to give thanks and praise to him, in a most solemn manner, for his
abundant mercies in Christ Jesus, we at any time unthankfully refuse to come?
Do we think that our Blessed Savior can take it well at our hands, if when he,
by his Ministers, invites us to commemorate his Love in dying for us, we at any
time turn our backs upon him, as those who think him not worthy our
remembrance? Are we afraid that we shall give too much countenance to our
Religion, if we always appear upon this occasion; or that the Church will grow
too strong, by our thus often becoming one bread and one body? Or do we suspect
that we shall be too much gainers by our constant communicating in the blessed
effects of the body and blood of Christ. Methinks I am ashamed to ask such
questions as these. Oh! with what Joy ought we to run to our Lord's Table, when
ever we behold it spread for us? How ought the sight of the heavenly Food,
there prepared for us, to transport and delight us? How much more eagerly ought
we to embrace every opportunity of having the pardon of our sins confirmed, and
the promises of Grace and everlasting Life renewed to us, than of heaping up
Riches, Honors, or any other worldly good? and yet we are sure to be careful
enough to let slip none of these.

But perhaps you will say, certainly there are sometimes, when a man may be
despensed with from communicating, some reasons which will excuse his absence;
and every time of staying from the Lord's Table is not sure to be looked upon
as a sin of Omission. I answer, that the excuses which will avail in this case
are very few. That which is commonly made, of want of time for particular
preparation, I have already showed to be insufficient in the foregoing Chapter:
And I know of none that will hold good but these three.

First, In some Parishes the number of Communicants is so vastly great, that
they cannot possibly communicate all at one time, at least not with any
tolerable convenience; and in such a case, a good man not only may, but ought
to give way and make room for others, who have a right to communicate as well
as he. But then we must be very careful that when we do absent our selves upon
this account, there be real ground and reason for it, and that we may be sure
of this, we shall do well to consult our Minister about it, who is the most
competent Judge in this matter.

Secondly, It may sometimes so happen, that a man, just before the time when he
should receive the Lords Supper, by some sudden and surprising occasion, may be
drawn into some gross and enormous Sin, and not have time enough between that
and the Administration of the Sacrament, to recollect and examine himself, to
try whether he be truly sorrowful for this his fault, and do sincerely detest
and repent of it. And if so, he ought certainly for that time to stay away, and
make his peace with God, and to make himself sure that he has a right to the
benefits of Christ's Death and Passion, before he presumes to come to the
Communion of them.

Lastly, Whatever will excuse a man from coming to Church, as works of
Necessity or Charity, being sick and in distress our selves, or attending upon
such as are so, and need our help, etc. will, by parity of reason excuse us
from coming to the Lord's Supper. But he who comes to Church, and yet at the
same time neglects the Lord's Supper, to which he is there invited, without
either of the two forementioned reasons, is inexcusable. And upon this account,
I suppose it was that the Canons Apostolical and the Synod of Antioch threaten
every one of the Faithful with excommunication, who come to Church to hear the
Holy Scriptures, but stay not to participate of the Holy Supper.

But it may be farther urged, does not the Law of our Land it self, which
obliges us to communicate three times a year only, suppose this to be
sufficient?

I answer, First, that the Law of the Land plainly supposes it very good and
commendable to do it oftener, because it says, we shall receive it three times
at the least.

Secondly, If what has been said above, concerning the reasons of our omitting
no opportunity of communicating, be true; this is enough to oblige us without
any farther consideration.

CHAP. IV. Objections against Communicating answered.
HOping that some men at least are sincere in their excuses, which they make
for not coming to the Lord's Supper, how light and trifling soever the excuses
themselves may be, I shall not grudge my time and pains in considering them
distinctly, and giving answers to them. And First, The most common excuse which
men make in this case is that they are unworthy, and therefore dare not
communicate; always bearing in mind those terrible words of St. Paul. 1 Corinthians. 11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily ea^eth and drinks
damnation to him^. Now in answer to this, I desire men to consi^ the three
things.

First, what it is they mean, when they say they are unworthy. For, if they
mean any thing to the purpose, they must mean either that they are not sorry
for their sins, and fully resolved to forsake them, or that they do not
steadfastly believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, or lastly, that
they are not in Charity with the world, ready to forgive and do good to all
mankind; for these are the only things which can render a man unworthy to
receive the Lords Supper. And yet, I verily believe, that the far greatest
number of those, who call themselves unworthy, would think themselves very much
injured, if any of these things should be said of them. Well then, such men
give themselves their own answer, they are not really unworthy, and therefore
they may safely come.

But, say they, we are encumbered mightily with worldly business: we do not find
in our selves a zealous and a warm Faith and Love of God, our Savior and
Religion; we have contests, disputes and lawsuits with many of our Neighbors,
and these things we are afraid render us unworthy. By no means: if we pursue
our worldly business honestly and fairly, without letting it incroach upon the
business of Religion, by swallowing up all our time, and leaving none or very
little for the worship of God and service of our Neighbors, we not only do
what is innocent, but commendable, and our duty. If we are rooted and grounded
in Faith, so that in the general course of our lives, we have our conversation,
as becomes the Gospel of Christ, and keep all his Commandments; this is a
sufficient proof of our Faith and Love to God, our Savior and Religion, although
we never have any hot fits and sudden starts, raptures and ecstasies. Lastly, If
we are contending with our Neighbors for nothing, but what we sincerely think
our right, if we take a fair and legal way of righting our selves, and
prosecute our suits, without the least malice or ill will to our Neighbors
person, there is no harm in all this; none of these things are any bar to our
communicating. But

Secondly, If you are really unworthy, whose fault is it that you are so? May
you not have, or at least might you not have had for asking, such a measure of
Divine Grace, as would sufficiently enable you to attain all those
qualifications which are necessary to render a man a worthy Communicant, and
why then did you not, or why now do you not, accept and make use of it? Do you
think to make your own fault your excuse? Or will you plead in your behalf that
you are not worthy, because you will not be so? No certainly, all that you can
do in this case, is to make what haste you can possibly, by immediately
embracing and complying with the offers of Gods Grace to become worthy; that so
there may lie no fault at your door, either on one side or the other, but that
you may both communicate and communicate worthily.

Lastly, as to those terrible words of St Paul, He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself; I might observe, that the
word which we here render damnation, signifies no more than Judgment, and
probably was designed in this place only to denote temporal Judgments; but I
shall not insist upon this. For whatever the meaning of these words may be, it
is certain, that the unworthy receiving the Lords Supper, till repented of, is
a damnable sin; as being a downright impudent mocking of God and Christ, by
pretending ourselves their Servants, and solemnly vowing all holy obedience to
them, when yet in our hearts, we at the same time, mean no such thing. But what
then? Shall we therefore stay away from the Communion, and by so doing wilfully
break a plain Commandment of our Savior, and thereby become guilty of a
damnable sin? This is to take a certain damnation for fear of one, which we may
avoid if we please. No certainly, the juster consequence, in this case, is that
we ought to use our utmost endeavors to qualify our selves for communicating
worthily, that so we may have no reason to fear the dreadful punishment of
communicating unworthily.

Secondly, Others are afraid of communicating, lest they should fall into sin
afterward, and this they think would be unpardonable; and for this reason some
men have thought it wisdom to abstain from communicating till the time of their
death, when they are beyond all danger of sinning more.

Now I readily grant that it is a very great aggravation of any sin, that it is
committed after receiving the holy Communion, because this makes it a sin
against new Vows and Promises, which we there made, a sin after greater
measures of Grace and Divine assistance, which we there received, than we had
before, and consequently a more inexcusable sin, than it would have been
before; but that it should be unpardonable is what can never be proved. For

First, It is certain from our Saviors own words, that all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto men. So that unless sinning after Communicating be
the sin against the Holy Ghost, which I think was never yet pretended, we need
not fear its being forgiven us, upon our sincere repentance for it, and
endeavoring to be more careful for the future. But

Secondly, Did not St Peter, after receiving the Communion, nay, and
immediately after too, commit sin, and that too one of the greatest sins that
he could possibly be guilty of, the denying his Lord and Master, and yet no
body doubts but that upon his sorrow and repentance, this was entirely forgiven
him. And ought not this example to be a great encouragement to all such, as are
so unhappy to sin as he did, upon repentance like his, to hope for a pardon
like his too? However,

Lastly, The consideration of this aggravating circumstance of our sins, ought
to make us extremely cautious and fearful of sinning after the Communion; for
no wise man will venture himself into an eminent danger, merely because there
is a possibility of his escaping out of it.

Thirdly, Others think to excuse themselves by saying that they have already,
perhaps often too, been partakers of the Lord's Supper, and been so far from
receiving those benefits from it, which we pretend are to be had there, that
they have not found any benefit at all by it, and therefore they cannot
conceive, to what purpose they should give themselves the trouble of coming to
it any more. To which I answer,

First, That generally speaking, this is not true; it being plain from
experience that most men, even the worst of Men too, gain this sensible
advantage by communicating, that for some time both before and after, they are
more serious, more thoughtful, and keep themselves within stricter bounds of
Temperance and Sobriety, than they used to do at other times. And this is a
very considerable advantage, and has very often proved the happy occasion of
men's looking into and examining their own lives, of their finding fault with,
and becoming sick of themselves, and of their seeking a remedy for their
sickness, in a thorough Repentance and Reformation.

Secondly, If men do not find these benefits which we assure them of, in the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, it must be wholly their own fault,
for God is faithful who has promised, and will infallibly make good his part
of the Covenant, to all those who are careful to make good theirs. So that this
objection, so far as it is true, is an objection only against our selves; it
can be no reason for our absenting from the Holy Communion, but it may and
ought to be a powerful reason for our taking care to come so prepared, that we
may be fit to receive the blessings there offered by God to us.

Thirdly, Men are apt to judge of the effects of their receiving the Communion,
before (according to the nature of things) they can possibly appear. God's
Grace, though it works in a supernatural manner, yet it attends the natural
motion of men's own endeavors, works and keeps equal pace along with them. And
therefore our reason will tell us that it must take up some time to watch and
observe the effects of it. The conversion of a Sinner, and perfection of a
Saint, are not things to be wrought in a moment, there are a great many little
steps and degrees, to be taken and gained, which are almost insensible, at
least do not become remarkable, till they have been often added one to another;
And therefore we must wait with patience, and keep on doing our own business,
and then in time we need not fear but the works of the Lord will be made
perfect in us. We can no more argue that we do not grow in Grace, because we do
not see every small increase of such our growth, than that we do not grow in
bodily stature, for the same reason. But,

Lastly, Supposing no benefits at all were to accrue to us, from our receiving
the Lord's Supper; What then? Are we to obey none of our Savior's
Commandments, but such as we are to be gainers by? Is it not enough that he has
plainly enjoined us to do this? Are not his Power and Authority sufficient
grounds and motives for our obedience? Moreover, are we never to minister to
the glory and honor of God and our Savior, but where we can at the same time
minister to our own profits too? This methinks is strange Doctrine, especially
in a Christian's mouth, who promised at his Baptism, without reserve, to keep
all God's Commandments, and to walk in the same unto his lives end.

Fourthly, Another Objection comes from those men, who do not care to
communicate with ill men, who they see constantly flock to the Lords Table:
much less to receive the communion from the hands of an ill Minister, as it may
sometimes happen. But this I hope to show to be rather an affected niceness and
squeamishness, than well-grounded Wisdom and Religion. For,

First, as to Lay Communicants, supposing them to be ill men, which yet
Charity, especially such Charity as a man ought to bring with him to the
Communion, commands you to be well assured of, before you suppose it; yet
what is that to you? are you bound to answer for their unworthiness in
receiving, or for the sins they shall be guilty of after? are you afraid that
they are infectious, and that you shall catch their sins of them, only by
looking on them, or kneeling by them? if not, what means this foolish nicety,
these groundless scruples? would it not become you better when you meet such
men, at the Lords Table, to hope that they are now beginning to repent and
amend, and to wish and pray that it may be so? ought you not rather to embrace
and welcome them with joy thither, as the Angels do a repenting sinner, and to
lay hold of this occasion of encouraging them to love thy self, and other good
men, as that which may afterward prove a likely means of making them love that
Religion, to which thou and they owe all their goodness. This certainly would
be the properest behavior at this feast of Love: this Charity of thine to them
would nearest resemble that of thy Lord to thee.

But you will say, perhaps, that the thoughts of that extreme danger, which
they incur by coming unworthily to the Lords Table, and their cold and
indifferent behavior there, discompose thy thought and deaden thy devotions.
Be it so; yet this is no thy fault but theirs, so far as they are the necessary
occasion of it. But surely it will be no hard matter for thee to divert thy
thoughts from them at such a time, and by meditation and private prayer to
apply them to the business thou art about. Nay, the very thoughts of the great
danger of communicating unworthily and indecently, which you say these me^
bring into your minds, are very proper thoughts a^ that time. Add to this, that
our Lord himself gave the Communion to Judas, as bad a man, as we can wel^
suppose, and the rest of the Apostles made no objection against his
communicating; and who art tho^ then that pretendest to be wiser than our Lord
an^ and his Apostles?

Secondly, As to an ill Minister. this objectio^ might be of some force, if the
virtue and efficacy o^ the Communion did at all depend upon the goodnes^ or
badness of him who administreth it; but this i^ does not. It is enough that he
be lawfully ordained and empowered to minister to us in Holy things; farther
considered as to his goodness or badness, there is no more in the case betwixt
him and us, than in the case betwixt us and any other Lay Brother, and this, I
hope, has been sufficiently considered.

Fifthly, It is objected by some that they cannot come to the Lords Supper, as
administered by the Church of England, because they cannot comply with the
posture of kneeling, in which that enjoins them to receive it. But why can they
not comply?

Is it because the posture is in itself unlawful? that they will be hardly so
foolish as to say; it being acknowledged by all Mankind that postures are
indifferent things, and the practice of the best men that ever lived, nay, even
of our Lord himself, having plainly proved that there is no unlawfulness in
this of kneeling.

It is because the supreme Authority of our Nation has commanded it (for the
Rubricks of our Common Prayer, are all Act of Parliament, and by these we are
commanded to kneel at the Communion: a thing which I wish some men would
seriously lay to heart) this methinks must be strange perverseness, to refuse
to obey our Governors in indifferent things, the only things in which our
obedience to them can be tried.

Is it because this was not the posture in which our Lord instituted this Holy
Supper? How do they know that? for the Scriptures are silent in that matter;
but supposing it was not, do these men think us obliged to observe all the
circumstances, which our Lord then made use of? If not all, why more
particularly this of his posture? If all; why then do they themselves vary so
much from many of them as they do? Why do not they make ready the Lords Supper
in an upper Room, why not at the same time of the day which he did?

Is it because kneeling is no Table gesture? I answer, that the nature of the
Lords Supper, does not require that it should be so; if it did, it would
likewise, for the same reason, require other circumstances proper to a Feast
and a Table, which yet the^ who make this objection will by no means allow o^
so that in this they give themselves their answer.

Is it because, kneeling is not a proper posture* not suitable to the business
of communicating? Certainly the most proper of any whatsoever; as servin^ best
amongst us, to express that humility and thankfulness of mind, with which we
receive and commemorate, as we ought to do, the benefits of Christ^ death and
passion. Or,

Lastly, is it because, this posture is abused to ver^ ill purposes by
Idolaters, more especially by the Papists in this very instance of
communicating? I answer, that the abuse of an indifferent thing, can b^ no
argument against the lawful use of it, more particularly the use of it, to very
good and commendable ends.

Sixthly and Lastly, there is one other Objection* which tho very seldom
mentioned, yet I fear lyet^ at the bottom of many Men's Hearts, and that is
giving away money at the Communion. But here i^ is to be considered, that although
this is a very good expression of that charity, which we are indispensabl^
bound to bring with us thither, yet this is no necessary condition of, or
qualification for, our worth^ receiving. Those who have nothing or very little
t^ give have equal right to the Communion, and will b^ made as welcome at it by
our Savior, as they wh^ give never so largely out of their abundance. L^ not
any man then neglect this happy opportunity o^ doing honor to God and his
Savior, and unspeakable good to himself and his Brethren, purely because he
cannot make such a show with his Mone^ as other men. (...) him give cheerfully
what he (...) able, and he need not fear but that our Savior, wh^ so much
commended the Widow's Charity in h^ Mite, will likewise accept and approve his?
Or if (...) has nothing else to offer to God, yet let him off^ him a penitent
faithful and charitable heart; and the he will find dear and precious in his
sight.

And thus I have answered, I hope fully and clearly, all those objections which
men ordinarily make against communicating; at least all such as occur to my
mind at present. If there be any others that have escaped me, I shall be very
thankful to those, who will be so kind as to inform me of them, and most
readily give them their due weight and consideration.

Three Prayers to be used by such as have leisure, every Morning and Evening
with their other Devotions, for a week before they receive the Lord's Supper.
For Repentance.
O Most Holy Lord God, who art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; and have
more especially required, that those who compass thine Altar, should wash their
Hands in Innocence: Grant me, I beseech thee, unfeigned Repentance for my past
Sins, a most deep and hearty sorrow for them, and most firm and steadfast
purposes and resolutions to forsake them; and do thou by thy Grace so assist
and strengthen these my resolutions, that they may become effectual, for the
bringing forth fruit unto holiness, so that in the end I may have everlasting
Life. Thou only, O Lord, art able to work in me both to will and to do,
according as I ought. Cleanse me therefore, I most humbly pray thee, from all
filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, and enable me so to perfect holiness in
thy fear, that I may be a fit Guest for thy Son's Table, and likewise meet to
be partaker of that Inheritance of the Saints in light, which thou, in thine
infinite mercy, have promised to all such as faithfully serve and please thee,
through thy dear Son, and our alone Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
For Faith.
O Most gracious and ever merciful Lord, who have promised to all them that
believe in thy Son Jesus, everlasting life, and have instituted and ordained
holy Mysteries, as pledges and seals of these thy promises: Give me, I most
earnestly beg of thee, such a sure and lively faith in him, as may entitle me
to become a worthy receiver of these pledges, and heir of these promises. I
believe, O Lord, help thou my unbelief; I believe that the blessed Jesus laid
down his life for me, and acknowledge with all possible thankfulness, his
inexpressible kindness in so doing; I believe that he gave himself for me and
all Mankind, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; therefore will I I endeavor
to manifest my Faith by my works; I believe that there is none other name under
Heaven, given among Men, whereby they must be saved, but the name of the Lord
Jesus; therefore in his name only I implore thy mercy, increase of Faith here,
and of Glory hereafter.

Amen.
For Charity.
O Lord, who have taught us that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into my heart that most excellent gift of
Charity, the very bond of peace and of all Virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee. More especially now, when I am going to
commemorate the unspeakable love of my blessed Savior in dying for me, let me
not be destitute of love toward my Brethren. O let my readiness to forgive
others their trespasses fit me for thy forgiveness of mine; let me not be an
enemy to any man, lest I be thy enemy too, but give me that Charity, which
covers a multitude of Sins, that Charity, by which all Men may know me to be
Christ's Disciple, which shall dispose me to be of a meek, patient, long
suffering, forgiving temper like him, and to do good to all men as he did; that
Charity which shall never fail, but shall go along with us into, and make us
fit Inhabitants for that City of Love, the new Jerusalem. Grant this, O
merciful Father, for the sake of thy Son Christ Jesus, through whose love alone
we are encouraged to present these our requests to thee.

Amen.
A Prayer to be said in the morning, before we communicate, after our usual
Prayers.
O Most gracious and ever merciful Lord God, who art always wont to give more
than we either desire or deserve, accept, I beseech thee, my most humble and
hearty thanks for thy great mercy in bringing me to the light of this day, and
thereby giving me an opportunity of meeting my dear Redeemer at his holy Table;
of testifying my love and gratitude to him, and of communicating in all the
blessed effects of his love toward me; of renewing to him my Baptismal Vow of
Faith and Obedience, and of receiving from him fresh confirmations of the
benefits made over to me in my Baptism, even remission of sins, grace and
eternal life. O that I may be careful duly to improve this happy opportunity
now before me! that I may eat and drink so worthily, as to eat and drink my own
Salvation: that my sins which are many and great, more especially all such as
have been committed knowingly and wilfully, (such as -- Here mention those
wilful sins, if there are any such, which thou know thy self to have been
guilty of) may be forgiven me; and that henceforward, whither I live, I may
live unto thee, or whither I dye, I may dye unto thee, that so, living or
dying, I may be ever thine.

And the same mercies, which I beg for my self, I beg likewise for all my
fellow Christians; more particularly those who shall this day, any where,
partake in the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. O let not one of
their precious Souls perish, who seem to be so near to the Kingdom of Heaven;
but do thou, by thy Grace so assist and direct, strengthen and support them,
now and evermore, in doing thy will, and working out their own Salvation, that
in the end they may obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A short Prayer to be said after that which we commonly say at our first coming
into the Church.
GRant, O blessed Jesu, that the nearer I draw to thy Table, the nearer I may
likewise draw to thee in purity of heart and affections, in strength and
liveliness of Faith, in fervency and extensiveness of Charity* That so, being
of the same mind which was in thee, and thinking, believing and doing* as
becomes thy Disciple, I may be meet to be partaker of those pledges of thy
favor* which thou now offerest at thy holy Table to all thy faithful Servants,
and of those Joys in another world, which thou in thy mercy have prepared for
them.

Amen.
Just before we receive.
HEar those Prayers, O Lord, which have been offered up by thy Congregation,
and for the sake of thy well beloved Son Jesus Christ, suffer us to draw nigh
unto thee, and to hope for thy mercy. In his name alone it is that I, a most
vile wretch and miserable Sinner, am bold to call thee Father, and to entreat
thy favor and forgiveness. O let his merits answer for my unworthiness, let
his death preserve me from dying, let his Body and Blood preserve my Body and
Soul unto everlasting life.

Amen.
Immediately after receiving the Bread.
O Merciful Lord, Grant I beseech thee, that by virtue of thy dear Son's Body
given for me, and represented to me by this Bread, I may become acceptable in
thy sight, obtain thy pardon and peace, thy grace and assistance, thy
everlasting happiness and glory. And do thou, O Lord, so fill my heart with
thankfulness for the inestimable benefits of my Savior's death and passion,
that I may be ready to do any thing, even to lay down my life for him; and that
loving nothing more than him, he may vouchsafe to think me worthy of him, and
to crown me with eternal Glory in his Kingdom.

Amen.
Immediately after receiving the Wine.
I Thank thee, from the bottom of my heart, O gracious God, that thou have
redeemed us to thy self by the blood of thy Son; O let me evermore bear in mind
thy inexpressible kindness and condescension in so doing; and show forth my
sense of them, in a sincere, universal and constant obedience to thee. That so
the Lord Jesus may be indeed the Author of Salvation to me, and I being washed
and cleans'd from all my sins in his Blood, may appear pure and spotless before
thee, and be admitted to partake of those rivers of pleasure, which are at thy
right hand for evermore.

Amen.
When you return to your Seat.
GRant, O blessed Lord, that I and all those who meet together this day under
pretense of commemorating thy death, may so effectually remember it, as for
ever after to hate those sins, which were the occasion of it; so effectually
remember it, as constantly to love and adore thee for it; so effectually
remember it, as to use our utmost endeavors to imitate and transcribe it; so
effectually remember it, as to remember that we are thine, bought with the
price of thy Blood, and are therefore bound to serve thee, with our Bodies and
Spirits, which are thine.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used the evening after communicating, with our other Devotions.
ACcept, O Blessed Lord, accept my unfeigned thanks, for thy great mercy in
admitting me this day to the sweet and comfortable communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ, and for all those benefits which I there received. Enable me
for the future to live worthy of them, to make good all the promises and vows I
there made, and to continue steadfast in that Repentance, Faith, and Charity,
which I there professed. Mavelous was thy love in sending thy Son to dye for
us, and particularly great has it been toward me, in that it has caused me to
be born in a Christian Country, where I had early and easy opportunities of
knowing the Christian Religion, and that too in its utmost purity and
simplicity, and have long been protected and maintained in the free and
undisturbed exercise of it. Oh that my behavior may prove answerable to these
mercies? that I may use all these happy opportunities, which many other poor
Souls want, as one that is truly sensible of the advantage of them; that I may
grow in Grace, and the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and abound in every good word
and work, to the praise and glory of God. I know, O Lord, that if we sin
wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation. O let me constantly carry this in my thoughts, and
seriously reflect upon it, that so I may not be of them who draw back unto
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul.

I pray likewise, that all my fellow Christians may sincerely perform that
covenant, which they have this day made to thee; that they may cease to do evil
and learn to do well, that they may be strong in the faith of Christ, and love
one another, as he has loved them; that so thy honor may be effectually
promoted, the Salvation of all men farther'd, thy Sons Kingdom enlarged, and
his coming hastened, to the inexpressible comfort and eternal joy of all those,
who having sincerely obeyed the Gospel of Christ here, shall evermore rejoice
in the blessed fruits and rewards of their Obedience in Heaven. Grant this, O
merciful Father, for the sake of thy well-beloved Son Christ Jesus, to whom,
with thy self, and thy Eternally blessed Spirit, three persons but one God, be
all Honor and Glory, Might, Majesty and Dominion, from this time, henceforth
and for evermore.

Amen.
The End.
Books Printed for Thomas Speed, over against Jonathan's Coffee-House in
Exchange Alley in Cornhil. 1700.
THE Duties of the Closet: Being an earnest Exhortation to private Devotion.
Part 1. the second Edition. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Great Duty of Communicating Explained and Enforced; the Objections against
it answered, and the necessary Preparation for it stated. With Devotions to be
used Before, At, and After the Lord's Supper. By the Author of The Duties of
the Closet Price 3 d. but 20 s. a hundred to those who give them away.

A Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall, November 5. 1696. On Job, Chapter
5. Ver. 12. The second Edition. Price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at
Guild Hall Chapel, On Sunday the 11th of April, 1697. On Prove. 14. ver. 34.
Price 6 d.

Christianity best propagated by the good lives of Christians. A Sermon
preached before the Gentlemen Educated at Merchant Tailors School, at St Mary
le Bow, January 16, 1699. On Matthew. 5. ver. 16. Price 6 d.

These by Sir William Dawes, Baronet, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Fisher, Sister to the Honorable Sir
Will. Dawes. Bar. D. D. And Wife to the Reverend Dr. Peter Fisher. Preached at
Bennington in Hertfordshire, June the 2d. School. By William Milner, Vicar of
Shephal in Hertfordshire. Price 6 d.

Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Sermon preached before the Queen
at White Hall, October 12* 1690. By Will. Beveridge, D. D. Rector of St. Peter*
Cornhil. The fourth Edition. Price 6 d.

Conversation in Heaven, in two parts. Part I* Being Devotions consisting of
Meditations and Prayer^ on several Considerable Subjects in practical Divinity.
Written for the raising the decayed Spirit o^ Piety. Part II. Being Sacramental
Devotions; consisting of Meditations and Prayers Preparatory unto a worthy
Receiving of the Holy Communion: As also, Meditation^ and Prayers suited to
every Part of Administering and Receiving it. By Lawrence Smith, L. L. D. Recto^
of South-Warmborough in Hampshire. The third Edition* Corrected, with Additions.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr Thomas Gray, late Vicar of Deadham
in Essex, preached in the Parish Church of Deadham, Feb. 2d, 92. With a short
account of his life, by Joseph Powel. M. A. Rector of St Mary on the Wall in
Colchester, quarto, Price 6 d.

The death of Good Josiah Lamented. A Sermon, occasioned by the death of our
late most Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary of ever blessed memory, preached at
Balsham in Cambridgshire, March 3d, 95, By Joseph Powel, M. A. Rector of
Balsham, Quarto* Price 6 d.

The necessity of a present Repentance. A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen March 10. By Will. Bramston, Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty, Quarto, Price 6 d.

Religion the only Happiness: A Poem, in a Letter to a Friend. Quarto. Price 6
d.

Poems on several Divine Subjects, and other occasions. Written by a young
Lady. 80, Price 2 s.

All sorts of Bibles, Testaments, Common Prayers* Singing Psalms, and most
sorts of English Books; as also Blank Receipts for the Collectors of the King^
Taxes, and Trophy Tax, are sold by Thomas Speed.

FINIS.

