The Declaration AND ENGAGEMENT OF THE Commanders, Officers, and Seamen in the
Ships, under the Command of the Right Honorable the EARL of Warwick in the
Downs, declaring their free concurrence in the Remonstrance of the Lord
Fairfax, and the Army under his Command.

ALSO, A Representation of the Forces under the Command of the Honorable Sir
Michaell Livesey, Commander in Chief in the County of KENT:

Declaring their free Concurrence in the Remonstrance of the Lord General
FAIRFAX, and the Army under his Command.

December. 28 LONDON, Printed for John Playford at his shop in the Inner Temple.
December. 28. 1648.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM depiction of a device consisting of an open book with
a swword, scepter, and surrounding motto
To the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, General over all the Parliaments
Forces at the Headquarters London, these present.
Right Honorable,
WE have had the honor lately to receive four Letters, with the Armies
Remonstrance, all from your Excellencies Council, with which our hearts and
Affections do freely concur as well as any, know ing the things therein
expressed are just and good, for we do verily believe the blood of these
precious ones which has been spilt since this war, even like water on the
ground, cries aloud for the speed y execution of justice upon all such who
shall be found guilty hereof: And as the blood of the Innocent cries loud for
justice, so we are confident that many thousands oppressed, groan under their
intolerable burdens, having long expected to be eased thereof, which God in
mercy give deliverance to all. We are sorry the said Letters came no sooner to
our hands before our Fleet was dispersts, which if they had, God permitting, we
should cheerfully have improved our inrerest to the utmost to have answered
your Excellency, with the Honorable Councels present expectations. But now we
are but four Ships here in the Downs; The St George, Unicorn, Mary-rose, and
Fellowship.

The reasons of our not declaring at present, is namely the Lord Admirals
absence from us, for that we think our selves obliged in duty to his Lordship,
as our Head, to motion the same first to his Honor, hoping to have his
concurrence therein, knowing we are bound in Conscience acting under his
Lordships power to observe all his just and lawful Commands. We do heartily
wish and desire there may be a fair correspondency between his Lordship and
your Excellency: That as the Lord has been pleased to use both your Honors
as instruments of much good to these poor distracted shaken Kingdoms; so our
prayers shall be, that God Almighty from that fullness which is in himself,
would fill you more and more with himself: whereby your Honors hearts,
together with all the faithful, may be united as one man, to live and dye
together in the Cause of God and peoples Liberties, against all oppositions
whatsoever. Now as God has been pleased to set this upon our hearts, so we may
confidently assure your Excellency the same has root in the hearts of many
other the Commanders of our Fleet, and not only in us and them, but in many
other the Officers and Seamen under our Respective Commands.

Thus much we humbly thought our selves obliged to hint forth to your
Excellency in answer to these received; and we hope so long (by Gods
assistance) as we have hearts and hands, they shall be lift up for Gods glory,
and the Kingdoms good, being confident God will perfect his own work in his
time to his own glory: for we have had many pledges of his favor and
goodness in owning your Excellency and that Army, against all the opposition
of yours and our enemies. We have likewise seen his power, Love and Goodness,
to the Fleet under our General the Lord Admiral in the late Expedition, even
to the Admiration of men, and astonishment of our enemies. Now the God of
Heaven, who is wisdom it self, fill your Councels with the wisdom that is
from above, which is first pure, then peaceable. We shall now humbly beg leave
of your Excellency to subscribe our selves as we desire to be,

St George in the Downs, December. 24. 1648. Your Excellencies most humble
servants to command, Robert Moulton. Richard Haddocke. Thomas Harrison. Fra:
Pen.


The engagement of the Commanders, Officers and Seamen of the Ship Unicorn,
under the Command of Captain Richard Haddock Vice Admiral for the Fleet
Commanded by Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of England, against
the revolted Ships, and all adhering to them now in Hostility against the
Parliament.
WHereas it has pleased the Honorable Houses of Parliament in consideration
of the late revolt of diverse Ships of the Navy, and their desperate designs
against the Cause of God, which the the Parliament (we do assured believe) does
maintain, and do afford the Navy diverse weighty and worthy motives and
encouragements to oppose that parts, and from the bloody and barbarous of the
Apostate Ships, so especially from the worth of our Liberties as Subjects, and
Religion as Christians; We the Commanders, Officers, and Seamen in the Ship
Unicorn, do not from any slavish Principles of Respects, fear, or credit, but
voluntarily and freely from the bottom of our hearts and consciences subscribe
to live and die with the Honorable Earl of Warwick, now Lord High Admiral of
England, in this present engagement, for the preservation of the public good,
and the maintenance of that Covenant which we have formerly taken: testimony
whereof we subscribe our hands.

Subscribed by above 350.
To His Excellency Tho: Lord Fairfax, Lord General of all the Forces raised in
the Kingdom of ENGLAND, and Dominion of WALES.
The humble Representation of us the Officers of the Forces under the Command
of the Honorable Sir Michael Liuesey, Commander in Chief in the County of
Kent, in the behalf of our selves and the Soldiers under our Command.
Shows,
THat we have as deep, and large a sense as any sort of men whatsoever of the
blessings of God going along with your Excellency in your just and righteous
undertakings, wading through so many Seas, and passing over so many Mountains
of difficulties, in regard of the many bloody designs, and contrivements, and
the cruel, implacable, and restless rage of the open Enemy; as also, the
odious A postacy of seeming friends; yet through the exceeding mercy of God
toward you, and the Army under your Command, in bearing up, and encouraging
your Hosts, even to admiration, and all honest hearts rejoicing, the Lord has
crowned you and the Army with many great and glorious victories and successes,
both in the first and late Wars: And when as the Lord was pleased to determine
the quarrel of the enemy against them in their subversion, and vouchsafing you
once more an opportunity, and put it into your hearts to think of, and to
endeavor after such things as might conduce and lead unto a happy settlement
of this poor distressed, and almost dying Nation, (occasioned by a bloody,
treacherous, and wilful enemy,) Your Excellency and Council of War were
pleased in order hereunto lately to present unto the house of Commons a
Remonstrance, and latter Declarations, which we having seriously weighed, and
considered of the excellency, justness, and reasonableness thereof, we do
fully correspond, and give our hearts approbation thereunto: And in an
especial manner, in order to your desires therein, We earnestly desire that
justice may impartially be executed on all offenders, from the greatest to the
least, as well upon the Person of the King, as others; And that the prosecution
thereof may be vigorous and without delay, for delays (by sad and frequent
experience) have proved to be of a very dangerous nature, and pernicious
consequence and tendency; And thereby have rarely recovered, or gained the
like, or same opportunity.

In order to the prosecution of all which, we do jointly and unanimosly declare
unto your Excellency, that we both are, and shall he ready (as God shall enable
us) to engage our selves as your Excellency shall command, and direct us, that
these things may be effected. And we profess we shall not judge or account our
lives, or de^rest enjoyments near unto us, so that our dear and native
Country may live, and be delivered out of those miseries and calamities that
have so often, and so long threatened its ruin and destruction; And that
Tyranny, Oppression, and injustice might be removed and supplanted, and the
just, dear bought Liberties and Freedoms of the Commoners of England may
return unto them; That this Nation may once more be happy, and crowned with
blessedness, which shall be the earnest, cordial, and constant breathings and
desires of we, who do subscribe our selves the Petitioners, and your
Excellencies most humble and faithful servants.

FINIS.

