A TRUE NARRATIVE Of that Grand JESVITE Father Andrews; Who Lived at Hardwick
IN MONMOUTHSHIRE How he Fled into a Large WOOD to Escape JUSTICE.

How he came to an Untimely END, and the Manner of his BURIAL.

In a Letter to a Friend in London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1679.

A True NARRATIVE Of that Grand JESUIT Father Andrews, etc.
SIR,
I Have here given you a Short but Perfect Account of one Father Andrews a
Jesuit, sometimes Inhabiting at a place called Hardwick in Monmouth-shire, and
sometimes at his Brothers, Thomas Andrews's House in the Parish of Skenfreth,
about eight Miles distant from Hardwick in the same County. Upon the Discovery
of the late Plot, Warrants being issued out by several Justices of the Peace,
for the Apprehending of the said Father Andrews; so that he was forced to
abscond from those places above mentioned, and fled into an adjacent Wood,
where he lay Incognito, for the space of Three Months and upwards; his Food
being conveyed to him by a Servant Boy, which his Brother sent daily to him. He
finding that place not to agree well with his Constitution, one Hills a Priest
and a Visiter of his, got him a Private Lodging in a poor Widows House, whose
name was Jane Harris. Hills came often to Visit him during the space of three
or four Days. The poor Woman was employed by Hills to go several times to a
Butchers, (who lived in a small Village about half a Mile distant) to buy Meat
for Father Andrews; she was not to buy much at a time, because he must have it
Fresh and Fresh; the sight of a Large Joint was enough to have taken away his
Stomach, being a weakly man, and much stricken in Years. This Butcher taking
notice of this Poor Woman's coming so often to him to buy Meat, which formerly
she did not use to do: for she was not in a Condition to buy it for her self;
he took an occasion to ask her who it was for; She ingeniously confessed, that
it was for an Ancient Gentleman who was newly come to lodge at her house;
whereupon the Butcher suspecting that he must be either a Priest or a Jesuit,
presently went to one Mr. Arnal a Justice of the Peace, (and a great Prosecutor
of the Papists) and gave him Information what the Woman had said, upon which
Mr. Arnal went himself with several of his Servants, and some Neighbors to
search the House; but old Father Andrews, having some private notice of it,
made his Escape before they came. The Widow Woman was examined what became of
the Old Gentleman which Lodged at her House; she said he was newly gone, but
whither she did not know, he was a Stranger to her, and had been there but four
days. The Justice Committed the Woman to the Common Goal of Vske, for the said
County, where she now remains. After this Escape Mr. Arnal could hear no more
of him, till about the 27 th of June last; and then a Farmer living at
Wengothan near Abergaveny; who having occasion to lay some Hay in a Barn of
his, which was formerly a Chapel belonging to some Abbey or Priory; and there
clearing away some old Stubble-Straw to make room for the Hay, under which he
found a place dug like a Grave, and newly filled up; whereupon he was at
first surprised, and could not tell what to do, at last he thought it his best
way to go to a Justice of the Peace, and Inform him of it, supposing somebody
might have been Murdered and Buried there. The Justice presently Ordered the
place to be searched; and there they found the Corpse of a Man who had been
newly Buried; he had no Coffin, only a Sheet wrapped about him, with a Cross made
of Wax on his Stomach, with several Beads, Crucifixes, and other Romish
Fopperies about him. Then presently the Coroner was sent for, and called a Jury
of Inquest, who sat and found the Body had been poisoned, for it was very much
swelled. The Body was exposed to public view, for two or three days; in which
time it was discovered, that it was the Body of the aforesaid Father Andrews
the Jesuit. Search was presently made, to see if they coul'd find out how he
came to be Buried in that place, and how he came to his End; but it could not
be done, so that it is thought he was privately conveyed thither in the Night,
and there Buried, because it was Anciently a Religious Place. This is a Just
Account, I am,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, J. D.
Skenfreth, July the 2d. 1679.
FINIS.

