A DECLARATION Of all the passages at the taking of PORTSMOVTH; SHOWING The
reasons why it was surrendered up to the Committee of both Houses of PARLIAMENT:
Together with a true copy of the Articles agreed upon between the Committee and
Colonel Goring.

London Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Pope's Head Alley. September.
15. 1642.

The Declaration of all such Officers as were in the Town of Portsmouth in the
County of Southampton, when the same was besieged, made the sixth day of
September, in the eighteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles.
THese are the Reasons why the Town of Portsmouth was delivered up to the
Committee of Parliament.

There was upon the second of August, 1642. which was the day the Governor
declared that he held and resolved he would hold the Town for his Majesty's
service: In the Town of Portsmouth of the ordinary Garrison about 300.
persons, and of the Townsmen, about one hundred, that were able to bear
Arms, and of the Island which was also under the command of the Governor
about 100. fighting men more.

Of Officers with their Servants there were then about 50. with their, and the
Governors Horses there was above 50. Horse, Of victual there was not by
estimation sufficient for this number above two days.

The Town it self unfortified and very weak in many places; the Thursday
following the County of Hampshiere by virtue of Order from the Parliament,
began to assemble against the Town, and from that time forward provision came
in, but with great difficulty.

The Commissions of Array were daily expected by us to be put in execution for
relief of us according to promise.

The orders for the Militia were put in execution, which caused one or more
companies of the Trained Bands, which had formerly declared for the King, to
turn about and express themselves for the Parliament.

All Soldiers and Townsmen in Portsmouth, 3. or 4. excepted, did agree to the
Governors Declaration, and notwithstanding within less then 10. days, above
half of them forsook the town. Diverse Gentlemen of the County of
Southampton, and parts adjacent promised to come into Town with men and horse,
whereby we had fitted up our Troops of Horse and Foot, but most of them
failed, by reason of the gathering together of the Country Forces, and the
approaching of others from London.

The Saturday after being the 6. of August, all provisions and succors from
the Issle of Wight were stopped, and upon Monday morning following the Kings
Ships rode before the Town.

Upon Thursday a Messenger with some difficulty came into the Town, with
Letters from his Majesty, which gave great comfort to the Soldiers and
Townsmen, who were much out of heart before.

The next day after being Friday, we were alsolutely blocked up by Sea and by
Land.

The Wednesday before the Maria Pinnace was ready rigged and manned with about
14. persons, of which, two were officers was taken without striking one blow,
which we conceive was by the treachery of Goodwin, the Master thereof. We
continually led on and encouraged the Soldiers with the expectation of the
Kings coming, or Forces from his Majesty, but at length they finding
themselves delayed, grew impatient, and so bold, that they declared they would
not fight against, but rather take part with those without the Town: So that
with a very small number of Officers and Gentlemen; we were forced not only
to keep watch over those that were without, but those that were within the
town.

About eight or ten days after they began to raise several batteries against
the Town at Gooseport, from one of which they begun to play upon Friday the
second of September upon the Town, which made the common Soldiers of the
Garrison very unwilling to stand to their Arms or work

This playing of the Ordnance upon the Town continued till Sunday morning
following, with some intermission in the first night.

On Saturday night before, Southsea Castle was taken without one blow stricken.

After Southsea Castle was taken, the Mayor of the Town, one Lieutenant, one
Ensign, and other inferior Officers stealing out of Town over the wall did so
much increase the fear and villainy of the common Soldiers, that as many of
them dropped away, so we concluded all of us that there was not one of them all
that remained would fight: Besides, it was concluded by us all that no one part
of the Town was so perfectly furnished that it was possible with our small
number to hold it out against an assault.

Upon this all the common Soldiers and Townsmen being possessed with fear of
having the Town battered down on all sides, and being frighted more by their
wives, did throw away their Arms, and absolutely refused to do duty: And
though some of them were persuaded to return to their guards, yet they
professed that if there should come assault the would not fight a stroke.

This caused the Officers of the Garrison to desire my Lord Wentworth to send
Master Weston to the Governor to demand a council of War, which he
presently called, wherein the Reasons aforesaid, and an estimate made of all
the men we could draw to fight, which were not above the number of threescore
at most, and those, Gentlemen and their servants which were not used either to
traversing of great Guns or use of Muskets. The Council of War, (Nullo
contradicente) grew to this resolution, of sending for a parley upon the most
honorable conditions we could get.

Articles agreed upon between the Committee for the Parliament in the County of
Southampton, and Colonel Goring, for, and on his own behalf, and other the
Officers and Soldiers within the Garrison of Portsmouth, fort he rendering up
of the said Town.
FIrst, that the Committee for the Parliament shall this day, being the seventh
day of September, Anno Dom. 1642. at, or about six of the Clock in the morning
put in two Companies of Foot in the Town of Portsmouth, for preventing of
disorders, and preservation of the Magazine.

Secondly, that all such persons as are not of the old Garrison, excepting
Colonel Goring, the Lord Wentworth, Master Weston, Master Covist, with their
ordinary servants, shall forthwith issue out of Town, and have free liberty to
pass and go wheresoever they please in this Kingdom, except unto any part of
that Army raised against the Parliament, with their Horses, Swords, and
Pistols, but no other Arms, and all other their goods whatsoever, and that they
may be allowed twenty days for their journey, they carrying themselves
according to the Laws, in a peaceable manner.

Thirdly, that Sir Thomas Jervase, Sir William Walter, who with one servant a
piece, and Sergeant Major Lobbe, shall go into the Town to take possession of
the Stores, and several provisions in the Town, and that for their security
Master Weston, Master Covist, Lieutenant Colonel Donnet be delivered as
Hostages.

Fourthly, that if any of the said persons in the Town desire to go beyond the
Sea, they may have liberty to pass with their proper goods in that Town,
(Arms only excepted) without the molestation of any one, and a Ship to convey
them.

Fifthly, that all Officers and Soldiers under the Governor, that were
formerly of this Garrison, and now residing in Town, shall continue their
places, or have three months liberty to sell, or otherwise dispose thereof to
some other persons, except such as have bin put in since the last of July.

Sixthly, that no person whatsoever, now residing in Town, and who within any
time since the first of August has resided in Town, that has done any act
for the keeping, defense, or maintenance thereof, or used any other words in
justification of the maintenance thereof, on the behalf of the Kings Majesty,
shall be questioned or molested.

Seventhly, that such Soldiers as are run from their Colors to the Town,
shall be excluded out of this Treaty.

Eighthly, that there shall be no Train left to any Mine, or to the Magazine,
whereby to blow up the Town, or endamage the Garrison that shall be put into
it, And that the Governor, Gentlemen of quality, and all the Officers of the
said Towue shall discover upon their Oaths, what they know concerning any such
things, and that sufficient Hostages be given for performance thereof, who are
to be retained two days in the custody of such person as shall be put in the
Town as Governor.

Ninthly, that Carriages shall be provided for the use of such persons as shall
issue out of the Town, they paying the usual rates for them.

Tenthly, that all prisoners on both sides be released, excepting such as are
sent up to London.

Eleventhly, that the Governor shall presently after delivery up of the Town,
which shall be on Thursday next, by nine of the Clock in the morning, have
permission from the Committee to dispatch such a Gentleman to the King, as he
shall name.

FINIS.

