A Declaration and Vindication of the Loyal-Hearted Nobility, Gentry, and
Others of the County of KENT, and City of CANTERBVRY, That they had no Handin
the Murder of our KING.
WHereas the Generality and as (for the number) much the greater, so also (for
the quality) much the better part of this famous and populous County and City,
has from the Alpha to the Omega, from the first to the last of these
distracted, distempered, and unhappy times, been truly cordial, constant and
steady (in the matter of their Fidelity and Loyalty) to their Prince and
Sovereign, without the least thought or desire to deviate, apostatize, or turn
out of the good old way of due Allegiance, or (in the least measure to diminish
or detract from his Majesty's just Rights and Royalties; much less to blast or
blaspheme his Honor; least of all to lift up their hard, or offer any violence
to his Sacred Person, as no other in their esteem, then what undoubtedly he is,
The Lords Anointed.

Whereas (also) Truth and Syncerity, with their Friends and Followers, by the
invincible oppression and opposition of a Massanellian brood of bold Usurpers
and Invaders of the Government, (who, like that Neapolitan Crew, unhappily
thriving in their ways of blood and violence, had got the Mastery and upper
hand of their more Loyal Fellow Subjects) durst not of latter times appear
abroad, or show themselves in public: but were inevitably forced to strike
sail, and give way to the violent and irresistible tide and torrent of Falsehood
and Imposture, with their impudent Abettors; and in silence patiently to wait
for such an opportunity and season as this (of safer and more sober times) to
discover and assert themselves.

And whereas (further) it highly concerns all men in general; more especially
Christians; most of all Subjects; and amongst them Protestants, (both in point
of Conscience and Credit) to keep themselves free not only from the actual
guilt, but also from the just suspicion of Regicide and King-killing; of all
crying sins the loudest and most execrable, as scarcely, if at all capable of
Expiation.

Whereas (moreover) of latter times, since we of this County and City, with
the rest of the Nation, labored under an universal and common force, (being
with the Defender of our Faith robbed of the Protector of our Freedom, and
slavishly captivated and subjected to the lawless and Arbitrary power and
Tyranny of a perfidious and bloody English Phocas, and his Confederates:) many
several Petitions, Remonstrances, Declarations, and other like Addresses,
framed, or rather forged by a few disloyal, factious and seditious time-serves,
(persons, for the most part, as inconsiderable for their estates, as number)
have with much Impudence in the Authors, and injury to us, without our privity,
and to our great and just regret, been fathered, foisted and obtruded upon us,
and presented and exposed to the open view of all the world in Print, under our
Name and Stamp, as carrying the Title, some of this Counties, others of this
Cities Addresses: and amongst these, one more black, detestable, and odious
then all the rest, nor indeed to be remembered without just abomination, and
perfect abhorrency, to wit, That for requiring of Justice against his late
Majesty (of ever Blessed and precious memory) and for bringing his sacred and
royal Person to (what no Law either of God or Man subjected him unto) his
Trial, as an arraigned prisoner at the Bar of a pretended, but spurious,
illegal, and for ever infamous Court of Justice; a Court never once heard or
thought of, much less with approbation, amongst Christians, or indeed but
civilized Men, in any Age or Nation until then; nor then erected without the
perpetual and indeleble shame and reproach both of the English Nation, and of
(what should be of highest esteem with it) the Protestant Cause and Religion,
clearly repugnant to such prodigious and infernal practices.

And whereas (lastly) in truth and verity, (which thanks, under God, to that
ever indeared Savior of his Country, our gallant General, may freely now be
spoken) all those Petitions and Addresses in general, and that never enough
abominated one in particular, were fo far from being the Acts, or from speaking
the Sense and Desires of our more Loyal County and City, that as they were
hatched and bred in corners, and in a sly and clandestine way carried on,
without either Counties or Cities privity; so were they never subscribed or
avouched by any party of either place, considerable or comparable (either for
number or weight) with the Non-subscribers: scarce one of a hundred, we may
truly say of a thousand, of the numerous Inhabitants of either putting his
hand, or giving his consent to them, but (with full concurrence of heart and
tongue) unanimously abhorring, abominating, renouncing, detesting, disclaiming
and disowning all such (we want words to express how foul and horrible)
designs and practices, with their promotors and abettors.

WHerefore to vindicate our undistained and unshaken Loyalty to our Prince and
our constant readiness (according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance) to
adhere, and (had it been as much in our power as desires) to have defended and
rescued his late Majesty's sacred Person from violence, and his Honor,
Greatness and just rights from the least violation or incroachment: and to wash
off, and purge away all just suspicion of our concurrence with the men of
blood, those sons of violence, the worst of Paricides, (titles which they have
taken more delight to deserve, than we to impose (who have not spared to imbrue
their hands in that of their and our late Dread and gracious Sovereign, their
and our common Father, the best of Men, and Mirror of Princes: we cannot but
(with those renouned Patriots of the City of London) lay hold on this first
opportunity (given to Loyal Subjects, both to declare the Truth, and to assert
their own Integrity) to renounce, disown, disclaim, and from our hearts and
souls to protest, as against all Petitions, Declarations, and other like
Addresses inconsistent with the Duty of Loyal Subjects, and such as desire to
make the known Laws of the Land the Rule and Square of their Obedience; so
particularly and principally, against that impious, infamous, and most
uncharitable Address (framed and presented as the rest, in an under the name of
our County and City) for calling his late sacred Majesty into question, and
bringing him, as a Malefactor to a personal Trial, with all the sad and
accursed effects, results and consequences of it: humbly desiring (what in
justice cannot be denied as) that what was so clandestinely, surreptitiously,
and impiously contrived and acted by a few individual Members, may not pass or
be imputed, either by the present or future ages, to the whole body of so large
and populous a County and City: or that (at least) it may not be laid to the
charge, or cast in the teeth of any one of us, who by this Protest of ours
(aiming only at the righting and vindication of our selves, not at the wronging
or irritation of others; we being, though at enmity with their practices, yet
in charity with their persons) do as truly as solemnly disclaim it: with this
annexed serious Vow and Promise, as in the presence of God, since we cannot
recall the Father, to redouble our Endeavors for establishing the Son (the
true and apparent Heir of his paternal Throne and Virtues) in that fullness of
Honor, Splendour and Greatness, which (with Gods blessing) may in good time
justly crown him with the Title of Charles the Great.

Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane. 1660.


