A DECLARATION AGAINST Anabaptists: To stop the Prosecution fo their Errors,
falsely pretended to be a Vindication of the Royal Commission of KING JESUS, as
they call it.

Briefly and fully answering all their Allegations, and clearly proving the
Anabaptisticall Doctrine to be against the glory of God, the honor of Christ
and his Church, against the Covenant of grace, and against the word of God, and
the privileges of the Church made over to them by promise; And also against
the Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms.

In Answer to a book, by Francis Cornwall presented to the house of Commons, on
Friday last, for which he is committed.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5. There is one Body, one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your Calling, One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions,
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.
For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by
good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

Imprimatur,

Ja: Cranford.



October. 9th London Printed for R. W. 1644.

A DECLARATION against Anabaptists, to stop the prosecutition of their errors,
falsely pretended to be a vindication of the Royal Commission of KING JESUS, as
they call it.
I Shall neither spend much time, nor wast much Paper, in the answering of a
Case so plain: I shall pass by the circumstances, and only gather what you,
Master Francis Cornwall does say for your self, and answer that breefly and
fully.

I. You Argue thus: That which God has joined together no man ought to
separate: But Faith and Baptism (or more properly dipping) God has joined
together: Therefore faith and Baptism (or dipping, as the original renders
it) no man ought to separate.

The Major is true Sir, but that helps you nothing, for I shall prove your
Minor, and your Argument to be both false.

1. That God has not inseperably joined Faith, and Baptism together is very
evident, and there is proof enough for it, the Apostles were sent to teach and
Baptize all Nations, Matthew. 28.19. but many have after fallen away and perished
in unbelief. And on the contrary, many have gone to heaven that were never
baptized, for we are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.26. And though a man be baptized, yet he that believes not shall be damned,
Mar. 16.16. All Christians are not Saints, and no doubt there are many Saints
that were never made Christians.

2. So that now you see this proves no Argument, and moreover were this
granted, then by the same Argument none ought to be baptized until they were
able to cast out Devils, and speak with new tongues, for those were the signs
which Christ declared should follow them that believe, Mar. 16.17. And if they
object and say that the working of miracles are ceased: then may I very well
answer, that for men's spirits to discern, and know who are believers, and who
not, that is also ceased.

In the next place, you quote the decree of Pope Innocentius the third, and the
decree of Gregory, Lib. 3. Tit. 42. C. 3. out of Doctor Willets Synopsis,
brought in by him to prove the lawfulness of the baptizing of Infants now, as
well as circumcising Infants under the Judaicall Law, which you reprove and
call the Doctrine of Antichrist.

But let me tell you doctor Willet does allege better testimony then that, in
the very same place; namely that children of believers are to be baptized. 1.
Because they belong unto the Covenant, as it is, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed. 2. Because they are called holy. 1 Cor. 7.14. Again
3. Because they are redeemed by the blood of Christ, who died for all the
children of God. John 11.52. And to them belong the Kingdom of God, Mar. 10.4.
And 4. Lastly it is proved by the practice of the Apostles, who baptized whole
families, with all persons that thereunto belonged, Act. 16.33. and children
are of the family, to this is added the testimony of diverse learned men,
besides the forementioned, as Augustine, Lib. 5. Cont. Pelag. Hypognostic.
Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 3. in sanct. lavac. The confession of Helvetia, Sect.
13. page 397. confession of Bohemia, page 399. And in the English confession
Article 9. page 402. No not babes are not to be restrained (from Baptism)
because they pertain to the people of God.

Now for the Covenant in respect of the seals of circumcision, and of
Baptism, you and the rest of your opinions are mistaken in the maine thing of
all, for the Covenant which was made to Abraham, of which the circumcising of
the flesh was an outward Seal: its an everlasting Covenant. Genesis 17.13. and
circumcision being taken away, because Christ is come himself (the grace of God
being the inward seal, as Calvin says) and baptism a perpetual supply
thereof: Chrisistom, hom. 39. in Genesis

But in regard of the Protestation you have taken, you say you oppose the
baptizing of infants; and your first reason is, because there was a precept
from God to enjoyne circumcision. Gen 17.11. and an example, Genesis 24.4. But
neither precept nor example in Scripture, for baptizing of Infants.

To answer this in the first place, I will give you a precept out of the
Scripture where all both young and old are to be baptized, and that is Act.
2.38, 39. Be baptized every one of you (says Peter there) and let it be done
in the name of Jesus Christ, old and young, all were to be baptized, and if
they did repent and were baptized, then (says he) they shall receive the gift
of the holy Ghost, and to encourage them (and in them us also) to baptize
infants; he tells them, the promise is unto you, and to your children; yea, and
to the children of those that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call: And for that which you speak of dipping, or sprinkling it much
matters not, so there be the external element, which is water, Acts 10.47. And
there is likewise an example, Acts 2. In the infancy of the Church, there were
added to the Church in one day three thousand souls, which received the outward
Seal of Baptism, ver. 41. and all that believed were together, and had all
things common, ver. 44. which was after that the Apostle had declared to them,
that the promise was to them, and their children, ver. 39. and therefore we
must needs think that the children pertooke of the same privileges with them.

Your second reason is because that there was a prefixed day for circumcision,
to wit the eight, Genesis 17.12. but no day appointed when it shall be dipped (or
sprinkled.)

To which I answer; That the place you mention, Genesis 17.12. is a command, that
every son of eight days old shall be circumcised, not that the command is
absolute for the eight day: For all the people that were borne in the
wilderness, by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not
circumcised, until afterward, Josh. 5.5. when necessity urged Circumcision
must be deferred, as the eating of the Passover might be put off, Numb. 9.10.

But thirdly, you say, That there was a penalty imposed on the uncircumcised
man-child, Genesis 17.14. but not on those that are not baptized, because
Election, and not Baptism, saves the infant, Romans 9.11.12.

To which I answer; That for the eight day there spoken of, it is used only in
the Septuagint, it is not in the Hebrew: and for the rest, the words are, Qui
non circumciderit, he which shall not circumcise, etc. So reads the Original,
the Calde Paraphrast, Junius, etc. which shows, that it must be understood of
them that are adulti, of years of discretion, not of infants. And for the
punishment, What is it? Some take it for corporal death, some for the
extraordinary shortening of their days, some for excommunication; and lastly,
others take it for the cutting off from the society of Gods people now, and the
fellowship of the Saints hereafter, for contemning Gods Ordinance of
Circumcision: And thus the Fathers of the Hebrews, having exhorted them to
faith and a good conscience, and to be baptized, Heb. 12.22. he told them, that
if he that despised Moses Law, died without mercy -- of how much sorer
punishment shall he then be thought worthy of, who contemning the Ordinance of
God, whether Baptism, or other, has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and has done despite unto
the Spirit of Grace? I would have you that contemn Baptism to consider this
well: And as for infants, if they be not baptized, (as formerly those that were
not circumcised) it is the parents fault for omitting it, not the infants,
except the child be come to discretion, as may appear in the example of
Moses, whom the Lord punished, and not the child, for the neglecting of the
Sacrament, Exodus 4.24.

II. To proceed: You argue thus: That which is not of faith is a sin to the
Church that does it. But the baptizing of the infants of believers (as it is
used) is not of faith. Ergo a sin.

Now the Clause which you bring in (as it is now used) you might have told us
what circumstances you mean: I doubt not, but something will appear
superstitious in it, as the Cross in Baptism, which is now almost left; and
some other Ceremonies may be excepted against; so that I shall only prove the
baptizing of believers children to be of faith, in answer to this Argument; as
may appear by that in the 19. of the Act. where Paul tells the Disciples which
he found at Ephesus, That John Baptized, saying to the people, that they should
believe on him that should come after him, that is on Christ Jesus, Acts 19.4.
This was a command which he gave to them; and when they were baptized, they
were very ignorant, for they had not learned to know whether there were an holy
Ghost or not, verse. 2. though afterward Paul laid his hands on them, to
declare, that they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and they
received the holy Ghost, verse. 6. And the children of believing parents are
clean by being so; and being of the holy seed, 1 Cor. 7.14. have right to
(Baptism) the Ordinance of God thereby, Acts 16.33.

But to answer your Reasons, as you call them, which are very unreasonable
ones, wherein I will be very brief.

1. You say, That Baptism of infants of believers, puts them into a sta e of
grace, and remission of sins before calling, when as your own testimony is
against you, and proves that Baptism has no such prerogative, for it is the
Election of Gods own purpose and grace before the world began, that puts us
into a state of Grace, which is manifested unto, and conferred upon some before
Baptism, Act. 8.36, 37. and upon others after Baptism, Act. 19.4. Baptism
being the only outward seal of the Church, and the Grace of Gods Spirit the
inward seal, as is before proved.

2. That it constitutes them visible members of the Congregation, is true, and
those places alleged, 1 Pet. 2.9. Romans 1.6, 7. and 1 Cor. 1.2. do not keep out
the unbeleeving husbands of believing wives, nor the unbeleeving wives of
believing husbands, nor their children from the Sacraments; for if they did,
those children would be unclean indeed; but now are they holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.

3.4. Your third Reason is answered in the first, because Baptism is but the
outward seal; and your fourth Reason is very absurd: for I for my part doubt
not, but there will be care taken for the liberty of tender consciences, so far
as Gods word will bear and assist; that to be without order, is against Paul's
rule; and where the powers ordained by God, appoint orders according to Gods
word, I am sure that Paul says, to resist such power, is to resist the
Ordinance of God, Romans 13.1, 2.

5. Your next Reason is answered by what has been said already: Namely, that
the Covenant of grace is the inward seal of Gods Elect, Baptism the outward
seal of the visible Church, whose members are not all elected, nor shall all
be saved; for many fall away, and make a mock of Christ, Heb. 6.6. But those
who have the inward seal, that are baptized into Christ, whether Jew or
Gentile, bond or free, they are heirs of heaven, according to the promise,
Gal. 3.27, 28, 29.

6.7.8. For your next Reason, it does not at all follow; for none is so unwise
to think that grace is entailed to generation, but regeneration; neither does
it follow that all that are baptized are saved, the contrary being already
proved. And God is able as well to give to infants an habit of faith, so far as
to make them capable of ascending to heaven if they die, as well as men and
women: Therefore Christ tells us, that to such belong the Kingdom of God, Mat.
19.14.

9.10. Your former Reasons proving thus false; you see your discovery is
nothing, but I have discovered your folly in these pretenses: I have also
proved that baptizing of infants is not against the Commission of Christ, and
how members of the Church, as discipled in Baptism, I shall show by and by.

11.12.13.14. Your next reason is all one with the sixth, and your twelfth with
the tenth, so that I pass to your thirteenth reason, where you falsely draw
these conclusions: either first, that all baptized persons are saved, or
Secondly, that some being in the state of grace, may fall away afterward,
neither of which follow, because baptism does not confer grace, as is
already proved, which is your fourteenth conclusion.

15. That you say baptizing of infants opposes the Kingly, and prophetical
office of Christ in faith and order, and to prove that, you allege, Matthew.
16.15. to make good that you say, that Christ requires that every person that
is baptized be a believer: I answer, it is true Christ requires it, and before
God the unbelievers have no right to those Ordinances, nor is it effectual to
them whilst they are so, yet because men cannot distinguish believers from
unbelievers, therefore as Matthew has it, Mat. 28.19. Jesus sent his Apostles,
and bade them, go ye (says he) and teach all nations, or as you quoting the
place, render disciple the nations, or make disciples; and how must that be
done? baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: well, and when they are made, what must be done then? teach them, etc.
here is no opposition of this order you see.

III. In the next place you Argue thus: That consequence which is upheld by the
traditions of men, is destructive to the National Covenant of England, and
Scotland, raised by an Ordinance of Parliament. But baptizing of Infants is so
held, Ergo distructive to the National Covenant.

As you have abused the Scripture to your one interpretation contrary to all
judicious men; so do you go about to abuse the Covenant of the three Kingdoms:
first, the Covenant binds to join with the Scots in the baptizing of infants,
which you would not have done: 2. It binds to join in reforming what is
amiss in the manner of baptizing, you would take the Ordinance quite away: 3.
It binds to extirpate Schism, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine,
which you would bring in: 4. You are bound to preserve the liberties of the
Kingdom; you would have the holy seed cast out and loose those privileges,
which Christ has purchased for them. 5. You are bound to discover such as are
ill instruments, by hindering the reformation of Religion, or making faction,
and to bring them to public trial to receive condign punishment, and you
your self are such a one: 6. You are bound in your calling to labor for the
peace of the Kingdom, and you go about to disturb it, and give occasion to
honest men, that desire some liberty of conscience in lawful things to be
worse thought on for you, and so whereas you should be a help to them, you are
an hurt and a scandal: and therefore examine your self well, and try your self
by the Scripture, and by the Covenant, and Con it over, and over again, till
you know what it is to make such a Covenant in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, protesting that you did it with a true intention to
perform the same, as you shall answer at that great day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed; oh how dangerous a thing it is to make a seame,
and a rent in the Church of Christ, when the work is a doing by such wise
master builders, and pray to God again, and again, most humbly beseeching the
Lord to strengthen us by his holy spirit to do all things to his glory, and to
bless their desires, and proceedings with such success as may be deliverance
and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches,
groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in
the same, or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of
Christian Kingdoms, and Common wealths.

FINIS.

