THE DEBATES IN Deposing Kings; And of the ROYAL SUCCESSION OF GREAT BRITAIN.
The Succession to the Crown of Great Britain.
THE Monarch of Great Britain has Right to the Imperial Crown of this Island
by Inheritance, according to the Laws of GOD and Nature, and the fundamental
Constitutions of the Realms of England and Scotland, which both agree in this,
That, upon the Death of the King, the next of the Kindred, though born out of
the Dominions of Great Britain, or born of Parents, not Subjects of Great
Britain, is immediately King before any Proclamation, Coronation, Publication,
or Consent of Peers or People.

The Rule of Inheritance, given by GOD himself to the People of Israel, is
this: If a man die, and have no Son, then he shall cause his Inheritance to
pass unto his Daughter. And if he have no Daughter, then ye shall give his
Inheritance unto his Brethren.

Agreeably to which Rule, the Crown of Great Britain descends, as an inalinable
Heritage, from the Father to the Eldest Son and his Heirs; for want of Sons to
the Eldest Daughter, and her Heirs; for want of Daughters to the Brother and
his Heirs; and for want of Brethren, to the Sister and her Heirs.

And so unalterable is this Course of Descent, that no Act, no Crime, no
Attainder of Treason, can bar the next of Blood from being King in the instant
of Time, his Predecessor does not so much die, as by a State- Metempsychosis
transmit his Life, his Breath, or his Soul into the Nostrils, the Body of his
Successor.

For Hereditary Monarchy being (as it has been clearly demonstrated) an
immediate Ordinance of GOD, founded in the Prime Laws of Nature, and the Laws
of GOD and Nature being (as all Christians acknowledge) absolutely immutable,
it is a Madness to think, that any Act of Parliaments can change this
unchangeable Law, or, with the least Color of Justice, alter the Right of
Succession.

This was well known to all our ancient Parliaments, that were neither
overawed by any prevailing Faction seduced by designing Intreagues, nor yet
vainly flattered themselves with an Omnipotent Power to create and annihilate
Kings: In one of which the States of the Realm unanimously answered King Edward
the IIId. asking their Advice in matters, relating to the Crown: That they
could not consent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the Disherison of
the King, and his Heirs, or the Crown, whereunto they were sworn. From whence
Sir Edward Cook concludes, That it is a Law and Custom of Parliament, that no
King can alien the Crown from the right Heir, though by consent of the Lords
and Commons. And elsewhere affirming King John's Resignation of the Crown to
the Pope to have been utterly void, he alleges this Reason: Because the Royal
Dignity is an Inherent inseparable to the Royal Blood of the King, descendable
to the next of Blood to the King, and cannot be transferd to another.

And although by the Treasons and Conspiracies of ambitious, disloyal, and
designing Persons, the Crown has now and then been transferred from one Family
to another, yet does it appear in Story? that since the time of the Norman
Conquest the right Heir was never yet kept out beyond the second Descent. And
to the Honor of the English Parliaments we can aver, that never any Usurper
(though armed with Power) laid claim to the Crown in Parliament, but by
pretending to be of the Right Line; nor did ever the Parliament allow of such
Pretense, if false, but awed by Fear and a vast Army. And whenever, the Terror
of such armed violence being removed, the true Heir was enabled to claim his
Right, the Parliament, notwithstanding all such pretended Acts, readily
submitted themselves to their legitimate Prince, as being bound thereunto by
the Laws of GOD and Nature.

Thus although Henry, Duke of Lancaster, backed by an Army of forty or fifty
thousand men, under Pretense of a feigned Title from Edmund Crouchback, forced
his Nature Sovereign, King Richard the IId. first to resign, and afterward to
be deposed from his Crown, which, waving his former pretended Title, he caused
to be entailed upon himself, his four Sons, and the Heirs of their Bodies, by
Act of Parliament, whereby he thought to have secured it to his Posterity for
ever; Yet, notwithstanding these cautious Provisions, seconded by the Valor and
prodigious Success of that noble Prince Henry the Vth. when in the year 1460.
this Entail was alleged against Richard Duke of York, laying claim in
Parliament to the Crowns of England and F^ance, as being the next Heir to
Lionel Duke of Clarence, elder Brother to John of Gaunt, of whom the House of
Lanchaster was descended, the Duke of York unanswerably replied, That, if King
Henry the IVth. might have obtained the said Crowns of England and France by
Title of Inheritance, Descent, or Succession, he neither needed, nor would have
desired, or made them to be granted too him in such wise, as they be by that
Act: Which ( said he) takes no place, neither is of any force, or effect
against him, that is right Inheritor of the said Crowns as accords with the
Laws of GOD, and all Natural Laws. Which Answer of the Duke of York, and his
Claim to the Crown, was by the same Parliament expressly recognized and declared
to be Good, True, Just, Lawful, and Sufficient.

And when in the same year Edward Earl of March, eldest Son to the said Duke of
York, upon the death of his Father, took possession of the Crown by the Name of
King Edward the IVth. his Title was in full Parliament by all acknowledged in
these words: Knowing also certainly, and without doubt and ambiguity, that by
GOD's Law, and the Law of Nature, He (viz. the said King Edward) and none
other, is, and ought to be true, Rightwise, and Natural Liege and Sovereign
Lord: And that he was in right, from the Death of the said Noble and Famous
Prince his Father, very just King of the same Realm of England. And so little
Respect was given to the aforementioned Act of Entail, that it was not so much
as repealed, being esteemed from the very beginning null and void in it self.
Nor indeed were any Acts of Henry the IVth. Vth. or VIth. (styled Kings in Deed
and not of Right) deemed to be in force, but such, as were expressly confirmed
by Edward the IVth. in the same manner, King Charles the IId. confirmed the
judicial Proceedings of the late Usurpation.

As little Success had that Monster of Nature, Richard Duke of Gloucester, who,
being by the Interest of several factious Lords chosen Protector to his Nephew,
the young K^^g Edward the Vth. and having by that means gotten into his hands
the Military Force of the Nation, pretending, that the Children of his Brother
King Edward the IVth. were illegitimate, laid claim to the Crown, which he not
only entailed by Act of Parliament upon himself and his Issue, but the better
to secure it in his Line, caused the Innocent young King, and his only Brother,
the Duke of York, to be barbarously murdered in the Tower; yet did he within
three years lose both his Crown and Life to Henry Earl of Richmond, on whom,
and his Heirs, it was again by Act of Parliament entailed, which yet would
little have availed him or his Posterity, had he not prudently (according to
his promise, by which several of the Nobility were induced to assist him)
married Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of King Edward the IVth. and immediate
Heiress of the Crown, whereby, happily turning his Usurpation into a lawful
Sovereignty, he secure himself in the Throne.

But that his Issue by any other Lady could not have had better Success against
the Princely House of York, than Adonijah had against Solomon, may more than
probably be presumed, if we shall consider, what Fate attended the many mad
Acts, made by Henry the VIIIth. about the Succession.

This haughty Prince, whose capricious Humor none of his Parliaments durst
gainsay, having after above twenty years Cohabition divorced his Queen, a chaste
and virtuous Lady, did in the twenty fifth year of his Reign disinherit by Act
of Parliament the Lady Mary his Daughter by her, settling the Crown by special
Words, for want of Issue Male, on his Issue Female by the Lady Anne Bullen: To
the observation of which Act the whole Nation was obliged by an Oath, imposed
the year following, the Refusal of which Oath was adjudged Misprision of
Treason. And yet in the twenty eighth year of his Reign he bastardized and made
illegitimate to all intents and purposes (as he had done formerly the Issue of
Queen Katherine) the Issue betwixt him and the Lady Anne Bullen, barring them
to claim, challenge, or demand any Inheritance, as Lawful Heir, or heirs to him
by Lineal Descent; making it Treason for any one (notwithstanding their former
Oath) by Words, Writing, Printing, or any other exterior Act directly, or
indirectly to call any of the Children, born under the unlawful Marriages of
Katherine and Anne Bullen, legitimate; and enacting, that case he had no Issue
by Jane (his then Queen) he might dispose of the Crown to whatsoever person or
persons, he pleased, the whole Nation being bound to the observance of this Law
by the Sanctimony of an Oath, the refusal whereof was made High Treason. After
all this, in the thirty fifth year of his Reign he by another Act entailed the
Crown on himself, Prince Edward, and the Princesses Mary, and Elizabeth,
(without repealing the former Acts, or taking the least notice of their being
so signally bastardized (and for default of Heirs of their Bodies, on such
person or persons, as he should nominate by his Letters Patents under his Great
Seal, or by his last Will in writing, signed by his most Gracious Hand, the
whole Nation being again sworn to observe his pleasure herein: Consequently
whereunto he by such his last Will and Testament solemnly bequeathed the Crown,
upon failure of his own Issue, to the House of Suffolk, and his Act of
Parliament lay) the Issue of his Elder Sister, means from the Throne, (as much
in him, and his Act of Parliament lay) the Issue of his Elder Sister, whose
Royal Blood he affirmed the cold Air of Scotland, to have frozen up in the
North. Yet when after the Death of his Three Children, reigning successively,
these disinheriting Statutes (the last whereof was confirmed by Act of
Parliament in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, in whose thirteenth year there
passed also an Act, That it should be Treason, during her Life, and a
Praemunire afterward, to assert* that the Imperial Crown of England could not
be disposed of by Act of Parliament) came to the Test, they had not the Honor
to be repealed, but were held null and void from the beginning, as being
notoriously repugnant to the Laws of GOD and Nature, and the common Customs and
Constitutions of the Realm. And the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the
Commons assembled in Parliament (notwithstanding all these unrepealed Acts
(having confessed the Inestimable and unspeakable Blessings accrewing from the
Union of England and Scotland under one Imperial Crown in the Person of King
James, lineally, rightfully and lawfully, descended of the most Excellent Lady
Margaret, Eldest Daughter, of the most renowned King Henry the VIIth. and the
high and noble Princess Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, eldest Daughter of King
Edward the IVth. proceeded to the Recognition of his Title in these Words: We,
being bounden thereunto both by the Laws of GOD and Man, do recognize and
acknowledge that immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of Elizabeth,
late Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all the
Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights, belonging to the same, did by inherent
Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession descend and come to your most
Excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir
of the Blood Royal of this Realm: And that by the Goodness of GOD Almighty, and
lawful Right of Descent Your Majesty is under one Imperial Crown of the Realms
and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland the most potent and
mighty King. And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit and oblige
our selves, our Heirs, and our Posterities for ever. And some years after it
was by all the Judges of England expressly resolved in Calvin's Case: That King
James his title to the Crown was founded upon the Laws of Nature, viz. by
inherent Birthright, and Descent from the Blood Royal of this Realm.

All Acts of Parliament then for excluding from the Throne the next Heir of the
Blood Royal, on whom the Crown descends by the Laws of God and Nature, by
inherent Birthright, and undoubted Succession, being ipso facto null and void,
it is not to be wondered, that his present Sacred Majesty so constantly
declared, that he would never consent to alter the Descent of the Crown in the
right Line, as not being willing, by showing, his People a Method of disposing
the Succession, to shake at the same time the Title of his own Possession:
Since it is evident, that the Heir apparent, or next of Blood has the same
Right to enjoy the Crown after his Predecessors Death, as the Actual Possessor
has to it, during his Life.

But well fare the noble Lords of England, who (with a Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutari) rejected that abominable Bill, which, though it would, if passed an
Act, have been of no greater Force or Validity, than the Wild Ordinances of the
Rebellious Parliament of 1640. yet might it (as they were) be made use of to
induce the deluded Multitude to hazard their Souls, Bodies, and Estates by a
damnable Opposition of their Lawful Sovereign, and to raise up a Contest in
this Nation, not unlike to the old Yorkish and Lancastrian Quarrel, the
Thoughts whereof every good Man must certainly dread, when he shall seriously
consider, how that War lasted about sixty years, and cost the Kingdom its whole
Treasure, and the Lives of above two hundred thousand of the Commons, besides
several Kings and Princes, and Nobles without number.

So sensible was the renowned Queen Elizabeth, of those fatal Consequences,
which necessarily attend so unjust an Act, as that of altering the Succession,
that, although for Reasons obvious enough (and needless here to be mentioned)
she yielded to pass an Act, whereby it was made Treason to say that she and her
Parliament could not dispose of the Crown, yet could she never be brought to
give her Consent to the actual disposing thereof, though the next Heir, then
alive, was not only a Papist, but her own Rival to the Throne. Nay she was so
averse to any such Act, that (as Camden, tells us,) She never heard any thing
more unwillingly, than that the Title of Succession should be called into
question. And therefore she sent Mr. Thornton Reader of Law in Lincoln's Inn, to
the Tower, because in his Reading he called in question the Queen of Scots
Title to the Crown. And when the Lord Keeper Bacon was accused by the Earl of
Leicester for having intermedled against the Queen of Scots Right to the
Succession, and for being privy to a Book, wherein Hales went ahout to derive
the Title of the Crown of England, in case the Queen should die without Issue,
to the House of Suffolk, Hales was therefore committed to the Tower, and Bacon,
though denying it, was not without great difficulty restored to favor. So
likewise, when in the eighth year of her Reign, Bell Mounson, and a great
Number of the House of Commons, thought it their Right, as Representatives of
the whole Kingdom, whereof they do not in reality represent the sixth part, to
decide and settle the Succession, the Queen by a Prince-like Speech in the
Parliament House speedily suppressed their insolence. In like manner when in
the thirty fifth year of her Reign Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley
delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the Upper House
to be Suppliants with them of the Lower to Her Majesty for entailing the
Succession of the Crown, for which they had a Bill ready drawn, the Queen
highly displeased hereat, charged her Council to call the Parties before them:
Whereupon Sir Thomas Henage, sending for them, commanded them to forbear the
Parliament, and not to go out of their several Lodgings. They were after called
before the Lord Trease^er, Lord Buckhurst, Sir Thomas Henage, by whom Wentworth
was committed to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromley, and other Members of the House
of Commons, to whom he had imparted the matter, being sent ^o the Fleet. So
careful was this prudent Queen to keep the People from presuming to intermeddle
with the Succession.

The same Consideration, that the Altering or Diverting the Succession in an
hereditary Monarchy, where the Kings (deriving their Royal Power from GOD
Almighty alone) do succeed lineally to the Crown, according to the known
Degrees of Proximity in Blood, cannot be attempted without involving the
Subjects in Purjury and Rebellion, and exposing of them to all the Fatal and
Dreadful Consequences ^f a Civil War, not only caused the Estates of Scotland
from an hearty and sincere Sense of their Duty to recognize, acknowledge, and
declare, That the Right to the Imperial Crown of that Realm is (by the Inherent
Right, and the Nature of the Monarchy, as well as by the Fundamental and
unalterable Laws of the Realm) transmitted and devolved by a Lineal Succession
according to the Proximity of Blood; And that upon the Death of the King or
Queen, who actually Reigns, the Subjects of that Kingdom are bound by Law, Duty
and Allegiance to obey the next immediate and lawful Heir, either Male or
Female, upon whom the Right and Administration of Government is immediately
devolved; And that no Difference in Religion nor no Law, nor Act of Parliament,
made, or to be made, can alter or divert the Right of Succession and Lineal
Descent of the Crown to the nearest and lawful Heir, according to the Degrees
aforesaid; nor can stop or hinder them in the full, free and actual
Administration of the Government, according to the Laws of the Kingdom; but are
obliged for the preservation of the Peace and Tranquillity of that Kingdom,
with Advice and Consent of the said Estates of Parliament, to declare, That it
is High Treason in any of the Subjects of that Kingdom, by Writing, Speaking,
or any other manner of way, to endeavor the Alteration, Suspension, or
Diversion of the said Right of Succession, or the debarring the next lawful
Successor from the immediate, actual, full, and free Administration of the
Government.

Nor is it to be doubted, but that the Commons of England, who now begin to
grow sensible of those Precipices of Ruin, whereinto they were ready to tumble
through the Contrivances of those malicious Incendiaries, that by terrifying
the People with panick Fears, and Arbitrary Power endeavored to kindle a Fire
of Rebellion in this Nation, will, whenever it shall please their Majesty to
call a Parliament, show themselves no less Zealous (than the Scots) to assist
and defend (according to their Oaths) the Rights and Privileges, the chiefest
whereof, upon which all the rest depend, as on a Corner Stone, is the
unalterable Hereditariness of the Monarchy, and thereby defeat the Designs of
those cursed Achithophels, who labor by involving us in Confusion to establish
their beloved Democracy, the very worst of Tyrannies.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for H.I. 1688.


