A DECLARATION FROM The Children of Light (who are by the world scornfully
called Quakers) against several false reports, scandals and lies, in several
news Books and Pamphlets, put forth by Hen. Walker, R. Wood, and George Horton,
whose lies, and slanders shall not pass for truth; but shall be judged, and
cast out by Michael and his Angels into the world, which is their habitation
amongst the Children of darkness.

ALSO A Warning from the Lord to all Ballad-makers, and Image-makers, with them
that print and sell them, who are found without the fear of God, contrary to
the command of God, who says, You shall not make an Image of Male nor Female:
and to the Doctrine of the Apostles, who were to avoid profane and vain Fables.

WITH A Lamentation over all them that live in pride and gluttony, swearing,
and all manner of uncleanness; and profess God, and profess Christ, and
themselves Christians; but are seen to be those, whose God is their belly,
whose end will be destruction.

Thus being turned aside from that which was made manifest from God, God also
has given you to believe a lie, who are filled with all unrighteousness, envy,
murder, hatred, and all manner of uncleaness, as you may read your conditions at
large in Romans 1. and 24. ver. to the latter end, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. ver.
whose damnation is just upon all them that take pleasure in unrighteousness.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1655.

A Declaration from the Children of the light (who are by the world scornfully
called Quakers) against several false reports, scandals and lies, in several
News-Books and Pamphlets, etc.
IN that which is called the Perfect Proceedings, a book of news, which is
printed for Robert Ibbiison dwelling in Smithfield, which says in his book,
which comes from Wa^ker, one who professes himself to be a Teacher, but it
(...) of lies: That there is much horrible wickedness committed by some of the
Quakers about London: as cursing, ranting, and filthy uncleanness; whereupon
some went to the said Walk^r, to know why he publ^shed such lies to the Nation,
for all such things we do deny. And then the said Walker to cover his
filthyness, instanced a Ranter or two, which are contrary to the Quakers, and
all their filthy p^actices denied by those called Quakers. And this is it
Walker would cover his slander with, which he puts forth against them called
Quakers to the Nation; but them that are not given over to believe lies sees
his folly: And Christ says, They shall speak all manner of evil upon you
falsely for my nam^s sake, which we find fulfilled, the filthy actions which are
done amongst the unclean ones, does he fetch up, and put in his Book against
them called Quakers, to make them odious; and no unclean filthy thing is
justified amongst them cal^ed Quakers, which thou Walker says, is according to
thy work and your works shall ye have your reward; and the Scr^pture is
acknowledged to be a Declaration of the Word, as you may read Luke the first:
And whereas it was said to thee Walker who does so slander: That the Plagues
written in the Book thou might own to be thy due: in that generation thou art
found to which they were spoken to: And whereas thou accusest a woman for
following of the Ranter that came often to White Hall, that is another of thy
slanders; for she testifies against it and thee: And many other lys and
slanders in thy book which is not worth the mentioning, and all unsavory
expressions we do deny. And thou bring one Rober^s and one a Glasier, which
thy conscience tells thee, are contrary to them, thou calls Quakers: and there
Walker thy seed is known, and what seeds-man thou art, comprehended with the
children of light, who sees that they which are given over to believe lies,
may give care to thy slanders; but the honest-hearted and godly-minded, will
judge the appearance of thy seed.

From them who declares peace and love, to all them that thirst after
righteousness, John Bollon, Simon Dring, Will. Rayman, Rich. Davis.

And again, we find many slanders and lys in that which is called The Weekly
Post, printed by R. Wood, and he says, witness the burning of the Bible by
sundry Quakers; Now Wood we command thee to mention those sundry Quakers that
burned the Bible, and bring thy works to the light; and them that deny the true
testimony of it, mention them in particular: and the Ordinances of Christ and
the Ministers of Jesus Christ we own, and free will is denied; and mention what
Ministers those are in particular that they do deny, else let thy mouth be
stopped for ever; for upon record, thou art seen with the light which
comprehends the world, and thy end and race, and thy folly is manifested; who
art one of them that Prints false reports (...)

And another slanderous paper Printed for G. Horton, called, The Quakers Dream,
and on the outside of it he has set many Images of Males and Females, which
the Scripture forbids: so under the Judgment of the Scripture thou art brought.
And thou brings one Gilpin for thy cloak for thy slanders, a fit object in whom
the Devils trembled, who turned from being a Quaker to be a drunkard, against
whom a Warrant was given out for his drunkenness. And then thou speaks of
several converted Quakers in Leicestershire, that the Devil appeared to; We
demand of thee their names, and do not with thy lies make the truth odious; for
we know no lie is of the truth: and them that are not of the truth, may be
subject to believe thy lys, and filthy Dreams that are in thy slanderous Paper.
Was John Gilpin convinced of his drunkenness? and is he now turned to it again?
That which did convince him, will convince thee, and you all, and be our
witness at the last; and thy dancings and feastings which thou speak of, is
denied with them who are scornfully called Quakers amongst you, who are become
your song, your byword and reproach; but our strength is the Lord God, and our
Redeemer the Holy One of Israel: So take warning all ye liars, and slanderers,
least the Lord sweep you away with all the refuge of lies; for the Lord is
cleansing the Land of evil doers.

And R. Wood showed Simon Dring and Will. Wilson, a book called A Mirror, or a
Looking-Glass both for Saints and Sinners, set forth by S. Clarke Pastor in
Bennet-Finch London; the Saints have looked into it, in which book is lys, out
of which book, R. Wood said G. Horton had his ground, to publish forth that
which we know to be lys, and print them, which he calls His Quakers dream. And
the said R. Wood said to Simon Dring and William Wilson, that the said George
Horton was a fudling abroad, and how the drunkards makes their Songs.

Thou George Horton, who have published many lies, scandalls and slanders in
thy papers which thou calls the Quakers terrible vision. And many unsavory
speeches (which be not worth mentioning) is found in it, which is come out of
the generation of liars, and all thy unsavory expressions, in the paper, and
thy lies, and thy slanders are denied. And they that make lies their refuge,
may be builded upon thee, and may have a refuge under thee, who art one of the
Devils seeds-men (who sowes his lies abroad) who is of them, And Horton we
demand of thee what they be, that hold community of women, and other folks
wives, and what women they be, and what men's wives they are, mention the names
of them, and where they live, and let the Law take hold upon them, else upon
record thou ar^ left Horton, thou belies Isaiah, who says he did not go naked,
when the Scripture says he did, and here thou art not only a liar upon us,
but upon the Scripture, as you may read, Isaiah 20. and read thy 5 page; and a
great deal of stuff, thou have about Gilpin, one of thy own generation, which
is under the power of Satan. And thou Horton says Paul was zealous in his way,
persecuting the Saints, Thy fruits, appears, to be in Saul's steps, who art to
the truth an enemy. And mention, those Quakers that hold forth free will.
Mention their names, (who manifests thy self to be in works of darkness, to
slander in the dark: for the lie, and the slander, in thy paper, we deny, and
thy unsavory expressions. And again thou art babbling, and has stuffed in thy
paper, of one thou calls Mr. Fox taking a man by the singer out of a
whirl-pool; And this is like unto the rest of thy filthy stuff, and again, thou
art tormented, because some throw off their ribbons: and here again, thou do
manifest thy self, they that are of the world they may own thee, but the
children of the light sees, that the lusts of thy Father thou do, and the
lusts of thy Father thou would have, and cannot endure his Kingdom should be
overgrown, and such who be in the nature of Swine, as thou art, and Dogs do
bark at the children of light, and Swine does cry to the great admiration of
the people. And thou scoffs at the light w^thin, and sets above it the Images
of Male and Female. And again Horton we command thee to make mention, of those
Quakers, that makes the word of God but as a shadow; oh! was here ever the like
in any age seen, who profess Christ, live ^n so much Impudency, breathing of
lies and slanders, what an unsavory smell is this, that comes from those, that
calls themselves Christians, and Churches, but we see thy fruit, in thy paper,
and thy smell is gone out into the Nation, and recorded thou art, and answered
shall be to that in thy conscience, in the day of thy condemnation. And this
Mist, which thou cast forth, does no hurt, among the children of light, nor
among them who fear God, thy lying spirit the Lord will rebuke and all the
rest, of thy other unsavory speeches, whom to thy self shall return, and the
author of them, but now the time is come that they say report, and we will
report, and all manner of evil is cast upon the children of light, so ye are
them that fulfill Christ's words, but this we say, The Lord forgive you.

Ye Ballet-makers, and ye Ballet-sellers, Stationers, and Printers of them; and
buyers of them beware, for the Lord God of glory is arising, who says, Thou
shall not make any Image of Male or Female, which you do amongst you, and are
sound upon your ballets, and so out of Gods counsel, are amongst the heathen
making Images: and your vain jesting books, which stirs up the heathen, which
knows not God, and such be out of his command, which makes Image of Male and
Female, and other creatures contrary and out of Gods command, and because the
Images and Ballads are cried against, it makes the Heathen to rage, and imagine
vain things against them, who does them cry against, showing that these have
their hearts, and are their gods, yea, but says them that be in the flesh, in
the lust, and in the pride, We shall loose our gain, and our calling, if we
forsake our jesting-books, our ballads, and our books of rimes, which upon them
is the Image of Males and Females, and that is to set them out: though God does
forbid them, it brings us in gain Iupiter-l^ke which all his Tradesmen cries,
These are pestilent fellows with cries against these things, which brings us
in gain, we can profess Christ, and hold up these things too, says Jupiter
who be in Jupiters nature with his Images: but to you all professors of Christ
Jesus, which be in the evil with your jesting-books, and ballads, and books of
verse and rhyme and vain songs, and your ballads with your Images of Male and
Female, upon them to the light in your consciences, I speak: with that mind
which you read your jesting-books and sing your ballads, you profess the
Scriptures, and lives out of the obedience of them, so you are them that cry
Lord, Lord, which enter not into the Kingdom of God, who does not the will of
God, for who does his will knows his doctrine, and from all that which stirs
up wantonness, and pleasures, and fables-followers are turned away from, which
enters into the kingdom of God: so your jests and songs shall be turned into
howl^ng, as you may read Amos, and you that make songs and ballads upon wicked
people, and so rejoice in iniquity which is contrary to Scripture, as you may
read, oh how are the world in many places, and streets, and walls painted with
b^llads and fables, and yet now profess your selves to be Christians, and of
the Church of Christ, oh stop your mouths, and cover your lips, where did any
of Christ's flock so, but this is the froth of the sea, and the foame of it, and
here you are proved to be such who said; they were Jews, but were not,
therefore I do warn all young and old people from the Lord God, give over your
reading ballads your song-books, and rime-books, which are all for the fire,
with them that made them, and read the Scr^ptures with was from the life of God
declared, which declared against all vain fables and lightness, and
wantonness, and pleasures, lest that you be given over to believe lies, and so
remain under the power of Satan, and perish, and not regard that light which
shows you the works of Satan, and the works of God, where you might receive
power from the Lord Jesus, and so be turned from the power of Satan unto God,
and so come to witness the entrance into the Kingdom of glory which has no
end; but you who this light do hate, it is your condemnation, so this is your
Teacher, and this is your condemnation, that do it hate: and you that this do
not regard, your blood be upon your own head from him who says, There is no
peace to the wicked.

A lamentation and grief, and sorrow to see so much profession of Christ and
God, and of the holy Prophets of God, and o^ the holy Apostles words amongst
people that are so proud, that cannot tell how to go, nor what to put on, nor
what to eat, which shows your selves to be of that Kingdom of the world,
professing him in words, and with your lips profess honor to him: but your
hearts are far off, and your practice do manifest it and fruits; for by the
fruits the tree is known, and a lamentation and sorrow to see the fruits of the
Doctrine of the teaching of the world; for they in their conversations, and
their communications which is heard now abroad among such as profess God, and
Christ, and Prophets, and Apostles words, when they in their filthy
communications, one cries Oh Lord! another cries Oh Christ! with a vain mind
taking Gods name in vain, making mention of Christ's name and not depart from
iniquity: and others crying and swearing, by God they will do such a thing, or
swearing, by God they will not do such a thing: and others swearing by their
Faith such a thing is so, and by their Faith such a thing is not so and
swearing when they are selling their Merchandise, by their troth they will have
so much, and by their troth they cannot take so much: So are quite out of
Christ's Doctrine, who says, In all your communications let your yea be yea,
and your nay, nay: for whatsoever is more is evil: and others swearing by Mass
and Mary, and thus the Land mourns because of oaths; and this ill savory smell
ascends which stinks in the Nostrills of God, which is found out of Christ's
Doctrine, and out of the Apostles doctrine, who says, Above all things my
brethren swear not at all, least you fall into the condemnation of the Devil;
and ye that swear, are out of the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, and are
fallen into the condemnation of the the Devil, as you may read, Math. 5. Again
others when they are crossed fall out into cursed speeches, being the cursed
children, and speak forth often, and bid a pox on such a thing that crosses
them, and cry Gods wounds. Oh lamentation! miserable profession who take the
Prophets Words, and Christ's und his Apostles for a cloak! God will not be
mocked with your hypocrisy, His plagues you cannot escape who chooses the
evil, and refuses the good. The day of the Lord is coming upon His
adversaries, and many will appear in that day and say, Lord, Lord, but to them
he will say, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not; are you
workers of iniquity? depart then; Have ye your old garments on? and are you
wicked and slothful? into utter darkness you are to be cast, where there shall
be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Do you live sumptuously and in
pleasures upon the earth? and are you not rich gluttons which have pleasure in
your life time? Did not he go into torment who lived so? is not he an example
to you all? and will you not be warned in your life time, but still go on in
your gluttonous way of pleasures? Are you not coveting after money which is the
root of all evil, and so pierce your selves through with many noisome and
hurtful lusts? Are not you joyn^ng house to house, and field to field, until
there be no more place left for the poor? Remember the end of such. Do you not
live wantonly upon earth, as in pleasures, and kills the just, and so are dead
whilst you live, which the Scripture mentions. Are you not drinking w^ne and
beer, and strong-drink until the wine inflame you, and so call for the Pipe and
Harp, which the Prophets of the Lord were sent to testify against? and do not
you who live in these beastly practices before mentioned, profess your selves
to be a Church, and professes your selves to be Christians, and so outwardly to
men do appear beautiful; but are the generation that slays the righteous blood?
So your works being evil, your reward will be according. And every one search
with the light which from Christ the Lord Jesus does come, that with it you may
see your works, whether you be free from those practices before mentioned; who
are shall have his reward: and who are not, are with the light to be condemned,
and his works are for the fire: and in your life time, remember you are all
warned, and this is the day of your visitation, wherein you are visited, now
you have time prize it: to the light in all your consciences I speak, which is
my witness which comes from Christ, which lightneth every man that comes into
the world, that with it you may see your selves, and your deeds, whether they
be wrought in God and he that hates it, his deeds are evil, they are not of
God, and this is the condemnation of all that hate it, the Light.

FINIS.

