THE DECLARATION AND RESOLVTJON OF THE Knights, Gentry, and Freeholders of the
COUNTY of KENT, Now in Arms for the defense and preservation of the Kings
Majesty's Royal Person, ^he Privileges of the Subjects, and the Laws and
Liberties of the Freeborn People of this NATION.

With their Resolution touching the Army; and a^l others that shall oppose them.

And their randevouzing at Black Heath, and their Skirmish with a Party of the
G^nerals horse, with the manner thereof, and their taking of diverse Pieces of
Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

May 29. London, Printed for R. W. Anno Dom. 1648.

A DECLARATJON OF THE Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of KENT
THat the innocence of our intentions, and Justice of undertakings, may more
clearly appear to all men of incorrupt understandings, and hearts not made too
servil by the long and odious custom of oppression: We the Knights, Gentlemen,
and Franchlins of the County of Kent, the most free people of this late
Flourishing Nation; by the wisdom and valor of our Ancestors, delivered from
the Laws of a Conqueror, and to these late days unhappy confusion and
distraction enjoying the same, through all the Reigns of the most glorious
victorious Kings and Princes of this Nation: Do hereby declare and manifest to
all the world, That our assembling and meeting together at this time, is no
other then for a vindication of our selves and purposes, from the scandal, and
aspersions of the Committee of this County; who upon occasion of a Petition in
behalf of the County of Kent, assented and subserbed to by the Grand Jurie at
the Sessions of the Judges upon an espetiall Commission of Oyer and Terminer
executed at the Castle of Canterbury the 11. of May last, for the said County;
not only made Orders agoinst the same, and commanded them publicly to be read
in all Churches sentencing and condemning the said Petition and all the Abetors
thereof: and have summoned the Troops of Horse, and Forces of Foot of this
County for suppresion of the said Petition: which tends not only to the
suppression of the Liberty, even of the most enslaved persons of the world; but
also as much as in them lies, endeavor upon any causes whatsoever, which suits
not with their humors, to over ^we the senses of other men, and upon
opposition therein think they have ground enough to take away the lives and
Fortunes, or both, of their said opposers.

In consideration of which, and that now the said Committee finding themselves
unable to involve this County in blood; have made their address to the
Parliament, and Army; and make strange and malicious representations, of our
purposes, thereby discovering nothing so much as their own pride and malice. We
the said Knights, Gentlemen, and Frree-Yeomen of the County of Kent do herein
appeal^ to a^l the world to judge, If it were not high time for us to put our
selves in^o a posture of Defense; and do further declare, that we will
prosecute our said petition with our lives and fortunes, not doubting of a fair
reception from the two houses of Parliament; whom we know to have been
instigated against us by the said Committee: And therefore saving to our selves
the enlarging of the said Committee with increasing the Taxes of this County
above the du^ proportions, and only for maint^ining their own private luxury
and pride; with usurping a power over the Est^te and Fortunes of this County
not grafted in them, and expressed by words and actions, all along the exercise
os th^s power, (which m^kes them unfit for rule) to the exasperating of the
peoples hearts into all annimomosity, and overthrowing of all love and peace in
this County: which also has been followed to that hight of prosecution, That
had not two Houses given a stop to their exorbitant proceedings, we had
suffered much more uder the torment of these men's projected designs: wherein
we acknowledge our selves to have been secured in the temper and moderation of
the Houses. we have no more to say or do, but to defend our selves, till we can
have a right understanding of our purposes and action before the Houses. In the
mean time, we shall look upon all opposition, as the provocation of a conscious
and enraged Committee, and in respect of the invasion lately made upon the
persons of our Neighbors we think fit not to lie at the mercy of Soldiers,
but to have refuge to our Arms, from which no threats or face of Soldiery
shall drive us, knowin^ well the justice of our cause, and the temper of our ow^
hearts.

An exact and full Relation of the proceedings of the Kentish-men, and the
manner of their Fight at Dedford, with the Parliaments Forces.
SIR,
ON Friday last being the 26 of this instant the Kentish-men boarded a Pinnace
that lay on the River, and seized on all the Arms and Ammunition, and took all
her Ordnance, which they landed near Dedford, and planted them in two or three
passages, placing their Guards both of horse and foot; then they marched to
New-Cross, and with Carts, harrows, and such like materials blockt up the
passages to stop the Parliaments horse in their march, and placed two Drakes at
a Court of Guard there; from thence they went to Dedford bridge, and did the
like: the colors which their Ensigns bore were white and red. Their body of
horse and foot (which at this time consisted of about 800.) randezvouzed at
Black Heath, where diverse other of the country forces made their appearance.

Also this evening diverse Gentlemen and Esquires went from this town over into
Essex, to know their resolutions; but what answer they received, as yet J
cannot hear; but they are assured from Surrey, that before Sunday morning, they
will bring to their assistance 5000, men completely armed. On Satterday about
five of the clock in the afternoon came in five Companies more to Black-health
with yellow Cullers, at whose approach the Body gave such a shout, that they
made the place to ring. It is confidently reported, that they expected to be
about 16000 before Sunday at noon, and this Evening they took four Drakes out
of another Ship which lay upon the River over against Detford. This day
likewise they put themselves into a posture of defense, and made choice of
their Officers both Horse and Foot, and it it is reported, that they intend to
choose the Earl of Thanet General. On Satterday in the morning about three of
the clock, a party of Horse belonging to Col. Rich his Regiment, faced the
Guard at New Cross, where both parties fired at each other, but the Kentish
horse pursuing them, and returning, met some of their own foot (who went over
the fields, and thought to have engaged Col. Riches horse) and had like to have
falu upon them, but that they presently gave them the word, God grant a happy
uniting betwixt both parties, and stop the further effusion of blood, which
shall be the constant prayers of him, who remains

Greenwich 27. May, 1648. Your obliged Friend, G. MALLOTT.

FINIS.

