A PERSUASIVE TO FULL Communion, WITH THE Churches of Christ IN ALL
GOSPEL ORDINANCES AND PRIVILEGES.

Containing An Essay for the Conviction and Reformation of such Adult, or grown
Persons who live in the sinful neglect of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Together with An Account of the Manner of the Transition of Church Members
from their Infant to their Adult-state, and regular Admission to full Communion.

Written, For the help of such as need Instruction in these spiritual Concerns,
1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit.

By the Late Reverend Mr. George Day, Minister of the Gospel in London-street
in Ratcliff, 1697.

London: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
School.

The PREFACE.
THERE are some Circumstances, that attend the Publication of the Ensuing
Treatise, which may render this short Preface, not only Excusable; but, also in
some respects Necessary, That the Readers may be acquainted with two Things. 1.
Touching the Author, and the Coming forth, of this small Piece. 2. Touching the
Subject Matter handled in it. 1. As for the Author, the Late Reverend Mr.
George Day, He was a well accomplished, and approved Minister of Jesus Christ,
very Exemplary in his Holy Conversation, and abundant in his Ministerial
Labors, in which his Study, Diligence, and Fidelity were the more Conspieuous,
in regard of those painful and weakening bodily Distempers, by which it pleased
God, to Try, and Exercise him for many Years last past. As to the Publication
of this Discourse, which is now sent abroad into the World, it was Composed,
and fitted for the Press, by himself, That very Copy, which he delivered to the
Bookseller, was sent by him to several Ministers to be perused. Among others,
we whose Names are subscribed to this Preface, had it in our Hands about a Year
ago, and upon a deliberate Inspection into the Matter, Method, and Manner of
handling his Subject; have thought, it might be of good Use and Benefit to
many, if it were made Public, and certified him of our Opinion touching it.
After this, it lay in his hands as Dormant. But about the End of November last,
this Good Man finding himself to decline very sensibly, delivered his Copy to
that Bookseller, who had been so long Instrumental, in divulging exceeding
many Learned, Pious, Practical, Excellent Books. It was not long after
committed to the Press, but before one quarter of it was Printed, it pleased
the Lord to remove the Author out of this World, and to receive him into his
Celestial Rest and Glory, to the great Grief; undoubtedly, to the great Loss of
that Congregation, in which the Providence of God had set him to Labor, in the
Word and Doctrine of the Gospel. 2. Touching the little Book it self. It has
several Properties, which may greatly recommend it to the perusal of all, into
whose hands the Providence of God shall bring it. For, it is very short, and
will not much Exercise the Patience of the Reader. It is very plain adapted to
the Capacity of the Meanest Understandings. The Discourse is managed in a very
sound, serious and profitable Manner. The Arguments made use of are clear,
strong, and nervous, and enforced with all the advantages of Zeal and Charity.
The Persons concerned to attend unto this Persuasive, are exceeding numerous.
The subserviency of it toward the promoting of the Glory of God, the Interest
of Religion, and the welfare of Souls, is evident to every considerate, serious
Person.

In this little Book, there is nothing that may discourage the Reader: No
profound Speculations to amuse him: Nor doubtful Disputations to perplex him:
But a serious Persuasive to incline him, to comply with the Command of Christ,
in the performance of two plain, weighty and necessary Duties. To which no
Parties among Christians are obliged, by their Principles, to make any
Opposition.

1. He persuades the Adult, who are unbaptized to fit themselves for, and then
to seek after Baptism. It is true indeed, that the Author (in the Introduction)
tells us, that the People called Quakers, do wholly reject both Baptism and the
Lords Supper, as useless Ceremonies; and dispute against them. But all they who
acknowledge them to be Gospel Ordinances, must, according to their declared
Principles, concur with our Author, to press all Adult, unbaptized Persons to
be Baptized. They who go under the Denomination of Anabaptists, may possibly,
except against the Baptizing of Infants which he asserts. But they are as
zealous as any other, to persuade the Adult, who were not Baptized in their
Infancy, to hasten to that Ordinance.

2. He persuades Baptized grown Persons to labor to be fit for, and then to
communicate in the Lords Supper. This is acknowledged by all, to be their
unquestionable Duty. So that in this Point, he can have no Adversaries,
whatever different Sentiments some may have about the due Qualifications of
those who are to approach to the Lord's Table.

Having given this account of the Author and his little Book, we have answered
the Design of this Preface. And shall only add our Prayers, that the Lord would
afford his Blessing, that the Book may attain the End, which the Author
propounded to himself in his Writing of it.

William Bates, George Hamond.


ERRATA.
To be Corrected, Page 46. line 22. for Bercelerius, read Bertelerius.

Books Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
THere is Published of Mr. George Days, The Communicants Instructor, or a
Sacramental Catechism.

Mr. Days Funeral Sermon, Preached by the Reverend Mr. Sam. Slater; Printed for
John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.

There is now Published Two scarce Books, The Fountain of Life Opened; or a
Display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glory: Containing Forty Two
Sermons on various Texts. And also a Treatise of the Soul of Man. Both in 4to.
By the late Reverend and Learned Mr. J. Flavel, Minister of the Gospel at
Dartmouth.

There is likewise newly Published, A Sermon Preached on the Late Day of
Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. By Mr. J. How, Minister of the Gospel. To which
is Prefixed, Dr. Bates Congratulatory Speech to the King, November. 22. 1697. In
the Name of the Dissenting Ministers in and about London.

A Body of Practical Divinity in 176 Sermons, on the lesser Catechism of the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster. By Tho. Watson, formerly Minister at St.
Stephens-Wallbrook, London.

THE INTRODUCTION.
IT is a Truth, which no sober Christian will deny, that Omissions, or Neglects
of commanded Duties are as truly breaches of the Law of God; as Commissions of
Sins forbidden, and so as certainly destructive to the Souls of Men; and
therefore all such as would please God, and escape Destruction; ought as
conscientiosly to perform Duties, as to forbear Iniquities, and to have Respect
to all Gods Commandments, as well as to hate every false Way.

Now, amongst the many Sins of Omission, of which Persons under the Christian
Name are guilty in this Age, and for which God has a Controversy with us at
this Day: The neglect of those Sacred Ordinances of Christ, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper is one, and not the least, it being notoriously evident, that
many of Twenty or Thirty Years Old, and some more, have never been Baptized,
and these (with Thousands more of Adult or grown Persons) live also in the
neglect of the Lord's Supper: The Cause of which neglect, in some is the
Ignorance, and Error of their Parents, who (if they were Quaker's) wholly
reject these Ordinances, as useless Ceremonies, and Dispute against them; or
(if Anabaptist's) neglect to bring their Children to Baptism in their Infancy,
and many of them being bred up in Ignorance, are careless of their own Souls
concerns; and so Live, and Dye without the Participation of these Ordinances.
Now though I dare not Judge such as to their Eternal State, for to their own
Master they stand or fall; I freely acknowledge, the Grace of God is not bound
to external Ordinances, and God does nothing by them, but what he can do
without them, (if he please) yet I know we are bound to the Use of Ordinances,
(when we may have them) by the express Command of God, because they are his
Institutions, by which he does usually work Grace in us; And to neglect known
Duties, yea, or to live in Ignorance of Duties, under the means of Knowledge,
are Soul-damning Sins; which I earnestly desire all that are thus, guilty,
seriously to consider. Upon the Observation of these sinful Omissions, I cannot
but conclude it to be the unquestionable Duty of all the Ministers of Christ
that would be found faithful to him, and to the precious Souls of Men, not only
to observe, mourn over, and reprove these Sins, but to do their utmost also in
their proper Stations, and Relations, for Reformation in this Particular: The
Sense of this Duty, has been so deeply impressed on my Spirit, as to put me
upon this well-meant (though mean) endeavor, to contribute something, toward
this needful and desirable Work.

I am too Conscious of my own weakness to dictate to my Reverend Brethren,
acknowledging that I rather need, and therefore desire their Light and Help
herein; yet hope I may (without giveing Just Cause of Offense to any) take
leave to Confess, that many of us, have been very defective in our Duties
herein; and in this Confession, I cast the first Stone at my Self. The Good
Lord Pardon us, that we have manifested no greater concern of Spirit for the
Holy Institutions of our Lord-Redeemer, and help us, that while we Reprehend
our People, for their sinful Omissions, we may be duly humbled for our own; and
make it more visible in our Practice, that we teach our Selves, as well as
Others.

A PERSUASIVE TO FULL Communion, OF Baptizing Adult, or Grown Persons.
I Shall then first apply my Self, to such Adult or grown Persons, who, though
they go under the Christian Name, yet were never Baptized. If this Paper comes
to the Hands of any such, I would propose some Considerations, to convince you
of your Sin, and (if the Lord shall bless them) bring you to Repentance; and
then give you some Councels, or Directions, for a right performance of your
Duty.

In Order to your Conviction, be persuaded seriously to consider these seven
Things.

First, Consider, That Baptism, is as much an Ordinance of Christ, as Preaching
the Gospel is; and to continue in use in the Christian Church, as long as that,
(as appears by Christ's own Command, Mat. 28.18, 19. (viz.) to the End of the
World; and so it is as much the Duty of all professed Christians, to receive
the Ordinance of Baptism) as to attend on the Ordinance of Preaching. For the
same Authority that enjoins the one, enjoins the other, Therefore the neglect
of it must be sinful. And how dare you Live in any known Sin?

Secondly, Consider, That it is both the Duty of Christian Parents, to bring
their Children unto Christ, and the Right and Privilege of such Children, to
be so brought, to receive his Blessing; Mark 10.13, 14, 15, 16. And this Seal
of the Covenant of Grace, under which they are as well as their Parents, Genesis
17.7. And so must have a Gospel-right to this Ordinance, as have been
sufficiently proved, by many Judicious Pens, (to which I must refer you for
more Light in this Point, if you need it, because of my intended Brevity.)

And if so, it must be the Sin of your Parents, that they brought you not to
this Ordinance in your Infancy; and by Consequence, your Sin and loss to
neglect it, ever since you came to Years of Discretion, and a Capacity to
Covenant with God, and present your selves to Baptism.

Thirdly, Consider, That your Parents sinful neglect of their Duty, is no just
Plea, or Excuse for your neglect of this Ordinance, since you came to Years of
Understanding; for then it became your Duty, both to acquaint your selves with
the Covenant of Grace, and give your own Understanding, and Hearty Consent to
it, and to testify the same, by receiving this Ordinance.

For Jews, or Heathens, (when instructed in the Christian Religion) if they
make a serious Profession, of Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him, ought to
be Baptized; much more may the Adult Children of Christians, when they make the
like Profession, Acts 8.36, etc.

4. Consider, That it looks as if you were ashamed to own Christ, and
Christianity; that you do not so much as wear the visible Badge of his
Disciples, and Followers, i. e. Baptism. For by this Ordinance, Christians are
distinguished from all the rest of Mankind, and whilst you want this mark of
Distinction, and yet profess Christianity, you deserve to be called
Heathen-Christians, or Christian- Heathens, owning only the Name of Christ's
Followers, but seeming ashamed of his Livery. And if you are indeed ashamed to
own Christ, or his Ordinances here before Men, he will be ashamed to own you
before his Father, and the Angels hereafter, Mat. 8.35. And how sad will their
Condition be, whom Christ will not own in the great Day! Are you not loath to
be found amongst such at last?

Fifthly, Consider, That though the neglect of Baptism, may seem a small fault,
(if any) to ignorant and inconsiderate Persons, yet it is indeed a great, and
heinous Sin; being downright disobedience to the Command of Christ, and a
virtual slighting and practical refusing of the Covenant of Grace, of which
this is the visible Sign and Seal; therefore it must be very provoking in the
Eyes of God. We find God threatened that Parent, who did not Circumcise his Son,
to cut him off from his People; that is, either to exclude him from the Church
of God, and all the Privileges, Promises, and Blessings, belonging to it, or
to cut him off, by an untimely and violent Death, for so the Learned understand
that Text, Genesis 17.14. Compared with Exodus 31.14. So that Moses himself, was
like to have been made an Example, for this Omission. as Exodus 4.24.

Here its worthy our serious Observation, least any should think the Punishment
threatened, to be greater than the Sin deserved; God was pleased to give the
Reason of it, in the formentioned, Genesis 17.14. He has broken my Covenant; God
calls a Rejection and Contempt, of the Seal of the Covenant, a breach of the
Covenant it self.

Now if Baptism, come in the room of Circumcision, (as Protestants generally
conclude from Col. 2.11, 12.) And if God was so angry with his Servant Moses,
for neglecting to Circumcise his Son, that he met him, and sought to kill him:
Judge you, whether those Parents that neglect to Baptize their Children, have
not cause to fear that God is angry with them also, though he does not
presently manifest it in his Providence, nor can we suppose him, to be
well-pleased with the Children of such careless, or erroneous Parents, who
imitate them in Sin, when grown up, by Living in the neglect of this Ordinance.

Sixthly, Consider, That such as slight and neglect the outward Baptism of
Water, may justly fear, they were never yet Partakers of the inward Baptism of
the Holy Ghost, which is signified thereby, and that they are still
unsanctified, or unholy Souls; for where the Spirit of God comes with Power, he
convinces of Sin; John 16.8. and the neglect of any Ordinance of Christ, is
one Sin of which the Spirit, will certainly Convince such as are guilty,
whenever he Works savingly on them, and if you have not had the Convincing-work
of the Spirit upon you; surely you know nothing of its Converting, Renewing,
and Sanctifying-work; and if so, should you Dye in this Condition; you have no
Ground (that I know) to hope, for the Witnessing and Comforting-work of the
Spirit in Death, nor for Eternal Life after it; for none but Holy Souls, have a
Promise of these Blessings.

It Is true, God can sanctify the Soul by his Spirit, though the Body be not
washed with Water; therefore, I do not say, that none are sanctified by the
Spirit, that are not Baptized with Water for (doubtless) there are many
Instances of the contrary, as Elect Infants that Dye before Baptism, and others.

But this I do affirm, that seeing God has been pleased to set up Ordinances
in his Church, to be the Means of Grace, made it our Duty to use them, and does
usually Work Grace in and by them; it is a Sin to neglect these Ordinances,
where they may be had, and such as do so, have Cause enough to fear they never
yet received any saving Benefit by them: For that would make them to prize
Ordinances highly, and continue in the diligent use of them. Now consider, Can
you be Content, to Live without sanctifying Grace, and Dye without Comfort, and
well-grounded Hope of Heaven at last?

Seventhly, Consider, That the sinful neglect of one Ordinance, provokes God to
withhold his Blessing from other Ordinances, as a just and suitable Punishment
of that Sin; and I fear, this is one Reason, why so many unbaptized Persons
profit little by Reading and Hearing the Word. God sometimes Threatens a
People, that though they hear the Word, they shall not understand; and though
they see, they shall not perceive, that their Hearts shall be made Fat, their
Ears heavy, and their Eyes shut; least they should see with their Eyes, and
hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and Convert and be
Healed, as Isa. 6.9, 10. Should God say thus concerning such as you, how
miserable would your Condition be? You have Cause to fear it, for your Sin
provokes him to it.

Supposing now, that these Considerations duly weighed, may be sufficient to
convince you of the sinfulness, of your neglecting Baptism, (and they will be
so, if the Holy Spirit of God sets in with them, for which I Pray. (In the next
Place, let me give you some plain Councels and Directions, for the performance
of your Duty.

First, Be deeply humbled before the Lord, for your sinful neglect of this
Ordinance hitherto; acknowledge it to God, with Shame and Sorrow of Heart; beg
Pardon of it, in the Name of Christ, and resolve to use all good endeavor,
duly to prepare for the Participation of it, and set presently upon the Work,
as remembering Time is short, Life uncertain, and delays in Soul-matters most
dangerous.

Secondly, Get a Competent Knowledge of the Principal or Foundation-Truths, of
the Christian-Religion, which the Assemblies Catechisms, both Shorter and
Larger, well Read and Considered will help you to, (if you have not already
attained it) especially acquaint your selves well, with the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace, and the Gospel-seals of it, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper,
which the Sacramental Catechism opens to you.

Thirdly, For your better Help in this great Concern, apply your selves to some
able, and faithful Minister of Christ, (especially to such, under whose
Ministry you do ordinarily sit,) and open your Souls Case to him, propound your
Doubts or Scruples, (if you have any) ask his spiritual Counsel, or Instruction
and desire his Prayers to God in your behalf.

Fourthly, Beg earnestly of God, that you may have complete Baptism, or be
baptized not only outward with Water, but inwardly by the Holy Ghost, as John
3.5. And have not only the washing of Regeneration, but the Renewing of the
Holy Ghost; as Tit. 3.5. Pray, that you may be meritoriously washed, from the
guilt of Sin, by the Blood of Christ, and efficaciously washed from the filth
and Power of Sin, by the Spirit of Christ, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. 1 Cor. 6.11.

Fifthly, Give your Understanding, and hearty Consent to the Covenant of Grace,
and humbly, and thankfully accept and choose JEHOVAH, the only Living and True
God, to be your God; and give up your selves to him as his Covenant Servants,
as Isa. 44.5. and Isa. 56.4, 5. When this is done, you may humbly Claim the
Ordinance of Baptism, as your Right and Privilege, being a Seal to confirm the
Covenant, between God and your Souls.

Now, as for the Manner of Administration, that is to be left to the Prudence
of the Ministers of Christ, who are to be the Dispensers of this, and all other
Gospel Ordinances; I pretend not to prescribe to any: But hope I shall offend
none by giving an account of my own Practice, which I submit to the Censure, of
more mature Judgments.

When by Conference with, and Instruction of the Person seeking Baptism, I
apprehend Him, or Her to have a Gospel-right to, and fitness for it: At the
Time of Administration, I first speak something touching the Nature, Use, and
Ends of this Ordinance, and the Covenant of Grace, to which it does belong: And
then seek the Lord by Prayer, for his Blessing on it.

Then I propose these following Questions to the Adult Person that is to be
Baptized, and receive his Answers.

Q. Were You never yet Baptized, as far as you do understand?

A. No.

Q. Are you willing, and desirous to be Baptized?

A. Yes, it is my earnest, and hearty Desire.

Q. Why do you desire to be Baptized?

A. I desire for these two Reasons.

First, Because by receiving this Ordinance, I would profess and testify my
Consent to the Covenant of Grace, with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
Baptism being one of the Signs, and Seals thereof.

Secondly, Because I would hereby be ingrafted, into the Mystical Body, of
Christ his Church, and be owned as a Member thereof, this being the Ordinance
of Admission.

Q. Seeing none have a Gospel-right to Baptism, but professed Believers, and
their Seed, do you profess Faith, in the Lord Jesus Christ, and Obedience to
him, according to the Gospel?

A. I do solemnly, and sincerely profess the same.

Q. What be the Chief Articles of the Christian Faith, which you profess to
Believe?

A. Those which are contained in the Creed, commonly Called the Apostles Creed,
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.

Q. Do you know what Estate you were Born in?

A. Yes, I have Learned by the Word of God, that I, and all Mankind, are Born
in a State of Sin, and Misery.

Q. How came Mankind into this sinful and miserable Estate?

A. Mankind fell into this Estate, by the first Sin of our first Parents, Adam,
and Eve, or by their Eating the forbidden Fruit.

Q. Did all Mankind then fall in Adam 's first Transgression?

A. Yes, The Covenant of Works being made with Adam, not only for himself but
for his Posterity, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation,
sinned in him, and fell with him in his first Transgression.

Q. What is the sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. The sinfulness of that Estate whereinto Man fell, consists in the guilt of
Adam's first Sin, the want of Original Righteousness, and the Corruption of his
whole Nature, (which is commonly called Original Sin) together with all actual
Transgressions which proceed from ^t.

Q. What is the Misery of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. All Mankind by their Fall, lost Communion with God; are under his Wrath,
and Curse, and so made liable to all Miseries in this Life, to Death it self,
and to the Pains of Hell for ever.

Q. Did God leave all Mankind to peish in the Estate of Sin and Misery?

A. No, God having out of his mere ^ood Pleasure from all Eternity, elected
^ome to Everlasting Life, did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver them
out of the State of Sin, and Misery, and to bring them into a State of
Salvation by a Redeemer.

Q. Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of Gods Elect is the Lord Jesus Christ, who being the
Eternal Son of God, became Man, and so was, and continues to be God and Man,
in two distinct Natures and one Person for ever.

Q. How may we be made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We may be made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
Effectual Application of it to us by his Holy Spirit.

Q. How does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. The Spirit applies to us the Redemption purchased by Christ, by working
Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our Effectual Calling.

Q. What is Effectual Calling?

A. Effectual Calling is the Work o^ God's Spirit, whereby convincing us of our
Sin and Misery, inlightening our Minds in the Knowledge of Christ, and renewing
our Wills, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ as he is
freely offered to us in the Gospel.

Q. What does every Sin deserve?

A. Every Sin deserves God's Wrath and Curse, both in this Life, and that which
is to come.

Q. What does God require of us to escape his Wrath and Curse, due to us for
Sin?

A. To escape the Wrath and Curse of God due to us for Sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Life, with a diligent use of all outward
means, whereby Christ communicates to us the Benefits of Redemption.

Q. What is Faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving Grace, whereby we receive, and rest upon
him alone for Salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel.

Q. What is Repentance unto Life?

A. Repentance unto Life is a saving Grace, whereby a Sinner out of a true
Sense of his Sin, and Apprehension of the Mercy of God in Christ, does, with
grief and hatred of his Sin, turn from it unto God, with Purpose of, and
endeavors after new Obedience.

Q. What are the Outward, and Ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us
the Benefits of Redemption?

A. The Outward, and Ordinary Means whereby Christ communicates to us the
Benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances; especially the Word, Sacraments,
and Prayers, all which are made Effectual to the Elect for Salvation.

Q. Which be the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. The Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is an Holy Ordinance, instituted by Christ, wherein the washing
with Water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, does Signify and
Seal our ingrafting into Christ, our Partaking of the Benefits of the New
Covenant, and our Engagement to be the Lords.

Q. What is the New Covenant, of which Baptism is a Sign and Seal?

A. The New Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, is an Holy Contract, or Agreement
between God, and his Elect in Christ; wherein, for the sake of Christ, he
promises them Pardon and Life upon their Repenting of Sin, and believing in
Christ the Savior.

Q. Do you heartily Consent to this Covenant of Grace with the Living and True
God?

A. I Hope through Grace I do, and therefore I do here (as in the Presence of
God, and before this Congregation) seriously profess to Repent of my Sins
against God, to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and to take the
only Living and True God, Father, Son, and Spirit, for my only God and chief
Good, my Father, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; and do give up my whole Self, Soul,
and Body to be Gods Covenant Servant for ever.

When these Questions are thus ANswered, I apply my Self to the Answerer in
these or the like Words.

Upon this credible Profession of the Christian Faith, which you have now made,
and your solemn entering into Covenant with God; I as a Minister of Christ, do
receive you in his Name, and shall administer this Holy Ordinance of Baptism to
you; Exhorting, and Commanding you to hold fast this Christian Faith, and be
faithful and steadfast in keeping Covenant with God, yielding him cheerful
Obedience all your Days; that the Blessings promised in the Covenant may be
your Portion in Time and Eternity.

Then I administer the Ordinance, by Dipping the Face of the Person in the
Water, and so close the Action with Prayer, and the Blessing.

Of the Transition, or passing of Church Members from their Infant to their
Adultstate, and of their Admission to the Lord's Supper, and full Communion with
the Church.
As it is the comfortable Privilege of Christian Parents, to bring their
Children unto Christ in their Infancy, and to see them owned as in the same
Covenant with God, together with themselves; by receiving Baptism, the Sign and
Seal thereof; so it is their unquestionable Duty to instruct them (as soon as
they are capable to Learn) in the Knowledge of God, and of the Covenant
solemnized in Baptism, the Nature, Use, and Ends of it, and the Seals thereof;
and to acquaint them (when grown up to Years of Understanding, and competently
instructed in the Christian Religion) that it is their Duty, and will be their
Interest to give their own actual, and hearty Consent to their
Baptismal-Covenant (seeing the Consent of Parents in their behalf, will serve
them no longer then until they are capable to Consent for themselves) which if
they refuse or neglect to do, they forfeit the Benefits, and Blessings of the
Covenant. And that they ought to desire, and prepare for the Renewing of their
Covenant with God, by receiving the Lord's Supper, that being the other
confirming Seal thereof.

But alas! The Generality of Parents sinfully, and shamefully neglect the Souls
of their Children, (and their own Souls too) at this Day; breeding them up in
gross Ignorance of the very Foundation-Truths of Christianity, by which means
the most of our Youth, either regard not Religion at all, or only content
themselves to be now and then present in our Public Religious Assemblies, (to
which they are led more by Custom, and Example, then by any Sense of Religion,
or Conscience toward God) little minding what is said, or done there, because
indeed they understand little of it, and so are little the wiser, or better for
what they hear; Continue Strangers to the Life and Power of Godliness, lie open
to Temptations, and are easily carried away to Error, or Profaneness.

The Lord convince such Careless, and Cruel Parents of this crying Sin, give
them Repentance, and quicken them to their neglected Duty toward the Souls of
their Children, or else I fear the next Age will degenerate into downright
Heathenism, and Atheism.

If any of them shall cast their Eyes on this Paper, I entreat them to spend
one hour in the serious Consideration of these few Particulars.

First, Consider the preciousness of your Childrens Souls, they are
Heaven-born, Immortal Spirits, capable to know, fear, love and serve the God
that made them here, and to see and enjoy him for ever hereafter: And so are
more worthy of your Love, and care than their Bodies; yea, one Soul is of
greater value than the whole World; and should you not be much more concerned
for their present, and future Welfare and Happiness? What? Will you suffer so
precious a Thing as the Soul of a Child, to be lost for ever, through your
sloth and carelessness? when your Love to them will make you ready to hazard
your own Lives, to save their Bodies from a Threatening Danger?

Secondly, Consider the need they have of Instruction, for they come into the
World spiritually Blind, and Ignorant of God and Christ, yea of themselves too;
they know not their sinful, miserable, and dangerous State by Nature; the need
they have of a Savior, nor what they must do to be saved: The future Happiness
of Saints in Heaven, nor the dreadful Punishment of Sinners in Hell; and that
which yet makes their Condition the more deplorable, is, that usually they
desire not the Knowledge of these Things, but are rather unwilling to be
Instructed, and Love Darkness rather than Light.

Now one would think, you that have the Bowels of Parents, should Pity the
Blind, Compassionate your Ignorant Children, and do what you can for their
Cure; though you were under no other Law, but that of Nature to do it.

Thirdly, Consider, God has made it your indispensible Duty by his Positive,
and express Command to Teach your Children, his Revealed Mind and Will, with
the greatest Care, Constancy, and Diligence. Read, and weigh those Scriptures,
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. So that it is no Arbitrary Thing, nor left
to your Pleasure to do it or not; your neglect of it is a direct Disobedience
to the Law of God, and how will you be able to Answer it to God in the Day of
your Account?

Fourthly, Consider, God has entrusted you with Authority over your Children,
to Command them to Learn the Knowledge of God, and of his Will, and to obey it;
and has commanded your Children to Honor and Obey you herein, and expects you
should use your Authority over them; especially to this End, and Godly Parents
have so done, and are commended in Scripture for it. Read and Consider, Ephesians.
6.1, 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Genesis 18.19.

You Use this Power over them for your selves, in requiring them to Obey your
Wills; and will you not also use it for your God, who gave it, and for the good
of your dear Childrens Souls?

Fifthly, Consider, if your Children Live and Dye in Ignorance of Soul-saving
Truths, they will perish for ever; and if they do so through your default, or
neglect of Instructing them, their Sin will hereby become yours; and God will
require their Blood at your Hands. See Isa. 26.11. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.

Now, do you not cry out of those, as Monsters in Nature, Wolves, and Tigers in
humane Shape; yea worse than Beasts, who Murder their own Children, and imbrue
their Hands in their own tender Infants Blood? How much greater Monsters are
those Parents, who starve the Souls of their Children, by withholding
spiritual Food from them, and so help them forward toward Eternal Destruction:
And are you willing to be found in the number of such bloody Parents at the
last Day, and to have your Portion with them for ever?

If these Considerations have convinced you, how sinful your neglects of
instructing your Children and Families have been, and impressed your Souls with
such a Sense of your Duty, that you resolve upon it in the Strength of Christ
for the Time to come? This will prepare you to accept of, and hearken to a Word
of Counsel, which I will offer you also in a few Particulars.

First, See that you are well acquainted with the Knowledge of God and Christ,
his Will and Worship, your selves, that you may be capable of Teaching your
Children; Remember God requires Parents first to get his Word into their own
Hearts, and then to Teach them diligently to their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.6. It Is
impossible for you to instruct others in that, which you have not learnt your
selves.

It Is very sad to observe, that many Parents are but Children in Understanding,
and that when for the Time they have lived under the Means of Knowledge, they
might have been such good Proficients, or Scholars in the School of Christ, as
to be able to Teach their Families, they themselves need to be taught the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, as Heb. 5.12.

I am persuaded this is the Grand (though not the only) Reason, why
Family Duties are so generally disused at this Day, it is not so much out of a
dislike of, or a Malignity against the work it self in many; as for want of
Ability to perform it, and this Impediment can be no ways removed, but by the
Blessing of God on a diligent use of due Means for the obtaining such an
Ability. Therefore, if you are indeed too Ignorant of the Will of God, be
ashamed of your Ignorance and Sloth, but not ashamed to Learn, though Late, yet
better late then never.

Secondly, Having got a competent Measure of Knowledge your selves, begin your
Work of Teaching your Children betimes; be dropping and instilling, some of the
plainest, easiest and most necessary Truths into them, as soon as you find them
capable to Learn, and to remember. Be frequent at it, to Impress them the more
firmly on their Memories; when they can Read, put Catechisms into their Hands,
and require them to Learn them, to Read the Holy Scriptures daily, Hear
Sermons, and take Account of them, what they Remember; and Discourse with them
about the Truths heard, to help them to a clearer Understanding of them; and
labor to affect their Hearts with those Truths that chiefly concern them; and
Charge them especially to commit such to their Memories, encouraging the
Diligent, by your Commendations and Rewards, and quickening the Negligent, by
Reproofs and moderate Corrections.

Thirdly, Be much in Prayer to God, both for and with your Children, begging a
Blessing on your Instructions; Pray your selves, and teach them to Pray, that
God would second your endeavors, and succeed all the Means used for their
Instructions by the Inward and Effectual Teaching of his Holy Spirit, to open
their Understanding, strengthen and sanctify their Memories, Write his Law in
their Hearts, and put his Truth into their Inward Parts; that they may
understand spiritual Truths spiritually, and be made wise to Salvation.

Fourthly, Set before your Children a good Example of Sobriety, Righteousness
and Holiness in your own Lives; second your Godly Instructions with a Godly
Conversation; let them see by your own Obedience to the Will of God, that you
believe the Truths which you teach them; and press no other Duties on them,
than what you make Conscience to perform your selves: Then will your
Instructions be most like to prove Effectual, for your Children are naturally
prone to imitate you in their Practice; more apt to be led by the Eye then by
the Ear, and more inclinable to do as you do, than as you say, or Command.

Could you be persuaded to follow these plain and necessary Counsels, your
Children would have the Benefit, you would have the Comfort, the Church would
be Enlarged, and God would be Glorified: And what should you not be willing to
do within your Power for such desirable Ends as these?

But if any Christian Parents remain yet unperswadable by these Arguments, to
set about this Duty, their sinful neglect will become the more inexcusable, and
themselves the more unworthy of that Honorable Name by which they are called.

Blessed be God, there are yet some Pious Parents left among us, who have a
Sense of their Duty; and endeavor to bring up their Children in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord; and I hope the late unanimous Labors of the
Ministers of Christ in and about this City, pressing their respective
Congregations to the Revival of Family Worship, have been signally Blessed for
the Increase of the Number of such, and that this is one good presage of Gods
continuing his Candlestick in the midst of us. For Religious Families are the
Seed-Plots of Piety, and the Nurseries of the Church, so that if these flourish
(which God grant) the Church will from them be supplied and enlarged.

There are also some Adult Persons whom (though their Parents wretchedly
neglected their Souls in their Minority, yet) God is pleased to awaken and
Inlighten, Convince and Convert by the Public Ministry, and so are brought
into Christ, and join themselves for full Communion with the Particular
Churches of Christ.

Though alas! the Number of Converts in our Days is small in Comparison with
what has been in former Ages; as Gospel Ministers generally observe to their
Grief, and this proves us to be upon the decaying Hand.

And though it be the certain Duty of all Adult Persons, that make a serious
Profession of Christianity to join themselves to some Particular Church in
Order to a Participation of all Gospel Ordinances, and Church Priviledges, yet
the far greater Number live in the shameful neglect hereof, some to thirty,
forty, yea fifty Years of Age, and yet never received the Lord's Supper.

These may properly be called Christians at large, or loose Professors, if not
for the Looseness, and Immoralities of their Lives, yet for sitting so loose
from the stricter Rules of Religion, and for their backwardness to come wholly
under the Yoke of Jesus Christ, though it be really a far easier Yoke than that
of Sin. To such as these I would in the next Place make an Address, attempting
to Convince them of, and dissuade them from their Sin, and to instruct them in,
and persuade them to their Duty.

For your Conviction, I offer you these following Considerations.

First, Consider, until you are Joined to some Particular Church of Christ, you
come not under the special Care, Guidance and Oversight of any Pastor, and so
lose the Spiritual Benefit of that Relation, which may be a greater Damage to
your Souls, then you are aware of; for in diverse Cases you will need their
special help by Way of Council, Instruction, Support, or Comfort, to Answer
your Doubts, Encourage you against your Fears, Succor you under Temptations,
etc. The want of a skilful and faithful Soul-friend in such Cases would be
greatly Prejudicial to you.

Secondly, Consider, until you are thus Joined, you neglect one of the Holy
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ his Supper, the last that he Instituted,
left as a standing Monument of his Matchless Love to his Church in Dying for
it, and as a means to Perpetuate the Memory thereof in all Future Ages, and as
another Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace. An Ordinance, wherein he
proposes himself as the spiritual Food of Believers, to refresh and satisfy
their Souls, increase their Grace, and nourish them to Life Eternal; so that by
the neglect of this Ordinance,

1. You Contract the guilt of great Sin upon your Souls, for it is a direct
Disobedience to the express Command of Christ, who says, Take, Eat, etc. Drink
ye all of it, and Do this in Remembrance of me. Therefore to neglect it, is
practically to forget Christ, and if you forget him, how can you Hope he will
remember you?

2. You lose the Spiritual Benefit and Comfort of this Ordinance, the
nourishment and strengthening of your Souls in Grace, which you need as well as
others, and hereby give God just Cause to withhold his Blessing from other
Ordinances; And is this a loss that you can easily bear? Is it much at one with
you, whether you Profit by the Means of Grace, or no? If so, you are
(doubtless) yet strangers to Christ and Grace, and in a wretched State.

3. You Grieve and Discourage, the Ministers of Christ in their Work, and give
them occasion to fear that all their Labors are lost upon you; That you
believe not their true Reports of the Will of God, nor make due Application of
the Word they Preach, to your own Hearts, and Lives, and so receive this Grace
of God in Vain. This must needs sadden the Hearts, and weaken the Hands of the
Servants of Christ in their Work.

4. You Scandalize other Christians, and Tempt them to think that you are but
Formalists, and Hypocrites, taking up only with an empty Name, and Profession
of Religion, but ignorant of the Life and Power of Godliness. To be sure if you
have Grace, the neglect of this Ordinance, (which is appointed as a Principal
Means to strengthen and increase it) is a plain Evidence, that your Grace is
but small, and weak, and rather on the decaying than growing Hand.

5. You set an ill Example before Younger Persons, and Tempt them to live in
the neglect of this Ordinance also, (for they are more apt to follow Evil
Examples than Good) they will be ready (through Ignorance) to Conclude, that it
is no Sin, because they see you, their Elders and Betters do so; and that
Partaking of this Ordinance is no necessary Duty, but a mere Arbitrary Thing,
that may be done, or not done at Pleasure; And would you be guilty of leading
Young Ones into such an Error? Do you not see the malignant Influence of bad
Examples on the most of Mankind, especially on Youth? And do you not know that
you Contract the guilt of all the Sins of others, into which they are drawn by
your Example? And have you not Sins enough of your own? O therefore beware of
partaking with other Men's Sins, keep your selves Pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. And do not
Live in the neglect of this Ordinance any longer for others Sakes, as well as
for your own.

Thirdly, Consider, until you are Joined to some Particular Church of Christ,
you loose the Benefit also of diverse other Church Privileges, such as
Communion with the Choicest, and most Experienced Christians, an Interest in
their special Love, their Watchfulness over you, and Helpfulness to you by
Instructions, Admonitions, Exhortations, Sympathy in your Afflictions,
Consolations, Communication of Experiences, Prayers, etc.

And no wise Person would slight such Privileges, and spiritual Helps as these
that knows how needful and useful they may be to him in this imperfect State.

Fourthly, Consider, until you are Joined to some Particular Church of Christ,
you lie more open to Temptations from your Souls Enemies, and will be more
easily overcome by them, for the Sense and Consideration of those solemn and
sacred Bonds, which you have laid upon your Souls, by a Public owning your
Baptismal Covenant, and actual Renewing of it in Receiving the Lord's Supper;
will be apt mightily to awe your Consciences, keep you closer to your Duties,
and make you more watchful, and resolute against Temptations, and ready to cry
out, when assaulted, How shall I do this great Wickedness, and Sin against that
God, whom I have chosen, and to whom I have given up my Self, to Love, Fear,
Obey, and Serve him in an Holy Covenant for ever?

Let these, and such like Things be seriously Considered, until you are
Convinced of the sinfulness of your Neglects, and humbled for them, and
convinced also of your Duty, and made willing to set upon it, I say Willing;
for I think it very sinful to force Persons into Churches, or frighten them
into that Participation of Sacraments by Threatening Penal Laws, etc. Seeing I
find not, that Christ the Head of the Church, has entrusted any Man, or
Society of Men with such a Coercive Power, or that he would have any pressed into
his Service. Certainly he accepts of none but Volunteers, and though none are
such by Nature, he makes all those such by efficacious Grace, whom he receives.
It Is true, Christ Commanded his Servants, Gospel Ministers, to Compel Men to
come in to his spiritual Feast, Luke 14.23. But surely he means not, that they
should use any outward Violence to their Persons, or drive them in by Staves,
Whips, or Swords. No, nor with Pecuniary Mulcts, or Fines, for the use of these
belong only to the Civil Magistrate. Christ committed no Civil Power to his
Ministers; Their Business was with Men's Souls, which they were to deal with in
a Way agreeable to their Rational Nature; proposing to them weighty Arguments
to invite, and persuade them to accept of the Kindness offered, and though
these alone are not sufficient to prevail upon the depraved Wills of Men; yet
God, Joining the Inward Powerful Workings of his Holy Spirit, to the outward
Ministry of the Word, makes them effectually persuasive to all his Elect, and
of unwilling, makes them Willing in the Day of his Power, as Psalm 110.3. For
the Will of Man is not to be forced. Indeed the Compulsion there spoken of,
signifies no more than a Loving Invitation, or Bidding; and so it is expressed
by another Evangelist, Mat. 22.3. Christ sent forth his Servants to call them
that were bidden to the Wedding, and they would not come; Christ does not say,
Then force them against their Wills to Come, or Punish, Fine, Excommunicate, or
Imprison them for their Refusal; he will himself call Men to an account for
slighting his Invitation in his own Time, and therefore I think they ought to
be left to him.

In the mean while, I must profess I cannot find any warrant in Scripture for
Admission of all Persons though never so Ignorant, or Profane to the Lord's
Table: Surely the Ministers of the Gospel [whom Christ has entrusted with the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven] should not suffer the Lords Table to be made
[like the Table of a Common Ordinary] Free for all Comers, nor cast Christ's
Holy Things, to known Dogs and Swine. Who ever dares to do so, must be
accountable to Christ for it, who is Jealous for his own Name, and will not
hold them guiltless that either pollute or profane his sacred Institutions, or
permit others to do it, when it is in their Power to prevent it.

But I shall leave such, to Answer for these Crimes at his Righteous Bar, who
will have no respect to Persons in Judgment. And should now proceed to the next
Thing intended, which is to Instruct such as by the forementioned
Considerations, are Convinced of their sinful Neglects of this Holy Ordinance,
and to show them their Duty; But that I meet with diverse Objections, which some
make against their Approaching this Holy Supper, which must be answered,
because they lie as Stumbling Blocks in their Way, and are sometimes pleaded as
Excuses for their Sin. They are such as these,

Obj. 1. Some say, we think our selves unworthy to Partake of this Holy
Ordinance, therefore we come not to it.

Ans. 1. If you mean by unworthiness that you deserve it not, this should not
keep you from it; for all that are Partakers of it, are thus unworthy. We are
all unworthy of our common Food for our Bodies, much more unworthy of this Holy
Food for our Souls; and the deeper Sense you have of this unworthiness, the
more Worthy you are in Gods account.

2. If you have a Gospel-right to this Ordinance, and a Gospel-sitness, or
Preparedness for it, you are worthy in a Gospel-sense to be Partakers of it.
See then that you are thus qualified, and come.

Obj. 2. But we fear we are not fitted, or prepared enough to approach this
Holy Table, and this keeps us off.

Ans. 1. It may be you do not rightly understand what that Fitness, or
Preparedness is, that you ought to have, and so your Ignorance may occasion
your fears: If so, your next Duty is, to get the Knowledge thereof, and then
Examine your selves, whether you have it or no.

The Sacramental Catechism will instruct you herein.

2. Your Unfitness, and Unpreparedness is your Sin, because you ought to be
fit, and have sufficient means to make you so; therefore to Plead this for your
forbearance of this Ordinance, is to excuse one Sin by another, which is a Plea
that God will not allow of.

3. It may be some that make this Objection, are better prepared then they take
themselves to be. For there are many sincere Christians, who being naturally of
a Melancholy Temper, or of a Timorous Spirit; and having mean Thoughts of
themselves, are full of Jealousies, and Fears, concerning their own Sincerity,
and afraid of being found Hypocrites at last. Whereas this is one good Sign of
their Sincerity, that they are Self-suspicious, and such (though they come
Trembling to this Ordinance) are more fit, and worthy; and so like to be more
Welcome Guests at the Lords-Table, than many of those who approach it with
great Confidence; but over-looking or not clearly discerning the Grace of God
in themselves, they want the Comfort, and so give not God the Glory of his
Grace. Now such as these should not rest satisfied, in their own Judgment of
the State of their Souls, but seek to some Judicious Minister for spiritual
Counsel, and help herein.

4. If you are not yet fit, when will you be so? Has not God given you many
Years to prepare for this Ordinance? And are you not still as unfit as ever?
Yea more unfit now then you have formerly been? Whereas in a few Days, well
improved, you might have gotten a Gospel-fitness.

5. If you are not prepared for this Ordinance, doubtless, you are not prepared
for Death, and how dare you live unprepared for that, one Day or Hour; seeing
you know you must Dye e're long, and you may dye soon, even this Day or Hour;
and should you dye in an unprepared State, must you not be miserable for ever?
O let the serious Consideration of this Danger, quicken you to prepare for
Death, and then you will be prepared for this Ordinance also.

6. What has hitherto hindered your Preparation? Has it not been want of a
Sense of your Duty, to wait on God in the Use of this, as well as of other
Ordinances? And of your need of it for spiritual Ends? Your worldly Cares, and
Encumbrances, your Love to some Sin, or other, and loathness to leave it, or
your Sloth and Carelessness about your Souls Concerns? Doubtless these have
been the Obstructions that have kept you back from your Duty, and these are
Sins, and must be repented of, and turned from, if ever you be saved: Therefore
set upon this Work presently.

Obj. 3. But (others say) some Ministers, will not admit us to this Ordinance,
without a strict Examination of us; they require we should have a great deal of
Knowledge, and we fear they will ask us such Questions, as we shall not be able
to Answer, and then we shall be turned away with Shame.

Ans. 1, The Ministers, or Pastors of Churches are (under Christ) your
spiritual Guides, and Overseers, and solemnly Charged to take heed both to
Themselves, and to their Respective Flocks, as Acts 20.28. And Heb. 13.17. They
are entrusted by Christ, the Chief-shepherd with the Care of your Souls, and
must give an account to him of them in the Great Day.

He has Empowered them to teach and Rule his Church under him, and by his
Laws, and will you not allow them to do their Duty? And inquire into the State
of your Souls, and take heed whom they admit to meddle with these Holy Things?
Would it not be great unfaithfulness both to your Souls and their own too, if
they neglect their Duty?

2. No Prudent Minister will ask you any Questions, but such as you should be
able to Answer. If you are Adult, or grown Persons, and Educated under the
Ministry of the Gospel, and such as relate to Things necessary to be known, to
make you Wise unto Salvation. They only inquire, whether you understand, in
some Competent Measure, the Religion you profess, and Soul-saving Truth;
desiring to know what need you have of their Help by Way of Instruction, and
have you any Reason to be against this? Surely, did you well understand your
own Interest, and Wants; you would beseech the Ministers of Christ to give you
their Assistance in your Souls-concerns, and thankfully accept it when offered
to you.

3 Inquire of those that have been with Ministers on this Occasion, and have
been Examined, and Instructed by them, and so admitted when duly qualified; and
hear what they say concerning this Matter, and whether they Repent of their
Applications to them, and Converses with them? Or whether they have found
spiritual Benefit thereby; If so, let that encourage you to go, and do
likewise, and suffer not Ministers to be Misrepresented, and your Selves
abused, and prejudiced against them by flying, and false Reports, or your own
evil Surmises.

4. Suppose the worst, that Ministers upon Conversing with you, should not find
you duly qualified for this Ordinance, will it do you any hurt, to be brought
to a better Knowledge, of the State of your own Souls, and to be counseled,
and directed by those that are wiser than your Selves what to do, that you may
get due Qualifications? And this is the worst Treatment, you are like to find
at Ministers Hands.

5. Consider this seriously, if any Profane, or Unworthy Persons should be
admitted to this Holy Ordinance, through the neglect of Ministers, their
Profanation of it would be justly chargeable on such Ministers; and therefore
Love to their own Souls, as well as to the Souls of others, should make them
careful in this Matter. This made Holy Calvin, that Blessed Instrument of the
Reformation, deny the Lord's Supper to one Bartherius and other Servetians, who
were most unworthy of it, tho some (called Protestants) rose up against him for
it, so that he was ready (if not altogether forced) to leave Geneva for a Time,
yet bearing up his Christian Courage, he said, I (like Chrysostom) will rather
suffer Death, than that this Hand of mine should give the Holy Things of the
Lord (that is the Lord's Supper) to the adjudged Contemners of God. [ Melch.
Adam in the Life of Calvin:] Now should not every faithful Minister of Christ
be as careful to keep this Ordinance of Christ from Profanation, and their own
Souls from Participation of other Men's Sins as he? Doubtless they should.

6. You do not forbear to Consult a Lawyer about your Estates, or a Physician
about your Bodies, (when occasion requires it) for fear they will ask you such
Questions as you cannot answer. But you willingly submit to their Inquiries,
because you know it is necessary that they should understand your Case, that
they may give you proper and agreeable Counsel, and Advice; and should you not
be as willing to submit to the Inquiries of Gospel Ministers, (the Counselors,
and Physicians of your Souls) that they may know your Spiritual State, and give
you such Counsel as is suitable to it?

Obj. 4. But we are ashamed to come before Ministers, and have not Confidence
enough to Discourse with them, nor are we able to express our Minds to them, or
give an account to them of our Knowledge.

Ans. 1. You should be ashamed of nothing, but Sin: To be ashamed of Duty, or
of what is good, is a sinful Shame, and you have Reason to be ashamed of such a
Shame, and Repent of it, and Pray against it, until you are Cured of it. Yet,

2. It must be granted, there is a natural Bashfulness, in some (especially in
those of the weaker Sex, and in Youth) that is not easily Conquered; this
Ministers do well Understand, and therefore Prudence will direct them to Treat
such, with the greater Tenderness and Mildness.

3. Ministers will not expect that such should express the Sense of their Minds
with that readiness, that others of a bolder Spirit may, but will wisely
consider their Weakness, and discern Sincerity under Imperfection.

Obj. 5. But (others say) we are afraid to come to this Holy Ordinance, least
we should Eat and Drink unworthily, for we should thereby become Guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, and Eat, and Drink Damnation to our selves, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.27, 29. And we dare not run such an Hazard as this.

Ans. 1. It must be granted, that it is very hazardous for all wicked and
graceless Persons to meddle with this Holy Ordinance, for they cannot but abuse
and Profane it, and so bring themselves under great Guilt, and become liable
to great Punishment for it; therefore none such should dare to Approach this
Ordinance, until they Repent of their Sins, and are Converted; this Ordinance
being appointed, not to work Grace, where it is wanting, but to Increase and
Strengthen it where it is already wrought; it is Childrens Bread, and not to be
given unto Dogs. Yet know,

2. If you are yet in a graceless State, you are already in danger of Damnation
for your other Sins, though you keep from the guilt of this; and so should as
much fear it, as those that are guilty of this Sin. Nor is this Sin
unpardonable, but upon true Repentance, both has been, and may be forgiven.

3. The Sin of Eating, and Drinking unworthily lies in a Persons not discerning
the Lords Body; that is, in not distinguishing, or not putting a difference
between Ordinary, and Common Bread, and this Sacramental and Holy Bread, by
which the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ is signified and represented, and in
using this Bread with as little Preparation, Care, Regard, and Reverence as he
does the other.

Now gracious Souls know, there is a great difference between Common Bread and
this Holy Bread, and therefore will take due care to use it in an Holy and
Reverent Manner; and so keep from the guilt of unworthy Partaking, though they
are not altogether free from sinful Weaknesses and Infirmities in this, as well
as in other Duties, which yet should not keep them off from this Ordinance;
because, upon their Repentance, they are Pardoned to them for Christ's sake.

4. The Threatening mentioned in the Text, of Damnation, or Judgment, is not
designed by the Apostle to affrighten Christians from this Ordinance, but to
Caution them against the Profanation of it.

5. Consider, that the neglect of a known Duty, and turning your backs upon an
Ordinance of Christ, is a Sin, and makes liable to Damnation, or Judgment, as
well as the ill performance of a Duty, or the Partaking of an Ordinance
unworthily; and you ought to fear the one, as well as the other. It is well
worth your Consideration, what Christ intimates to us in that Parable of the
Marriage Feast of the Kings Son, Mat. 22. That those who made Light of the
Gracious Invitation, and refused to come, were at last as blameworthy as those
who came without a Wedding Garment; and therefore as he was Punished for his
Defect, so were they for their Disobedience; And most deservedly, for of the
two, they were the greater Sinners, it being a greater Sign of Contempt wholly
to neglect an Ordinance of Christ, than to Partake of it without some due
Qualifications (as one well Observes) so that the only way to avoid the Danger
on both Hands, is to examine your selves carefully concerning your Right to,
and fitness for this Ordinance, and when you have an Evidence of these, so Eat
of this Bread, and Drink of this Cup with Holy Care and Reverence.

Obj. 6. But we fear to come to this Holy Ordinance, lest we should Sin again
after it, and then what will become of us?

Ans. 1. It must be acknowledged you have Cause enough to fear sinning after
this Ordinance, as well as before, while you are liable to Temptations from
without, and have Corruption remaining within you, inclining you to close with
them. The Sense of your danger should make you to watch against Temptations,
and Occasions of Sin, and nourish in you a fear of Caution. Such a fear (while
it keeps within its due Bounds) is your Duty, and of great use to prevent Sin.
But it is immoderate and sinful, if it makes you neglect another known Duty (as
Receiving the Lord's Supper is) and no better than being guilty of one Sin to
avoid another.

2. There is not a Child of God on Earth, that is perfectly free from the
danger of sinning, while he is in this imperfect, tempted State, and you may
not expect to be freed from it any more than others; so that if none should
come to this Ordinance, but such as live without Sin, we must all lay aside the
Use of it, for there are no such Persons on this side Heaven, Eccl. 7.20. 1
John 1.8. James 3.2.

3. Know that the right Use of this Ordinance, is a good mean to keep you from
sinning, being a solemn renewing your Covenant with God, and a new Bond laid on
your Souls to love and serve the Lord, and walk the more Circumspectly, and a
means to strengthen Grace in you.

4. If you do Sin after your Partaking of this Ordinance, you have no Reason to
despair of Mercy, as if this did render your Sin unpardonable; but your Duty is
to renew your Repentance for it, to pray for Pardon of it, and Power against
it, and to stand more strictly on your Guard for Time to come. Then you have
Scripture ground to hope for Pardon, 1 John 2.1, 2. Psalm 32.5, 6. Jer. 3.22.
Read and Consider those Scriptures well.

5. Beware, that it be not a secret Love to some Sin, or other, and lothness to
part with it, that keeps you from this Ordinance, what ever else may be
pretended. Be very Jealous of your own Heart, for the Heart of Man is deceitful
above all Things; Examine your selves therefore very strictly, least this
should lie at the bottom; but if you find you are indeed willing to part with
every Sin, and to obey every Command of Christ, though you cannot live a
sinless Life, yet you have no just Cause to fear coming to this Ordinance.

Obj. 7. But there are so many different Opinions, and Sects among Professors
of Religion, some saying their Church is the True Church, and others saying
theirs is so, that we are at a loss, and know not which to Join our selves to.

Ans. 1. It is greatly to be lamented, that there are such Differences and
Divisions in Matters of Religion among us, and Woe be to the Causers and
Fomenters of them: They will never be able to Answer it to our Lord Jesus in
the Great Day; for they lay a stumbling block before the Blind, as Lev. 19.14.
Making them to wander out of the Way, and thereby bring themselves under a
Curse, as Deuteronomy. 27.18. Its to be feared, that these Differences may hinder some
Persons from Joining themselves with any particular Church in full Communion,
though this be the Fruit of their Ignorance, Weakness, or Prejudice; These
Differences being no just Cause of, nor Plea for the neglect of their Duty.

For though there be such Divisions among us, yet it is certain that some of
these Societies of Christians (at least) (...) ^^^ue Churches of Christ, though
some may be more Reformed, Pure, and Sound than others; and its the Duty of
every Private Christian to Join himself to some Particular Church, and (where
they have Liberty of Choice) to those who are justly esteemed, by Persons
capable to Judge (viz.) by wise and Judicious Christians, the purest and best,
or such as keep nearest to the Gospel-Rule, both in Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline.

2. Consider, for Persons to refuse, or neglect Joining with any Church, under
pretense of fearing, least they should not Join to a True Church; this is to be
Guilty of a certain Sin, to avoid an uncertain One, and therefore no Wise, and
Good Man would do thus.

3. In what soever Society of Christians the essential Marks of a true
Gospel Church are to be found, (viz.) The Pure Preaching of the Word of God,
and the due Administration of the Sacraments by a Minister Called, Qualified,
and set a part, according to the Rule of the Gospel: That Society should be
accounted a true Gospel Church, and will be owned by Christ as such: Though it
may differ from other Particular Churches in some Circumstantial, and lesser
Things: And Private Christians ought not to refuse Joining themselves to any
such Society, seeing Christ has received them.

4. It is evident to every Understanding, and Impartial Eye, That those of the
moderate Episcopal, Presbyterian, and Congregational Persuasions, have the
Essence of true Gospel-Churches, and own the same Doctrinal Articles of the
Christian Faith, though they differ in Discipline, and Modes of Worship:
Therefore Private Christians may safely Join themselves to either of them,
according as they are persuaded in their own Minds.

And (supposing you have heard the Ministers of each of these Persuasions)
where you have found the most spiritual Benefit: There it is most advisable for
you to Join, if it may be.

Obj. 8. But (says another) I am Poor, and Low in the World, and have nothing
to give toward the Maintenance of a Minister, and should I seek to Join my Self
to a Church, they may be ready to think I do it only in hopes of a share in
their Charity, and Reject me, for fear I should be burdensome to them; this
keeps me off.

Ans. 1. This Objection savours of Pride, and Uncharitableness, which become
not any Christians, especially the poorer sort, Humility, and Charity, or Love
would teach you to think the best, and to esteem others better than your
selves; and to hope that Ministers, and Christians do better understand the
Will of Christ, and their own Duties, than to be guilty of refusing Admission
of any Person into their Communion, merely for their Poverty; and you ought to
think thus of them, until you find the contrary.

2. Were you sure beforehand, that they would refuse you, yet it is your Duty
to offer your self and seek Admission; and then if they unjustly refuse you,
the Sin will lie at their Doors, and you will be Free: But their Omission of
their Duty, will be no good excuse for your neglecting your own Duty.

3. No faithful Minister of Christ dares to refuse the poorest Christian,
because he is Poor; provided it appears to him that he has a Gospel-Right to,
and fitness for Admission to this Ordinance; seeing he could not Answer it to
our Lord Jesus Christ, who refuses none that come to Him, but inviteth all,
whether Rich or Poor; as Mat. 11.28. and John 6.37. And requires his Ministers
to do the same, Mat. 28.19, and Mark 16.15, 16. Mat. 22.9, 10.

They know, that not many Mighty, not many Noble are called; but that God has
chosen the Poor of this World, Rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he
has promised to them that Love him, as 1 Cor. 1.26. and James 2.5. And whom
God has chosen, and called, they will not knowingly Refuse.

4. You ought rather to be Jealous of your own Heart, then Suspicious of
others; and see that you aim at higher and better Ends in seeking to Join your
self to any Church of Christ, than to obtain some worldly Support, as knowing
those that followed Christ only for the Loaves, were justly blamed by Him, John
6.26. If your Ends be Right, and Good, leave God to take care of your Esteem in
the Hearts of other Christians.

Obj. 9. But (say others) we hope we may go to Heaven, though we never Receive
the Lords Supper; God forbid, that all who Dye without this Ordinance should
perish.

Ans. 1. Far be it from me to say, or think that none go to Heaven but the
Receivers of this Ordinance, for I believe the contrary: Yea, I know that some
of those who are Partakers of it will perish, for want of a Saving Change upon
their Hearts, as Luke 13.26, 27.

I freely grant that neither the Participation of this, nor any other Ordinance
is absolutely necessary to Salvation; seeing God does nothing by Ordinances,
but what he can do without them, if he please. Yet,

2. I say, it is necessary that we should use the Means appointed by Christ in
Order to our Salvation, and this is one of them: If we would obtain the End, we
must use the Means; it being no better then a Tempting of God, to expect the
one without the other.

3. The neglect of this Ordinance is a Sin, being a Disobedience to a plain
Command of Christ; who says, Do this in Remembrance of me; and unless God grant
Repentance to those that are guilty of it, it will prove damnable: Now while
Men continue in this neglect, they do not truly repent of it, for there is no
true Repentance without Reformation.

4. God has no where promised Salvation to such as Live, and Dye in the known
and wilful neglect of this, or any other Ordinance, or Duty; but threatens the
contrary, and who would hazard his Salvation by such a neglect?

Obj. 10. But (say others) we have heard of such ill things of some
Church Members, that we think it a disgrace to us to Join with them, though
they make Holy Professions, yet their Practices are unholy, and profane, and
scandalous, and this keeps us off from their Communion.

Ans. 1. It may be the Report you have heard is false, and only raised by some
Enemy to Religion, and the Professors of it; if so, you wrong both your selves,
and the Persons concerned in believing of it, before you have thoroughly
examined the Truth of it; it is sinful to Take up a Reproach against our
Neighbor, as Psalm 15.3.

2. Suppose the Report appear to be true, yet their Church Membership is not
the cause of those Immoralities, but the Corruption of their own Hearts, or the
want of that Grace which they pretend to have.

3. Their Sin is to themselves, and shall not be charged on those that hold
Church Fellowship with them; if they do their Duty in Admonishing and Reproving
them for it, and do no way Partake with them therein. Such a Reproof Prudently,
and privately given by a Fellow-Member, may be Blessed of God, to the
Conviction and Reformation of a disorderly Walker, being a Means of Christ's own
Appointment to this End: If not, the Reprovers ought to acquaint the Church
with it, that they may use Church Discipline upon them; which if they neglect,
the Reproving Members will have this to satisfy them, that they have
discharged their Duty, and delivered their own Souls, as Mat. 18.15, 16.

4. The Participation of all Gospel Ordinances, being the Privilege, as well
as the Duty, of all true Believers, to be kept from any of them, must be a Loss
and Punishment; so that if you are such, and yet keep your selves off from any
Ordinance of Christ, because some of those that Partake of them are guilty of
scandalous, or disorderly Walking, you punish your selves for the Faults of
others, which is Injustice.

5. To keep off from any Ordinance of Christ, merely because some unworthy
Persons partake of it; is to make their Sin in one kind, an occasion of your
sinning in another kind: Their Sin being a Sin of Commission, yours a Sin of
Omission.

6. If all that truly fear God, should keep off from Joining with this, or that
Particular Church, because there are some Members in it that are disorderly
Walkers; either all such Churches must be dissolved, or else they must be made
up only of such disorderly Walkers: But I suppose no Wise and Good Man will
say, that either of these ought to be. You must know, the Visible Church of
Christ on Earth has Hypocrites in it as well as sincere Christians, and when
the Hypocrisy of any Member appears by their open and scandalous Sins, that
Particular Church to which they belong, ought to use Church Discipline upon
them, to bring them to Repentance and Reformation; and to keep themselves free
from a share in their Guilt. But no Christian ought to keep from Joining with a
Particular Church, because there are some such Peccant Members in it.

Obj. 11. But if this Ordinance is to be used only in Remembrance of Christ
(say some) we can remember him well enough without it; we think of him every
Day; the Reading, and Hearing of the Word, puts us frequently in Mind of Him:
How can any Christian forget him that has done, and suffered so much for them?
Therefore we see no such need of this Ordinance for this End.

Ans. 1. This Objection savours rankly of Ignorance, and Pride, which are very
Provoking Sins in the Eyes of God; did you well understand the Nature, Use, and
Ends of this Holy Ordinance, and the spiritual Benefit of a right Participation
of it, you would not think it a needless Thing.

And were you not puffed up with Pride, you would not account your selves wiser
than Christ himself, who Instituted this Ordinance; which he had never done,
had he not intended it for the Spiritual Good of the Receivers. Did Christ
judge it needful, and dare you say it is needless? Does it become sinful Dust,
contemptible Worms to slight an Ordinance of their Lord and Savior?

2. Though the Reading, and Hearing of the Word are useful to put us in Mind of
Christ, yet the use of this Holy Supper may do it more Effectually: For some
Truths do more powerfully affect our Hearts, when they are conveyed to us by
the Eye, than by the Ear: The Sight of the Execution of a Man usually makes
deeper Impressions on our Spirits, and moves our Affections, more than a bare
hearing of it does.

Now in this Ordinance, Christ is represented as Crucified before our Eyes, as
Gal. 3.1. And our dull and dead Hearts need the most Heart-affecting, and
quickening Means and Ordinances.

3. Know, that this Ordinance is Instituted for other Holy Ends besides that of
remembering Christ; as to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace: To be a means to
nourish and strengthen Grace, etc. (as you have heard before) and so is
needful, and to be used for those Ends, as well as for that.

4. Gracious Souls have sometimes met with some peculiar Manifestations of
Christ, and of his Love in this Ordinance, and such Spiritual, Refreshment,
Strength, and Comfort, as they found not in Reading, or Hearing the Word. For
Christ will not be wanting to bless his own Ordinances to their proper Ends;
and their Experiences should be Arguments, encouraging others to use this
Ordinance in hopes of the like Benefits.

Obj. 12. But (say others) we are so Encumbered, and Distracted with the Cares
and Troubles of this World, that we cannot be enough Composed in our Spirits to
approach this Holy Ordinance; could we once get well through them, we would
then endeavor to prepare for it, and come to it.

Ans. This is no Just Plea, or Excuse for your neglect of this Ordinance, for
Consider

1. God allows you sufficient Time for necessary Cares about your Worldly
Matters, and appoints you proper time also for the care of your spiritual
Concerns; and it is your Duty to see that every Thing be minded in its due Time
and Place. Spiritual Things should be minded in the first Place, as Mat. 6.33.
And therefore, if you put them off till last, you are guilty of Inverting or
Changing the Order which Christ has commanded you to observe, and that is
sinful.

2. No more Worldly Cares are lawful, and allowable to you, but what are
consistent with the more weighty Care of Religion and your Souls; while they
are moderate, and keep within due bounds, they hinder not the other; but the
excess of them is sinful, which therefore you ought to Watch and Pray against.

3. You may get through the World, as soon as get through your Worldly Cares
and Troubles; for they usually accompany us, more or less, all our Days; as
soon as one Trouble is over another succeeds, one begets another, as Wave
begets Wave; so that if you stay from this Ordinance until you are wholly freed
from them, you are never like to Partake of it.

4. Many of your Worldly Troubles and Afflictions, are procured to you by your
own Sins; or sent of God to correct you for them, drive you from them unto God,
and make you more mindful of Religion, and your Souls concerns; so that you
make a quite Contrary use of them, if they drive you farther from God, and make
you the more to neglect the Care of better Things.

Obj. 13. But when you have said all that you can for this Ordinance (say
others) this is but a Ceremony, that you Plead so much for; and to neglect a
Ceremony we hope can be no great Offense, but will be easily forgiven while we
mind the more substantial Duties of Religion?

Ans. 1. Though it be but a Ceremony, it is commanded to be used by the Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and so of Divine Authority; so that the neglect of it is
Disobedience to God, and that is no small Offense.

2. Though it be a Ceremony, yet it is a very significant, and honorable
Ceremony, being appointed by Christ to signify and represent his Death and
Sufferings for our sakes, in which his matchless Love to Sinners was displayed,
and therefore to slight and neglect it, must be no less than a slight put upon
his Love, and a Practical forgetfulness of him, seeing he requires us to use
this Ordinance in Remembrance of Him; and ^s this nothing in your Eyes?

3. The smaller the Thing, or the easier the Duty is that Christ Commands, ^he
greater is the Sin of such as Disobey ^t. Had he commanded far greater Things,
should you not Obey? how much more when he injoyns you so small (...) Thing as
this? What will you deny ^o do an easy Duty at the Command of Christ, who
refused not both to do and suffer the greatest Things for you? Is ^his your
Love and Thankfulness to Christ?

4. Know, That the abuse or neglect of a Ceremony that is of Divine
Insti^ution, may be very displeasing unto God, and Dangerous to our Selves; was
not the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil a Ceremony? Yet by our first Pa^ents
abuse of it, in Eating the Fruit ^hereof contrary to Gods Law, the Wrath of God
was brought on them and all their Posterity, Genesis 2.17.

Was not Circumcision a Ceremony? yet Moses his neglect to Circumcize his Son
was like to cost him his Life, as Exodus 6.24.

And as slight as you may make of this Ceremony of the Lord's Supper, yet for
the abusing of it, some of the Corinthians were smitten with Sickness, and
Weakness, and others with Death; as 1 Cor. 11.30. Now if God punishes Men for
the abuse of this Ordinance, can it be rationally Thought that he will suffer
the Neglecters and Despisers of it to go unpunished?

Obj. 14. But (say some) the Lord's Supper was but a Temporary Ordinance, or to
be used in the Christian Church only for a Time, that is, till Christ's coming;
as 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye do
show forth the Lords Death till he come. Now (say Quakers, for this is their
Objection) Christ is come to us in Spirit: Therefore we use not this Ordinance.

This indeed is the most sinful, and dangerous Objection of all; because it
strikes at the very being of this Ordinance, and seeks the Destruction, and
Cutting it off from the Churches of Christ; and therefore must be the more
warily, and vigorously opposed.

For the Confutation of it, I shall propose these following Considerations:

First, Consider, Though it must be granted, Christ does indeed speak of
another Coming to his Church before his Coming to Judge the World; as John
14.18. I will not leave you Comfortless, I will come to you; and this Coming
may be called his Coming in, or rather by the Spirit, which he promised to send
in his Name, to Teach, Sanctify, and Comfort his Church; as John 15.26.

So that in respect of this his Spiritual Coming, he promised to be with it
always, even to the End of the World; as Mat. 28. last. Yet I say, The Apostle
is not to be understood in that Scripture, to speak of Christ's Coming in
Spirit, but of his Coming in Person: For,

Secondly, Consider, Christ was come in Spirit to his Church before that
Epistle to the Corinthians was written; whether we understand it of that
extraordinary, and miraculous Coming of the Spirit on the Apostles, mentioned,
Acts 2.1, to 5. or of the ordinary Coming of the Spirit, as the Teacher,
Sanctifier, or, Leader, and Comforter of the Church, Blessing his Ordinances to
these Ends.

Every true Believer has Christ thus come into his Soul at his Regeneration,
or Conversion; and to be fine the Holy Apostles experimentally knew this Coming
of Christ by his Spirit unto their Souls, before the Institution of his Holy
Supper; and so did the sincere Members of those Primitive Churches at Corinth,
Ephesus, Philippi, etc. who yet kept up the Use of this Ordinance among them.

Thirdly, Consider, the whole Current of Learned Expositors in all former Ages
of the Christian Church to this very Day, understand by that Coming of Christ
mentioned, 1 Cor. 11.26. to be meant his Coming to Judgment, [as I could easily
show, but that the Quotations of them would take up too much Room here] nor
have I found any Christian otherwise Minded, until the Qunkers Invented this
New Sense of those Words, to Countenance their Rejection of this Holy
Ordinance; Now can any wise Man Imagine, that Christ would have suffered his
Church to err in this Point for so many past Ages; and never have discovered
the true Sense of that Text; till of Late, to this sort of Men who are guilty
of rejecting other Ordinances of Christ, as well as this; as Baptism, Singing
of Psalms, the Observation of the Lord's Day, and the Gospel Ministry?

Believe it he that can.

Fourthly, Consider, if this Opinion were true, that when Christ is come in or
by his Spirit to Men, they should no longer Partake of the Lord's Supper; Then
none should Partake of it, but such to whom Christ is not thus come, that is,
Graceless Persons; But this is a gross Error, for these ought not to meddle
with this Holy Ordinance, until they are Converted.

None are fit Guests for this Holy Table of the Lord, but those that are truly
Gracious, because they must Exercise Grace at this Ordinance; as Faith,
Repentance, Love, etc. which necessarily Implies, that they must have it before
they come. All unsanctified Persons that Partake of it, do but profane, and
pollute it, and Eat and Drink Judgment to themselves. So that if graceless
Persons ought not to approach this Ordinance, because they are graceless (as we
say) and if Gracious Persons ought not to use it, because they are Gracious (as
the Quakers say) then none at all must use it; and so this Ordinance would be
wholly laid aside as useless.

But can any Man of tolerable Sense be of this Opinion? What would this be
less than to accuse Christ (who is Wisdom it self) of Folly, in setting up a
useless and needless Ordinance in his Church? And do foolish Worms think they
shall be able to make good this Charge against him in the great Day?

Fifthly, Suppose that Text in 1 Cor. 11.26. Were to be understood of Christ's
Coming in Spirit (as they hold) yet I think it worth observing; that, though
the Apostle approves of the Use of this Ordinance till then, he does not say,
then it is to be laid aside, and used no more by such.

Nor will his Words admit of that Sense any more than the like Phrase used by
him, as 1 Timothy 4.13. Till I come, give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation,
to Doctrine. Did the Apostle mean (think you) that young Timothy should Study,
and Preach the Word only until he came to him, and ever after lay both aside?
Surely no, I judge this Expression in 1 Cor. 11.26. Frees Christians no more
from their Obligation to continue the Use of the Lord's Supper, than the like
Expression in 1 Timothy 4.13. Freed Timothy from his Obligation to continue his
Ministry.

Sixthly, The Reasons and Ends for which Christ Instituted this Ordinance, will
continue as long as Christ has a Church in the World, and that will be till
his coming to Judgment; therefore this Ordinance ought to continue so long
also. For as none but Christ has Right and Power to set up, alter, or remove
an Ordinance in his Church (he being the only Head and Lawgiver of it) so he
never makes any such Alteration, but when there is just Cause for it.

Thus we find the Ordinance of Circumcision continued in the Jesish Church,
until the Time of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, when it pleased him to Institute
Baptism to be of the same Use in the Christian Church: So the Passover
continued until Christ appointed the Lord's Supper (an Ordinance of like
Signification and Use) to succeed it.

And this (doubtless) must continue until it shall please him to set up another
in the room of it (which is not to be expected, these being the last Ages of
the World) and while the Church has need of it for its Spiritual Uses and
Ends, that is for the preserving the Memory of Christ's Death, the Confirmation
of the Covenant of Grace, etc. and these Ends will continue till Christ's coming
to Judgment.

To this purpose is the Note of a Judicious Divine on 1 Cor. 11.26. Because
(says he) we shall always want such an help as long as we remain in this
World, St. Paul signifies, this Remembrance of Christ is recommended to us,
until he appears to Judgment; for seeing he is not conversant among us in a
Visible Form, it is necessary that there should be some Sign of his Spiritual
Presence with which our Minds may Exercise themselves.

These Things duly and impartially considered, may be (I hope) sufficient to
convince all sober minded Persons, that this Ordinance is not Antiquated, or
grown out of Date, but ought still to be Reverently used by Christians to the
End of the World.

Having thus endeavored to Answer all the Objections I have met with, or could
think of; by which Persons are, or may be kept off from this Ordinance, and so
cleared my Way, and (I hope) theirs too, by removing Obstructions: I shall now
Instruct such as are convinced of their sinful Neglects, and are made in some
Measure willing and defirous of Reformation in this Matter.

1. Go to God and humbly acknowledge your faults with Shame and Sorrow of
Heart, begging pardoning Grace for the sake of Christ, and resolve in his
Strength to continue in this Sin no longer; but use all good Means to get the
Knowledge of your Duty, and set about it; To which end,

2. Examine your Selves, Whether you be in the Faith, or whether you have a
Gospel-right to, and fitness for this Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper? If
you need any help herein, the Sacramental Catechism may be useful to you as to
this. But for your better Assistance,

3. Apply your selves to some able Minister of the Gospel, especially to him to
whose Spiritual Oversight and Conduct you intend to commit your Souls; desire
his Assistance, submit to his Inquiry into the State of your Souls, and Entreat
his Impartial Thoughts or Judgment of it. Propose your Doubts, and Scruples to
him (if you have any) in order to Satisfaction, and ask his Spiritual Counsel
and Direction in the Way of your Duty.

4. Get the Knowledge of the Way and Manner of Transition, or Passage of
Church Members from their Infant-state to that of Adult, or grown Persons; and
the Terms of their Admission to full Communion with a Particular Church, that
you may understand what will be required of you, and consider well, whether you
can freely, and heartily Comply with the Terms proposed? If you find in them
any Matter of Doubt, or Scruple, signify it to the Pastor, and seek
Satisfaction of him; and when you are satisfied, make it also known to him,
with your Desires of Admission.

Indeed the Method of Admission is not the same in all Particular Churches:
Though I acknowledge an Uniformity in this Thing (as well as others of Common
Concern) is much to be desired and endeavored, as what would be greatly
Conducive to Unity, Love, and Peace amongst Christians, and the Edification and
Enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ in the World.

I shall not pretend to give you an account of the various Methods of several
Churches here: But only add these Two Things more,

First, I shall acquaint you with the Practice of the Primitive Church in this
Matter; and

Secondly, Give you an account of my own Judgment and Practice herein, Humbly
submitting it to the free Censure of the more Judicious.

First, Then as to the Transition, or passing of Church Members from their
Infant-State to the State of the Adult, and Admission to full Communion with a
Particular Church of Christ; know, that in the Church, or Household of Faith,
there are Members of several Sizes or Statures, some are but newborn Babes; as
1 Pet. 2.2. Some little Children, others; Young Men, and others called Fathers;
as 1 John 2.12, 13, 14.

In Christ's Fold some are Lambs others Sheep; as John 21.15, 16. Being thus
distinguished according to the different Time of their standing in the Church;
or the different Measure of Knowledge and Grace they have obtained; and regard
ought to be had to each accordingly in Feeding and Ruling of them, that Milk be
given to Babes, even the sincere Milk of the Word; i. e. Such Truths as are
Plain, and easy to be understood by them who are unskilful in the Word of
Righteousness, and strong Meat to such as are of full (or perfect) Age, i. e.
Such Truths as are more Mysterious, Sublime and Spiritual; they being Persons
who by Reason of Use, have their Senses exercised to discern both Good and
Evil, as Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. Some Christians are in their Infant-state, and so
to be admitted only to a Participation of those Privileges and Ordinances that
belong to it: Others are in their Adult-state, and so have a Right to Partake
of the highest Privileges and Ordinances in the Church; Church History informs
us, that in the Primitive Times there were several Ranks of Professed
Christians; the lowest were called Catechumens, Catechized Persons of which
there were two Sorts.

1. Such as were Sinners of the Gentiles, or Heathens by Birth; but upon the
Preaching the Gospel to them, inclined to, and began to embrace the Christian
Faith, and were thereupon instructed in the Principles of it, or in the
Doctrine of Christ. These were only in the Church Porch.

2. Such as were the Children of Believing, or Christian Parents; who by their
Birthright, being Members of the Visible Church, and under the same Covenant
of Grace with their Parents, received Baptism in their Infancy as a Seal of the
Covenant; and were to be brought up by their Parents, in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, as Ephesians. 6.4.

Both these Sorts of Catechumens were Instructed in the Christan Religion by a
Catechist, or Minister; whose main Business was to feed these Lambs of Christ,
and to train them up in the Way they should go, and take care of these Young
Plants, as being the Nurseries of the Church.

When the former Sort were sufficiently Instructed, they desired to be
Baptized, and then were called Competent; i. e. Persons desiring Baptism, upon
which they gave in their Names, and came under a strict, even a sevenfold
Examination, and so were admitted to Baptism: Then were called, Batptizati, and
Illuminati, i. e. Baptized and Enlightened Persons, and no longer accounted to
be in the Porch, but got over the Threshold into the Church; owned as
Fellow-Citizens and Denisons with the Saints and of the Household of God, and
had their Names enrolled among the Servants of Christ.

Being thus initiated, or entered into the Church, they obtained some
Privileges, which they had not before, of which this was one: That the
Mysteries of the Sacraments (of which, they were ignorant while Catechumens, or
knew but little of them) were more clearly revealed to them. For the Church
then thought fit to conceal the knowledge of them till after Baptism, both
because they were such high Mysteries, and least the knowledge of them should
bring them into Contempt, and that they might be stirred up to stronger Desires
after them (say some) yet were they accounted but incomplete Christians; and
might not be admitted to all the Privileges of Church Members, as being yet
but in their Infant-State, or Minority, until they received Confirmation also,
which was performed by the Imposition, or laying on them the Hands of the
Minister, or Pastor of the Church, and Prayer unto God for his Holy Spirit,
Increase of Grace, and their Confirmation or Establishment in the Faith of
Christ, which they had professed.

This Religious Rite of Confirmation both the forementioned sorts of
Catechumens were obliged to receive; and so by it were passed from their
Infant-state, to the State of the Adult, and then admitted to the Participation
of all the Privileges of Church Members, even to the Lord's Supper it self, the
highest Mystery of Christianity; and so became, and were declared to be
complete and perfect Christians, therefore they were called, (...). Perfect, as
Phil. 3.15. Not as if they had attained a sinless Perfection in Grace and
Holiness: But because now they had all things needful to the Perfecting of
their Church State.

Those that were not Baptized till Adult, or grown Persons, received
Confirmation, by Imposition of Hands (ordinarily) in a short Time after their
Baptism, to make them complete Church Members. But such as being the Children
of Believers, were Baptized in their Infancy, were not Confirmed till they were
grown up to Years of Discretion, and well Instructed in the Principles of the
Christan Religion by their Parents, and by the Catechists, and so capable to
give an account of their Knowledge and Faith; nor were any judged meet for
Admission to the Lords-Table, until they had some considerable Time before
given Proof of their Manners and Godliness. But when they were Confirmed, and
had received that Ordinance, they were then arrived at the highest Form in the
School of Christ, his Church, and then were called Fideles. The Faithful.

That this was the Practice of the Primitive Church is plainly and fully proved
by diverse Learned Pens, and amongst our own, especially by Mr. Hanmer, and Mr.
Baxter; to whose Writings, I refer such who desire more clear Light, and fuller
Satisfaction in this Point.

All that I shall further observe at present, as to Confirmation is; That this
(as well as other Gospel Ordinances) was in after-Ages Corrupted and Abused, by
the Addition of Chrysm, or Unction; that is, Anointing with Oil; and by
admitting those to it, who were not the meet Objects of it, as Persons grossly
Ignorant and Propane, etc.

The just Resentment and Abhorrence of these Corruptions, has occasioned a
fault on the other hand in many of the Churches of Christ (viz.) the Total
Rejection or disuse of this Pious Rite, of which (I fear) they will be able to
give no good account to our Lord Jesus in the Great Day; our Duty (doubtless)
lies between these two Extremes, to Reform the Abuses, and reassume the
Primitive right Use of Confirmation; a thing greatly to be desired, and
zealously to be endeavored by the Reformed Churches, for the Glory that might
hence Redound to God, and the Benefits that would accrue to the Church of
Christ by it. As the forementioned Authors have excellently demonstrated, and
therefore with Nervous Arguments persuade to the Revival of it.

May there be new Effusions of Gods Holy Spirit on those who are principally
concerned, i. e. Christian Magistrates and Ministers, to put them on the
vigorous Use of their Authority and Interest, for a more perfect and through
Reformation in this, and some other Points that call for it, at this Day; that
all remaining Corruptions may be swept out of Gods House, and Christian
Practice at length reduced to, and regulated by, the Gospel-rule in all things.

Secondly, Mean while I shall next (as I promised) humbly propose this
following Method, for the Passage of Church Members from their Infant-state to
the State of the Adult, and Admission to full Communion; being what is already
practiced in some, and easily practicable in other Churches of Christ, if their
respective Pastors would come to a mutual Agreement herein; which I humbly
conceive, might without much difficulty be obtained, If attempted by prudent,
and proper Hands, to whose Thought, this well-meant-Motion is heartily
Recommended, in hopes that it might prove in Time, a good Expedient to restore
Confirmation to its Primitive Use, and for the present be an equivalent.

First, Seeing the Title-Condition of Infants Church Membership is not the same
with that of the Adult (as the Learned Baxter has plainly proved) that of
Infants being this, That they be the Children of Believing Parents, and
Dedicated to God by them in their Baptism; That of the Adult being this that
they be actual Believers, and Dedicate themselves to God in Baptism, I think it
requisite, that when any Person signifies his Desires of Admission to full
Communion, the Pastor of the Church should Inquire, which of these Titles he
pretends to, and deal with him accordingly: if the former, Then to acquaint him
with the Manner of Transition from the Infant to the Adult-state, by renewing
his Baptismal Covenant, and Profession of the Christian Faith, and Exhort him
to it. If the latter, to enquire into the Sincerity, and Credibility of his
Profession (as far as may be) and to admit, or refuse him, according to the
Satisfaction, or Dissatisfaction he shall receive herein.

Secondly, Seeing many of those who were Baptized in their Infancy, are bred up
in Ignorance of the very Principles of Religion, others Corrupted with Error,
others Immoral, and Profane in their Lives, it is also necessary that the
Pastor inquire both into the Knowledge, Faith, and Life of him that seeks
Admission. I say,

1. Into his Knowledge, Whether he be competently acquainted (at least) with
the Fundamental and necessary Truths of Christianity, and if he be found grossly
and culpably Ignorant; the Pastor may endeavor in a prudent and loving Way, to
make him sensible of the greatness of this Sin of Ignorance, in those that
enjoy such excellent and plentiful Means of Knowledge as we; of the necessity,
excellency, and usefulness of spiritual Knowledge, in order to the pleasing of
God, and saving his own Soul; of the danger of living and dying in Ignorance,
etc. And seriously press him to a more careful Use, and improvement of the
means of Knowledge, for Time to come; such as Reading the Holy Scriptures and
other good Books, Hearing of, and Conferring with Ministers of the Gospel, and
Praying for the Teachings of Gods Holy Spirit.

And that his Knowledge may be the more Methodical and Distinct, advise him
first to take some good Catechism in Hand, [especially that of the Assembly of
Divines, and the Explications of it, the Communicants Instructor, or
Sacramental Catechism, etc.] and persuade him to familiarize the precious
Truths contained in them, and make them his own, getting them (if possible)
into his Memory, which a little Pains, and a willing Mind might soon obtain in
the most.

I have known some of Forty, Fifty, yea sixty Years of Age, who in a few Months
Time have by this means got more Understanding in the Things of God (as they
have freely Confessed) than ever they had in their whole Life before. And
though I know it is no easy Matter to persuade some grown Persons to this, who
being Proud, and Idle, as well as Ignorant, account it a Disgrace to be put
(like Children) to a Catechism; yet every one that is so far awakened, and
inlighten'd as to see his own Ignorance and need of Knowledge, and to have a
sincere Love to, and Desire after it, will readily follow the spiritual Counsel
of such as are Wiser than themselves, in Order to the attaining of it. And as
many as have a just and deep Concern for the Eternal Salvation of their own
Souls, will think no Pains too much to take for the furthering and securing
thereof.

It may (possibly) be a little difficult at first, but when they have been
Inured to it for some time, their Desires after Knowledge, and the sweetness of
it, will facilitate, or make it easy to them. Could we prevail on those Adult
Persons amongst us that need it, to take this faithful Advice, their Minds
would be much more enlightened in the Knowledge of Christ, and the better
prepared for profiting by Reading and Hearing the Word. Were such a Form of
sound Words well learnt, and thereby the Foundation of Christianity well laid
in the Minds of Men, the superstructure of Knowledge would be carried on with
greater facility, firmness, and success; but until this be done, Ministers have
little Reason to wonder, that they Work at the Labour-in-Vain in Preaching;
though they may be Instant in Season, and out of Season, if Milk be not given
to Babes in Christ, as well as strong Meat to grown Christians, the Younger may
starve while the Elder thrive and flourish. O that all the Ministers of the
Gospel, would seriously think of this, and take due Care to feed Christ's Lambs,
as well as his Sheep, (but this by the Way.)

Yet in inspecting the Knowledge of Persons, due regard must be had to their
different Capacities, the Means and Helps they have had to get Knowledge, the
Time they have enjoyed them, their different Abilities to express themselves,
their Bashfulness, etc. That no sincere, though weak Christian be discouraged,
and that such as have arrived but at a tolerable degree of the Knowledge of,
and belief in God, the Father, Son and Spirit, of their Baptismal-Covenant with
God, and other Points of absolute Necessity to Salvation (though their
Apprehensions in some Things are but rude and imperfect) be not Rejected, but
Treated with all Tenderness, Love, and Prudence; and helped forward in the Ways
of Christ.

But if the Pastor find the Candidate furnished with a competent Measure of
Knowledge, he should next inquire,

2. Into his Faith, whether he be sound in the Faith of Christ, or believes the
fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion; that if the Pastor find him
under any Error, he may endeavor by better Instruction to Cure him of it
before his Admission; least he should Infect others therewith, and occasion a
Schism in the Church. When the Pastor is fatisfied as to this Particular, he
should further Inquire:

3. Into his Life and Conversation, whether it be agreeable to his Holy
Profession, and such as becomes the Gospel of Christ; of this Neighboring
Christians should be the Observers and Witnesses, for the better Satisfaction
of the Pastor, and the whole Church. Great Care should be taken also in this
Matter, least such as are scandalous in their Lives be admitted, and thereby
this Holy Ordinance be profaned, the Godly offended and grieved, the Mouth of
the Wicked opened to speak Evil of the Ways and Servants of Christ, and God
dishonored, and provoked to inflict some Judgment upon them.

4. Seeing the Lord's Supper is appointed for the increase and strengthening of
Grace where it is, and not for the working of Grace where it is not, and so
those that approach it should be only Gracious Persons, if they would receive
Benefit thereby; [for we must first live spiritually (as well as naturally)
before we Eat and Drink] therefore it is needful that the Pastor inquire also
into the State of the Candidates Soul: What experience he has had of the
workings of Gods Word and Spirit upon him? What Reason he can give of the hope
of Salvation, that is in him? What Evidences he has of a saving change, or
work of Grace upon his Heart, 1 Pet. 3.15.

And for the better discovery of his Souls Condition, direct him in that
needful and useful Duty of Self-examination, and Exhort him to a diligent
performance of it, and to an Holy Jealousy over his own Heart, least he should
be deceived by it in a Matter of so great Importance, 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. The
Sacramental Catechism may be very helpful to him in this Work, in which he will
find the Marks, or Signs of saving Grace, and thereby may the better Judge of
his own Case.

4. When the Pastor has received Satisfaction in these Points, and in the
Judgment of Charity, believes him to have a Gospel-right to and fitness for
this Ordinance; it seems necessary (at least on a prudential account, and for
the fuller Satisfaction of the Church) that the Person be propounded to the
Church, when met together, by Name, and Place of Habitation, and held as an
Expectant for some convenient Time, [at least from the Time of his Proposal to
the next Sacrament-day] That the Members may have liberty and opportunity to
Inquire, whether he be well reported of, and unblameable in his Conversation.
And that they first give the Pastor an Account of what they hear, more
Privately, that if any thing be objected, he may further inform himself as to
the Truth of it, and the Person be kept off until the Objection shall be
removed, and all concerned receive Satisfaction.

5. When the Expectant is actually to be admitted, and come before the Church:
The Pastor may signify him to be the Person formerly propounded to them,
desiring to be joined to them, and admitted to full Communion with them,
requiring that if any Member remain yet unsatisfied, he would Now speak, or by
their silence [lifting up the Hand, or other Signal] testify their unanimous
Consent to his Admission, which being done, the Pastor may next desire him to
make Profession of his Faith, and own his Baptismal-Covenant, addressing
himself to him in these, or such like Words.

Seeing you desire to be admitted into full Communion with this Church of
Christ, to walk with it in all Gospel Ordinances and Duties, and to partake
with it in all Church Priviledges, and it being fit the Church should satisfied
that every Person admitted a Member thereof do own and profess the same
Principles of the Christian Faith which the Church professes. In Order to this
Satisfaction, you are desired to make true Answer to these following Questions.

Q. 1. Do you believe there is but one only Living, and True God; the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which are Three distinct Persons, and each of them
God, and yet all of them but One God, Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable in his
Being, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 2. Do you believe that this God from all Eternity, ordained whatsoever
comes to pass in Time; and that in the beginning of Time, he Created and made
the whole World, and all Things therein out of nothing, by the Word of his
Power in the space of six Days, and all very Good, and that he does still
uphold, preserve, and govern it according to his own Will, and for his own
Glory?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 3. Do you believe that God made Man upright, after his own Image, in
Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, with Dominion over the Creatures here
below, and that he entered into a Covenant of Life with him, upon Condition of
Perfect Obedience, forbidding him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil upon Pain of Death?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 4. Do you believe that our first Parents, being left to the Freedom of
their own Wills, and hearkening to the Temptation of Satan, Transgressed the
Commandment of God, by Eating the forbidden Fruit; and so brake their Covenant
with God, and thereby brought themselves, and all their Posterity, descending
from them by ordinary Generation, into an Estate of Sin and Misery?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 5. Do you believe that Man thus fallen, was not able to recover himself,
and that God, having out of his mere good Pleasure elected some to Everlasting
Life, did enter into a Covenant of Grace, to deliver them out of that Estate of
Sin and Misery, and to bring them into an Estate of Salvation by Christ as a
Redeemer?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 6. Do you believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, being the Eternal and only
begotten Son of God, became Man also in the fullness of Time, by taking to
himself a true Body, and a reasonable Soul, being Conceived by the Power of the
Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, of her Humane Substance, and born of
her, yet without Sin, both in his Nature, and Life; and that so he was, and
continues still to be both God and Man in Two distinct Natures, and one Person
for ever?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 7. Do you believe that this Redeemer of God Elect, as a Prophet does Teach
his Church by his Word and Spirit, the Will of God for their Salvation: And as
a Priest has satisfied Divine Justice for their Sins, and reconciled them to
God by his once Offering up himself as a Sacrifice unto God, in Suffering the
Cursed Death of the Cross, and now continually interceeds for them in Heaven;
and as a King, subdues the Elect unto himself, Rules and Defends them, and
Restrains and Conquers all his and their Enemies?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 8. Do you believe that though this Jesus Christ was put to Death and
Buried, yet he rose again from the Dead on the Third Day, showed himself to his
Disciples, and Conversed with them alive, and afterward in the sight of diverse
of them, ascended into Heaven; where he still remains sitting at the Right
Hand of God the Father, from whence he shall come at the Day appointed by God
to Judge the World in Righteousness?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 9. Do you believe that God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and
the Son, has fully, and sufficiently Revealed the Will of God in the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be the perfect, perpetual, and only
Rule of our Faith and Obedience: And that the same Holy Spirit does Effectually
apply the Redemption purchased by Christ, with all the saving Benefits of his
Mediation, Death and Merits, to the Elect, by working Faith in them, and
thereby uniting them to Christ in their Effectual Calling?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 10. Do you believe that this Holy Spirit of God dwells and works in all
that are Effectually Called, and drawn to Christ: And that all Gods Elect,
being united unto Christ, as to their Common Head, make up one Catholic
Church, or Mystical Body of Christ, the Members whereof having Fellowship with
God the Father, Son and Spirit by Faith, and one with one another by Love, do
in this Life partake of Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, with all
the Benefits that do accompany or flow from them. And that their Souls at Death
are made perfect in Holiness, and do immediately pass into Glory, but their
Bodies being still united to Christ, do rest in their Graves till the
Resurrection?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 11. Do you believe that these precious Benefits, purchased by Christ, are
dispensed to the Elect by the Holy Spirit of God, in the Use of his Sacred
Ordinances, the Word, Sacraments and Prayer, as being the means appointed by
God, for the Working, Increasing, and Perfecting of Grace in their Hearts, and
that therefore these Ordinances are duly and reverently to be used, and
carefully improved by Christians to these spiritual Ends, until Christ's second
Coming?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 12. Do you believe that in the general Resurrection at the last Day, all
the Righteous shall be raised up in Glory, by Virtue of their Union unto Christ
their Head, and shall be openly acknowledged and acquitted by him their Judge,
and so made perfectly Blessed in the Full and Eternal Enjoyment of God in
Heaven, whereas the Wicked also shall be raised by the Power of Christ; but
shall be condemned by him, and sent into Everlasting Punishment in Hell?

A. I do believe this.

Q. 1. Do you also own and heartily Consent unto your Covenant with God in
Baptism; that is, repenting of your Sins against God, and renouncing the World,
the Flesh and the Devil: Do you take the only Living and True God for your only
God, and Chief Good; God the Father to be your God, and Father; God the Son to
be your Redeemer, and Savior; and God the Holy Ghost to be your Sanctifier,
Guide, and Comforter: And do you sincerely give up your whole Self, Soul and
Body to this one God, as his Covenant-Servant to Believe, Love, and Obey him
constantly, and faithfully according to his Word, and that unto the Death.

A. I do this sincerely, as far as I know my own Heart.

Q. 2. Are you desirous to partake of the Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper,
as being a Seal of the Covenant of Grace: That thereby this Covenant between
God and you may be Renewed, and Confirmed, and that you may thereby keep in
thankful Memory the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. This is my unfeigned Desire.

Q. 3. Do you truly Consent and Promise to submit to the Holy Discipline and
Government, which the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Head and Lawgiver of his
Church, has ordained for his own Glory, and his Churches good, and in
particular to submit to the spiritual Guidance, and oversight of the Pastor of
this Church, according to the Mind of Christ?

A. I do truly Consent and Promise so to do.

Q. 4. Will you also patiently submit to the Christian Admonitions, and
Reproofs of your Fellow Members in this Church, and conscientiously perform the
same Duty toward them (if occasion so require) according to Christ's own
command for Church Order?

A. I will do so, the Lord enabling me.

These Questions thus Proposed, and Answered: The Pastor may apply himself to
the Person concerned, in these, or such like Expressions.

Upon this serious and credible Profession of the Christian Faith, which you
have now made before God, and this Church; the Renewing of your Covenant with
God, and the Satisfaction I have had concerning the suitableness of your
Conversation Here I humbly conceive the Imposition of the Pastors Hands may
properly take Place.
. I Receive and admit you into full Communion with this Church of Christ, to
walk with it in all Gospel Ordinances and Duties, and to partake with it in all
Gospel-Priviledges. And I, as the Pastor thereof Exhort and Beseech you; yea, I
Charge and Command you in the Name of the Chief Sheppard, our Lord Jesus
Christ: That you hold fast this Christian Faith which you have now professed,
and be faithful and steadfast in that Covenant with God, which you have now
Renewed.

And that denying all Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, you live Soberly,
Righteously and Godlily in this present World, that you may also be received by
Christ, and owned by him in the great Day, as a living Member of his Mystical
Body, and God in Covenant may be your God and Portion for ever.

When Imposition of Hands shall be used, it seems proper to join a short Prayer
with it at the close of this Exhortation, for Christ's gracious Reception of the
Person thus admitted, Gods favorable Acceptance of him through Christ, the
Confirming of his Covenant with him, and bestowing the Grace of the Covenant
upon him, etc. Mean while the Pastor may put up such Petitions for him in his
Prayer, before the Celebration of this Ordinance.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: Si non, His utere mecum.
If thou know what does more with Rule agree,
Kindly impart it: Or use this with me.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Treatise of the Institution, right Administration and receiving of the
Sacrament of the Lord's upper, By Mr. Richard Vines.

A True Touchstone of Grace and Nature, or a Discourse concerning
Self-examination, with Meditations relating to the Lord's Supper. By Mr. N.
Vincent, late Minister of the Gospel.

A Communicant Instructed, or Practical Directions for worthy receiving of the
Lord's Supper. By Fran. Roberts, M. A.

Convivium Caeleste, or a Discourse concerning the Lord's Supper, showing at
once the Nature of that ^acrament, as also the right Way of preparing our
selVes for the receiving of it, etc. by the Right Reverend Father in God,
Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts before, and after the Lord's Supper.
By John Shower.

Sacramental Discourses upon several Subjects, to which is added a Discourse of
the Life of Faith. By Christopher Amirant Minister of the Gospel in Norfolk.

The Welcome Communicant, or a Brief Discourse, directing the weakest Christian
(proceeding from Grace to Grace) how he may come with cheerfulness to the
Lord's Table.

The Worthy Communicant, or a Treatise, showing the due Order of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By Jeremiah Dyke.

The Fountain of Life opened: Or a display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory, containing Forty Sermons on various Texts. 4to.

Pneumatologia. Or a Treatise of the Soul of Man. 4to. Both by Mr. John Flavel
Late Minister in Dartmouth.

Scripture Light about the Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism, in a Letter to some
Scrupulous Friends.

A Treatise of the Lord's Sufferings. By Tho. Doolittle, M. A.

Monthly Preparations for the Holy Communion. By R. B. To which is added,
suitable Meditations before, in, and after, Receiving; with Divine Hymns in
Common Tunes.

A Treatise on the Sacrament. By Tho. Watson.

The Poor Man's Melp, and Young Man's Guide.

An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism. These two by W.
Burkitt Rector of Dedham in Essex.

An Allarm to unconverted Sinners. By Jos. Al^^^.

Discourses concerning the Rich Man and La^arus. By Tim. Cruso, Late Minister
of the Gospel ^n London.

The Golden Snuffers, a Sermon Preached to the Society for Reformation of
Manners. By Dan- ^urgess.

Proofs of God's Being, and of the Scriptures Divine Original, with Twenty
Directions for the profitable Reading of them. By D. Burgess.

Holy Confidence well improved by Nehemiah and the Jews, whose Faith and Spirit
were considered and applied to the Societies for Reformation o^ Manners: In a
Sermon at Salters Hall in London. Aug. 16. 2697. By Mat. Sylvester.

A Looking-Glass for the Unmarried, wherein they may see these five Things,
viz. (1.) The Benefits, Helps, and Comforts of Marriage. (2.) How they may
proceed regularly in Order to Marriage. (3.) How to make a Happy Choice. (4.)
How to demean themselves to each other in Order to Family Peace and Concord.
(5.) The Relative Duty of Husband and Wife.

The Righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel: Or an impartial Enquiry into
the genuine Doctrine of St. Paul, in the great but much controverted Article of
Justification; to which are prefixed the Epistles of the Right Reverend the
Bishops of Ely, Worcester, and Chester. By Mr. John Humfrey.

Mr. John Humfrey's Friendly Interposer between the Authors of those Papers,
the one called. A Report; the other, A Rebuke of that Report, in Order to a
sound Reconciliation between the Presbyterian and the Independents in
Doctrinals, by preparing a Third Way, when both of them are out in the^^ own
Way.

The Swearers Doom, or a Discourse against Vain^ and Rash Swearing. By John
Roast, A. M. Recto^ of Offwel, and Gittisham in Devon.

A Body of Practical Divinity, containing a hundred seventy six Sermons upon
the Assemblies shorte^ Catechism. By Tho. Watson. Folio.

An Account of the Life and Death of Mr. Philip Henry Minister of the Gospel
near Whit-church in Shropshire.


