A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY, Presented to the Kings Majesty in the Isle of
Wight; Declaring, their full Resolution touching His Majesty's Reign and
Government, and we ring the Crown of England; and their Proposals upon what
Terms and Conditions they will re-inthrone Him.

With His Majesty's Vow and Protestation touching the Army.

Also, the Armies Propositions to the General Council of the Army at St.
Albanes, concerning King, Lords, and Commons, debated on Wednesday last,
November. 8. 1648.

depiction of King Charles I of England

nou: 9th London, Printed for C. W. near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY SENT To the Kings Majesty in the Isle of Wight,
Declaring their Resolution and Intentions touching the Treaty.
May it please your Majesty,
Whereas, the Officers and Soldiery under the immediate conduct of hi^
Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, are possessed with diverse fears and
jealousies, that they cannot be safe for the future, unless speedy Justice be
executed upon the capital Offenders of this Nation; and that this present
Treaty may not conclude a peace with his Majesty, without care, taken to
preserve the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of this Nation; the which,
being granted and confirmed, we do declare, that none shall be more
isntrumental for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace, then our
selves. And that so soon as your Majesty shall be pleased, to enact and make
provisions for the freeborn people of England, that both we and future
Generations may defend our selves against insulting tyranny and oppression; We
shall use our utmost endeavors for the re-investing of your Royal person, and
making You and Your Posterity happy and glorious throughout all Ages.


This Letter (or Declaration) is said to be sent from diverse Officers and
Soldiers in the West of England, to his Majesty; for the better expelling of
the Cloud of Jealousy, and clearing all doubts and scruples that may arise in
his Majesty's Royal Breast; And that their actions may appear visible to the
World, of their candid Intentions, and unanimous Resolutions for peace, and
composing of all differences both in Church and State, the Agents of the
several Regiments have commanded these ensuing Proposals to be forthwith
printed and published; a Copy whereof were presented to his Excellency the Lord
Genesis Fairfax, and the General Council of the Army on Tursday last, which were
as follows.

1 That execution of Justice may be done upon those who raised the former and
the later wars against the Parliament of England, And that there not be any
exemption of persons from Justice, to neither King nor Subject. 2 That the
Treaty may not conclude a peace with the King and his party, without care taken
to preserve the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of this Nation. 3 That
limits may be set to bind Kings for the future, that they shall not have power
to inslave the people by tyranny and oppression, and triumph upon them as over
conquered slaves. 4 That provisions be made for the people of England, that
both we and future Generations may defend our selves against insulting Kings. 5
That there may be some course taken for pay for the Soldiery, that have served
and been faithful to the Parliament. And sufficient security thereunto for
them, to guard them in what they have done. 6 That these, and such other things
as shall be agreed on by the General Council, may be sent to the House of
Commons by the Lord General, and his Excellency to desire a speedy answer
therein.
Some other Proposals were presented to the General Council of the Army, by
the Agents of the respective Regiments, Declaring, that there is now a design
on foot to rescue the King from the Isle of Wight, and therefore desire that a
sufficient strength may be sent to guard the said Island, and to prevent the
resorting of Malignants thither.

These Propositions were presented on Monday last, and debated Tuesday and
Wednesday; and there is no doubt but a mutual concurrence and agreement will
attend the close of this happy Meeting, which so much concerns the good and
welfare, both of Religion. King, and Kingdom.

Bloody News from the English Navy.
SIR,
ON Thursday last being the 2. of this instant Novem. we received an Allarum
from Sea, occasioned by certain ships, who had the Princes colors, and struck
sail within three leagues of Helverd-stuce; whereupon the Lord Admiral sent
forth three Frigates, and two of the great Vessels, who chased them, and gave
them many a gallant shot, and after few hours dispute, boarded one of them, and
sunk another; the Master of the prize which was taken, confessed, that they
were bound for the Prince, with a resolution to join with him, and to assist
his Highness against the Parliament.

This Fleet is said to consist of about eleven ships, most of them being men of
War, and it is rumored, that they were most of them Swedish Ships.

But the Princes Fleet has declared, that they will not be commanded by any
strangers, who since the dismissing of the Lord Willoughby, and Capt. Batten,
have made Prince Rupert Lord Admiral; but the Seamen were so much enraged and
troubled thereat, that they began to mutiny, resisted the Command of Pr. Rupert
and the rest of the Irish and Dutch Commanders, fell to blows, killed 3 or 4
eminent Commanders, wounded diverse of them, amongst the rest, Prince Rupert
has received a dangerous wound, and its thought mortal. The Conflict being
ended, the Mariners of the revolted ships called a Council amongst themselves,
turned out Pr. Rupert, and diverse others, and have made choice of new
Commanders.

They have sent a Letter to the Prince of Wales, to invite him aboard; but by
reason of the weakness of his body, occasioned by sudden sickness, and a
dangerous disease, He cannot answer their expectations.

The Lord Admiral has again offered them Indemnity, and it is conceived they
will embrace the same, for they have protested to his Lordship, never to engage
with the Princes Cavalry.

Gowry,
From aboard the Fleet 6 November. 1648.
An Abstract from the King.
SIR,
FOr the better faciliating the work in hand, we hear that his Majesty has
sent a Message (by the D. of Lenox) to the Aldermen and Common Council of the
City of London, and also to diverse members of both Houses, intimating, That He
desired a longer time to be added to the Treaty, desiring them to be
isntrumental for the re-investing of his Majesty, and to agitate for his
speedy coming to London, with other remarkable Occurrences, which He desires
may be cammunicated to his Royal hearted Citizens, and that they may seriously
read and peruse the same. It is conceived his Majesty has some notable design
against the Army, for He has vowed to play a new Game, if the Treaty take not
effect. But upon the close of this Letter, here arrived a Post from the Army to
Col. Hamond, desiring him to be vigilant for the last 14 days added to the
Treaty, and to prevent his Majesty's escape, there being a design laid for the
conveying of his person away, if he cannot accomplish his desires in the said
respit of time. Col. Hamond is extraordinary vigilant in managing the great
trust reposed in Him, and has declared that he will use his utmo^t endeavors
for the preservation of His Majesty's Royal person from the hands of his
Enemies, and to protect him from the rage and subtilty of those who seek his
Majesty's ruin [meaning the Royal party now resident at his Court] And the
Soldiery do assure him, they will live and die with him therein.

Newport 7 November. 1648. Letters further from the Isle of Wight, November. 8.
advertize, That his Majesty having received intelligence of the new modelling
and choosing several Agents throughout the Army, to act in behalf of their
respective Regiments, and of the calling a General Council; as also, that
they were possessed with fears and jealousies, that his Majesty had a design to
escape from the Isle of Wight, if the Treaty took not effect: Therefore his
Majesty declared (in presence of the Commissioners) That rather then he would
stain his honor or be accounted perjured, in breaking of his Royal Word or
Promise, He would finish His whole Race in prison, and become the most
deplorable Object of all Christian Princes.



FINIS.

