THE DECLARATION Of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry and Commonalty of the County
of KENT.
Together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of Rochester, and
the Ports within the said County.
HAving with sadness weighed the multiplied calamities wherein we are at
present involved, how friendless we are Abroad, and how divided at home; the
loud and heart-piercing cries of the poor, and the disability of the better
sort to relieve them; the total decay and subversion of Trade, together with
the forfeiture and loss of the honor and reputation of the Nation, and (what is
more dear to us then all these) the apparent hazard of the Gospel through the
prodigious growth of Blasphemies, Heresies and Schism, all which own their
birth to the instability of our Governors, and the unsettlement of our
Government. Lastly, how in all these, an universal ruin threatens us, and will
(if not timely prevented) doubtless overwhelm us. We thought it our bounden
duties, both as Christians, out of tenderness to our Religion; as English men,
to our Country; and as Friends, to our selves and our Relations, to represent
and publish to the world our just griefs for, and our lively resentments of
this our deplorable condition, and to seek all lawful and probable means to
remedy and redress the same.

Wherefore having the leading Examples of the renowned Cities of London and
Exeter, together with the Counties of the West, before our eyes; and the
clamours and outcries of the People always in our ears, (whereof the one
encourages, and the other enforces us to this our Declaration) we thought
that we would not be silent at such a time, when our silence would speak us to
be either Assentors to our own ruin, or Abettors of such proceedings as have
neither Law nor Equity to support them.

We therefore, the Nobility, Gentry, Ministry and Commonalty of the County of
Kent, together with the City and County of Canterbury, the City of Rochester,
and the Ports within the said County, do by these Presents unanimously Declare,
That our desires are for a Full and Free PARLIAMENT, as the only probable
means, under God, to lead us out of this Maze and Labyrinth of confusions in
which we are at present engaged; that is, that the old secluded Members, so
many of them as are surviving, may be readmitted into the House, and that there
may be a free Election of others to supply the places of those which are dead,
without any Oath, or Engagement previous to their Entrance, these we shall own
as the true Representatives of the People; these we shall with our Lives and
Fortunes, to the utter most of our power, assist, and with all cheerfulness
submit to, and acquiess in whatsoever they shall Enact or Ordain.

Thus concluding, that all public spirited men, and good Patriots, will with
all readiness join and concur with us in a matter of so universal concernment,
and that we shall find Opposition from none but such as prefer their own private
Interests, and temporal respects, to their Religion and laws of the land; we
shall as boldly subscribe our Names as we do heattily declare our Desires.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe forward zeal of some well-disposed persons, to express their Cordial and
unanimous Concurrence with their Countrymen of the several Counties and Cities
of England; having caused a Declaration imperfect, in a very weighty and
material Clause thereof, to be Printed and published, in the name of the County
of KENT, etc. It was thought fit, that the genuine and true Copy of the said
D^claration should be set forth, as it was intended to be presented to the
Speaker, and to the present great Arbitrator of the Nations peace and
ha^piness, General Monck; but through the mis-informations of some unquiet
spirits, (who while they may have leave to accuse, will leave no man innocent,
nor the State without trouble) the persons of many Gentlemen are secured, and
others threatened, by a great force marched into the Country, the Presentation
was necessarily omitted, and the Names and Subscriptions not exposed to public
view, for reasons very obvious and evident.


