THE DECLARATION Of His Highness the Prince of WALES, TO The several Princes
and States of Christendom, concerning His Royal Father the KING; And His new
Oath and Protestation, touching the Lord Gen, Fairfax, Lieut. Genesis Crumwell,
and the Army.

ALSO, The setting forth of the Princes Fleet to Sea, and their Resolution for
Ireland, to land an Army in Wales, and so for England, for the rescuing of the
King from the power of the Sword.

TOGETHER, With a bloody Fight at Sea, 14 Sail of Ships boarded and taken, and
about 40 piece of Ordnance. And the Declaration and Proposals of the
Parliaments Navy, to the ARMY.

LIKEWISE, A Conference between the Lord Genesis Fairfax, Lieut. Genesis Crumwell,
and the Lord Admiral Warwick, touching the KING and KINGDOM.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM THE NAVY TO The Kingdom of England, and the Army;
concerning the Kings Majesty, and the Impeached Members of Parliament, now
under restraint and power of the sword.
When we beheld the glorious splendour of Justice and Righteousness, beaming
forth it self in your Remonstrance to the House of Commons, we were filled with
joy and satisfaction, that the divine presence had again overshadowed you, and
appeared thereby to us with smiles of love, and pledges of favor, when with the
night of ruin we were almost overwhelmed For which, as we kiss the footstool
of that glorious Majesty who thus rarely brings forth our deliverance; so we
cheerfully confess you to be his glorious Instrument, whereby he has stilled
the enemy and the avenger. For, 1. We must seriously profess, that though
your former proceedings against that Generation were exceedingly prospered,
beyond the parallel of former ages, and had engraven upon them the kindness
of God to a distressed people; yet they had but served to make us more
exquisitly miserable, if your former Conquests should have acquiesced in the
actions of that House; who were bringing your conquered prisoner with honor
and safety to sit upon his Throne of power, Majesty, and Greatness, without
satisfaction for the blood that has been spilt both by Sea and Land, or
sufficient provision made for the security of the liberties of England.

2 We were filled with sorrow when we saw the abominable Apostasy, and
degenerated actings of the majority of the House of Commons, who after we had
bought their security with our most precious blood and treasure, should by
treating with the King, so cruelly sell us into the blood and revenge of him,
and his confederats, so contrary to their first principles and Declarations;
the consideration whereof, as it filled us with amazement, so it drew from us
thereof a mutual Remonstrance, to live and die, and stand and fall with your
Excellency, for the establishing of peace and righteousness, in our native,
bleeding, and languishing Kingdom.

A Declaration of the Prince of Wales.

THe Prince of Wales, with his Council, has had some consultation touching the
affairs of England, and the pr^sent state and condition of the King, and are
resolved to make ready the Fleet, to put to Sea, having taken an oath and
protestation, to hazard life and fortune for the rescuing of his Royal Father
(the King) from the power of the Army. Most of the Brass Guns that were in the
revolted ships are taken out and sold, all but such as were fit for the field,
and put iron ones in their room, which ships are to be commanded by Prince
Rupert, the Prince is to return to his Mother, the Duke goes to a University,
this Fleet of ships are to go first for Garnsey, Garsey, and Silly, and settle
those Islands, then to Ireland, to settle the Marq. of Ormond, for reducing
that Kingdom to the obedience of his Majesty, and then comes an Army over into
Wales, and so for England, That such prizes as shall be taken, or other kind of
Marchandizing Trade given, Agents are dispersed to the several Princes and
States of Christendom, for freedom, as formerly with his Majesty of England.
This Message is said to be sent from the Prince to the aforesaid kingdoms.

For augmentation of this Fleet, and to make it more formidable against the
English, all undone, deeayed, and discontented Gentlemen, are invited to join
and provide ships, which is in part done, diverse being gone out of the West
parts already to Silly and Ireland.

There goes with Prince Rupert 1000. Soldiers, besides Saylors, also very many
Gentlemen or Reformadoes, whose purses are emptied in Holland: the Inhabitants
of the Island of Garnsey its said, must be molded into Regiments, and employed
by Sea or Land, as being like to prove more advantageous then there livelihood
here: besides, other notable designs on foot, for the raising of new Forces
against the English Army.

Right Honorable,
HIs, Highness the Prince of Wales, having received several informations and
complaints from the English Merchants, of their great losses which they have
lately sustaind at Sea by a pretended Fleet for the King under the conduct of
Sir William Mucknell, who (with a with a Squadron of Irish ships (consisting of
about 11 in number) lies hovering up and down the narrow Seas, seizing on
diverse Merchants ships, and others, to the great retarding and obstructing of
the Trade and Commerce at Sea. In consideration whereof, his Highness
forthwith called a Council, aboard the Reformation, and after some
consultation, came to these results, and resolved.

That a Message should be forthwith sent to the Merchants of London, and
others, purporting, That his Highness would take a speedy course, for
prevention of future injuries, and that he had sent an express command to the
said Vice Admiral Mucknell, to desist from acting any thing whatsoever, that
may rend to the obstructing or hindering of Commerce at Sea, protesting, That
he is so far from harboring the least thought of violence or oppression, either
to the Citizens of London, or any other of his Majesty's liege people of
England, that he would rather sacrifice his life then be guilty of the least
action of tyranny. And therefore desires that these his resentments may be
communicated to the Citizens of London, and all others whom it may concern; to
the end, that traffic and commerce both by Sea and Land may be maintained and
preserved throughout all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

But notwithstanding all their fair preretices whatsoever, none are more
active and inveterate against the peace of England, than those who are in
highest es^^em with the Prince, Diverse forces are raising in several parts of
these Provinces, another Army in Denmark, and great provision making for War;
but what their Design is, we cannot as yet discover, but it is supposed for
England.

Brill the 15. of December. 1648.

The Officers and Soldiers in Dover Castle have humbly declared their sense
and resolution to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, desiring that his
Excellency would be pleased to proceed in what is justly proposed, that the
Kingdom may not be beguiled with the specious pretenses of our subtle
adversaries, but that Delinquents may be punished, our liberties confirmed, and
the Kingdom settled, to the glory of God, and for his people; for the effecting
of which without respect to our private interests, we shall willingly with our
lives in our hands, encounter with the great difficulties, which really engage
in what may manifest our selves,

Your Excellencies and the Kingdoms faithful servants, December. 18. Letters
further from Windsor, that his Majesty is expected there this night, and that
several Rooms in the Castle are appointed for his accommodation. Diverse of the
Gentry are gone to meet Him. But whether his residence will be there, or at
London, is yet uncertain. It is said that his Majesty will be suddenly brought
to a fair and legal trial, and that the General and Lieut. Genesis are resolved
o act nothing against his Majesty's person but what shall be agreeable to the
known Laws of the Realm, and the common Rights of the people. And upon Tuesday
December. 19. the Council of the Army are resolved to insist on the business,
and speedily to prosecute the same; and it is given out, that the sentence will
pass against Major Genesis Laughorn, Col. Poyer, and Col. Powell, to be shot to
death at Windsor, who being told by an Officer of the Army, that they must
prepare themselves to dye, they replied, Gods will be done, we thank God, we
have made our peace with him, and shall without fear, undergo what he shall be
pleased to suffer men to do unto them.

The right Honorable the Lord Admiral Warwick has declared his sense and
resolution, touching the transaction of affairs between the King, Parliament,
City, and Army, and is resolved to join with his Excellency and the Army, for
the impartial executing of Justice, and settling of the peace of the Kingdom.
His Lordship has also something to offer from the Council of Sea Officers, in
reference to the King and the peace and tranquillity of this Nation. And the
Army has also something to propose to them concerning the Navy.

The Lord Genesis Fairfax, and Lieut Genesis Crumwell, has given the Lord Admiral a
visit, where they congratulated each others good successes, and at a
Conference, professed joint concurrence, in what might make the kingdom happy:
some disputation happened, in reference to the King, and settling of the Kingdom.

December. 21. Letters from the Navy say, That there has bin a bloody Fight at
Sea between the English and the Irish, and that the Irish have obtained the
Conquest, and taken 14 Merchants ships, and others, 40 piece of Ordnance, and
other rich booty and prize. A speedy course will be taken for subduing the said
Rebels.

FINIS.

