A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY To His Excellency The Lord General CROMWELL, FOR The
dissolving of this present Parliament, and choosing of a new Representative.

WITH Their Proposals and Desires touching 1 The Government of this Nation. 2
The Liberty and Freedom o^ the People. 3 An account to be given of the great
sums of Money received. 4 The taking off all Taxes. 5 The setting free of
prisoners that are not worth 5 l.


August 10 Imprinted at London, for John Smithson, and are to be sold at the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1652.

A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY, To His Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, for the
dissolving of this present Parliament.
THe Officers of the Army having had sundry Consultations and Conferences,
touching the dissolving of this present Parliament, and electing of a new
Representative; after much time spent in debate thereof, proceeded to a period
of their Results, grounded upon public safety; and in pursuance thereof,
presented a Model of their Proposals, to his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell; with the subscriptions of most of the Officers of the Army; And by a
general Condescension, it was drew up in a Declaratory-Way to the Parliament;
but exceeding high they are in their Proposals. But what will ensue, or be
resolved upon time will manifest.

In short, the current runs thus; For redressing of the groans and heavy
oppressures of the people, both in City and Country, and the enjoyment of
freedom throughout the Nation, according to the several Engagements and
Protestations of the Officers and Soldiery; and which has been purchased at a
dear rate by the expense of much blond.

For, indeed, to desire liberty, and shun servitude, is natural to very beasts;
and man seeming to be of worse condition than brute beasts, which as rational
pass by the greater delights of sense to shun subjection; he as irrational,
passing by the better reasons of the understanding, precipitates himself into
servitude, as if slavery were the greatest sensuality. The great God of Heaven
has made all souls equal, all bodies of the same materials; and if the
Divine Power endow one species with more noblenes then another, yet He does not
so in individuals. Wherefore shall we then make some greater then all, whom
Nature has not made greater then any one? If a Commonwealth be liberty, a
Kingdom is servitude; nor is it the more to be praised if it be voluntary;
rather he is more to be blamed who serves out of weakness, then he who serves
enforst by Necessity.

When time requires recourse to daring, there ought no recourse be had to
patience: patience does well in generous breasts, to assuage, necessity, and
there it becomes fortitude: In all other places it is baseness of mind, unless
it be assumed when time serves, to be laid aside when time serves.

In a Word, there is nothing more desired by the Army, then the public safety,
liberty, and freedom of the People; who desire, that the ancient and sovereign
Law, called Salus Populi, should be for ever kept inviolate, All other Laws,
Customs, Conquests in that Case provided and usurped whatsoever, in any wise,
notwithstanding.

And in pursuance thereof, have proposed a way for redress of all Grievances,
as evidently appears by these ensuing particulars, to wit; 1 That there be an
account given of the vast sums of money, collected several ways throughout
this Nation. 2 That an account be given by all Treasurers, Committees, and
others, how the said sums have been disbursed, and for what use and service
they have respectively been employed. 3 That a new Representative be forthwith
elected. 4 That the heavy burdens of the people be removed, and all Oppressures
and Taxes taken off, that so the poor may no longer be insulted over by the
rich; but that truth, equity, and justice, may abound amongst them. 5 That
Courts of Judicature be reduced into a smaller number, and the Officers not to
exceed in number; but that both themselves, and their Revenues, be equally set
down and stated.


Many other particulars of great concernment are agitating; and amongst the
rest, An Act for the redress and delivery of poor prisoners, which are not able
to satisfy their debts, being impoverished beneath the value of 5 l. speedy
care is taken for the expediting thereof.

But me thinks, Gentlemen, I hear a resounding echo from some distempered
spirits, who say, That injuries received, tend to the ruin of men, who with
the zeal of honor do not accompany wisdom; they run upon revenge for
past-wrongs, and throw themselves headlong upon new miseries; they would amend
one error and produce a thousand.

Too much haste is as much before time, as too much delay is out of time:
Errors of impatience are worse then Errors of delay; for it is better to shun
precipices, than to run upon them: if they be not hindered they will be
retarded. Justice is not believed to be there, where violence is observed to
be; nor can it be accounted wisdom, where there is no argumentation.
Argumentation is not had in an instant; Time is not measured by instants; and
things which have not bin done in times past, may well be effected in times to
come. For, truly, never was there an Army, who desired to purchase freedom for
their Country, more then these; and, indeed, well may they be called, the
Academy of Europe; or, an Army of Saints, by reason, that their Discipline is
composed both in a spiritual and temporal Warfare.

FINIS.

