THE DECLARATION Of the GENTRY, of the COUNTY of NORFOLK, And of the COUNTY and
CITY of NORWICH.
WE the Gentry of the County of Norfolk, and County and City of Norwich, being
deeply affected with the sense of our sad Distractions and Divisions, both in
Church and State, and wearied with the miseries of an Unnatural Civil War, the
too Frequent Interruptions of Government, the Imposition of several heavy
Taxes, and the loud Outcries of multitudes of undone, and almost Famished
People, occasioned by the General decay of Trade, which has spread it self
throughout the whole Nation, and these Counties in particular; and having met
together, and consulted what may best remedy, and remove our, and the Nations
present Grievances and Distractions, Do humbly conceive, that the chief
Expedient will be, the recalling of those Members that were secluded in 1648,
and sat before the Force put upon the Parliament (We of the County of Norfolk)
being by such Seclusion, deprived of any Person to represent us in Parliament,)
and also by filling up the Vacant Places thereof; and all to be Admitted
without any Oath, or Engagement, previous to their Entrance; which being done,
We shall be ready to acquiesce, and submit in all things, to the Judgment and
Authority of Parliament, without which Authority, the People of England cannot
be obliged to pay any Taxes.

This Declaration, subscribed by three hundred Gentlemen, was delivered to the
Honorable Will: Lenthall, Speaker of the Parliament, on Saturday the Eight and
Twentieth of January, 1659. By the Lord Richardson, Sr John Hobart, and Sr
Horatio Tounsend, Baronets.


