A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, To the People of
SCOTLAND.

SIgned in the Name, and by the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell, and His Council of Officers.

Jo: RUSHWORTH Secr.



London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. July 23. 1650.

To the People of Scotland.
Whereas the Army under my Conduct, by the Authority of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, is to advance into Scotland, upon the grounds, and for
the ends expressed in their Declaration of June 26. 1650. And considering the
several ways and practices of some in that Kingdom, whose design it has been,
and still is, by all manner of groundless and unjust Reproaches, and most false
Slanders, to make the Army odious, and to render us unto the people, as such
that are to be abhorred of all pious, peaceable and sober Spirits, and to be
rather Monsters then Men.

We think fit therefore, for the clearing of our selves, to reminde you of our
former deportment and behavior, when about two years since we entered into the
Kingdom of Scotland, and then carried in by the Hand of Divine Providence, and
through the earnest Invitation of those now in present Authority and Power with
you, What injury or wrong did we then do, either to the persons, Houses or
Goods of any? Whose Ox have we taken? Did we seek any thing for our selves? Did
we other then preserve the best affected from; their and our most desperate
enemies? And having established our Inviters in their power without doing the
least violence to any, we returned to our own Nation.

And considering this, we have cause to hope, That those former carriages of
ours are not so soon forgotten; and that the present Misreports of what our
dealings will be, shall not disturb, nor affright the people from their houses
and dwellings.

And for satisfaction of all those that are Lovers of Religion, Peace and
Public Liberty, and being desirous to put a difference between the Innocent
and the Guilty; We do hereby Declare, in the Integrity of our hearts, That as
to the Gentry and Commonalty of the Nation of Scotland, whose Habitations are
in those places, whither the Army by the providence of God may come, As we know
full well they are not the Persons, who by their Councels and Undertakings have
laid the certain foundation of a second unrighteous and unjust Invasion of
England, by closing with, and entertaining of Him, who stirs up, and labors to
engage many Foreign Princes to invade the Commonwealth of England, and has
exercised actual: hostility against the Nation, by destroying the People, and
Commissionating Pirates to kill our Men, and to rob, spoil, and take away our
Ships and Goods by Sea, to the ruin of England, so much as in Him lies; Nor of
those who have refused so much as a Treaty with the Commonwealth of England,
wherein only a just and equal satisfaction for past Injuries was aimed at, and
a security for a firm Peace between the two Nations desired: Which denial, and
other practices, has put us upon this unavoidable necessity of entering into
Scotland, unless we would have stood still, and Jeen, not only the destruction
of the godly and well affected, but also of the very Power of Godliness and
Holiness in both Nations: So we shall not (the Lord continuing his goodness and
presence to us) offer the least violence and injury to the persons, goods or
possessions of any of them, but strive and labor to our utmost to prevent all
disorders that happen from an Army, and to give all speedy Redress and
Satisfaction that possibly may be, when any just Complaint of Miscarriage shall
be made.

And upon the Confidence of these our sincere and honest intentions (which we
hope our good and gracious God will enable us to perform;) We do hereby INVITE
all such persons to stay and abide in their own Houses and Habitations, where
they may and shall enjoy what they have in peace; and not to suffer themselves
to be misled by the craft and subtilty of any, into that which must needs
prove their inevitable Loss and Ruin, and a great hazard to their Country.

Howsoever, we have done this, as our Duty to God, and for satisfaction to all
good men.

Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell, and His Council of Officers, Joh: Rushworth Secretary.

FINIS.

