A DECLARATION OF The Marks and Fruits, of the false Prophets:
with, The Discovery of the two Mothers, and their Teachers: From them who in
the World in scorn is called Quakers, which suffers for the Righteous Seed sake.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate (says the Lord) and
touch not the Unclean Thing, and I will receive you. 2 Cor. 6. 17.
THe word of the Lord to this Nation, People, Priests, and Magistrates, who be
without the fear of the Lord God, and regards not his Law, which says thou
shall not respect persons, who holds up Baal and Baalam, which receives the wages
of unrighteousness, gifts and rewards, which the Lord God sent his Prophets and
sent his Apostles to cry against, as in all ages they did, which was in the
Light, and which are in the Light, such were Prisoned, and such are Prisoned
now, as they then, with you that hold up such as goes in the ways of Balaam,
to gifts and rewards, and in the way of Cain; such (in all ages) were
Persecutors of the Righteous, where it was brought forth, (as it is now in this
Nation of England at this day, with the Generation of men and people, that are
now in Cains way, and Balaams way, that pretends Christ's words, and Prophets
words, and Apostles words; that professes those words, and pretends to worship
God, which all is with the light seen which comes from Jesus, which witness
against persecution, and witness against the Unrighteous, and the Ungodly, and
spoke of the Saints sufferings, with the unrighteous Generation, and hailing
them forth of the Synagogues before Magistrates, which ye Rulers, Priests, and
people of this Nation of England does fulfill the words of Christ: Oh the blood
that has been shed in this Nation, and the Prayers and Humiliation Days, and
fasting-dayes, and for Reformation; and now they that come to walk in the Laws
of God, and the Life of the Scriptures, which cannot respect the Persons of
Men, as it does forbid, you do Prison and persecute with your Law, which is
your Will; let that in all your Consciences judge, and now see the Fruits of
your Profession, and the end of your Fasting, the end of your
Humiliation-Dayes, the end of your Reformation is manifested, and be silent all
Profession, who has not the possession, and possesses not the Life of the
Prophets, of Christ, and of the Apostles which gave forth the Scriptures, for
such Professors as has the words of the Prophet, Christ, and his Apostles,
goes in Cains Way, and Balaams Way, receives the wages of Unrighteousness for
gifts and rewards: Let the Teachers of the Nation of England, their practice
witness it, and be their Judge; and in Cains-Way, persecuting, and these their
Fruits and Marks be their Witness and their Seal, for how many Goales in
England, by, and through them, have Prisoners in them, and often almost filled
with Prisoners, which witness the Truth against Cains Generation and Balaams,
which receives the wages of Unrighteousness, Rewards and Gifts, let their
practice it self be a witness agaihst them, and the Scripture it self judge,
and all who be in the Light, that forth it gave, who with it sees their Fruits
and Marks, and Doctrine, and Manners, and the Manners of their People; without
shame, People and Priest; without Natural affections, strikers, stoners, and
beaters, hailers out of the Synagogues, Punchers, and throwers down, yea, in
their Synagogues, and that which they call their Temple, where they pretend to
worship God; and these are their Fruits and Marks: Many of the dear Children of
God, and Servants of the Lord, are there almost murdered, and yet are not
ashamed to call themselves a Church, and the Ministers of Christ, and the
Gospel: many have been sore bruised, and cruelly wounded in that they call the
place of their worship, where the Children of God has been almost murdered;
but these are the Fruits and Marks of Cains-Generation, and Balaams, who are of
old ordained for Condemnation, which condemnation is the Light, which to it in
all your Consciences I do speak, which is your condemnation, who, to it,
contrary do walk; and you that hold up such as receives gifts and rewards, you
hold Balaam, and follow Balaam, and so turn from the true Prophets of the Lord,
which ever testified against such; and you that do maintain such, maintain
Balaam, and are blind, witnessed against with the Scriptures; let that in your
Conscience, and the Scriptures judge you, who contrary to it do act, and that
which gave forth the Scriptures, who holds up Balaam, and such as goes in his
way; you love not God that does see; but love the world, and are of the world,
and the world loves their own, such as goes in Balaams way, receives gifts and
rewards, the wages of unrighteousness, and in Cains way, persecutes; the world
loves, yea, and fights for with stones, staves, and their Books; and they have
a Popish Law to guard them, which guarded the Papists; and such as go in Cains
way, and Balaams way, are not Gods, but the worlds, and the world loves them,
as you may read, in Peter and Jude, Let the Apostles words there judge you, and
you that holds up such as bears rule by their means, ye are not of God, and ye
hold up such as are not of God, but of the world, and the world loves her own;
and the Prophet Jeremy testified against such, who was of God, as you may read,
Ier. 5. and such Shepherds as seek for their gain from their Quarter, are the
worlds, and the world loves her own* for such are not of God, for the Lord sent
his Prophet to cry against such; as you may read, Isa. 56. and such are the
worlds, and not Gods, as seek for the fleece; such Shepherds as makes a prey
upon the people, and devours them, such are the worlds, and the world loves her
own and the Lord sent his Prophet Ezekiel to cry out against such; as you may
read, Ezekiel. 34. And such are not of God, but of the world, and such the world
fights for, with Clubs, States, and Stones: And such as are Hirelings, which
the Lord sent Jeremiah and Micah-to cry against, these are the Worlds Priests,
and Prophets, and not the Lords, and these are their Fruits and Mark, and the
world hears their own, and loves such, and fights for such, and persecutes the
dear Children of the Lord, which are moved to cry out against them, and such
Magistrates as be ignorant of the true and wise God, persecutes them, to the
fulfilling of the Scriptures, and such as are called of men Master, stands
praying in the Synagogues, the chiefest Seats in the Assemblies, which Christ
cried woe against, are the worlds, not Christ's, and the world loves her own, and
fights for such as are called of men Master, stands praying in the Synagogues,
and have the chiefest Seats in the Assemblies, the world hears such, and not
Christ; they that are of Christ hears not such, but Christ Jesus the Son of
God; and all such as are called of men master, goes in Cains way, and Balaams
way, are the worlds, which receives the wages of unrighteousness Gifts and
rewards, and are persecutors, and the worlds, and held up by the world, and the
world loves such and fights for such, and such their persons must be respected,
and such regards not the Law of God, but casts it behind their backs, and such
as these are their fruits and marks, and they that do respect persons, are
convinced by the Law of God to be transgressors, and he that breaks one point
breaks, all and they that cannot respect persons, but the Law of God, with the
world persecuted and imprisoned, witness the Goales now in the Nation of
England: To the Light in all your Consciences I speak which comes from Jesus,
which lets you see the world, and lets you see all that which they that dwelt
in the Light were sent to testify against, and lets you see the Law of God,
which is one with that of God in every man's Conscience, which if you love this
Light, it will let you see Christ Jesus from whence it comes, and will let you
see all the fruits and marks of the worlds teachers, which if you hate the
Light, and act those things contrary to the Light, as they who in the
Scriptures declared against the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles; with the
Light you are all seen, and your actions contrary to the Light, with the Light
you are condemned, for this is the condemnation the Light says Christ: and to
you this is the word of God, and remember you are all warned in your life time;
all such teachers as bear rule by their means, are the worlds, which the Lord
sent Jeremiah to cry against such, and the world fights for such, and say they
are Ministers of Christ, and such as are called Ministers, prisons and
persecutes, to hold up their kingdom, that their folly may be made manifest,
and their fruits and marks may be seen, and all such shepherds that seeks for
their gain from their quarter, that the Lord sent I say to cry against, and all
such shepherds as seek for the fleece, and make a prey upon the people, which
the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry against; are the worlds, and the world loves such,
and fights for such shepherds, let their daily practice judge, and all such as
are Hirelings, and preach peace to the people, but if they put not into their
mouths, they prepare war against them; these are of the world, and the world
loves such, and fights for such, let their practice judge, all such as are
called of men Masters, stands praying in the Synagogues, and have the uppermost
Seats in the Assemblies, are the worlds, for Jesus Christ cried woe against
such, and all such as goes in Cains way, and Balaams way, and speaks a
divination of their own brain, are the filthy dreamers, and through
Covetousness makes merchandise of the people through feigned* words; these are
all the worlds, and these are their Fruits and Marks, contrary to the Prophets,
Apostles and Christ, with the Light was they all testified against, and it is
witnessed and seen now in this Nation, that the World holds up such, and Love^
and Fights for such contrary to the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, Let
their practice and the Scriptures be their Judge, and that in their Consciences
their Condemnation.

Jesus Christ says, Beware of salse Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps
Clothing, but inwardly are raving Wolves; now here are some Marks and Fruits
by which they should know the false Prophets they are inwardly raving Wolves,
they are as the briars and the thorns, and corrupt trees, that bring forth the
evil Fruit, their house is upon the sand; and it is not every one that says
Lord, Lord, that enters into the Kingdom of God, but he that does the will of
the Lord: And here the false Prophets gets the Sheeps Clothing, that which
clothed the Sheep, and so the good words deceives the simple, but they
themselves are as thorns and briars, and inwardly ravening wolves; and these
are the Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets, though outwardly they appear
beautiful, as yon may read, Mat. 7. And secondly, more Marks and Fruits you may
see of the false Prophets, they be they which are out of Christ's Doctrine, love
the chiefest place at Feasts, the chiefest seats in the Assemblies, greetings
in the Markets, and to be called of men Master, which Christ says, Be ye not
called of men Master, ye have one Master, to wit, Christ, and ye are all
Brethren: and he that will be greatest among you, let him be your servant: And
here again they be out of Christ's Doctrine, and by their Fruits you may know
them. Read Mat. 23. throughout, it is worth your reading and observing, for to
discover to you the Fruits and Marks of the false Prophets, or Pharisees* which
Christ cried woe against: And again you may read Mat. 24. the Marks and Fruits
of the false Prophets and the Antichrists such as are drawing people to lo
here, and lo there, whenas Christ says, Go not forth, who lights every man
that comes into the world. Ioh. 1. 9. that with this Light they may come to
see him, and all the Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets. And again you may
see in Mat. 10. such as Christ sent forth, they was not to take Gold nor
Silver, nor Money, nor two Coats, nor a staff, he told them they should be
scourged in the Synagogues; and here you may see such scourge in their
Synagogues, which takes the Gold the Silver, the Money, the staff, and such
other things as are mentioned in the same Chapter, contrary to Christ's
command: and here you may see the Marks and fruits of the false Teachers: and
again, they are such that swear, which Christ Jesus says, Swear not at all,
and so there they do not own his Doctrine, but are against it, and are
Antichrists, and by their Marks and Fruits they are known. And again they are
such as serve not our Lord Jesus Chrict, but their own bellies, and through
flattering speeches deceives the simple, Romans 16. And they are such as sues men
at the Law, and here they are out of Christ's Doctrine, and by their Fruit we
know them, 1 Cor: 6. and such are they as transform themselves as Ministers of
righteousness, and as an Angel of Light, but by their Marks and Fruits we know
them, and they are such as confess they have not the same Spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, and so draws people from the Spirit, and so bewitch them
Gal. 3. and are such as have the form of godliness, but the power deny, which
are to be turned away from, they are headdie, high minded, boasters, and
proud, unholie, cursed speakers, truce breakers, false-accusers, intemperate,
fierce, no lovers at all of those that are good, lovers of pleasure more than
lovers of God: Of this sort are they which creep into Houses, leading silly
women captive, which be always learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, but does resist the truth, as Iannes and Iambres, did,
being men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which respect no man's person, which purifieth the; Heart Here by their
Marks and Fruits you shall know the false Teachers, the false Prophets, 1 Timothy
3. and they are such as are puffed up, knowing nothing, doting about Questions,
and strife of words, whereof comes Envy, strife, railings and Evil
surmizings, froward disputations, men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth,
which think gain is godliness; from such separate thy self: Here is their Marks
and Fruits by which thou may know them. 1 Timothy 6. And they are such as desire
after Money, and lusts after it, which draws men into perdition, and
destruction and noisome Lusts, and so are erred from the Faith. And there Marks
and Fruits, Oh man of God, flee these things and follow after righteousness,
and godliness, faith, love, patience, and meekness, and lay hold on eternal
life; and profane bablings, ungodliness, put away foolish and unlearned
Questions, which genders strife, and their words shall fret as a Canker; and
here is their Marks and Fruits, 2 Timothy 2. and are such as are given to telling
of Fables, and Stories, having itching ears, and so are turned from the
Doctrine of Christ, 2 Timothy 4. whenas the Lord says, Thou shall not walk about
with Tales among any people: Levit. 19. and in Titus you may see the Marks and
Fruits of the false Teachers, they are Vain-talkers, Deceivers of minds, not
holding fast the faithful word, according to Doctrine, which teaches for
filthy lucre sake, whose mouths must be stopped, evil beasts and slow-bellies
reprove them sharply; here you may see more marks and fruits of the false
Prophets.

Again you may prove them by the Apostles Rule, he must not be slandered of
Riot, not taking heed to Fables, and commands of men that turn away from the
Truth, Tit. 1.

And again he must be one that is temperate, and modest, and harmless, apt to
teach, unreproveable, the Husband of one Wife; and not given to join, no
striker, not given to filthy Lucre, one that can rule his own house honestly,
if he cannot, how can he take care for the Church of God? He must be grave,
not double tongued; and first, let them be proved, and then let them minister
if they be found blameless, and here is the Marks and Fruits of a false
Teacher, and how a true Teacher may be known from a false, and you that take
any without proofs, are not them that proves all things, and holds fast that
which is good, as you may read, 1 Timothy 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

Again, the false Prophets are such as makes merchandise of the word, through
seigned words and covetousuess, and speaks great swelling words through the
lusts of the flesh, promising liberty, are themselves servants of corruptions,
for of whom a man is overcome he is in bondage, and here is Marks and Fruits of
the false Prophets, and they are such as sport themselves in the day time, with
wantonness th^orgh the lusts of the flesh, live delitiously, delighting
themselves, and feasting with you (in their deceivings,) hearts exercised with
covetousness, beguiling the souls that are not established, as natural bruit
beasts to be destroyed, perish in their own corruptions, by reason of whom, the
way of truth is evil spoken of; and many follow their pernicious ways: Here is
the Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets, and such as deny the Lord Jesus
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation; there is the end
of the false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2. And they are such as are giving private
interpretations of the Scriptures, which came not by the will of man, neither is
it of any private interpretation; and here is another Mark which comes from the
private interpretations, which fills the world so full of opinions; so as John
says, every Spirit is not to be believed, but they are to be tried; that
spirit that confesses not that Jesus is come in the flesh, is not of God* but
is Antichrist, of whom ye have heard should come; but now already is come into
the world; look to your selves, whosoever transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God, he that continues in the Doctrine of Christ,
he has both the father and the son; and if there come any among you and bring
not this Doctrine, receive him not into your houses, norbid him God speed, lest
ye be partakers of his evil deeds, as you may read in the Epostles of John, and
he that has the form of godliness and not the power, from such turn away: And
here you may see more of the Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets and
Deceivers, and they are such as turn the grace of God into wantonness, denying
God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ, though they have the form of
godliness, but denies the power; and as raging waves of the Sea, murmurers and
complainers, walking after their own lusts, whose mouths speak proud things,
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage, following the way of
Cain, and of Balaams wages who perished in the gainsaying of Core; and mockers,
which should come in the last times, which should walk after their ungodly
lusts, having not the spirit, but having men's persons in admiration, which is
out of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ: And* here is more of the marks and
fruits of the false Teachers, as you may read in Jude and James 2, and are in
the wisdom which is below, where is envy and strife, sedition, and all manner
of evil works, and here is the fruits of their wisdom; so the wise man which
is endued with knowledge, and the wisdom of the Lord Jesus the true Prophet
sees and savours the fruits and marks of the false Prophets, and super fluity,
and filthiness, and maliciousness; these are the Fruits of them that deceives
their own souls, that are speakers of the Scriptures, and does not live in the
life, James 1: and Isay declared the fruits of the false Shepherds, and the
marks, he said they seek for their gain from their quarter, and they was
greedy Dogs, and many other Marks he gives them; and the Apostle bids Mark them
that walk not according to the Doctrine of Christ. And Isajah says they are
greedy and can never have enough; and here is the Marks and Fruits of the false
Shepherds, Isa. 56. shows how they may be known: And Again Jeremiah does show
the Marks of the False Prophets, how they speak a vision of their own heart,
and not from the mouth of the Lord, and how they do not stand in the Lords
counsel, but they are such as used their tongues but the Lord sent them not;
and such as run; but the Lord has not spoken to them, and such as by their
lies and their lightness, counsel the people to err, and such steals the word
from their Neighbor.

And against such Prophets will the Lord come, and the Lord tells such his word
is as a hammer, and as a fire; and here ye may see the Fruits and the Marks of
the false Prophets, which gets the Letter, and tells people it is the word, Ier.
2^.

And again Jeremiah shows the Marks and Fruits, and the horrible filthy thing,
the Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests bear ^ule by their means, and the
people love to have it so: O foolish people, eyes, and do not see, ears, and do
not hear! fear ye not me says the Lord? Ier. 5. and Ezekiel. 34. you may read how
he sets forth the Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets, how they make a prey
upon the People, and devour them; And again Mi^. 3. how he does show forth the
Marks and Fruits of the false Prophets, and he says they deceive the people,
They cry peace to them, but if a man do not put into their mouths, they prepare
war against him: here is one of their Marks, and he faith, they shall cover
their lips, for they have no answer from God; therefore they tell people the
Letter is the Word, where it says, God is the word. John 1: And again Micah
says, They prophecy for Money, and teach for hire, and against such was Micah
sent to cry against, and their Fruits, and by their Fruits and Marks they are
known. And Mallachy he shows the F^u^ts and Marks of the Priests, Whose
blessings are cursed, whose se^d is corrupted, such as neglect Gods command,
Mall. 1. The Fruits of the Idol-Shepheards, Zach. 1^. and the judgments of God
that shall come upon them: and the Fruits of the false Fast of hypocrites,
which Zacharias was sent to speak against, Isa. 58. 7. there you may read, and
how the Lord sent Habuckuk to cry against the persecutors, Hab. 1. and Hos. 6.
he sets forth the fruits of the murtherous Priests, how they (as Thieves) wait
for a man, so a company Priests murder in the way by consent, for they work
mischief. And ye may read the Marks and Fruits of the false prophets in Ez^k.
13. and how they polluted the people for hand-fuls of Barley, and pieces of
Bread, to slay the souls of them that should not dye; and these are the foolish
prophets that follow their own Spirits, and see nothing, and they say the Lord
says it, but the Lord has not sent them, and they made others to hope that
they should confirm to the words of the prophecy, these were them that daubed
with untempred mortar, and these are them that hunt souls, and these are like
Foxes in the vast places, and these are them that have their pillows, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked; and here are the Marks and Fruits of the
false prophets, which the Lord is against, which have their pillows under their
arm, and will not let their souls go; and here is he Mark and the Fruit of the
false prophets, and you may see the Fruits of the false prophets, which do
discover the iniquity, in Lamen. 2. and Ier. 29. there shows the Marks and
Fruits of the false prophets, how they prophesied lies in the name of the Lord
God, and I have not sent them says the Lord.

This is to all you that speaks in his name, and he has not sent you, here is
a mark and a Fruit, by which ye may be known, and Ier. 14. there he shows the
Marks and fruits of the false Prophets, how they spoke in his Name, and he has
not sent them, neither command them, Neither spoke I unto them, but they
prophecy unto you a false vision, and deceit of their own heart, and
prophecy in his name, and the Lord has not sent them; and here is Fruits and
Marks how they may be known, which who was in the light discovered.

And again you may see the Marks and fruits of the evil Pastures, in the 10. of
Jeremiah, and their Marks and Fruits there, how they become as Beasts, and have
not sought the Lord; and ye may see the Marks and Fruits of the chief Priests,
which were enemies to our Lord Jesus Christ, the unchangeable Priest; the
chief Priests could tell Herod by the Scriptures, where Christ should be born,
when he gathered them together, and the chief Priests adjured Christ to tell
them whether he was the Son of God, (though the chief Priests could tell by the
Scriptures where he should be born) yet they knew him not when he was come, for
he was not born by the will of man: And then when Jesus confessed he was the
Son of God, the High Priests rent his clothes, and said he had spoken
blasphemy; so when the morning was come, all the Chief Priests and Elders took
Counsel against Jesus to put him to death, and led him away bound; and here was
their Fruits, and is the Marks of the Chief Priests now: and Pontius Pilate,
before whom he witnessed a good Confession; and the chief Priests and Elders,
and all the Counsel, sought false witnesses against Jesus to put him to death,
and the High Priest mocked him, with the Scribes, and Elders, and Pharisees; and
the chief Priests and Elders had persw aded the people that they should ask
Barnabas, and destroy Jesus; and here is their fruits and marks* And Judas
which betrayed Christ, had money of the Chief Priests, and came with a great
multitude, with Swords and Staves from the High Priests to take Jesus, and so
when Judas turned from Christ, he turned to the Priests, who was the betrayer
to the murderers, and when it was heard that Jesus was risen, and showed to
the high Priests, they gathered together with the Elders, and took counsel,
and gave large Money to the Soldiers, saying, say ye his Disciples came by
night, and stole him away whilst we slept: and here is the Marks and Fruits of
the priests and liars, as you may read in Matthew, and ye may see the Marks and
Fruits of the Chief priests who examined Stephen in the 7. of the Acts,
Stephen for witnessing forth Christ Jesus the unchangeable Priest, was Stoned
to Death, denying the Types: And Saul, whilst he was under the Priests, had a
Commission from them to persecute them which witnessed the second Priesthood:
and here was the Marks and Fruits of the first priesthood, and of Saul while
he was under it; and after Paul was persecuted with the Chief Priests, and the
Jews, when he was come to witness Christ Jesus the second priesthood, and
deny the Temple and the first priest-hod, Acts 24. and Acts 17. and Acts 21.
and Acts 22. 5. and many examples and Marks, and Fruits, you may read in the
Revelation, how John (by the spirit of the Lord) sets them forth there, and in
Peter and Jude also.

THe word of the Lord God to all you which are called the two Mothers in this
Nation, with them which do come from you, whom you have made Ministers (as you
call them,) they have told us Christ Jesus has sent them, and we see now with
the Light which comes from Jesus Christ, that they are made Ministers by the
will of man, and Christ Jesus sent them not, but their Mothers (as they call
them) and they told us the Letter it was the Light, when the Letter says,
Christ is the Light; here we do charge them, both they and their Mothers, to be
liars, and to be adulterate from the Light, and knows nothing but the outside,
so with the Light they all liars are to be condemned for the Lake, as its
written, the liars must have their portion in the Lake that burns, and they and
their Mothers have filled this Nation full of their lies, but with the Light
which comes from Jesus Christ which never changes, they are comprehended with
it, and condemned to the Lake of Liars, and they told us the Sons and Children
that came from their Mothers; that the Bible it was the Word, and the Bible
says, that in the beginning was the word and the word was God: And here again
with the Light which comes from this word, which word endures for ever, which
was before paper and ink was, and the Scriptures was given forth; and here
again we do charge both the Mothers and their Sons to be liars, and no
Ministers of the word, for they which was Ministers of the word, and eye
witnesses, took in hand to set forth a Declaration in order, so it is a
Declaration which the Ministers of the word set forth, which word was in the
beginning, by which all things was made and upheld by the word and power, the
word became flesh and dwelt amongst us, and here thou that have sit as Queen,
and seen no sorrow, and had many children, thy desolation is coming and come,
and the loss of thy children, thy skirts are seen, and thy nakedness appears,
and thy lewdness, and whoredoms, and witchcraft, and lies does appear to all
the children of the Light, who are in the Light that comprehends all the world,
and reaches over it: And the Children which are come from their mothers, taught
us and told us that Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, was the Original, and is the
Original, and such learned men must open the Scriptures: and with the Light
which is eternal, which is come from the Son of God, with it we do see that
before Babell was, all the earth was of one Language, and then Nimrod the
cunning hunter before the Lord, which came out of Ham's Stock, the Father of
Canaan who was cursed, he was the beginner of the building of Babell, whom God
confounded into many Languages, and we do see that Pilate which crucified
Christ had this Original, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin and set it over Christ; so
here with the light we see them Babylon building up, and throwing down, with
their many Languages which is confusion, and their Mother the Mother of
Harlots, which teaches them many languages, which is trimmed and deceives the
Nations, but with the Light which comes from Jesus Christ, she and her Sons
are comprehended, and they can go no further then Babel, which are Babylon, for
with the Light you are seen, comprehended and judged, with the word which was
before any language was, by which all things was made, as is said before, and
here you are hammered, who are in many languages, with the word which was as a
hammer to beat you in pieces, and with the word you are to be cut and divided
assunder, for the word is as a two-edged sword, and the word is as a fire to
burn you up, who be in the many Languages; and to you all is the word of the
Lord, which does endure for ever, and who are redeemed, are redeemed forth of
the many languages, and is come before Babel was: And the Children which come
from their Mother, told us that sprinkling Infants was the Baptism, and the
Steeplehouse was the Church, of a Sacrament, which there is no such Scripture;
and so here again with the Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened us withal,
we see they taught us more lies, and so with the Light they are to be
condemned, as I said unto you before, for the light that gave forth the
Scriptures says, the Church is in God, and with the Spirit they was all
baptized into one body, and was made all to drink in one spirit; with the Light
we do see and witness this, praised be God, which has separated us from this
lying Generation, which holds up these Mothers and their Sons, which be
Teachers of Lies. And they did tell us these Children that comes from their
Mothers, that they were the ministers of God, and his Prophets, and his
messengers; now with the Light which comes from Christ Jesus we do them all see
to be such as be out of the truth, and such as the Lord sent M^cah to cry
against, that are hirelings, they that does not put into their mouths they
prepare war against them, they that does, to them they preach peace, and boast,
and say, is not the Lord amongst them? none evil can come to them; who see the
evil and transgression, with the light which comes from Christ comprehended
they are, with the Light the Prophet that saw Christ, witnessed against such
with the same Light, which Light we witness made manifest, which never changes,
with which light all deceits and deceivers are comprehended, and with the Light
we do see them that come from their mothers, to be such as seeks for their gain
from their quarter, as bears rule by their means, as seeks for the fleece,
which the Lord sent his Prophets to cry against, which was in the Light, which
with the Light they savv Christ, which Christ has enlightened us with, with
which Light we see the same as the Prophets did, which was witnesses of Christ
with the Light, and so here we do see them to be deceivers that goes into the
world, who uses their tongues, and says the Lord says, when he never spoke
to them, and speaks a divination of their own brain, and follow their own
Spirits, which are the dreamers, with the Light they are seen which never
changes, and with it which is eternal all comprehended; and to you this is the
eternal word of God, and these Sons that come from their Mothers, told us they
was Christ's Ambassador; with the Light which comes from Christ, which Christ
has enlightened us withal, we do see them to be holding up the figures in the
first Covenant, and their Mothers to be liars, and they no Ambassadors of
Christ, which takes tithes of the people, and if they will not give it them who
witnesses the unchangeable P^iest, Christ Jesus, and deny the changeable, they
sue them at the Law, and cause them to be hailed before magistrates, Courts,
and Sessions, and put them in prisons, because they will not pay them tithes,
here you are declared to the whole nation to be liars, and no Ambassadors of
Jesus Christ, for whom he sent forth, he sent forth freely and denied all
oppression; here with the Scripture it self you are judged to be out of the
practice of them that he sent forth, and you that take tithes of the people,
and brings the Scripture for your rule, as they that received tithes in old
time, which had a storehouse to put it in, and them that did not bring their
tithes and ^il it, they robbed God, as says Mallachie, and the Priests which
received the tithes, the strangers; the fatherless, and the widows was to come
within the Priests Gate, and he was to minister forth to the stranger, the
widows, and the fatherless, that there might be no beggar in Israel; now to
you that receives tithes I speak, who are neither ministers of the Gospel, nor
ministers of the first covenant, but jugglers, as you call it, are made
manifest to all that be in the light.

Now it you say, give Caesar his due, which are Hypocrites, and bring that for
your Cloak for to hold up the figure, the first priesthood, that Cloak will not
you cover, but your nakedness and whoredom from the Light is seen, and with
the Light are all to be condemned, from the First Covenant, and the Second
both, who are found in the truth in neither, for the first priesthood who had
the Storehouse, into which the Tithes was received, which the priests
ministered forth to the strangers, widows, and Fatherless, a Figure of the
unchangeable Priest, Christ Jesus; who ministers out of the everlasting
Treasure, and while the first priesthood was standing, Storehouses and Tithes
was preached up, it was before Christ Jesus was preached up, the unchangeable
^riest, over the household of God, then the unchangeable was confessed with
them, and the changeable priesthood, storehouse, and Tithes was denied,
disanulled, and of no effect, which the deceivers of the world for their own
ends, Mothers and Sons brings up tithes again, and say they are Ministers of
Christ, but with the Light which comes from Christ Jesus, we do see who they
are, and what they are, that have told us these lies, so with the Light they
are to be condemned, and their Mothers and their Children, and their p^o^^lites
that they have begotten: To the Light in all your Consciences I speak, which
shall witness me eternally, and you all condemn that hate it, and hold up such
things; and to you this is the word of God, that you might see your selves what
you are: and they have told us which came from their Mothers, that they was in
Christ steed, and he sent them; but with the eternal Light which never changes,
which Christ Jesus has enlightened us withal, we do them see in the steps of
the Scribes and Pharisees, garnishing the Sepulchers of the Righteous, building
the Tombs of the Prophets and Apostles, as whited walls, outside Sepulchers,
and Graves which buries the just, whose hands are full of Blood, Envy, and
Hatred, which be such as are called of men Master, and have the chiefest places
in the Assemblies, stand^th praying in the Synagogues, in the steps of the
phraisees their Fathers, which were enemies to Christ, as you may read, Mat.
23. And with the Light which comes from our Lord Jesus Christ, you are all
seen, and with it to be condemned, no cloak can cover you, but you are seen
with all the Children of Light, praised be the Lord God.

And the word of the Lord God to all you who says that you are gifted men, who
says that you are not made Ministers by these two Mothers, but you are
experienced men, and received a gift, and you must exercise your gift, and you
will have 40. 50. 60. 80. pounds a year, more or less, as you can get it for
your gift: You I do charge, in the presence of the living God, to be such as
erred from the Spirit, as your Father Balaam did, are turned from the commands
of God, as Cain did, and you are in the selfe-seperation, whose fruit shall
wither; you are the Clouds without water, the wandering stars, who receive the
wages of unrighteousness, who speaks high swelling words, through the lusts of
the flesh, which has men's persons in admiration because of advantage; you are
the wells without water, which say you are experienced men, and gifted men, and
go sell your gift to the world; here again I do charge you, in the presence of
the living God, to be liars, dissemblers, and deceivers of the world, and
contrary to the Scriptures, and never exercised the gift of God, for the Elect
you cannot deceive which have received the gift of God, which is perfect, which
cannot be bought and sold for money, so your gifts which can be sold for money
are not received from God, but the Light which comes from Christ Jesus which is
eternal, you and your gifts are to be condemned, which can be bought and sold
for money, you are them that separate your selves, not having the Spirit, with
the Light you are seen and your fruit which withers, and with it which never
changes you and it is condemned; to that in your Consciences which never
changes I speak, which shall witness me, which condemns you: to you this is the
eternal word of God. And you that say you are Ministers of Christ, and declare
against these two Mothers before mentioned, and her Sons and Children, and you
your selves are such as are called of men master, have the chiefest place in
the assemblies, and stand praying in the Synagogues, which our Lord Jesus
Christ cried woe against, and now say the Scriptures is your rule, here with
Christ's words are you judged, and seen to be deceivers that deceives the world;
but they who are in Christ, which cried woe against such as you and the Scribes,
you cannot deceive. And you Teachers that say the Scripture is your rule, and
are separate from these two Mothers and her Children, before mentioned, and
which say you must observe the commands of Christ as ordinances, and are
zealous of the outward commands, as the Jews was, and yet ye do not believe
that Jesus Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the world; here you
and your zeal are to be candemned, for it is without the knowledge of God; to it
I bear record eternally, and the commands of Christ you know not, and with the
Light which comes from Christ Jesus, you and your zeal is to be condemned,
which is taken on from the Letter, in that mind and nature which acts
contrary to the Light, so you are in that state of the Scribes, whose mouth
must be stopped.

FINIS.

