THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMY CONCERNING The Kings Majesty, and the Treaty; and
their resolution to execute justice upon all those Lords and Commons, Aldermen,
and Common-councell-men of the City of London, who invited Duke Hambleton and
his Army into this Kingdom.

ALSO, Their Letter to the Citizens of London, who presented the late and large
Petition to the Parliament, against a Personal Treaty with the King; And their
Protestation to live and die with them against all opposers whatsoever.

PResented to His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, in the Name of the
Officers and Soldiery of the Army, and commanded to be printed and published^
Subscribed, PAUL HOBSON.

Whereunto is annexed, New Propositions from the King, His Declaration
concerning the Presbyterian Government, and a Journall of the proceedings of
the Treaty.

Die 9. October. 1648.

Printed for C. VV. and are to be sole near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

Exceeding joyful NEWS FROM THE TREATY Being an exact Journall of the
proceedings of the Kings Majesty, and the Commissioners for PEACE.
Right Honorable,
ON Monday last the King and the Commissi^oners met again in the Treaty
Chamber, ant debated the Bill for Church-Governmen, and after several Argument
laid down by the Counceil on each side, touching Episcopacy, and
Lay-Presbyterians, His Majesty declared, That he was reasonable well satisfied
touching that particular, in proving of Lay-Presbyterians to be Jure Divino,
and therefore desired them to proceed on to the rest of the Propositions.

That which most induced his Majesty to give his Royal assent therein, is said
to be, the excellent Arguments laid down by Mr. Seamer, to the King, proving
that Lay-Presbyterians are Jure Devino: His excellency therein, touching the
clearing of this point, appeared in its full splendour and purity and gave a
glorious glimpse throughout the whole Treaty Chamber. After which, his Majesty
rose up out of the Chair of State, saying, That He did (in part) approve of the
said Arguments, and were well satisfied therewith, desiring a Conference with
the said Mr. Seamer, which was assented to, where his Majesty declared himself
very learnedly and said, That nothing should be wanting in him, for the settling
of a firm and lasting peace.

Tuesday October. 3. His Majesty delivered several Papers to the Commissioners,
touching Bishops, 1. That His Majesty cannot consent to the abolishing of
Episcopacy, because it is his judgment, that they are nearest to Agostolicall
institution. 2 That He is not satisfied how He can in Conscience do it, in
regard to his Coronation Oath. But after another Conference with the Ministers
and Lawyers, his Majesty dissented, and changed his resolution.

Newport October. 6. 1648.
The Declaration of the Army concerning the Treaty. presented to the Lord
General Fairfax.
May it please your Excellency,
WE make bold being pressed in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our
fears, so the matter of our desires. It has pleased God after much plottings
and endeavors of the old and new malignants to crown the Army with great
success; and although that calls for Justice, little or none is done, and less
is like to be done, unless your Excellency presently appears to do something,
and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us; we wait for it. Instead of
Justice, behold a Treaty with them for Peace, that God speaks no peace to: and
instead of owning just Petitions, they are laid aside, and not countenanced;
some employed in the Treaty not long since voted the Army Rebels; what that
prognosticates in the future, when they have power, we leave to your Excellency
to judge. So hoping you will so far honor us, as to stand by the Kingdom and
the Army in their just rights and privilege, We subscribe in behalf of the
Officers and Soldiery,

Lieu. Col. Paul Hobson, Capt. Clark,

The Army has further declared to his Excellency, That it is not the sense of
the Army, to have a personal Treaty with the King, but desire Justice to be
execued upon those Lords and Commons, Aldermen, and Common Counsel men of
London, who invited the Scots into this Nation; as also against those Common
council men of London, that durst join with the Prince (while in arms against
the Parliament and people) in his Desires, concluding that all these
wickednesses must be salved up with a personal treaty, etc.

Joyful News from the Kings Navy at Sea.
WE have and shall endeavor to give satisfaction to the whole Kingdom of
England, in the grounds of our present proceedings. But we think fit
notwithstanding, to make a particular address to you, being extremely desirous
that the City of London should be fully satisfied that our intentions are just
and honorable, for the peace and happiness of all his Majesty's subjects.

And we cannot despair of gaining a belief and confidence with you, when it
shall appear that Our actions and proceedings are conformable to our
professions, and in order to those public ends, and that happy settlement of
the Kingdom, which we have proposed as the chief end of all our endeavors.

And we further think fit to assure you, that we are so far from intending
violence to the persons or goods of any of Our Fathers Subjects of England, or
any other particular advantage therein, that our only aim and end is to procure
a subsistence for the Navy at Sea under Our Command, that thereby we may be
enabled to protect the Ships, Vessels and Goods, and to secure the Trade, not
only of the City of London, but of all other his Majesty's good subjects.

And being for the present utterly unable to provide for so great a charge, as
having been for some years deprived as well of our own estate, as of the
supplies We might have drawn from the bounty of the King Our Royal Father.

We think fit to have recourse to you, desiring you to supply Us with such
necessaries and subsistence, as may tend to the supportment of the Navy now
under Our Command.

And being thus furnished by you in this necessity, We shall immediately
discharge all ships of Merchandise which have been stayed by Our Fleet, and
shall carefully hereafter use Our utmost endeavors for protecting the Ships
and Goods, and secure the Trade and Commerce of the said City, and other his
Majesty's Cities, Cinque Ports, and Town, which we conceive to be the only,
proper, and natural employments of his Majesty's Navy; and for which, as for
other reasons, it has always been maintained out of the Customs paid to his
Majesty, out of which, as soon as it shall be in Our power, We shall take care
to have the said sum or sums repaid you. And so desiring a present supply, the
pressing necessities of the Fleet admitting no delay, We bid you heartily
farewell.

Given under our Hand and Seal, aboard the Fleet Royal, in the 24. Year of the
Reign of Our Royal Father the King. Subscribed CHARLES P.

By Letters from the Hague in Holland it is advertized, That the Prince of
Wales, and his council, has had some consultation touching the Earl of
VVarnicks anchoring near the Fleet Royal, and hearing of his Lordships great
proffers to the Fleet, viz. Indemnity and Money, His Highness posted toward
Goree, came aboard the Fleet, and expressed himself in several declaratory
speeches to the Seamen.

GEntlemen, and Fellow-Commoners. As we all languish apd groan under the
insuportable weight of the public oppression of the Land, so it is our duty to
struggle and strive jointly together for the relief of each other, for to our
Neighbor we are bound as to our selves; and we are all the sons of one Nation
and brethren by Nature, whose several Weal and woe is included and wrapped up
in the fold of one Commonwealth; that we must even stand or fall together. We
though we have our swords in our hands, cannot be without you, nor you without
us, in this day of public calamity, as we with you so you with us are
sufficiently sensible, which to all conscientious and judicious men may be
sufficient to tie us firmly together in one Common bond of unity against all
our oppressors, and opposers offreedome whatsoever, but in this we give you
the pre-eminence, for though we are with you in hear^ and affection, for the
principles of Common Right and freedom to the Laud, yet we must give you the
right hand of fellowship in appearing and going before us therein. For to the
great refreshments of our spirits we find, that God has provided yet thousands
for us, that have not bowed their knee to Baal, and are yet firm and untaynted
with the poysonus principles of oppression and Tyrany, as by your two late
Petions appears. And as you have bin an encouragement unto us, to raise up
your spirits, and put us upon action, so let us be an encouragement unto you to
pursue you with the uttermost vigor and might in those happy beginning of
yours, and we shall by Gods assistance second you with our most power against
all opposers whatsoever.

Finis.

