THE DECLARATION Of many thousands of the City of CANTERBURY, or County of KENT.

Concerning the late Tumult in the City of Canterbury, provokt by the Mayors
violent proceedings against those who desired to continue the celebration of
the Feast of Christ's Nativity, 1500 years and upwards maintained in the Church.

Together with their Resolutions for the restitution of His Majesty to his
Crown and dignity, whereby Religion may be restored to its ancient splendor,
and the known Laws of this Kingdom maintained.

AS ALSO, Their desires to all His Majesty's loyal Subjects within his
Dominions, for their concurrence and assistance in this so good and pious a
work.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1647.

THE DECLARATION Of many thousands of the City of Canterbury, or County of KENT.
Concerning the late Tumult in the City of Canterbury, provokt by the Mayors
violent proceedings against those who desired to continue the celebration of
the Feast of Christ's Nativity, 1500 years and upwards maintained in the Church.
THe long looked for Reformation of Church and Commonwealth, has been the
expectation of most men: happy they at first that could but put a finger, or
add a mite to this great and glorious work, or (as falsely and blasphemously)
the work of the Lord. How forward was the holy City of London to bring forth
their Treasure for the advancing of so pious a Design, their Money, Plate,
Jewels were not wanting; the common sort of people thought we should have had a
golden Age, that it should have been with them as in the days of Solomon, to
have silver and gold as plentiful as stones in the street; their zeal was so
hot, that it ever eat up many of them, they cannot recover it to this day. The
most part of the Kingdom has been deluded with vain pretenses of truth in
Religion, of liberty and property, of all earthly happiness that might be;
they expected England to have become a second Paradise. But what the Proverb of
old, is now to our sorrow found too true, the remedy of these pretenders to
Reformation is worse then the disease; the two Houses have sat above seven
years to hatch Cocatrices and Vipers, they have filled the Kingdom with
Serpents, blood-thirstie Souldi^^s, extorting Committees, Sequestrators,
Excisemen; all the Rogues and scumme of the Kingdom have they set on work to
torment and vex the people, to rob them, and to eat the bread out of their
mouths; they have raised a causeless and unnatural War against their own
Sovereign Lord and King, a most pious Christian Prince, contrary to their
Allegiance and duty, and have shed innocent blood in this Land. Religion is
only talked of, nothing done; they have put down what is good, and (as the
Church of Rome heretofore did) they lead us in an implicit blind way, we know
not what Faith to profess. Nay, Heresies and blasphemies condemned in General
Councils long before Popery had any growth in the Christian Church, are
revived; and though not publicly owned by our Reformers, yet winkt at, or at
least left unpunished. The Civil Government is doubtful: our fundamental
Laws so much talked of in this pretended Reformation, are now become only the
Votes of the two Houses: if they be pleased to take away our lives and fortunes
by a Vote, (as they did some of our dear Countrymen for performing their duty)
it is Law, though we never come to trial: the liberty and property of the
Subject (so much contended for) is wholly theirs, we but vassals and slaves to
their will; and their will is now our Law. There is now little mention made of
the King in any of their proceedings; they voted Him long since not to be in a
condition to govern: it is conjectured by us plain Countrymen, that they
esteem him but as a conquered Prince, subject now to their mercy; if he could
escape with life it were well; all Power and Authority is now monopolited and
confined within the verge of our omnipotent (yet monstrous) Parliament. The
greatest scruple is what to do, or how to dispose of this heavy burden of the
Kingdom, the King; if they should depose him, or take away his life, they fear
the people, because most of them yet take him for their King: they have (since
he came within their power) endeavored to vex and grieve him, by the debarring
him of the society and comfort of his Royal Consort, the enjoyment of his
children, the attendance of his faithful Nobility and Counselors, by removing
his trusty servants from him, denying any access of his loyal Subjects unto
him, keeping strict guards about him, urging him to the signing of such
Propositions, which might render him odious to his Subjects (As they have
justly made themselves already) and the scorn of all Kings and Nations: and
the end of all this is, to break his heart, and shorten his life; for that is
the only way to secure their own lives and estates. They would hold the people
in hand, that they are laboring to settle peace in this Kingdom, to relieve
Ireland and keep union with Scotland; But we understand that Scotland is not
pleased, Ireland to our knowledge is not releived, and this Kingdom much
discontented, and miserably divided. If Peace be so near unto us (as is
pretended) why have they voted a standing army of so many thousands to the
further grievance and impoverishing of the Land? Wherefore continue they so
many useless garrisons and County troops? Why lay they greater taxes upon the
people, and yet burden them with free quarter? The charge of the Kingdom is
increased, and yet they promise us sudden peace: Surely they must acknowledge,
that either they expect a forain enemy, or else intend to act such desperate
things against the King and Kingdom, as may justly provoke another war here by
insurrection of the people. And it is very well known, that the eyes of most of
the people of this land are opened, and they fully discern now their own
weakness in being over credulous, and the wickedness of the two Houses in
seducing them under specious pretenses, of Religion, Liberty, property and what
not? They have deluded the Scots also with the same arguments, and engaged them
in that cause of which the Scots begin now to repent, and be ashamed, and are
ready to vindicate the wrong done them by the two Houses, as also to restore
the Kings Majesty to his just rights, who is now imprisoned by them in the I Will
of Wight: to which design of the Scots signified in their late Declaration we
are ready to join our assistance, and desire the concurrence of all his
Majesty's loyal Subjects within this Kingdom, as hereafter we shall more
fully express.

The cause of this so sudden a posture of defense which we have put our selves
into, was the violent proceedings of the Mayor of this City of Carterbury and
his uncivil carriage in persuance of some petty order of the House of Commons
for hindering the celebration of Christ's Nativity so long continued in the
Church of God. That which we so much desired that day was but a Sermon, which
any other day of the week was tolerable by the orders and practice of the two
Houses and all their adherents, but that day (because it was Christ's birth day)
we must have none; that which is good all the year long, yet is this day
superstitious. The Mayor causing some of us to be beaten contrary to his oath
and office, who ought to preserve the peace, and to that purpose chiefly is the
sword of Justice put into his hands, and wrongfully imprisoned diverse of us,
because we did assemble our selves to hear the word of God, which he was
pleased to interpret a Riot; yet we were unarmed, behaved our selves civilly,
intended no such tumult as afterward we were forced unto: but at last seeing
the manifest wrong done to our children, servants, and neighbors, by beating,
wounding, and imprisoning them, we were moved to vindicate the wrong done them,
and to release them that were imprisoned, and did call unto our assistance our
brethren of the County of Kent, who very readily came in to us, and have
associated themselves to us in this our just and lawful defense, and do
concur with us in this our Remonstrance concerning the Kings Majesty, and
the settlement of Peace in this Kingdom.

Forasmuch therefore as the two Houses have exceedingly erred in exalting their
privileges above the Kings Prerogative, and outgone all former Presidents in
Parliament, by exercising an Arbitrary power and government over their fellow
subjects, have raised an unjust War against our Sovereign Lord and King, and
destroyed many of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonaltie of the Land, have
unjustly murdered (though executed as Malefactors) many of his Majesty's
loyal Subjects, some of our own County also, have suppressed the true
Protestant Religion, suffered all kinds of Heresies and Errors in the Kingdom,
have imprisoned or at least silenced and put down all the Orthodox C^ergy,
taken away the livelihood and being of many thousand Families, oppressed and
robbed the fatherless and widows, put grievous burdens upon the people,
unusual taxes of Proposition money, Excise, etc. which former Parliaments
never dreamed of: have imprisoned the Kings Majesty turned away his Chaplains
and Servants from him, have broken the Union betwixt England and Scotland, and
have render themselves odious to God and all good men.

We the Inhabitants of the City of Canterbury and County o Kent, do protest
against these exorbitant and wicked proceedings of the two Hou^es, as most
injurious to Religion, the Kings Majesty, and all his loyal Subjects, and
contrary to Gods holy Word and the known Laws of this Kingdom, and also
contrary to the trust reposed in them by those Countries, and Towns for which
they serve. And we will endeavor by Gods gracious assistance to restore
Religion to its ancient splendor and luster, release the Kings Majesty out of
thraldom and misery, and restore him to his just rights and power, whereby he
may call those men to account for all the blood they have caused to be shed,
for all the vast sums they have extorted from his subjects, and the wrong they
have done to him and the whole Kingdom. And in this our design we shall
endeavor the preservation of the honorable Constitution of Parliament,
(though those men have abused it) and all the just privileges thereof, as much
as our own lives and fortunes.

And we desire all his Majesty's loyal Subjects within his Dominions, readily
and cheerfully to concur with us, and assist us in this so good and pions a
work, if truth in Religion may again flourish, the King may be honored and
obeyed, every man restored to just rights, the oppressed may be eased, the
distressed releived, and a firm and lasting Peace settled within these three
Kingdoms, to the great joy and contentment of all the people thereof.

FINIS.

