A DECLARATION OF THE Northern Army Under the Command of Major General LAMBERT,
As it was sent unto the Well-affected Ministry, and people of the Kingdom of
Scotland;

Showing their willingness to hazard their lives for the peace and welfare of
both Kingdoms (in opposing theirs and the Kingdoms Enemies) for procuring their
Peace, notwithstanding themselves, at last, be denied to have any Benefit
thereby.

July.21 London, Printed by J. M. 1648.

A DECLARATION OF THE Northern Army Under the Command of Major General LAMBERT,
To the well-affected Ministry, and People of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
WE whose names are subscribed, Members of the Army, under the command of the
right Honorable THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Captain General of all the Parliaments
Forces in the Kingdom of England, being by the providence of God brought into
the Northern parts of this Kingdom, to oppose the common enemy, and the
disturbers of the Peace, both of this and the Kingdom of Scotland: And being
given to understand, by good hands, the sad and deplorable condition of the
godly and well-affected, our Brethren in Scotland, by reason of the height and
insolency of Malignants there; and through the goodness of God sympathizing
with their condition (as if it were our own) in this day of their suffering and
persecution: We are induced hereby to declare the integrity of our hearts, and
the sincerity of our intentions toward them.

That, as it pleased God to move the hearts of the godly there to yield relief
and assistance to the well-affected of this Kingdom, in the day of our
distress; we cannot but remember the same with all thankfulness, and own it
as an obligation upon our Spirits, to endeavor all possible assistance unto
them, which may fall within our poor powers, as some small return of that
kindness of theirs, never to be forgotten by us; And although through the
policy of Satan, and the workings of some ungodly men, there have bin monstrous
Representations of us to them, and many of them to us, whereby to divide us,
and (as we have found by woeful experience) thereby to gain the greater
advantage against both, for our mutu^l ruin: Yet we doubt not but God will
clear the name and innocence of both to each other, yea that we are Brethren;
and notwithstanding there may be some difference in things not Fundamental,
(through the various measures of light dispensed by God) yet in the main we
judge we all agree, unfeinedly desiring that the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, might in its own power and glory take upon the hearts of all men
so, as there might be one professor amongst us in word only, but in deed also,
and that we may convince the world thereof by a holy and righteous conversation
toward God and man.

We do declare from our hearts, as in the presence of God who knows them, that
we would not give any countenance or encouragement to any way or thing that
should be cleared to us to be Error, or contrary to the mind of Christ; and if
any thing be held by us, or any amongst us, that is so, it would be the
rejoicing of our souls to have that discovered to us, and by the power of the
Lords holy Spirit our selves or others to be reduced from it.

We are so far from seeking to supplant the Government by Presbytery, that (if
all power were given into our hands, (we profess before the Almighty Jehovah;)
rather then to disturb those who therein wait upon God, as on the worship which
they in conscience hold to be according to his Will; ^ we could engage our
lives to deliver them from the hands of any that would compel them to another
Form: And all that we should desire for our particulars, is but the like
Freedom; not that we ask any liberty to sin, to profaneness, looseness or
ungodliness of any kind, contrary to the Word and Will of God. That which
through the goodness of God we account our Crown, and our glory, is to be
serviceable in our generations; and if it may seem meet to him to use us in
this great work now on foot, as a succor or refreshment to his people in any
place, that very thing would be a sweet recompense of reward to us; yea we take
pleasure to hazard our lives, to the uttermost, in this work, though it should
be our portion, when the peace of others shall be redeemed (by us
instrumentally,) from their Captivity, our selves to be led into it: And if
after all this we shall be found, or thought to be a burden, we trust we shall
be enabled quietly to submit to any suffering or condition, unto which the good
Hand of our God shall lead us.

This Declaration is subscribed by many thousands, whose Names for brevity sake
are here omitted.

FINIS.

