A DECLARATION OF THE COMMONERS of ENGLAND, TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General
CROMWELL: CONCERNING

The Crown, Government, Liberty, and Privileges of the People; and the setting
of the Land free from all Taxes, Slavery, and Oppressions; according to the
Engagements, Vows, and Promises, both of Officers and Soldiers.

Likewise his Excellencies Resolution, to remove all Burdens and Oppressions
from the People; to advance Trading; to pluck down Tyanny; and to purge and
cast out all those, who are Enemies to the Peace and Freedom of this Nation.

ORdered to be forthwith printed and published; And appointed to be sent into
all Counties in England and Wales.

^^^don, Printed for G. HORTON 1652. feb: 13 1651

A Declaration of the Commoners of England to his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell.
THe Government of a commonwealth is the uniting of the people of a Nation
into one heart and mind; And blessed is that People, whose Earthly Government
is the Law of common Righteousness. When Israel was under a commonwealths
Government, they were a terror to all Oppressing Kings in all Nations of the
World; and so will England be, if this righteous Law become our Governor: But
when the Officers of Israel began to be covetous and proud, they made a breach;
and then the Government was altered, and fell into the hand of Kings like other
Nations, and then they fled before their Enemies and were scattered. But if we
look upon the customs of the Law it self, it is the same it was in the Kings
days, only the name is altered; as if the Commoners of England had paid their
Taxes, Free Quarter, and shed their blood, not to reform, but to baptize the
Law into a new name, from Kingly Law, to State Law; by reason whereof the
spirit of discontent is strengthened, to increase more Suits of Law, then
formerly was known to be And so as the Sword pulls down Kingly power with one
hand, the Kings old Law builds up Monarchy with the other.

And whereas if an Army be raised to cast out Kingly oppression, and if the
Hea^s of that Army promise a Commonwealths Freedom to the oppressed people, if
in case they will assist with person and purse; and if the people do assist,
and prevail over the Tyrant, those Officers are bound by the Law of Justice
(who is God) to make good their Engagements: And if they do not set the Land
free from the branches of the Kingly oppression, but reserve some part of the
Kingly power to advance their own particular Interest, whereby some of their
friends are left under as great slavery to them, as they were under the Kings;
Those Officers are not faithful Commonwealths soldiers, they are worse Tyrant
and Thieves then the King they cast out; and that honor they seemed to get by
their Victories over the Common wealths Oppressor they lose again, by breaking
promise and engagement to their opressed friends who did assist them. For what
difference is there between a professed Tyrant, that declares himself a Tyrant
in words, laws and deeds, as all Conquerors do, and him who promises to free me
from the power of the Tyrant if I Will assist him; and when I have spent my
estate and blood, and expect my bargain by his Engagements to me, he sits
himself down in the Tyrants chair, and takes the possession of the Land to
himself, and calls it his, and none of mine, and tells me he cannot in
conscience let me enjoy the freedom of the Earth with him, because it is
another man's right?

Such a soldier as this Engagement-breaker is neither a friend to the
Creation; nor to a particular Commonwealth, but a self lover, and a hypocrite;
for he did not fight to set the Earth free from the bondage of the Oppressor,
as he pretended by his Engagements; but to remove that power out of the others
^and into his own. And this is just like the Beasts who fight for mastery and
keeps it, not relieveing, but still Lording and Kinging over the weak. These
are Monarchical soldiers, not Commonwealths soldiers; and such a soldier is
a murderer, and his warfare is unlawful. But soldiers of true noble spirits
will help the week, and set the Oppressed free, and delight to see the
Commonwealth flourish in freedom, as well as their own gardens.

There is none of this true Nobility in a Monarchical Army, for they are all
self-lovers; the best is as a bryar, and the most upright amongst them is as a
Thorn: speak you Prophets of old if this be not true.

A Monarchial Army lifts up Mountains, and makes valleys, viz. Advances
Tyrants, and treads the Oppressed in the barren lanes of poverty.

But a Commonwealths Army is like John Baptist, who levels tha Mountains to
the Valleys, pulls down the Tyrant, and lifts up the Oppressed; and so makes
way for the spirit of Peace and Freedom to come in to rule and inherit the
Earth.

And by this which has been spoken, and Army may see wherein they may do well,
and wherein they may do hurt. Therefore you Army of Englands Commonwealth look
to it; the Enemy could not beat you in the field, but they may be too hard for
you by policy in Council, if you do not stick close to see Common Freedom
established.

WHereas many of Our Privy Council have with preposterous rigor, and
unreasonable severity, endeavored to kindle and blow up those horrid flames,
the sparks of Discontent, which want not the least of pre-disposed fuel for
an absolute Rebellion; and like some Cyclopick Monsters, whom nothing will
serve to eat and drink, but the flesh and blood of Our own Subjects; in whose
common welfare Our interest lies, as much as some men's does in their
perturbations: who think they cannot do well but in evil times; As for Our
resigning up the Crown and Government to the Prince Palatine, We are clearly of
another Judgment; And truly it is the unfeigned Desire of Our Heart, to wear
the Crown and Scepter no longer, then that His Glory may be Our End; and His
Word Our Rule: And upon that Glorious Account We shall leave the success of
all to God, who has many many ways to teach Us those Rules of true Reason,
and peaceable Wisdom, which is from above, tending most to Gods glory, and his
Churches good; which we think Our Self so much the more bound in Conscience to
attend with the most judicious zeal and care, by how much we esteem the Church
above the State; the glory of Christ above Our own; and the salvation of men's
souls above the preservation of their Bodies and Estates.

Since the publishing of this Declaration, there has been high Disputes
amongst the Nobility; and some have declared for the King of Scots, desireing a
contract of Marriage, the calling in of his person, the day prefixed, and the
general Attributes thereof to be solemnly declared, throughout the cities of
Heidelburgh, Switzaon, and other places: But others of the Nobility are
resolved to the contrary: However her Majesty has declared, that she desires
nothing more then the free Vote, and real Consent, of her People: touching
which, many of the Nobility inclines to her Majesty's gracious will and
pleasure; but others again seem to be of a contrary judgment.

And now the Commoners of England in this Age of the world are risen up in an
Army, and have cast out that Invasion of the Duke of Normandy, and have won
their Land and Liberties again by the Sword, if they do not suffer their
Councels to befool them into slavery again upon a new account. For if so be
that Kingly Authority be set up in your Laws again, King CHARLES has conquered
you and your Posterity by policy, and won the field of you, though you have
seemingly cut off his head. For the strength of a King lies not in the visible
appearance of his body, but in his Will, Laws, and Authority. But if you remove
Kingly Government, and set up true and free Commonwealths Government, then you
gain your Crown, and keep it, and leave peace to your Posterity.

FINIS.

