A DECLARATION Of several Members of the Churches of Christ; Being a few of the
despised Remnant in London, and elsewhere, that yet cleave close to the Cause
and Interest of our Lord Jesus, so much disowned and rejected in these times of
Apostacy, and in this hour of our great tribulation and temptation.
IN the Name of Jehovah-Nissi, (Exodus 17.15.) our Lord Christ Protector of his
people, King of Saints and Nations: To all that are sanctified in Jesus Christ,
whether in Churches, or ouT, that partake of the same Faith (with us) of our
Lord Jesus, especially the sealed number now upon their Watch, that have not
defiled their Garments, whose robes are washed with the blood of the Lamb, that
are redeemed from among men, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, in
these three Nations or elsewhere: We their unworthy Brethren, one with them in
the present Sufferings of our Lord Jesus and his Saints, in the behalf of our
selves and many others, do from the bottom of our hearts, wish like Faith
Grace, Light Zeal, Joy and Peace, which we enjoy from God the Father, and Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.
FOrasmuch as we believe many godly people in these three Nations and
elsewhere, are deceived (and therefore unsatisfied) concerning us in the
matters of our Faith, relating to the most precious Cause, Interest, and
Monarchy of the Lord Christ, (which we cleave unto) through misrepresentations
and false reports made of us and our Principles, by Persons, and Letters posted
about the Nations for that purpose, full of errors, mistakes, unchristian
censures, uncharitable reproaches and invectives, wherein the Adversaries have
all the advantage against us that worldly power can possess them with: But now,
that we may no longer (by a forced silence) be a dissatisfaction to our
friends, grievance to the truth, offense to the Saints, a trouble to our own
consciences, and advantage to the Adversaries, or be so much the Subject (as we
have been) of our Enemies malice, to forge their lies, jealousies, or evil
reports upon, nor yet be suspicious to many, and for signs and wonders to most
in the Commonwealth, as if we were monsters, and not men; infidels, and not
believers, enemies to Government, and not Orators for it day and night, as God
has appointed it: We shall therefore (in the behalf of thousands more (we
hope) one with us herein) in all faithfulness, meekness, and clearness, declare
unto you, (and to all the world) how far we are engaged in this most glorious
(though crucified) cause of Christ, (maugre all opposition of Men or Devils) in
as little room as this short Narrative will allow us, being awakened thereunto
every day. Yet it cannot be expected, that in this Paper we should relate all
our grievances, lay down all our grounds, or answer all Objections, (which we
hope to do hereafter) but only so far as may make obvious to any unbyassed eye
or understanding, the just rise of our Discontents, Troubles, and
Dissatisfactions, and as may exonerate our souls in the sight of Heaven and
earth.

O our bowels! our bowels! our hearts even ache, and are pained within us, to
hear the doleful and daily groans of Gods people, crying out, O where are our
Deliverers and Saviors! The reeds that we leaned upon, have pierced our hands,
and we bleed! and after our eyes fail with looking for Freedom, Peace, and
Light, behold Darkness, Oppression, and Distraction, more then ever! and what
hope is left us? And all this through the declension of the Armies first
Principles, and former Declarations, extant to the view of the World: Witness
page 14, 15. of the Remonstr. Albans, and page 66. They urge it upon the
grounds of Common right, Freedom, and Safety, that Parliaments be by a certain
succession, Annually, or Biennially. And in their Declar. June 14. 1647. page
8, 9. they declare this so essential and fundamental to Freedom, as that it
cannot, nor ought it to be denied or withholden from us: and that arbitrary or
absolute power in any person or persons during life, does not render that State
any better then Tyranny, nor the people subjected thereto any better then
vassals. And therefore they say, page 9. We are so far from designing or
complying to have an absolute or arbitrary power signed or settled for
continuance in any persons whatsoever, as that (if we might be sure to obtain
it) we cannot wish to have it so in the persons of any whom we could most
confide in, or who should appear most of our own opinions or principles, or
whom we might have most personal assurance of, or interest in, but that the
Authority of this Kingdom in Parliament, may ever stand, and have its course.
Yet for all this, were not the last Parliament dissolved, for that they would
rule as Saints, (or part of the fifth Monarchy, for Christ?) and for doing that
the former Parliament neglected, and therefore were dissolved? and for doing
that which the Army and good people had many years declared to be their duty to
do? viz. Remonstr. p. 20. And have not some by Printing opprobriously and
injuriously abused those precious Members that stood for the Magistracy and
Ministry of the Gospel or Unction, as if they would have had no Government, no
Ministers, nor propriety at all? and, after all their integrity, cast an Odium
upon them, and upon the name of Saints, yea, and upon the Interest of Christ,
against which they have opened the mouths of many thousands to blaspheme? O
these are the swords which pierce our hearts! Besides, does not this personal
interest now up, look too much alike that which God has confounded and stamped
upon before our eyes? in the same predicament of Pride, Profaneness, Persecution
of Saints, and Oppression, with them that went before? Oh! are not the Wicked
exalted on every side, and such taken up again, ( Malignants and others) as not
long since they most declaimed against? and are not the Saints (and them only,
or mostly) afflicted, cast out of their Assemblies from praying and preaching?
and some of the faithfullest of them in all these Wars, now closely imprisoned
(for their Consciences, and this Cause of Christ) from the common air, yea,
cast among malefactors condemned; threatened, reproached, and trampled on? Oh!
can we have hearts so hard, as to mention these, and (many more) suchlike
effects, without yerning and mourning? Besides, are not the new Court of Tryers
at White Hall for Ministers, of like make with the Bishops
High-Commission-Court? The graven image of the worldly power, creating a
worldly clergy, for worldly ends, highly scandalous, and against the rule of
the Gospel and faith of Christ, and as much to be exploded as the Pope and
Prelate? Notwithstanding they assume the title of Orthodox and soundness of
opinion to themselves, and upon that account charge others (that are not one
with them in their carnal and Antichristian interest) with Errors and rashness.
But, as the Declaration of the Army to Scotland (page 15.) says, This has
been found in all ages of high advantage to them that assumed it, that it were
strange if those (Civil Tryers) should not have used it to smite them withal,
whom they would render odious and destroy. And is not this against their own
Declaration to Scotland, page 6. where they say, That that Church Government
which is of God, God's own means, viz. his Word, must establish, without a
busy meddling with, or engaging of the Authorities of the world? And the Lord
General CROMWELL in his Letter to the Kirk-Assembly from Dunbar, page 11. says,
It is worth consideridg, how those Ministers take into their hands the
instruments of a foolish shepherd, that meddle with worldly Policies, or
Earthly Powers, to set up that which they call the kingdom of Christ, which
indeed is neither it, nor if it were, would such means be found effectual for
that end, and neglect, and trust not to the Word of God, the Sword of the
Spirit, etc. Is not this all true in the Tryers? And is not this also against
their own Remonstrance Albans, page 20. where they declare it the Parliaments
part, to protect religious men, and take away all the corrupted Forms of
outside-Religion, and (National) Church State, whether imposed without Law, or
rooted in Law in times of Popish Ignorance or Idolatry, or of Gospels dimmer
light; and also to take away the dependence of the (National) clergy in Civil
Laws and Ecclesiastical Affairs, which they had upon the King; or that interest
of the Clergy in Civil Laws and Affairs, which the craft of both in length of
time had wrought for each other: But that the King's part was to discountenance
the Godly, or any conscience obliging above or against humane or outward
Constitutions, and to uphold and maintain the Civil dependence of the Clergy,
and their Church Matters under him. Our bowels are so moved at these things,
that we cannot refrain from bewailing our condition, after so vast a stream and
treasure of the blood, tears, prayers, lives, and spoils of our dearest
relations. O did we ever think to see so many hopeful Instruments in the Army,
Churches, and elsewhere, to be so fully gorged with the flesh of Kings,
Captains, and Nobles? etc. ( i. e. with their Lands, Manors, Estates, Parks,
and Palaces) so as to sit at ease, and comply with Antichrist, the World,
Worldly Church and Clergy: Oh! how has the Cup of the Whore foxt and
enchanted men! viz. with the wine of the wrath of her Fornication, to commit
sin with her daily, (which the sober blush to see) and to paint her over
afresh, for New lovers to lie down with, to their utter ruin! O the Mystery of
Iniquity works apace! This subtle spirit and soul of Antichristianism (in a New
body) has bewitched many of the Common sort, and is wonderful cunning to
deceive; although by this universal Falling away amongst us, the man of sin is
(blessed by Jehovah) more discovered then ever, who must be destroyed with the
breath of Christ's mouth, and brightness of his coming. Yet under a sad sense
of so many fresh Assaults which the Saints meet with daily by outward violence,
and Ecclesiastical tyranny, and in a clear apprehension of that heavy Doom and
Precipice hard by (we verily believe) upon all those Powers and Interests of
men, which keep warm the Seat of the bloody Beast for the Mother of harlots:
And after many solemn meetings and seekings of God for a special presence,
rolling our selves only on his Arm, having no carnal confidence (blessed be
our wise God) now left us to look upon, we are fully persuaded in our souls,
that he who has hitherto most eminently appeared, and plainly owned this
blessed Cause (which the Apostates of the times have cast aside, and we yet
cleave unto) in England, Ireland, Scotland, and elsewhere, according to the
faith and prayers of his poor despised people, that he will yet appear, and
that more eminently (and terribly too) to save then ever, and witness to the
righteousness of his own Cause, and the innocence of his servants that suffer
therein, in great mercy and pity, passing by the failings and infirmities of us
his poor creatures. Therefore though we are sure that God will vindicate His
own Name to purpose, ere long, under so much reproach yet in the dread of that
Name, we appeal unto the Lord, who will be a swift witness against as if we
utter these things in hypocrisy, or for base ends, or for any carnal personal
interest whatsoever, if we are not in the sincerity and simplicity of our
hearts (so far as we have one true grain of grace in us) for Christ alone, and
his poor rejected Cause and People, that we may ease and exonerate our selves
in the sense we have of our duty herein, and be withdrawn (to the eye of all)
from partaking in the crying sins and Apostacy of the Times; with all
faithfulness, holy awe, and humility, we profess and declare,

1. For this Cause and Kingly interest of our Lord Jesus, in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, or elsewhere, according to the several Declarations of the Army,
sealed to with the blood of thousands of the precious Saints, the cry of whose
blood is for Christ, according to the Declaration of the Army to Scotland, page
36, 37, 38, 39. who declare, They were stirred up by the Lord to assist the
Parliament against the King, for this end, To bring about the destruction of
Antichrist, and the deliverance of his true Church and people; and upon this
simple account was it, that they engaged in the Wars of the three Nations,
against all Opposers of this work of Jesus Christ; having these things singly
in their eye, viz. the destruction of Antichrist, and advancement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and deliverance and reformation of his Church, and the
establishment of Christ's Ordinances according to his Word, and the just Civil
Liberties of Englishmen. And this they declare, with the loss of many precious
Saints, page 38. That they engaged against the late King and his Monarchy, as
one of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints: which act
(say they) they are confident God will own against all Kingdoms or Nations that
will oppose them, and that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be King. So page 39.
they declare, they value the Churches Then owning the Congregated Churches, as
appears by Letters written to Mr. Feak, and Mr. Simpson, and the Churches that
walk in fellowship with them, and others, etc.
of Christ, who are the lot of Gods inheritance, a thousand times beyond their
own lives; and that it is their duty to persevere therein to the utmost hazard
of their lives: and that the Lord made them instruments to vex all in his sore
displeasure, that take counsel against Christ, whom the Lord has anointed and
decreed King: And that they were not merely the servants of man; and that they
not only proclaimed Jesus Christ, King of Saints, to be King, but that they
would submit to him (alone) upon his own terms, and admit him (only) to the
exercise of his Royal Authority. Therefore say they, in p. 40. We beseech you,
in the fear of God, look about you: for our Lord Jesus is coming, etc. Now
accordingly we have and do declare for this Royal Interest of Christ, which
ought to be set up, (which so much blood has been poured out for like water in
the three Nations.) This Cause of Christ was magnified by God, in answering the
Dunbar-Appeal against the King of Scots: The English Army appealing to God,
according to the Act of Parliament, 1648. declaring it High Treason to set up
Charles Stuart, or any Other Person, Chief Magistrate in England or Ireland, or
any of the Dominions thereunto belonging. And as our Appeal was for No King but
Jesus, (by which were the greatest Victories obtained that we had) the Scots
Appeal on the other side was for A King, or personal interest of Man, etc. Gods
Answer was so full and wonderful on the No King's side but Jesus, and according
to the Act of Parliament, (upon which the Army marched against the King of
Scots) that all Scotland was given in in few months, and their Armies
destroyed: And, to use the very words of the Act of Parliament, Die Martis, 17
September. 1650. this Answer was enriched with so many remarkable circumstances
as is to be admired at by succeeding Generations; evidencing such a divine
presence, as the Commonwealth can never be thankful enough for: And that it was
given in as a Seal or Confirmation from heaven, of the justness of this Cause,
after solemn Appeals made on both sides to God himself, the Righteous Judge in
this War between England and Scotland: and that God did so decide the
Controversy (himself) was of such value and high consequence, that Generations
to come may taste the sweet of it, etc. Besides all this, much more we might
mention (of their own) for this Cause and Kingly interest of Christ, which we
are resolved to adhere to, and (if the Lord will enable us) never to recede
from, but to live and die in it. Neither is it a Resisting of Government, (as
some say of us) but a Reforming of it (which our Principles lead us to)
according to the Word. And seeing the Army and Parliament have often declared,
as page 7. of Declar. June 14. 1647. No resisting of Magistracy to side with
Just Principles; upon which Maxim they assisted the Parliament against the
King; and that it is one Witness of God in the world to carry on a Testimony
against the Injustice and Unrighteousness of men, and against the miscarriages
of Governments, when corrupted, or declining from their Primitive and Original
Glory. We use their own words. It Is true, Every soul must be subject to the
higher Powers; and it is in obedience thereunto, that we are subject to Christ,
and stand by this his Cause (as we do) so long as the Controversy is not now
(with us) between man and man, (as was wont to be in other Ages) but it is
between Christ and man: Which of these two then shall have the absolute power
of Government in the Nations? And who are the resisters of the higher powers
which are of God, those that own, or those that oppose Christ's claim? Judge ye!

2. Because the Boutefeus of the Times are ever blowing up the flames upon us,
and incensing the present worldly powers and others against us, with their
lying accusations and evil surmisings, as the Adversaries did, Ezra 4. and
Nehem. 6. against Judah and Jerusalem, (to render them odious to Artaxerxes)
that they intended to Rebel when they had done their building; and that if he
suffered them to go on, it would hinder his Revenue, etc. and so Sanballat sent
Nehemiah word, that he and the Jews intended to Rebel, when they had done with
the walls they were about: and all this, to weaken the hands of them that had a
mind to work: Therefore to avoid such jealousies and fears, we do freely
declare against all Carnal Plots, Devilish Designs, or Ungodly Combinations of
Men whatsoever, as inconsistent with those gracious Principles which have (we
hope) carried us (and yet do daily) into a Spiritual Warfare and hot contest
for this Cause of Christ, by the Word, Faith, Prayer, and Solemn Appeals unto
our God, the righteous Judge of heaven and earth. And indeed, being (thus)
armed with the whole armor of God, we dare (as before) wrestle with
principalities and powers; and, through the grace of our God, we are not afraid
of their Armies or Numbers, but (although we have not the least Reliance on any
arm of flesh, yet) we can bid defiance unto all the Enemies of this glorious
Cause of Christ contended for by the Saints, with those means that God's Word
leads us unto; for which, our dear brethren are imprisoned, and suffer
persecution at this day. Therefore in a just and necessary defense of what is
dearer to us then our lives, (bought with price of the Blood of Christ, and
thousands of his dearest Saints) we call Heaven and Earth to witness between Us
and our Brethren that have denied us and this Cause! For in Cases not clearly
or properly under man's judgment, or where it is not easy for man to give a
certain judgment, the Engaged upon sure Principles and Pretenses do center in
Appeals to God for Judgment: and so did the two Tribes and a half, Josh. 22.
for that it is then the proper work of God to bear witness, and give righteous
judgment: which as he has always done, soon or later, clearer or darker,
after the Appeal is made to him; so in this last age and part of the world he
has made more haste then formerly to judgment, and given it more quickly,
speedily, and terribly, and made his own Arm so bare therein, as all men might
see it: witness the foresaid Appeal at Dunbar. In the same Cause the Appeal is
now made (by us) again. All which has induced us to take up the Word of God,
Faith, and Prayer (by Solemn Appeals to the just Judge of heaven and earth) in
the like and the same Cause. A few particulars of the Matter whereof, take as
follows.

1. About their Vows, Declarations, Promises, Engagements, made unto God for
Christ and his interest, Psalm. 66.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 23.21. Eccles. 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
in time of their great distress: all which, are they not broken, both as to
Magistracy, Ministry, Churches, Liberty, and the Right of the Saints of the
most High? We appeal to God.

2. Whether an espousing of the fame, or a like Interest with that which God
has destroyed before our eyes, and rejecting this blessed Cause of Christ,
King of the Nations, for a Personal Cause of Man, as we now conceive, Jer. 3.1.
Mal. 2.11. be not a provocation of God in the highest degree, and too full a
testimony of the foulest Hypocrisy and Selfishness in them, whose former
Profession and Declarations obliged them to the contrary?

3. Whether a persecuting and imprisoning some of the choicest and holiest
servants of Christ, in the present light, and work of this Generation, whilst
the Wicked are exalted on every side, and such as were cast by, taken up again,
Isai. 49.24, 25. Jer. 13.17. be of God, or no?

4. Whether the violence and force, flattery, or any other ways which are used,
to compel any of us, against our Consciences, to prostrate to men's carnal
interests, and to sin against the light, be according to their former pretended
Principles, or the Word of God?

5. Whether their unjust and unchristian accusations of us in the face of the
world, are not full of loathsome and cruel lies, whiles they spread about, That
we are against Magistracy, Ministry, Propriety, Ordinances, and the like?
Whether it be so or no, we appeal to him that judges righteously.

6. Their vexing and rising up against the Spirit of God, which they call an
Impostor, and the false, devilish, fanatic spirit of Blackfriars, or
Alhallows-meeting; speaking blasphemously against it, and that frequently:
wherein we appeal to the Lord to judge, Whether that Spirit that is among them,
leading to Pride, Pomp, Worldliness, Carnality, Lying, Persecution, and
Blaspheming; or that Spirit which leads us day and night to the duty of Faith,
Assembling, Praying, Preaching, Exhorting, and building up in the present Truth
contested against by them, and to Comforting, Counselling, and Quickening up one
another every day to hold fast our Profession without wavering, to Self-denying
and Mortification, that we may not mind the present world, nor the vanities
thereof: whether this Spirit, our infirmities excepted, or theirs, which acts
them, be of God; and which is the devilish, worldly, and deluding spirit. Isa.
63.10. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

7. Is not pomp, pride, and vanity in Court and elsewhere, now up again, (in
some respects more then ever) so much contested and inveighed against for so
many years together, by themselves and others? Whether by these (amongst other
things) they have not opened the mouths of the Enemies to blaspheme Christ and
his Spirit? to reproach his Cause, and to harden their hearts? And whether they
have not given advantage to Chapter St. or some others, to invade us, our lives,
our relations, afresh, by open Wars, inundations of blood and mischief, so as
seems to make void and uneffectual many years Wars, with vast treasure,
expense, and blood?

8. Whereas they say, we are all for Wars, and would have no Peace with the
nations round about; we appeal to God therein, whether we are not for the best,
safest, and lasting (godly) Peace? and, were it God's will, could wish no more
blood might be shed! Although we would not willingly see a Peace (worse then
War) made with the nations, against the Word of God, Safety and Liberties of
the good people, (for which so many have bled both by land and sea) and upon
such terms too, as makes more for the interest of some men, then for the
Public; or upon such Articles (as might make us blush for shame, at this time
of the Day, and after so many outgoings of God in the midst of us, as have not
so much as one Article for the Lord Jesus or his Saints, (that are in the
present work of this Generation, concerning Christ's Kingdom or Interest, to
subscribe unto, Number. 33.52, 53. to the end. Exodus 23.32, 33, and 34. Chap.
12.13.

Upon these (and many other) Grounds, we are induced (and are resolved, in the
strength of Christ) to keep up the Altar Josh. 22.34.
ED, and continue our Appeal, until the Lord does answer in justice, and yet in
much mercy, to his poor little remnant, (which we are persuaded will be
speedily) as Luke 18.7, 8. And if men will (yet) needs blind their eyes, and
harden their hearts, (we could wish it be not to their destruction) yet we do
bless our heavenly Father that has opened our eyes, and kept our feet from
falling, (with them) that we can so comfortably see the things that concern our
(best) peace, according to the Law and the Testimony, in the sure Word of
Prophecy. Blessed be JEHOVAH. Amen, Amen.

3. But thirdly and lastly, for that we find much Misunderstanding among some,
and Misrepresentations among most, of the Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ
in the Nations, which the holy Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testament,
do clearly and plentifully declare, with a positive period to the Worldly,
Heathenish Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions of men, as they are now executed
in the Nations of the world: And whereas it is also upon the hearts of many of
the choice servants of God, that in this present Age the Lord JEHOVAH is
setting up the fifth Kingdom, (as Dan. 2.44. and 7.22, 26, 27. Zech. 21.) which
shall not be left to other people, but shall break in pieces all the four
kingdoms, and remain for ever and ever; and that (at this time) when as the
fourth Monarchy is partly broken in these Nations, that Christ may be the only
Potentate, the King of kings, and of all Nations, 1 Timothy 6.15. Micah 4.7. Zech.
9.9, 10. Col. 1.16. Heb. 2.8. Rev. 11.15. and 17. Chap. 14. and 19. Chap.
15.16. Now finding this (the present Truth) so much opposed by the National
Rulers and their Clergy, yea, and by some godly people and Church Members,
accounted Orthodox, who cannot endure this day of Christ's coming; We therefore
are resolved, according to the presence and assistance of the Lord with us, to
entertain a serious Consideration and Debate for the benefit of all others,
touching the premises, viz. of the Laws, Subjects, Extent, Rise, Time, Place,
Offices, and Officers of the fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom, whereby the World must
be governed according to the Word of God, without the mixture (as now is) of
Men's Laws and Inventions, whether in respect of Magistracy or Ministry,
Church or Civil affairs: which Debate we intend to hold once a week in this
City of London: And we desire our beloved brethren which are one with us in the
present Truth and sufferings, whether in Churches or out, whether in City or
Country, (that are enlightened) to take special notice of it, for this end, that
they may enjoy the like freedom with us in those Meetings and Debates, as often
as they please to come. And, if the Lord give us the liberty, we do purpose to
proceed with the Debate of it from this day onward, until we have taken up a
full and clear Narrative thereof (so far as shall appear to us) out of the
Scriptures, fit to publish to the view of all men, that our Principles in that
point of the fifth Monarchy may be fully known, with desire to know what any of
our Adversaries (now against us) shall have to say to us or to our Principles
therein; who are contented with all our souls (the Lord knows) to be convinced
of any Error or Mistakes by the Word of Truth: But we think not imprisoning or
persecuting us, a competent or fit way to convince our consciences, if we were
in Errors, as they pretend.

And although we need no Law of men to allow us this Liberty, it being our
Birthright in Christ among Christians, and so fully warranted by the Word of
God, and practice of Primitive Saints, yet if we should condescend to the
Captious of our times, we could tell them, The Instrument entitled, The
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in the five
and twentieth Article declares, That Liberty shall be given to discover and
confute Error and Heresy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine: All
which the Engager, fol. 46. has promised in the presence of God to observe,
and cause to be observed, to his power; subscribed, O. CROMWELL. In the mean
time, men would do well to take heed of blaspheming, reproaching Christ, his
Spirit and his Monarchy, as they do daily (for which our hearts are grieved
within us) and to search the Scriptures whether these things be so or no. For
as the Lord Cromwell writes, in his own Letter to the Kirk of Scotland, The Word
of the Lord may be to some a word of judgment, that they may fall backward,
and be broken, and snared, and taken; there may be a spiritual fullness, which
the world may call a drunkenness, (or giddiness) Act. 2. O that we might
beseech such in the bleeding bowels of Christ, (crucified before our eyes) to
think it possible they may be mistaken! Though the Great Ones, and Wise Ones,
Priests and Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, and Orthodox Professors (so
accounted of the times) were all on their side; yet a little handful of the
weak ones may have the Truth (though but the despised persecuted truth) on
their side. And we do in the tenderness of our hearts and affections to all
that are faithful, beg of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus, (who is coming to
reign righteously and gloriously) that they will have nothing to do with them
that are guilty of so great sins, lest partaking of their sins, they partake
also of their Plagues. And we hope the Lord will enable us to undergo the
sharpness of this Day, for our dear Christ and his Cause, through the
Reproaches, Imprisonments, Persecutions, unjust Charges, uncivil Raylings, or
un-Gospel Carriages, which (...) have, or are like to meet with, whether less
or more, so we may drink out of Christ's Cup, and pledge our Master, who first
drank to us the bitter Potion.

We shall close at present with our heartiest Prayers and Supplications, That
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would in his due time cast down all
those carnal, earthly, cruel, and political Combinations of men (of all sorts)
that would not have him to Reign over us, but set up themselves, and their own
corrupted Interests, in the room of that Scepter of righteousness which he has
given into the hands of his dear Son; that he would by his Spirit (resting and
abiding upon you and us) keep up all our hearts in a constant and patient
waiting for his coming till he comes: Even so come quickly, Lord Jesus come
quickly.

After this Copy is subscribed, you are desired to return it with all speed
possible, to your affectionate friend and brother in our Lord Jesus,


