A DECLARATION of the Great and weighty Affairs and Matters of Consequence
concerning this Kingdom.

Also the several Orders made by the House of Parliament, March 22, 1641.

With some Remarkable Occurrences from Holland, and the Kingdom of IRELAND.

Printed by Order of the House of Parliament, March 22. 1641.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

Express Commands from both the Honorable Houses of Parliament.
WHereas the Abuses and Usurpations of the Papists in their Religion, has
given cause to the poor Subjects of this his Majesty's Kingdom, to present
diverse Peitions unto this Honorable Assembly; therein desiring relief and
deliverance from their eminent grievances, appearing by reason of their too
much power over them, and overmuch duty toward the Pope; by which occasion
they deny that authority and supremacy belonging to his Majesty over the
Church, contributing the same unto his Holiness, who is their supreme head; as
also, being men of abilities for the most part, they use extreme rigor toward
chose Tenants, who are Protestants, not only in the way of exaction of their
due before the time it should grow payable, but also by raising their Rents
yearly, by renewing of Fines, and laying other exactions upon them; we
therefore having been moved often in this behalf, taking it into our
consideration have Ordered concerning the same, as follows.

1 That all Papists and Recusants within this his Majesty's Kingdom of England
and Wales, of what condition, state, or ability soever, denying to take the
Oath of Supremacy, administered unto them by a Justice of the Peace, be
forthwith committed to prison in his Majesty's Goaie next adjoining, unless
they give security for their appearance at the next Sessions, their surety
being bound in the value of 1000. l. to produce the party, or parties so
denying the same.

2 Concerning those Knights and Gentlemen within this Kingdom, who are
Recusants, and whose Tenants are Prokestants: It is Ordered, that the Rent of
their Lands, Leases House, or house-roome be valued and paid for according to
the proportion that other Neighbors adjoining, shall pay to their Protestant
Landlords, there being deducted out of the said sum upon every pound to be
distributed to the poor, the sum of twelve pence.

3 That as for those persons Papists, who shall be proved to have any mutual
concurrence with the Rebels in Ireland in these ways, either for supplies of
Victual, contribution of money, loan, or such like, their goods be confiscate
to the King, and those that shall desire the same, shall have a reward from the
Parliament.

The Order concerning fortifying His Majesty's Forts and Castles.
THere being likewise diverse Petitions delivered to this Honorable Assembly,
to free them from those fears of Innovations, by reason of his Majesty's Forts
in the County of South-hampton, and the Isle of Wight, not being Fortified as
they ought to have been in some of them; there being not above two, others
three pieces of Ordnance, fit for service: also others not having Powder and
Ammunition to ressist Innovations; For the amendment of which, and Removal of
the Country Grievances, it was Ordered:

1 That the Cattles of Yarmouth, the Cows Hurst Castle, Southside Castle, Dunse
Castle Morby Port, Newston Port in the Isle of Wight, the Castles of Weymouth,
Purbeck; Nelson. Holibey, Darkingdon, Mockliffe, Painswick, Harrowbey, Bantum,
Walloway, Aggerton, and Vestoll in the County of Dorsot. The Castles of Tanton
Dean, Appleby, Brownsoad, Bridgwater, Pimbley, and Norton in the County of
Somerset, with all other his Majesty's Castles within the aforesaid Dominions,
should be every one provided with 100. of the best and most ablest men, near
and neighbouringly adjoining to the said Castles, chosen out of the Train-Bands
of the said Counties; and such as shall not fail in performance of their duty
therein.

2. That every one of the said Castles be fortifled with ten pieces of Ordnance
at the least, well mounted, and sit for service.

3 That the Captain of the Castle be a man noted for a Religious person, and
not given to the Catholic Roman Religion, but to be careful of performing
that duty imposed upon his charge. But if in case they shall prove otherwise,
upon just complaint and proof thereof be discharged; according to the Order
now Enacted.

4 That to every of the aforesaid Castles, there be allowed as many Gunnes as
Ordnance; besides, every Gunner to have his Matise or man to attend him.

An Order made by the House of Parliament, concerning the suppressing of those
men, that are gathered together in a warlike manner in the County of Durham.
WHereas by Letters written by the Sheriff, and diverse Justices of peace of
the County of Durham, to an Honorable Member of this House, and this day read
in this house, It does appear that great Multitudes of People have of late
assembled themselves at several times, in several places of that County, to
the number of three or four Hundred in one Company in Warlike manner, upon a
pretense of pulling down some inclosurs, which they have already done in a
very outrageous manner in some parts of the County, and threaten to do the
like in other parts, And for that, this House conceives that such tumultuous
and disorderly meetings are altogether in themselves unlawful, and may in
these times prove of very dangerous consequence. It is therefore this day,
Ordered by the House of Commons, that the Justices of peace of the said County
shall make diligent inquitie after the names of such Persons, as were the
chief Leaders in the said tumultuous assemblies, or any of them and certify
their names forthwith to this House, that such speedy and exemplarie courses
may be held against them as to Law and Justice appertains. And for the f^e it
is farther Ordered, that if any tumultuous assemblies or routs of people, upon
any pretense whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be made in any part of the
said County, that the said Justices of peace and Sheriff shall by all ways
and means possible endeavor to suppress the same, and that if need be, the
Sheriff shall go with the power of the County to arrest such offenders and
Riotours and shall Arrest them, and the said Justices and Sheriff shall record
that which they shall so find done in their presence against the Law, and if it
happen that such trespassers and offenders shall be scattered and departed
before the coming of the said Justices and Sheriff, that the said Justices or
any three or two of them shall diligently enquire after such assembly and Rout
of people so made, and shall do therein, what by the Statute and Laws of this
Realm they are enabled to do, and they are hereby further required to
certify the names of offenders and their further proceedings in the premises
to this House, That in case such offenders shall by their Multitudes as
otherwise evade such punishment as the Justices of the Peace can inflict upon
them.

Then this House may take the same into further consideration and take such
courses for Punishing the offenders as inJustice shall be thought meet.

Nevertheless this House does further declare, that if any Person or Persons
whatsoever be injured by any enclosure of late made in this County without just
Warrant of Law or consent of parties upon their address to this House by
Petiton otherwise of their just complaint. This House will be careful to take
speedy course for their relief as shall be agreeable to Justice. And will
also take into consideration in due time the Petition now remaining before
them: against the Bishop of Durham and others, for their inclosuers. And the
Sheriff of the County is likewise hereby required to publish this Order that
it may be taken notice of throughout the County.

The Coppie of a Letter, written by Master William Nowton, one of the Gentleman
Vshets unto the Lady Elizabeth, unto his Brother Francis Newton, Esquire and one of
the Four Squires of the Body to his Majesty.
From the Hage, March the 18. New style, 1641. Brother,
WE are here at the Hage, but in little better case, as touching fears and
Iealousies, then you are in England: true, the matter of the Prince of Orange
is seemingly composed, J wish I could say ended, fire raked up, may possibly
appear, yea and flame: The States will not trust him with moneys. and paying
of the Army, as formerly, but will set up and create a new Officer for that
purpose, this sometimes discontents his Highness, the Governor of Bergin up
Zone, that town of so great strength, being once a near servant to his
Highness, and brought up a long time under him, in very near services, and
preferred unto that great place of trust by the Princes mediation, him would
the States now very feign remove; but the talk goes here that he will not
hearken to it, having that great garrison firm on his side; as it is feared
upon too just grounds; the Prince has all the Army, so that we are not yet
here quite clear of all furmizes of after claps the Burgers in the Towns,
plainly give out, that they fear the Prince has been aforehand with them, and
one of the Burgemasters of Flushing, openly in my Mr. the Princes-presence
Chamber, told my Lord Goring, in my hearing, that they had just cause to fear,
that the Princes Sons Marriage with the eldest daughter of the King of great
Britain, had set the Prince on such a high strain, that shortly he doubted
either their ruin or his own, pray God things stand as they were, for
unwonted aspiring thoughts, produce many times enterprises more pleasing then
successful, if distempers should again break out here: I think we must be
forted to come and visit you in England, truth is, the States General have
never the better opinion of the Prince since this match, some think the worse,
nay their usual respects are something colder toward my Lady, and Master, who
J dare say upon oath, is heartily grieved for this difference, and
discorrespondencie between the Prince and them, and has no interest or
partnership but sorrow in in it, and who must reap disconvenience by it, and
may account this to the rest of her crosses the Queens entertainment at the
Hage, is in my very soul more royal then hearty the Dutch liberality is
almost at an end and the Queens entertainment begins to slacken with them,
only his Highness houlds on his wonted nobleness in chearing her, they set
her Majesty a day, that they would be rid of her, if so it please or stand
with her occasions, Proclamation is made against your Parliament delinquents,
forbidding them strictly to repair hither during her Majesty's abode here upon
pain of imprisonment, and sending back into England with strict guard, has
been here published in all Towns and Dominions of the States, yet two have
bravely adventured to kiss her hand, who came hither wonderfully well
disguised and walked not openly in Court, lay in the Prince of Oranges
ownelodging, and after two days took leave to go to Brusiels, God knows the
Queen is very narrowly warched here, as a personage of her quality may be, and
I durst pawn my life the Parliament has some agents here merely to attend
that business, and three of them are in my Conscience L. O. S. S. J. H. Her
Majesty would have gone to Cullen, to have attended upon her Mother, then to
Brussels, but was denied, the Prince of Orange seemed very forward to
accomplish her desire in both, as far as in his power, but he was not so
forward, but she found the Dutch as froward, who absolutely denied in plain
terms, studying all the ways they can to gratify and comply with the
Parliament, not caring who they displease, so they satisfy them, I verily
think the Queen as the matter stands will not trouble them long here, and that
ye shall have her in England yet a good while before Easter.

Thus hoping your welfare, and all our contents from his Highness Court at the
Hage this present Friday, March the 18., J remain your ever true and loving
Brother and Servant,

Will. Newton.

March 22.
Very Joyful News from Jreland.
Master John Ha^kredge:
I Have written by the two last Posts, and now J have gotten a lame hand: but
having good News, it shall trot to impart it unto you. The last Saturday the
Lord Moore and Sir Henry Titchbourne fallyed out of the Town, and fell upon
the enemies, and drove them out of their Trenches, and raised their siege, slew
about 350, of their men, and took many of their chief Officers, and have
relieved themselves bravely, and took 150, of their Muskers, and a field full
of Pikes, we having lost as some affirm, no men. Here are three of our
Captains come by Land, so that this News is true. Upon Monday our Forces went
out, 4000. Foot and 500. Horse, they are already within 5. miles of Tredagh: by
the way; Lieutenant Colonel Read came in to our men, and submitted; if he had
not done it, he could not have fled: he is sent hither, and lodged in the
Castle. I do believe we shall now get good store of Corn out of the Country,
which will keep the price from rising. Our men are not expected home this
week, pray God keep them safe. Sir Philimy Oneale was in the Battle, but was
feign to slye; and that was not like to serve turn, so he hid himself in a
Furs-Bush.

With my true love, I rest: Your affectionate Friend, Raphael Hunt.

22. Martii.
It is this day Ordered, That this Letter be forthwith printed.

Hen. Elsinge, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

