A Declaration of the Grounds and Reasons why we the Poor Inhabitants of the
Town of VVellinborrow, in the County of Northampton, have begun and give
consent to dig up, manure and sow Corn upon the Common, and waste ground,
called Bareshanke belonging to the Inhabitants of VVellinborrow, by those that
have subscribed, and hundreds more that give Consent.
1 WE find in the Word of God, that God made the Earth for the use and comfort
of all Mankind, and set him in it to till and dress it, and said, That in the
sweat of his brows he should eat his bread; and also we find, that God never
gave it to any sort of people, that they should have it all to themselves, and
shut out all the rest, but he says, The Earth has he given to the children of
men, which is every man.

2. We find, that no creature that everGod made was ever deprived of the
benefit of the Earth, but Mankind; and that it is nothing but covetousness,
pride, and hardness of heart, that has caused man so far to degenerate.

3. We find in the Scriptures, that the Prophets and Apostles have left it upon
Record, That in the last days the oppresso^ and proud man shall cease, and God
will restore the waste places of the Earth to the use and comfort of Man, and
that none shall hurt nor destroy in all his holy Mountain.

4. We have great Encouragement from these two righteous Acts, which the
Parliament of England have set forth, the one against Kingly Power, the other
to make England a Free Commonwealth.

5. We are necessitated from our present necessity to do this, and we hope that
our Actions will justify us in the gate, when all men shall know the truth of
our necessity: We are in Wellinborrow in one Parish 1169 persons that receive
Alms, as the Officers have made it appear at the Quarter Sessions last: we have
made our Case known to the Justices, the Justices have given Order that the
Town should raise a Stock to set us on work, and that the Hundred should be
enjoined to assist them; but as yet we see nothing is done, nor any man that
goes about it; we have spent all we have, our trading is decayed, our wives
and children cry for bread, our lives are a burden to us, diverse of us having
5. 6. 7. 8. 9. in Family, and we cannot get bread for one of them by our labor;
rich men's hearts are hardened, they will not give us if we beg at their doors;
if we steal, the Law will end our lives, diverse of the poor are starved to
death already, and it were better for us that are living to dye by the Sword
then by the Famine: And now we consider that the Earth is our Mother, and that
God has given it to the children of men, and that the common and waste Grounds
belong to the poor, and that we have a right to the common ground both from the
Law of the Land, Reason and Scriptures; and therefore we have begun to bestow
our righteous labor upon it, and we shall trust the Spirit for a blessing upon
our labor, resolving not to dig up any man's propriety, until they freely give
us it; and truly we find great comfort already, through the goodness of our
God, that some of those rich men amongst us, that have had the greatest profit
upon the Common, have freely given us their share in it, as one Mr John
Freeman, Thomas Nottingam and John Clendon, and diverse others; and the Country
Farmers have proffered diverse of them to give us Seed to sow it, and so we find
that God is persuading Japheth to dwell in the tents of Shem: and rruly those
that we find most against us are such as have beenconstant enemies to the
Parliaments Cause from first to last.

Now at last our desire is, That some that approve of this work of
Righteousness, would but spread this our Declaration before the great Council
of the Land, that so they may be pleased to give us more encouragement to go
on, that so they may be found amongst the small number of those that considers
the poor and needy, that so the Lord may deliver them in the time of their
troubles, and then they will not be found amongst those that Solomon speaks of,
which withhold the Corn (or the Land) from the Poor, which the people shall
curse, but blessing shall be upon the heads of those Rulers that sell Corn, and
that will let the poor labor upon the Earth to get them Corn, and our lines
shall bless them, so shall good men stand by them, and evil men shall be
afraid of them, and they shall be counted the Repairers of our Breaches, and
the Restorers of our Paths to dwell in. And thus we have declared the truth of
our necessity; and whosoever will come in to us to labor with us, shall have
part with us, and we with them, and we shall all of us endeavor to walk
righteously and peaceably in the Land of our Nativity.

Richard Smith. John Avery. Thomas Fardin. Richard Pendred. James Pitman. Roger
Tuis. Joseph Hichcock. John Pie. Edward Turner.


LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1650.


