A DECLARATION OF The most High and Mighty Princess, the QUEEN OF SWEDEN,
CONCERNING Prince Charles, AND The Swedish Crown: With a Representation from
the States, to Her Majesty, in reference to the same; and Her Gracious Answer
thereunto. ALSo, The further proceedings of the Prince at the Hague, and His
Propositions and Desires to the States. Together with the Earl of Brainfords
Letter, to his Highness, concerning the Swedish Forces.

Published by Authority.

Imprinted at London, for R. W. 17 April, 1649.

A DECLARATION Of the Queen of SWEDEN Concerning Prince Charles, etc. And Her
Majesty's Gracious Answer to the Representation of the States General touching
His Highness.
Right Honored,
THe Earl of Brainford has had audience, with the most high and mighty
Princess the Queen of Sweden, and has given an account to his young master
the Prince, of the representing his Embassy to her Majesty, purporting, That
there are matters of great consequence, to be maturely debated before there can
be an Army of Zwitzers obtained, which gives a great demur to the new Game in
agitation, so that if their Cards be not well played upon the first leading, the
Game is in great halard of being utterly lost and frustrated in the conclusion.
And the rather, by reason of the uniting of the two most famous and renowned
Princes of Europe, which in all probability will soon be made manifest to all
Christian princes, through out their several Teritories: For the most
illustrious Queen of Sweden, has declared prince Charles palatine, etc. (her
Cozen German) to be her rightful Successor to the Crown, in case she die
without Issue: the State having with a great deal of joy and triumph approved
thereof, and for the further confirmation thereof, humbly besought her Majesty
to be pleased to accept of him also for her husband; to which she answered,
That if they did make propositions to Her of that nature, she would take them
into serious consideration and speedily give them a positive answer, etc. so
that there is so much probability in this, that it is taken for granted, that
the Solemnization of Marriage will suddenly be accomplished, between his
Highness, and her Majesty, the most virtuous and illustrious Queen now
reigning in Europe, the Worlds Mirror, Religion's Banner, and a second Star to
the late glorious Comet of England, the most high and mighty Princess Queen
Elizabeth of happy memory.

Hague 14. April, 1649.

Other Letters from Holland say, That the Scots Commissioners have had audience
with the Prince, they presented Letters unto their declared King, upon the
k^^e, and said that was their endeared affection (...) them to that po^ture of
obedience and loyalty they (...) King he knew Scotlands mind by some sent
before, and they desire to treat about it, but first Montrosse must depart,
they bewailed the death of his late Royal Father, uttering many inveterate
expressions against the causers of it: as yet no treaty has been, nor answer
given, and though it was declared, by their declared King to them, at the
delivery thereof, that within few days he would return a satisfactory answer;
yet he now seems to vary, determining to take some respite of time in
consultation thereon, and desires likewise to take the advice of the States
General; and to that end has given Sir Edward Hide directions to bring in a
Declaration, to be presented to the said Council, the sum and abstract whereof
follows.

That he desires a treaty with some of the States General, in reference to the
present transaction of affairs, touching his remove from the Hague to the
Kingdom of France, before he take his journey for Ireland.

2 That the chief motives of his inducement hereunto, are, by reason of the
distractions breaking out anew in the Kingdom of Scotland; which divisions
causes him to despair in the safety of his person, etc. But these
conjecturations in all probability will soon be frustrated, for we conceive he
will make his abode here, as the best center of his affairs, and that some of
the States may possibly be advisers in giving assistance to his resultations,
in case his Council be not over violent to ^o the contrary.

A Narrative of the proceedings of the Forces in Ireland touching Prince
CHARLES.
BY an Express from the City of Dublin, to several Merchants residing here,
it is advertized; That the Marquess of Ormond, General Preston, the Earl of
Clanaickard, and the rest of the Irish confederates, and compieres have no
considerable field army, and the several Factions break out into high
Differences, by reason of the falling off of the Lord Inchiquin, and General
Owen Roe, who are resolved not to fight against Lieut. General Crumwell, and
the English army, which has occasioned Prince Rupert to represent a letter to
the said Lord Inchiquin, which was to this effect, viz.

That He desires him to use his utmost endeavors, for the propagating of the
present work in hand, in relation to the investing of his sacred Majesty (as he
is pleased to call the young titular King, Charles the second) in all on his
English, Irish, and Scottish Throne, and to endeavor the restoration of him
to its just Rights and Dignities, etc.

But his Lordship returned this answer, That he was resolved to desist from any
further engagement against the parliament of England, or to be any ways
isntrumental, for the involving of bleeding England and Ireland, in another
bloody and domestique War; and that for the more apparent acquitting himself of
that inhuman crime he declared that he was resolved to sacrifice both life and
fortunes, against all opposition whatsoever that should endeavor the
obstruction of the peace and tranquillity of that Nation.

Insomuch, that the difference between prince Rupert and his Lordship
increases, and the breach is like to grow wider before there can be any
composure or reconciliation. For Genesis Owen Roe is likewise fallen into a
discontented against the Marq. of Ormond, who upon mature deliberation, in
reference to his proceedings, and of the English Forces to be sent over, under
the conduct and command of Lieut. General Crumwell, the said Owen Roe called a
Council of Officers, and after some time spent in debate of the present
transaction of affairs, it was resolved by the Council, That two Letter
should be forthwith drawn up, the one to be communicated to the parliament of
England, the other to Colonel Jones, intimating. That if they will not molest,
or cause to be molested, any of the Forces under his immediate command, in
their quarters during the time prefixed for their residence in that kingdom,
that then he will not iagage against any of their Forces, neither will he give
any assistance to the Marquess of Ormond, Preston, or any other parties who
shall engage against them, provided, that they will not any ways trouble his
quarters, upon the advance of the English Army over, during the time of his
residence as aforesaid.

2 That he may have safe passage into Spain with such forces as shall be
designed for that Kingdom, etc.

By which means and revolt, diverse begin to decline from engagement, and to
desert the prince; so that it is hoped that Nation will soon be reduced to the
power and obedience of parliament, and a period put to her languishing ane
bleeding condition. Ormond is in a very sad condition, and dare not take the
field, his men moulter away apace.

The Expedition, the Tiger, and another of the Parliaments ships are got to
Ayrs point within a few leagus of Leverpool, to secure the Coast of Ireland on
that side. We hear of some action at Sea, between the two Navies, which speaks
the parliament Victors, and that they have sunk and taken 9 of the princes
ships: for the further particulars whereof, I shall refer you to my next.

The Dammee-prince is at King sale, from whence we hear, that he has made
proclamation (in the young Kings Name) assuming the power of Deputy and Lord
Lieutenant General of Ireland, casting off the Marq. of Ormond, and other
Commission Officers, and placing others in their stead, which causes great
mutinies and insurrections amongst the Soldiery both by Sea and Land; the one
threatening to cast him over board; the other to pistol him; which fatal
Destiny, in process of time, may (in all probability) befall this bloody
tyrant, for revenging the blood of those precious Souls, whose cries are
echoed up to Heaven as an allarum against him.

Bristol. 12 April, 1649.
Imprimatur,

THEO: JENNINGS.

FINIS.

