A DECLARATION OF The Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the County of BRECKNOCK,
Concerning their firm Resolutions FOR THE PARLIAMENT, IN Adhering to the
Judgment and determination thereof, as to the Supreme Court of Judicature of
the Kingdom.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Declaration of the
Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the County of Brecknock, of Nov. 23. 1645. be
forthwith Printed and Published*

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, December 6. 1645.

November. 23. 1645.
A Declaration of the Gentlemen and Inhabitants of the County OF BRECKNOCK.
We the Gentry and Inhabitants of the county of Brecknock, whose Names are
subscribed, Do declare and profess, That we are fully satisfied in conscience,
that the two Houses of Parliament now sitting at Westminster, are the true and
undoubted lawful Parliament of England, and the Supreme Court of Judicature of
the Kingdom; To whose Judgment and Determination we do and will, in conscience
of our Loyalty, and not by terror or constraint, submit our selves, our lives
and fortunes.

We are also persuaded and confess, That the Arms taken up and continued by
Authority of Parliament in this Defensive war, are raised and continued in
their own just Defense, and for the just Defense of the protestant Religion,
the person and Honor of the Kings Majesty, the privileges of Parliament, and
the Liberty of the Subject; And that the Forces raised or to be raised within
the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, without their consent, are raised
and employed for destruction of Parliaments, fomenting and establishing of
popery, prelacy, and an Illegal and Arbitrary Government.

In apprehension whereof, we do unanimously resolve, and firmly engage and
undertake, That we, with all persons under our power and command, will from
hence forward, to the extremest hazard of our Lives and Fortunes, adhere to
and assist the Forces raised or to be raised by Authority of Parliament,
against all other Forces raised or to be raised against them, or without their
consent; And we shall willingly and cheerfully join with Major General
Laughorn, and those three Associated counties whereof he is Major General, And
with the county of Glamorgan, with whom we are already Associated; And
contribute our utmost assistance, and endeavors proportionably to the said
respective counties, in such way as Major General Laughorn shall think fit,
and meetest for the service of the Parliament.

And from this Resolution and Engagement we shall not swerve or receade, by
adhering to the contrary party, or embracing a detestable Neutrality, either by
persuasion, dread, or any other motive whatsoever.

H: Gwyn, Vic. Com. Brec. Edward Rumsey. John Williams. Lewis Lloyde. Edw:
Williams. Roger Vaughan. William Morgan. John Gwyn. Thomas Gunter. Edward Gwyn.
Richard Games. Will: Walbiefth. Will: Vaughan. Tho: Walbief. Meredith Lenys.
Lewis Ienkins. William Herbert. Edward Games. Tho: Williams. William Watkins.
Thomas Lloyde. William Jones. Thomas Roberts. Daniel Winter. William Haynes.
Thomas Bowen. Walter Lloyde^ Henry Jones. John Thomas. John Win. Hu: Meredith.
Ieffery Lewys. John Lewys. Edward Aubrey.


FINIS.

