A DECLARATION OF THE Czaars of Muscovy AGAINST THE FRENCH KING, IN Favor of
the poor Protestants Distress in this present Persecution; obtained for them by
the intercession of his Electoral Highness the Marquess of Brandenburg.
WE John Alexeiwitz and Peter Alexeiwitz, by the Grace of God, most Serene and
Mighty Princes and Czaars, Sovereign Masters of both Russias, of Moskow, Kiow,
Wlodimir, and Newgarden; Czaars of Casan, Astracan, and Siberia; Lords of
Pleskow; Great Dukes of Smolenkow, Twer, Jugoria, Perm, Wiathka, Bulgaria, and
other Principalities: Great Dukes and Lords of the Low*Countries of Newgarden,
Tzernigow, Resan, Rosthow, Jeroslaw, Berlowsery, Vdory, Obdory, and Condiny;
And Sovereign Princes of the Northern-Countries: Lords of the Countries of
Twer; Czaars of the Countries of Carthaline and Grussene; And Princes of the
Countries of Cabardine, Cirkasse, and Gorne, with many other Countries lying
Eastward, Westward, or Northwards, which belong to Us as Heirs and Successors
of our Fathers and Grandfathers, who were Lords and Princes thereof. By Order
of our Majesty's the Czaars, let it be known by these Presents, to all whom it
may concern, That our Majesty's the Czaars will and pleasure is, to make
several Persons of several Qualities partakers of our Favors, according to the
Tenor of these Letters Patents. In the beginning of this present Year 7197. the
most Serene Prince and Lord Frideric III. Marquess of Brandenburg, and other
Principalities, having deputed to our Majesty's the Czaars, John Reyer
Chapliez, Privy Secretary and Counselor of his Electoral Highness, and his
Envoy Extraordinary in our Court; Who being in conference with our Majesty's
the Czaars: Privy Boiars and their Colleagues, has declared and proposed unto
them by writing from his Electoral Highness, That his Majesty the French King,
has begun in his Kingdom to force all that professed the Protestant Religion to
abjure it, and has by several Torments driven them out of his Kingdom, or
forced to turn Roman Catholics, putting several of them to Death and parting
Husbands from their Wives, and Children from their Parents, by keeping them in
Prison: But that those amongst them who were not thus detained, have made their
escape out of the said Kingdom and sought for Shelter in the
Neighbouring-Countries; and that great numbers of them are come into the
Estates of his Electoral Highness, so that it is to be hoped many more will
follow their example in making their escape. And as many amongst them, who
would endeavor to find some means of getting their Subsistence, are (by reason
of their great numbers, and to fly from Persecution) desirous to be entertained
as our Subjects, and to settle amongst Us, in our great Kingdom of Russia: And
that his Electoral Highness has very earnestly desired Us in their behalf, to
receive them under our Sovereign Protection in the nature of Subjects, and to
grant them free access into our great Kingdom of Russia. We therefore upon the
Advice and Request of his Electoral Highness made unto Us by his Envoy
Extraordinary, and according to the report made by the Privy Boiars of our
Majesty's the Czaars; We great Lords the Czaars have willingly entertained, and
do give our consent to the Request of his Electoral Highness: That the said
Protestants banished by reason of their Religion, who desire to come and live
under the Protection, and in the Estates of our Majesty's the Czaars, may be
assured of the favor and protection of our Majesty's the Czaars, come in and
settle in the great Russia of our Majesty's the Czaars with full assurance; in
order whereunto our will and pleasure is, That all our Frontiers should lay
open and free for them to come in. Moreover they shall be favorably
entertained in the Service of our Majesty's the Czaars, and shall every one of
them obtain a reasonable Sallery, according to their Extraction, Condition, and
Dignity. And in case any of the said Protestants should desire to return into
their Country after they have served our Majesty's the Czaars, they that desire
to do so, shall no ways be hindered, but shall have free liberty to go.
Therefore we have caused by the favor of our Majesty's the Czaars, those
Letters Patents to be issued out by the Chancery of the Envoys of our Majesty's
the Czaars.

Given at the Court of Our Kingdom, in our great Town of Moskow in the Year
7197. from the Creation of the World, 21st. January, and of our Reign the
seventh.
Licenced April 13. 1689. JAMES FRASER.

LONDON, Printed for E. Maret. and C. Lucas. 1680.


