A DECLARATION of Great LVCIFER, Prince of the Air, and of Devils, and of all
the damned crew in Hell. In Answer to a Petition presented to them by a
Parliament Man, Dated in August 1648.

Printed in Hell near Westminster. 1648.

A Declaration of great Lucifer, etc.
TRue, trusty, and well-beloved servants of great Lucifer throughout the whole
world, especially you of the Kingdom of England, our special benediction;
whereas we have received a petition which was lately presented to us by the
hands of some of our obedient servants, containning sundry Acts, Passages,
Orders and Ordinances, by you commanded, and by the people in general
performed to the great advance of our Kingdom, in which you desire our
approbation by way of petition, which we have looked upon as acts of great
concernment; for whereas you say you have shook off all Loyalty and honesty,
and have raised an Army and fought against your King, and took him prisoner,
where he at this day remains under your custody to your great applause, and
have managed a war for the space of seven years or well nigh; and hunted your
Queen out of the Land, and driven your Prince away, took your Kings revenew
from him, and left him nothing but what you judge meet for such a one, and
maintained your selves like Princes with congratulatory gifts, and also as you
say, you have sold many or all the Bishops Lands, wherewith you have increased
your own estates and Lands, and murdered the good people of the Land, and
voted those to be Traitors that have risen in arms against you, and set up an
Exicise Office, where you receive and gather in the fat of the Land, and the
fruits of the Kingdom: And also have (to keep the people in subjection)
settled a Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, at Darby house, and such like places,
that whosoever misbehaveth himself, breaks your Orders, or will not pay those
assessements that you in your wisdom think meet to be paid for your use, and
have issued many warrants to bring refractory persons, and have procured
Knights of the Post to swear point blancke against such, and have commanded to
plunder, to kill and slay your opposers, and have maintained Sectaries,
Divisions, Heresies, Anabaptists, Independency, Presbyters, Sects, Schisms,
sacrilege, blasphemy, and what not, to the advance of our Kingdom, and have
countenanced treason, and rebellion, applauded Rebels, rewarded murders,
fomented untruths, falcified Oaths broken Covenants, robbed the people, and
used that most excellent art of equivocating; for these Acts, and deeds, and
such like, which we have not time at present to recapitulate; we accept,
affect, applaud, and approve; and put the case you fail in any thing that you
cannot procure, nor compass by wit or art to obtain, be it on the Seas, or on
the Land, or under the earth; yea be it in the air, we with our politic,
wise, crafty accomplices, will accomplish your desire, though the whole world
were engaged against you; for what have we not power to command the whole
earth? yea we have, and it will obey, for in the twinkling of an eye we have
our desire, and our servants shall be yours to command, be the act never so
unjust, for with their help you shall subdue, only thus much you must
acknowledge this to be of our great power, and impute nothing of it to your
selves; in this throne we are greatest, and as you have done most worthily
hitherto, and as it becomes our obedient servants; so we exhort you, and
command you in our name to persist in these ways, for we are the great
paymaster in the world, and if we set you on work be sure we will pay you
your wages.

Wherefore we say again, that we do approve of all and every act by you done,
or shall do in this kind, for its done to the advancement of our Kingdom, and
we are joyful to hear that we have such faithful and diligent servants, that
are so willing to perform our will, and as you have been thus careful and
forward to execute our Laws, and maintain such acts; we do here add and
ordain other Laws to be executed and put in practice by you, as you will
answer the contrary at you peril.

A Declaration with Orders of Lucifer, Prince of Devils, and of all the
infernal Princes, and damned crew in Hell.
For as much as our Kingdom extends it self to the uttermost parts of the
earth; and we are the greatest Conquerors that ever the world bred; for no
Emperor, King, or Potentate, be he or they never so mighty, is able to
withstand our strength, or any of our servants or agents whom we employ in our
cause.

Wherefore we great Lucifer, Prince of Devils, with the approbation of our
infernal privy Counsel, do order and declare (for there is no cause but we may
declare as well as others, having the most pollitick and subtelest under the
earth to be our Counselors) and by whom other Counsels are engaged for
advice, as follows:

That I great Lucifer, Prince of the air, am the Father of all lies, murders,
adulteries, blasphemies, incest, sacrilege, rapines, coveteousnesse,
drunkenesse, swearing, whoredoms, contempts, backbiting, slanders,
dissembling, and all manner of wickedness whatsoever can be named: and I with
the rest of my divelish Counselors, will maintain, defend, preserve, and put
in practice, set forward, and help these and the like designs upon any person
or persons, he or she, of what degree or calling so ever they be, whether
Kings, Princes, Lords, Earls, or Potentates, rich or poor, young or old, I, I
say will tempt, entice, provoke, and persuade withal manner of slights, baits
and suggestions; that men and women commit these, and such like, by all the
means and ways that can be used, whether in secret or public, openly or
privately, by night or by day, sleeping or waking, without giving rest to any,
no not for a minute; yea their best actions shall be worst performed, and to
make this more evident to the whole world, I with advice of my hellish
infernal Counsel of the upper Region, and the lower Hell, do order.

Imprimis, It Is ordered and judged meet by us Imps of Hell, that all creatures
shall and may have as many Idols as they please, whether Parliament Idols,
Goldsmiths Hall Idols, or Excise Idols, and shall and may make as many kind of
Idols, of gold or silver, wood or stone, Parliament man or Committee man, to
hug them, and shall and may set them up in any place wheresoever in earth or
hell, sea or land, Temple or market place, Westminster or London, or in their
own hearts, and shall bow, and cringe to them as often as they please.

Item, its agreed by the infernal Council of Hell that all days shall be
alike to do any kind of service, except Fasting days; and it is ordered that
they keep one day in a Moone-shine, and to offer up their little Idol money as a
sacrifice to us: And before such Moone-shine day, the four Winds shall blow
four several ways to give notice, and to put them in mind to prepare
themselves for that day of Moone-shine, to meet at the unholy Court called the
sacrificing Mount: in English, the Committees of Goldsmiths Hall.

Item, we act if any man come into the world without Father or Mother, or our
help to beget them, or if any Malignant beget another, they shall curse their
begetters, and their genitors (Parliament and godless men excepted) and
tolleration shall be given to all Rebels to curse, Authorities to rail at
government, and Governors, to despise dignities, to live without order, to
make one another odious, to practice treasons and rebellions, and to make every
thing mine and thine, and the longest liver take all, what the Devil leaves.

Item, we hold it Lawful, and it is a commendable deed of darkness, to
imbrew one another hands in the blood of others, and to hang up all Royalists,
especially those that will not submit to our Laws, and whether this act be
done inwardly by potions, or outwardly by weapons, we value it not, provided it
be done to the life, yea of Kings.

Item, it is acted that it shall be Lawful for any one to cover, or any to
prostitute themselves to any one, whether his or hers be sleeping or waking:
provided it be done that none sees it; and further by the said power it is held
Lawful, that if any attempt this act, to any kind of cattle, beast, swine, or
Dogs, it shall be tolerable, yea and to foul Martin.

Item, we judge it Lawful to rob, carry away, or to take any thing that is
another in spite of their noses, whether we want it or not, and who so shall
withstand us shall be torn in pieces with Devils: the Devil take them.

Item, it is Lawful to back-bite, slander, revile, and betray any one, be they
friend or foe. Noble or ignoble, always provided that before such an act they
have recourse to our high Court, or to some of our Committees, and from them
procure a commission for the same.

Item, it is ordered, and held Lawful to desire another estate, Land, money,
riches, wealth, wives, or children, or whatsoever is another, be it never so
good, or never so fair, or never so much, so it be to satisfy our lusts, and
to take any thing from any man's dwelling, bed, or board: provided it be done in
a coveteous way, and he esteemed a malignant or popish delinquent.

Lastly, it is agreed and concluded upon that we will that all men be as we
are, Liars, murderers, blasphemers, swearers, dissemblers, hypocrites,
drunkards, idolaters, revellers, covenant breakers, haters of honest men,
because we shall never come or have to do where honest men are, but shall
always remain bathing our selves in the lake of hell where we would that all
false assemblers should be pertakers with us, to the advancement of our
Kingdom without any dissolution or rejouring.

Unto which Articles, and orders we Lucifer with our Princes, Lords, Earls,
and Presidents of our Kingdom whose names are here under written, have
sealed, signed, and assented unto, and set their hellish claws. Lucifer.
Beelzebub a King. Astoroth a Duke. Berith a Duke. Bilith a President. Demas a
Marquess. Baal Peor a Lord. Satan a Captain. Belimoth a Duke. Diabolus a
Lord. Demonon a King.

Given at our high infernal Court and Palace of darkness, this 32. of the
month, and in the five thousand six hundred and fifty eighth year of our
reign over the whole world. If any be pleased to list themselves under any of
our Officers whom we shall appoint, and set over to fight our Battles, let them
repair to our Court of Limbo, or Purgatory, near Westminster, where they may
list soul or body, go as fast on foot or horseback as any of the Members.



FINIS.

