A Declaration of the English Army now in Scotland. TO The People of Scotland,
especially those among them, that know and fear the LORD;
We the Officers and Soldiers of the English Army do send Greeting.
AT the beginning of the great and wonderful workings of God in the^e two
Nations of E^gland and Scotland, We the Under Officers and Soldiers of the
English Army now in Scotland, were most of us, if not all, men of private
Callings, and not at all interested in Matters of Public and State Affairs*
but yet very many of us, in whom the Lord had begun to reveal himself in the
Face of Jesus Christ, were sensible of the Antichristian Tyranny that was
exercised by the lare King, and His Prelates, over the Consciences, Bodies and
Estates of the True Spiritual Church of Jesus Christ; namely, those that were
born again, and united to him by his Spirit; who were then by that
Antichristian crew, termed Puritants, Sectaries, Schismatics, etc. And for not
conforming to all the Canons and Ordinances of their Nation Church, were
frequently imprisoned, banished and otherwise grievously molested at the
pleasure of those that then ruled amongst us. Under these sad sufferings of the
people of God, our souls mourned: and understanding by the manifold gracious
promises in the Word of God, that a time of deliverance was to be expected to
the Church of Christ, and destruction and ruin to Babylon; Our hearts,
together with all truly godly in England, were exceedingly stirred up to pray
to the Lord, even day and night, that he would arise to destroy Antichrist, and
to save his People: Whilst this Spirit of Prayer was poured forth upon Gods
people in England, attempts are made upon Scotland, to bring them to a
conformity in religious worship, by endeavoring to impose upoe them a Popish
Service Book, which was through the great goodness of God, by his people in
Scotland, reserted; which made the wrath of the late King and His Prelates, wax
so hot against them, so as Scotland had no other way to preserve it self, but
by coming into England with an Army; which the godly in England did not then
count an Invasion to destroy England, no more then they do this our present
march for the ruin of Scotland but rejoiced to see some appearing against that
Antichristian power that had persecuted the Saints, and were assured, That the
Lord was come forth to answer the many Prayers and Tears that were then poured
and pouring forth for that purpose; and therefore so far as we have any
opportunity farthered the designs of that Army, some of us hazzarding our lives
by spreading their Book, entitled, The Scots Intentions, and pleading for the
justness of their Proceedings.

Let us remember how the Lord was pleased graciously to answer the prayers of
his people at that time, in their Deliverance from the Army raised by the late
King, and his Prelates, for the destruction of all the people of God in England
and Scotland; insomuch, That soon after Scotland sits in Peace, enjoying their
former Liberties, without being imposed upon by the Antichristian Prelacy in
England; and England obtains a Parliament, to whom they have opportunity to
complain of their grievances, and through the great goodness of God so
constituted, that grievances are heard, and overtures made to the late King for
their redress: which was so irksome to His Oppressing, Tyrannical and Bloody
spirit, that he again betook himself to overthrow the Parliament by force, and
to that end entertains the Officers of the Army that had gone forth against our
Brethren of Scotland; and withdrawing himself from his Parliament, an
appearance of a Civil War begins; which being made known to us, the inferior
Officers and Soldiers of this Army (then in our Private Callings) we found our
hearts extraordinarily stirred up by the Lord, to assist the Parliament against
the King; being abundantly satisfied in our judgments and consciences, that we
were called forth by the Lord, to be instrumental to bring about that, which
was our continual prayer to God (viz.) The destruction of Antichrist, and the
Deliverance of his Church and people. And upon this simple account we engaged,
not knowing the deep policies of worldly Statesmen, and have ever since
hazarded our lives in the high places of the field (where we have seen the
wonders of the Lord) against all the opposers of this work of Jesus Christ,
whom we have all along seen going with us, and making our way plain before us.
And having these things singly in our eye, namely, the destruction of
Antichrist, the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the Deliverance and
Reformation of his Church, in the Establishment of his Ordinances amongst them
in purity according to his Word, and the just civi^ Liberties of Englishmen: We
did many of us rejoice at the Covenant, because we found in it a strain toward
these ends, although some being more enlightened, did apprehend it to be so
mixed with worldly interest, that they justly feared the interest of Jesus
Christ would be only pretended to, and the Interests of this world, yea, of
Antichrist himself carried under a vizard, as we have since had abundant
experience of; which has made us (we confess) not to idolize the Covenant (as
we fear too many do) though we trust it will appear before God, Angels and Men,
that we shall ever pursue its true and Lawful ends, according to the plain and
candid meaning thereof; though we do not upon every occasion urge the Covenant,
(as we see every party, though as far d^fferent as light and darkness apt to
do,) the Lord having by his Word, and by his Spirit convinced us of our duty
therein, though there had been no such Covenant at all entered into.

But when we saw that under pretense of the Covenant, a corrupt party in
Parliament, by their worldly policy, after the war was ended in England, and
the lare Kings party subdued, with the loss of Thousands of the lives of
Saints (whose death is precious in the sight of the Lord) did endeavor to set
up the King upon his own terms, and with him to establish a National
Church Government, not in all things agreeable to the Word of God, but it
destructive to the just Liberties of the True Spiritual Church of Christ, which
he has by his own most precious blood purchased for them, and is now come
forth to bestow upon them: which did suffi^iently demonstrate it self by the
dealings of the then Master Builders with the Churches of Jesus Christ, in, and
about London, that were then threatened to be dissolved, and Laws made to
pr^v^nt the Communion of Saints with one another, except only in that one
Public Form then about to be established, to the astonishment of many of us
that had lifted up our hands to God, and sworn to endeavor a Reformation
according to the Word of God; and therefore after much waiting upon God by
prayer, and examining our own hearts, about the ends and sincerity thereof, we
were abundantly satisfied, that it was not only lawful, but our duty to keep
our Arms in our hands, till the ends beforementioned should be accomplished;
and to that purpose, the Army, whereof we are a part, did refuse to disband,
did march up to London to propose to the Parliament a way of Establishment that
might be more for the carrying on of the ends of Religion and Liberty, though
therein we were not at that time successful, yet most wonderfully and
graciously preserved by the Lord, and extraordinarily convinced, after much
seeking the Face of God, that our failing was in endeavoring to set up the
King upon any terms, he being a man of so much blood, that the Lord would have
no peace with him, nor any that should go about to establish him: Whereupon
after his own hard heart had hindered him from yielding to any overtures that
were made to him by the Parliament, through whom all the Armies Proposals were
to be tendered, and a second War more dangerous than the former contri^ed by
him, and his Son now with you, toget^er with those in Scotland that hated us of
the Army of England under the name of S^ct^^ies, being by the u^sp^^kable
goodness and mighty power of God waded through, and a second testimony given
from Heaven, to justify the proceeding of his poor servants against that
bloody Antichristian brood though with the loss of many precious Saints; we
were then powerfully convinced, that the Lords purpose was to deal with the
late King as a man of blood: And being persuaded in our consciences, That he
and his Monarchy was one of the ten horns of the Beast spoken of, Rev. 17.12,
13, 14, 15. And being witnesses to so much of the innocent blood of the Saints
that he had shed in supporting the Beast; and considering the loud cries of the
souls of the Saints under the Altar, we were extraordinarily carried forth to
desire Justice upon the King, that man of blood: And to that purpose petitioned
our Superior Officers, and the Parliament, to bring him to Justice: which
accordingly, by an high hand of Providence was brought to pass; which Act we
are confident the Lord will own, in preserving the Commonwealth of England
against all Kingdoms and Nations, that shall adventure to meddle with them upon
that account: When God executes his judgments upon Malefactors, let none go
about to resist: When he brings forth those his enemies that will not suffer
Jesus Christ to be King in the midst of his Saints, and breaks them in pieces
like a Potters vessel; let not Scotland, nor any other Nation say, What do
thou? We fear they have been too busy already: the Lord that sees the secrets
of all hearts, knows the compliance of Scotland with the late Kings Issue now
with you, was in order to disturb the Peace of England, for being Gods
Executioners upon a bloody Tyrant, and a supporter of the Throne of the Beast:
But blessed be the Lord, the crafty are taken in their own snare: England sits
in peace, whilst Scotland receives into their chief City, their new King, at
the very hour wherein an Army had marched 300 miles, is facing them at the very
gates. We wish our Brethren of Scotland, especially those that truly fear the
Lord, would consider these things, and not flight the providence of God so
much as they do: When Scotland chose new gods, and would have a King out of a
Family that God bad rejected, then was war in the gates: And though we do not
think providence alone, a sufficient rule for Gods People to walk by, yet we
do know that the Lord sp^^ks to his people by his Providence as well as by his
Word; and he is angry with his people that do not take notice thereof, and
promises blessing to those that do, Psalm. 107. and the latter end.

And here give us leave (not in a boasting spirit, but in meekness and fear) to
tell you, That we are persuaded we are poor unworthy instruments in Gods hand
to break hi^ Enemies, and preserve his people. You have acknow^edged us in your
own Papers to be a Rod of Iron to dash in piec^^ the M^lignan^^: but withal
say, We must now be broken in pi^^^^ because we now set our selves against the
Lot of Gods inhe^^^^nce. Le^ us here speak for our selves; yea, the Lord speak
for us, w^^ k^ows our hear^^, and all our ways: we value the Churches of J^su^
Christ, who ^re the Lot of Gods inheritance, ten thousand tim^^ ab^ve our own
li^e^; yea we do bless the Lord, we are not only a Rod of ^ron, to d^sh the
common enemies in pieces, but also a hedge (though very unwor^hy) about Christ's
Vineyard; and if we know ou^ own h^arts, where ever the Lor of Gods inheritance
shall appear to be found in Scotland, we shall think it our duty to the utmost
hazard of our lives, to preserve the same: But if there be any that have taken
counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed, whom the Lord has
decreed to set upon his holy hill of Sion; we are persuaded the Lord has
brought us hither as instruments, through which he will speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, We desire it may be known to you
our Brethren of Scotland, that we are not Soldiers of Fortune, we are not
merely the servants of men, we have not only proclaimed Jesus Christ, the King
of Saints, to be our King by Profession; but desire to submit to him upon his
own terms, and to admit him to the exercise of his Royal Authority in our
hearts, and to follow him whithersoever he goes, he having of his own good
will entered into a Covenant of Grace with his poor Saints; and be assured, it
is he that leads us into Scotland, as he has done in England and Ireland.
And therefore we do in the spirit of brotherly love, and of the fear of the
Lord, beseech you to look about you; for our Lord Jesus is coming amongst you
as a refiners fire, and as Fullers soap: and blessed are those in whom the
least dram of sincerity shall be found.

We have a Paper directed to us from the people of Scotland, it having been
publicly made known to us at the head of our Regiments; wherein we are first
desired to consider the lawfulness of our marching into Scotland. We bless God,
we did that before we came; and are abundantly satisfied, that we are brought
hither by the Lord: nay, many of us lying under temptations of flesh and blood,
and going about to frame excuses to take us from this march, found, that to
have staid behind, had been to have turned our backs upon Jesus Christ, and to
have deprived our selves of much sweet communion with God, that now through his
goodness we do enjoy.

We have also considered the Arguments, by which you go about to weaken the
grounds of the Parliaments, and our Superior Officers, leading us into
Scotland; and must needs give you this return: That we are still abundantly
established in this belief, that what the Parliament of England has done in
sending us into Scotland, has been of absolute Necessity to preserve
themselves from being destroyed in their Religion and Liberties, which they
have been at so much cost both of Blood and Treasure, to purchase and preserve:
and therefore by the way we must needs tell you, that we cannot endure to hear
them called A pretended Parliament; which we desire you to take notice of, that
if you write to us again, you would speak more reverently of the Authority of
our Nation, or else we shall easily think you will upon every occasion be ready
to invade England, that you may set up an Authority, which you may call lawful.

And let us, as in the presence of the Lord, further assure you, That we have
already examined our consciences, as before the Lord, and have a clear
assurance in our hearts, That he will countenance us in this action, and that
we do not break any Covenant which we have sworn before God, Angels and Men;
but could be contented should we not thereby Idolize the Covenant, to march to
any Engagement with you, if called thereunto by the Lord, with the Covenant on
the tops of our Pikes; and let the Lord judge who has observed the Ends of the
Covenant best, you or we? Yet we do acknowledge, We have not been the exact
Performers, though not the wilful breakers thereof: Our consciences also bear
us record, We do above any thing in the world, desire the Union of the two
Nations; and it is our prayer daily, That those that fear the Lord in England
and Scotland, may become one in the hand of the Lord, and join together in the
advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and throwing down, and trampling
upon the Seat of the Beast. Why should not Scotland as well as England,
rejoice to see the Horns of the Beast cut off, that we may join together, to
hate the Whore, and to burn her flesh with fire? The Lord is our witness
(whom we fear) we come not to oppress you, or shed your blood; we have cried
to the Lord, again and again, to prevent it: we have sent you our Declarations
of Love to the People of God in Scotland, which some amongst you, though they
pretended to Answer, yet do most injuriously and unchristianly keep from their
sight, nay, most falsely mis-representing us as a people come with intentions to
destroy the poor inhabitants, and that we are left of our God to be destroyed:
but we have made our prayer to the Lord, and made known before him their
sayings, who has told the people of Scotland, That God has forsaken us; and
therefore bid them persecute and take us, for now the Sectaries day is come,
etc. But the Lord is still with us, he is our Refuge, and a present help in
trouble, ready to be found: we do believe, the cry of the oppressed in Scotland
will be heard, and woe be to those that are the Cause thereof. Our Quarrel is
still against Malignants, the Root whereof is now, through the evil Policy of
some Statesmen, become the Head of Scotland. We dare not quarrel with those
whose hearts are upright with Jesus Christ, and faithful and loving to England,
but with those who are most treacherous and false to both; and therefore we
dare not any of us, though tempted thereto by your papers, be so carnally wise,
as to desert the Cause and Work of Jesus Christ, in which we have hitherto been
so long and so miraculously carried on. Do you think we are men so weakly
principled, as to be persuaded without the least strength of Argument to desert
the Interest of our own Nation, and expose thousands of the precious Saints of
Jesus Christ, to be trampled upon as the dirt in the streets, when the Lord is
about to put on their beautiful garments, and to make them a praise in the
earth? Or can we (think you) betray our superior Officers, in whom we see so
much of the sweet Spirit of Jesus Christ, into your hands, whose mouths are
opened wide to devour them? we pray you not to wait for such a thing. The Lord
has brought us hither by his Providence, and upon him we shall with confidence
depend, till we see a glorious issue, which we humbly and heartily desire may
be without the effusion of any more blood; and (if it be the will of God) both
speedy and comfortable to you and us, that we may return with joy into England,
and leave Scotland rejoicing that an English Army has been amongst them: which
possibly may be the sooner effected, were you and we suffered to confer, and
open our hearts one to another: We do believe much of the bitterness of spirit
would be allayed in our Brethren of Scotland, did they know how exceedingly we
are slandered by the pens and tongues of many of your Kirk-men, concerning our
Religion and faith toward God, which though we may not vainly boast of, yet
according to the Apostles direction, we are ready to give an answer to the
meanest Christian in Scotland, that shall ask a Reason of the Faith and Hope
that is in us, with meekness and fear. And indeed, we account our best way of
contending with those slanders, is to pray the Lord to make our hearts sound in
his statutes, that we be not ashamed, that so we sanctifying the Lord God in
our hearts, and having a good conscience, they that speak evil of us as of evil
doers, may be ashamed whilst they falsely accuse our good conversation in
Christ.

And thus have we in the naked plainness of our souls opened our hearts unto
you our dear Brethren that fear the Lord in Scotland, where ever you be found,
whether in the highest Councils or the poorest Cottages, who though you now be
scattered, the Lord will in his due time bring you together, and bind you up as
his Jewels, and make you one with those that fear the Lord amongst us: which
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him our God and Father
also, bring to pass in his due time; and in the mean time make both you and us
wise to understand the things that concern the exalting of Christ's Kigdom: That
in all our undertakings we may be subservient to the Affairs of Jesus Christ,
and above all things take heed how we stir up any of the powers or strength of
this world to destroy one another. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Prince of Peace, be with you. AMEN.

From the Leaguer at Muscleborough, August. 1. 1650.
FINIS.

