THE DECLARATION OF THE KNIGHTS, GENTRY, AND Trained Bands of the County of
KENT, Presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS.

Wherein they declare their Resolution to march against the Kings Army with all
the power and strength they can raise, and to rescue His Majesty out of the
Cavaleers hands.

Likewise the Answer of the House of Parliament to the said Declaration and
Propositions.

Dccember 22. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parliment, that this Declaration
and Answer be printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.



December. 22. printed for J. Barks, 1642.

THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS Of the Lords, Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty
of the county of Kent.
Presented to the House of Commons, December the 21.
WE your humble and faithful Petitioners, the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty
of the County of Kent, being deeply sensible of the many miseries which these
calamitous times (notwithstanding your great care and vigilence to prevent the
same) are likely to produce.

Wherein His Gracious Majesty seduced by the malevolent counsel of an
ill-affected party of Malignants and Cavaleirs, the protestant Religion, His
Royal person, and Honor, the privilege of Parliament, and the Subjects
Liberty, are thr^atned with too too apparent hazard and Ruin.

Toward the support of which, We the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty of the
County of Kent, according to the Duty of Loyal Subjects, and good Christians,
are not only willing to contribu^e our best wishes and Votes, but even the
utmost of their endeavors, both with their lives and fortunes, for the
redeeming of his Majesty from such hands, and Our Religion and Liberty from
such peril and danger:

But may it please this Honorable House to consider that we do apprehend
themselves in a condition and posture nothing suitable to this their Resolution
being deprived, and left naked by the taking our Arms from us: And therefore
beseech your provident care to empower us with such a proportion of Arms and
Ammunition to be magazined in these parts, whereby we may be enabled to
manifest our Affections and obedience to the Command of King and Parliament,
both for the pursuance of the aforesaid Intentions, and opposition of all
illegal Inf^ingemen^s of our Law^s and Liberties, such as the Commission of
Array, wherewith we are at this time threatened, and what other of the like
Nature and condition soever shall be hereafter obtruded upon us.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be printed
and published,

Hen. El. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

THE ANSWER OF THE House of Commons to the aforesaid Declaration.
THE House of Commons have taken your Deelaration into serious consideration,
and cannot but with great content observe the constancy of your good affection
to the King and Parliament, which as well formerly as at this present yo^ have
expressed by your Declaration and Propositions to this House, and disclayming
and opposing with so much industry and fidelity, the sedicious Designs and
Endeavors of some Malignant and ill-affected persons within your County, to
suppress those malicious practices, and to preserve that County in peace; care
has already bin taken by the House of Commons with good success, and as they
intended it, and do believe to your safety and satisfaction.

And the House of Commons do further declare and assure you, that they will
always continue the like care, as for the good, safety, and peace of the whole
Kingdom, so in particular of that County, being encouraged thereunto by this
seasonable Declaration, of your Resolutions and good affections, for the
manifestation whereof, of the whole Kingdom, and of their kind acceptance, and
thanks for the same.

The House of Commons have commanded your Declaration, and their Answer, to be
forthwith printed.

They do also most earnestly desire, that all other Counties would take the
same Resolution for the upholding of GODS true Religion, and that every man
would lay his hand upon his heart, and seriously consider with himself, what
danger the Gospel is in, it that the Papists grow Conquerors and Masters of
the field.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembed in Parliament, that this Declaration
and Answer shall be forthwith printed and published, and read in all Churches and
Chapels within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by the Parsons,
Vicars, or Curates of the same.

Hen. Elsing Cler. parl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

