A DECLARATION OF THE LORD GENERAL AND HIS COUNCIL of OFFICERS; Showing the
Grounds and Reasons for the dissolution of the late PARLIAMENT.

LONDON Printed by Hen. Hills and Tho. Brewster, Printers to the Army, and are
to be sold at the sign of Sir John Old-castles in Pye-Corner, and at the three
Bibles at the Westend of Paul's 1653.

A Declaration of the Lord General and his Council of Officers.
OUr intention is not to give an account at this time, of the grounds, which
first moved us to take up arms, and engage our lives and all that was dear
unto us, in this cause; nor to mind in this Declaration the various
dispensations through which divine Providence has led us, or the witness the
Lord has born, and the many signal testimonies of acceptance which he has
given, to the sincere endeavors of his unworthy servants, whilst they were
contesting with the many and great difficulties, as well in the wars, as other
transactions in the three Nations; being necessitated, for the defense of the
same cause they first asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions,
the same being evident by former Declations published on that behalf.

After it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland and give in Scotland, but
so marvelously to appear for his people at Worcester, that those Nations were
reduced to a great degree of peace, and England to perfect quiet, and thereby
the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the harvest of all their
labor, blood and treasure, and to settle a due liberty both in reference to
civil and spiritual things, whereunto they were obliged by their duty, their
engagements, as also the great and wonderful things which God has wrought for
them; it was matter of much grief to the good and well affected of the Land, to
observe the little progress which was made therein, who thereupon applied to
the Army, expecting redress by their means, notwithstanding which, the Army
being unwilling to meddle with the civil Authority in matters so properly
appertaining to it, it was agreed, that his Excellency and Offices of the Army,
which were Members of Parliament, should be desired to move the Parliament, to
proceed vigorously in reforming what was amiss in Government, and to the
settling of the Commonwealth upon a foundation of justice and righteousness;
which having done, we hoped that the Parliament would seasonably have answered
our expectation: But finding (to our grief) delays therein, we renewed our
desires in an humble Petition to them, which was presented in August last, and
although they at that time signifying their good acceptance thereof, returned
us thanks, and referred the particulars thereof, to a Committee of the House,
yet no considerable effect was produced, nor any such progress made, as might
imply their real intentions to accomplish what was petitioned for; but on the
contrary, there more and more appeared amongst them, an aversion to the things
themselves, with much bitterness and opposition to the people of God, and his
spirit acting in them, which grew so prevalent, that those persons of Honor
and integrity amongst them, who had eminently appeared for God and the Public
good, both before and throughout this war, were rendered of no further use in
Parliament, then by meeting with a corrupt party to give them countenance to
carry on their ends; and for effecting the desire they had of perpetuating
themselves in the Supreme Government. For which purpose, the said Party long
opposed, and frequently declared themselves against having a new
Representative: And when they saw themselves necessitated to take that Bill
into consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruite the House with
Persons of the same Spirit and temper, thereby to perpetuate their own sitting.
Which intention diverse of the activest amongst them did manifest, laboring to
persuade others to a consent therein: And the better to effect this, diverse
Petitions preparing from several Counties for the continuance of this
Parliament were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them.

For obviating of these evils; the Officers of the Army obtained several
meetings, with some of the Parliament, to consider what fitting means and
remedy might be applied to prevent the same: But such endeavors proving
altogether ineffectuall, it became most evident to the Army, as they doubt not
it also is to all considering Persons, that this Parliament, through the
corruption of some, the jealousy of others, the non-attendance and negligence
of many, would never answer those ends which God, his People, and the whole
Nation expected from them: But that this Cause which the Lord has so greatly
blessed, and bore witness to, must needs languish under their hands, and by
degrees be wholly lost, and the lives, liberties and comforts of his People
delivered into their Enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest People of this
Nation, as well as by the Army, and wisdom and direction being sought from the
Lord; it seemed to be a Duty incumbent upon us, who had seen so much of the
power and presence of God going along with us, to consider of some more
effectual means to secure the Cause which the good People of this Commonwealth
had been so long engaged in, and to establish righteousness and peace in these
Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary and agreed upon, that the
Supreme Authority should be by the Parliament devolved upon known Persons, men
fearing God, and of approved integrity, and the Government of the Commonwealth
committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful way to encourage and
countenance all Gods People, reform the Law, and administer Justice
impartially: Hoping thereby the People might forget Monarchy, and understanding
their true Interest in the Election of Successive Parliaments, may have the
Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, or
necessitating to keep up Armies for the defense of the same. And being still
resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary courses, we prevailed
with about twenty Members of Parliament to give us a Conference, with whom we
freely and plainly debated the necessity and justness of our Proposals on that
behalf; And did evidence that those, and not the Act under their consideration,
would most probably bring forth something answerable to that Work, the
Foundation whereof God himself has laid, and is now carrying on in the World.

The which notwithstanding, found no acceptance, but instead thereof, it was
offered, that the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being
that from which we might reasonably expect all good things. And this being
vehemently iusisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions, that not
any Love to a Representative, but the making use thereof to recruit, and so
perpetuate themselves, was their aim.

They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, that neither the Nation,
the Honest Interest, nor we our selves would be deluded by such dealings; they
did agree to meet again the next day in the afternoon for mutual satisfaction,
it being consented unto by the Members present, that endeavors should be uses,
that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament that might exclude
or frustrate the Proposals before mentioned.

Notwithstanding this, the next morning the Parliament did make more haste then
usual, in carrying on their said Act, being helped on therein by some of the
persons engaged to us the night before; none of them which were then present,
endeavoring to oppose the same: And being ready to put the main Question for
consummating the said Act, whereby our aforesaid Proposals would have been
rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full debate in
Parliament obstructed; for preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil
consequences, which must upon the grounds aforesaid have ensued, and whereby at
one blow the Interest of all honest men, and of this glorious Cause had been in
danger to be laid in the dust, and these Nations embroiled in new Troubles, at
a time when our Enemies abroad are watching all advantages against us, and some
of them actually engaged in War with us: We have been necessitated, though with
much reluctance, to put an end to this Parliament; which yet we have done (we
hope) out of an honest heart, preferring this Cause above our Names, Lives,
Families, or Interests, how dear soever; with clear intentions and real
purposes of heart, to call to the Government, Persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, believing, that as none wise will expect to gather Grapes of Thorns;
so good men will hope, that if persons so qualified be chosen, the Fruits of a
Just and a Righteous Reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will, by the
blessing of God, be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good
Hearts who have been panting after those things.

Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justify our
selves by aspersing others, and raking into the mis-government of Affairs; but
we shall conclude with this, That as we have been lead by necessity and
Providence, to act as we have done, even beyond and above our own thoughts and
desires: so we shall, and do, in that of this great Work which is behind, put
our selves wholly upon the Lord for a blessing; professing, we look not to
stand one day without his support, much less to bring to pass any of the things
mentioned and desired, without his assistance, and therefore do solemnly desire
and expect, that all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own
destruction, should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to follow
their business with peaceable spirits; wherein we promise them Protection by
his assistance.

And for those who profess their fear and Love to the Name of God, that seeing
in a great measure, for their sakes, and for righteousness sake, we have taken
our Lives in our hands to do these things, they would be instant with the Lord
day and night on our behalfs, that we may obtain grace from him, and seeing we
have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least dishonor
thereunto: which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the whole
profession of Godliness.

We beseech them also to live in all humility, meekness, righteousness and love
one toward another, and toward all men, that so they may put to silence the
ignorance of the foolish, who falsely accuse them; and to know, that the late
great and glorious dispensations wherein the Lord has so wonderfully appeared
in bringing forth these things by the travel and blood of his Children, ought
to oblige them so to walk in the wisdom and love of Christ, as may cause others
to honor their holy profession, because they see Christ to be in them of a
truth.

We do further purpose before it be long, more particularly to show the grounds
of our Proceedings, and the Reasons of this late great Action and Change, which
in this we have but hinted at.

And we do lastly declare, That all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Committees and Commissioners, and all other Civil Officers
and Public Ministers whatsoever, within this Commonwealth, or any parts
thereof, do proceed in their respective Places and Offices; and all Persons
whatsoever are to give obedience to them as fully as when the Parliament was
sitting.

Signed in the name, and by the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General,
and his Council of Officers. WILL. MALYN, Secret.
White Hall, Apr. 22. 1653.
FINIS.

