THE DECLARATION OF THE GENLEMEN AND OTHERS now in Arms in the COUNTY of
HEREFORD.
By Commission from his highness the Prince of Wales: under the Command of Sir
Henry Lyngen Knight, Collonell General of the said County.
TO wave all misconstructions that may unhappily be cast upon our real
intentions in this present engagement, We thought it necessary to hint upon
and publish some principles and motives that have induced us hereunto wherein
we shall be very submit in regard our fellow-Subiects even of the humblest
fortunes and capacities are already not incensible of them.

After the storm of the late War was blown over, and the Scots calmed and
retired within their own confines, both they and we in this vimdsall
concernment stood at gaze, hoping to taste of the sweet and often promised
fruits of the many Declarations and Protestations of the two Houses and Armies
for the settlement of the Kingdoms, Peace, Religion, Laws, and His Majesty in
his pristime Rights with glory and splendour, equal to the best of his
Progenitors.

But our pregnant expectations herein miscarried, for the King is iugled in the
I Will of Wight, barberously misused, traterously and desperately conspired
against, being yet scarce a Prisoner of hope, his most Royal Consort
disuorced, banished, and most of his Princely Race under an unnatural
restrain, the known and ancient Laws (which are the principal security of
the Subjects prosperity) dispirreted, and daily wounded by contradictory Votes
and Ordinances upon every estates design, Religion wholly unioynted and in
stead of a settled Peace, a Scismaticall Army is propagated with a propetuated
supported of sixty thousand pound a Month, besides Excise, Free Quarter, and
imnumerable other vast and insupportable prestures, amongst which we cannot
pass by the Arbitrary and uncontrolled power of the Committees and Governors
of the said City and County, by which our Purses have, been milked, our
Persons imprisoned, our Horses taken away, our Cattle driven, and many of us
plundered, and bloodily butchered at Kington, and elsewhere, without appeal or
known Law whatsoever, and for the more firm intayleing of this uassalage upon
us and our Posterity they have laid a foundation for the future of a new
Militia to overawe and and inslave us to the Law-martiall for ever.

Wherefore finding all their pretenses in order to peace and settlement, to be
shaddowy (not to mention the Votes of new Addresses, whereby the door of all
pacification was lately bolted) and their dilatorie overtures still to clash
with the Honor and Conscience of his Majesty, We have for the antecedeinge
causes re-assmued our Arms and do declare, that with the expense of our blood
and uttermost hazard of our lives and fortunes we will endeavor against all
opposition whatsoever to restraint his Majesty with glory and honor, to
repeal the Queen from banishment, to enlarge the royal Children under
restraint, to establish the true Protestant Religion, and known Laws, to have
a free Parliament, for the better settling of our differences, to preserve the
Union between us and the Scots, according to the Act of Pacification, and with
the extirpation of all Arbitrary power nulling of all illegal Taxes, and
disbanding of Armies, to obtain a lasting well-grounded and honorable Peace,
in persuance of which ends (being fully authorized and encouraged by his
Highness the Prince of Wales, Captain General of his Majesty's Forces by Sea
and Land, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, from whom the
charge and Cammanded in chief of the City and County commissioned to Sir Henry
Lyngen, (under Hand and Seal) We are confident that all the good and loyal
Subjects of this and the adjacent Counties, for we shall have others to their
demirits will rise and engage with us, or contrubute assistance to us,
declining all obedience to any other authority whatsoever, in which engagement
(we by Gods grace) hope to demean our selves, that the whole Kingdom shall
see we squint not upon selfe-ends, but firmly fix our eyes upon the public
intrest.

And so God save the King and bless our endeavors.

