A DECLARATION Of several of the Churches of Christ, AND GODLY PEOPLE In and
about the City of LONDON; Concerning The Kingly Interest OF CHRIST, AND The
present Sufferings OF His Cause and Saints in England.

LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

A DECLARATION Of several of the Churches of Christ, And Godly people: Being a
few of the despised Remnant in and about the City of London, that yet cleave
close to the Cause and Interest of our Lord Jesus, so much disowned and
rejected in these times of Apostacy, and in this hour of our great Tribulation
and Temptation.
IN the Name of Jehovah-Nissi, (Exodus 17.15.) our Lord Christ, Protector of his
People, King of Saints and Nations: To all that are sanctified in Jesus Christ,
whether in Churches, or out, that partake of the same Faith (with us) of our
Lord Jesus, especially the sealed number now upon their watch, that have not
defiled their garments, whose robes are washed with the blood of the Lamb, that
are redeemed from among men, and fellow the Lamb whither soever he goes, in
these three Nations, or elsewhere. We their unworthy Brethren, one with them in
the present Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, and his Saints, in the behalf of our
selves, and many others, Do from the bottom of our hearts, wish like Faith,
Grace, Zeal, Light, Joy, and Peace, which we enjoy from God the Father, and
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FOrasmuch as we believe many godly people in these three Nations and
elsewhere, are deceived (and therefore unsatisfied) concerning us in the
matters of our faith, relating to the most precious Cause, Interest, and
Monarchy of the Lord Christ, (which we cleave unto) through misrepresentations
and false reports made of us and our Principles, by persons, and Letters posted
about the Nations for that purpose, full of errors, mistakes, unchristian
censures, uncharitable reproaches and invectives, wherein the Adversaries have
all the advantage against us, that worldly power can possess them with: but
now, that we may no longer (by a forced silence) be a dissatisfaction to our
Friends, grievance to the Truth, offense to the Saints, a trouble to our own
Consciences, and advantage to the Adversaries, or be so much the subject (as we
have been) of our Enemies malice, to forge their lies, jealousies, or evil
reports upon, nor yet be suspicious to many, and for signs and wonders to most
in the Commonwealth; as if we were monsters, and not men; infidels, and not
believers; enemies to Government, and not orators for it day and night, as God
has appointed it; We shall therefore (in the behalf of thousands more (we
hope) one with us herein) in all faithfulness, meekness, and clearness, declare
unto you, (and to all the world) how far we are engaged in this most glorious
(though crucified) cause of Christ, (maugre all opposition of Men or Devils) in
as little room as this short Narrative will allow us; being awakened thereunto
every day. Yet it cannot be expected, that in this Paper we should relate all
our Grievances, lay down all our Grounds, or answer all Objections, (which we
hope to do hereafter) but only so far as may make obvious to any unbyassed eye
or understanding, the just rise of our Discontents, Troubles, and
Dissatisfactions, and as may exonerate our souls in the sight of Heaven and
Earth.

O our bowels, our bowels! our hearts even ache, and are pained within us, to
hear the doleful and daily groans of Gods people, crying out, O where are our
Deliverers and Saviors! The Reeds that we leaned upon, have pierced our hands,
and we bleed! And after our eyes fail with looking for Freedom, Peace, and
Light, behold Darkness, Oppression, and Distraction! and what hope is left us?
And all this, through the declension of the Armies first Principles, and former
Declarations, extant to the view of the world: witness p. 14, 15 of the
Remonstr. Albans, and p. 66. They urge it upon the grounds of Common Right,
Freedom, and Safety, that Parliaments be by a certain succession, Annually, or
Biennially. And in their Declar. June 14. 1647. p. 8, 9. they declare this so
essential and fundamental to Freedom, as that it cannot, nor ought it to be
denied or withholden from us: and that arbitrary or absolute power in any
person or persons during life, does not render that State any better then
Tyranny, nor the People subjected thereto any better then Vassals. And
therefore they say, p. 9. We are so far from designing or complying to have an
absolute or arbitrary power signed or settled for continuance in any persons
whatsoever, as that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have
it so in the persons of any whom we could most confide in, or who should appear
most of our own opinions or principles, or whom we might have most personal
assurance of, or interest in; but that the Authority of this Kingdom in
Parliament may ever stand, and have its course. Yet for all this, were not the
last Parliament dissolved, for that they would rule as Saints, (or part of the
fifth Monarchy, for Christ) and for doing that the former Parliament neglected,
and therefore were dissolved? and for doing that which the Army and good people
had many years declared to be their duty to do? viz. Remonstr. p. 20. And have
not some by Printing opprobriously and injuriously abused those precious
members that stood for the Magistracy and Ministry of the Gospel, or Unction,
as if they would have had no Government, no Ministers, nor Propriety at all?
and, after all their integrity, cast an Odium upon them, and upon the name of
Saints, yea, and upon the Interest of Christ, against which they have opened
the mouths of many thousands to blaspheme? O these are the swords which pierce
our hearts! Besides, does not this Personal Interest now up, look too much
alike that which God has confounded and stamped upon before our eyes? in the
same predicament of Pride, Profaness, Persecution of Saints, and Oppression,
with them that went before? Oh! are not the Wicked exalted on every side, and
such taken up again, (Malignants and others) as not long since they most
declaimed against? and are not the Saints (and them only, or mostly)
afflicted, cast out of their Assemblies from praying and preaching? and some of
the faithfullest of them in all these Wars, now closely imprisoned (for their
Consciences and this Cause of Christ) from the common air, yea, cast among
Malefactors condemned; threatened, reproached, and trampled on? Oh! can we have
hearts so hard, as to mention these, and (many more) such like effects, without
yerning and mourning? Besides, are not the new Court of Tryers at Whitehall for
Ministers, of like make with the Bishops High-Commission-Court? The Graven
image of the worldly power, creating a worldly Clergy, for worldly ends,
highly scandalous, and against the Rule of the Gospel, and Faith of Christ, and
as much to be exploded as the Pope and Prelate? notwithstanding they assume the
title of Orthodox, and soundness of opinion to themselves, and upon that
account charge others (that are not one with them in their Carnal and
Antichristian Interest) with Errors and Rashness. But, as the Declaration of
the Army to Scotland, (p. 15) says, This has been found in all ages of high
advantage to them that assumed it, that it were strange if those (Civil Tryers)
should not have used it to smite them withal, whom they would render odious,
and destroy. And is not This against their own Declar. to Scotland, p. 16.
where they say, That that Church Government which is of God, Gods own means,
viZ. his Word, must establish, without a busy meddling with, or engaging of the
authorities of the world? And the Lo. General CROMWELL, in his Letter to the
Kirk-assembly from Dunbar, p. 11. says, It is worth considering, how those
Ministers take into their hands the instruments of a foolish shepherd, that
meddle with worldly policies, or earthly powers, to set up that which they call
The Kingdom of Christ; which indeed is neither it, nor, if it were, would such
means be found effectual for that end; and neglect, and not trust to the Word
of God, the Sword of the Spirit, etc. Is not this all true in the Tryers? And
is not this also against their own Remonstr. Albans, page 20. where they
declare it the Parliaments part, to protect religous men, and take away all the
corrupted Forms of outside-Religion, and (National) Church-stare, whether
imposed without Law, or rooted in Law in times of Popish ignorance or idolatry,
or of Gospels dimmer light; and also to take away the dependence of the
(National) Clergy in Civil Laws and Ecclesiastical affairs, which they had
upon the King; or that interest of the Clergy in Civil Laws and Affairs, which
the craft of both in length of time had wrought for each other: But that the
King's part was to discountenance the Godly, or any conscience obliging above
or against humane or outward Constitutions, and to uphold and maintain the
Civil dependence of the Clergy, and their Church Matters, under him. Our
bowels are so moved at these things, that we cannot refrain from bewailing our
condition, after so vast a stream and treasure of the blood, tears, prayers,
lives, and spoils of our dearest relations. O did we ever think to see so many
hopeful Instruments in the Army, Churches, and elsewhere, to be so fully gorged
with the flesh of Kings, Captains, and Nobles, etc. ( i. e. with their Lands,
Manors, Estates, Parks, and Palaces) so as to sit at ease, and comply with
Antichrist, the World, Worldly Church and Clergy. Oh! how has the Cup of the
Whore foxt and enchanted men! viz. with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, to commit sin with her daily, (which the sober blush to see) and
to paint her over afresh, for New Lovers to lie down with, to their utter
ruin! O the Mystery of Iniquity works apace! This subtle spirit and soul of
Antichristianism (in a new body) has bewitched many of the Common sort, and is
wonderful cunning to deceive; although by this universal falling away amongst
us, the Man of sin is (blessed be Jehovah) more discovered then ever, who must
be destroyed with the breath of Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his
coming. Yet under a sad sense of so many fresh assaults which the Saints meet
with daily by outward Violence, and Ecclesiastical Tyranny, and in a clear
apprehension of that heavy Doom and Precipice hard by (we verily believe) upon
all those Powers and Interests of men, which keep warm the Seat of the bloody
Beast for the Mother of harlots: And after many Solemn Meetings, and seekings
of God for a special presence, rolling our selves only on his Arm, having no
carnal confidence, (blessed be our wise God) now left us to look upon, we are
fully persuaded in our souls, that he who has hitherto most eminently
appeared, and plainly owned this blessed Cause (which the Apostates of the
times have cast aside, and we yet cleave unto) in England, Ireland, Scotland,
and elsewhere, according to the faith and prayers of his poor despised people,
that he will yet appear, and that more eminently, (and terribly too) to save,
then ever, and witness to the righteousness of his own Cause, and the
innocence of his servants that suffer therein, in great mercy and pity,
passing by the failings and infirmities of us his poor creatures. Therefore
though we are sure that God will vindicate his own Name to purpose, ere long,
under so much reproach; yet, in the dread of that Name, we appeal unto the
LORD, who will be a swift witness against us, if we utter these things in
hypocrisy, or for base ends, or for any carnal Personal Interest whatsoever,
if we are not in the sincerity and simplicity of our hearts (so far as we have
one grain of true grace in us) for Christ alone, and his poor rejected Cause
and People, that we may ease and exonerate our selves in the sense we have of
our duty herein, and be withdrawn (to the eye of all) from partaking in the
crying sins and Apostacy of the Times; with all faithfulness, holy awe, and
humility, we profess and declare,

1. For this Cause and Kingly Interest of our Lord Jesus, in England, Ireland,
and Scotland, or elsewhere, according to the several Declarations of the Army,
sealed to with the blood of thousands of the precious Saints, the cry of whose
blood is for Christ, according to the Declaration of the Army to Scotland, p.
36, 37, 38, 39. who declare, They were stirred up by the Lord to assist the
Parliament against the King, for this end, To bring about the destruction of
Antichrist, and the deliverance of his true Church and people; and upon this
simple account was it, that they engaged in the Wars of the three Nations,
against all Opposers of this work of Jesus Christ; having these things singly
in their eye, viz. the destruction of Antichrist, and advancement of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and deliverance and reformation of his Church, and the
establishment of Christ's Ordinances according to his Word, and the just Civil
Liberties of Englishmen. And this, they declare, with the loss of many precious
Saints, p. 38. That they engaged against the late King and his Monarchy, as one
of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints: which act
(they say) they are confident God will own against all Kingdoms or Nations that
will oppose them, and that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be King. So page 39.
they declare, they value the Churches Then owning the Congregated Churches, as
appears by Letters written to Mr. Feak, and Mr. Simpson, and the Churches that
walk in fellowship with them, and others.
of Christ, who are the lot of Gods inheritance, a thousand times beyond their
own lives; and that it is their duty to persevere therein to the utmost hazard
of their lives: and that the Lord made them instruments to vex all in his sore
displeasure, that take counsel against Christ, whom the Lord has anointed and
decreed King: and that they were not merely the servants of man; and that they
were not merely the servants of man; and that they not only proclaimed Jesus
Christ, King of Saints, to be King, but that they would submit to him (alone)
upon his own terms, and admit him (only) to the exercise of his Royal
authority. Therefore say they, in page 40. We beseech you, in the fear of God,
look about you: for our Lord Jesus is coming, etc. Now accordingly we have and
do declare for this Royal Interest of Christ, which ought to be set up, which
so much blood has been poured out for, like water, in the three Nations.) This
Cause of Christ was magnified by God, in answering the Dunbar-Appeal against
the King of Scots: The English Army appealing to God, according to the Act of
Parliament, 1648. declaring it High treason to set up Charles Stuart, or Any
other person, Chief Magistrate in England, or Ireland, or any of the Dominions
thereunto belonging. And as our Appeal was for No King but Jesus, (by which
were the greatest Victories obtained that we had) the Scots Appeal, on the
other side, was for A King, or Personal Interest of Man, etc. God's answer was
so full and wonderful on the No King's side but Jesus, and according to the Act
of Parliament, (upon which the Army marched against the King of Scots) that all
Scotland was given in in few months, and their armies destroyed: and, to use
the very words of the Act of Parliament, Die Martis, 17 September. 1650. This
answer was enriched with so many remarkable circumstances, as is to be admired
at by succeeding generations; evidencing such a divine presence, as the
Commonwealth can never be thankful enough for: and that it was given in as a
Seal or Confirmation from heaven, of the justness of this Cause, after solemn
appeals made on both sides to God himself, the righteous Judge in this War
between England and Scotland: and that God did so decide the Controversy,
(himself) was of such value and high consequence, that Generations to come may
taste the sweet of it etc. Besides all this, much more we might mention (of
their own) for this Cause and Kingly Interest of Christ; which we are resolved
to adhere to, and (if the Lord will enable us) never to recede from, but to
live and die in it. Neither is it a Resisting of Government, (as some say of
us) but a Reforming of it (which our Principles lead us to) according to the
Word. And seeing the Army and Parliament have often declared, as page 7. of
Declar. June 14. 1647. No resisting of Magistracy, to side with just
Principles; upon which Maxim they assisted the Parliament against the King:
and that it is one witness of God in the world, to carry on a testimony against
the injustice and unrighteousness of men, and against the miscarriages of
Governments, when corrupted, or declining from their primitive and original
glory. We use their own words. It Is true, Every soul must be subject to the
higher powers; and it is in obedience thereunto, that we are subject to Christ,
and stand by this his Cause (as we do) so long as the Controversy is not now
(with us) between Man and Man, (as was wont to be in other ages) but it is
between Christ and Man. Which of these two then shall have the absolute power
of Government in the Nations? and who are the resisters of the higher powers
which are of God, those that own, or those that oppose Christ's claim? Judge ye!

2. Because the Boutefeu's of the Times are ever blowing up the flames upon us,
and incensing the present worldly powers and others against us, with their
lying accusations, and evil surmisings, as the adversaries did, Ezra 4. and
Nehem. 6. against Judah and Jerusalem, (to render them odious to Artaxerxes)
that they intended to rebel when they had done their building; and that if he
suffered them to go on, it would hinder his Revenue, etc. and so Sanballat sent
Nehemiah word, that he and the Jews intended to rebel, when they had done with
the walls they were about: and all this, to weaken the hands of them that had a
mind to work. Therefore, to avoid such Jealousies and Fears, We do freely
declare against all Carnal Plots, Devilish Designs, or Ungodly Combinations of
men whatsoever, as inconsistent with those gracious Principles which have (we
hope) carried us (and yet do daily) into a spiritual warfare and hot contest
for this Cause of Christ, by the Word, Faith, Prayer, and Solemn appeals unto
our God, the righteous Judge of heaven and earth. And indeed, being (thus)
armed with the whole armor of God, we dare (as before) wrestle with
Principalities and Powers; and, through the grace of our God, we are not afraid
of their Armies or Numbers, but (although we have not the least reliance on any
arm of flesh, yet) we can bid defiance unto all the enemies of this glorious
Cause of Christ contended for by the Saints, with those means that God's Word
leads us unto; for which, our dear brethren are imprisoned, and suffer
persecution at this day. Therefore, in a just and necessary defense of what is
dearer to us then our lives, (bought with the price of the blood of Christ, and
thousands of his dearest Saints) we call heaven and earth to witness between us
and our brethren that have denied us and this Cause! For in Cases not clearly
or properly under man's judgment, or where it is not easy for man to give a
certain judgment, the engaged, upon sure Principles and Pretenses, do center in
appeals to God for judgment: and so did the two tribes and a half, Josh. 22.
for that it is then the proper work of God to bear witness, and give righteous
judgment: which as he has always done, sooner or later, clearer or darker,
after the Appeal is made to him; so in this last age and part of the world he
has made more haste then formerly to judgment, and given it more quickly,
speedily, and terribly, and made his own Arm so bare therein, as all men might
see it: witness the aforesad Appeal at Dunbar. In the same Cause the Appeal is
now made (by us) again. All which has induced us to take up the Word of God,
Faith, and Prayer (by Solemn Appeals to the just Judge of Heaven and Earth) in
the like and the same Cause. A few particulars of the Matter whereof, take as
follows.

1. About their Vows, Declarations, Promises, Engagements, made unto God for
Christ and his Interest, Psalm. 66.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 23.21. Eccles. 5.3, 4. 5.6.
in time of their great distress: all which, are they not broken, both as to
Magistracy, Ministry, Churches, Liberty, and the Right of the Saints of the
most High? We appeal to God.

2. Whether an espousing of the same or a like interest with that which God
has destroyed before our eyes, and rejecting this blessed Cause of Christ,
King of the Nations, for a Personal Cause of Man, as we now conceive, Jer. 3.1,
Mal. 2.11. be not a provocation of God in the highest degree, and too full a
testimony of the foulest hypocrisy and selfishness in them, whose former
Profession and Declarations obliged them to the contrary?

3. Whether a persecuting and imprisoning some of of the choicest and holiest
servants of Christ, in the present light, and work of this Generation, whilst
the Wicked are exalted on every side, and such as were cast by, taken up again,
Isa 49.24, 25. Ier. 13.17. be of God, or no?

4. Whether the violence and force, flattery, or any other ways which are used
to compel any of us, against our Consciences, to prostrate to men's carnal
interests, and to sin against the light, be according to their former pretended
Principles, or the Word of God?

5. Whether their unjust and unchristian accusations of us in the face of the
world, are not full of loathsome and cruel lies, whiles they spread about, That
we are against Magistracy, Ministry, Propriety, Ordinances, and the like?
Whether it be so or no, we appeal to him that judges righteously.

6. Their vexing and rising up against the Spirit of God, which they call an
Impostor, and the false, devilish, fanatic spirit of Blackfriars, or
Alhallows-meeting; speaking blasphemously against it, and that frequently:
wherein we appeal to the Lord to judge, Whether that Spirit that is among them,
leading to Pride, Pomp, Worldliness, Carnallity, Lying, Persecution, and
Blaspheming; or that Spirit which leads us day and night to the duty of Faith,
Assembling, Praying, Preaching; Exhorting, and Building up in the present Truth
contested against by them, and to Comforting Counselling, and Quicking up one
another every day, to hold fast our profession without wavering; to
Self-denying and Morification, that we may not mind the present World, nor the
vanities thereof: Whether this Spirit, our infirmities excepted, or theirs,
which acts them, be of God; and which is the devilish, wordly, and deluding
spirit. Isa. 63.10. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

7. Is not pomp, pride, and vanity in Court and elsewhere, now up again, (in
some respects more then ever) so much contested and inveighed against for so
many years together, by themselves and others? Whether by these (amongst other
things) they have not opened the mouths of the Enemies to blaspheme Christ and
his Spirit? to reproach his Cause, and to harden their hearts? And whether they
have not given advantage to Charles Stuart or some others, to invade us, our
lives, our relations, afresh, by open Wars, Inundation of blood and Mischief,
so as seems to make void and uneffectual many years Wars, with vast treasure,
expense and blood?

8. Whereas they say, we are all for Wars, and would have no Peace with the
Nations round about; we appeal to God therein, whether we are not for the best,
safest, and lasting (godly) Peace? and, were it God's will, could wish no more
blood might be shed! Although we would not willingly see a peace (worse then
War) made with the nations, against the Word of God, Safety and Liberties of
the good people, (for which so many have bled both by Land and Sea) and upon
such terms too, as makes more for the interest of some men, then for the
Public; or upon such Articles, (as might make us blush for shame, at this time
of the Day, and after so many outgoings of God in the midst of us) as have not
so much as one Article for the Lord Jesus, or his Saints, that are in the
present work of this generation, concerning Christ's Kingdom or Interest, to
subscribe unto, Numb. 33.52, 53. to the end. Exodus 23.32, 33, and 34. chap.
12.13.

Upon these (and many other) grounds, we are induced (and are resolved in the
strength of Christ) to keep up the Altar Josh. 22.34.
ED, and continue our Appeal until the Lord does answer in justice, and yet in
much mercy, to his poor little remnant, (which we are persuaded will be
speedily) as Luke 18.7, 8. And if men will (yet) needs blind their eyes, and
harden their hearts (we could wish it be not to their destruction) yet we do
bless our heavenly Father that has opened our eyes, and kept our feet from
falling, (with them) that we can so comfortably see the things that concern our
(best) Peace, according to the Law and the Testimony, in the sure Word of
Prophecy. Blessed be JEHOVAH. Amen, Amen.

3. But thirdly and lastly, for that we find much Misunderstanding among some,
and Misrepresentations among most, of the Fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom of Christ
in the Nations, which the holy Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testament,
do clearly and plentifully declare, with a positive period to the Worldly,
Heathenish Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions of men, as they are now executed
in the Nations of the world: And whereas it is also upon the hearts of many of
the choice servants of God, that in this present Age the Lord JEHOVAH is
setting up the fifth Kingdom, (as Dan. 2.44. and 7.22, 26, 27. Zech. 21.) which
shall not be left to other people, but shall break in pieces all the four
kingdoms, and remain for ever and ever; and that (at this time) whenas the
fourth Monarchy is partly broken in these Nations, that Christ may be the only
Potentate, the King of kings, and of all Nations, 1 Timothy 6.15. Micah 4.7. Zech.
9.9, 10. Col. 1.16. Heb. 2.8. Rev. 11.15. and 17. Chap. 14 and 19. Chap. 15.16.
Now finding this (the present Truth) so much opposed by the National Rulers and
their Clergy, yea, and by some godly people and Church Members, accounted
Orthodox, who cannot endure the day of Christ's coming; We therefore are
resolved, according to the presence and assistance of the Lord with us, to
entertain a serious Censideration and Debate for the benefit of all others,
touching the premises, viz. of the Laws, Subjects, Extent, Rise, Time, Place,
Offices and Officers of the fifth Monarchy, or Kingdom, whereby the World must
be governed according to the Word of God, without the mixture (as now is) of
Men's Laws and Inventions, whether in respect of Magistracy or Ministry, Church
or Civil affairs: which Debate we intend to hold once a week in this City of
London: and we desire our beloved brethren which are one with us in the present
Truth and sufferings, whether in Churches or out, whether in City or Country,
(that are enlightened) to take special notice of it, for this end, that they may
enjoy the like fredom with us in those Meetings and Debates, as often as they
please to come. And if the Lord give us the liberty, we do purpose to proceed
with the Debate of it from this day onward, until we have taken up a full and
clear Narrative thereof (so far as shall appear to us) out of the Scriptures,
fit to publish to the view of all men, that our Principles in that point of the
fifth Monarchy, may be fully known; with desire to know what any of our
Adversaries (now against us) shall have to say to us or to our principles
therein; who are contented with all our souls (the Lord knows) to be convinced
of any Error or Mistakes by the Word of Truth: But we think not Imprisoning or
Persecuting us, a competent or fit way to convince our Consciences; if we were
in errors, as they pretend.

And although we need no Law of men to allow us this Liberty, it being our
Birthright in Christ among Christians, and so fully warranted by the Word of
God, and practice of Primitive Saints; yet if we should condescend to the
Captious of our times, we could tell them, The Instrument, entitled, The
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, in the five
and twentieth Article declares, That Liberty shall be given to discover and
confute Error and Heresy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine. All
which the Engager, fol. 46. has promised in the presence of God to observe,
and cause to be observed to his power; subscribed, O. CROMWELL. In the mean
time, men would do well to take heed of Blaspheming, Reproaching Christ, his
Spirit, and his Monarchy, as they do daily, (for which our hearts are grieved
within us) and to search the Scriptures whether these things be so or no. For
as the Lord Cromwell writes, in his own Letter to the Kirk of Scotland, The Word
of the Lord may be to some a word of judgment, that they may fall backward and
be broken, and snared and taken; there may be a spiritual fullness, which the
world may call drunkenness, (or giddiness) Act. 2. O that we might beseech such
in the bleeding Bowels of Christ, (crucified before our eyes) to think it
possible they may be mistaken! Though the Great Ones, and Wise Ones, Priests
and Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, and Orthodox Professors (so accounted of the
times) were all on their side; yet a little handful of the weak ones may have
the Truth (though but the despised persecuted Truth) on their side. And we do
in the tenderness of our hearts and affections to all that are faithful, beg of
them in the Name of the Lord Jesus (who is coming to reign righteously and
gloriously) that they will have nothing to do with them that are guilty of so
great sins, lest partaking of their sins, they partake also of their plagues.
And we hope the Lord will enable us to undergo the sharpness of this day, for
our dear Christ and his Cause, through the Reproaches, Imprisonments,
Persecutions, unjust Charges, uncivil Railings, or un-Gospel Carriages, which
we have, or are like to meet with, whether less or more, so we may drink out of
Christ's Cup, and pledge our Master, who first drank to us the bitter Potion.

We shall close at present with our heartiest prayers and supplications, That
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would in his due time cast down all
those carnal, earthly, cruel and political combinatious of men (of all sorts)
that would not have him to Reign over us, but set up themselves, and their own
corrupted interests, in the room of that Scepter of righteousness which he has
given into the hands of his dear Son; that he would by his Spirit (resting and
abiding upon you and us) keep up all our hearts in a constant and patient
waiting for his coming till he comes: Even so come quickly, Lord Jesus come
quickly.

ORDERED by this Assembly, (mentioned in the last branch of the Declaration)
That 150 (and no more) of the Names subscribed to the Declaration, be
transcribed out of the Original Copy, and published in the name of the rest:
And that a short Word to the Reader be drawn up and printed, to signify so
much.
The 30 day of the sixth month. 1654.
Of the Church that walks with M. Feak, now close prisoner for this cause of
Christ at Winsor-Castle.
EManuel Runwel Will. Bathoe John Jones Philip Hieron Miles Petty John Green
Tho. Cartwright Robert Shepherd Peter Kirby Peter Chamberlain
In the name of the whole Church that walks with Dr. Chamberlain.
John Light John Spittlehouse John Davies Richard Ellis Richard Smith Robert
Feak John Rogers
In the name of the whole Body that walks with Mr. Rogers, now prisoner for
this Cause of Christ at Lambeth-prison.
Henry Bridges Glid. Beaumont Gregory Garth Hur Horton William Medley
Christoph. Crayle Samuel Rutter Edward Grove John Saunders Gregory Kirby
William Russel Benjamin Rutter Francis Young Abel Wescot Humphrey Talbot James
Gresham John Fuller Nicolas Spencer Thomas Ridel Joseph Jefferies Thomas
Bernard James Hicks William Righton John Palmer David Morris
Of the Church that walks with Mr. Raworth.
Richard Bland James Wilson George Rickets Thomas Selbie Thomas Waltham Daniel
Rosier John Swetnam Robert Ask Philip Rickards Robert Young George Lawson
Josiah Carsewel John More
With M. Knowls
John Withinbrook Thomas Franklin John Perkins John Dunton Robert Mason David
Towler Joseph Heather Simon Wyld John Hewet Nathaniel Ask Thomas Harrison John
Webber Daniel Ingold Thomas Wilkes
Of the Church that walks with Mr. Simson.
Jeremy Wright John Sealy John Turner Will. Shrewsbury John Coombe Arthur Jones
Peter Kidd Daniel Hackman Joseph Cleaver
Of the Church that walks with Mr. Jesse.
George Barret John Clarke Thomas Pierson William Minchin Nathaniel Hewet
Joshua Rickards James Allen John Berry James Rich John Jones Joseph Makreth
George Ewbanck
Of the Church that walks with Mr. Barbone.
William Morris John Thorn Peter Soon John Green John Iackson Thomas Trouer
John Richardson Thomas Raymond John Luxford James Willow Christopher Cope John
Tufnel Hugh Griffen Samuel Bradleigh John Young Caleb Nicolas Robert Smith
Thomas Crundal John Franklin William Lucas James Mason William Mort
Of the Church that walks with L. Col. Fenton.
William Seal Edward Farmer Humphrey Bache Samuel Gilbert Ferdinando Adam
William Smart Thomas Wheeler Lawrence Ranson. Thomas Hill Matthew Turner Robert
Steel William Johnson Mihil Miles Thomas Baker John Hayward Will. Burrowston
John Glover
Of the Church that walks with Justice Highland.
Lewis Honyburne John Allen Philip Thomas Ralph Willis John Nicks John Low John
Read Anthony Cooper Robert Woodard Nich. Waterson Jeremy Wright William Bate
John Marlow etc.
To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THou art desired to take notice, that the End of this DECLARATION being to
witness to the blessed Truth, with the persecuted Cause and servants of the
Lord Jesus, these NAMES published are thought sufficient. Fewer, might have
rendered it an inconsiderable Testimony, and given Men advantage against us
(and Christ's Cause) on that side. The Multitude, or More (either those which
we have, or the which we might have hereto) might probably represent it far
more evil, formidable, or dangerous to them, (that are too ready, the Lord
knows, to receive any Charge against us for our Faith and Consciences, in these
matters of Christ's Kingly Interest.) Now to obviate this Advantage, also, which
men might have taken, Order is taken for these Names only, and no more, to be
published herewith; and that several other Churches beside, whom we might
mention, be forborne. And for subscriptions out of the Countries
(notwithstanding the hundreds out of Kent) they are also all omitted, on
purpose, to leave it to the Churches in their several Counties to bear their
own Testimony to this suffering Cause of Christ and his Saints, as in discharge
of our Duty (with the comfort of our Consciences, blessed be our heavenly
Father) we (who are judged to be in the first place concerned) have done, and
DO this DAY, in the sight of heaven and earth; and GOD IS OUR RECORD.

FINIS.

