A DECLARATION Of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders Of the County of
Surrey: Concerning their late PETITION AND The Slaughter and Imprisonment of
several of their COVNTREY-MEN; With their RESOLVTIONS thereupon.

Published for the Information of the Kingdom.

may 18th Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Declaration of the County of SVRREY.
AS we conceive it the Freedom of every Englishman, to petition the Supreme
Authority of the Kingdom, for redress of grievances, nay for the removal of
things established by Law; so we must acknowledge it to be our duty to rest
satisfied in the Judgment of Parliament, after the final determination thereof,
till another Parliament can be called, which may be in a capacity to grant what
by the present is denied. The consideration hereof did enduce us to make an
essay, to obtain such things as in our present apprehensions did appear the
most conducible to the Peace of the Kingdom; In order whereunto we desired in
that our Petition, that the King might be restored, never entending in the
general, that he should be brought in without satisfaction and security, first
given to the Kingdom: For we know well, (although the stream of many of our
Countrymens affections run strongly toward the bringing in of the King upon any
terms, nay, without any conditions;) yet should it be so, the Kingdom must of
necessity be miserably inslaved; For the King must, by the ruin of his
opposers, advance those that have sided with him, and have suffered by him; and
what discontents and commotions that will produce, we that have faithfully
served the Par. are not a little sensible off. We confess many of the Kings
party joined with us in our desires, and seemed to concur with us in our ends
and intentions, but by their deportment then, and since in appears, they only
made use of that pretense of petitioning, to discover their opposer^, and to
exasperate as many as they could, thereby to draw them to an engagement one
against another, that by such a confusion they might the easilier accomplish
their design of restoring the King to an unlimited power, and enslave all the
well-affected party in the Kingdom.

We could not but take notice of the threatening words which they gave out
against the Kingdoms best Friends, and what provocations they put upon the
Soldiery, on purpose to pick a quarrel with them; and at that time, though our
hands were to the Petition, and we present, yet our souls abhorred such their
deboist behavior.

We cannot but testify our dislike of their abusing the Soldiers, and
endeavoring to force the Parliament: and also, that the Soldiers should in
such a violent manner assault all men, and so barbarously kill, wound and
plunder all men, whether Friends or Foes, without exception.

We cannot but declare unto all our Countrymen, who desire the Peace of the
Kingdom, that for the Future we shall not presume to trouble the Parliament
with any more Petitions, we being now convinced of this truth, (viz.) that it
is much below the People of England to Petition their Trustees.

And therefore in pursuance of Future safety, we shall desire our Countrymen to
engage with us in these following particulars. 1. That if it shall be adjudged
necessary to bring in the King, that sufficient satisfaction and security be
first given to the Kingdom, and that his power for the future be limited and
declared. 2. That a period be set to this Parliament. 3. That the charge of the
Army be duly computed, and an equal tax laid upon all lands for the payment
thereof, we being resolved not to suffer free quarter any longer; and that so
soon as the occasions of the Kingdom will permit, the Army be disbanded. 4.
That no man be continued in power among us but such as shall have appeared
faithful to the Kingdom in the late War. 5. That we may associate our selves
together as one man to stand up for the defense of one another, till these our
just desires be accomplished.


And we further declare that we shall not rest satisfied, or cease the
prosecution of these ends, neither shall we think our Trustees in Parliament
have discharged their duties unless they appear effectually in the prosecution
thereof, that we may be reduced to a certainty, either by a settlement of the
Kingdom with, or without the King, by an ease of our heavy pressures, by an
increase of trade, and by the due execution of Justice; in the performance
whereof the Kingdom may expect a return of peace and plenty. And we further
add; That it is our sense, that those families which are destroyed by the late
slaughter of their friends at Westminster ought to be taken care of, for
without mercy there is no justice.

And lastly, we are resolved, That in pursuance of the forementioned ends to
use our utmost endeavors, and in order thereunto shall put our selves into a
posture of defense; So that as it is not in our thoughts to offer violence to
any that shall continue peaceable, so it shall not be in the power either of
the King, Parliament, or Army, to destroy us at pleasure; either by Committees,
taxes, free quarter as formerly, neither shall we deny obedience to any just
C^omands of Parliament; only shall act as persons necessitated to seek
security; the Parliament having declared unto us, that a Kingdom must not be
left without a means to preserve it self.

Signed by J. Segmour by consent and in the name of the whole.
Gilford, May 18. 1648.
FINIS.

