A DECLARATION OF THE ARMY OF ENGLAND, Upon their March into SCOTLAND.

SIgned in the Name, and by the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell, and His Council of Officers. JO: RUSHWORTH Secr.

Die Veneris, 19 Julii, 1650.
REsolved by the Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. July 19. 1650.

A Declaration of the Army of England, upon their March into Scotland.
To all that are Saints, and Partakers of the Faith of Gods Elect in Scotland.
WE the Army of England, do from the bottom of our Hearts wish like Mercy and
Truth, Light and Liberty with our selves, from God our Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Although we have no cause to doubt, but that the Declaration of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, bearing date the 26 of June, 1650. and
published, to manifest to the World the Justice and Necessity of sending their
Army into Scotland, may satisfy all impartial and uninterested men in all the
Nations round about us (the matters of Fact therein contained being true, and
the Conclusions made from thence, and the Resolutions thereupon taken,
agreeable to the Principles of Religion, Nature and Nations) and therefore it
may seem to some, if not improper, yet superfluous, for us their Army to say
any more: Yet however, out of our tenderness toward you, whom we look upon as
our Brethren, and our desire to make a distinction and separation of you from
the rest, as who through the cunning practices of some wicked and designing
men, biased by particular Interests, or for want of a true and right
Information, and Representation of the great and wonderful Transactions wrought
amongst us, and brought to pass by the mere finger of our God, may possibly be
scandalized at some late actions in England, and thereby be involved in that
common Cause, so much from Heaven declared against, by blasting all persons and
parties that at any time, in the least, under what pretense or disguise soever
engaged therein, and so with them to become partakers of their Miseries.

We have therefore thought fit to speak to some particulars, and that as in the
presence of the Lord (to whose Grace, and in the dread of whose Name we do most
humbly Appeal, and who (should we come to a day of Engagement) will be a sore
Witness against us, if we utter these things in hypocrisy, and not out of
bowels of love, to persuade the Hearts and Consciences of those that are godly
in Scotland) that so they may be withdrawn from partaking in the sin and
punishment of evil doers; or that, at least, we might exonerate our selves
before God and Man, do Remonstrate as follows:

And for as much as we believe many godly people in Scotland are not satisfied
with the proceedings of this Nation concerning the death of the late King, the
rejection of his Issue, the change of the Government, and several actions
conversant thereabout. Although it cannot be supposed that we shall in this
Paper meet with all Objections that may be made, (these very particulars alone
requiring more lines then we intend in the whole) Yet we briefly say, That we
were engaged in a War with the said King, for the Defense of our Religion and
Liberties; and how many times Propositions for a safe and well-grounded Peace
were offered to him, and how often he refused to consent thereto, you well
know, which according to humane account he might have closed with, had not the
righteous God, who knows the deceitful heart of man, and is the preserver of
Mankind, (especially of his people) in his secret judgment, denied him a
heart to ascent thereto. By which Refusals he made it appear, That nothing less
would satisfy, then to have it in his own power to destroy Religion and
Liberties, the subversion whereof he had so often attempted: That He was a man
guilty of more Innocent Blood in England, Ireland and Scotland, even of those
he ought to have preserved, as a Father his Children, then any of his
predecessors, or (we think) then any History mentions, the guilt whereof he
brought upon his Family by solemn Appeals to God: That the Son did tread in the
Fathers steps, and pursue his Designs, destructive to Religion and Liberty:
That a party in Parliament, false to God and to their trust, were willing, and
did endeavor to betray the Cause into the late Kings hands: That a remaining
number in Parliament, desiring to be true to God, and to the People that
entrusted them, (out of Integrity of Heart, and fearing that the high
Displeasure of God would fall upon them if they had not done it) did bring to
Justice and cause to be executed, the said King; did reject the Person now with
you, did lay aside the House of Lords, (an Estate not representing the People,
nor trusted with their Liberties, yet at that time very forward to give up the
Peoples Rights, and obstruct what might save them, and always apt enough to
join with Kingly Interest against the Peoples Liberties, whereof we wish you
have not like sad experience) and did, for the good of the people, resolve the
Government into a Commonwealth. And having done all this, that they are not
accountable to any other Nation, is sufficient to say to you, except it be to
excite you to rejoice in this wonderful work of God, and to be thankful to him
for so much Deliverance as you have thereby, and leave the rest to the State of
England, to whom it does only and properly belong, who have manifested their
regular proceedings therein, according to the true and equitable intent of the
constitution of England, and the Representors of the people in Parliament, in
their several and respective Declarations, if they be looked into, to which we
refer you. Besides, it is worthy consideration, with how many Providence this
Series of Action has bin blessed, which would require a Volumn to recount.

If Treaties be urged against us, It is easy to say by whom they were broken,
and how eminently, even by the then full Authority of the Parliament of
Scotland, and the Invasion by Duke Hamilton, and yet that not the first breach
neither. And if it be said, That has been protested against, and revoked
since; We ask, Does that make up the breach, so as to challenge England still
upon Agreements and Articles; you know, as to Right it does not, except you
suppose that England made their bargain so, That Scotland might break, and
England remain bound; whereas it is a known Law of Nations, That in the breach
of the League by the one party, the other is no longer obliged.

If the Covenant be alleged against us, this may be said by us with honesty
and clearness, Religion having therein the first place, civil Liberties the
next, the Kings Interest and constitution of Parliament the last, and these
with subordination one to another: The Covenant tied us to preserve Religion
and Liberty, as the ends of it, even when these were inconsistent with the
preservation of the Kings Interest, and the frame of Parliament; because when
the means and the end cannot both be enjoyed together, the end is to be
preferred before the means. Now that there was a real inconsistency between the
end and the means, and that the lesser did fight against the greater, is your
own judgment, who in a Book of yours, called, A necessary and seasonable
Testimony against Toleration, say thus of the two Houses, page 12. And
doubtless, the Lord is highly displeased with their Proceedings in the Treaty
at Newport, in reference to Religion and Covenant; concerning which, they
accepted of such Concessions from His Majesty, as being acquiesced in, were
dangerous and destructive to both. Had we not then appeared against these
Concessions, and likewise against those of both Houses who acquiesced in them,
had not Religion and Liberty both been destroyed? which now by the blessing of
God are preserved. And if that action concerning the Parliament deserve a
Charge, yet least of all from your selves, who when you saw the Parliament
which sent Duke Hamilton with an Army into England, proceed in ways destructive
to Religion and Liberty; you countenanced and acted with those that rose up for
public Safety, though contrary to Acts of Parliament, and called a new one,
excluding whom you thought fit; all which was done by virtue and authority from
the Committee of Estates then sitting at Edinburgh, which indeed was no
Committee (if you respect formalities) (the breach whereof you so often charge
upon us) being constituted of such persons, as by Act of the foregoing
Parliament, had not legal right to sit or act therein; they not having taken
the Oath (for faithful discharge of the Trust reposed in them, in reference to
the late Engagement against England) enjoined by that Parliament to be taken by
every Member of the Committee at his first sitting, or else to have no place or
vote therein, as is fully set down in the Commission for the constituting of
that Committee of Estates. We could more particularly set forth how the
Committee of Estates there sitting, according to the literal sense of the
aforementioned Commission, was broken and driven away, by that force raised and
acted by you as aforesaid: but we spare, not seeking to justify our actions by
yours, but to show, that you have done the same things for preservation of
Religion and Liberty, which you so highly charge as evil upon us. And
therefore, we further desire you seriously to consider, That the inconsistency
of our Religion and Liberties, with the Kings Interest and former constitution
of Parliament, did not arise from our jealousies or pretenses, but from the
hardness of the Kings heart, and the backsliding of the greater part of those
that were entrusted in the Parliament, by their acquiescing in those
Concessions, and endeavoring immediately to bring in the King upon them. We
therefore reckon it no breach, but a Religious keeping of the Covenant
according to the equity thereof; when our Parliament for Religion and Liberties
sake, and the Interest of the People, did remove the King and Kingship: As also
we assert our selves Keepers of the Covenant, when the competition has been
between the form and substance, if we have altered some forms of the Government
in part, for the substance sake.

As for the Presbyterial, or any other form of Church Government, they are not
by the Covenant to be imposed by force; yet we do, and are ready to embrace so
much as does or shall be made appear to us to be according to the Word of God.
Are we to be dealt withal as Enemies, because we come not to your way? Is all
Religion wrapped up in that, or any one Form? Does that name, or thing, give the
difference between those that are the Members of Christ, and those that are
not? We think not so. We say, Faith working by love, is the true Character of a
Christian; and, God is our witness, in whomsoever we see any thing of Christ to
be, there we reckon our duty to love, waiting for a more plentiful effusion of
the Spirit of God to make all those Christians, who by the malice of the World
are diversified, and by their own carnal mindedness do diversifie themselves by
several Names of Reproach, to be of one heart and one mind, worshipping God
with one consent. We are desirous, That those who are for the Presbyterial
Government, should have all freedom to enjoy it; and are persuaded, That if it
be so much of God, as some affirm, if God be trusted with his own means, which
is his Word powerfully and effectually preached, without a too busy meddling
with, or engaging the Authorities of the World, it is able to accomplish his
good pleasure upon the minds of men, to produce and establish his purposes in
the World, concerning the Government of his Church. And as for the Blasphemies
and Heresies wherewith some Statists amongst you have labored to brand us; We
can say, That we do own those sound Grounds and Principles of the Christian
Religion, preached and held by the generality of godly Ministers and Christians
of these later times; abhorring from our hearts, and being ready to bear our
witness against any detestable Blasphemies and Heresies lately broken out
amongst us; we have already punished some amongst us for Blasphemy, and are
further ready to do it; but how uningeniously we have been dealt with by some
amongst you, and of our own Countrymen, in heaping Calumnies upon our heads, to
render us vile and odious to our Brethren, yea and the whole world, we leave to
God to judge, who will, we trust, in due time make these things manifest. But
were Presbytery thus to be contested for, and that in upholding it, all
Religion did, and would flourish; yet, how improbable it is, That the course
taken by those in Authority with you, will produce the things you desire (to
say no more) let your own experiences a little mind you.

What pretenders were some Lords and other persons in the North of Ireland,
whilst they mingled the Presbyterian with the Kingly Interest; and the
Ministers by their preaching, seduced the people from their Obedience to
England, under the same pretense: But no sooner had those persons got the power
into their own hands, but they shook off the Ministers, by threatenings, causing
some of them to quit the country, and in general, discouraging the exercise of
the Government there, declaring plainly by their actions, that it was but a
device to draw on the Royal Interest; and those very persons that did get power
into their hands under those pretenses, immediately joined wirh Owen Roe O
Neal, and those bloody Irish Rebels upon the Kingly Interest. It will not be
unfit to mind you also, how the Nobility and some of the Ministers of
Scotland, Preaching, and crying up a War against England, under pretense of the
Covenant, did thereby lay the foundation to Duke Hamiltons getting the command
of that Army, who over numbering them in Parliament, power and friends, and by
the advantage of Malignants, thrust all that you could call the good party, out
of Power and Authority, himself getting the command of that Army into England,
and leaving his Brother and other Kindred in power in Scotland: Thus upon the
same ground and pretense, to carry on the Kingly Interest, have you been twice
deceived; and now he is brought in among you, who has turned every stone, and
tried all Friends and Allies in Foreign parts, endeavored commotions at home by
his wicked and Malignant Instruments, commissioned Rupert, the French, and all
that Pyratical Generation, who do spoil, take, plunder and destroy our Ships
and Trade at Sea, and all to the end he might destroy the people of God, and
the peace of the Three Nations: And now being by his Mother, and the Popish
Interests abroad councelled thereto, has made a compliance with you, as his
last refuge, who, even whilst he was treating with you, had his heart set upon
Montross and his Accomplices (writing Letters, and sending particular Orders to
him) and upon his Popish Army in Ireland, to whom he had given Commissions, and
whom he still owned as his faithful Subjects, notwithstanding all the Innocent
Blood by them shed; and would never be induced to comply, or close with the
Covenant and Presbytery, till utterly disappointed of all those his Malignant
and Popish hopes and confidences.

Is there not now just cause for all good men, with you, to fear, that one so
bred, so engaged and interested, and merely in such a way coming in to you,
does but watch his opportunity (to speak nothing of the weight of the Blood of
Saints under the Altar, crying still for Vengeance upon him and that Family)
till by his influence upon your Army (which you know how composed) he may gain
his ends upon you; and how likewise the generality of the people of Scotland
are affected, is not unworthy of your most serious consideration, nor of a
friendly intimation from us.

But that which most awakens us, is, That notwithstanding all this, and all the
wrongs done to England from Scotland, they refuse to do us right; so that what
wrongs soever we have, or shall sustain, must be without remedy, and we also
without security for the f^re; as is sufficiently expostulated in the
Parliament of Englands Declaration aforementioned, and the (...) said of a
perpetual War, by taking our grand (...) into your Bosoms, and your Engagement
to Him, in the late Treaty with Him, to restore Him to the possession of
England and Ireland; and therefore we call Heaven and Earth to witness, Whether
or no, we have not cause to defend our selves by hindering the present power of
Scotland, from taking their time and advantage to impose thus upon us: And
whether they have now any just reason to wonder at the approach of an Army to
their borders, and the taking some of their Ships by ours; yea, whether our
coming into Scotland with an Army, upon so clear a ground, be any other, then a
just and necessary defense of our selves, for preservation of those Rights and
Liberties, which divine Providence has through the expense of so much blood
and treasure given us, and those amongst you have engaged, they will if they
can wrest from us, unless it must be taken for granted, That the Parliament of
England ought to sit still and be silent, whilst their ruin is contrived,
their Friends and Brethren destroyed by Sea and Land, whom in Conscience and
Duty, both before God and Man, they ought to preserve.

And now we come to speak to all those who are within the compass of the Title
of this Declaration, That we undertake this business in the fear of God, with
bowels full of love, yea, full of pity to the Inhabitants of the Country; and
if it shall please God to make Scotland sensible of the wrongs done to us, and
to give to the Commonwealth of England a satisfying security against future
injuries, we shall rejoice. But if that may not be obtained, we shall desire
such as fear God, not to join or have to do with those who are the Authors and
Actors of so much evil and mischief against their Neighbors. And we dare say,
to the praise of God, That that which moves us to this great undertaking, is
not any reliance upon the arm of flesh, or being lifted up with the remembrance
of former successes, or the desire of accomplishing any designs of our own
that we have forelaid, but the full assurance we have that our cause is just
and righteous in the fight of God, looking at all precedent changes, and the
successes that have produced them, not as the work of the policy of strength of
man, but as the eminent actings of the Providence and Power of God, to bring
forth his good will and pleasure, concerning the things which he has
determined in the world. And we are confident, that as he has hitherto
gloriously appeared, so he will still, bearing witness to the righteousness of
this Cause, in great mercy and pity of the infirmities and failings of us his
poor Creatures. And we do most humbly implore his divine Majesty to give a
merciful testimony, whether the actings of diverse men amongst you have not
proceeded from worldly interests, together with the rancor and bitterness of
their spirits, who we fear through envy at Instruments, have refused to
acknowledge his hand and goodness in the accomplishment of these great changes;
and whether ours have not come from the simplicity of our and other his poor
servants hearts, who we trust, have desired (though in the midst of manifold
weaknesses) to follow him in integrity, through difficult paths, having nothing
but danger and ruin appearing to the flesh, and little to encourage us, saving
those signal manifestations of his presence in those high acts of his
Providence, and the fear of his Name, lest he going before, we should not
follow.

And this we can further add, That nothing is so predominant within us (next
to our duty to God, nor to betray a cause, to which he has so much witnessed)
as the love we have toward those that fear God there, who may possibly suffer
through their own mistakes, or our disability to distinguish in a common
calamity, of which Christian love, we hope we gave some proof and testimony,
when we were last in Scotland with this Army; and were by God made
instrumental, to break the power of those that then oppressed the Godly Party
there, and were then ready at their desire to do every thing on their behalf,
which might put them into the seat of Authority and Power, whose consciences
knows this is true, and for which, this late Act of Engagement to their new
King against England, is no good requital, nor their heaping upon us the
reproach of a Sectarian Army, a Christian dealing; all which we do with comfort
commend to God, and can notwithstanding all this, say, By the Grace of God, we
can forgive and forget those things, and can, and do desire of God, that the
precious in Scotland, may be separated from the vile, which is the end of this
our Paper. And to the truth of this, let the God of Heaven in his great mercy,
pardoning our weaknesses, judge of us, when we come to meet our Enemies in the
field; if through the perverseness of any in Authority with you, God shall
please to order the decision of this Controversy by the Sword, which we from
our hearts, beseech the Lord to avert, and to give you the like Christian and
Brotherly affection toward us, which we by Gods grace bear toward you.

Signed in the name, and by the appointment of his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell, and his Council of Officers. Joh. Rushworth, Secretary.


