A DECLARATION OF The Noble Resolution of the Earl of ESSEX his EXCELLENCE.

Concerning his intention in going forth with this great Army, consisting of
60000. now advancing forward under His Honorable command; in the defense of
the King and Parliament, and the Protestant Religion.

With an excellent Speech delivered unto his Honor, immediately before his
departure, by the Lord Roberts, before diverse Colonells and Captains at Essex
House, to encourage the Earl in his proceedings, and the justice of his cause,
being undertaken for the general good of the Kingdom.

Being thought fit to be published for the satisfaction of well affected
persons, and true Protestants.

Sep: 9 LONDON, Printed for T. Banks. 1642.

depiction of a man on a galloping steed

A Speech made unto the Earl of ESSEX his Excellency, by the Lord Roberts,
Son in Law to the Honorable Earl of WARWICK.
MY LORD,
I Know unto whom I speak, and therefore the address of my Speech shall
rather be a commendation, than an admonition to your Honor, in matters of
Knowledge and Valor; your noble Spirit being the Magazine and Armory of
knowing magnanimity, which together with other virtues inherent in your soul,
render you the most Illustrious example of true Nobility. I need not
commemorate here the noble actions of your worthy father, whom the Commons do
still remember with a reverend adoration, thinking all the praises and prayers
that they can accumulate on the name of Essex, to be poor sacrifices of their
unfeigned love and affection, which being derived from your noble father, is
now with the same fervor and heat of applause, by the general vote of the
people, cast upon your Honorable Excellence. But because it is but the part of
a School Orator, to endeavor with the Stars of Rhetorical figures to
illustrate the brightness of the Sun, to praise the beauty of the Spring,
rich in the dowry of nature, or generally to shadow out the exact portracture
of any thing that carries in it self a complete perfection: it would now
appear an extravagant affectation of words to amplify your Lordships troops of
Militant virtues, shining in you as in the thrice Honorable Son of Essex
valor, your breast being pregnant and swelling with all the natural gifts of
a complete and Heroic General.

It will become me therefore to leave the discourse of your generally
acknowledged praise, since the hearts and hands, and tongues of the Commons
united together, do with the utmost strength of good will cry Vives le Roy
and Essex, God save the King and Essex, that goes for the safety of the King,
and the general good of the Kingdom.

This War my Lord has a various object; the occasion has been formerly
manifested; the malignant party, and instigators thereof are well known, and
distinguished into kinds, as Papists and their adherents, together with evil
Counselors; but we hope and do believe with a faithful truly grounded
confidence, that the event shall with severe Justice teach those revolting
firebrarnds of dissension, that malum Consilium Consultori pessimum, Their
evil Counsel shall be revenged on them that were the evil Counselors.

If your Honor look into the material part of this intended war, your
Lordship may d^scerne there a Parliament opposed and oppressed in right and
privilege: nay, this Parliament, which must under God be the preserver of
three Kingdoms: This Parliament, which is the last hope of the long oppressed
Protestant Religion: This Parliament, which does preserve the Rights and
Liberties of the Subject, and does endeavor to correct all injustice and
oppression, by which also public dangers and fears are prevented: Lastly,
this Parliament which is the only means to continue us to be anation of free
men and not slaves, and to be owners of any thing that we may call our own, in
a word this Parliament which has so courageously endeavored to prevent an
inundation of all misery and confusion, and indeed the very desolation and
rain of this Kingdom.

This Parliament my Lord, through an inveterate malice they desire to destroy,
but I hope it will destroy the destroyers, and be a wall of fire to consume
them, as it is a wall of brass to us, to defend King and Kingdom, us and all
we can call ours.

The clouds that are like to make this foul day of war did first gather very
fast together at York, there keeping the beams of his Majesty's favor from
shining upon his Parliament and people, and now they threaten a sudden bloody
storm, but as clouds full gorged with ^apours do commonly weep out themselves
in showers of rain, and having emptied their own substance, vanish, so it is
to be hoped that the great and pious preparations of the Parliament will either
dissipate these appearing clouds of civil war, or else force them to quench
this fire of dissension by them raised, even with a shower of their own blood.
But what are strength or forces but motions and dumb shows of war, unless
they receive a quickening virtue from their magnanimous Commanders? from your
Excellence (my Lord, the soldiers receive animatioon, courage, life, flame,
and valiant hearts, nil desperandum est auspice Christo, and Duce comite
Essexiae, they are confident of victory through God and your Excellencies
magnanimity, they look on you as the Coriphaeus and sum of valor, and the
matchless Phoenix of a noble father, some sacred charm dwells in the name of
Essex that with so sweet a violence attracts the iron-hearted soldier to
follow your Excellence as their honorable and beloved adamant, or rather your
constant faithful heart to King and Country, has given you a fixed seat in
popular affection. Thus the soldiers do by a loving Sympathy with your honor,
and your Honors Ancestors, derive from you the influence of their courage and
forward resolution to attend your Honor, while you fetch your Promethean fire
from heaven, advancing forward with a strong army and with noble intents, the
safety of the K. the preservation of the Protestant Religion, the subduing all
malignants, the free privilege of the Subject, and the good of the Kingdom
and Commonwealth being the only end of this great expedition under you their
honorable Excellence.

There is no greater joy nor happiness in a Commonwealth in times of apparent
danger, than to have some heroike Atlas, in whose supporting fidelity they may
confide, and that through the assistance of Almighty God will like another
^oshua undertake to fight their battles. There was ever in other Commonwealths
an Alcibiad^s a Themistocles and some valiant Captains or other that in the
pressures and grievances of the state of their Country took courage to defend
it from a civil war, and now in these times of distractions, when the sword
threatens to impose a tyranny on the Subject, the divine power has encited and
encouraged the Earl of Essex his Excellence with a free and noble resolution
to undertake either a desired pacification between the King and his Parliament
if it may be obtained, or else a vindication and revenge against those
Cavalliers and malignants that do either seduce the King or oppose the
Parliament. And as his noble valiant father was so dear unto the people that
his name is never mentioned but with much expressions of love and affection, as
if they would never forget his service in many noble designs, so that he may
show that fortes creantur fortibus, valor is derived from the Ancestory to the
Posterity, has now by the votes of the Parliament, and the desire of the
Commons, buckled on his armout, intending to carry a defensive army into the
oppressed parts of this Kingdom, now pillaged by the outrages of hostility,
and though he goes forth strongly accommodated with all warlike ammunition, and
with many troops of Soldiers drawn out of the City and Country, who with
cheerful willingness will declare their courage in this expedition, yet his
strongest confidence and resolution cousists in the goodness and justness of
his cause:

It is not to add more illustrious titles to his name, for he has honor
enough derived unto him from his father and also inherent in him by his living
virtues, but he desires to do service for the King in beating off those flies
and parasites that have whispered so much evil counsel into the Kings ear,
thereby to alienate his affection from his loyal Parliament and people, for it
is better in all political justice, that some ill-affected members should be
cut off, rather than the whole body of the Commonwealth should perish, and
besides, the liberty of the Subject is precious and ought to be maintained,
that we may know our own, possess our own, and keep our own, and that the
Kingdom may not be converted into a country of Pesants or slaves as France is,
where the King at his free will and pleasure exercising an arbitrary power and
tyrannical government, does upon any accasion squeez his subjects like so many
orange; and if they suffer not themseves to be thus pillaged, their goods upon
the least resistance are confiscated, but if this be not worth defending, yet
who would not adventure life for that which is the life of his soul, the
Protestant Religion, which is in danger now to be changed again into Popery,
should the malignants and papists get the victory. On these grounds and reasons
the Earl of Essex his Excellence has undertook the common cause being full of
Justice, piety, and Religion, is now gone forth under the propitious favor of
God with a numerous and innumerable army collected out of the City and
Country, well appointed and provided with all sorts of ammunition, and
consisting of 40000 brave and resolute soldiers, who advance forward under the
command of the said Earl of Essex his Excellence, to settle an established
peace, or confound the malice of these Machavilian counselors and mischievous
bloody Cavalliers, who are enemies to the King and Kingdom, God bless and
prosper his noble purpose and resolution, to the good of the King, Kingdom,
and Commons of England.

FINIS.

