THE DECLARATION OF THE GENTRY, MINISTERS, FREEHOLDERS Of the County and City
of LINCOLN.
WE the GENTRY, MINISTERS, and FREEHOLDERS of the County and City of
Lincoln, being truly sensible of our Misseries and Greivances, namely the sad
consequents of intestine WAR, the fear of Invasion from abroad, at this time
of our Distractions and Divisions both in Church and State, the violent
alteration of GOVERNMENT, the heavy imposition of unheard of TAXES; All which
of late Years has ruined our TRADE, and impoverished the whole Nation, and
are all occasioned by reason of the many Violences and Breaches made upon our
known established Laws and Fundamental Liberties, Do therefore humbly
propose and declare (having first met and consulted, as other Countries have
done) that the only remedy for our said Greivances, will be for A Free Full
PARLIAMENT, speedily to be called and assembled, to sit according to our said
known established Laws, wherein the Free Votes of all Free People of this
Nation might be included, Since that such only have a leagall Capacity to
enact Laws and Statutes that may equally bind all the free people of this
Nation; And therefore if any persons (how ever empowered) not having the
authority of such a PARLIAMENT: shall take upon them to lay impositions upon
the sree people of this Commonwealth, or to prescribe or enjoyne any
Limitations, Restrictions or Quallifications whatsoever not formerly agreed
upon in full PARLIAMENT. We do declare our selves not obleiged thereto, as
being destructive to the freedom and undoubted privileges of PARLIAMENT.

Printed for H. M. at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1659.


