A DECLARATION Of the Three Deputy-Governors of the Isle of WIGHT, To his
Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX, concerning the taking of His Majesty's PERSON into
safe Custody: WITH A Letter from the House of Commons to Col. General Lambert,
Now Commander in Chief at the Leaguer before PONTEFRACT.

As also, His Excellencies DECLARATION, to avoid interruption in the Excise
Office.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for R. Smith^rst, 1643.

A Declaration of the three Deputy Governors of the Isle of WIGHT.
YEsterday there came into this Isle, some Officers of the Army, Viz. Lieu.
Col. Cobbet, and Cap Merryman, with Instructions from the General and Council
of war directed to themselves, and the Commander in chief here, forthwith to
secure the person of the King in* Carisbrook Castle, as before the Treaty,
until they should receive resolution from the Houses, upon their late
Remonstrance; And they understanding that the management of the affairs of this
Island, was by Col. Hammond committed to our selves, or any two of us, they
acquainted us with their instructions; desiring our concurrence with them, that
so the present work intended by them, might with less difficulty be
accomplished; while we were in debate of these things, there came in a
Messenger from the General with an Order under his hand and Seal, directed to
the Gentlemen; commanding them immediately to take the person of the King into
their charge and to remove him from thence into Hurst Castle, requiring us by
name, with all other Officers and Soldiers in the I Will, to be aidingand
assisting to them therein: two of us, Viz. Major Rolph, and Cap. Hawes, upon
sight of that Order, declared our selves obliged, not to disobey the Generals
Commands, but conceive our selves bound to yield obedience thereunto by our
Commissions, the other of us Viz. Cap. Boreman declared his judgment, that his
duty lay immediately to the Govenour, who had instructed him, contrary to whose
Instructions and Commission, he could not act, neither was he of himself in a
capacity to oppose them in that service. Cap. Hawes being dis-satisfied in the
action, manifested his unwillingnesse to join in it, and his resolution,
neither directly nor indirectly to oppose it. But these Gentlemen with the
concurrence of the Army forces here and the assistance of a fresh Troop of
Horse, and one Company of Foot (which landed in the night) in pursuance of
their Comands, very civilly made their addresses to the King (according to
another Order from the General, for his usage with all civillity, and due
respect unto his person) between 5 and 6 a clock this morning (by some of the
Gentlemen, who by the Parliament were appointed to attend him) acquainting His
Majesty with those Orders and instructions, they had in charge from his
Excellency the Lord General concerning him, who presently and quietly
consenting thereunto, set forward in his Coach, from Newport at 8 of the clock
this morning* toward Hurst Castle, with Mr. Harrington, Coll. Harbots, and
Cap. Mildmay, and other of his servants to attend him. Now we do assure you
that in the whole transaction of this great affair, there neither was nor is
the least disturbance in this Isle; his Majesty is safely arrived at Hurst
Castle. Thus we have with all clearness and faithfulness given you a full and
impartial account of these late proceedings here, having so done we subscribe
our selves.

Your humble Servants* Maj. Rolph, Cap. Boreman, and Cap. Hawes.

To Colonel General Lambert.
SIR,
WE have often considered the great services and wants of that Brigade under
your command now (as we are in formed) at Pontefract, which have likewise been
often presented to us by the Lieutenant General: And although our care and
endeavors, have bin for your supply; yet such has been the difficulties and
impediments in getting in of Money, that we could not (till now) attain any
considerable sum to return unto you. For that purpose we have now assigned a
Months pay to your two Regiments of Horse, Col. Brights Regiment, and the five
loose Companies of Foot, which we understand are appointed for the managing of
the Siege against Pontefract, as you will perceive by the Warrants enclosed, we
have desired the Treasurers at Wars to return this moneys by way of Exchange,
and we hope it will come timely for your supply: Sir we shall be always ready
to contribute our best assistance for your encouragement and supply (according
to our powers) in the service you are now upon, To which we desire God to give
a blessing.

Gentlemen,
WHereas upon this present eight o^ December, a party of horse and foot came to
the Excise Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excise.
These are to assure them, That the said Forces came thither by a mistake, and
that there was not any Intentions, to give Interruption unto the due Levying of
the Excise, or to seize upon any money in cash; and that you may proceed as
formerly according to those Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, which you have
received concerning the same, and that no molestation or hinderance shall be
given by the Army. I remain

Your very assured Friend FAIRFAX.

For my worthy Friends the Commissioners of the Excise and New-Impost.
FINIS.

