THE DECLARATION OF THE Rebels in Scotland;
IT is not unknown to a great part of the world how happy the Church of
Scotland was whilst she enjoyed the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in Purity and
Power, of the which we have been deplorably deprived by the Re-establishment of
Prelacy; so it is evident not only to impartial persons, but professed Enemies,
with what unparallelled Patience and Constancy the People of God have Endured
all Cruelties, Injustice and Oppression, that the Wit or Malice of Prelates and
Malignants could Invent or Exercise.

And being most unwilling to any thing which might import Opposition to lawful
Authority, or Engage the Kingdom in War, although we have been a long time
groaning under the overturning of the work of Reformation, Corruption of
Doctrine, slighting of Worship, despising of Ordinances, and the Changing of
the Ancient Church Discipline and Government, thrusting our so many of our
Faithful Ministers from their Charge, Confining, straightly Imprisoning,
Exiling, yea and putting to Death many of them; and introducing upon their
Flocks a company of insufficient and scandalous persons.

And Fining, Confining, Imprisoning, Torturing, Tormenting, and Scourging,
Stigmatizing Poor people, Plundring their Goods, and Quartering upon them Rude
Soldiers, Selling of their Persons to foreign Plantations, horning, and
intercommoning many, whereby great Numbers in diverse Corners of the Land were
forced to leave their Dwellings, Wives, Children and Relations, and made to
wander as Pilgrims in hazard of their Lives, none daring to reset (or receive
them) harbo^^ o^ supply them (though Starving) or so much as speak to them for
fear of the same Punishments.

And these things acted under color of Law and in Effect tending to Banish not
only all sense of Religion, but also to extinguish all Natural Affection, even
among persons of the nearest Relations; and likewise groaning under the
Intolerable Yoke of Oppression in all our Civil Int^res^s, ou^ Bodies,
Lib^r^es and Estat^s; so that a^^ ^^a^^ n^^ of O^trages have ^een most
Arb^^ra^^ly Exercised upon us through a Tract of diverse Years bypast,
particularly in the Year 1678. by sending against us an Armed Host of barbarous
Savages, contrary to all Law and Humanity; and by laying on us several
Impositions and Taxes as formerly, so, of late by a meeting of pre-limited and
overawed Members in a Convention of Estates in July 1678. for Ke^ping up of
(...) ^^me^ For^e entrusted as to a great part of (...) in ^^e hands of Avowed
Papists, or Favorers of them, by whom sundry Invasions have been made upon us,
and most Exorbitant Abuses, with incredible insolences committed against.

And we being continually sought after, (...) for Diviner Worship Ministers and
(...) Apprehended, and most rigorously (...) and so being (...) Attend the
Lords Ordinances in the Field even in the (...) place, (...) there often hunted
out to the Eff^sion of (...) amd (...) many of us* so that we were i^e^itably
(...) either (...) selves by Arms at these Meetings, or be altogether deprived
of the Gospel Preached by Christ's Faithful Ministers, (...) slaves.

And at one of whese Meeting (...) on the first of (...) being the Lords Day,
Captain Graham of Cla^^ors being* Warranted (...) late Proclamation to Kill
whomsoever he ^ound in A^^os at Field Conventicles, did furiously Assault the
People Asse^^ble^ and (...) provoke did ^^^elly bind like* Beasts, a Minister,
(...) other People whom he did that very Morning find (...).

And several being killed on both sides, and they knowing (...) that by their
Law, if apprehended, they behoved (...) they (...) to their own defense and
continued together, and there after ^^ny of our Friends and Country (...) being
under the same (...) and expecting the same measure, did freely offer their
Assis^^^^.

We therefore being inevitably and of absolute Necessity forced to take this
last Remedy, the Magistrates, having shut the Door by a Law against any
Application; That whatsoever, our Grievances either in Civil or Sacred Matters
be, we had not the priviled^^ of a Supplicant or Petitioner.

Do judge our selves bound to declame that these, with many other horrid
grievances in Church and State, which we purpose to manifest more fully
hereafter, are the true Causes of this our Lawful and Innocent Self defense.

And we do most solemnly in the Presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of
Hearts, declare, that the true Reasons of our continuing in Arms, are heartily
and sincerely these.

First, The Defending and Securing the true Protestant Religion, and
Presbyterial Government founded on the Word of God, and summarily comprehended
in our Confession of Faith, and Catechisms, and established by the Laws of this
Land, to which the King, Nobles and People, are solemnly engaged in our
National and Solemn League and Covenant.

And more particularly, the defending and maintaining the kingly Authority of
our Lord Jesus Christ over his Church, against all sinful supremacy deregatory
thereto, and incroching thereupon.

Secondly, The preserving and defending the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority in preservation and defense of the true Religion of the Kingdom, that
the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyalty that we have no
thoughts nor intentions to diminish his just power and greatness.

Thirdly, The obtaining of a free and unlimited Parliament and a free General
Assembly in order to the redressing the aforesaid Grievances for preventing the
Eminent Danger of Popery and Extirpating Prelacy.

This therefore being the Cause we do appear for, and do Resolve in Gods
great name to own, hereby homologating or assenting to all the Testimonies, of
all the Faithful sufferers for truth in Scotland these Eighteen Years bygone.

We humbly request the Kings Majesty would be pleased to restore all things as
he found them, when God brought him home to his Crown and Kingdoms, and if that
cannot be obtained then we heartily and humbly Invite, Entreat, Beseech and
Obtest in the Bowels of Jesus Christ All who are under the same Bonds with us
to Concur in the defense of this Common Cause and Interest, and that they would
not stand still and see, not only us oppressed, the foresaid Cause Ruined,
Adversaries highly and proudly insult against God, and all good men. Friends of
the Truth discouraged, yea the Protestant Religion in Brittane and Ireland,
destroyed; but even themselves within a little while made a Prey of, or else
force when we are broken, (which the good Lord prevent) dreadfully to wrong
their own Conscience.

Finally because we desire no man's hurt or blood, we request our Country men
now the standing Forces of the Kingdom, some of them being our Friends and
Kinsmen not to fight against us least in so doing they be found fighting
against God, whose Cause and Quarrel we are sure he will own and signally
Countenance, seeing we fight under his Banner who is the Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.

