(...) present Engagement in Defense of his Countries Liberties, etc.
(...)IR,
I Think my self, and the Gentlemen and others you know to be now engaged with
me, have no hopes by new Troubles to better our present condition; with
thankfulness we may say it, God has made our Lot larger than our Desires in
that kind; and we suppose by that blessing, put an obligation upon us, as we
are considerable Members of our Country, to have more sober and courageous
thoughts in time of extremity than other men have: And though the Indifference
that lies upon other men's spirits might flat ours, yet we tannot think, but if
it were represented to them, how the present Power does obliege us to put out
our right Eyes, when they require us to acknowledge them as a Parliament, and
lay upon us such heavy and grievous Burdens, and such deceitful ones, as a
Years Tax in Three Months, besides the many other Impositions of Excise, etc.
And by raising among us a Militia, they cut off our right Hand, by subjecting
us under the meanest and most fanatic Spirits of the Nation, under pretense of
Protection; their spirits would be warmed into the same zeal and indignation
that ours are kindled with. Now consider what it is we ask, and consider
whether it be not the same thing we have asserted with our Lives and Fortunes?
A Free Parliament: And what a slavery it is to our Understandings, that these
men that now call themselves a Parliament, should declare it an act of
Illegality and Violence in the late aspiring General Cromwell, to dissolve
their Body in 1653. and not make it the like in the garbling the whole Body of
the Parliament from 400 to 40, in 1648. What is this, but to act what they
condemn in others? Why do they associate themselves to the present Army, or
indeed to the present Commanders in chief, and keep out their numerous and
Fellow Members, if committing Violence on a Parliament be so notorious a crime?
And how do they teach the Soldiers boldly to do that, which themselves
practice, and make them Instruments of? What is this, but under another shape
to act the condemned acts of Usurpation and Tyranny in their old General? What
is this, but to necessitate men to complain? and upon Complaints, to be invaded
by their power, so to raise (if the English Spirits be not dissolved into
baseness and aptitude for Slavery) a Civil War, and to endeavor to water their
own root with the blood of many thousands of their Contrymen; or to gape
after those Confiscations, which by a Victory, upon presumption of the unity of
their Army, they hope to gain over all those that dare with danger assert their
Liberties, (which presumption yet may fail them; for the Soldier has, and may
declare himself, no Mercenary but an English Freeman; which indeed, thought it
be now contrary to his actions, may return into his thoughts again:) And what
will be the issue of all this? A mean and Schismatical party must depress the
Nobility and Understanding Commons; the Land must waste it self, and Forainers,
or others, must take the advantage of all. I dare say, I profess for my self,
and the greatest part with me, we have no aspect but this singly, that we be
not possessed, as Waste Ground is, only by the title of Occupancy, or that the
next that gets into the Saddle ride us. Let the Nation freely choose their
Representatives, and they as freely sit without awe or force of Soldiery; and
whatever in such an Assembly is determined, shall be by us freely and
cheerfully submitted unto. If this satisfy you, I am glad of it, for you are
my noble Friend. I use it not as an Artifice either to engage you, or to make
other Counties follow our Example. Which if they do not, let their posterity
judge their action and ours: For we were born for our Country; and our
Country, our Religion and Laws are in danger, and we will not be unconcerned:
But we are faithful and peaceful in the Land, and if they in Authority will
decline hostility, and agree of a means to admit the old Members of both
Houses, or to call a new Free Parliament, Let him be (and he only is truly) a
Traitor, that resolves not his Judgment and Obedience into their
Determinations. I am

(SIR) Chester Aug. 2. 1659. Your humble Servant GEORGE BOOTH.


