A DECLARATION Published in the North of England, AND Sir Arthur Haslerigg's
Letter TO Genesis Monk in Scotland, WITH His Resolution touching the Parliament
and Army; the Rising of the Country; and the number of Horse and Foot, drawing
to a Randevouz, and marching toward Northumberland.

ALSO, A Declaration of the Generall-Council of Officers at Wallingford-House;
And the number of Horse and Foot that are to march from the City of London,
toward York.

LONDON: Printed for N. Crook, and are to be sold in Cornhill, 1659.

Whereas the product of several years Experience has manifested to these
Nations the various Changes, and Revolutions, both in Church and State, the
admiring Turnings and windings of many in power: yet the ordinary workings of
providence has so often shown it self in the advancement of this Commonwealth,
that upon the reading thereof, we may track them in their progress: Yet seeing
it has pleased God by the hand of his wise and all disposing Providence, to
bring the Affairs of this Nation into the state and condition wherein they now
are, the Army hold themselves obliged to give an account to the people of their
proceedings therein: And conceiving it unnecessary to look back, or reflect
upon the secret Designs which were contrived in the former Parliament, We hold
it sufficient thus to demonstrate: That the Army have declared to walk in the
ways of peace and Righteousness, and effectually to establish the Nation upon a
true Basis of Government, and the happy Foundation of a Commonwealth; and not
only to keep these Nations from sinking into confusion, but to see it happily
established upon the just principles of Liberty and Freedom. And whereas the
Parliament was pleased to rescent the proceedings of the Army, with a deep
sense of disaffection, being highly incensed by Sir Arthur Haslerig, That they
had a dangerous Design against the House; who declared, That there was a
project on foot, to introduce a new Government, by setting up a single person,
etc. Insomuch, that the House fell into high Debates, expressing great heat and
anger against the Lord Lambert, and several other faithful Officers of his
Brigade, voting null their Commissions: And afterward ordered a Bill to be
brought in, and (contrary to he usual Orders of Parl.) thrice read in one and
the same day, and passed into an Act, thereby enacting, That all Orders,
Ordinances, and Acts made by any single person and his Council, or by both or
either of them, or otherwise, or by any Assembly, or Convention pretending to
have Authority of Parliament from and after the 19. day of April, 1653. and
before the 7. of May 1659. and which have not bin, or shall not be enacted,
allowen, or confirmed by this present Parl. be, should be, and were thereby
declared, deemed, taken, and adjudged to be of no force or effect, from and
after the said 7. of May, 1659. which was altogether contrary to what was
humbly desired in the 30 Proposal of the Petition and Address of the 12 of May,
1659. and committed that Proposal to a Committee of their own, to bring in such
a Bill or Bills for that purpose, as they thought necessary. And in the same
Bill it was likewise contained, That no person or persons should after the 11.
of October (being the very day that the said Act was hastily passed) raise
moneys without consent of the people in Parliament, thereby in an instant
putting a doubt and discomposure upon all men's minds that are concerned in
matters of that nature, so that if any thing should cross such their strange
proceedings, the Army might be necessitated to that odious Refuge of Free
Quarter, or else be exposed to such provocations, through the want of a fit
provision for their subsistence, as might alienate their minds from that care
and duty that is incumbent on them, for the peace and security of the
Commonwealth. And not only so, but the other mischiefs arising from this
precipitate Act will prove many and great. For then the most choice and godly
Ministers of the Nation will be found to be comprised herein, and themselves
and their maintainances altogether avoided, and great numbers of profane and
scandalous Ministers, which have bin ejected for near the space of 6 years
past, will then be re-estated; the Adventurers and Soldiers Lands in Ireland
left at a loss and in confusion; the Rebels that were transplanted there, be at
their liberty to return; the Union made between England and Scotland rendered
invalid; all Estates conferred on any person or persons by former Governments,
though upon never so valuable and public considerations, left in a dangerous
and uncertain condition, to the unravelling and unknown discomposure of several
men's estates and interests, the consequences whereof will in short time appear
by the sad effects of multiplying Suits, and vexation of innocent persons, if
the said Act could be deemed as valid. Concerning which we shall add no more
but, that had not strange precipitancy and design driven it on, it could hardly
be believed, that any Supreme Authority would ever have exposed a people to
such inconveniences.

Things being thus prepared in order to further ends, the next day (being
Wednesday) the Parliament hoping they had a great influence upon part of the
Army, and conceiving they had by their late Acts sufficiently perplexed those
whom they doubted might opposed them, and that the Government of these Nations
was so sure in their own hands, as in all probability things might come to
confusion, except managed by themselves, proceed vigorously to put their
designs in practice. In the morning, the Doors of the Lobby, by their
appointment being fast shut and guarded, that none might by any means come near
to the House, or understand their proceeding: Occasion is administered from one
of the Letters which was signed by several Officers, according to appointment
of the General Council, and sent to a Regiment of the Army, and produced by a
Member of the House (it being of no other purport then the sending the said
Representation and Petition to one of the Regiments of the Army as is
beforementioned) Yet nevertheless they fell foul upon the several Officers
who had subscribed it, and took this rise in pursuance of their former intent,
to make a plain breach upon the Army; and thereupon Vote out of their Commands
(without hearing any one person speak for himself, or examine whether the
persons whose names were subscribed, were their handwriting or not) the Lord
Lambert, General Disborow, and seven other Colonels and Field Officers,
disposing diverse of their Commands to the Officers next under them: And as they
did the day before, so now, they hastily passed it into an Act before they
rose, for the making void the Lord Fleetwoods Commission, and envesting the
Command of the Army in seven persons, whereof himself was one, some of whom
were the principal in carrying on this whole design. Whereupon the House
adjourned, and three of the said number immediately repaired to the Speakers
Chamber: And having provided themselves of six Barrels of Powder, and a
quantity of Provision, forthwith gave out Orders for Colonel Morley's Regiment
to draw thither; as also to diverse other Regiments, Troops and Companies, which
they thought would be most sure to them; And likewise gave order to Colonel
Okey to draw his Regiment to the Palace yard, upon which he marched to
Tuttle-fields with four of his Troops; and from thence (having sent one into
the Pallace-yard he marched with the other three into London for countenancing
the drawing together the Militia Forces, in order to a conjunction with them,
which proved there ineffectual, but had other success in Southwark, where by
like directions, Colonel Thomsons Regiment drew together under the Command of
their Lieutenant Colonel; and that no endeavors might be wanting, Orders were
sent to Col. Hackers Regiment, quartering in and about Leicestershire, and
other Troops in other remote places in the Country, to march to Westminster
with all speed; the tendency whereof, must naturally lead to the engaging the
City, Country, and Army, in blood.

The Officers of the Army having received notice of these things, and being
greatly amused at so strange and sudden a mutation, and that the office of
Commander in chief, should be thus minute executed by the hand of my Lord
Fleetwood, and the next, by the hands of Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Col. Morley, and
Col. Walton; and that Orders were so speedily hastened out for the drawing of
force together, were in great doubt, that such strange and violent courses, did
portend some sad and fatal event: And thereupon, they judged it their duty, for
preservation of themselves, their friends, and honest interest in the Nation
and Army, to draw together in Arms, and march to the Palace yard at
Westminster, (the place they had appointed for their Rendezvous) to understand
the reasons and grounds of their so assembling themselves together: And being
arrived there, and perceiving that several Companies of Col. Morley's Regiment
were placed in the Hall, Gatehouse, Clockhouse, and Exchequer Chamber, and
thereabouts, in hostile manner, all endeavors were used to inform them of the
true state of affairs, and to draw them to such a compliance wi^h the rest of
their Brethren of the Army, as might avoid the effusion of blood; but finding
them, by the persuasion of their leaders, obstinately bent to oppose, We found
our selves necessitated to put the Forces into a posture of defen^e; and for
the grounds and reasons aforementioned, (as also, that they might no be further
encouraged and countenanced in such a dangerous opposition, to the apparent
hazard of the public peace) to put a period and determination to the
Parliaments meeting together; and think our selves yet further obliged, for
preventing of the manifold evils and inconveniences, which must necessarily
fall upon the other good people of the Nation, as well as our selves, by reason
of the several Orders, Acts pretended Acts, or other Declaration, or any of
them, enacted, made, or past on Monday the 10th of this instant October. and on
Tuesday and Wednesday then next following, to declare them and every of them,
null and void, to all intents and purposes. And do hereby declare them and
every of them, and every clause and sentence therein, invalid, null and void,
to all intents and purposes: And likew^se all Acts, Orde^s, and proceedings
thereupon had or done, in as full, and ample manner, as if the said Orders,
Acts, pretended Act or Declarations, and every of them, had never been. All
which, we thought fit to publish and declare, to the end, all persons
concerned, may take notice thereof; and no person whatsoever, suffer any
further prejudice thereby, hoping that all peaceable, well minded and
unprejudiced persons, will acquiesce in the necessity and justice thereof.

And now we shall conclude, in declaring to the World, that it is upon our
hearts, and we earnestly desire, and shall endeavor, that a due liberty may be
assured to all the free born people of these Nations, both as Men and
Christians: that a full and through Reformation of the Law may be effected, as
also that a faithful godly and painful Gospel preaching Ministry may be
encouraged and provided for, by some certain way that may be less troublesome
to them, and less vexatious to the people, then that of Tithes.

And we do further declare, That we have no aim or ends, to set up a Military
or Arbitrary Government over this Commonwealth, but have already provided, that
the Civil and Executive part of Government may be lodged in a Committee of
safety, and they obliged in a short time, to prepare such a form of Government,
as may best suit and comport with a free State and Commonwealth, without a
single Person, Kingship, or House of Pears: And that we shall to the utmost of
our endeavors, labor to obtain those desirable things so often declared for;
and to maintain and preserve the peace of these Nations in our several Stations
and Places, and shall hope, that God for his own Glory, and the good of his own
People, will give a blessed end of these troubles, by a happy settlement upon
the principles formerly declared for; and which have been, and still are so
earnestly breathed after, by all those who truly fear his Name,

Who, we doubt not, being truly sensible of the many temptations besetting us
on every hand, the great difficulties we labor under, (and know not what
farther straits a day may bring forth) will say on our behalfs, who are
sufficient for these things? And out of former experiences, being taught, that
the Lord is a present help in time of trouble, will ery aloud for us before the
Throne of Grace, That the Lord himself may appear, and carry on his own work in
our hands. And if it shall please him by his Spirit, to stir up those that fear
his Name, to be instant on our behalfs, We shall not fear what evil men can do
unto us.

Thus having presented you with the state of the Case betwixt the Parliament
and Army, we shall proceed to some particulars touching the Effects thereof,
upon the return of diverse Members to their respective Counties; who by their
intermingled influence upon the Royal Presbyter, as well as Independent,
excited the people to no small discomposure of affections against the
Soldiery, enumerating the dangerous consequences of a standing army, and their
Design to introduce a new Government by a single person: Withal Declaring,
That the people by their electing Members, to represent them in Parliament,
ought not to have their National Knot cut with their own Sword, but to have it
employed in the preservation and defense of their just Rights and Liberties,
for which end it was raised, formed and erected; and that every Individual
Member of the Commonwealth ought to be instrumental in the conservation
thereof, so far as it may be lawful, warrantable, and consistent with the Laws
of God and Man.

Hereupon Sir Arthur Haslerigg seemed not a little active in promoting the
Parliaments Interest in the North, and to depress, extinguish, and alienate the
peoples affections from the Army, which they are prone and inclinable to. And
for the more feasible and effectual accomplishing of this Grand Affair, a
Letter was sent into Scotland, desiring Genesis Monck forthwith to march into
England; whose expectations ('it is said) will be answered, with his own person
at the head of an Army, consisting of eight or ten thousand Horse and Foot. So
that it is feared, a war may break in of the Scottish side, and like a Deluge
sweep all into Confusion. To prevent which, the Lord Lambert (we hear) is
designed for those parts, with 7 Regiments of Horse and Foot, who are to march
from the City of London, toward York.

FINIS.

