A DECLARATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF Thirteen Christian Kings, Princes, and
Dukes, And the present state and condition of the King of Scots:

With their Summons to all Christendom, for the raising of Three Hundred
Thousand Horse and Foot, under the command of Prince Philip, the third Son to
the Queen of Bohemia.

And the King of SCOTS Message to the Emperor of Germany, and the Princes of
Italy; sent by the Lord Wilmot: With their Royal Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, 1652. March.15. 1651.

A DECLARATION OF THE Proceedings of 13 Kings, Princes, and Dukes, touching the
present state and condition of the King of Scots; and their Royal Edict and
Summons sent to all Christendom.
THere has been a great and imperial Council held at Munster in Germany, by
the Ambassadors of 13 Christian Kings, Princes, and Dukes; At which Diet, they
took into consideration the present state and condition of many exiled Princes;
and amongst the rest, a Conference arose touching the King of Scots; but
nothing done therein (at present) by reason of other weighty and emergent
businesses, which call them to a Work of far greater concernment; and may also
prove fatal, if not timely prevented: For the Great Turk, and his Bashaw have
taken the field with seven hundred thousand Horse and Foot, and are resolved
(if possible) to make a great devastation and inroad upon Christendom this
Summer: But great is the care of the Emperor of Germany, the 7 Christian
Princes of Italy, the Queen of Sweden, the Prince of Transylvania, and Prince
Frederick of Malta, to raise a formidable Power, and to unite and join with the
Venetians, both in an offensive and defensive War against the Turks; And in
pursuance thereof, a League is concluding between the aforesaid Princes; who
have had a large consultation thereupon; But that which is thought most
requisite and feasible at present, is, the sending of a Summons to all
Christendom, for Warlike Provisions to be made against the Enemies thereof; And
indeed great reason have they so to do; for never was a more potent and
irresistible Army raised these many years, as now the Turks and Janisaries have
raised. Yet notwithstanding, Prince Philip (the third Son to the Queen of
Bohemia, and General to the Stases of Venice) has given them a great Overthrow
near the Isle of Candia, and killed, taken, and routed about threescore
thousand men: This Overthrow does exceedingly retard the Enemies Design; and as
it is a great prejudice to them, so it is a great advantage to Christendom; And
his Highness Prince Philip has embraced this opportunity; who by the
assistance of the Divine Power, has obtained another great Victory against the
Janisaries: Since which Achievements, he is called Philip the Great; a
Gentleman of a gallant temper, and endowed with excellent Properties and
Virtues, both for prudence, wisdom, and magnanimity of Spirit: He is even
become as great a Terror to the Turks, as Alexander the Great was to the
Christians.

The King of Scots has sent the Lord Wilmot with a Message to the Princes of
Italy, imploring Supplies and Accommodation, suitable to his present
Necessities and Condition; but, they have returned Answer, That by reason of
the homebred divisions, and foreign Preparations of the Enemy in several
parts against the Christian Territories, they could not answer his expectation
at present, etc.

The Duke of Malta has declared, that he will give his Royal Assent to the
Union; and that he will raise forty thousand Horfe and Foot, to join with the
Christians against the Turks; and in pursuance thereof has granted a
Commission to Prince Frederick, Landgrave of Hesse, to command in chief under
his Highness Prince Philips.

By an Express from Amsterdam it is certified, that the General Assembly of the
United Provinces met at the Hague, where there was a large Debate touching the
proclaiming of open Wars with England, otherwise to have restitution and
satisfaction for all their ships and Goods taken: But after mature deliberation
touching the apparent dangers that might thereby ensue, the States of Holland
gave in their positive Result, declaring, That they were resolved (to the
utmost of their power) to preserve a firm League and Union with, the States of
England; and to hold a fair correspondency for the increase of free Trade and
Commerce: Whereupon the States and Merchants of Zealand rose up in great fury,
dissolved the Assembly, and vowed revenge upon the English; but its thought the
States General will be more prudent and wise then to hearken to the cries or
gruntling of the Bores; for here is a Proverb, That the Cries of the Geese are
never heard up to Heaven.

Yet notwithstanding, the spirits of many thousands are much exasperated, and
great are the preparations which are making throughout the United Provinces;
The Merchants of Zealand have sent 40 Commissioners to the States General, to
treat and two hundred ships with Letters of Mart; so that they are again fat
down in Council, and its conceived that at this Meeting, it will be resolved,
to man out about 150 Men of War at the public charge, besides what will be set
forth by the Merchants, and Others, upon Letters of Mart, which (if things hold
at this pass) our Governors that are well-affected to England, will be in
evident danger of utter ruin.

For great are the Contests between the Burgomasters and the Bores; for the
latter does threaten to sequester their Estates, and bring them to a Trial for
their lives, if they will not take a course to defend and assist them at Sea.
And some Tumults and Risings have already been in Zealand, Rotterdam, Dort,
Delf, and at the Hague, where many were both slain and wounded, and amongst the
rest foam English, which the Mutiniers chiefly aimed at, and brand them with
the most infamous Badge of Traitors and Conspirators to their Religion and
Liberties; which they are yet to choose. And upon this Score, diverse English
Merchants are prohibited from coming upon the Exchange in Amsterdam, and other
places. 200 Commissioners have bin sent to all the Frontier and Haven Towns, to
see how many ships each Town can make ready in three weeks time: And having
taken a List thereof, upon their return, caused the same to be printed; wherein
appears the similitude of a great Armado, consisting of about 300 sail of
ships, Danes, Dutch, and Hamburgers: Besides they talk of 200 more to be set
forth upon Letters of Mart; but the truth is; they will talk more by an inch of
Candle in their liquor by Land, then they can perform by a whole pound, when
they are in their Element at Sea. And although they build Castles in the Air,
make their Accounts in Spain, and resolve to cast them up in England, by
blocking up Dover, Sandwitch, Deal, and other Ports.

And the truth is, the English are become odious in those parts, and dare not
walk the streets without great hazard to their persons: But sure it is, That
these Times will not last always.

FINIS.

