A DECLARATION Of the VVell-affected to THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, In the Cities of
London, Westminster, and Borough of Southwark; with the joint Consent and
Concurrence of all the Well-affected in all other the Cities, Towns and
Boroughs of England and Wales, for the Return and Session of The Long
PARLIAMENT, (Interrupted by the late Protector April 20. 1653.) Directed to the
surviving Members of that Parliament.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is our desires to let you know, and by this Instrument to declare, That
although for those many years your Session has been interrupted by the late
Protector, and your visible being withheld from this Nation; yet so long as a
Quorum does survive, notwithstanding that, or any other interruption, your
Authority abides, and you remain the only Legal Parliament of England, until
your Legal Dissolution; and no other Authority or Power ought to be owned or
exercised amongst us: and for our parts, we will neither submit to, nor own any
other for the present Authority, but Yours; and in Yours we will acquiesce, (as
in the rightful Supreme Authority of England) and in no other whatsoever. And
as it is our Duty to Own and Obey your Authority; so, it is your Duties
(Providence having opened the way for you) to Return to your Trust. It is
Treason in us to forsake and decline your Authority, and Breach of Trust in you
not to take upon you the exercise thereof.

You are the rightful and natural Head of our Country, from whence all
subordinate Powers and Administrations Civil are derivative, without which a
Legal new Parliament cannot be called: Law and Common Right denies that to the
Sword; it is inherent only in you.

The Army as de jure they may not disturb or interrupt the Freedom of
Parliaments, so de jure they cannot Summon a Parliament, nor impose a
Government upon us: for the People of England are a free People, the true
Original of their own Authority.

And as the Army can neither give nor take away the right of the People, so
neither will they any ways hinder or interrupt your Session, or invade their
Countries Right: for have they not like true English men appeared as one man
for the Good Old Cause, and made so honest and honorable a procedure therein,
as has united all the hearts of the honest and well-minded of the Nation to
them? for which most just and conscientious undertaking, we do declare our
selves in union with them, and their friends to be our friends, their enemies
our enemies; and that we will stand or fall with them in this their glorious
enterprise. Therefore fear not their interposition; their interest and ours is
all one, and we will jointly stand by you and own you, as (indeed you are) the
Supreme Authority of the Commonwealth of England (as it was established at your
last Session) without King or House of Lords: The several seeming Parliaments
in this deplorable interval of your Authority, and the several Models of
obtruded Government since, being no other, then as one continued Act of
usurpation and innovation upon the Rights of the People, and their Power of
Parliaments.

And now the Grand Enemy and Interrupter of your Session being in the Dust, He
that let being taken away, your Authority arises and reviveth; and the
Army, People and Nation, of course retire to the Good Old Cause; and all that
have continued or are faithful to Authority of Parliaments, invite you and call
for you, and challenge the Freedom of your Session as of English Right: and as
you had and truly derived your first Session from the People, so we present you
with this signal of our unanimous Agreement for your Re-assembling and Session
at Westminster: but we desire you to humble your selves, and repent truly of
your great failings in your last Session, which were very many and grievous;
but we trust your eyes are opened, and you see your miscarriages, and that you
will be faithful and careful Trustees for the People. Indeed so has the Divine
Providence of God ordered the state of Affairs, that your Interest is and must
be, to be honest to the People, or you will perish by their hand. We do own
and acknowledge, you are the fittest persons in this Nation to do the work of
the People, and settle us in true freedom and peace; and therefore the hearts
of the good people are toward you, and invite you: do but you appear, and all
the Court-Policies and Practices will end in that moment, your enemies will be
quite defunct and defeated; Plots and Designs, Insurrections and Invasions will
be prevented, our Divisions and Distractions will be composed; and we shall
return to settlement and safety; otherwise both Army and Navy, Nation and
People, will be all confounded, ruined and lost.

But in Case of your Assembly again, we desire, That at your first sitting
down, you may ascertain a time for your ending, and for the Succession and
Beginning of a new Representative; and so settle the Foundations of our
Government, as our Parliaments may be Successive, and of Course, with their
certain times of their Beginning and Ending; and with such Boundaries,
Limitations and Powers, as all Arbitrariness in Government may be prevented,
and the Rights and Freedoms of the People secured. And we shall (together with
your and our faithful Army) stand or fall with you, in the necessary and just
Defense of your Persons and Authority.

London, Printed by J. C. 1659.


