A DECLARATION OF THE POWER OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT
Clearing Their Authority to Judge Delinquents for High Treason, and other high
MISDEMEANORS.

WITH A Full ANSWER to all Judge Jenkins his Arguments.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648. Feb. 26:

Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.



IF in the computation of all times we have had a Parliament unquestionable in
substance, in form, in all necessary adjuncts, and now, even now when eclipsed
Justice, like the Sun imprisoned under a cloud, breaks forth with luster, be
concluded in defect of Judicature, I say, the stars have had malignant aspects
in this our Horizon.

Anima est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. Judicature in the Soul of
this great compacted body, and enjoyes that diffusive property.

The power of Judicature must be founded upon a preparatory Impeachment, and
this prepatory Impeachment must be framed by the Commons House, who must
justify themselves not guilty of the title of fools by the Wiseman, to lay a
foundation and never consider by what means the structure is to be finished;
nay, excuse themselves from that general remonstrance of a general Grievance,
Extrajudiciall Proceedings.

The Lords are Peers of the Realm, the Commons are an House of the Parliament;
the health of these will much advantage the preservation of the whole Compound;
nay, on the contrary, the Gout is as mortal and dolorous as the Headache.

Beside their commenced proceeding, against the parties impeached of high
Treason, though seasoned with much moderation and temper, are of rige age, and
blush to be kept in long coats, which are now suspended; by which
mis-interpreted rumor of our Jurisdiction drawn into question the Commons of
this Kingdom openly proclaim, That to be excessive vicious is to be secure,
and that facts of Treason are above the cognizance and punishment of the Acts
of Reason, and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Survey this High Court of Parliament. Parliament, did I say? From what radix?
Parler le men's, the speech of the mind. This must be attended with judgment
and reason; but I think we speak with none of these, if we cannot maintain
our Jurisdiction: This is its Etymology, which is warranted by the best
Antiquary of his time, Vetusto nomine, e Gallia mutato, Parliamentum dicitur.

This High Court has not been confined to this individual appellation, but
has been christened by several godfathers.

Majores nostri Anglo-Saxones entitled it, Prudentum Conventus, Concilium,
Magnus Conventus. Succeeding Historiographers, Commune Concillum, Curta
Altissima, Generale Placitum, Curia magna, Magnatum Conventus, Commune totius
regni Concilium, Praesentia Regis, Praelatorum, Procerumque collectorum.

But certainly, if they intended these flourishing titles to a Parliament
without Judicature, they spoke of their riding to Parliament, not sitting in it.

An unhappy Parliament: like the City Myndas, whose gates were so wide, that
the City might run out of them.

To allow these to be synonyma's of Parliament, and to disallow Judicature,
were but heathen-like to confess the Jews to be the people of God, and yet
fight against them.

Neither are these up-started Titles, or new-bought Coats of Arms that this
High Court blazons. No they are venerable for their Antiquity, and of most
ancient birth and extraction.

Mulmuccius, of some called Donwallo, did write two books of the Britains, the
one called Statata Municipalia, the other Leges Judiciariae, for so the same do
signify in the British tongue, wherein he wrote the same, which is as much to
say, as the Statute Law and Common Law, which books were written 441. years
before the Incarnation of Christ, and how should there be Statute Laws without
a Parliament? King Alfred ordained for a perpetual usage, That twice in the
year, or oftener if need be, they should assemble themselves at London. to
treat in Parliament of the government of the people of God, how they should
keep themselves from sin, should live in quiet, and receive right by holy Laws
and Judgments.

In the Heptarchy, Parliaments had their continuance, witness the style of
Parliaments in the time of Ina King of the West Saxons: Ego Ina Dei gratia,
etc. Congregatione servorum Die sollicitus de salute animarum vestrarum, and
statu regni mei, constitui rectum conjugium and justa judicia, pro stabilitate
and confirmatione populi mei benigna sedulitate celebrari, and nullo Aldermano,
vel alicui de toto regimine nostro liceat conscripta abolere judicia: So did
Offa King of the Mercians, and Ethelbert King of Kent.

In the reign of King Athelston, his Acts of Parliament are styled thus: Haec
sunt judicia Exonae quae sapienies Concilio Ethelstani Regis instituerunt, and
iterum apud Frefresham and tertia vice apud -- ubi haec definita simul, and
confirmata sunt. Here I find a Parliament summoned, Concilio Regis, prorogued
in those words Iterum and tertia vice, the Royal assent in the words
Confirmata sunt, the dissolution Definita sunt.

King Edgar tells us they are Instituta quae Edgardus Rex concilio sapientum,
etc.

King Etheldred, Hoc est Concilium quod Etheldredus Rex and omnes supien tes,
etc.

King Edmond calls it Conventus Sapientum, Spiritualium and Temporalium.

The Parliament of King Canutus at Winchefler bore this title; Haec sunt
statuta Canuti Regis, Anglorum, Danorum, Norvegarum, venerando ejus sapientum
concilio, ad laudem and glorian Dei, and sui regalitatem and commune commodum,
babita in sancto natali Domini apud Wintoniam.

Here we begin to make Land, and descry a visible Title to a Parliament, being
in substance and form nearly allied unto the Presidents of these very times;
and though some will contest this word [Parliament] bears date but from the
third year of Edw. 1. yet (me thinks) those words in the ninth year of Ed. 2.
being the immediate successor to Ed. 1. might convince them, viz. Sciatis quod
quum dudum temporibus progenitorum nostrorum quondem regum Angliae in diversis
Parliamentis suis, etc. which word [Progenitorum] had been improper, if that
name had commenced in his fathers reighne.

In one word, time out of mind, this high Court and its Judicature has
flourished before the Conquest, in the Conquest (notwithstanding that silent
leges inter arma) and ever since the Conquest, until this present hour.

Me thinks, I appear as one drawing his Sword, transversing his ground, lying
upon his guard, there being neither offense nor opposition.

You may say, What need you waken so many sleepy Records to prove Parliaments
have been? who is it of so desperate an opinion, that offers it in question?
What David ap Jenkin, ap Judge?

Whosoever they were that instilled this jealousy of Judicature into the
peoples thoughts, did ipso facto subvert Parliaments, and the strong rooted
rites thereof.

Aristotle bids us not to dispute, utrum nix sit alba, and the like visible and
apparent truths; but if any Man of an obdurate judgment would have denied that
there was Anima Rationalis, then Aristotle must prove there is Homo, and Anima
Rationalis, will be drawn in by consequence. Prove Homo prove a Parliament,
and Anima Rationalis, which is Judicature, will be drawn in by consequence:
besides I am protected by the Verse, Judicis officium est ut res, ita tempore
rerum -- Quaerere.

Next I must offer that which the Law has a tender respect unto, even the ends
of Parliament. Exitus acta probat.

These I find thus to be capitulated by Sir Edward Coke, Primo, ad subditos a
delinquendo declinandos, hoc est, ut delicta tam bonis cautisque legibus, tam
debita carundam executione anticiparentur: now, if debita executio legum can be
in Parliament inflicted upon delinquentes subditos, without legal proceedings
and trial, (except they will say nothing, and so be pressed to death) I leave it
to be argued amongst punies.

2. Vt tuta tranquillaque sit vita hominum; but certainly the life of man in
not preserved by the impunity of offenders, which must pass sublata judicatura.

3. Vt fixis quibusdam sanctionibus sanciisque judiciis jus unicuique fierit;
but whether jus implies not punishing malefactors as well as relieving the
oppressed Crudelitas parcens, being more destructive to the Commonweal, then
Crudelitas puniens) I leave it to be argued among children.

Fleta says, a Parliament is called, Terminare dubitationes judiciorum novis
injuriis emersis nova constituere remedia, unicuique prout meruerit justitiam
retribuere, Treason and Murder is injuria, Death and the loss of the
offenders goods is remedium, the end of a Parliament is to apply this remedy.
Then our Parliament must have a short cut in trial. We must condemn without
hearing of any part, for why should they hear, if they have no power to
determine?

A Parliament then is a structure founded upon the Common laws of England, as
is manifest in its proceedings upon many trialls according to the course of the
Common Laws. It is the heir apparent to the Common Law, and parent of the
Statute Law. To make this position pass for touch, I will give you the Test of
that ancient and learned Author of the book entitled, Mirror de les Justicies,
in his own words, Hoc cum sit forum in hoc regno place supremum pars est
structurae jurium municipalium, and nonnunquam secundum frequentem illum, and
usitatum in lege communi ordinem processus habet.

Parliaments are the very stars which we must sail by; their Presidents, the
miridian sun we must observe to find the Latitude of our proceedings by.

In its Etymology it is Altissima Curia, but how illfavouredly this name
becomes it, if one Justice of Assize may hear and determine capital offenses,
and this Altissima Curia, not have power of a grand Jury to him to find Billa
vera.

Yet ask this Justice of Assize by what president in this Kingdom he
adventures upon this service, Ask of the Justice of Peace by what Presidents
he takes notice of Presentiments, Indictments, awards the alias, the plures
Capias, and his power must take footing from Parliaments.

Inquire of the Court of Chancery for its Equity, for the power of Writs and
Judgments. Inquire the power of the Kings Bench for a Wager of battle in an
appeal. Inquire of the Courts of Common Pleas for their authority in any of
their rules of Court, Nay inquire of the petty-Constable by what power he
executes his office, nay, for the carrying of his painted staff; and they will
return but starved and hungry arguments, except they fetch it from the
Parliament.

Admit we had no interest in Presidents, were it not durus sermo, that the long
and well settled rites of Parliament should fall to the ground for want of a
President, which undoubtedly has power in it self to make a President not
repugnant to Law?

Who knows not but in the former dark and Tragical times that most part of
the Rolls, and Records of this Kingdom were destroyed by William the
Conqueror, and that the end of others, was the Antitype of the end of the
world, even a dissolution by fire; some laid in horse loads in every corner of
the streets for Dung-hilrakers to pick antiquities up, and Tailors to make
measures of.

This Epidemicall consumption of our Records was a fatal and dismal injury to
this Kingdom in it self; but it will wound us afresh, if our selves and
posterity for want of them (though no fault in us then unborne) should permit
Treasons, Repines, Murders, Disturbers of the Kingdom and Commonweal, pass
with impunity.

The first man that ever suffered for Treason, if want of a President would
excuse him, might have begot Traitors to third and fourth generation with
impunity. My house has taken fire, I call for water to quench it; I would
suppose him mad that would advise me to let it burn to the ground, because my
neighbor would not quench his, and therefore I want a President.

We will impute it unto the integrity of those times that have not fostred such
unbounded spirits to attempt such crimes as might leave Presidents of this
nature.

It is Justice that those who will renew Presidents of long buried crimes,
should renew or create Presidents of deserved trial and punishment. I have
mustered some few Arguments in vindication of the Judicature of the Parliament
in this Kingdom, they are valid enough for the intricacie of the question:
Where tacks will serve, what needs ten-penny nails? A good face wants no band.
A valid Parliament wants no assertions for its Jurisdiction, and such is this
present Parliament.

There is nothing now left, but that as I have spent some time in scanning a
Parliament with Judicature, since Contrariae, contrariis ^pp^s^^a magis
elucescunt, we may cast a smiling eye upon that pretty silken bugbeare of
State, a Parliament without Judicature.

Curia altissima, must be Curia infima; Curia magna must be Curia minima. It
will resemble a sword with guilt hilts, and a blade made of a larth. Whereas
then all Courts were derived from it, now al Courts may insult upon it,

The cloth of State no man ought to name without reverence, will esteem it
self in a deplorable, and widowed estate for the death of her only consort,
JVDICATVRE. And like the single Turtle mourn whilst the Cushions of the
Toulesale prick up their ears.

Me thinks the Lions roar, the strings of the Harps break and sourd in discord,
the Flower de luces wither to be stretched out in a place (...) Judicature.
None sits under that Pavilion that bears the sword in (...). ^he high prized
tincture of the Lords robes begins to fade, the Er^^^s lose their complexion,
if they lose their Judicature.

That well becoming title to a Nation, Peerage, would hand down its head,
blush, and curse the influences in its nativity, if it should come to such an
untimely end.

Their Speaker may study silence, and report that himself, which they never
read nor heard of, A Parliament without JVDICATVRE.

The House of Commons, that were hitherto styles Prudentum Conve^^^^, may
impeach but little wit, and the Lords remedy them with as l^t^le ^ower; Call
and call, Impeach and Impeach, and demand Justice fr^^ the titular Lords, that
can neither help themselves nor them. And ministers of the Assembly may sit
attendants on the Houses, in re^^^^ of intricate mysteries in Judicature that
happen to be discussed before the Tribunal (though most venerable in their own
sphere) like so many Plovers pricked down for Stales, with this Motto, Vide^t^r
et non sunt. The Common Law speaks our Parliament and its Judicature, the
Statute Laws confirm it. Presidents strengthen in; Reason, even undeniable
reason fortifies it.

FINIS.

