THE DECLARATION OF THE STATES Of HOLLAND and FRIEZLAND, CONCERNING Prince
Charles, AND The PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND; AND Their Proclamation to be proclaimed
throughout the United Provinces; With a Message and Declaration to His
Highness, and His Desires Proposals to the States.

ALSO, A Proclamation to be proclaimed throughout the Cities of London and
Westminster (this present Thursday) concerning the said Prince CHARLES.

Imprinted at London for G. W. May 24. 1649.

THE RESOLUTION OF THE STATES OF Holland and Friezland, concerning Prince
Charles, and the Parliament of England, and their Proclamation to be proclaimed
throughout the Netherlands thereupon.
SIR,
THe Earl of Montrosse being constituted and made General for Scotland, the
Prince has negotiated with the States for ten thousand Arms, who upon
consultation in reference thereunto, resolved not to intermeddle in the least,
but to endeavor the preservation of a right understanding between the
Republic of England, and the Netherlanders, and in order thereunto has sent
an Express to his Highness, purporting, That He must either depart the United
Provinces, or acquit himself of his followers, they being held in an universal
hatred for the late barbarism committed upon the Parliaments Agent.

But yet notwithstanding the Prince has sent new Propositions, to the States,
desiring 2000. Gilders for his present accommodation, for a certain time, which
its believed he will be furnished withal, for the Prince of Orange has
declared a willingness, to contribute toward his present necessities.

The Scots Commissioners have delivered in their last paper to his Highness,
wherein they declare, That they cannot descend any lower then what they have
already offered, and that if He will not give his assent to those things
therein specified, they must be enforced to take care of that Kingdom, for the
preservation of the fundamental Rights and Liberties of the people, and oppose
all persons whatsoever that shall endeavor to attempt or assume any power
within their Territories, for the obstructing of the peace thereof.

The Prince being highly displeased at these demonstrations, in a great passion
declared, that they were bound to obey, maintain, and defend his person as
their dread sovereign Lord and King, and that if they did desist from their
former acknowledgment, he would give them such a Memento, that should prove
both effectual and satisfactory.

Yet many of his Grandees begin to wave their former Resolutions, and begin to
appear obscure in their a^tings, which is conceived to arise from the present
declinings and remonstrations of the State provincial of Holland, and
West-Friezland, who have declared their Resolutions, to preserve and continue a
good correspondency between the two States of England and Holland; and are
resolved to use their utmost endeavors for the suppressing, and bringing to
condign punishment all persons whatsoever, that shall foment, suggest or
seditiously stir up the people, in raising any thing tending to the illegality
of the proceedings of the aforesaid States, and are likewise resolved to set
forth proclamation, prohibiting all persons from acting or intermedling with
the public affairs of either States, in reference to the discountenancing or
withdrawing of others from their due obedience, upon pain of incurring such
penalties, as shall be inflicted upon them according to their demerits.

This Proclamation is to be proclaimed throughout all the respective United
provinces.

We hear that the princes Design goes very slowly on at Sea, and that instead
of becoming masters thereof, are here esteemed as great losers; for it is said,
that the two unfortunate princes, Rupert and Maurice, has lost 12 sail of
ships, and above one hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance.

Prince Charles Elector Palatine of the Rhyne, has sent a Message and full
submission to the Emperor of Germany, so that it is believed the restitution of
his Country will be suddenly accomplished.

Hague 19. May, 1649.

A description of the Levellers, and the speeches of those that were lately
executed, are as follows, and first be pleased to peruse the words of
undanted Tomson.

That it is just what did befall him, that God did not (...) the ways he went,
that he had offended the General, and desired the prayers of the people, and
told the soldiers that were appointed to shoot him, that when he held out his
hand they should do their duties, and accordingly he was immediately after the
sign given shot to death, next after him was a corporal brought to the same
place of execution where looking upon his fellow mutineer and bid them that
were appointed to shoot, shoot, and dyed desperately. The third being also a
corpor^l brought to the same place, and without the least acknowledgement of
error, or show of fear, pulled off his Dublet (standing a pretty distance from
the wall) bidding the soldiers do their duties, looking them in the face, till
they gave fire, not showing the least kind of t^rror or fearfulnes of spirit.
After these 3 corner Dan, was brought to the place of execution, he expressed
himself with much penitancy, and said that he was more worthy to die then live,
with much remorse of conscience for being an occasion to lead others into this
way of mutiny, and disobedience. But immediate before the act of execution, The
General sent him a pardon, and he was sensible of the mercy all that while this
act of Justice was doing, the rest of the mutineers were in the church
beholding the sad spectacle, and after all was over Lieut, Genesis Cromwell, and
other officers went to them in the Church* and acuainted them how mercifully
the Genesis had dealt with them, that he had destinated them, and has made so few
examples (excepting only every tenth man to die the mutiny being of so high a
nature hazarding the ruin of the Parliament and Kingdom, and delivering up all
honest men to the cruelty of the Common enemy against whom they had fought so
long.

This is to be observed, that before the Sentence of the Council of war passed
against them, they were very high and peremptory in their language and
carriage, but the Sentence of death so struck them, that when they had their
moneys sent them to buy provisi^ns, they all refused to ac^ept of it, saying,
they must take care to provide for the Soul, and not for the Body, and many of
them wept bitterly for the unhappiness of their condition, i^ being misled to
so rude a business; it is likewise s^^^ly to be observed that many of those
men being form^rly great professors of the Gospel, have of late thrown off all
Ordinances, nay some, the Scripture it self, fancying to themselves, that they
live above Ordinances or Rules of Scripture; and God has suffered them to be
ensnared with such temptations of the Devil as to be ^eft to themselves.

Cornet Den did confess that many of that party that were thus engaged with
him, their hearts were so enraged, and full of bitterness against the
Parliament party, and all others that did not adhere unto them, that he did
think in his conscience there would have bin great cruelty used by these men,
and that it was a blessed and happy hour they were surprised and prevented.
Colonel Eyres is now brought prisoner to Oxford, to be tried for his life: He
did in n high manner exasperate the Mutineers, and at Newbridge led on the
Forlorn Hope, and would have charged col. Reynold, and col. Okey, who made good
the pass against him, though they were but a handful to their number; he with
diverse others was in that house where that man was killed of our party, and
shot diverse of our soldiers before they would yield.

Oxford 21 May, 1649. Upon the 23 of this instant, came further intelligence,
that another party of Levellers began to appear visible in the Isle of Wight,
and were resolved to set up their Standard of Seagreen Colors, making great
boasts of diverse parties prevailing for them it, England thinking thereby to
seduce the Soldiery (by which means they did mislead some) and the people;
but a speedy couse is taking for the suppressing of them, and the major part of
the Inhabitants and Soldiery have declared a unanimous resolution to live and
dye with the Parliament and Army.

The grand proclamation touching Charles Stuart eldest Son to the late King,
is said to be this present Thursday, to be proclaimed throughout the Cities of
London and Westminster, prohibiting all persons whatsoever, from acknowledging
the said Charles Stuart to be Prince of Wales, or to have any Right or Title
thereunto or to any other places whatsoever, throughout the two Nations of
England and Ireland.

May 23. 1649. Imprimatur

T.J.





FINIS.

