A DECLARATION OF The present Proceedings of the French, Danes, and the
Hollanders, touching the King of Scots:

And the New Act and Proclamation of the States, to all Captains, Masters, and
Officers of ships, throughout all Harbors, Haven-Towns, and Cinque Ports,
within the Dominion of the Netherlands: Published by sound of Trumpet, and beat
of Drum throughout the United Provinces, for all Officers in general to yield
Obedience thereunto; Upon pain of Death.

Together with their Orders and Instructions to Admiral De Wit.

And a Letter sent to the Parliament of England from the Generals at Sea,
concerning the Transaction, Affairs, and Engagement of the Enemy.

Subscribed, Robert Blake, Rich: Dean, Geo: Monck.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by E. Alsop. 1653.

A LETTER Sent To the Speaker of the Parliament of England, from the three
Generals of the English Navy, touching the last great and bloody Engagement
between the two Fleets of England and Holland.
SIR,
THe 18 instant in the morning, being some five leagues distant from the
English shore, we discryed the Dutch Fleet early in the morning, consisting (as
we then judged, and are since informed by some of their own number) of 80. all
men of War, and some 200 Merchant men, a league and an half to windward of the
weathermost of our ships, and of most of the Fleet two or three leagues.

The ship Triumph, with the Fairfax, Speaker, and about 20 more, being nearest
unto them, the Dutch Admiral might probably (if he had pleased to have kept the
wind) gone away with his whole Fleet, and we had not been able to have reached
him with our main body, only with a few Frigots, our best saylors, which had
not been likely to have done very much upon them; But the said Admiral, so soon
as he had discovered us, put all his Merchant men to windward, and ordered them
to stay there (as some that we have taken have since informed us) and himself
with his body of men of War, drew down upon us, that were the weathermost
ships, where we were in a short time engaged, and by reason the greatest part
of our ships were to Lee-ward, and much a stern, those that were weathermost
had a very sharp conflict of it that whole day, till about 4 a clock in the
afternoon, by which time a considerable number of our ships and Frigots had got
so far a head, that by tacking they could weather the greatest part of the
Dutch Fleet, which so soon as the Dutch Admiral perceived, he tacked likewise
and those with him, and left us: We spent the remainder of that day and night
to man our selves out of the weaker ships, and to repair our Rigging, Masts and
Sails, without which we were not in a capacity to move in the Sea. We took and
destroyed in this day 7 or 8 men of War.

They had possession of Captain Barker in the Prosperous, Captain Bourn in the
Assistance, the Oak and some other ships, but blessed be God we repossest them
again, with the loss of some in the Assistance. The Leewardmost part of our
ships continued fighting till night separated, being engaged within two hours
as soon as we: We lost the Sampson whereof Captain Button was Commander, which
was so much torn and unserviceable, the Captain and many more wounded and
slain, that we took out the men that were left, and let her sink into the Sea.
At night the Dutch Fleet and we kept as near one another as we could
conveniently without mixing, each of us having our lights abroad all night, the
Wind Westernly, and little Wind, they steered directly up the channel, their
Merchant men a head, and men of War in the Rear; We were in the morning some
three or four leagues to the Southward of the Isle of Wight: As soon as it was
day, we made what sail we could after them, but being calm could not get up
until noon, and our main body not until two of the Clock, by which time we drew
very near each other, and had warm work while night parted us; We took and
destroyed this day some five sail of men of War: The Dutch Fleet steered up the
Channel with their lights abroad, we followed, the Wind at W. N. W. a fine
little gale all night.

The 20 day about 9 a clock in the morning, we fell close in with them with
some 5 great ships, and all the Frigots of strength, though very many others
could not come up that day, and seeing their men of war somewhat weakened, we
sent smaller Frigots and ships of less force, that could get up amongst their
Merchantmen, which put their whole body to a very great trouble, that many of
them, and their men of war, began to break off from their main body, and
toward the evening we pressed so hard upon them, that they turned their
Merchant men out of their Fleet upon us (as is conceived) for a bait, we gave
strict order that none of our ships that could get up to their men of war, and
had force should meddle with any Merchant men, but leave them to the Rear; we
continued still fighting with them until the dusk of the evening, by which
time we were some 3 leagues and a half of Blackness in France, the wind at
North-west, we steering directly for the point of land, having the wind of the
Dutch fleet, so that if it had pleased the Lord in his wise providence, who
sets bounds to the sea, and overrules the ways and actions of men, it had
been but one 3 hours longer to night, we had probably made an interposition
between them and home, whereby they might have been to have made their way
through us with their men of war, which at this time were not above 35 as we
could count, the rest being destroyed or dispersed; The Merchant men also must
have been necessitated to run ashore, or fallen into our hands, which as we
conceive the Dutch Admiral being sensible of, just as it was dark bore directly
in upon the shore, where as it is supposed he anchored, the Tide of ebb being
then come, which was a Leewardly Tide, we consulted with our Pilots, and men
knowing those coasts and parts, what it was possible for them to do, whose
opinions were that he could not weather the French shore, as the tide and the
wind was then, to get home, and that we must likewise anchor, or we could not
be able to carry it about the Flats of Soam, whereupon we anchored, Blackness
being N. E, and by E. three leagues from us.

This night being very dark, and blowed hard, the Dutch got away from us, so
that in the morning we could not discover one ship more then our own, which
were betwixt 40 and 50 the rest being scattered, and as many prizes as made up
60 in all; we spent all this night and day while 12 a clock, in fitting of our
ships, masts, and sails, for we were not capable to stir till they were
repaied, at which time being a windward tide, and the Dutch Fleet gone, we
weighed, and stood over to the English shore, fearing to stay longer upon the
coast being a Lee shore.

The 22 day in the morning we were fair by the Isle of Wight, being the place
whereunto we then thought fit to repair for accommodation, but the Wind blew so
hard Nouthwardly, we could not get in that day.

The 23 day we weighed and got near the St. Ellens Road, and sent for all the
Captains on board, to understand the state of the fleet, but it blowing hard we
could not accomplish it, only we commanded all the ships that were disabled to
turn into Stokes bay, and the rest remained about us.

The 24 day we sent for all the Captains on board of this ship, and ordered out
2 squadrons, one to ply to the Eastward, the other to the Westward of the Isle
of Wight.

The last of which sailed yesterday being the 25 present. It has blown so
hard, that we have scarce been able to send our boats one from the other, or do
any thing till this day that we got up to this place.

Thus you see how it has pleased the Lord to deal with us, poor unworthy
instruments employed in this late transaction, wherein he has delivered into
our hands some 17 or 18 of their ships of war, which have been by your Fleet
(without the loss of any one ship, save the Sampson) taken and destroyed,
besides Merchantmen, whose number we know not, they being scattered to several
Ports. We have many men wounded, and diverse both of honesty and worth slain.

Aboard the Triumph the 27. of Febr. 1652. in Stoke Bay. Subscribed, Robert
Blake, Rich. Dean. George Monk.

Several of the Dutch are driven a shore in France, one without any men at all
in her. Six Merchant ships are brought prize into Foy in Cornwall. A List of 56
prizes are already brought into the Prize-Office.

The Parl ordered a Letter to be written to the Generals and Commanders, with
the Parliaments resentment of their great and faithful service in the late
Engagement with the Dutch.

On the 1 of this instant March, we received further advertisements, that Sir
John Evarson one of the Dutch Admirals was slain in the late engagement, and
that de Ruttier is sore wounded; most of the fleet that got off to Calice Road
are extremely rent and torn, both in their Masts, Sails, and Rigging, which the
high States hearing of, forthwith set out their Placaert or Declaration,
throughout all the Cinqueports in the united Provinces, expressly charging and
prohibiting all Captains, Masters, and other Officers, of all and every
respective ship or vessel, not to depart (upon pain of death) without license
from the General Council, and thereupon immediately dispatched a messenger to
De Wit, requiring him not to go forth to sea with his fleet, without special
orders from the States General; so that as yet he lies in the Tazel.

They talk high that the treaty between Holland and Denmark is concluded, and
that a treaty is driven on in France, for a league also, wherein the interest
of the King of Scots will likewise be included, which pleases the Orange party
highly; for indeed they were always very active to have him personally in the
Netherlands, and are now in hopes to prevail with the Province of Holland, to
unite in this Chimical design, because the chief Obstructer thereof, (the Lord
Paw) is now dead.



FINIS.

