A DECLARATION OF THE STATES of HOLLAND, CONCERNING THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND:
WITH The Rising of the Dutchmen, their seting forth three hundred Sail of
Ships to be revenged upon the English; their Design against Dover Castle; and
their banishing of the English from the Exchange in Amsterdam, and other places.

Also, joyful News from IRELAND; the obtaining of a great Victory by the
Parliaments Forces; and the surrender of the strong Town of Gallaway to Sir
Charles Coot; with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Bagg and Baggage.

March.8th. London, Printed for George Horton, 1652. 1651

A DECLARATION OF THE High and Mighty States, the States General of the United
Provinces; concerning the proclaiming of open Wars with England.
SIR,
ON the third of this instant Month, the great Assembly of the United Provinces
met at the Hague, where there was a large Debate touching the proclaiming of
open Wars with England, otherwise to have restitution and satisfaction for all
their ships and Goods taken: But after mature del^beration touching the
apparent dangers that might thereby ensue, the States of Holland gave in their
positive Result, declaring, That they were resolved (to the utmost of their
power) to preserve a firm League and Union with the States of England; and to
hold a fair correspondency for the increase of free Trade and Commerce:
Whereupon the States and Merchants of Zealand rose up in great fury, disolved
the Assembly, and vowed revenge upon the English; but its thought the States
General will be more prudent and wise then to hearken to the cries or gruntling
of the Bores; for here is a Proverb, That the Cries ot the Geese are never
heard up to Heaven.

Yet notwithstanding, the spirits of many thousands are much exasperated, and
great are the preparations which are making throughout the United Provinces;
The Merchants of Zealand have sent 40 Commissioners to the States General, to
treat with them about setting forth the Summers Fleet, and two hundred ships
with Letters of Mart; so that they are again sat down in Council, and its
conceived that at this Meeting, it will be resolved, to man out about 150 Men
of War at the public charge, besides what will be set forth by the Merchants,
and Others, upon Letters of Mart, which (if things hold at this pass) our
Governors that are well-affected to England, will be in evident danger of utter
ruin.

For great are the Contests between the Burgomasters and the Bores; for the
latter does threaten to sequester their Estates, and bring them to a Trial for
their lives, if they will not take a course to defend and assist them at Sea.
And some Tumults and Risings have already been in Zealand, Rotterdam, Dort,
Delf, and at the Hague, where many were both slain and wounded, and amongst the
rest some English, which the Mutiniers chiefly aimed at, and brand them with
the most infamous Badge of Traitors and Conspirators to their Religion and
Liberties; which they are yet to choose. And upon this Score, diverse English
Merchants are prohibited from coming upon the Exchange in Amsterdam, and other
places. 200 Commissioners have bin sent to all the Frontier and Haven Towns, to
see how many ships each Town can make ready in three weeks time: And having
taken a List thereof, upon their return, caused the same to be printed; wherein
appears the similitude of a great Armado, consisting of about 300 sail of
ships, Danes, Dutch, and Hamburgers: Besides they tatk of 200 more to be set
forth upon Letters of Mart; but the truth is, they will talk more by an inch of
Candle in their liquor by Land, then they can perform by a whole pound, when
they are in their Element at Sea. And although they build Castles in the Air,
make their Accounts in Spain, and resolve to cast them up in England, by
blocking up Dover, Sandwitch, Deal, and other Ports; yet I believe in God, and
refer you to the enclosed.

From Ireland we hear that the Enemy have united their Forces, and have had a
conjunction with with the Earl of Clanrickard, whose design was to have raisede
the siege at Gallaway; but Sir Charles Coot having received intelligence
thereof, drew off a party of Horse and Foot, and intercepted them in their
passage, which the Enemy perceiving, betook themselves to flight, and in great
disorder exposed themselves to several Passes; but most of them were
intercepted, about 1500 slain upon the place, and 700 taken prisoners: Thus it
pleased Divine Providence so to blast and maugre their devices and stratagems,
that of 4000, there escaped not above 1800; But in their Retreat they were met
withal by Col. Sanchy, who charged them, and after a sharp dispute, routed
them, killed many, and took diverse prisoners; pursuing the rest as far as the
Bog of Moneal, where taking advantage of the frost entered the Bog, stormed the
strong Castle of Mondonall, and put all to the sword: After which great
success, he marched to another strong Hold (three miles distant) called Dublin;
which place contained 800 Houses, or Cabins; but he immediately stormed that
also and killed 500 upon the place; In this gallant Attempt, the Colonel
deported himself with a most magnanimous Spirit, being the first man that
entered the Works; and the soldiers followed him so close, that they soon became
Masters of the Town, for which singular piece of service, he gave them the free
plunder of the Town, which amounted to a great value; as will appear by the
List enclosed.

The Enemy has lately made a desperate salley out of Gallaway, and fell into
our quarters, where they took a prey of near 100 Cows, and 200 sheep; But it
pleased the Lord as they returned, a party of Col. Russels rescued the prey,
fought the Enemy, killed 60 of them, and took an Ensign, and diverse others
prisoners.

The Town has held out a long time, expecting relief, but now they begin to
hearken to a Treaty; and its believed that General Preston (their Governor)
will desert them, (leaving them to make their own Terms and Conditions) and be
take himself to a strong Island of his in the Sea; and truly it is high time, for
the soldiery begin to mutiny, and threaten to deliver him up to the mercy of
the Parliament, in case he will not condescend to a Rendition of the Town.

But the Governor understanding the great distractions of the Soldiery, and
perceiving that there was little hopes of Relief, thought it requisite to
preserve himself by making an escape; and accordingly attempting the Design, it
proved effectual; Since which time we hear, that the said town is surrendered,
with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage: which if true, will
prove a work very acceptable and advantageous, and much conducing to the
interest of the Commonwealth of England.

There are 15 Dutch Captains arrived here from the Barbadaes. who affirm, That
the English turned them out of all their ships, only gave them a small Vessel
to carry them home; but were forced to sell the same to buy them provisions:
This does exceedingly inrage them, and they have vowed revenge either by Sea or
Land.

Amsterdam 4 March, 1652.
FINIS.

