Fasciculus Chemicus: OR Chemical Collections.

EXPRESSING The Ingress, Progress, and Egress, of the Secret Hermetick Science,
out of the choicest and most Famous AUTHORS.

Collected and digested in such an order, that it may prove to the advantage,
not only of the Beginners, but Proficients of this high Art, by none hitherto
disposed in this Method.

Whereunto is added, The Arcanum or Grand Secret of Hermetick Philosophy.

Both made English By James Hasolle, Esquire, Qui est Mercuriophilus Anglicus.

Our Magistry is begun and perfected, by only one thing; namely, Mercury.
Ventur. p. 26.

London, Printed by J. Flesher for Richard Mynne, at the sign of St. Paul in
Little Britain. 1650.

These Hiero^l^phicks veil the Vigorous Beams Of an unbounded Soul The
Sorowle and Scheme's The full Interpreter: But how is conceald. Who through
Aenigmaes looks, is so Revealed.
T. Cross sculp: T: W: M: D:
woodcut frontispiece London Printed for Richard Mynne
Astm regunt homines

Quod est Superius est sicu^ inferius

Mercurio philus In^^icus

woodcut with astrological symbols and images

TO ALL Ingeniously Elaborate STUDENTS, In the most Divine Mysteries OF
Hermetick Learning.
I Here present you with a Summary Collection of the choicest Flowers, growing
in the Hermetick Gardens, sorted and bound up in one complete and lovely Posie.
A way whereby Painful Inquisitors avoid the usual discouragements met with in a
tedious wandering through each long Walk, or winding Maze; which are the
ordinary and guilful Circumstances, wherewith envious Philosophers have
enlarged their Labors, purposely to puzzle or weary the most resolved
undertakings. It Is true, the manner of delivery used by the Ancients upon this
Subject, is very far removed from the common path of Discourse; yet I believe
they were constrained (for the weight and majesty of the Secret) to invent
those occult kind of expressions in Aenigmaes, Metaphors, Parabols, and
Figures.

Now amongst the Catalogue of Authors that have treated of this sacred
Learning, I have chiefly observed four sorts.

The first are such whose wel-mindedness and honesty, have caused them to lay
down the whole Mystery faithfully and plainly; giving you a Clew, as well as
showing you a Labyrinth; and they only are to be studied.

The second are those whose Magisterial handling a part or branch thereof, did
it rather to discover themselves Masters, then with intent to instruct others:
These may be read, but they are too sublime for those, who stand in need of an
Introduction.

Others there are, who out of Ignorance or Mistake, have delivered blind and
unbottomed Fictions, which have too much deluded and abused the credulous
World: so that of this sort I may say (not blemishing the honor, which some of
them have justly acquired in other parts of learning,) their Works are like
Pigmaleons Image, [full of exquisite proportion, feature, delicacie, and
beauty, but not animated with the life and soul of Truth;] and whilst a man
consults with such; he shall always doubt, whether what he reads be to the
matter, or not: However the Judicious may smell their levity by the rankness of
their impertinancies.

But the last and worst sort of all, are those, who through Envy have scattered
abroad their unfaithful recipies and false glosses; (taking for president the
Devil that can sow tares, and transform himself into an Angel of light) with
intent to choke and obfuscate the more evident light of the plain dealing
Philosophers: And to discern these Impostures, requires a Judgment able to
divide a Hair.

From this variety of Writers it is, that many, otherwise stedy Minds are tossed
up and down, as from Racket to Racket; being forced to change their Thoughts,
as often as they change their Authors, and conceiving they have settled right upon
a Point, (just like ticklish Weather-cocks,) are necessitated to shift with the
next puff, (although but of an empty windy conceit:) New discoveries begetting
new opinions, which raise more untoward and turbulent Doubts, then their
greatest strength of Judgment can conjure down. Thus (unhappy men!) thinking
themselves ready to Anchor, a cross gust blows them off the shore; perhaps into
a rougher sea of Debate and Perplexity then before, and with greater hazard and
danger of splitting.

I know that the truth of the proper Argent, its Preparation, and the Fire,
(the three most important steps to this blessed Work) with the whole process,
is by some Philosophers so sincerely laid down and unfolded, that to a knowing
Artist it is a cause of much wonder, why he that reads (though but smatteringly
acquainted with Nature) should not meet with clear satisfaction: But here is the
reason, Many are called, but few are chosen: It Is a Haven toward which many
skilful Pilots have bent their course, yet few have reached it. For as amongst
the people of the Jews, there was but one that might enter into the Holy of
Holies, (and that but once a year,) so there is seldom more in a Nation, whom
God lets into this Sanctum Sanctorum of Philosophy; yet some there are. But
though the number of those Elect are not many, and generally the fathom of most
men's Fancies, that attempt the search of this vast and subtle Mystery, too
narrow to comprehend it, and their strongest Reason too weak to pierce the
depth it lies obscured in; being indeed so unsearchable and ambiguous, it
rather exacts the sacred and courteous Illumination of a Cherub, then the weak
assistance of a Pen to reveal it. Yet let no Man despair: For surely there is a
spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding; and
though all things before us seem hudled up in a deformed Chaos, yet can he
place them in comeliness and order. For many Philosophers closely shut up, or
concealed diverse things, which they left the ingenious Inquirer to sift into,
or find out; presuming to whom God intended the discovery of the Wonder, he
would afford Eyes that should pierce through the mist of Words, and give them a
ray of light which should lead them through this darkness: To find out that
Path which no Fowl knows, and which the Vultures eye has not seen: For, if
seriously perused, you shall find their Books are much like Drawers, that lead
to some choice and secret Box in a Cabinet, [one opening the way to the rest]
which if heedfully revolved, the satisfaction you miss of in one Author, will
be met with in another, and all perhaps may at length discover such pregnant
and sublime Secrets; as shall manifest thee to be one of those chosen vessels,
ordained to be informed of this Knowledge, which sometimes God has hid from the
wise and prudent, but revealed unto Babes.

Whosoever therefore undertakes the search of this abstruse and secret
Learning, must know it requires heedful and piercing Judgments, apt and clear
Fancies, faithful and distinct Conceptions: For the Philosophers writings are
not only interwoven with most exquisite cunning and ingenious artifice, but
the Golden Thread of the Matter is so warily disposed, covertly concealed, and
so broken off and dispersed; (they being ever fearful to afford too early light
or satisfaction to the Readers,) that unless the Father of Illuminations
prompt, or lend an Angels hand to guide, the best principled Student may be
lost in tracing its several Meanders, and fall short of finding out its
scattered ends. Be wary then in the application of words (for therein the
Imagination is subject to many miscarriages, being apt to twist and bow each
Sentence to the various frame of its present Conceptions, and the unwary
discoveries it first makes:) Especially those words which appear to lie most
naked; for where the Philosophers seem to speak plainest, there they have
written nothing at all; or else in such ordinary expressions, have wrapped up
some sense, highly mysterious: Generally fitting their discourse with Words,
that like the Delphian Sword will cut both ways, or reach to a larger extension
or latitude, then some Conceptions can stretch them too; intending and aiming
at things beyond, (and sometimes below) what we suppose those bare expressions
discover.

In fine, they have set before us a task for Explanation, other then is used in
our ordinary beaten track of Discourse: which he that will well understand,
must first be master of the language of Nature, having run through the
discouragements of the tedious progress, and laborious difficulty of joining
her Letters, and spelling her Syllables.

It Is true, the dignity of this infallible Mystery lies open to many hard
Censures, and profane Scandals, so well known, I need not mention them; but
that thereby I shall endeavor to remove, and purge this pure and heroic
Science (almost generally contemptible) from the dross, and corruption of an
Imposture.

Commonly we shall find them most traduce it as false and deceitful, who
(having the repute of Scholars) pretend to have spent much time and industry
in the search thereof; and because it is dressed in such variety of flourish and
figurative Speeches, that their shallow understandings cannot easily pierce
into it; (their wild unhappy Fancies like so many Tailors shops full of various
shreds of Conceits, making up out of such changeable colors at best but a
Fools Coat:) They profess all the discoveries thereof to be mere Chimeraes, and
it self a studied Fable. But the Egyptians might as well deny light in the Land
of Goshen, because themselves lived in darkness, or we, if either of the
Luminaries suffer defect to our view, conclude that the Eclipse is Universal.

If these (otherwise well accomplished) Men, would but consider how many occult,
specific, incomprehensible, and inexplicable qualities there lies dormant and
obscured in Nature, of which no absolute or true account can be rendered by
themselves: As the concatenation of Spirits, their working without the Body,
the Weapon Salve, the Sympathetical Powder, the Virtues of the Loadstone, the
wonderful and never to be enough admired Secrets of Magnetic Philosophy, and
Natural Magic: As also what Art it self is able to perform, by the power of
Mathematical conclusions, in Geometry, Numbers, both mysterious and vulgar,
Perspective Optics, etc. What famous and accurate Works, industrious Artists
have furnished these latter Ages with, and by Weights, Wheels, Springs or
Strings, have imitated lively Motion, as Regiomantanus his Eagle, and Fly,
Drebler's perpetual Motion, the Spring in a Watch, and such like Self-Movers,
(Things that seem to carry with themselves (like living Creatures) the
principles of their own Motions, and unallied to any outward Object, except
only to set them going:) The Arts of Navigation, Printing, and making of
Gunpowder (which for the honor of our Countryman Roger Bacon, I the rather
mention, who lived above a hundred years before we heard of its original from
the German Monk, and certainly knew its whole Composition; but that his pious
Thoughts (finding it might prove so swift and devilish a destruction to Men,
Cities, Castles, etc.) would not suffer him to reveal the way of making it,
though he plainly discovered its Nature, force, and horrible execution; (as
appears in the sixth Chapter of his learned Epistles De Secretis operibus Artis
and Naturae.) In a word, what mavelous conclusions, Art (making use of Nature
for an Instrument) can perform, without the help of so low and inferior
assistants as Characters, Charms, or Spells, (and yet these have their several
powers, if judiciously and warily disposed and handled;) insomuch, that no man
that understands the safe and honest power of Art and Nature, can justly
asperse their Legitimate Children, as though they were the offspring (or
indeed had any relation) to Diabolical Arts. From which few particulars, I
might infer many other wonders possible to be wrought, which yet to appearance
or probability, are beyond the power of accomplishment: and where the various
productions of Nature, Art, or both, have given the levity and infidelity of
many men's Judgments, the lie; whose prejudicate thoughts would never believe a
thing could be done, till they found (beyond evasion or denial) it was done. I
say, if such men would but seriously consider these and the like miraculous
effects, they might be of force sufficient to persuade the most doubtful
amongst them, that Art with the help of Nature, may arrive at such perfection,
to work Wonders, as far beyond these, as these would be beyond their
apprehensions, had they never heard of them before; nay to believe, there is
nothing incredible either in divine or humane things: and yet they never become
so happy Favorites as to be made privy to the mysteries of this Cunning.

Another Error these curious Brains run into, is, That they look beyond Nature,
and often despise the Path for the Plainness thereof, supposing it too vulgar
to conduct them to such rare and intricate Wonders; whereas they consider not,
that Nature in all her productions, works plainly, easily, and without
inforcement. Briefly, such ought to suspect as false, all things that appear
not feasible, without it excel in subtilty, or be rackt upon the Tenter: And
this is the Rock, against which diverse suffer shipwreck, apprehending they
ought to place the materials of this glorious and magnificent building, in more
remote and strange things, then really it is.

Some again calumniate and scandalize this serious and divine work, as a
fictitious thing, and they are such, whose easy confidence (forgetting the
cautionary Items of the Philosophers) believe all true they once find Written:
And when after tedious and chargeable Chemical operations, (the expressions of
the Philosophers seeming to look that way) they find no reality in the
Experiments answerable to their expectations; but all prove as defective in
their production, as the birth of Ericthonius was imperfect; then in a
discontented humor (perhaps having been cheated to boot) ruin (with their good
opinion of the thing) all they have before undertaken. But it is no wonder if
they be at much expense, that make use of many things: What need is there of so
vain a use of many Glasses, so much blowing of the Coals, such consumption of
Fire, and other impertinent and expensive preparations: When the Philosophers
tell us, One Glass, one Furnace, one Fire, (and that an immaterial one, not to
be found in the Furnace of the Chemists,) is sufficient to perfect the work;
which whosoever attempts, and cannot first fancy the Complement thereof to be
gone through without charge, (at least very little or inconsiderable) let them
leave off, and desist; lest the consumption of their wealth leave their hearts
as cold, as the drudging in a false Fire has made their faces pale.

Others there are that clamor, and cry out against this guiltless Learning,
whose covetous desires have made them rush upon the practice so far, that they
are forced to retreat by weeping cross. It is the common Fate of the Covetous
to meet with a Cheat, and the smooth stories of a Quack do oftentimes set so
delightful and eager edg upon their griping desires, (which doubtless a Knavish
genius may cunningly carry on) that the confiding Miser shall never distrust
him, till he be set to rake among the Ashes for his wealthy return. And as
unskilful men cannot use too much wariness, if they be to deal with any that
pretends to teach the process of this Mystery; so they cannot take too much
good advise to avoid their illusions. By way of Caution therefore, beware of
those mercenary pretenders, that (boasting much of their abilities) offer to
discover you any of those Secrets, upon condition you give them such or such a
sum of money; for by this tinkling sound you shall judge them counterfeit metal.
Never was this Holy Mystery communicated to so wicked a man, as ever would or
durst make sale of it; or indeed do such men stand in need. They want not
Money, or are necessitated to condition for a Trifle, that possess so great and
unexhaustible a treasure; for length of days is in her right hand, and in her
left hand, riches and honor. Therefore who has this, has all: it incircling
within it self, all temporal felicity, health of body, and all good fortune.

Next, trust not those that prostitute their skill; these are the Wasps that
creep into the Hive of Hermes: such Vagrants doubtless are empty and unfraught,
and have more use of what they may skrew out of you, then you can make benefit
of what may be gained from them. It is a Jewel of that price and estimation,
that they who find themselves once blessed with its possession, entertain it as
Lot did his Angels; who would rather deliver up his only daughters, [his dear
and nearest comforts] then expose such choice Guests into the hands of wicked
men; not daring to make the Secret common, lest they become breakers of the
Celestial Seals; much more to betray it into untrusty hands, for any gain or
benefit.

But besides these, the generality of the World are nursed up in a belief, there
is no such thing: First, because they never heard of any that publicly professed
it, or by visible operations manifested its truth in any age. Secondly, in
regard they as seldom found any Man, that (by his Condition or Conversation)
made evident show to the World, that he was possessor of such a wealthy
Science: Many of the Professors commonly living miserably poor, who though they
boast what vast Treasures they can command, yet scarce are seen to have a penny
in their purse, or a whole Rag to their backs.

To the first, I answer, That there are diverse things which peculiarly grow
within the bowels of the Earth, and seem as buried to us, because they neither
bud forth or grow up; and withal, there being so few Adepted Priests in the
World, it is no wonder, the Ceremonies of so divine a Miracle, should be both
seldom and privately celebrated.

To the second, That there is, that makes himself rich, and has nothing; and
that makes himself poor, having great riches. For on whomsoever God out of his
especial grace, is pleased to bestow this Blessing, he first fits them for a
most virtuous life, to make them the more capable and worthy of it; and being
so qualified, they straightway lay aside ambitious thoughts, and take up a
retiredness; they dwell within their Root, and never care for flourishing upon
the Stage of the World: The consideration of this Magistery being theirs, does
more fill their Minds, then all the Treasures of the Indies, were they
entailed upon them, (it being not to be valued, because it is the summity and
perfection of all Terrestrial Sciences;) nor indeed need such regard the airy
and empty glory of Magnifying-Fame, that can command an absolute Content in all
things. Nay, some lose their vain glory so far, as none shall scarce ever hear
them mention it; counting nothing more advantageous, then to conceal what they
enjoy. For, as it is a Secret, of the highest nature and concernment; so God
will not suffer it to be revealed to any, but those that can tell how to
conceal a Secret; and if we rightly weigh this, that the possession of the
thing takes from the possessors, the root of all evil, [Covetousness;] how then
can any corrupt or sinister thoughts grow up in them?

It is also worthy consideration, how many eminent dangers, troubles, fears,
and inconveniences, the very suspicion of having the Stone, has entitled some
Men to; and how many several ways their lives have been attempted, by powerful
and wicked men; because they concealed the Mystery from them. But let the
reward of those who would forcibly strip this Secret from any breast, be like
that of the Sodomites, which would have Lot deliver them his Angels, [Blindness
in the eyes of their understandings,] to waste out their time in seeking the
Door that lets in to this knowledge, but never find it.

Furthermore, this Learning is not revealed by any Master, but under the most
weighty Ties and Obligations of an Oath; and that by long trial and experience
of a man's fidelity, virtue, judgment, discretion, faithfulness, secrecy,
desires, inclinations, and conversation; to sift and try whether he be capable
and deserving; for the nearest Relations (unless exactly qualified with merit)
cannot obtain this knowledge from them: Every Child cannot be an Heir, nor
every bosom Friend an Executor. And this strict care is taken, lest the Learner
should misapply his Talent, by serving the Ambition of evil men, or supporting
wicked and unjust Interests; to domineer with violence and oppression, perhaps
to the trampling under foot the general Peace: For doubtless a severe account
will be exacted by God at the Teachers hand, if the Learner should misgovern or
abuse this so great a Grace.

It is said, Wisdom which finds out Knowledge and Counsel, dwells with
Prudence. A Conscientious breast must keep it most religiously inviolable, if
once obtained: Stability and Constancy must be resolved on by the undertaker,
ever flying that inconstant humor, which sometimes leads men on, with too
greedy an appetite, and a while after withdraws and cools. Such fickle and
wavering Dispositions should leave off betimes, lest they meet with those fresh
conceits, that shall wind and turn their Fancies so many several ways, that
at length like Pentheus (distracted with irresolution) they can setle no where;
and how apt such inconstant Seekers are for this Work, their imperfect
productions will bear them witness.

Another needful Caution may be given, and that proverbially: Haste makes
waste. This mischievous Evil is commonly forwarded by an over-covetous desire;
and this is that grand enemy to the Work, which often proves the ruin of all.
He must therefore persevere in his undertakings, and patiently contemplate on
Natures slow and leisurely progress in the bringing forth of her best things.
It is not a Matter that is thoroughly apprehended at first, upon a slight or
superficial view: The Philosophers that raised this Fabric, did it by many
degrees, and it is by their steps we must make our Ascension to those high
Wonders. Do not then presume, (though your understanding be able to build a
Structure) that it is strongly or exactly compiled; unless you find it raised
from a ground that is sincerely plain and natural, managed and squared by the
strict Rules of Art. And considering that your Errors may prove fundamental,
(for whosoever misses his way at the entrance, shall build upon so unsound a
Foundation, as allows of no emendations, but a new beginning:) You can never
use too much Caution in your Course, or be over sedulous in the guidance of
your understanding. It is wisdom to anatomize and dissect every apprehension
clearly, and examine what the operations of the Mind have effected; and in
what manner the Senses convey them unto you: And as you walk along, heedfully
to observe, where the principal Thread is broken off, and then search about
where it is likely to be met with again; for doubtless the ends thereof are
possible to be found out, if heedfully ^raced. However, if yet what you
apprehend does not so exactly hit the mark; return to the study of Nature,
there dwell, and look round to discover the best Way; cast about again for a
new Scent, and leave no path unsearched, nor no bush unbeaten; for though you
readily find not the real Truth, yet peradventure you may meet with such
satisfaction, as will quiet your Reason, and make you take pleasure in the
search. And he that once begins to love Wisdom for its own sake, shall sooner
be acquainted with her, then he that courts her for any sinister or by respect:
wherefore in this sense may be taken that of our Savior, He that has much,
shall receive more; but he that has little, shall be taken away, even that
which he has. Elisha obtained the sight of the Horses and Chariots of Fire,
that carried Elias up into Heaven; but it was not till he had desired, that a
double portion of his spirit might rest upon him, And Elisha's servant saw the
Mountains full of Horses and Chariots of Fire; but not till his Master had
prayed to the Lord to open his eyes: If thy Thoughts are devout, honest, and
pure, perhaps God may at one time or other, lay open to thy Understanding,
somewhat that will truly and faithfully lead thee to the Knowledge of this
Mystery. Solomon's slothful man that fears the Lion in the way, must not venture
into these Streets of Wonders; where are Remoraes that will puzzle or abate the
most forward and severe Inquiries, and quench the thirst and desire of farthest
search. In our progress, the higher we go, the more shall we better our
prospect; it is not a level or a flat, that can afford us the benefit of
discovery to a Knowledge, and Learning so remote.

Astrologers well know the secret Chambers of the South, and that there are
Stars that have influence under the depression of the South Pole, though not
visible in our Hemisphere. As therefore in Filtration, we must lay the drawing
side of the Filter, as low or lower, then the superficies of Water, from whence
it draws, else it has not power to bring up any thing; so we must search as
deep as the ancients Fountain, ere we shall be able to draw any water out of
their Wells; which if once obtained, the time for operation is best known by a
fit Election wherein the Rules of Astrology are to be consulted with; in which
Science, the Practisers of this Art ought to be well read for the several uses,
that continually and necessarily must be made thereof.

I profess, for my self, it is a satisfying Contentment, that I can find some
probable grounds for the possibility of such an Enterprise; it is no more
incredible to me, that from plain and simple principles, it may be exalted to
such an height, even beyond perfection, then to see the strings of Instruments,
(framed and composed of so base, and neglected things, as the Guts of Cats)
should be able (through degrees of refining,) to afford such sweet, mellow, and
admirable Music. Nor is it a mean degree of happiness, I conceive my self
seated in, that in so great a depth of Mystery, I am enabled to discover some
little Light, though but glimmering and imperfect: If I enjoy no more but only
to live in the Womb of such Knowledge, or if with a dim reflex (from this Rock
of Flesh) I see no more then the back parts of this Divine Science, though the
glory has passed by to the Ancients before; it will contribute much to the
quieting of my solicitous, and waking Inquiries.

We are not a little beholding to the industry of our Ancestors, for collecting
into Books this Elemented Water falling from Heaven, as into so many several
Vessels or Cisterns; and there reserving it for our times and use; which else
would have soaked away, and insensibly lost it self in the Earth of Oblivion.
But as to the freeing us from the toil and discouragement of a tedious and
irregular search, (many Philosophers pointing but at one part of the Mystery,
in the whole bundle of their Treatises;) we are eternally obliged to our
Author, for so highly befriending us with these learned Collections, of the
only few and pertinent Things, from the rest of their large and unnecessary
Discourses, (and that from their writings who were unquestionably blessed with
the knowledge of this Divine Mystery,) even as a skilful Chemist, who by
Spagyrical operations, separates the gross and earthy from the more fine and
pure, and out of a large Mass, extracts only the Spirit. And though it is not
to be denied, that the Philosophers left many Lights behind them, yet is it as
true they left them enclosed in dark lanthorns, and us to search them out in
corners: But here our Author has brought them out of that obscurity, and
placed them before us in a branched Candlestick, whereby we may view them all
at once, and where like a full Consort of Instruments each sounds his part to
make the harmony complete; so that it will evidently appear to the Judicious
and Learned, that these Collections were not rashly, or with slight choice,
snatched or stripped from the whole bluk of Authors; but with a wary and heedful
Judgment, culled out and selectly chosen; and what the Ancients delivered
scattered, and confused, is by his elaborate pains disposed in so advantageous
a Method, that we are much the nearer to find out the right path by the order
wherein he has ranked their sayings: yet not so, that the whole Process lies
just in that Methodical Chain, as seems linked together by each Paragraph; but
that the same is here and there intermixed, and irregularly pursued; sometimes
the beginning being disposed in the middle, the middle in the end, etc. And
besides, part of the Philosophers sentences may (and must) as well be referred
to other Chapters, and under other Heads; and left for the industrious and
painful Contemplator to set and join together. His Expositions in the
Corollaries are very remarkable, rendering him a man of a most piercing
Intellect and singular Judgment, and letting in much light to the dark phrases
of the Philosophers; so that indeed they show rather the effects of Experience,
then Contemplation. In a word, The work is like the Sun, which though it seems
little, yet it is all light.

For the Author himself, I must not be silent in what I have learned, though
this Work render him sufficiently famous, especially being reported to me, to
be a Gentleman, Noble, ingenious, and deserving. He was Son to that excellent
Physician, Doctor John Dee, (whose fame survives by his many learned and
precious Works, but chiefly celebrated amongst us, for that his incomparable
Mathematical Preface to Euclids Elements) and chief Physician to the Emperor of
Russia, being made choice of, and recommended by King James, to the said
Emperor, upon his request, to send him over one of his Physicians. In this
employment, he continued fourteen years, being all that time Munificently
entertained, as his merits and abilities well deserved. Upon his return into
England, he brought most ample Testimonies of his own worth, and Emperial
Commendations to his late Majesty; and since retired to Norwich, where he now
lives, And may he yet live the full possessor of that honor due to his Eminent
parts.

Touching the Translation, I have as faithfully performed it, and given it as
plain a Version, as the dignity of the Subject will allow; the better to fit it
to their Understandings, who have wanted the assistance of being bred Scholars,
and yet perhaps are designed to be informed of this wonderful Secret.
Nevertheless, I thought fit to retain the Subtilty of the Mystery, though the
words speak English; whereto the constant Students may but with labor reach,
and that to whet their appetites, not that the lazy Vulgar should pluck with
ease, lest they despise or abuse. It is no desparagement to the Subject that it
appears in an English dress, no more then it was when habited in Greek, Latin,
Arabic, etc. among the ancient Grecians, Romans, and Arabians, for to each of
them it was their vulgar Tongue: And had not those Nations, to whom Learning
(in her progress through the world) came, taken the pains of Translation, and
so communicated to their own Countries the benefit of several Faculties; we had
yet lived in much ignorance of Divinity, Philosophy, Physic, History, and all
other Arts; for it was by the help of Translation they all rose to their
several heights. I presume to hope you will pardon the want of that Elegancy
and Richness, which will stay behind with Originals, as their proper and
peculiar Ornaments and Graces; and accept of that homely Habit a Translation
must be content to wear: For saving the pains whereof to future times, if some
general Forms and Characters were invented (agreeing as near to the natural
quality, and conception of the Thing they are to signify, as might be;) that
(to men of all Languages) should universally express, whatsoever we are to
deliver by writing; it would be a welcome benefit to Mankind, and much sweeten
the Curse of Babels Confusion, save a great expense of Time taken up in
Translation, and the Undertakers merit extraordinary encouragement.

Nor will this unity in Character seem impossible, if we consider there is in
all men one first principle of Reason, one common interior Intelligence, and
that originally there was but one Language. Nay, it will appear less difficult,
if we look back upon those steps already laid to our hands; for we may draw
some helps from the Egyptian Hieroglyphick Symbols, Musical Notes, Stenography,
Algebra, etc. Besides, we see there are certain Characters for the Planets,
Signs, Aspects, Metals, Minerals, Weights, etc. all which have the power of
Letters, and run current in the Understanding of every Language, and continue
as Relics and Remains of the more Sacred and Secret Learning of the Ancients,
whose intentions and words, were not expressed by the Composition of Syllables
or Letters; but by Forms, Figures, and Characters.

To present this invention as more feisable, we may consider that the useful
radical words, if numbered, would not swell beyond our Memories fathom,
specially if well ordered and digested by the judicious direction of an able
and general Linguist; and such a one that rightly understands the first and
true impressions; which Nature has stamped upon the things they would have
signified by the Form. Our misery now is, we spend a great part of our best and
most precious time in learning one Language, to understand a little Matter,
(and in how many Tongues is it necessary to be perfect, before a man can be
generally knowing?) whereas, if this invention were but completed, Arts would
arrive at a high perfection in a little space, and we might reckon upon more
time, in the short account and measure of our days, to be employed in a
substantial study of Matter.

But I must retire; and confess I have extremely transgrest the limits of a
Preface; which (if it bore exact proportion to the Matter ensuing) should be
more brief and compendious: And yet I intended to deliver herewith some short
account of the first and true Matter, with the process of the whole Work; but I
shall leave you to the Collections ensuing, for present satisfaction, and if
encouraged by your acceptance of this, may one day bestow my own Meditations
upon a particular Discourse: In the mean time. I charge all those that shall
reap any benefit by this Translation, under the secret and severe Curse of God,
That they bestow upon it the August reverence due to such a Secret, by
concealing it to themselves, and making use of it only to the Glory of our
Great Creator.

That being the principal aim of this Work, and of all others stamped with the
Signature of James Hasolle.
1. March. 1649/50.
POSTSCRIPT.
AFter I had writ this Preface, and committed it to the Press, I happily met
with the following Arcanum, and perceiving it to suit so punctually with these
Chemical Collections, for the solidity, likeness, and bravery of the Matter and
Form, and to confirm some of those Directions, Cautions, and Admonitions I had
laid down in the Prolegomena; and withal, finding it a piece of very Eminent
Learning and Regard, I adventured to translate it likewise, and persuaded the
Printer to join them into one Book, which I hope will not dislike the Reader,
nor overcharge the Buyer: And though in the Translation thereof, I have used
the same solemnity and reservation, as in the former, and such as befits so
venerable and transcendent a Secret: Yet I hope, that those who (favored with a
propitious Birth) search into the Sacred Remains of Ancient Learning, admire
the rare and disguised effects of Nature, and through their Piety and Honesty,
become worthy of it, may find Ariadnes thread to conduct them through the
delusive windings of this intricate Labyrinth.

1. April. 1650. James Hasolle.

TO THE STUDENTS IN Chemistry.
ALthough (according to Aristotle) Music be ranked in the number of Sciences:
yet we read how K. Philip taunted his Son Alexander, when he found him
Harmoniously singing, in these words; Alexander, art not thou ashamed to sing
so finely? By which words he accounts it dishonorable for a Noble Man to use
that Art publicly; but rather when he is at leisure: Privately, either to
refresh his Spirits, or if there be any dispute concerning Physic, that it
should be tempered with all Harmonical sweetness, and proportion. In like
manner it is (to our grief be it spoken) with the Art of Chemistry, whilst it
is so much defamed, disparaged, and brought into disgrace, by the fraudulent
dealings of Impostors, as that whosoever professes it, shall still be
stigmatized with Public Reproach.

Nevertheless very many, yea, too many there are to be found at this day,
(professing I know not what shadow, of this Divine Art) who ingross unto
themselves, as it were the whole World, to its Destruction, [Brass, Iron, or
other Metal,] not to convert the same into Gold, but are found at length to
cheat with it for Gold, to the great grief of many: Orphans mourn, by reason of
such Knaves, Widows weep, Husbands lament, Wives bewail their misery. This Man
desires his Lands, that his House, another his Rents taken from him. And
amongst these also (which is the more to be wondered at) we have known very many
instructed in every Academical Science; because of whom (being struck no less
with Admiration then Fear,) I begun to be something discouraged, and by the
example of their vain Expense, gave over any further scrutiny in this Golden
Science.

But the remembrance of my Infancy in this Study, wherein for seven years
together I had been an eye witness of the Truth thereof, I spent many laborious
days, and tedious nights, until that according to the advice of Count Bernard,
I had for some years read, and more accurately perused the most select and
approved Authors; the which (although at first I supposed they had differed
amongst themselves, as if what this says, another denies, what here is raised,
there is ruined, yet) at length I found (by Gods assistance,) that they agreed
Hermetically and Harmonically, in one Way, and one Truth; by which means I
discovered the one sort true Philosophers, the other false Chemists, and at
length, called to mind the memorable saying of Dastin the Philosopher: That it
suffices not to be Learned, unless in the very thing from whence the Question
arises. So I found men, (otherwise Learned) unlearned in this Art; amongst
which I knew a Bishop, (whose fame in Chemistry was celebrated of many, whom I
visited, after I had seen a little Chemical Tract, writ with his own hand:) And
when I took him laboring in our Common Gold, whence he studied to Extract
Vitriol, (which he held his only Secret) I left him; for that I saw he had
neither before him the proper Matter, nor the manner of Working, according to
the Doctrine of Philosophers; and that I knew he had many Coal-rakers, and
Brokers of Receipts, as well in England, as in Germany, and Bohemia: But truly
I found not one Man for Thirty years together, that wrought upon the proper
Matter, and consequently not any who deserved the name of a Philosopher. And
for my own part, if more may not be granted me, then a far off to behold the
Holy Land, I shall admire whatsoever the Great and Omnipotent God, is pleased
out of his infinite Mercy, to grant me; yet in the interim, whilst (for delight
sake) I was conversant (by the favor of Hortulanus) in the Philosophical
Rosary, I picked out some no less pleasant then wholesome Flowers, which I have
made up into a Fasciculus, for the Ease and Benefit of Young Students, in this
Art (whilst in reading and perusing, they were wont to consume some years,
before that they learned rightly how to handle, or in handling to compound:)
The which (if not too boldly) I dedicate to you the Lovers of this Truth, and
have accounted it worthy of public view. Deign therefore (ye ingenious Men,)
that this my Fasciculus, howsoever collected by my Labor, yet by your Authority
and Favor, to be presented a more Illustrious Work: whence (by Gods Favor and
Permission) they may be able to pick out what is daily so much desired, and
sought for, by multitudes.

What in observance, Faith, and all Duty, and in memory of your Merits, may in
any wise be performed by me, to your praise and honor: the same I most freely,
and dutifully promise, and vow shall be performed. Farewell most Famous Men, and
may ye not disdain to cherish me with your Patronage.

Yours most devoted ARTHUR DEE. C. M. Archiatros Anglus.

TO THE Candid READER.
EVen as Reason and Experience, are justly called the Hands of Physicians;
without which, neither Health [the Treasure of Life] can be preserved; nor
Sickness [the Herald of Death] expelled: And that Physic it self remains
Lame and Defective: So, in this Philosophical Work, Nature and Art ought so
lovingly to embrace each other, as that Art may not require what Nature denies,
nor Nature deny what may be perfected by Art. For Nature assenting, she demeans
her self obediently to every Artist, whilst by their Industry she is helped,
not hindered. Of whose Steps, Progress, Motion, and Condition, whosoever is
ignorant, let him not presume to attempt this Work, (of it self Abstruse, and
otherwise wonderfully shadowed over by Philosophers, with infinite Clouds:) For
nothing Answers his Expectation, who either knows not, or strives to compel
Nature. For that she (as learnedly Raymund) will not be enforced, or straightened.
But he that covets after Fame, by the Honor of the Art, or to reach the Summity
thereof; let him first observe, and obsequiously follow Nature Naturalizing,
Propagating, Multiplying, and being the Mistress and Guide, must resemble Art
in what she is able: which although in diverse things it be a Correctrix, and
help of Nature, whilst it cleanses her from all Errors and Defilements, and
being hindered in Motion, is helped by it; yet is it impossible she should be
imitated in all things.

For, as in this Divine Work (not undeservedly so called, inasmuch as it is
affirmed of all Philosophers, that never any Man of himself, without Divine
Inspiration, could comprehend, or understand it, though otherwise he appeared a
most Learned Philosopher:) So, in all other Compound Bodies, in the first
Mixture, or Composition of Elements (that I may conceal the Occult cause of
Motion and Conjunction) the weight and proportion of every Element, are utterly
unknown. That Secret of Secrets, bestowed by God upon Nature in the Beginning,
she still retains in her own Power, and shall so, until the end of the World:
Perhaps, lest Mortal Men (if it had been made known to them) elated by the
insolence and pride of Devils, should presume to Create, which is proper to God
only; who by the unspeakable Power of his Word, has endued Nature (as his
Minister) with the Generation, Propagation, and Multiplication of all things.
For when he inspired in things Created, the Generation of the World (saying,
Increase and Multiply;) he gave also a certain Springing or Budding, [that is,
Greenness, or Strength,] whereby all things multiply themselves (whence some
more profoundly contemplating, said, That all things were green; whereas to be
green, may be said to increase, and grow up together,) and that Greenness they
called Nature. Therefore it is not without cause, that the prime Philosophers
do so seek after, and sacrifice to Nature: when without her help, Art (in this
knowledge) performs nothing. Nor any wonder, if the most Learned English Monk,
[Roger Bacon,] writ of the wonderful Power of Nature, and the mavelous
Secrets in Art. Nor does Parmenides less admire the Power of Nature, [in these
words, O that Heavenly Nature, overruling, and excelling the Natures of Truth,
and causing them to rejoice. This is that special and Spiritual Nature, to whom
God gave a Power, above the violence of Fire; and therefore let us magnify it,
seeing that nothing is more Precious!]

Therefore (Friendly Reader) I recommend to thee, and the Sons of Art, this
Lady of Honor, without which we attain not, (or perfect any thing in) this Art;
that so it may be your work, and chief study to obtain her Friendship, so, as
when an occasion serves, ye may be found Judges, not Jugglers of Nature and Art.

For which cause I have writ this little Tract; [viz. My Fasciculus Chemicus;]
wherein I have given you the more abstruse Secrets of Nature, chosen, culled,
compacted, and digested in no ordinary manner, as being a renowned Speculum,
whose refulgent, and reflecting Beams make known, the unknown Secrets of
Nature; taking original from the Chaos, proceeding to the Separation of Light
from Darkness; and by the Degree of Perfection (Art handling it) the Foot-path
is manifested, and chalked out; whereby Nature is at last brought to more
Perfection. Which Book indeed, although perhaps it may be looked upon, by many,
as a thing of no value, because it consists (for the most part) of the sayings
of Philosophers, digested only in order, (yet is it no easy business, when as
David Lagneus witnesses of himself, in his Epistle to his Harmonious Chemistry,
whilst he was Counselor and Physician to the most Christian King, That he
sweat with continual Labor, for twenty two years, until he had composed (it may
be) such another little Tract.) As touching the Method of this Work, it
contains ten small Chapters, and every Chapter follows the Order of the Work:
whence also a Mystery is revealed, which for matter of dissembling, or
concealing things, was never before set forth in this manner: Other me^ having
ever put the Beginning ^^ the End, and the End at the Beginning, in such sort
(as witnesses Dynysius) that it was impossible (the Divine Counsel so disposing
it) to find all things orderly writ. Some Chapters also are noted, not onel^
with Titles (scarce hitherto heard of ^ but rare Things, [even the Secret^ of
the Art laid open,] which (^ very many affirm) ought not to ^ published. But in
the end of ever^ Chapter, I have briefly comprised and expounded the extracted
Marrow thereof. Otherwise (as Senio^ says) If I did not expound some thing out
of them, my Book should be the same, with the Book of those Wise men, and my
words theirs; and, as if I had taken their words, and used them for my own,
which were both unworthy, and a disgrace to him that should do so.

But the Authors I have produced, whosoever has read them, will not deny, but
that they are the Choicest, the most Acute, and Approved; and that the things
selected and culled from their Writings, are such only, as must necessarily be
known; That so Art may be made known in things requisite, and the frivolous
omitted, by which many have been seduced from the way of Truth, whilst only
it behooves the Intelligent Reader, to distinguish Truth from Falsehood. For the
Truth is not otherwise hid in their Writings, then Wheat amongst the Chaff, the
which with Labor and Toil I have found out, and here presented, (Unmasked and
Naked) to the Studious Readers, for the Public good; Hoping, that this my
Labor will not only be useful to the younger Proficients; but even grateful to
the Learned themselves; And which I desire you may all of you, fairly, and
freely accept of. Farewell.

From my Study at Musco, the Calends of March. 1629.
ARTHUR DEE Doctor of Physic, His Chymicall Collections.
CHAP. I. Natural Matter, what it is, and from whence.
IN truth the matter of Petrus Bonus.
which the Stone is made, is only one; nor can this neighboring Faculty be
found in any other thing. And it is that which is most like to Gold, it is also
that of which it is begotten; and it is Argent Vive, alone, pure, without the
commixtion of any other thing, and it is obscured with infinite names, and the
manner of operating is only one, but it is diversely varied by the
Philosophers, therefore no wonder if the Art be difficult, and the Artists
greatly err. Nevertheless Art begets Medicine from the same, or altogether
the like principles, as Nature begets metalls. Petrus Bonus, page 120.

The Vive Argent is compounded Arnoldus.
with Citrine Sulphur, so that they are changed and become the same in one
mass Lucide Red, weighty, of which two kinds are sufficient for the
composition of the Elixir. He therefore that desires to search into the secrets
of this Art, it is fit he know the first matter of Metalls, lest he lose his
labor. Arnoldus lib. de Alchimia, page 1.

Art willing to follow Nature Petrus Bonus.
inquires out her end, and finds these principles congealed by Nature into
this middle Nature, and not impure; and endeavors to digest and purify such a
Matter with the heat of Fire, that from thence she might draw the form of Gold,
with which all imperfect metals are turned into Gold, in as much as they are
ordained by nature to this end, Petrus Bonus p. 105.

We say that the whole is but Lullius.
one thing, which is varied into the number of three, by its operations, and in
varying by one decoction is one thing of one single power, and after this
passing by degrees to information, by another digestion it will be another
thing, which we call Argent Vive, Earth, Water, and Ferment, Gumm and our
second Salsature, bitter and sharp, which by its Compound virtue and propriety
got by the second digestion, does loose the whole body, and after by another
digestion has a greater force. And so thou may understand that in our
Magisteriall there are three proper Earths, three Waters, and three proper
Ferments; three proper Gumms, three Salsatures, three Argent Vives Congealing,
as in our Practice is manifest. Lullii Theorica p. 109.

Such a Matter must be chosen Tauladanus.
in which is Argent Vive, pure, clean, clear, white, and red, and not brought
to perfection, but equally and proportionably mixed by a due mean, with such a
sulphur, and congealed into a solid Mass, that by our discretion and prudence,
and our artificial Fire, we may attain its inmost purity, that after the
perfection of the work it may be a Thousand Thousand times stronger then simple
bodies digested by natural heat. Tauladanus page 314.

If we had Sulphur and Mercury from that matter upon the Earth, Lullius.
of which Gold and Silver are made under the Earth, from them we could easily
make Gold and Silver, with the propriety of their own nature. Therefore there
is nothing farther requisite, but that we find what is nearest to it, of its
own nature. Mercury in all Elemented substances is one and the same; which
Mercury is indeed natural heat, which produces as well Vegetables as
Minerals, although diversely according to the command of Nature. And so our
Mercury never is visible, but intelligible only, and so it is manifest, that it
is in every thing and every place, hence common to all things. Lullii
Codicillus page 131.

In our Stone, there are the Sun, Flamelius.
and the Moon vive, and they can generate other Suns and other Moons; other
Gold and Silver, to these, are dead. Flamelii Annotationes, page 138.

The Philosophers Stone is found Ros. Philos.
created by nature and our Mercury, viz. the matter in which the Philosophers
Mercury is contained, is that whjch nature has a little wrought and framed in
a Metallic form, but yet left imperfect. Ros. Philos. page 231.

I saw a red Toad drinking the Ripleus.
juice of Grapes even till his Bowels were burst. Riplei Somnium.

Art following Nature will not Vogel.
use Argent vive alone, nor Sulphur alone, nor Argent vive and Sulphur
together; but the same Matter mixed and compounded of the same Principles, which
Nature has prepared for Art, like a careful Mother for her Daughter. An^ has
conjoined them from the beginning of the generation of Metals not otherwise, as
in Milk, Butter, Cheese, and Whay. But afterward Art separates and sequester
it, and again joins and digests i^ being purified by the addition ^ outward
heat only: Nature oper^ting from within, until that ou^ward Sulphur be divided
from the Argent vive. Vogelius page 105.

Think with thy self whereto Basilius Val.
thou would labor to bring our Stone, then shall thou know, it flows from no
other then a certain Metallic Radix; from whence also Metalls themselves are
ordained by the Creator. Basilius Valentinus page 15.

When I speak of Mercuriall water, Clangor Buc.
do not understand Crude Mercury, but the Philosophers Mercury of a Red
substance, drawn from Mineralls, having the matter in themselves, from Sulphur
and Mercury, and that Argent vive and Sulphur are one thing, and proceed from
one thing, therefore whiten the Leton, viz. Brass with Mercury, because Leton
is of the Sun and Moon, a compound Citrine imperfect body, which when thou have
whitened etc. Clangor Buccinae page 503. 470.

The Philosophers Gold and Dunstan.
Silver, are two principal Tinctures, red and white, buried in one and the
same body, which Tinctures can never naturally come to their perfect
complement, yet they are separable from accidental dross, and earthly
lutosity, and afterward by their proper qualities in their pure Earths the
tinctures red and white are found commixtable, and the most fit Ferments for
them, so that they may in a manner be said to want no other thing. Of this very
Body the matter of the Stone, three things are chiefly spoken, viz. The green
Lion, Assa foetida, and white Fume; but this is inferred by the Philosophers
from the Compound, that they might answer the foolish according to their own
folly, and deceive them by the diverse multiplicity of names. But do thou
always understand one thing to be really intended, although accidentally three
things may be so called. For the green Lion, Assa foetida, and white Fume, are
altogether attributed to one and the same subject, and are always coucht in one
and the same subject, until by Art made manifest. By the green Lion, all
Philosophers whatsoever understood, green Gold, multiplicable, spermatick, and
not yet perfected by Nature; having power to reduce Bodies into their first
matter, and to fix volatile and spiritual things, and therefore not unfitly
called a Lion. By Assa foetida, we understand a certain unsavory Odor, exhaled
from the unclean body in the first operation, which may in all things be
likened to stinking Assa foetida. The reason why it is called white Fume is
this: In the first distillation, before the Red Tincture ascends, there arises
a smoke truly white, whereby the receiver is darkened or filled with a certain
milky shadow, whence it receives the name of Virgins milk. Therefore where ever
thou find a substance endowed with these three properties, know that it is
the matter of the Philosophers Stone. Dunstan. pa. 3.

Therefore let us take a matter Clangor Buccinae.
which will be Gold, and which by the mediation of our skill is brought into a
true ferment. Clangor. page 510.

The matter of Metalls is a certain Rosarius Philos.
smoaky substance, and it is the first matter of Metalls, containing in it self
an unctuous or oily moisture, from which substance the Artist separates the
Philosophical humidity, which is fit for the work, which will be as clear as a
water drop, in which is coucht the metallic Quintessence, and that is placable
Metal, and therefore has in it a mean of Joining Tinctures together, because
it has the nature of Sulphur, and Argent vive. Rosar. Phil. p. 278.

The thing whose head is Red, Dastin.
feet White, and eyes Black, is the whole Mystery, Dastin. visio. p. 2.

Know that our Leton is Red, Mori^n.
but not for our use, until it be made White. Morienus p. 38.

When thou would have Mineral Lullius.
Elements, take not of the first, nor last, because the first are too much
simple, but the last, too gross. When thou art hungry, take Bread, not Meal;
when thou would make Bread, take Meal, not the Ear. Lullius Theori. p. 34.

There is a pure Matter, which Eximedes.
is the Matter of Gold, containing in it self, the heat which gives increase,
and has a power to increase and multiply in its kind, as all other things.
Eximedes, p. 45.

In our imperfect Metal, are the Arnold.
Sun and Moon, in virtue and near power, because if they were not in the
Compound, neither the Sun nor Moon could thence be made. Arnold. Epist. page
491.

Mercury is in all Elemented Lullius.
Substances, one and the same; which Mercury is indeed the natural heat which
produces as well Minerals as Vegetables, although diversely according to the
precept of Nature; and so our Mercury is not visible but intelligible; and it
is manifest, that it is in every thing and place, and common to all. Lullii
Codic. fol. 134. Repelat. 6.

THE COROLLARY.
Vogelius, Trevesanus, with diverse other Philosophers advise, first seriously
to consider in what point Authors most agree; for in it they affirm, the only
and single truth is involved: To me therefore, meditating this from the most
select Authors, recited with their Harmony, both in the Substance, Form, and
Color, and in all necessary Circumstances and Accidents, was discovered (by
Divine assistance) the Subject of all wonder (as Cornelius Agrippa rightly calls
it) in open and naked words. It is therefore generally agreed, and of all
confessed, That there is one vive or volatile Argent, retaining a certain
Vegetability, while it is yet in motion, not brought to maturity, or the
determinate term of natural digestion in the Mines. And the same is immaturate
Argent vive (not that Mature of the vulgar) which is next to Metal in
possibility; and therefore of some is called Immature Metal. According to
Arnold, Riplie, Dunstan, Morien, and Clangor Buccinae; it is clothed with a
Red color, offered or brought to us by Nature; but if it be not by the Artist
taken from its Radix in a due time, viz. before it come to such maturity, as to
contain one grain of Malleable Metal, it will be unfit for our purpose. Seek
therefore the Philosophic Embryon in its due place, and mature immaturity, and
you shall know (as Rosarius says) our Stone is found created of Nature; which
truly is to be understood of the matter of the Stone compounded by Nature, and
formed into a Metallic form, but given to Art imperfect, that by degrees it
might be brought beyond the degree of perfection.

CHAP. II. The Preparation: or the first work, or work of the Winter.
THis is the Preparation, because Senior.
there are blind men, and they have erred a long time, while they were
ignorant that this Stone was prepared with this preparation. Senior, p. 31.

If the first work proceed not, Dastin.
how is the second attained to? Because, if no division be made, there is no
conjunction. Dastini Speculum, page 56.

We must begin with the separation Arnold.
of the Elements, from the Red earth, as of the pure from the impure. Arnoldus
in Hortulanum, page 9.

Thou must diligently consider, Pandolph.
how this dissolution may be made, and certainly know, that it is not done, but
by the water of Mercury; and know, that every body is dissolved with the
spirit, with which it is mixed, and without doubt is made spiritual. Pandolphus
in Turba, page 16.

Son of Truth, understand, that Lullius.
we in the first operation of our work, do purge and prepare matter for the
creation of its Sulphur; which being prepared, by and by in the second
preparation, we compound and create medicine, which how great virtue it has,
will be manifest. Therefore first thou must create its Sulphur, because without
that, thou can not make the complete Elixir. And when thou have created
Sulphur, then begin the Philosophic work; but ever consider, that the nature
and propriety which is in the very spirit, may not be combust in its
preparation by the power of the fire. Because then the spirit cannot whiten,
nor join it self with the Earth: Therefore it often happens, that they who
think to make water of life, make water of death, by reason of combustion.
Lullii Apertorium, p. 2.

The Vessels so disposed, a most A^noldus.
subtle smoke will arise in the Alembick, and the same will be turned into a
clear water, having the nature of these species, whereof the Stone is
generated: which Water descends by the Nose of the Alembick. Arnoldus in
Comment. Hortulani. p. 16.

The Phlegm wherein our Sulphur, Lullius.
which is called Gold, is decocted, is that in which Air is included: for our
Phlegm is a middle substance; and the first water of Mercury, wherein the
principle of the Stone is; viz. its dissolution; nor does it enter with it, but
as it were wetting the parts of things, not generating or increasing. Lullii
Testam. page 1.

It is meet thou prepare the Matter, Lullius.
till it be fit to receive our Mercury, which we call glorious Mercury; and the
manner is, That thou take a proportion of the said Earth, and put upon it the
fourth part of the said imperfect Menstruum, wherein is such a Mercury, and set
it in a Balneo for the space of six days, and distill it, and so continue
until the Earth be disposed to embrace a Soul; which will not be done at the
first or second time; therefore put it again and again in the Balneo for the
space of six days, in a Glass very well sealed; after that open the vessel,
and setting the Alembick on again, with a most gentle fire distill the
humidity; and again pour on more of its Menstruum, which has its seed in it,
and digest it as aforesaid, and so continue until the Earth be disposed to
entertain its soul. Son, it is to be observed, when it shall drink up and
retain four parts more of its weight, that if thou put a little upon a heated
plate of Gold or Silver, it will all fly up into smoke: then is the Earth
pregnant and prepared, which ought to be sublimed. Lul. Test. page 15.

First, all the superfluous and corrupt humidity in the essence of Rosar.
Philosoph.
those things, and also the subtle and burning superfluity must be elevated
with a proportionable Fire, and that by Calcining. Then the total substance
remaining corrupt in the Calx of these Bodies of the burning superfluous
humidity and blackness, is to be corroded with the aforesaid Corrosives, acute
or acerb, until the Calx be made white or red. Rosar. Philos. page 345.

Our Mercury is made of perfect Scala.
bodies, and not imperfect, that is, with the second Water, after they have
been duly calcined by the first. Scala, page 128.

It behooves thee to extract one Artepheus.
living or vive incombustible Water, and then congeal it with the perfect body
of the Sun, which even there is dissolved into nature, and a white congealed
substance, as if it were Cream, and would come all white. Nevertheless, first
this Sun in his putrefaction and resolution in this Water in the beginning
loses his light; is obscured and waxes black; at length he will elevate
himself above the Water, and by little and little, a white color will swim
above him, and so the perfect body of the Sun receives life, and in such a
Water is inlivened, inspired, increased and multiplied in his specie, as other
things: Therefore our Water is a Fountain fair, pleasant and clear, prepared
only for the King and Queen, whom it very well knows, and they it, for it
attracts them to it self, and they remain two or three days to wash themselves
in that Fountain, viz. some months; and these it makes to grow young, and
renders them very beautiful.

These three things mutually follow, viz. Humidity, Putridity, and Blackness;
from whence the glassie house may be posited, and subtly sited, until the
moist Matter included, by little and little became putrid and black, for the
putrefaction begins together with the solution, but the putrefaction is not yet
complete, until the whole Matter be dissolved into water. Artephus page 9.

One of the contraries exceeding Dastin.
destroies the rest, whence the Earth is made Water, when the watery qualities
overcome it, and on the contrary, this Water must draw forth three things, viz.
a Spirit, a Body, and a Soul, whence this Water is threefold in Nature, which
has in it self Water, Fire, and Earth. We divide the dissolved Stone in the
Elements, and wash it particularly, that it it might be more subtilized, and
the better purified, and that at pleasure the Complexion might be more firmly
composed, but we distill it very often, as the Water and Air are clean without
dregs, and light without filth, pure without contraries, for then they wash
more easily, touch more plentifully, and work more nobly. For Art (as Aristotle
says) in like manner throws off all superfluities from its work as Nature
does. For Fire extracts that which exists in the interiours of things, and
feeds on the sulphurity of them, subtilizing and rarifying at pleasure. And
therefore we distill them, that we might sweetly draw out their filth. But we
do it sweetly and with inhumation, lest the excessive Fire consume the sought
for subtilties. Whence in every distillation observe this sign, that
universally there be candor and purity in it, and whatsoever drops forth
unmixt, put apart, because the work is corrupt if thou do otherwise. Therefore
we so much distill it, until it send forth no dregs, unless happily white
ones, and this we iterate seven times, that in their simple purity they might
transcend the orders of the seven Planets. For it is meet they be most pure and
clean, which by their purity should cleanse and perfect other things. And
according to the quantity of distillation they will be clear, and according to
the plurality of clearness, they will cleanse and touch other things. Whence it
ought to be distilled seven times; what is more is evil, because as diminution
hinders, so augmentation corrupts.

In the fourth distillation follows the Lavement, that its every Element might
be rectified severally, whence we distill the Water and Air seven times by
themselves. But thou shall distill all things with moisture, because dryness
corrupts the work with combustion: And the Philosophers advise that every
distillation be always made seven days with inhumation, meaning that inhumation
be made seven days between every distillation. Dastini spec. page 96.

It behooves thee to exercise the Rosar. Arnold.
separation of the Elements as much as thou art able, to wash off the Water and
Air by distillations, and to burn up the Earth by Calcination, until there
remain not any thing of the Soul in the Body, unless what may not be perceived
in the operation, the sign of which will be, when nothing shall be evaporated
from the Body, if a little of it be put upon a heated plate. Rosar. Arnold.
page 423.

As an Infant exhausts all airy Massa Solis and Lunae.
vapors in nine months, and the menstruum turned into a milky form: so in
nine months the first work is performed, viz. the second whiteness, because
the whole is coagulated: Nevertheless the work is finished about six months
according to the Experience of the Author, but according to Balgus Page 1^9.
in Turba in an hundred and ninety days. Massa Solis and Lunae. page 275.

Let not the water be suffered to stand when it is fit for operation, because
it receives its Curd into the bottom, crudled or coagulated by the cold of the
Air, and congealing dries; which happened to one of my Companions, who for the
space of a year found it so, but it was not distilled. Massa Solis and Lunae.
page 274.

No solution ought to be made Rosar. Philosoph.
without Blood, proper or appropriate, viz. the Water of Mercury, which is
called the Water of the Dragon, and that Water ought to be made by an Alembick
without the addition of any other thing. Rosar. Philos. p. 223.

The whole course of the work Roymundus Lullius.
endures for the space of two years, whence the Stone is of one year, and the
Elixir of another to every new Artist who never made it, but to every good and
expert Artist who is subtle, one year and three months are accounted
sufficient, For by what it is corrupted, in like manner it is generated. Lul.
Theo. p. 76.

Accommodate well the Fire in Ventura.
the furnace, and see that the whole Matter be dissolved into Water, then rule
it with a gentle Fire, until the greater part be turned into black dust.
Because when our Stone is in our vessel, and our Matter feels our Sun, it will
presently be resolved into Water. Ventura p. 129.

Putrefaction is made with a Rosarius Philos.
most gentle Fire, so that nothing may ascend, because if any thing should
ascend, there would be made a separation of parts, which ought not to be,
until the Masculine and Feminine are perfectly joined. Rosar. Philos. page 261.

The encompassing frigidity of Dastin.
the Air, the binding solidity of the Earth, the dissolving heat of the Fire,
the impetuosity and restless motion of the Water, and exceeding quantity of
Multitude do hinder Putrefaction (as Aristotle says.)

But the calidity of the Air, the subtility of Matter, the gentleness of the
Fire, the stability of Rest, the equality of Compounds, the gravity of
Patience, the maturity of Time, do necessarily induce and hasten Putrefaction;
yet so, that the Air be tempered, what is thick subtilized, the Fire moderated,
Rest preserved, Proportion adequated, Patience strengthened, and the time
expected until Nature proceeding naturally shall have completed her own
work. Dastin spec. page 184.

Our Water must be divided into Scala.
two parts, whereof in one part the Body is congealed, viz. with seven
Imbibitions and Congelations, but in the other part it putrefies and melts,
that the fiery Water abovesaid might be cast forth. Scala Philos. pa. 151.

If the work in its managing be deduced to the final red state, by corruption
before the due term of whiteness (which it may not be) thou have erred; then
for a remedy take away the redness with fresh white Water, by imbibition and
inhumation. Idem.

There are three Humidities, the Lullius.
first is Water, the second is Air, (the mean between Water and Oil) the third
is Oil it self. The Water is distilled to the likeness or sign of perfect
whiteness, which is transparent splendor, and the shining clearness of
crystal; and he that attains to this Token has the Philosophers Mercury,
dissolving all Bodies, chiefly of the Sun and Moon, because of the vicinity or
nearness of Nature. Lul. Codic. p. 119.

In our whole Magisteriall there Lullius.
are three principal Spirits necessary, which without the consummation of
their resolution cannot be manifested, and they are otherwise called three
Argent vives, and for Argent vive understand the Water in which the Tincture is
carried. Raymund. Theor. p. 122. 24.

If you will hear me, I will truly Ripleus.
show what is that Mercury chiefly profitable: know therefore that there are
three Mercuries which are the Keys of Science whom Raymund calls his Menstrua,
without which nothing is done rightly, but two of those Mercuries are
superficial, the third Essential, of the Sun and Moon, perfect Bodies when we
first Calcine them naturally, but no unclean Body is ingredienced except one,
which is commonly called of the Philosophers, The green Lion, which is the mean
of joining Tinctures. With the second Mercury, which is vegetable Humidity,
both the Principal, Material, and Formal bodies ought to be resolved,
otherwise they are of little moment. And with the third, which is Humidity,
very permanent and incombustible, the unctuous Tree of Hermes is burnt into
Ashes. Ripley pa. 25.

Sons of Wisdom, there are Incertus.
three solutions, the first is of a crude Body, the second is of a
Philosophical Earth, the third we put in Augmentation. The Virgin is Mercury,
because it never propagated a body in the Womb of the Earth, and yet it
generates the Stone for us, by resolving the Heaven, that is, it opens the
Gold, and brings forth a Soul. Incertus de Chemia. pa. 6.

Metals are reduced to the first Ventura.
Matter, when they are driven back, to that first simplicity, which their
Elements had in their first Composition, in which there were Spirits and
Vapors by nature perfectible to the form of the Compound. Vent. pa. 12.

By Argent vive is understood Ludus Puerorum.
the humidity of that unction, which is the radical humidity of our Stone.
Ludus Puerorum page 174.

The Preparation of this Spirit, is its subtilation, which is performed Vogel.
by many distillations, until it has gotten crystalline splendor and
clearness. Vogel. p. 148.

Keep the rectified Water apart, Aristotle.
because that is the Mercury of the Philosophers, the water of Life washing the
Leton. Aristotle page 366.

The whole labor and tediousness Lull. compendium.
is in this, viz. the separation of the Elements and Sulphur. Air cannot be
divided from Metals, unless by the twentieth, twenty second, or thirtieth
distillation. And the Fire may be divided from the Earth at the eleventh
distillation, and as many distillations as there are, so many putrefactions and
reiterations of Water and Air together, to wit, of our Menstruall water, and
every putrefaction requires eight days, or six continued, so that the division
of the Elements, dures the space of an year, but we have completed it in seven
months. Lull. compend. pa. 281.

The Alchymists have said that the Stone is compounded of two Waters, viz. of
one which makes the volatile Stone, and the other which fixes and hardens it.
Idem.

Between every Calcination of Avicenna.
the Earth, pour on water moderately, to wit, not much nor little; because if
much, there is made a sea of perturbation, if little, it will be burnt up into
ashes. But sweetly, not hastily, from eight days to eight days, by watering,
decocting, and calcining the Earth, till it has imbibed its Water; therefore
when the Earth shall not be white, bray it together with its Water, iterate and
calcine it, because Aroc and Fire do wash the Earth, and take away its
obscurity from it; for its preparation is always with Water, and as the
fitness of the Water shall be, so also shall be the clearness of the Earth,
and by how much the more the Earth shall be white, etc. Avicenna page 420, 421.

He which knows not to extract Scala.
more things out of one, is ignorant also to compound one thing of more. Our
separation is a separation of a watery or moist vapor or phlegm in Balneis, a
levigation of rarity, a production of principles. Scala. p. 134.

Imbibe Calx or Body oftentimes, Geber.
that thence it may be sublimed, and yet more purified then before, because the
Calx ascends upwards very difficultly or not at all, unless helped by the
Spirit. Geber. lib. summae perfectionis page 573.

The Vessel being fitly placed in Ventura.
the Furnace, the Fire underneath must be continued, then the Vapor of the
Matter will ascend upwards into the Alembick most subtly, and the same will
be turned into serene bright and clear Water, having the form of a water drop,
and the Nature of all the species of which it is generated, and it descends
again by the Crows beak, that is, the Neck of the vessel of the Alembick; and
this Water, because it is subtle, does enter the Body, and extract first the
Soul, afterward it dissolves all that is left, and turns it into Water.
Moreover know that all things which are sublimed are sublimed two ways, some by
themselves, and some with others; but our Mercury since it is a Spirit, is
sublimed by it self, but our Earth, since it is the Calx of the Body, is not
sublimed, unless very well incorporated with Mercury. Therefore beat or pound
them together, and imbibe till they become one Body, because the Body ascends
not unless incorporated with Mercury. Ventura p. 141.

Dissolve the Gold and Silver in Vogel.
Water of their kind if thou know it. Vogelius p: 78.

And this is the last Preparation, Massa Solis and Lunae.
viz. of Spirits often reiterated by Contrition and Assation with their Body,
until thou see these things which thou desire in it. Massa Solis and Lunae
page 240.

Sons of Learning, know ye that Afflictes.
the whole Work, and the Government thereof is not done but by Water, with
which mingle ye the body of the Magnesia, and put it in its Vessel, and close
the mouth carefully, and boil it with a gentle fire, till it be made liquid,
for by the heat of the Water, the whole will easily be made Water. Afflictes in
Turba. p. 32.

THE COROLLARY.
From a certain Mineral Mass, coagulated, lucid, red, ponderous, being
perfect Metal, in the nearest power, containing in it self vive spermatick
Sulphur, and vive immature Mercury, multiplicable in it self, with the most
gentle fire of a Balneum, or Bath, is drawn forth a certain insipid,
phlegmatic Water, which if it be again repoured on, with its due proportion of
Earth, and in due season digested, and abstracted by dissolving daily by little
and little (but yet more and more) the Body, it dissolves likewise the other
Elements, and by including Air in it self, carries it up by distilling through
an Alembick, the Water and Air ought again to be so often poured on, digested
and abstracted till the Body be altogether resolved by repeated distillations
and inhumations. Then after the fourth distillation, the Air is to be
separated from the Water, and to be rectified by it self seven times, with
which afterward abstract the Fire from the black Earth. Lastly, separate the
Fire from the Air. And at length impregnate the dry Earth (deprived of its
humidity by imbibing) so often with Air, until light arise from darkness,
and our Infant appear before our eyes, expected by more then many lucubrations,
which at length is crowned with a Diadem, King of Kings, whose rise the
Philosophers adore, under the Aenigma of the rising Sun in the increasing Moon.
But in the very point of Coagulation, which is performed by Infrigidation, all
Philosophers with one consent affirm that the work of the Winter, and of hidden
Preparation, is finished, then begins the second work truly Philosophical, as
in these words our Countreyman Norton the excellent Philosopher has expressed:
Our Philosophical work (says he) takes not its beginning before all be clean
within and without. And according to Attaman, The second work is not made but
from a clean and purified body. And this Preparation, or first work he calls
a Sordid labor, and adjudges it not worthy a learned man, therefore not
unfitly said to be the work of Women. But he deserves not Sweets, that will not
taste of Bitters: And they who either know not, or neglect this hidden laborious
Preparation, will neither attain the benefit, nor desired end of this Art. But
he that does not clearly understand, from these, the manner of Practice, let
him seek further assistance from Raymund Lullie, Ripley, Rosary, whence it
plentifully may be fetched, especially whilst out of their Writings, in this
little Chapter, where, here and there, they have obscurely delivered
themselves, the Path it self is evidently cleared.

CHAP. III. The Weight in Preparation.
IF thou know not the quantity Dastin.
of the very Weight, thou will altogether want the doctrine of this Science.
Forget not therefore, that whatsoever ought to dissolve, ought to exceed in the
quantity the thing to be dissolved. But the first part of the Water (according
to Philosophers) ought to dissolve the Earth, and turn it to its self. Whence
they say the Water is to be divided, that with the first part in forty days, it
ought to be dissolved, putrefied, and coagulated, till it be turned into a
Stone, therefore it is meet that Water should exceed the Earth. Dast. spec. p.
208.

When thou dissolvest, it shall be fit the Spirit exceed the Body, and when
thou fixest, the Body ought to exceed the Spirit; for therefore is the Spirit
that it might dissolve the Body, and therefore is the Body that it might fix
the Spirit. Therefore thou must impose three thirds of Moist, and one of Dry;
for in the beginning of thy operation, help the work in Dissolution, by the
Moon, and in Coagulation by the Sun. Idem page 96, 98.

There is another Weight singular Massa Sol. and Lunae.
or plural, and it is twofold; the first is of the first operation, and that
is in the Composition of the Air, and it is diverse according to diverse men. Now
there is anothe Weight Spiritual, of the second work, and that is also diverse
according to diverse men. Massa Solis and Lunae p. 177.

I say that the first Water is to be Dastin.
divided into three thirds, whereof the first is to impregnate, terminate, and
whiten the Earth, but the two other thirds are reserved to rubifie the white
Earth, that is to be incerated, and lastly to be whitened: But yet no third (as
Democritus upon the Magnesia says) is ingredienced all at once, but every of
the thirds is divided into another third, that so the Nine thirds returning to
one Earth, might complete a perfect Decinary. But the three first thirds, are
the three first Salsatures to perform the first Dealbation, but the six other
remaining thirds are six parts of Divine Water to consume the second
Dealbation. But none of those thirds does altogether ingredience the whole, and
at once, but every part of them one after another is severally imposed in their
own season, work and order. Dastin. spec. pa. 177.

A small Error in the principles does cause great Error in things principiated;
therefore that thou may not err in the first and second work, we have taught
always to impose Equals, for so equality shall flourish in both, that the Earth
might cease, as the Water moistens; as the Earth ceases. Idem p. 222.

It is fit to attend what belongs Ripley.
to Proportion, for in this many are deceived, therefore that thou may not
spoil the work, let thy Bodies be both subtly limated with Mercury, and
subtilized with equal proportion, one of the Sun, another of the Moon, till
all these things be reduced into Dust, then make thy Mercury, of which join
four parts to the Sun, two to the Moon, as it is meet, and in this manner it
behooves thee thou begin thy work in the figure of the Trinity. Three parts of
the Body and as many of the Spirit, and for the Unity of the Spirit, one part
more of Spirit then of corporeal Substance. According to Raymunds Repertory,
this is the true proportion. This very thing my Doctor showed me, but R. Bachon
took three parts of the Spirit for one of the Body, for which I have watched
many nights before I perceived it, both is the right, take which thou will. If
also thy Water be equal in proportion with the Earth and measured Heat, there
will at once come forth a new Budde both White and Red. Ripley pa. 30.

Take of the whitest Gum Mundus.
one part, and of the Urine of a white Calf another part, and part of a Fishes
Gall, and of the Body of Gum one part, without which it cannot be corrected;
and decoct it forty days, afterward dry it in the warm Sun till it be
congealed. Mundus pa. 88.

Take thy dearest Son and join Aristotle.
him equally to his white Sister, drink to them a Love-cup, because the consent
of good will joins one thing to another. Pour on them sweet Wine, till they be
inebriated, and divided into smallest parts. But remember that all clean things
agree most aptly with clean things, otherwise they will generate Sons unlike
themselves. Arist. in Tractatulo page 362.

Observe the first preparation, Massa Solis and Lunae.
and cogitate this, which is the extraction of all Spirits from the Body, and
the cleansing of them into their Water. Massa Solis and Lunae pa. 240.

Thou must impose three thirds Dastin.
of moisture, and one of dry; for in the beginning of thy operation help the
work in the Solution by the Moon, and the Congelation by the Sun. Dastin spec.
pa. 98.

THE COROLLARY.
Count Bernard Trevisane vowed to God, that he would never in naked words, or
vulgar speech disclose the Weight, Matter, or Fires, but only in true
Parables, without either diminution or superfluity, in imitation of the Wise
men, as in this Chapter. Amongst others our English Ripley has delivered
things sufficiently obscured; But the youngling Artist ought to ruminate and
consider that what ever are nominated in the composition of the Weight, must
always be understood of two things only, viz. of Water and Earth, which are
sometimes under Spirit and Body, sometime under Mercury, the Sun and Moon,
sometimes under Air and Poison, nay under as many infinite other names
concealed, as the very first Matter. But that those that seek might be directed
into the right Path, and Ripleys cloud dispersed with the beams of the Sun, let
us attend the proportions which he has disposed in these his own words, Let
the Bodies (says he) be corrected or limated with an equal proportion of
Mercury: whence understand that the proportion of Earth and Water must be
equal, then he proceeds further and teaches, that one Body of the Sun be
joined with two of the Moon, in which words are understood two parts of Water
to one of Earth. He proceeds also farther, and joins four parts of Mercury to
the Sun* and two to the Moon; whence observe that four and two make six parts
of Mercury, Water, or Fire, which parts are to be mixed with one part of the
Sun, and another of the Moon, which since they constitute two parts of Earth,
there shall be a like proportion to the aforesaid six parts, viz. of Water, as
one part of Earth to three parts of Water. As appears from his following words:
viz. after this manner begin thy work in figure of a Trinity: and with this
Key his other Aenigmaes of the weight in this chapter are unlockt. Whence also
the Parables of other Philosophers are disclosed, while Book opens Book, and
the truth is from them scarce disciphered without a Vail. For they always
deliver things that be like, and conceal the truth, that they might deserve
both to be said, and be Philosophers.

But since in Number, Weight, and Measure, all elementated Bodies of Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, are naturally united, bound, concatenated and
compounded, and by the Harmony of these all principiated Principles attain the
perfection ordained by God, and completed by his handmaid Nature: Not unfitly
may this Trinity, viz. of Number, Weight, and Measure, be called the Golden
chain, by which as in all Animals to every Member is granted their special
Form, so by this Chain every Member is joined, united, and performs his Office.

Likewise also in Vegetables (since Nature operates after one and the same
manner) we may presume in every Vegetable, its own proper weight may be
particularly observed, also the prefixed number of Flowers, Leaves, and also a
due measure of Longitude, Latitude, and Profunditude. Even as Minerals and
Metals are also perfected in a fit proportion of the Weight of Elements pure or
impure, in a due measure of Time, and certain Numbers: By which bounds rightly
disposed all things flourish, but being inordinate and confused, there is made
a Chaos, Imperfection, and a Dissolution of the Compound. For in their
Concatenation and Connection, is rebuilt an admirable power of Art and Nature,
neither can Nature her self consist without these, nor Art perform any thing.
Not enviously therefore did the Philosophers wonderfully conceal the
Proportion of the Elements, and the mixture of them in their operation, as if
this being known they had unvailed all things. But as much as belongs to our
purpose, viz. the weight of the Philosophic Work, these things only are
principally observed, to wit, Equals, two to one, three to one, nine to one;
which when and how they are to be distinguished, our Dastin (a famous
Philosopher) has in these words clearly opened: When thou dissolvest, the
Spirit ought to exceed the Body, and when thou do fix, the Body to exceed the
Spirit. Who therefore knows the due time of Putrefaction to solution, the time
of Imbibition, Desiccation, Fermentation, and Inceration, shall with easy
pains and small endeavor from the forenumbred Proportions, make choice of what
is convenient for every time or season of the Work. And he that has known the
Weight, (as Petrus Bonus says) has known the whole Mystery, and he that is
ignorant of it, let him leave digging in our Books.

CHAP. IV. The Philosophers Fire, what?
TAke Water Proportionated Lullius.
in quality according to the Body which thou would dissolve, in such a
manner, as the unnatural may not exceed the natural heat; for every
complexionated thing is destroyed, unless the Fire of Nature govern it. There
are three Humidities, the first is Water, the chief of resolvable things; the
second is Air, and it is the mean between Water and Oil; the third is Oil it
self, the cerative of all Elements, and our final Secret. Lull. practica fol.
175.

Our Fire is Mineral, and vapors Pon^anus.
not, unless it be too much stirred up, whose proportion must be known,
that-it may only stir up the Matter, and in a short time, that Fire without the
Imposition of hands, will complete the whole work. Ponta. pa. 40.

The Fire which we show thee is Senior.
Water, and our Fire is Fire, and not Fire. Senior. page 29.

Argent vive is a Fire, burning, Dardarius.
mortifying, and breaking Bodies, more then Fire. Dardarius in Turba 113.

I say with Lullius that this Water, Vogel.
or Vive Argent is called Fire of the Philosophers, not because inwardly it is
of its own Nature, hotter then Oil, or the forementioned radical moisture; but
because in its actions it is more powerful then Elementary Fire, dissolving
Gold without violence, which Fire cannot do. Vogel. pa. 145.

Let the Artist well consider what Lullius.
are the powers of Fire natural, unnatural, and against nature; and what may
be the friend, or enemy of each. Lull. Codic. p. 37.

It is fit the heat be so much, as Ventura.
that thou may by sweating send forth the Water, and let it be no way
hardened or congealed; because Gum, contrary to the Nature of other things,
sweats, and is coagulated with gentle decoction. Ventura pa. 113.

Philosophers have four different Ripley.
Fires, viz. Natural, Unnatural, against Nature, and Artificial, whose
diverse operations the Artists ought to consider. Ripleus pa. 38.

The Fires meeting themselves, Rosin.
devour one another. Rosin. pa. 265.

The Spirit is a second Water of Scala.
which all the things forementioned are nourished, every plant refresht and
quickened, every light kindled, and it makes and causes all Fruit. The first
Water being the Sun is Philosophically calcined, that the Body might be opened,
and made spongious, that the second Water might the better enter, to operate
its work, which second Water is the fire against Nature by whose power the
complement of this Magistery is performed. Scala pa. 125.

We calcine perfect Bodies with Ripleus.
the first Fire naturally, but no unclean Body does ingredience our work except
one, which of the Philosophers is called the Green Lion, which is the medium of
uniting and joining Tinctures. Ripl. pa. 26.

There is a certain Soul existing between Heaven and Earth, arising from the
Earth, as Air with pure Water, the cause of the life of all living things,
continually running down upon our fourfold Nature producing her with all its
power to a better condition, which airy Soul is the secret Fire of our
Philosophy, otherwise called our Oil, and mystically our Water. Idem pa. eadem.

Our Mercury is made of perfect Albert.
Bodies, not imperfect, that is, with the second Water, after the Bodies have
been duly Calcined by the first. Albert. pa. 19.

This Fire is called Humor, because Vogel.
in it, as has been said, heat or the fire of Nature is hidden, even as the
heat of Animals, in the Primogenian moisture.

Water since it is Heterogeneall to its Earth; if sensible of the least heat,
will evaporate, it being left and forsaken.

The Soul is no other then Oil, Oil then Water. Vogel. p. 134.

If any know to make choice of Flamelius.
such Matter as Nature delights, and to enclose it rightly prepared in his
Vessel and Furnace; He and I (says Nature) will forthwith do the Work: so he
provide the requisite Fire, Natural, against Nature, not Natural, and without
ardour. Flamel. pa. 123.

We therefore call it Innaturall Lullius.
or not Natural, because it is not naturated of it self, nor takes away any
thing from naturated Nature, nay it rather helps her, by the Mediation of a
moderate Exercise, according to what Nature requires in her Reformations.
Lullius Codic. pa. 24.

Our Fire is Mineral, is equal, is Artepheus.
continual, it vapors not unless it be too much stirred up, it participates
of Sulphur, it is taken elsewhere then of Matter, it destroys, dissolves,
congeals, and calcines all things, and it is Artificial to find out, a
compendium, and without cost, or at least very little; it is also moist,
vaporous, digesting, altering, penetrating, subtle, airy, not violent, not
fuming, encompassing, containing, only one, and it is the fountain of Life, or
which incircles the Water of Life, and it contains the King and Queens bathing
place: in the whole Work that humid Fire shall suffice thee, both in the
beginning, middle, and end, because in it the whole Art consists, and it is a
Fire Natural, against Nature, and Unnatural, and without Adustion; And to
conclude, it is a Fire hot, dry, moist, cold; think on these things and do
rightly, without any thing of a strange nature.

The third is that Natural Fire of our Water, which is also called against
Nature, because it is Water, and nevertheless of Gold it makes mere Spirit,
which thing common Fire cannot do: this is Mineral, Equal, and participates
of Sulphur, it destroys, congeals, dissolves, and calcines all things, this is
penetrating, subtle, not burning, and it is the fountain of living Water, in
which the King and Queen wash themselves, which we stand in need of, in the
whole Work, in the beginning, middle, and end, but not of the other two, except
sometimes only. Join therefore in reading the Philosophers Books these three
Fires, and without doubt thou will not be ignorant of their sense and meaning
concerning Fires. Artephius pa. 31.

Weigh the Fire, measure the Dastin.
Air, mortify the Water, raise up the heavy Earth. Dastin spec. pa. 202.

By earnest consideration of Lullius.
things Natural, Innaturall, and against Nature, it behooves thee to attain
the Material and Essential knowledge of the temper, through all his parts
Essential, and also Accidental, that thou may know how to behave thy self
in our said Magistery, having so comprehended the said principles. Lull. Theor.
fo. 16.

There are four principal Fires to be observed, in respect of the Substance
and Propriety of the four Elements. Idem pa. 174.

Although in our Books we have Lullius.
handled a threefold Fire, Natural, Innaturall, and against Nature, and other
different Manners of our Fire; nevertheless we would signify one Fire, from
more compound things, and it is the greatest secret to come to the knowledge of
this. Since it is no Humane, but Angelick and heavenly gift to reveal. Lull.
Testament pa. 78.

Son, our Argent vive, or part of Lullius.
it, is Water distilled from its Earth, and the Earth in like manner is our
Argent vive, animated, and the Soul is Natural heat, which stands bound
together in the first Essence of the Elements of Argent vive. Idem.

In the Structure of the Fire Trevisane.
some differd from others, although they all aimed at the same scope, namely,
that it should be made after this manner, lest the fugient should first fly
away, before the Fire could any way bring forth the persequent thing. Bernard.
Comes pa. 40.

The Fire which we show to thee is Scala.
Water; and our Fire, is Fire, and not Fire. Scala. pa. 148.

Raimond speaking of Fires in his Scala.
Compendium of the Soul, says, It is to be noted that here lie contrary
operations, because as contranaturall Fire dissolves the Spirit of a fixed Body,
into the Water of a Cloud, and constringeth the Body of a volatile Spirit into
congealed Earth: So contrariwise the Fire of Nature, congeals the dissolved
Spirit of a fixed Body into glorious Earth; and resolves the Body of a Volatile
Spirit, fixed by Fire against Nature, not into the Water of a Cloud, but the
Water of the Philosophers. Scala. pa. 126.

The Water of which the Bath Basil. Valent.
of the Bridegroom ought to be made is of two Champions; that is to be
understood, confected of two contrary Matters wisely and with great care, lest
that one adversary may vanquish the other. Basil. Valent. pa. 32.

What ever actions they nominate, Rosin.
know that these things are always done by the action of the heat of certain
Fire, which causes not Sublimation because it is so gentle, nor may it elevate
any smoke naturally, by reason of its debility, whence if it be such as may in
a manner elevate and not elevate, it is good. Rosin. ad Sarratant. pa. 286.

THE COROLLARY.
If any would rightly weigh the ayings of Philosophers in this Chapter, the
manner of their Equivocations would appear clearer then the Sun, for as they
have deciphered the second Work somewhere, in the name of the first Work, so in
this Chapter they nominate the second Water the first Water, and the third
Water the second, as it appears in Scala. pa. 123. where it is said that the
first Water the Sun calcines, that the second might the better enter: And
again, the second Water is Fire against Nature. And Ripley utters like things
also in his Preface. But let every Artist know that the first Water is Phlegm
only, or unnatural Fire, because it is not natured of it self, nor takes any
thing from natured Nature, and that it is unfit to calcine or prepare any
perfect Body, but this Work belongs to Natural Fire, to wit, that the perfect
Body be calcined and prepared in that second Water, or Natural Fire, that
after it might be dissolved in the third Water or Fire against Nature. But as
they call their second Work, the first, because nothing enters into that Work,
which has not been purified, cleansed, and purged in the first Work: So also
they will not here recite the first Water for their Water, since it is only
Phlegm, not entering the Philosophic Work: But call the second the first, and
the third the second, which industriously they do that they might deceive and
seduce the Ignorant. Of the same sort was Artepheus also, while he endeavored
promiscuously to confound the name of Natural Fire, with the name of Fire
against Nature, in these words, The third (says he) is that Natural Fire of
our Water, which is also called against Nature, because it is Water,
nevertheless of Gold it makes mere Spirit, which common Fire cannot do. But
with these Equivocations whosoever is unexpert is easily induced into the greater
Error. But as the whole Theorick of Physic is comprehended in the Explanation
of three things; viz. Natural, Non-naturall, and Contranaturall. So that whole
Hermetick and Divine Work is performed with Fire, Natural, not Natural, and
against Nature, which Fires are of the Philosophers, veiled in the name of
Fire, although to us they appear in form of Water, clear, pure, crystalline,
which tortures, calcines, exanimates, and inanimates the Physical Body, and at
length renders it more then perfect, which neither by the violence of common
Fire, nor virulence of corrosive Waters, nor by the Spirits of any Animal,
Vegetable, or Mineral can perform: And he that knows not from our only
Subject to draw out, separate, rectify, and compound these menstruous Matters,
these Fires, these Waters, these Mercuries, is ignorant of the Key of the whole
Work. Therefore in these must be the toil.

CHAP. V. The Rise or Birth of the Stone.
THE birth of the Earth is made Lullius.
by the way of invented Sublimation: That the Earth has conceived and drunk of
the Water of Mercury as much as suffices, you may discern and know it by its
volatility, and privation of feces and dregs from the most pure Substance,
while it ascends after the manner of most pure and most white dust, or of the
leaves of the Moon, or of splendid Talk. But when thou see the Nature of the
most pure Earth elevated upwards, and as a dead thing even adhere to the sides
of the subliming Vessel, then reiterate the sublimation upon her, without the
dregs remaining below, because that part fixed with the dregs adheres, and then
no man, by any mean or industry, can separate it from them. Lull. Codic. pa.
193.

Son, you may know that this Lullius.
is the general head to all Sublimation of Mercuries. Then take the pregnant
Earth, and put it into a Sublimatory vessel luted and well shut up, place it
in Fire of the third degree for the space of twenty four hours, and sublime the
pure from the impure, and so shall thou have the Vegetable Mercury, sublimated,
clear, resplendent, in admirable Salt, which we properly call Vegetable
Sulphur, Sal almoniack, our Sulphur, the Sulphur of Nature, and many other
names we impose on it. Lull. Test. p. 4.

The Water approaching, that Semita Semitae.
is Argent vive in the Earth; increases, and is augmented because the Earth is
whitened, and then it is called impregnation, then the Ferment is coagulated,
viz. is joined with the imperfect Body. Prepare it, as has been said, till it
become one in color and aspect, and then it is called the Birth, because then
is born our Stone, which of the Philosophers is called a King. Semita Semitae.
p. 441.

Son, it is a sign when it has imbibed, Lullius.
and retained four parts more of its Weight, that if thou put a little on a
heated plate of Gold or Silver, it will all as it were fly away into smoke,
which if it do not so, reiterate it until such a Sign appear. Lull. Test. pa.
16.

But to know this day of the Petrus Bonus.
Crisis and the Birth or Rise of the Stone, which is the term of the whole
consummation of the Work; it is meet to foreknow the Indicating day, since it
is the very sign it self, and things indicated are as it were things signified,
for there is the perfection, or annihilation of the Work, because in that very
day, nay hour, the simple Elements arise, purified from all filths, which
presently stand in need of Composition, before they fly from the Fire, and are
turned into Earth, that is in their fixation, and not sooner nor later. Petrus
Bonus pa. 127.

And when thou shall see that Geber.
thing excelling in its whiteness the whitest snow, and as it were dead,
adhere to the sides of the subliming vessel, then reiterate its Sublimation
without dregs. Geb. in lib. Summae perfectionis pa. 169.

When this Mercury arises, the Ventura.
Sun and Moon arises together with it in its Belly. Vent. pa. 170.

The Heaven is to be reiterated Scala.
so often upon the Earth till the Earth become Heavenly and Spiritual, and the
Heaven be made earthly, and be joined with the Earth. Scala. pa. 121.

Restore the vive Argent to the Vogel.
Earth and decoct it, and as before sublime, and that reiterate nine or twelve
times, always augmenting the Fire in the end, until the Earth with often
sublimation and force of the Calcining Fire become White and more Spiritual,
part of it being made more subtle, begin something to ascend from the bottom
of the Vessel, and to adhere to its sides. But this purging of the Earth,
which is performed by Sublimation, is altogether necessary before the Physical
Work begin. Vogel. pa. 228.

The Argent vive exuberated, Clangor. Bucc.
that is the Body of the Earth, passing together with the menstruous Matter
through the Alembick, and the Sulphur of Nature, is the Spirit of Metals,
sublimated and turned into foliated Earth, which is the first and nearest
matter of Metals. Clang. Bucc. p. 480.

Therefore burn it with dry Fire, Aristotle.
that it may bring forth a Son, and keep him warily lest he fly away into
smoke: and this is that which the Philosopher says in his Turba, Whiten the
Earth, and Sublime it quickly with Fire, until the Spirit which thou shall
find in it go forth of it, and it is called Hermes Bird; for that which
ascends higher is efficacious purity, but that which falls to the bottom, is
dross and corruption. This therefore is Dust drawn from Dust, and the begotten
of the Philosophers, the white foliated Earth, in which Gold is to be sown.
Arist. pa. 371.

Gather carefully what thou find Lullius.
in the middle sublimated, lest it fly away into Smoke, because that is the
approved sought for Good, the better Best, the white foliated Earth coagulating
as the Rennet of a Lamb, the Ashes of Ashes, the Salt of Nature, the begotten
Infant, the first and nearest Matter of Metals, the first Subject in which are
its proper Elements, to wit of Natured Nature; the moist and temperate Matter
ought to be reduced and fixed, till it flow with its Ferment, like Wax without
Smoke, and endure all Fire. Therefore labor with it to Silver, and thou may
quickly begin the Magistery; nor let it wax old without commixtion, because
thou may not take it, unless new made after the Birth with its Blood. Lul.
Codic. p. 117.

If from Subliming little shall Dastin.
come forth and clean, the Fire will yet be little. Therefore let it be
encreast. But if much and unclean, the Fire is superfluous, therefore let it be
withdrawn. But if much and clean, then the proportion is found. Dast. spec. p.
48.

The Dust ascending higher from Rosar.
the Dregs, is Ashes, Honored, Sublimed, Extracted from the Ashes, but that
which remains below is Ashes of Ashes, inferior, vilified, condemned Ashes, a
dreg, and like dross. Therefore make a difference between its clear and
limpid, because when it shall ascend most white as Snow, it will be complete,
therefore gather it carefully, lest it fly away into Smoke, because that is the
very sought for good, the white foliated Earth, congealing what is to be
congealed. Rosarius Arnoldi, pa. 427.

The Calx or Body must be often Geber.
imbibed, that thence it might be sublimed, and more yet purged then before,
because the Calx does not at all, or very difficultly climb upward, assisted by
the Spirit. Geber. lib. summae perfectionis. p. 172.

O Nature how do thou burn Artepheus.
Bodies into Spirit, which could not be done, if the Spirit were not first
incorporated with the Bodies, and the Bodies with the Spirit made volatile, and
afterward permanent. Therefore the compound receives its cleansing by our
Fire: viz. by dissolving the humid, and by subliming what is pure and white,
the dregs being cast forth, as a natural Vomit. For in such a Dissolution and
natural Sublimation, there is made a deligation of the Elements, a cleansing
and separation of the pure from impure, so that the pure and white ascends
upwards, and the impure and earthy remains fixed in the bottom of the Vessel,
which is to be cast forth and removed (because it is of no value) by receiving
only a a middle white substance. And in this is accomplished our Philosophical
and Natural Sublimation, not in the Vulgar unfit Mercury, which has no
qualities like these, with which our Mercury drawn from the red servant is
adorned. Arteph. fo. 21.

The first part abides not, unless it be bound to the second in the same hour.
Idem.

It is fit that the end be restored upon its beginning, and the beginning upon
the end. Idem.

When the Artist sees the white Soul risen, let him join her immediately to her
Body. When the clean and candid Water shall be generated, it is meet we join
the Earth to it in the same Hour.

And according to Plato, the Fierinesse Plato.
is contraried in the hour of coagulation.

And according to Dastin, by the access of Cold, the Water may well be turned
into dry Earth. Idem.

There is one and the same thing Margarita pretiosa.
in the Subject having all these properties, and operations; for while it
remains in liquefaction, by reason of Subtilty it is called Spirit, without
which Spirit there can neither be made Generation, nor Conjunction of the Soul
and Body. Whence in the whole Magistery, the Spirit actually rules, until the
Soul and Body be generated: but while it can fly from the Fire, it is called a
Soul, but while it remains in the Fire, and can persevere, it is called a Body.
If therefore in the time of Generation the Soul shall stand in the Fire, and
his strength prevail, through the force of the Spirit, then she flies from the
Fire, and draws with her the Body to flight, and the Workman remains frustrate
of his purpose, and expects that which has been already come and gone, and
will never come hereafter, and it seems wonderful to him: But if the strength
of the Body prevail above the strength of the Soul, then by equality of Spirit
it is turned from Act into Habit, then the Body retains the Soul altogether,
nor ever has the power to fly from the Fire; and the Workman has his purpose,
which the Ancients had, and then the Spirit remains always with them,
sometimes in Act, and sometimes in Habit. But a quick and double insight is
altogether necessary, specially both in the end of Decoction, and Sublimation,
that all the superfluities being whitened, the Artist may see the wonderful
and terrible Candor, and may presently obtain his joyful and quiet rest, after
this Consummation of Labor, for then by infrigidating the Moon, the Sun is
hidden in her Bowels, and the East is joined to the West, Heaven to Earth, and
Spiritual to Corporal, whence is said in Turba, Know ye that ye shall not Die
the purple Color, but in Cold. And Hermes, Whose Nature has been hot, if Cold
find him, it shall not hurt him. And Avicen, Know that he which has evaporated
all, has wrought well, therefore make it Cold, for then is manifest the
hidden, and the Manifest by infrigidating is hid. And this Infrigidation or
cooling is done with rest, in which there is no operation of the hands, since
it is the end of operation. Margarita pretiosa. pa. 204.

That Earth so mingled with Lullius.
Menstruous Matter, is called Argent vive, Exuberated, which gather speedily,
and while it is new; after its Birth put it in Water of Metals, in digestion in
a tripode of the Athanor. Lull. Test. p. 21.

This is our Mercury sublimed, Dunst^^.
and made fixed from the white altered Earth of Bodies, arising first
wonderfully by the power and help of the Water. This is that Mercury, in stead
of which the Fools and Idiots assume that compounded of common Vitrioll, and
Sublimated with Salt, in which they are grossly deceived. Dunstan. p. 18.

Sublime the Body as much as Clangor Buccinae.
thou can, and boil it with clean Mercury, and when the Body has drunken
some part of the Mercury, subtilize it with a Fire quick and stronger, as thou
art able, until it ascend in likeness of most white Dust, adhering to the
sides of the Vessel in manner of Snow; But the Ashes remaining in the bottom
are dregs, and the vilified dross of Bodies, and to be cast away, in which
there is no life, because it is most light Dust, which with a little blast
vanishes, because it is nothing but bad Sulphur excluded by Nature.

Then the dregs being cast away, iterate the Sublimation of the most white Dust
by it self without its dregs, till it be fixed, and till it send out no dregs,
but ascend most purely, like Snow, the which is our pure Quintessence; And then
thou shall have the Soul Tincting, Coagulating, and Cleansing, both the
Sulphur, and the not burning Arsnick, which the Alchimists may use, that with
it they might make Silver. Clangor Bucc. pa. 519.

When the Water shall necessarily Petr^^ Bonus.
be generated clean and white, it is meet we join the Earth to it, even in the
same hour, and those being joined in their season, all four will be joined, and
then the Work is perfect; and if they are not joined, then the Water is
resolved into Smoke, with the Earth, and by consequence the other Elements by
the force and perseverance of the Fire, and so the Work is annihilated;
wherefore it is fit an Artist know the simple Elements thoroughly, before he
begin their Composition, that he may know rightly how to compound them to the
constitution of the Compound. Pet. Bonus pa. 221.

If any of the purer parts remain Vogel.
in the Earth (which thou may observe from a certain whiteness,
promiscuously shining) think not much to mingle it again with the same Mercury,
then Decoct, and at length, as has been said, Sublime till nothing of the
purer essence be left in it. Vogelius p. 209.

In the last day, the World shall Basil. Valent.
be judged by Fire, that what before was by its Master made of nothing, might
again by Fire be reduced into Ashes, from which Ashes the Phoenix might at
length produce her young ones, for in such Ashes lies hid the true and genuine
Tartar, which ought to be dissolved; and after his dissolution, the strongest
Lock of the Kings Closet may be opened. Basil. Valent. pa. 23.

We have shown thee our Water Lullius.
after its congelation with its Ferment, which is then indeed called our
Magnesia, and if thou understand our Waters, thou will also understand Argent
vive. Lull. Test. fo. 108.

THE COROLLARY.
In this Chapter is openly explained the Fable of Phaeton, in Ovids
Metamorphosis. As also of Dedalus with his Son Icarus; who when they had made
themselves wings of Feathers, and had fastened them with Wax, and when with
these they had flown through the Air beyond the Labyrinth, it is reported
Icarus flying too high, fell into the Sea, in which he was drowned, because the
Sun melted the Wax. By his Father Dedalus is understood the Sulphur of Nature
sublimated and Philosophically coagulated. By Icarus the same Sulphur
sublimated, but with undue governance of the Artist, and continued violence of
the Fire, melted into Water, and buried in the dead Sea. In these also is
explained the Fable of our English Roger Bacon the Monk, of whom it is related,
That he composed a Brazen Head, whose custody (after many lucubrations) he
committed to his servant, that while he refresht his tired spirit with sleep,
he would carefully observe the time, that as soon as ever it spoke, in the very
moment he should wake him; but the servant being asleep, the Brazen Head
uttered these words, Time is, and again an hour after, Time is past, when by
their negligence the Work was deprived of life and annihilated; which also
appears in the assertion of that excellent Philosopher Petrus Bonus in these
words:

If in the time of Generation the Soul shall stand in the Fire, and her
strength prevail by the force of Spirit, then she flies away, and draws with
her the Body to flight, and the Workman remains frustrate of his purpose; and
expects that which has been already come and gone, and shall never come again
hereafter, because it is mingled with that condemned Earth, whence it is
impossible it should again be separated.

But as the Condemned or rejected Earth is not found out, unless the pure be
separated from the impure; nor is that said to be pure, which in it self
contains feculency, of consequence it must be prepared with the greatest
Industry, nor with less vigilance is our Physical subject compounded first by
Nature for us, and formed into a Metallic Form, so that it may be reduced into
the first Matter, and by our skill, viz. by the Separation, Putrefaction,
Imbibition, Sublimation, Conjunction of the Elements, there might arise at
length a new Form, which is the Basis of the Philosophic Work as is manifest
in the Chapter. Whence the saying of Artepheus is apparent. viz. That the first
part remains not except it be bound to the second, even in the same Hour. But
that Allegation is done by Coagulation, the Coagulation by Infrigidation even
in that Hour in which the Artist shall see, and in his Judgment perceive, the
whole most pure substance sublimated from its rejected Earth. Which secret of
secrets obscured of all Philosophers in their sundry Aenigmaes, concealed and
diversely dispersed in their Books, I have in brief so clearly opened, as of none
the like hitherto. And this is the Preparation in which (as Senior says) men
are blinded since they know not that the Stone is prepared with this
Preparation.

CHAP. VI. The Weights of the second Work.
IN the operation of our Magistery, Rosar.
we shall need one only Vessel, or Furnace, one Disposition, which is meant
after the Preparation of the Stone. Rosar. Philosoph. pa. 240.

The second Work is to turn Dastin.
Water and Fire into Earth, and Air into one simple Substance compounded of
Simples. Dastin specul. pa. 106.

If thou impose the Medicines Dastin.
equally, thou will perceive no Error, but if thou add or diminish, make haste
to correct it: whence if a Deluge proceed it drowns the Region, but if too much
Siccity should be, it burns up the Roots of Herbs. Who therefore putrifies the
Body in the equal part, till it be exsiccated, makes the whole, one white
Body, for they are at once Inspissated, Incinerated, and Exsiccated; and this
is the Head of the World. Of the Work therefore (as Democritus says) let part
answer part equally. Idem page 122.

In the beginning take our Stones Ripleus.
and bury them every one in the Sepulcher of another, and join them together in
equal Marriage, that they may lie together, then let them cherish their seed
six weeks, nourish their natural Conception, and preserve it, not arising all
the while from the bottom of their Sepulcher. Which secret deceives many. Rip.
pa. 44.

Also thus understand, that in Ripleus.
our Conjunction, the Male, our Sun, ought to have three parts of his Water,
and his Wife nine; which ought to be three to him. Rip. pa. 39.

We cannot with our own proper Massa Solis and Lunae.
hands work on Mercury, but with ten species, which we call our hands in this
Work, that is, nine parts of Water, and the tenth of Earth. Massa Solis and
Lunae. page 257.

But since there are three parts Rosar. Arnold.
of his red Water with him, let it be sublimed on this manner time after time,
till it be fixed downward. Rosar. Arnold. pa. 449.

Put clean Bodies in this clean Mercury, poised in an equal balance. Idem pa.
447.

Boil him at the warm Sun, until Dastin.
he has dried his Water, which being exsiccated, pound him again with water to
his Weight, and boil him at the Sun, till he be dried into a Stone; do this
oftentimes till he has drunk of his Water ten times his own quantity, and
become dry, hard and red. Dastin spec. pa. 191. 134.

Son, it behooves thee to mingle Lullius.
the Earths of the foresaid Sulphurs, that is, of Gold, and Silver together,
and prepare them by giving them the fourth part of their Weight, of the said
menstrous Matter, by digesting and drying, as it is done in the Creation of
Sulphur, until it has drunk four parts of the said menstruous Matter, and be
disposed to Sublimation; which thou shall sublime in Fire of the fourth degree.
Lull. Test. p. 24.

Take of the sincere Body one Dastin.
part, and of the other Copper three, and mingle them together with Vinegar.
Senior in Turba. It is meet the Water exceed the Earth nine times, that so in a
Decinary number, which is a perfect number, the whole Work may be consummate.
But (as Diostenes says) if too much of the Water be at once imposed, it is not
contained in the Earth; but if too much be subtracted, it is not joined to the
Earth; Whence all the Water is not to be at once imposed on the Earth.
Therefore divide it into three parts, and every of them into another third,
because so one may better fight against one, then against a number of more:
Mingle the Hot with the Cold, the Humid with the Dry, and the mixed shall be
temperate, neither Hot nor Cold, nor Moist nor Dry; for one tempers another,
making the mixed adequate. Dast. spec. pa. 177. 134.

A man may be easily stifled in Basilius Valentinus.
great Waters, and little Waters are easily exsiccated with the heat of the
Sun, so that they may be as nothing. Therefore that the desired Work might be
obtained, a certain measure in the commixtion of the Philosophic liquorous
Substance must be observed, lest the greater overcome and oppress the lesser
Proportion, by which Generation might be hindered, and lest the lesser, in
respect of the greater, should be too weak to exercise equal Dominion, for
great showers of rain hurt the Fruit, and too much drought produces no true
Perfection. Therefore if Neptune have fitly prepared his Bath, weigh well the
permanent Water, and consider with diligent care, that thou do not any thing
too much or too little to him. Basil. Valent. pa. 42.

Take of the red Water and Arnold.
White, as much of the one as of the other, according to weight, and put them
together in a Cucurbite, made of Glass, strong and thick, having a Mouth like
an Urinall, afterward the whole Water will be Citrine, even soon enough, and so
will the true Elixer be perfected in respect of both, viz. perfect
Impregnation, and true Coition. Arnold. in Comment. Hortulani p. 34.

Let the Queen born by nine Dastin.
Virgins, decently attend the Bedchamber of so great a King, and so in
progress of time thou shall determine unity from the denary number. Dastini
Epist. fo. 2.

In this Magistery, the Government Basil. Valent.
of the Fire ought to be observed, lest the humid Liquor be too soon
exsiccated, and the Wisemens Earth too quickly liquified and dissolved.
Otherwise of wholesome Fishes, thou will generate Scorpions in thy Waters.
Basilius Valentin. pa. 10.

What ever actions they nominate, Rosin.
understand always, that these things are done by the action of the heat of
certain Fire, which makes not Sublimation, because it is so gentle, nor ought
it naturally to elevate any Smoke. Ros. p. 287.

THE COROLLARY.
Lest perhaps Ripley and Dastin our Countrymen, and most excellent
Philosophers, should in this Chapter seem to some, to differ among themselves:
since Ripley takes equal parts, and joins them in equal Wedlock; but Dastin
affirms the Water ought nine times to exceed the Earth, that so in a Decinary,
which is a perfect Number, the whole Work might be consummate: I thought it
worth my labor to reconcile this appearing contradiction. As therefore he that
well distinguishes, teaches well; so he that knows this distinction of time,
shall forthwith have the Solution of this doubt.

For Ripley first speaks of the first Composition in the second or Philosophic
Work, where the Earth and pure Water prepared exactly before must be equally
joined in equal Proportion. But Dastin utters that his Opinion of Imbibitions,
after the perfection of the second Work; and so while they are distinguished,
they are understood, and that easily. But what means Ripley in these words,
viz. That they should lie together six Weeks, not rising all the while from the
bottom of their Sepulcher? this must be enquired and searched into, since he
affirms it a secret which has deceived many. That Conjunction is done, that
even as a Chicken is made of an Egg after Putrefaction, so after this
Conjunction and due Putrefaction, we may attain the Complement of the Work.

Therefore we must know, if any thing may be born by Putrefaction, it is
necessary it happen after this manner. The Earth by a certain hidden and
included humidity, is reduced into a certain corruption or destruction, which
is the beginning of Putrefaction, which ought to be nourisht with such a
tempered heat, as that nothing exhale from the Compound, or be sublimed to the
top of the Vessel; but that the Masculine and Feminine, the Matter and the
Form, Agent and Patient, remain together. The Water in the Earth, and the Earth
unseparated from the Water, are contained together, as the yolk of an Egg,
included in the inner thin skin, till the time of Putrefaction loose the reins,
which will not be done sooner then in the space of forty days; for as Nature
hates sudden mutations or alterations, so no Putrefaction is made but in a long
time, and appointed, as Dastin elegantly said, viz. The calidity of the Air,
subtility of the Matter, gentleness of the Fire stability of Rest, equality of
Compounds, gravity of Patience, and the maturity of Time, do promote and
induce Putrefaction, and therefore then also the Air is to be tempered, the
Thick subtilized, the Fire restrained, Rest preserved, Proportion adequated,
Patience strengthened, and the Time expected, till Nature proceeding naturally
shall complete her own Work.

But that I may return to the purpose, and add Corollary to Corollary; we must
observe that in Preparation, three parts of the Spirit are assumed to one part
of the imperfect Body, and at last about the time of the Birth three parts of
imperfect Body are assumed to one of Spirit, and this not once, but often. But
in the second Work, which of Philosophers is called the first; first, part is
joined with part, afterward three parts of Body to one of Spirit, and that the
oftener for Imbibitions, and at length three of Spirit to one part of perfect
Body for inceration or fermentation, by which is performed our Mystical,
Divine, and more then perfect Work numberlesly exceeding the very degree of
Perfection.

CHAP. VII. Of Imbibition.
LAstly, nourish such an animated Parmenides in Turbam.
thing with its own Milk, that is, with its own Water, from which is concreated
the Work, or the thing begun from the beginning. Exercit. in Turbam p. 165.

Give him the fourth part of Ripley.
new Water, and yet he ought to have many more Imbibitions; give him the
second, and afterward the third also, not forgetting the said Proportion: And
when thou have made seven Imbibitions, then thou must turn the Wheel about
again, and putrefie all that Matter without addition. Ripley pa. 51.

If thou would Volatise or Imbibe, Clangor. Bucc.
thy prepared Elixer, the second, third, or fourth time, this must be done with
the fourth part of the Elixir of Mercury, but do this oft-times, until the
part of Water perish, that is, waste or consume, so that it ascend no further.
But yet I command ye, pour not on the Water at once, lest the Ixir be drowned,
but by little and little, that is, pour it in at seven times, and powder it,
and last of all exsiccate. Clangor. Bucc. pa. 505.

Moisten and beat it together Hermes.
many days, and this nine times, which are assigned by the nine Eagles, and in
every Dissolution and Coagulation, the effect thereof shall be augmented.
Hermes de Chemia pa. 179.

Beat the Earth oftentimes, and Avicenna.
by little and little imbibe it from eight days to eight days, Decoct and after
moderately Calcine it in Fire, and let it not weary thee to reiterate the Work
oftentimes, for the Earth bears not fruit without often watering, whence if it
be dry, it thirstingly drinks up its humidity and wet. Avicen. p. 420.

If ye make it without weight, Dastin.
Death will befall it, therefore put upon it all the rest of its Humor, temper
it neither too much, nor too little; because if there be much, a Sea of
perturbation will be made, but if little, it will be burnt to a brand. For the
heat of the Fire (as Avicen says) if it may not find Humidity which it dries
up, it burns, but if thou pour in much moisture at once, thou will not
desiccate but dissolve. Therefore the Weight is every way to be considered,
lest too much siccity or superfluous Humor corrupt, that through thy whole
Work thou dissolve so much by Inhumation, as falls short by Assation, and
diminish so much by Assation, as the Inhumation dissolves. And every
dissolution shall always be made by Inhumation, and Connection. The Humor
gotten by dissolution, natural heat only remaining, shall always be
desiccated. Dastin. Epist. fo. 5.

I began industriously to exhaust Trevisane.
the Water, yet so that there might not remain in it above the tenth part in
ten parts. Trevisane p. 47.

It is meet the Water exceed the Dastin.
Earth nine times, that so in a Decinary, which number is perfect, the whole
Work may be consummate. Dast. spec. pa. 134.

It behooves thee to take one Cadmon.
part of our Copper, and of permanent Water, which also is called Copper three
parts, then mingle them together with Vinegar, and boil them so long, until
they be thickened, and there be made one Stone. Cadmon in Turba. pa. 37.

It is nourished with its own Semita.
Milk, that is, with Sperm, of which it has been from the beginning, but
Argent vive is imbibed again and again, till it can imbibe two parts, or what
may suffice. Semita p. 442.

Son, settle thy Spirit to understand Lullius.
what we say, do not drink unless thou eat, nor eat unless thou drink; we
tell thee this in respect of uniform Imbibition, which thou must make of moist
and dry successively. Lull. pract. fo. 193.

It is meet the King rest in a sweet Dastin.
Bath, till by little and little he has drunk the Trinity of his Nourisher,
and let Drink be after Meat, and not Meat after Drink; therefore let him eat
and drink one after another with discretion; desist not therefore to moisten,
decoct, and desiccate the King, till he has devoured his Mothers Milk, the
Queen with him being nine times prostrate on the Earth. Dastin. spec. fo. 4.

Let the King after forty days Pythagor.
moistning in all his own humor, be always putrefied in equal heat; till he
put on his Mothers white Countenance. Pythagoras in Turba pa. 80.

Three times shall thou so turn Ripley.
about thy Wheel, keeping the aforesaid Rule of repast. Ripley pa. 53.

When thy Matter has conceived, Lullius.
expect the Birth, and when it has brought forth, thou must have Patience in
Nourishing the Boy, till he can endure the Fire, and then of him thou may
make free Projection, because the first Digestion is made. Lull. Theor. fo. 30.

At length nourish such an animated Parmenides
Body with his own Milk, that is his Water, of which is concreated the Work, or
the thing begun from the beginning, but concerning the feeding it is taught,
that the Proportion be so ordered in it self, that there be three parts of
Water to one of Lead. Parmenides in Turba. p. 165.

With that permanent humidity, Lullius.
which likewise took its original from vive Argent, imbibe our Stone, because
by it the parts thereof are made most clear, as is manifest, when after its
perfect putrefaction, from every corruptible thing, and chiefly from the two
superfluous Humors, viz. the unctuous, adustible, phlegmatic, and evaporable
parts, it is reduced into its proper incombustible Substance of Sulphur, and
without that Substance, it is never corrected, augmented nor multiplied. Lull.
Codic. pa. 46.

The Water is living which came Artepheus.
to water its Earth, that it might Germinate and bring forth fruit in its
season; for by watering, or bedewing, all things born of the Earth are
generated: The Earth therefore does not germinate without the watering and
humidity of May dew, that does wash, penetrate, and whiten Bodies, like rain
Water, and of two Bodies make a new one. Arteph. fo. 17.

Beat the Earth and imbibe it Rosarius Philos.
with Water by little and little, from eight days to eight days, decoct it in
Dung, because by Inhumation, Adustion is taken away: and let it not weary thee
to reiterate this often, because the Earth bears not fruit without frequent
watering. Rosar. Philosoph. p. 355.

As often as ye moisten the Ashes, Dastin.
desiccate them by turns, but if it be moistened before it be desiccated and
made Dust, it is drowned, inebriated, and reduced to nothing; for he that makes
it without weight (as Trismegistus says) kills and strangles it, because who
drinks and thirsts not, cherishes indigestion, and does invite and induce the
Dropsy. Dast. spec. pa. 209.

Then must it be beaten, and Afflictes.
with the remaining Water and a half, be seven times moistened, with permanent
Water consumed, it must be putrefied, till the desired thing be obtained.
Afflictes in Turba.

But ye shall moisten this redness Nicares.
seven times in the remaining Water, or till it can drink all its Water, then
boil it till it be desiccated and turned to dry Earth, then let it be put in a
kindled Fire forty days, until it putrefie, and the Colors thereof appear
with the Ashes. Nicares in Tarba 102.

As the same thing is both an Dastin.
Embryo, Infant, Boy, and Man, passing from an incomplete Essence, to a perfect
Complement: So also our Compound, by increasing passes from one thing to
another better thing, and from incomplete Essence, with its own Milk is carried
forth to his complement of the Elixir. And therefore all its Compound is of the
form of the Elements. Wherefore Morienus says, the disposition of that work is
like the creation of a Man, when as he is nourished of himself by increasing
from day to day, and from month to month, till he has attained his Youthful
age, and in a certain time be completed. Dast. spec. pa. 150.

The near cause of this fixation Lullius.
is a very little mixtion of both by their least parts, so that the height of
the Volatile, may not excel the height of the fixed Body, but let the virtue of
the fixed Spirit, excel the height of the unfixt, according to the intent of
fixation. Son if thou understand this, thou may have the Treasure of Heaven
and Earth. It is required when the Body is so naturally augmented, and nourisht
by convenient moisture, that then near the measure, thou imbibe it with the
more Water of its nutrition or augmentation, according to the Weights revealed
by Art, to the conformity of principles, and the quality of the Body given to
be augmented, and let it be decocted with a gentle Fire, exsiccating the
natural heat, and not exceeding until it attain its perfect whiteness.
Lullii Codic. pa. 157.

And note that after Imbibition Lullius.
they ought to be buried seven days. Therefore iterate the Work many times,
though it be tedious, and the Weight in this must be every way observed, lest
the too much siccity or superfluous Humor spoil it in the operation, as
namely decoct so much by Assation, as the Dissolution has added, and by
Imbibition dissolve as much as has been wasted by Assation, wherefore thou
shall sweetly and not hastily irrigate the Earth from eight days to eight days.
Idem.

If one Imbibition, one Decoction, Dastin.
one Contrition does suffice, they would not so much have iterated their
sayings, but therefore they did this, that always they might insist on the
Work, without divorce and tediousness. Wherefore also they say, Hope, and so
shall thou obtain. But when it is exsiccated, then by another Course, let it be
delivered to insatiable Comestion, that being by degrees between every
Inceration, burnt into Ashes, it might try the power thereof. Dastin Epist. fo.
4.

THE COROLLARY.
Aristotle affirms in the first of his Physics, that the whole is not known
without the parts in which it consists; But the whole as it resents the nature
of all its parts, so the whole and the perfect are altogether the same. Whence
it follows, that it is not sufficient for a Man to know the Subject of some
Edifice, that thence a House might be built, unless he knew the particular
parts, and their Construction and Composition. So likewise it would little
conduce to the perfection of the Stone, to have known only the Subject and its
Preparation, unless after it be prepared the Artist know how to bring it to
Maturity, then to nourish it, and lastly to feed it, even until it attain a
Degree above perfection. Then the parts testify of the whole, and the whole of
the parts, the beginning of the end, and the end of the beginning; for what
pity were it an Heir from the Kingly Stock should be born, and none found that
knew how to nourish it? Therefore to nourish this our Infant we advise with
Physicians, that (since he is of the Royal Stock, and the most pure
constitution) he might not be delivered to any strange Nurse, but might suck
the Breasts of his Mother, who as she had before nourisht him in the Womb with
her own Blood; so being now come to Maturity, he is to be nourisht, and in a
due proportion fed with the exuberated Blood, circulated and rectified through
the Mamillary veins. And the medicinal measure of that Milk, let it be weekly
the fourth part of the weight of the Infant; But let him keep this Diet for
seven Weeks, till he be so Medicinally fed that while in a glassen Lodge
(ordained and firmly obserated by Physicians and Philosophers) he be placed and
reposed in a Bath, and being lulled asleep, his limbs dissolve and melt with
sweat, which by the help of Art and Nature, and due governance, shall resume
their former shape, renewed, and their strength so multiplied, that now he
desires Kingly food, with which nourishment in a short space he will become a
King, stronger then a King, and so stout in Battle, that he alone being a most
powerful Conqueror, will obtain the Victory against ten thousand Enemies.
Therefore seek this King, whom who so has for his Defense, shall command all
Sublunary things.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fermentation.
BY the Testimony of all Philosophers Tauladanus.
there are three parts of the Elixir, viz. Soul, Body, and Spirit; The Soul is
only the Ferment or Form of the Elixir, the Body is the Paste or Matter, which
two parts are to be drawn from Metals only; to wit, the Form from the Sun and
Moon, the Matter from Jupiter, Saturn, Venus, and Mars, as also Lullius
affirms. But the third part of the Stone is Spirit, which since it is the Seat
and Chariot of the Soul, it does pour the Soul into the Body, and compounds and
joins these two extremes with an indissoluble bond of agreement, which Mediator
being removed, the Soul can never enter league with the Body. For two extremes
agree not well, nor tarry in one place, unless they are reconciled and
confederated by the help of a mean. This Spirit it nothing else then that
liquor attenuating the Form and Matter of the Stone, and reducing it to a
spiritual Nature, which Spirit is sometimes called of the Philosophers,
Heaven, sometimes solutive Mercury, sometimes menstruous Matter, sometimes
Quintessence, and infinite other names. Tauladan. pa. 338.

Unto thy Compound add the Ripley.
fourth part the Ferment, which Ferment is only of the Sun and Moon. And know
that there are three Ferments, two of Bodies in pure Nature which ought to be
altered, as we have told thee, the third most secret, which we now meditate, is
that first Earth with its proper green Water; wherefore while the Lion thirsts,
make him drink, until his body be broken. Ripley pa. 56.

Take the fourth part of the Semita Semitae.
Ferment, and let that Ferment be dissolved, and made Earth like an imperfect
Body, and prepared after the same manner and order; moreover join and imbibe
it with the aforesaid blessed Water; for Ferment prepares the imperfect Body,
and converts it to its own Nature, and it is not Ferment unless Sun and Moon.
Semita Semitae pa. 444.

Give it fermented Ferment, equally Rachaidibus.
elementated with every Element, which is Gold; give it the fourth part, but
which is first calcined and dissolved into Water. Ferment is twofold, white and
red, of which the Ferment of the Sun, is the Sun, and of the Moon, the Moon.
But let the Ferment be the fourth part of our Copper. Rachaidibus pa. 393.

Thou will have no perfect Ferment Dunstan.
till it be altered, with our Mercury, from its first qualities, into a new
whiteness, between Putrefaction and Alteration. Dunstan. pa. 7.

They who knew not Natures Lullius.
indigency, thought this Ferment ought to be prepared with new menstrous
Matter, in which is Fire against Nature, not perceiving the perdition of the
Temperature from which the Body departs, by reason of the burning Fire, viz.
against Nature. Ferment, to wit, a Body, as much as it is understood for
Ferment, is not prepared but with natural Fire and Water of Mercury. Lull.
Codic. pa. 211.

Take one part of Ferment, and Rosar.
three of imperfect Body, dissolve the Ferment in Water of Mercury equal to
it, boil it together with a most gentle Fire, and coagulate that Ferment, that
it may be as an imperfect Body. Rosar. Philosoph. p. 317.

Take red Earth, and form it Arnold.
into thin Plates, or shaved Dust, and put it in Water, as has been taught,
and it shall not be dissolved in it, but only calcined into red Dust; which
done, remove the Water warily, and put it into another Vessel, like that in
which it is, so that the calcined Dust of red Earth may remain in its Vessel
without Water, and in the removed Water put white Earth, and that shall be
dissolved, and so Water shall profit thee, and shall not be spoiled. Arnold. in
Cament. Hortulani pa. 31.

In the preparation of the Ferment, Lullius.
before its last Fermentation we use vulgar Mercury, not only solemnly
prepared, viz. into Virgins Milk, but as it exists in its Nature, by the alone
Sublimation to this, that it might reduce the Body of Ferment to its
simplicity, and it may be the mean of conjoining Tinctures. Lull. Codic. pa.
215.

Let it be given to an insatiable Dastin.
Devourer, afterward it must be nourisht with grosser meat, that complete
Digestion being received, it may pass from the Mothers into the Fathers
Kingdom. Dast. Epist. pa. 6.

As the Ferment of Gold is Tauladanus
Gold; of Silver, is Silver; so the Ferment of Iron, is Iron, of Copper, is
Copper, and of Lead, is Lead. Therefore every Agent acts according to its form.
To some, what we have spoken may seem new; as if the Elixir could be made of
all ignoble things, which shall turn all other things as well noble as ignoble,
either into Mars, or Jupiter, or Saturn, or Venus. Which although it now seem
new and incredible to many learned men, and chiefly to Petrus Bonus, a man of
singular learning; yet there is no necessary reason, which forbids it may be
done. Nay if it were not done, Alchymy had been lost, and the Art of Chemistry
might have been worthily called a Figment and a Fable. For Nature has
established this Law, viz. That as often as Actives are rigbtly joined with
Passives Action and Passion do immediately follow, and the alteration does
always resent and savor of the nature of the Agent. And as often as that which
before had the strength and qualities of the Patient, be so disposed that it
can stoutly act, it is necessary that the alteration be answerable and
conformable to the Nature of the Agent from which it suffered. Wherefore if
ignoble Metals disposed to suffer or change by the action of Gold or Silver,
rightly disposed to Action, it is necessary that noble Metals disposed to
suffer should be changed by ignoble Metals, skilfully disposed to Act.
Tauladanus pa. 297.

Let the Ferment be prepared, Clangor Bucc.
that the powder may be white and subtle, if thy intention proceed to white;
but if to red, then let thy powder be of Gold prepared most Citrine; and there
shall not be other Ferment: the reason is, because those two Bodies are
shining, in which are tingent splendid Rays, excelling other Bodies naturally
in whiteness and redness. And if thou would ferment white Earth, divide
that Earth into two parts, one part thou shall augment to a white Elixir, with
its conserved Water, (and so it never ceases to be of it) and the other part
put into its Glass, that is, the Furnace of its Digestion, and increase the
Fire to it, until by the force of the Fire, it be turned into most red Dust,
even as dry combust Saffron. And if thou would that the most white Elixir
have the Tincture of Redness, transforming and tincting Mercury, the Moon and
every Body into the most true Sun, or Solificous Body; then ferment its three
parts with another part and a half of most pure prepared Gold, and let the
powder be most subtle with two parts of Solificous Water artificially reducing
by Union by the least parts into one Chaos even unto the inmost part of the
Body, and place it in its Glass in his Fire, and decoct it, that the most true
bloody red Stone might shine forth. Clang. Bucc. p. 529.

There is no other Ferment but Lullius.
of the Sun or Moon. And it is not Ferment until the said Bodies be turned
into their first Matter, because it is expedient, that Ferment be compounded of
the Sun, and the most subtle Earth. Wherefore if thou know not how to
reduce two perfect Bodies into their first Matter, thou can have no Ferment.
Lull. Theor. p. 92.

For this is Mineral, that when Massa Solis and Lunae.
thou putst Water on the Earth, the White overcomes the Citrine and Red; and
whitens them into whiteness of Silver. Then the Citrine overcomes the White
and Red, so that it makes them Citrine, above the Citrinity of Gold, and then
the Red overcomes the Citrine and White, and reddens them into a Tyrian
redness, and when thou see these, rejoice. Massa Solis and Lunae. pa. 212.

THE COROLLARY.
As in this Chapter is clearly and plainly taught the excellent manner of
Fermentation, so to the unexperienced Reader, this contradiction may appear,
between Raimund and Ripley in these words, viz. whilst Raimund affirms two
Ferments only, one of the Sun, another of the Moon; but Ripley adds a third,
which is called the Green Lion, and the unclean Body, which is also called
Laton, which Laton since indeed is no other thing then an imperfect compound
Body of Gold and Silver according to Morienus; that third of Ripley is clearly
demonstrated to be no other thing then immature Gold and Silver; and so they
do not differ but agree in matter of Ferment, though for immaturities sake it
be signified by another name. To this our Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury
seems to assent. It is certain the Earth may be the Ferment of Water, so it be
fixed, and the Water the Ferment of the Earth, if contrariwise it be perfect and
pure, and this altogether without all help of Vulgar Gold and Silver. Which
words do seem indeed to bring a new controversy amongst their opinions, while
some affirm the Elixir cannot be made without Vulgar Gold and Silver. Again,
others affirm that Vulgar Gold and Silver is nothing useful in our Work: Let
therefore Dunstans opinion intercede. We must note (says he) that ancient
Philosophers did not use Vulgar Gold and Silver in this Work, and therefore
they said their labor needed no great Cost, but might equally be performed as
well of the Poor as of the Rich, the Countriman as Citizen; which would
altogether differ from truth, if it might not be performed without Vulgar Gold
and Silver. He thus taught therefore that we should take heed: For although
Gold and Silver may be subtilized and mingled with Tinctures, and be reduced to
lesser Elixirs; yet the way according to the Doctrine of the Philosophers, is
not in them; For their Gold and Silver are two chief Tinctures, Red and White
buried in one and the same Body, which by Nature never attained their perfect
Complement, yet they are separable from their Earthly Lutosity, and accidental
Dross, and then by their proper qualities so commixtible with Earths pure Red
and White, and are found so fit Ferments for them, that they may no way be said
to need any other thing. In which words is described no other thing then
Ripleys green Lion, or their Gold, not Gold, unless in possibility while as
yet immature. Which always and only is set apart and chosen of all
Philosophers, and those that understand, for their first Matter. Whence it is
clearly manifest that neither Vulgar Gold nor Silver ought to be taken for the
first Matter, but yet it is doubtful. If, why, and when they are necessary for
us, to the Composition of the Elixir. To which I answer from the authority of
the Philosophers, That they are so necessary, as without them the Elixir cannot
be perfected. But yet not as they are Vulgar Gold and Silver, but being so
altered as that they may be reduced to their first Matter, and while they are
fixed by Nature, may be made Volatile by Art, and then at length while they are
in such a Condition, it shall be impossible for any Artist to reduce them again
to Vulgar Gold and Silver, after the manner of Goldsmiths; because then
according to the Turba the Body becomes incorporate, as also Rosarius
witnesses. He that knows so to destroy Gold, that it be no more Gold, has
attained the greatest secret. And when it is so prepared, then it shall be the
first proper Dish, of which our Infant is nourisht, and by Philosophers shall
have the name of Ferment. Which, after the Stone be come to its perfect
Redness, and has been nourisht with the Mothers Milk, it ought to be joined
with its red Earth for the accomplishment of the Elixir, that it might render a
more then perfect Tincture, and might communicate its fixed Nature, to the
prepared Medicine, which being specificated it might at length become perfect.
Therefore hence it appears, That why, and when Vulgar Gold and Silver are not
necessary to the complement of the Work. That therefore I may briefly reduce to
one Harmony this appearing Controversy (which the Philosophers understanding
one another mutually, deliver purposely in intricate terms) in these words of
Guido Montanus, viz. Although the Philosophers Stone may be made even to
Whiteness and Redness without Vulgar Gold or Silver, yet the Elixir cannot be
made without Vulgar Gold or Silver, altered and prepared as before. But that I
may conclude this Corollary, always observe, that after the Work of Winter is
performed, and thou shall see the Sun exalted in Aries, and that then the
Philosophic Work be begun, That in that very hour we ought to prepare
Ferments, because they need long Preparation, and it would be the greatest
inconvenience, that when the King should hunger, food should be wanting, or
that there should not be a Dish of Dainties prepared. Therefore let every
Artist be provident.

CHAP. IX. Of Projection.
A Dry earthy Body tincts not, Artepheus.
unless it be tincted, and because it enters not, therefore it alters not.
Therefore it tincts not Gold, because the hidden Spirit thereof ought first to
be extracted from its Belly by our white Water, that it might become altogether
spiritual. Arteph. fo. 13.

Many through ignorance have Ripley.
destroyed their Work, when they have made Projection upon impure Metal; for
their Tinctures by reason of Corruption do not remain, but vanish, because
they removed not from the Bodies those things which after Projection are
brittle, dark, and black. See therefore thou first Project thy Medicine on
Ferment, then that Ferment will be brittle as Glass; then cast that brittle
Substance upon Bodies clean and very pure, and presently thou shall see them
curiously colored with Tincture which will abide all Trials. So make three,
four, or five Projections till the Tincture of thy Medicine begin to decrease,
then is there an end of making further Projection. Ripley pa. 62.

But the manner of Projection Avicenna.
is, that thou Project one part of the foresaid Medicine upon a hundred parts
of fused or powered Gold, and it makes it frangible, and the whole will be a
Medicine of which one part Projected upon a hundred of any fused Metal turns
it into the best Gold. And likewise if thou work with the Moon; But if the
Medicine or Elixir should not have ingresse, take of the Stone extracted in the
first operation, and of the foresaid Mercury a like quantity, and mingle them
together, and incorporate them by grinding upon a Stone, and then distilling in
a Bath, that they might the better be joined together, then dry them. Avicenna
pa. 435.

Son, compound the Minerals, Lullius.
which pertain to the Mineral Magistery, by multiplying their virtue thus:
Take one part of the Powder or Dust, viz. an ounce or pound, and Project it
upon ten parts of Amalgama, made of one part of the Moon or Sun, and five of
Mercury, and the whole shall be turned into Powder or Dust according to the
condition of Dust; and Project one of those ten parts, upon other ten of
Amalgama or simple Mercury, so proceed by Computing and Projecting until thou
see the Matter turned neither into Dust nor Metal, but into a hard frangible
Mass, and make trial of it, viz. how many parts, one part can turn into
Metal; and by this manner thou shall necessarily find the end of Projection,
otherwise thou shall never find it, unless it be first converted into a hard
frangible Mass, as we told thee before. Lull. Test. pa. 64.

But this is the greatest Secret, Ventura.
that the virtue of the Medicine shall be also augmented in the Projection, not
only in extensive Quantity, but also in the virtue of Perfection and
Goodness, viz. If the Medicine be Projected in a due Proportion upon a Body,
and the whole be put into Fire, and augmented by its degrees, and be oftener
dissolved, and oftener coagulated, till it be more fluxill then Wax. Wherefore
if in Projection the Medicinebe so much weakened that it cannot have ingresse
any longer, ingresse is given to it if part of the first Medicine be joined to
it, and it be decocted by dissolving and coagulating till it flow. But by how
much less the virtue of the Medicine is, it is necessarily convenient to
administer the Fire from the beginning, and according to the degrees of Time,
by so much the more temperature. But if there shall nothing remain of the first
and most perfect Medicine which might be added, (which lest it happen to him,
the ingenious Artist must chiefly beware) thence it will be fit to do
otherwise. The third manner is (according to Rosarius) that a little part of
the Medicine, whether white or red, be joined with the Stone or our Mercury,
(which was never in the Work) and let it be put to digestion as before, and
decocted by Putrefying, Subliming, and Fixing, until the whole become a
tinctured Oil, then again thou shall have the perfect Stone; and this is done
in a few days, and with less cost, labor, and hazard. But always keep some
part for Ferment, as well of the White as Red; and this wise Consideration
shall excuse thee of much trouble. Ventura pa. 195.

Let one part of Medicine be Clangor.
taken, and ten parts of putrefied Mercury, so that Mercury be made hot even to
Fumosity, and then let the Medicine be cast upon it, which will presently flow,
even penetrating the least parts; then by a convenient Fire made strong, let
the flowing Mercury be gathered together, of which let a little part be taken,
and let as much of his vive Mercury be put to the Fire, and let the Weight be
proved; If the added Mercury shall notably recede, then it affects the Medicine
to its farthest parts. But if the Body in the Body shall not be notably broken,
but that the Matter be yet frangible, and too soft or hard, then again take a
little of this, and as much of crude Mercury, and in all things proceed, as
has been said, till thou have thy intent. Clangor. Bucc. pa. 539.

THE COROLLARY.
As the Provision of Citizens, if it were not supplied by Country men, would
suddenly be wasted, and in like manner the great Store of the Country men
themselves quickly exhausted, if after the Work of Winter, viz. the Preparation
of the Earth, and winnowing of the laid up Corn, it were not again delivered to
naturating Nature, and again laid up in her lap to putrefie, dissolve, and
multiply: In like manner also, in the Philosophic Work, whose included Matter
is not easily found out, whose mystical manner of Preparation is not
understood without infinite Lucubrations; lastly, whose Process^ (that it might
be brought unto a degree above perfection) though long, difficult, and
hazardous, before that the immense and infinite treasure be perfected; No
otherwise that being performed (unless we shortly, and with a little cost and
trouble obtain the manner of multiplying) would all that be speedily consumed,
which was gotten by long and unwearied industry.

Therefore take this for a Corollary, that since it is manifest from what has
been said, that Me^^cine is to be multiplied two ways. First in quantity and
quality, or else in quantity only. In quantity and quality it is done by
dissolution and fermentation; in quantity, only by Projection: Thou must with
all care and providence take heed, lest through ignorance of the right form of
Projection, that Divine Work, (when it is now brought to its Complement, and
degree above perfection) should be destroyed. Therefore he must know, that upon
whatsoever Body thou shall first project the Medicine, it will change it into
Dust answerable to the nature of the Body on which thou did Project it, which
indeed is Mystical and to be wondered at; If therefore thou desire to bring
thy Elixir to the Sun, let thy first Proportion be made upon the Sun, that in
the Sun it may be specificated. And so with the Moon to the Moon, thou must
thence proceed as has been manifested clearly enough from the authority of
most approved Philosophers.

CHAP. X. Multiplication.
EVery increasing or growing Semita.
thing, both Vegetable and Animal, is multiplied in its kind, as Men, Trees,
Grain, and the like, for of one Seed, a thousand are generated, therefore it is
possible that things be infinitely encreast. Semita Semitae pa. 438.

But thou shall multiply the Bacon.
Medicine thus; After thou have completed it, take notice on how many it falls,
which being foreseen, again resolve, and congeal it, and in every Resolution
the Tincture is doubled, that if before its resolution one part fall upon a
hundred, afterward it will fall upon two hundred. Bacon fo. 19.

Medicine may be multiplied Scala.
two ways, first by Dissolution and Reiteration of Congelation, and this is its
virtuall Multiplication in Goodness or Quality; the second by Fermentation,
and this is its Multiplication in Quantity. Scala 165.

The Multiplication of Medicine Rosar.
is performed two ways, one by the reiterated Dissolution and Coagulation of
the Stone; the second by Projection of the first Elixir Stone upon a Body,
either White or Red, in such a Quantity, that the same Body may also be turned
into Medicine, and then there may be put together to dissolve in their Water
and menstrous Matter, and so the first Elixir is the Ferment of such a
Tincture; and so do Women that bake. Rosar. Philosophor. pa. 347.

The Augmentation in Goodness Clangor.
and Quality, is to dissolve and coagulate the very Tincture, that is, to
imbibe and exsiccate it in our Mercury. Or thus, take one part of the prepared
Tincture, and dissolve it in three parts of our Mercury, then put it in a
Vessel, and seal the Vessel, and cover it with hot Embers, till it be
exsiccated and become Dust, then open the Vessel, and again imbibe and
exsiccate as before, and how much the oftener thou do this, so often shall
thou gain some parts. Or else take of the fixed Matter which tincteth, that is,
of the prepared Tincture three parts, and of the Philosophers Mercury one part,
and put it into a Vessel, and seal the Vessel, and put it among hot Embers as
before, and exsiccate it, that it may be made Dust, then open the Vessel,
imbibe, and exsiccate it as before: And the Water that is Argent vive or
Mercury, adds nothing to the Weight, or to the Body, unless as much as
remains of the Metallic humidity.

Also Multiplication in Quantity is made by mixtion of the Medicine with vulgar
Argent vive in a Crucible, which Argent vive indeed is turned into red Dust by
admixtion of the Stone, and again, that, of that Argent vive which should be
cast upon other Argent vive, is again also turned into Dust, and so thou shall
make reiterations of the Dust of Argent vive upon other Argent vive, until the
Argent vive cannot be turned into Dust, but remain turned into a perfect
Metal. Clangor Buccinae pa. 533.

If thou would multiply it, it Artepheus.
is fit thou dissolve the red again, in a new dissolutive Water, and in an
iterated decoction to whiten and redden it by the degrees of Fire, by
reiterating the first Regiment or Work. Dissolve, Congeale, Reiterate, by
Closing, Opening, and Multiplying, in Quantity and Quality, as thou please.
Because by a new Corruption and Generation, is again introduced a new Motion,
and so we cannot obtain an end, if we would always operate by Reiteration,
Dissolution and Coagulation, by the mediation of our Dissolutive Water, that
is, by dissolving and coagulating through the first Regiment or Work, as has
been said. And so the virtue of it, is augmented and multiplied in quantity, so
that if thou have an hundred in the first Work, in the second thou shall have a
thousand, in the third ten thousand, and so by prosecuting, thy Projection will
become infinite, in truly, perfectly, and fixedly tincting or giving Tincture
to every Quantity, how great soever, and so by a thing of no value is added,
Color, Weight, and Virtue. Arteph. fo. 37.

THE COROLLARY.
I knew (said Count Bernard of Trevisane) a certain man of the County of
Anchona, who had very well known the Stone, but was ignorant of the
Multiplication, He (says he) did solicitously follow me sixteen entire years
that he might learn, but from me he never knew it, for he has the same Books
as I.

But I cannot think any man so dull and stupid, but that he may from this
Chapter easily understand the Multiplication of the Stone. Such things by how
much the oftener they are dissolved, filtrated, and coagulated, become by so
much the more subtle, pure, penetrating, and much more transparent. It is
likewise so with that Physical Stone, which, although it be brought to
perfection, yet by how much the oftener it is dissolved and coagulated, by so
much the more the strength thereof is multiplied in Projection, even until it
attain an infinite number. To the practice whereof in this our last Chapter, it
will not be requisite that I add a further Paraphrase; since this our
dissolving Philosophic Mercury is to every one clearly evident from what has
been said in these our Collections. That, that is Fire which they call
Natural, by whose help the Solution and Resolution of the Elixir is performed,
and the Proportion thereof, and manner operating, they have truly and elegantly
explicated in this Chapter without Tropes or Figures: For before this time, was
enough and too much obscured, and over shadowed by their parabolicall Mists,
that true Pathway by which every lover of the Art is brought through
difficulties, Woods, and Mountains, to that most famous Tower of Philosophy,
consecrate to Art and Nature, in which the Fire of Nature is imprisoned and
locked up.

The Tri-une God, Father, Word, and Holy Spirit, Incomprehensible height,
Impartible Trinity, Immutable Essence, which rules all things, but not
inclusively, beyond all things, but not exclusively, Immense, Incircumscript,
Ineffable, from his infinite and unspeakable Mercy, vouchsafe to open, detect,
and unlock it, to all that worthily importune and implore his Aid, to his
eternal praise and honor. Amen.

Things to be observed.
1. THE Material Part being known, and had, it ought not to be kept in a Hot,
and Moist, but in a Cold or Dry place; nor be kept long: but thou beginnest to
Work with it whilst it is fresh, and but newly Extracted from its Mine.

2. Begin not to Work, unless thou have so much of the Proper Material
weighed out, as will serve for two years; that in case thou failest the first
time, thou may correct it the second. Because thou can not examine Truth
without Falsehood; nor that which is Straight without consideration had of that
which is Crooked. So that if thou should want Matter to work upon, thou
leavest the Work unfinished, and gettest nothing but thy Labor for thy Pains.

3. The Elements are to be separated in a soft Bath, that the Alembick be not
perceived to be hot, but that the vapor (being Elevated and Congealed in the
Colder Air) may be turned into Water, having the form of all the Species's
whereof it is Generated.

4. After the Water shall be Distilled, let it not stand long when it is fit
for Operation; Because the Coagulum thereof falls into the bottom,
congealing the Coagulated (Body) by the Coldness and Dryness of the Air:
which (says Senior) happened to one of my Associates, who found it so for a
whole year, but not Distilled.

5. It is necessary the Artist have a great Quantity of Water, because that in
the Beginning, Middle, and End, there will always be a necessity thereof, as
well in Putrefying, Washing, Calcining, Subliming, Imbibing, as that the Elixir
may be often Resolved. Wherefore Avicen in his Epistle to his Son, My Son it
behooves thee to have a great Quantity of our Sun and Moon, that thou may
extract their Moistures, sixty Pounds at the least.

6. Thou may with on Pound weight of Water, resolve the Matter into Water,
even to an Infinite Quantity. But he that desires to gather this first Pound
let him be Patient, and proceed softly and sweetly, not hastily: For that Work
is termed of Philosophers, An Extraction of his own Sweat.

7. But above all, thou must beware, that at no time thou put a cold Glass
into the hot Water; lest it should be broke, and thou losest thy Labor.

8. It is to be noted, When thou take up a Vessel, thou suffer it to cool
with Water, for the space of three hours, at the least.

9. Take heed in Distillation, that the Water bubble not at the same time.

10. In every Digestion, the Glass must be Sealed with the Seal of Hermes.

11. To Fix Inceration, a Necessity is observed amongst Quacks, that a Fire be
made thereon, whereby the Matter may the better be Fixed, which notwithstanding
is not to be slighted.

12. He that understands what is meant by the Philosophers Magnesia,
understands the Preparation and Perfection of the first Work, and what is meant
by Sal naturae, Sal Armoniacus, Mercurius Exuberatus, and Sulphur naturae,
which being understood

Dimidium facti, qui been coepit, habet. 13. Shortly after the second Work, or
the Philosophic Work is begun, forget not even at the same hour, to begin the
Preparation of thy Ferments, because they require a long time of Preparation;
Let the Sun make his own Ferment: the Moon hers.

14. To the Building of a Kings Palace, these following Artificers are
necessarily required, A Mason, a Smith, a Glasier, a Potter, (or maker of
Earthen Images) a Carpenter; without which, neither the Palace can rightly be
built; nor the King therein preserved from Cold, and the Injuries of Winds.

15. Many men through Ignorance have destroyed their Work, when at the first
they made Projection of the Medicine, upon Imperfect Metals. For, on whatsoever
Body thou first of all Projectest the Medicine, that same is converted into a
Frangible Mass, and shall be an Elixir according to the nature of the Body
upon which it is so Projected. So, as that if the Projection be made upon
Jupiter, or Venus, it shall be a Medicine, which not only converteth other
Imperfect Bodies into Jupiter, or Venus, but also reduces Perfect Bodies (to
wit, the Sun and Moon) into Imperfect Bodies; according to the nature of the
Body upon which the Medicine shall first be Projected: Which caused the most
Learned Raimund (struck with Admiration) to cry out in these words, What! is
Nature Retrograde?

16. He that would understand the sayings of Philosophers, must not give credit
so much to their Words, as to the things they Treat of: For, the knowledge of
Words, is not to be taken from the manner of speaking; because that the Matter
is not subject to the Speech, but the Speech to the Matter.

17. Note, that a short and broad vessel is requisite for distilling a Heavy
Body, or at least Water with its Saltness. Because that by how much the Water
is more Ponderous then the Body, by so much ought the Vessel to be the broader
and deeper, through which the heat passes more temperate and profitable to the
Work.

18. Great care is always to be had, lest at any time from the first
Conjunction to the Whiteness, the Matter should wax cold; or be at any time
moved by reason of imminent Danger.

19. Let not a greater Quantity of the Matter be put into the Philosophers
Egg, then may fill two Thirds thereof, at the utmost.

20. It is to be noted, that in Ablution, or Calcination of the Earth, although
the Waters Imbibition, or Exsiccation, be made in Preparation by the temperate
heat of the Bath; yet its Sublimation or Rising is perfected by a swift fire of
Ashes.

21. The Philosophical Work may be begun with an equal Proportion of Earth
prepared, and pure Water seven times rectified; which are joined and put up in
an Ovall Glass Hermetically Sealed. Afterward let them be placed in the
Philosophical Furnace, or Athanore, and cherished with a most soft Fire,
whilst the Earth drinks up her Water, and (according to Ripley) the Streams are
dried up. Then lastly, let the dry Matter be comforted with seven Imbibitions,
and every Imbibition keep the following Proportion, that so the Water may be a
just Measure exceed the Earth nine times according to the Doctrine of
Philosophers; which cannot otherwise be done, then by observing these Numbers.
But this secret was never as yet Revealed by any Body.

For Example: If in the first Conjunction the Earth weigh 480 Grains, then let
so many be added to it of its Water, which together make up 960 Grains, and for
the time appointed to the first Imbibition 240 Grains of new Water are
required, 300 to the second, 375 to the third, 468 to the fourth, 585 to the
fifth, 732 to the sixth, 940 to the seventh, whereby the Imbibition is
perfected; and then proceed to Fermentation.

THE END.
Nil adeo parvum est, tibi quin solatia praestet.
Saepeque Punctum unum, grande Levamen habet.
ARCANVM: OR, The grand Secret OF HERMETICK PHILOSOPHY.

WHEREIN, The Secrets of NATURE and ART, concerning the Matter and Manner of
making the Philosophers Composition, are orderly and methodically manifested.

The Work of a concealed Author.

Penes nos unda Tagi.

The third Edition amended and enlarged.

To the Students in, and well affected unto HERMETICK Philosophy, health and
prosperity.
AMongst the heights of hidden Philosophy, the production of the Hermetick
Stone has of a long time been strongly believed to be the chiefest, and
nearest a Miracle, both for the Labyrinths and multitudes of operations, out of
which the mind of man, unless it be illuminated by a beam of Divine light, is
not able to unwinde her self; as also because of its most noble end which
promises a constant plenty of health and fortunes, the two main pillars of an
happy life. Besides, the chief Promoters of this Science have made it most
remote from the knowledge of the vulgar sort by their Tropes and dark
expressions, and have placed it on high, as a Tower impregnable for Rocks and
Situation, whereunto there can be no access, unless God direct the way. The
study of hiding this Art has drawn a reproach upon the Art it self and its
Professors: for when those unfortunate Plunderers of the Golden Fleece by
reason of their unskilfulnesse felt themselves, beat down from their vain
attempt, and far unequal unto such eminent persons; they in a furious rapture
of desperation, like madmen, waxed hot against their fame and the renown of
the Science, utterly denying any thing to be above their cognizance and the
sphere of their wit, but what was foolish and frothy: And because they set
upon a business of damage to themselves, they have not ceased to accuse the
chief Masters of hidden Philosophy of falsehood, Nature of impotency, and Art of
cheats, not for any other reason, then that they rashly condemn what they know
not: nor is this condemnation a sufficient revenge, without the addition of
madness to snarl and bite the innocent with infamous slanders. I grieve (in
truth) for their hard fortune, who whilst they reprove others, give occasion
of their own conviction, although they justly suffer an hellish fury within
them. They moil and sweat to batter the obscure principles of the most hidden
Philosophy with troops of arguments, and to pull up the secret foundations
thereof with their devised engines: which yet are only manifest to the
skillful, and those that are much versed in so sublime Philosophy, but hid from
strangers: Nor do these quicksighted Censors observe, that whilst they malign
another credit, they willingly betray their own. Let them consider with
themselves, whether they understand those things which they carp at; What
Author of eminency has divulged the secret elements of this Science, the
Labyrinths and windings of operations, and lastly, the whole proceedings
therein? What Oedipus has sincerely and truly explained unto him the figures
and entangled dark speeches of Authors? With what Oracle, what Sibyll, have
they been led into the Sanctuary of this holy Science? In fine, how were all
things in it made so manifest, that no part remains yet unveiled? I suppose
they will no otherwise answer my question, then thus, that they have pierced
all things by the subtilty of their wits; or confess that they were taught (or
rather seduced) by some wandering Quack or Mountebank, who has crept into a
good esteem with them, by his feigned countenance of a Philosopher. O
wickedness! who can silently suffer these Palmer-worms to gnaw upon the fame,
labor, and glory of the wise? who can with patience hear blind men, as out of
a Tripode judging of the Sun? But it is greater glory to contemn the hurtlesse
darts of bablers, then to repel them. Let them only disdain the treasure of
Nature and Art, who cannot obtain it. Nor is it my purpose to plead the
doubtful cause of an unfortunate Science, and being condemned, to take it into
tuition: Our guiltless Philosophy is no whit criminous: and standing firm by
the aid of eminentest Authors, and fortified with the manifold experience of
diverse ages, it remains safe enough from the fopperies of pratlers, and the
snarlings of envy. However Charity has incited me, and the multitude of
wanderers induced me, taking pity on them, to present my light, that so they
may escape the hazard of the night: by help whereof they may not only live
out, but also procure an enlargement both to their Life and fading Fortunes.
This small Treatise penned for your use (ye Students of Hermetick Philosophy) I
present unto you, that it may be dedicated to those, for whose sake it was
writ. If any perhaps shall complain of me, and summon me to appear as guilty of
breach of silence for divulging secrets in an itching style, ye have one guilty
of too much respectfulnesse toward you, confessing his fault, sentence him if
you please; so that my crime may supply the place of a reward to you: The
offense will not be displeasing unto you, and the punishment (I doubt not)
pleasant unto me, if I shall find my self to have erred in this only,
whereby you may put an end to erring for the future.

Hermetick Secrets.
CANON 1.
GODS fear is the entrance Admonition.
into this Science. Its end is good will toward our Neighbor, the
all-satisfying Crop is the rearing and endowing religious entertainment, with
certainty; that whatsoever the Almighty freely bestows on us, we may
submissively offer again to him. As also Countries grievously oppressed, may be
relieved; prisoners miserably captivated, released; and souls almost starved,
comforted.

2. The light of this knowledge is the gift of God, which by his freeness he
bestows upon whom he pleases: Let none therefore set himself to the study
hereof, until having cleared and purified his heart, he devote himself wholly
unto God, and be emptied of all affection unto things impure.

3. The Science of producing Natures grand Secret, is a perfect knowledge of
Nature universally and of Art, concerning the Realm of Metals, the practice
whereof is conversant in finding the principles of Metals by Analysis, and
after they are made much more perfect, to conjoyn them otherwise then before
they have been, that from thence may result a catholic Medicine, most
powerful to perfect imperfect Metals, and for restoring sick and decayed
Bodies, of what sort soever.

4. Those that are in public Honors and Offices, or be always busied with
private and necessary occupations, let them not strive to attain unto the top
of this Philosophy, for it requires the whole man, and being found, possesses
him, and being possessed, challenges him from all long and serious
imploiments, esteeming all other things as strange unto him, and of no value.

5. Let him that is desirous of this Knowledge, clear his mind from all evil
motions, especially pride, which is abomination to Heaven, and the gate of
Hell: let him be frequent in prayers, and charitable; have little to do with
the world; abstain from company keeping; enjoy constant tranquillity; that the
Mind may be able to reason more freely in private, and be higher lifted up;
for unless it be kindled with a beam of Divine Light, it will not be able to
penetrate the hidden mysteries of Truth.

6. The Alchymists, who have given their minds to their welnigh innumerable
Sublimations, Distillations, Solutions, Congealations; to manifold Extraction
of Spirits and Tinctures, and other Operations more subtle then profitable,
and so have distracted them by variety of errors, as so many tormentors; will
never be bent again by their own Genius to the plain way of Nature and light of
Truth, from whence their industrious subtilty has declined them, and by
twinings and turnings, as by the Lybian Quicksands, has drowned their
entangled Wits: the only hope of safety for them remains in finding out a
faithful Guide and Teacher, that may make the clear Sun conspicuous unto them,
and vindicate their eyes from darkness.

7. A studious Tyro of a quick wit, constant mind, inflamed with the study of
Philosophy, very skillful in natural Philosophy, of a pure heart, complete in
manners, mightily devoted to God, though ignorant of practical Chemistry, may
with confidence enter into the highway of Nature, peruse the Books of best
Philosophers; let him seek out an ingenious and sedulous Companion for himself,
and not despair of obtaining his desire.

8. Let a Student of this secret, carefully beware of reading or keeping
company with false Philosophers; for nothing is more dangerous to a learner of
any Science, then the company of an unskilful or deceitful wit, by which
false principles are stamped for true, whereby an honest and too credulous a
mind is seasoned with bad Doctrine.

9. Let a Lover of truth make use of a few Authors, but of best note and
experienced truth; let him suspect things that are quickly understood,
especially in mystical Names and secret Operations; for truth lies hid in
obscurity; nor do Philosophers ever write more deceitfully, then when plainly,
nor ever more truly then when obscurely.

10. As for the Authors of chiefest note, which have discoursed both acutely
and truly of the secrets of Nature, and hidden Philosophy, Hermes, and Morienus
Romanus, amongst the Ancients, in my judgment are of the highest esteem:
amongst the Modern, Count Trevisanus, and Raimundus Lullius, is in greatest
reverence with me: for what that most acute Doctor has omitted, none almost
has spoken: let him therefore peruse him, yea let a Student often read over
his former Testament, and Codicil, and accept them as a Legacy of very great
worth. To these two Volumes let him add both his Practicks, out of which Works
all things desirable may be collected, especially the truth of Matter, the
degrees of Fire, and the ordering of the Whole, wherein the whole Work is
finished, and those things which our Ancestors too carefully labored to keep
secret. The occult causes of things, and the secret motions of nature, are
demonstrated more clearly and faithfully. Concerning the first and mystical
Water of Philosophers he has set down few things, yet very pithy.

11. As for that clear Water sought for by many, found out by few, yet obvious
and profitable unto all, which is the Base of the Philosophers Work, a noble
Polonian not more famous for his learning then subtilty of wit (not named,
whose name notwithstanding a double Anagram has betrayed) In his Novum lumen
Chymicum, Parabola and Aenigma, as also in his Tract of Sulphur, he has spoken
largely and freely enough; yea he has expressed all things concerning it so
plainly, that nothing can be satisfactory to him that desires more.

12. Philosophers do usually express themselves more pithily in types and
aenigmaticall figures (as by a mute kind of speech) then by woprs; for example,
Senior's Table, the allegorical Pictures of Rosarius, the Schemes of Abraham
Judaeus in Flamellus: of the later sort, the rare Emblemes of the most learned
Michael Maierus, wherein the mysteries of the Ancients are so fully opened,
that as new Perspectives they can present antiquated truth, and remote from our
age as near unto our eyes, and perfectly to be seen by us.

13. Whosoever affirms that the Philosophers grand Secret is above the
strength of Nature and Art, he is blind, because he knows not the Sun and Moon.

14. As for the Matter of their Of the Matter of the Stone.
hidden Stone, Philosophers have writ diversely; so that very many disagreeing
in Words, do nevertheless very well consent in the Thing; nor does their
different speech, argue the science ambiguous or false, since the same thing
may be expressed with many tongues, diverse expressions, and a different
character, and also one and many things may be spoken after a diverse manner.

15. Let the studious Reader have a care of the manifold significations of
words, for by deceitful windings, and doubtful, yea contrary speeches, (as it
should seem) Philosophers vent their mysteries, with a desire of keeping in and
hiding, not of sophisticating or destroying the truth: And though their
writings abound with ambiguous and equivocall words; yet about none do they
more contend, then in hiding their golden branch:

-- Quem tegit omnis
Lucus; and obscuris claudunt convallibus Aen. 6.
umbrae.
Which all the Groves with shaddows overcast,
And gloomy Valleys hide.
Nor yields it to any Force, but readily and willingly will follow him, who

Maternas agnoscit aves
-- and geminae cui forte Columbae
Ipsa sub ora viri coelo venere volantes,
Knows Dame Venus Birds --
And him to whom of Doves a lucky pair
Sent from above shall hover 'bout his Ear.
16. Whosoever seeks the Art of perfecting and multiplying imperfect Metals,
beyond the nature of Metals, goes in error, for from Metals the Metals is to
be derived, even as from Man, Mankind; and from an Ox, that species is to be
fetched.

17. Metals (we must confess) cannot be multiplied by the instinct and labor
of Nature only; yet we may affirm that the multiplying virtue is hid in their
profundity, and manifests it self by the help of Art: In this Work, Nature
stands in need of the aid of Art; and both does perfect the whole.

18. Perfect Bodies are endued with a more perfect seed: and therefore under
the hard bark of perfect Metals the perfect seed lies hid, which he that knows
to take out by the Philosophers solution, has entered into the high way, for --
In auro Augar. Chrysop. lib. 1.

Semina sunt auri, quamvis abstrusa recedant
Longius.
In Gold the seeds of Gold do lie, Though buried in Obscurity.

19. Most Philosophers have affirmed that their Kingly Work is wholly composed
of the Sun and Moon; others have thought good to add Mercury to the Sun: some
have chosen Sulphur and Mercury; others have attributed no small part in so
great a Work to salt mingled with the other two. The very same men have
professed that this clear Stone is made of one thing only, sometimes of two,
otherwhiles of three, at other times of four, and of five; and thus though
writing so variously upon the same subject, do nevertheless agree in sense
and meaning.

20. Now that (abandoning all Cheats) we may deal heartily and truly, we hold
that this entire Work is perfected by two Bodies only, to wit, the Sun and
Moon rightly prepared, for this is mere generation which is by nature, with the
help of Art, wherein the copulation of male and female does intercede, from
whence an off spring far more noble then the Parents, is brought forth.

21. Now those Bodies must be taken, which are of an unspotted and incorrupt
virginity; such as have life and spirits in them; not extinct as those that are
handled of the vulgar, for who can expect life from dead things; and those are
called corrupt which have suffered copulation; those dead and extinct which (by
the enforcements of the chief Tyrant of the world) have poured out their soul
with their blood by Martyrdom, fly a fratricide from whom the greatest
imminent danger in the whole Work is threatened.

22. The Sun is Masculine, forasmuch as it sends forth active and enforcing
seed, the Moon is Feminine, called the matrix and vessel of Nature, because she
receives the seed of the male in her womb, and fostereth it by her monthly
provision yet does it not altogether want its active virtue; for, first of all
(being ravished with love) she climbs up unto the male, until she has wrested
from him the utmost delights of Venus, and fruitful seed: nor does she desist
from her embraces, till that being great with child, she slip gently away.

23. By the name of the Moon Philosophers understand not the vulgar Moon, which
also is masculine in its operation, and in copulation acts the part of a male.
Let none therefore presume to try the wicked and unnatural conjunction of two
males, neither let him conceive any hope of issue from such copulation, but he
shall join Gabertius to Beia, and offer the sister to her own brother in firm
Matrimony, that from thence he may receive Sol's noble Son.

24. They that hold Sulphur and Mercury to be the Matter of the Stone, by the
name of Sulphur, they understand the Sun and common Moon; by Mercury the
Philosophers Moon: so (without dissimulation) holy Lullius Cap. 62 Prioris
Testam.
advises his friend, that he attempt not to work without Mercury and Luna for
Silver, and Mercury and Sol for Gold.

25. Let none therefore be deceived by adding a third to two: for Love
admits not a third; and wedlock is terminated in the number of two; love
further extended is adultery, not matrimony.

26. Nevertheless, Spiritual love polluteth not a virgin, Beia might
therefore without crime (before her promise made to Gabritius) have contracted
spiritual love, to the end that she might thereby be made more cheerful, more
pure, and fitter for the business of matrimony.

27. Procreation of children is the end of lawful Wedlock. Now that the Infant
may be borne more vigorous and gallant, let both the combatants be cleansed
from every scab and spot, before they both go up to their marriage bed, and let
nothing unnecessary cleave unto them; because from pure seed comes a purifyed
generation, and so the chaste wedlock of Sol and Luna shall be finished when
they shall enter into Loves bedchamber, and be conjoined, and she shall
receive a soul from her husband by embracing him; from this copulation a most
potent King shall arise, whose father will be Sol, and his mother Luna.

28. He that seeks for a physical tincture without Sol and Luna, loses both
his cost and pains: for the Sun affords a most plentiful tincture of
redness, and the Moon of whiteness, for these two are only called perfect;
because they are filled with the substance of purest Sulphur, perfectly
clarified by the skill of nature: Let thy Mercury therefore have its tincture
from both of these Lights; for things must of necessity receive a tincture
before they can give one.

29. Perfect metals contain in them two things, which they are able to
communicate to the imperfect, Tincture and Fixation; for those, because the are
dyed and fixed with pure Sulphur, to wit, both white and red, they do
therefore perfectly tinct and fix, if they be fitly prepared with their proper
Sulphur and Arsenick, otherwise they have not strength of multiplying their
tincture.

30. Mercury is for imperfect metals, fit only to receive the tincture of the
Sun and Moon in the work of the Philosophers Stone, that being full of
tincture, it may give forth other things in abundance: yet ought it (before
that) to be full of invisible Suphur, that it may be the more colored with the
visible tincture of perfect bodies, and so repay it with sufficient Usury.

31. Now the whole tribe of Philosophers sweat much, and are mightily troubled
to extract tincture out of gold: for they believe that tincture can be
separated from the Sun, and being separated increase in virtue; but

Spes tandem Agricolas vanis eludit aristis.
Vain hope, at last the hungry Plough-man cheats
With empty Husks, instead of lusty meats.
For it is impossible that the Suns tincture can at all be severed from his
natural body, since there can be no elementary body made up by nature more
perfect then gold, the perfection whereof proceeds from the strong and
inseparable union of pure coloring Sulphur with Mercury, both of them being
admirably pre-disposed thereunto by Nature; whose true separation nature
denies unto Art: But if any liquor remaining be extracted (by the violence of
fire or waters) by the Sun, it is to be reputed a part of the body made liquid
or dissolved by force. For the tincture follows its body, and is never
separated from it. That is the deluding of Art, unknown to Artificers
themselves.

32. Nevertheless it may be granted, that tincture is separable from its body,
yet (we must confess) it cannot be separated without the corruption of the
tincture: when as Artists offer violence to the gold, or Aqua fortis rather
corroding then dissolving. The body therefore spoiled of its tincture and
golden fleece, must needs grow base, and as an unprofitable heap turn to the
damage of its Artificer, and the tincture thus corrupted to have a weaker
operation.

33. Let them in the next place cast their tincture into Mercury, or into any
other imperfect body, and as strongly conjoyne both of them as their Art will
permit; yet shall they fail of their hopes two ways; First, because the
tincture will neither penetrate nor color beyond Natures strength; and
therefore no gain will accrue from thence to recompense the expense and
countervaile the loss of the body spoiled and of no value, so

Cum labor in damno est, crescit mortalis egestas.
Want is poor mortals wages, when his toil
Produces only loss of pains and Oil.
Lastly that banished Tincture applied to another body will not give a perfect
fixation and permanency to endure a strong trial, and resist searching Saturn.

34. Let them therefore that are desirous of Chemistry, and have hitherto
followed Impostors and Mountebanks, sound a retrait, spare time and cost, and
give their mind to a work truly Philosophical, lest the Phrygians be wise too
late, and at length be compelled to cry out with the Osey. 7.
Prophet, Strangers have eaten up my strength.

35. In the Philosophers work more toil and time then cost is expended; for he
that has convenient matter, need be at little expense: besides, those that
hunt after great store of money, and place their chief end in wealth, they trust
more to their riches, then their own art. Let therefore the too credulous
Fresh-man beware of these pilfering pick-pockets, for whilst they promise
golden mountains, they lay in wait for gold; they demand bright ushering Sol,
(viz. money before hand) because they walk in darkness.

36. As those that sail between The Philo. Merc.
Scilla and Charybdis are in danger on both sides: unto no less hazard are
they subject who pursuing the prey of the Golden fleece, are carried between
the uncertain Rocks of the Philosophers Sulphur and Mercury. The more acute by
their constant reading of grave and credible Authors, and by the irradiant Sun
have attained unto the knowledge of Sulphur, but are at a stand in the entrance
of the Philosophers Mercury; for Writers have twisted it with so many windings
and Meanders, involved it with so many aequivocall names, that it may be sooner
met with by the force of the Seekers intellect, then be found by reason or
toil.

37. That Philosophers might the deeper drown their Mercury in darkness, they
have made it manifold, and placed their Mercury (yet diversely) in every part
and forefront of their work, nor will he attain unto a perfect knowledge
thereof, who shall be ignorant of any part of the work.

38. Philosophers have acknowledged athreefold Mercury especially, to wit,
after absolute preparation of the first degree, and Philosophical sublimation;
for then they call it their Mercury, and Mercury sublimated.

39. Again, in the second preparation, that which by Authors is styled the
First (because they omit the First) Sol being now made crude again, and
resolved into his first matter is Mercury, properly called of such like bodies,
or the Philosophers Mercury; then the matter is called Rebis, Chaos, the whole
world, wherein are all things necessary to the work, because that only is
sufficient to perfect the Stone.

40. Lastly the Philosophers do sometimes call perfect Elixir and coloring
medicine, their Mercury, though improperly; for the name of Mercury does only
properly agree with that which is volatile; besides that which is sublimated in
every region of the work, they call Mercury: but Elixir because it is most
fixed, cannot have the simple name of Mercury, and therefore they have styled
it their own Mercury, to difference it from that volatile. A straight way is
only laid down for them to find out and discern so many Mercuries of the
Philosophers, for then only

-- Quos aequus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera Aeneid. 6.
virtus.
-- Whom just and mighty Jove
Advances by the strength of love;
Or such whom brave heroic fire,
Makes from dull Earth to Heaven aspire.
41. Elixir is called the Philosophers Mercury for the likeness and great
conformity it has with Heavenly Mercury; for this, being void of elementary
qualities is believed most propense to receive influence from them, and that
changeable Proteus puts on and increases the genius and nature of other
Planets, by reason of opposition, conjunction and aspect. The like this
uncertain Elixir works, for that being tied to no proper quality, it
imbraceth the quality and disposition of the thing wherewith it is mixed, and
wonderfully multiplyeth the virtues and qualities hereof.

42. In the Philosophical sublimation The Philosophical sublimation of Mercury.
or first preparation of Mercury, Herculean labor must be undergone by the
workman; for Jason had in vain attempted his expedition to Colchos without
Alcides.

Alter inauratam nota de vertice pellem
Principium velut ostendit, quod Aug. Cry. sop. 2.
sumere possis;
Alter onus quantum subeas --
One from an high a Golden Fleece displayes
Which shows the Entrance, another says
How hard a task you will find.
For the entrance is warded by horne-pushing beasts; which drive away those
that approach rashly thereunto to their great hurt; only the ensigns of Diana
and the doves of Venus are able to assuage their fierceness, if the fates
favor.

43. The natural quality of Philosophical Earth and the tillage thereof,
seems to be touched by the Poet in this Verse,

Pingue solum primis extemplo a Geo 1.
mensibus anni
Fortes invertant Tauri --
-- Tunc Zephyro putris se gleba resolvit.
Let sturdy Oxen when the year begins
Plough up the fertile soil --
For Zeph'rus then dissolves the rotten clods.
44. He that calls the Philosophers Luna or their Mercury, the common
Mercury; does wittingly deceive, or is deceived; so the writings of Chap. 4.
pari. lib. 1 perfecti. Magisterii.
Geber teach us, that the Philosophers Mercury is Argent vive, yet not of the
common sort, but extracted out of it by the Philosophers skill.

45. That the Philosophers Mercury is not Argent vive in its proper nature, nor
in its whole substance, but the middle and pure substance thereof, which thence
has taken its original and made by it, the grand Philosophers opinions being
founded in experience.

46. The Philosophers Mercury has diverse names, sometimes it is called Earth,
sometimes Water in a diverse respect, because it naturally arises from them
both. The earth is subtle, white, sulphurous, in which the elements are fixed
and the philosophical gold is sown: the water is water of life, burning,
permanent, most clear, called the water of gold and silver; but this Mercury,
because it has in it Sulphur of its own, which is multiplied by art, it
deserves to be called the Sulphur of Argent vive. Last of all the most precious
substance is Venus the ancients Hermaphrodite, glorious in each sex.

47. This Argent vive, is partly natural, partly unnatural, it being
intrinsecall and occult has its root in nature, which cannot be drawn forth
unless it be by some precedent clensing, and industrious sublimation, it being
extrinsecall is praeternaturall and accidental: separate therefore the clean
from the unclean, the substance from the accidents, and make that which is hid,
manifest, by the course of nature, otherwise make no further progress, for
this is the foundation of the whole work, and nature.

48. That dry and most precious liquor does constitute the radical moisture of
metals, wherefore of some of the ancients it is called Glass; for glass is
extracted out of the radical moisture, closely lurking in ashes which will not
give place, unless it be to the hottest flame; notwithstanding our inmost or
centrall Mercury discovers it self by the most gentle and kindly (though a
little more tedious) fire of nature.

49. Some have sought for the latent Philosophical earth by Calcination,
others by sublimation; many among the glasing vessels, and some few between
vitrial and salt, even as among their natural vessels: others enjoyne to
sublime it out of lime and glass. But we have learned of the Prophet, that in
the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was without
form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the Deep; and the spirit of
God moved upon the Waters, and God said, Let there be Light, and there was
Light; and God saw the Light that it was good, and he divided the light from
the darkness, etc. Joseph's blessing spoken of by the same Prophet will be
sufficient to a wise man (Deuteronomy 33.) Blessed of the Lord be his Land, for the
(...) a (...) In re quapiam eximium and praestans. Sweetness, old transla.
Precious things, new tran
Apples of Heaven, for the dew, and for the Deep that lies beneath; for the
Apples of fruit both of sun and moon, for the top of the ancient mountains, for
the Apples of the everlasting hills, etc. pray the Lord from the ground of thy
heart (my son) that he would bestow upon thee a portion of this blessed land.

50. Argent vive is so defiled by original sin, that it flows with a double
infection; the first it has contracted from the polluted Earth, which has
mixed it self therewith in its generation, and by congelation has cleaved
thereunto: the second borders upon the dropsy, and is the corruption of
intercutal Water, proceeding from thick and impure water; mixed with the clear,
which nature is not able to squeeze out and separate by constriction; and
because it is extrinsecall, it goes away with a gentle heat. The Mercuries
leprosy infesting the body, is not of its root and substance, but accidental,
and therefore separable from it; the earthy part is wiped off by a moist Bath
and the laver of nature: the watery part is taken away by a dry bath with the
pleasant fire of generation. And thus by a threefold washing and clensing the
Dragon putting off his old scales and ugly skin is renewed.

51. The Philosophical sublimation of Mercury is completed in two things;
namely by removing things superfluous from it, and by introducing things
wanting: the superfluities are the external accidents, which in the dark
sphere of Saturn do make cloudy ruddy Jupiter. Separate therefore the
blewnesse of Saturn coming up, until Jupiters purple star smile upon thee. Add
hereunto the sulphur of nature, whose grain and leaven it has in it self, so
much as suffices it; but see that it be sufficient for other things also.
Multiply therefore that invisible Sulphur of the philosophers until the Virgins
milk come forth: and so the first gate is opened unto thee.

52. The entrance of the Philosophers garden is kept by the Hesperian Dragon,
which being laid open, a fountain of the clearest water proceeding from a
seaven*fold spring flows forth on every side the threshold, wherein make the
Dragon drink thrice the magical number of Seven, until being drunk he put off
his hideous garment: may the divine powers of light-bringing Venus and horned
Diana, be propitious unto thee.

53. Three kinds of most beautiful flowers are to be sought, and may be found
in the garden of the wise: Damask-coloured Violets, the milk-white Lilly, and
the purple and immortal flower of love, Amaranthus. Not far from that
fountain at the entrance, fresh Violets do first salute thee, which being
watered by streams from the great golden river, put on the most delicate color
of the dark Saphir: the Sun will give thee signs. Thou shall not sever such
precious flowers from their root, until thou make the Stone: for the fresh
ones cropped off, have more juice and tincture: and then pick them carefully with
a gentle and discreet hand; if fates frown not, they will easily follow, and
one flower being plucked, the other golden one will not be wanting: let the
Lilly and the Amaranthus, succeed with greater care and labor.

54. Philosophers have their Sea also, wherein small fishes, fat and shining
with silver scales, are generated; which he that shall catch in and take out of
a small and fine net, shall be accounted a most expert fisher.

55. The Philosophers Stone is found in the oldest mountains, and flows from
everlasting brooks; those mountains are of silver, and the brooks of gold:
from thence gold and silver, and all the treasure of Kings are produced.

56. Whosoever is minded to obtain the Philosophers Stone, let him resolve to
take a long peregrination, for it is necessary that he go to see both the
Indies, that from thence he may bring the most precious gems and the purest
gold.

57. Philosophers extract this their Stone out of seven stones, the two chief
whereof are of a diverse nature and efficacy, the one infuseth invisible
Sulphur, the other spiritual Mercury; that brings heat and dryness, and
this cold and moisture: thus by their help, the strength of the elements is
multiplied in the Stone; the former is found in the Eastern coast, the latter
in the Western: both of them have the power of coloring and multiplying, and
unless the Stone shall take its first tincture from them, it will neither
color nor multiply.

58. The winged Virgin very Practice.
well washed and cleansed, impregnated by the spiritual seed of the first male,
and gravidated with the permanent glory of her untoucht virginity, will be
discovered by her checks dyed with a whitish red color: join her to the
second male, without Jealousy of adultery, by whose corporeal seed she shall
conceive again, and shall in time bring forth a reverend offspring of either
sex, from whence an immortal Race of most potent Kings shall gloriously arise.

59. Keep up and couple the Practice.
Eagle and Lion well cleansed in their transparent cloister, the entry door
being shut and watched, lest their breath go out, or the air without do
privily get in. The Eagle shall snap up and devour the Lion in the copulation;
afterward being affected with a long sleep, and a dropsy occasioned by a
foul stomach, she shall be changed by a wonderful metamorphosis into a
cole-black Crow, which shall begin to fly with wings stretched out, and by its
flight shall whisk down water from the clouds, until being often moistened, he
put off his wings of his own accord, and falling down again it be changed
into a most white Swan. Those that are ignorant of the causes of things, may
wonder with astonishment, when they consider that the World is nothing but a
continual Metamorphosis, they may marvel that the seeds of things perfectly
digested should end in greatest whiteness. Let the Philosopher imitate Nature
in his work.

60. Nature proceeds thus The middle and extremes of the Stone.
in making and perfecting her works, that from an inchoate generation it may
bring a thing by diverse means as it were by degrees, to the ultimate term of
perfection: she therefore attaineth her end by little and little, not by leaps;
confining and including her work between two extremes, distinct and severed as
by spaces. The practice of Philosophy, which is the Ape of Nature, ought not to
decline from the way and example of Nature in its working and direction to
find out its happy stone, for whatsoever is without the bounds of Nature, is
either an error or nearest one.

61. The extremes of the Stone are natural Argent vive, and perfect Elixir:
the middle parts which lie between, by help whereof the work goes on, are of
three sorts; for they either belong unto matter, or operations or demonstrative
signs: the whole work is perfected by these extremes and means.

62. The material means of the Material means.
Stone are of diverse kinds; for some are extracted out of others successively:
The first are Mercury Philosophically sublimated, and perfect metals, which
although they be extreme in the work of nature, yet in the Philosophical work
they supply the place of means: of the former the seconds are produced;
namely, the four elements, which again are circulated and fixed: of the
seconds the thirds are produced, to wit, either Sulphur the multiplication
whereof does terminate the first work: the fourth and last means are leaven
or ointments weighed with the mixtion of the things aforesaid, successively
produced in the work of the Elixir: By the right ordering of the things
aforesaid, the perfect Elixir is finished, which is the last term of the whole
work, wherein the Philosophers Stone rests as in its center, the
multiplication whereof is nothing else then a short repetition of the premised
operations.

63. The operative means Operative means.
(which are also called the Keys of the work) are four: The first is Solution
or Liquefaction; the second is Ablution; the third, Reduction; the fourth,
Fixation. By Liquefaction bodies return into their ancient matter, things
concocted are made raw again, and the copulation between the male and female
is effected, from whence the Crow is generated: Lastly the Stone is divided
into 4 confused elements, which happens by the retrogradation of the
Luminaries. The Ablution teaches to make the Crow white, and to create Jupiter
of Saturn, which is made by the conversion of the body into Spirit. The office
of Reduction is to restore the soul to the Stone examinated, and to nourish it
with dew and spiritual Milk, until it shall attain unto perfect strength: In
both these latter operations the Dragon rages against himself, and by
devouring his tail, does wholly exhaust himself, and at length is turned into
the Stone. Lastly, the operation of the Fixation fixes both Sulphurs upon
their fixed body, by the mediation of the spirits tincture; it decocteth the
leavens by degrees, ripeneth things raw, and sweetneth the bitter; In fine, by
penetrating and tincturing the flowing Elixir, generateth, perfecteth; and
lastly, rises up to the height of sublimity.

64. The Means or demonstrative The demonstrative means.
signs are Colors, successively and orderly affecting the matter and its
affections and demonstrative passions, whereof there are three special ones
(as critall) to be noted, to these some add a Fourth. The first is black,
which is called the Croweshead, because of its extreme blackness, whose
crepusculum shows the beginning of the fires action of nature and solution,
and the blackest night the perfection of liquefaction, and confusion of the
elements. Then the grain putrefies and is corrupted, that it may be the more
apt for generation. The white color succeeds the black, wherein is given the
perfection of the first degree, and of white Sulphur. This is called the
blessed stone: this Earth is white and foliated, whererein Philosophers do sow
their gold. The third is Orange color, which is produced in the passage of the
white to the red, as the middle and mixed of both, and is as the morning with
her safron-haire a forerunner of the Sun. The fourth color is ruddy and
sanguine, which is extracted from the white fire only: Now because whiteness
is easily altered by any other color, before day it quickly fails of its
candor. But the dark redness of the Sun perfecteth the work of Sulphur, which
is called the Sperme of the male, the fire of the Stone, the Kings Crown, and
the son of Sol, wherein the first labor of the workman rests.

65. Besides these decretory signs which firmly inhere in the matter, and
show its essential mutations, almost infinite colors appear, and show
themselves in vapors, as the Rainbow in the clouds, which quickly pass away
and are expelled by those that succeed, more affecting the air then the earth:
the operatour must have a gentle care of them, because they are not permanent,
and proceed not from the intrinsecall disposition of the matter, but from the
fire painting and fashioning every thing after its pleasure, or casually by
heat in small moisture.

66. Of the strange colors, some called out of time, give an ill omen to the
work, as the Blackness renewed: for the Crows young ones having once left
their nest are never to be suffered to return. Too hasty Redness; for this
once and in the end only gives a certain hope of the harvest; if before it
make the matter red, it is an argument of the greatest aridity, not without
great danger, which can only be averted by Heaven alone, forthwith bestowing a
shower upon it.

67. The Stone is exalted by Four Digestions of the Stone.
successive digestions, as by degrees, and at length attaineth to perfection.
Now four Digestions agreeable to the four abovesaid Operations or Governments
do complete the whole work, the author whereof is the fire, which makes their
difference.

68. The first digestion operateth First.
the solution of the Body, whereby comes the first conjunction of male and
female, the commixtion of both seeds, putrefaction, the resolution of the
elements into homogeneall water, the eclipse of the Sun and Moon in the head of
the Dragon, and lastly it brings back the whole World into its ancient Chaos,
and dark abyss. This first digestion is made as in the stomach, of a melon
color and weak, more fit for corruption then generation.

69. In the second digestion the Second.
spirit of the Lord walks upon the waters; the light begins to appear, and a
separation of waters from the waters; the Sun and Moon are renewed; the
elements are extracted out of the chaos, that being perfectly mixed in Spirit
they may constitute a new world; a new Heaven and new Earth are made; and
lastly, all bodies are become spiritual. The Crows young ones changing their
feathers begin to pass into Doves, the Eagle and Lion embrace one another with
an eternal League. And this generation of the World is made by the fiery
Spirit descending in the form of Water, and wiping away Original sin; for the
Philosophers Water is Fire, which is moved by the exciting heat of a Bath. But
see that the separation of Waters be done in Weight and Measure, lest those
things that remain under Heaven be drowned under the Earth, or those things
that are snatched up above Heaven be too much destitute of aridity.

Hic, sterilem exiguus ne deserat humor Georg. 1.
arenam.
Here, lest small moisture, leave a barren Soil.
70. The third digestion of the Third.
newly generated Earth drinks up the dewy Milk, and all the spiritual
virtues of the quintessence, and fasteneth the quickening Soul to the Body by
the Spirits mediation. Then the Earth lays up a great Treasure in it self,
and is made, like the coruscant Moon, afterward to ruddy Sun; the former is
called the Earth of the Moon, the latter the Earth of the Sun; for both of them
is begot of the copulation of them both; neither of them any longer fears the
pains of the Fire, because both want all spots; for they have been often
cleansed from sin by fire, and have suffered great Martyrdom, until all the
Elements are turned downwards.

71. The Fourth digestion consummateth Fourth.
all the Mysteries of the World, and the Earth being turned into most excellent
leaven, it leaveneth all imperfect bodies because it has before passed into
the heavenly nature of quintessence. The virtue thereof flowing from the Spirit
of the Universe is a present Panacea and universal medicine for all the
diseases of all creatures, the digestions of the first work being repeated
will open to thee the Philosophers secret Furnace. Be right in thy works, that
thou may find God fovourable, otherwise the plowing of the Earth will be in
vain; Nor

Illa seges demum votis respondet avari Georg. a-vari

Agricolae --
Will the expected Harvest e're requite
The greedy High-shoot --
72. The whole Progress of the Philosophers work is nothing but Solution and
Congelation; the Solution of the body, and Congelation of the Spirit;
nevertheless, there is but one operation of both: the fixed and volatile are
perfectly mixed and united in the Spirit, which cannot be done, unless the
fixed body be first made soluble and volatile: By reduction is the volatile
body fixed into a permanent body, and volatile nature does at last change into
a fixed one, as the fixed Nature had before passed into volatile. Now so long
as the Natures were confused in the Spirit, that mixed Spirit keeps a middle
Nature between Body and Spirit, Fixed and Volatile.

73. The generation of the Stone is made after the pattern of the Creation of
the World; for it is necessary, that it have its Chaos and First matter,
wherein the confused Elements do fluctuate, until they be separated by the
fiery Spirit; they being separated, the light Elements are carried upwards, and
the heavy ones downwards: the light arising, darkness retraits: the waters
are gathered into one, and the dry land appears. At length the two great
Luminaries arise, and mineral virtues vegetable and animal, are produced in
the Philosophers Earth.

74. God created Adam of the mud of the Earth, wherein were inherent the
virtues of all the Elements, of the Earth and Water especially, which do more
constitute the sensible and corporeal heap: Into this Mass God inspired the
breath of Life, and enlivened it with the Sun of the Holy Spirit. He gave Eve
for a Wife to Adam, and blessing them he gave unto them a Precept and Faculty
of multiplying. The Generation of the Philosophers Stone, is not unlike the
Creation of Adam, for the Mud was made of a terrestrial and ponderous Body
dissolved by Water, which deserved the excellent name of Terra Adamica, wherein
all the virtues and qualities of the Elements are placed. At length the
heavenly Soul is infused thereinto by the Spirit of the quintesse and Solar
influx, and by the Benediction and Dew of Heaven; the virtue of multiplying in
infinitum by the intervening copulation of both sexes is given it.

75. The chief secret of this work consists in the manner of working, which
is wholly employed about the Elements: for the matter of the Stone passes from
one Nature into another, the Elements are successively extracted, and by turns
obtain dominion; every thing is agitated by the circles of humidum and siccum,
until all things be turned downwards, and there rest.

76. In the work of the Stone the other Elements are circulated in the figure
of Water, for the Earth is resolved into Water, wherein are the rest of the
Elements; the Water is Sublimated into Vapor, Vapor retreats into Water, and
so by an unwearied circle, is the Water moved, until it abide fixed downwards;
now that being fixed all the Elements are fixed: Thus into it they are
resolved, by it they are extracted, with it they live and dye: the Earth is the
Tomb, and last end of them all.

77. The order of Nature requires that every generation begin from humidum and
in humidum. In the Philosophers work, Nature is to be reduced into order, that
so the matter of the Stone which is terrestrial, compact and dry, in the first
place may be dissolved and flow into the Element of Water next unto it, and
then Saturn will be generated of Sol.

78. The Air succeeds the Water drawn about by seven circles or revolutions,
which is wheeled about with so many circles and reductions, until it be fixed
downwards, and Saturn being expelled, Jupiter may receive the Scepter and
Government of the Kingdom, by whose coming the Philosophers Infant is formed,
nourished in the womb, and at length is borne; resembling the splendour of Luna
in its beautiful serene countenance.

79. The Fire executing the courses of the Nature of the Elements, extreme Fire
promoving it, of hidden is made manifest: the Saffron dies the Lilly: redness
possesses the cheeks of the whitening Child now made stronger: A Crown is
prepared for him against the time of his Reign. This is the consummation of
the first work, and the perfect rotation of the Elements, the sign whereof is,
when they are all terminated in Siccum, and the body void of Spirit lies down
wanting pulse and motion: And thus all the Elements do finally acquiesce in
Terra.

80. Fire placed in the Stone is Natures Prince, Sol's Son and Vicar, moving
and digesting matter, and perfecting all things therein, if it shall attain its
liberty; for it lies weak under an hard bark, procure therefore its freedom
that it may secure thee freely; but beware that thou urge it not above measure,
for it being impatient of Tyranny it becomes a fugitive, no hope of return
being left unto thee; call it back therefore by courteous flattery, and keep it
prudently.

81. The first mover of Nature is External Fire, the Moderator of Internal
Fire, and of the whole work; Let the Philosopher therefore very well understand
the government thereof, and observe its degrees and points; for from thence the
welfare or ruin of the work depends. Thus Art helps Nature, and the
Philosopher is the Minister of both.

82. By these two Instruments of Art and Nature, the Stone lifts it self up
from Earth to Heaven with great ingenuity, and slideth from Heaven to Earth,
because the Earth is its Nurse, and being carried in the womb of the wind, it
receives the force of the Superiors and Inferiors.

83. The Circulation of the Elements is exercised with a double The twofold
Wheel, the great and the less.
Wheel, by the greater or extended, and the less or contracted: The Wheel
extended fixes all the Elements of the Earth, and its circle is not finished
unless the work of Sulphur be perfected. The revolution of the minor Wheel is
terminated by the extraction and preparation of every Element; Now in this
Wheel there are three 3 Circles.
Circles placed, which always and variously move the Matter, by an Erratick
and Intricate Motion, and do often (seven times at least) drive about every
Element, in order succeeding one another, and so agreeable, that if one shall
be wanting the labor of the rest is made void. These are Natures Instruments,
whereby the Elements are prepared. Let the Philosopher therefore consider the
progress of Nature in the Physical Tract more fully described for this very
end.

84. Every Circle has its proper Motion, for all the motions of the Circles
are conversant about the Subject of Humidum and Siccum, and are so
concatenated, that they produce the only operation, and one only concent of
Nature: two of them are opposite, both in respect of the causes and the
effects; for one moves upwards, drying by heat; another downwards, moistning
by cold; a third carrying the form of rest and sleep by digesting, induces the
cessation of both in greatest moderation.

85. Of the three Circles, the First Circle
First is Evacuation, the labor of which is in substracting the superfluous
Humidum, and also in separating the pure, clean, and subtle, from the gross
and terrestrial dreggs. Now the greatest danger is found in the motion of this
Circle, because it has to do with things Spiritual, and makes Nature
plentiful.

86. Two things are chiefly to be taken heed of in moving this Circle; First,
that it be not moved too intensly; the other, that it be not moved longer then
is meet. Motion accelerated raises confusion in the matter, so that the
gross, impure and indigested part may fly out together with the pure and
subtle, and the Body undissolved mixed with the Spirit, together with that
which is dissolved. with this precipitated motion the Heavenly and Terrestrial
Nature are confounded, and the Spirit of the Quintessence corrupted by the
admixtion of the Earth, is made dull and invalid. By too long a motion the
Earth is too much evacuated of its Spirit, and is made so languishing dry, and
destitute of Spirit, that it cannot easily be restored and recalled to its
Temperament. Either error burns up the Tinctures, or turns it into flight.

87. The Second Circle is Restoration; Second Circle.
whose office is, to restore strength to the gasping and debilitated body by
Potion. The former Circle was the Organ of Sweat and labor, but this of
Refreshment and Consolation. The action of this is employed in the grinding and
mollifying the Earth, (Potter like) that it may be the better mixed.

88. The motion of this Circle must be lighter then that of the former,
especially in the beginning of its Revolution, lest the Crow's young ones be
drowned in their nest by a large flood, and the growing world be overflowne by
a deluge. This is the Weigher and Assayer of Measures, for it distributeth
Water by Geometrical Precepts. There is usually no greater Secret found in the
whole practice of the Work, then the firm and justly weighed Motion of this
Circle; for it informs the Philosophers Infant and inspireth Soul and Life
into him.

89. The Laws of this Circles Motions are, that it run about gently; and by
little and little, and sparingly let forth it self, lest that by making have
it fall from its measure, and the Fire inherent overwhelmed with the Waters,
the Architect of the Work grow dull, or also be extinguished: that meat and
drink be administered by turns, to the end there may be a better Digestion
made, and the best temperament of Humidum and Siccum; for the indissoluble
colligation of them both is the End and Scope of the Work. Furthermore see,
that you add so much by Watering, as shall be wanting in assation, that
Restoration may restore so much of the lost strength by corroborating, as
Evacuation has taken away by debilitating.

90. Digestion the last Circle Third Circle.
acts with silent and insensible motion; and therefore it is said by
Philosophers, that it is made in a secret furnace; it decocteth the Nutriment
received, and converteth it into the Homogeneal parts of the body Moreover, it
is called Putrefaction; because as meat is corrupted in the Stomach before it
pass into Blood and Similar parts: so this operation breaks the Aliment with
a concocting and Stomach heat, and in a manner makes it to putrefie, that it
may be the better Fixed, and changed from a Mercuriall into a Sulphurous
Nature. Again, it is called Inhumation, because by it the Spirit is inhumated,
and as a dead man buried in the ground. But because it goes most slowly, it
therefore needs a longer time. The two former Circles do labor especially in
dissolving, this in congealing, although all of them work both.

91. The Laws of this Circle are, that it be moved by the Feverish and most
gentle heat of Dung, lest that the things volatile fly out, and the Spirit be
troubled at the time of its strictest Conjunction with the Body, for then the
business is perfected in the greatest tranquillity and ease; therefore we must
especially beware lest the Earth be moved by any Winds or Shewers: Lastly, as
this third Circle may always succeed the second straight-wayes and in its
order, as the second the first: so by interrupted works and by course those
three erratick Circles id oe complete one entire circulaton, which often
reiterated, at length turns all things into Earth, and makes peace between
enemies.

92. Nature uses Fire, so also The Fire of Nature and Art.
does Art after its example, as an Instrument and Mallet in cutting out its
works. In both operations therefore Fire is Master and Perfect. Wherefore the
knowledge of Fires is most necessary for a Philosopher, without which as
another Ixion (condemned to labor in vain) he shall turn about Wheel of
Nature to no purpose.

93. The name Fire is Equivocall amongst Philosophers; for sometimes it is used
Metonymically for heat; and so, as many fires as heats. In the Generation of
Metals and Vegetables, Nature acknowledges a threefold Fire; to wit,
Celestial, Terrestrial, and Innate. The First flows from Sol as its
Fountain, into the Bosom of the Earth; it stirs up Fumes or Mercuriall and
Sulphurous vapors, of which Metals are created, and mixeth it self amongst
them; it stirs up fire, placed and snorting in the seeds of the Vegetables,
and adds sparkles unto it (as Spurs) for vegetation, The Second lurketh in
the bowels of the Earth, by the Impulse and action whereof the Subterraneous
vapors are driven upwards through Pores and Pipes, and thrust outward from
the Center toward the Superficies of the Earth, both for the composition of
Metals, where the Earth swells up, as also for the production of Vegetables,
by putrefying their seeds, by softning and preparing them for generation. The
third of the former, viz. Solar, is generated of a vappid smoke of Metals, and
also infused with the monthly provision grows together with the humid matter,
and is retained as in a Prison within the strength of it; or more truly, as
form is conjoined with the mixed body: It firmly inhereth in the seeds of
Vegetables, until being solicited by the point of its Fathers rays it be
called out, then Motion intrinsecally moves and informs the matter, and
becomes the Plastes and Dispensator of the whole Mixture. In the generation of
Animals, Celestial Fire does insensibly cooperate with the Animal; for it is
the first Agent in Nature: but the heat of the Femella answers Terrestrial
heat, until it putrefie the Seed, and prepare it: The Fire implanted in the
Seed, Sol's son, disposes the matter, and being disposed in forms it.

94. Philosophers have observed Threefold Fire of the Stone.
a threefold Fire in the matter of their work, Natural, not Natural, against
Nature. The Natural they call the Fiery Celestial Spirit Innate, kept in the
profundity of matter, and most strictly bound unto it, which by the sluggish
strength of metal grows dull, until being stirred up and freed by the
Philosophers discretion and external heat, it shall have obtained a faculty of
moving its body dissolved, and so it informs its humid matter, by
explication, Penetration, Dilatation and congelation. In every mixed body
Natural Fire is the Natural.
Principle of Heat and Motion. Unnatural Fire they name that Unnatural
which being called and coming extrinsecally, is introduced into the matter
wonderful artificially; that it may increase and multiply the strength of
natural heat. The Fire contrary to Nature they call Against Nature.
that, which putrefies the Compositum, and corrupts the temperament of
Nature; It is imperfect, because being too weak for generation, it is not
carried beyond the bounds of corruption: such is the Fire or heat of the
menstruum: yet it has the name improperly of Fire against Nature, because in a
manner it is according to Nature, for salving the specifical form, it so
corrupts the matter, that it disposes it for generation.

95. It is more credible nevertheless, that the corrupting Fire, called Fire
against Nature, is not different from the Innate, but the first degree of it,
for the order of nature requires, that corruption precede generation: the fire
therefore that is innate agreeable to the Law of Nature performs both, by
exciting both successively in the matter: the first of corruption more gentle
stirred up by feeble heat, for to mollify and prepare the body: the other of
generation more forcible, moved by a more vehement heat, for to animate and
fully inform the Elementary body disposed by the former. A double Motion does
therefore proceed from a double degree of heat of the same fire; neither is it
to be accounted a double Fire. But far better may the Name of Fire contrary to
Nature be given to violent and destructive Fire.

96. Unnatural fire is converted into Natural or Innate Fire by successive
degrees of Digestion, and increases and multiplyeth it: Now the whole secret
consists in the multiplication of Natural Fire, which of it self is not
able to Work above its proper strength, nor communicate a perfect Tincture to
imperfect Bodies; for it is sufficient to it self; nor has it any further
power; but being multiplied by the unnatural, which most abounds with the
virtue of multiplying, does act far more powerfully, and reaches it self
beyond the bounds of Nature coloring strange and imperfect bodies, and
perfecting them, because of its plentiful Tincture, and the abstruse Treasure
of multiplied Fire.

97. Philosophers call their The Water of the Stone is Fire.
Water Fire because it is most hot, and endued with a Fiery Spirit; again,
Water is called Fire by them, because it burns the bodies of perfect Metals
more than common fire does; for it perfectly dissolveth them, whereas they
resist our Fire, and will not suffer themselves to be dissolved by it; for this
cause it is also called Burning Water: Now that Fire of Tincture is hid in the
belly of the Water, and manifests it self by a double effect, viz. of the
bodies Solution and Multiplication.

98. Nature uses a double Fire in Fire is twofold, intrinsicall and
extrinsicall.
the Work of generation, Intrinsecall, and extrinsecall: the former being
placed in the seeds and mixtures of things, is hid in their Center; and as a
principle of Motion and Life, does move and quicken the body: But the latter,
Extrinsecall, whether it be poured down from Heaven or Earth, raises the
former, as drowned with sleep, and compels it to action; for the vital sparks
implanted in the seeds stand in need of an external mover, that they may be
moved and actuate.

99. It is even so in the Philosophers work; for the matter of the Stone
possesses his Interior Fire, which partly Innate, partly also is added by the
Philosophers Art, for those two are united and come inward together, because
they are homogeneous: the internal stands in need of the external, which
the Philosopher administreth according to the Precepts of Art and Nature; this
compels the former to move. These Fires are as two Wheels, whereof the
hidden one being smitten of the sensible one, it is moved sooner or later: And
thus Art helps Nature.

100. The Internal Fire is the middle between the mover and the matter, whence
it is, that as it is moved by that, it moves thus; if so be it shall be driven
intensly or remisly, it will work after the same manner in the matter. The
Information of the whole work depends of the measure of external Fire.

101. He that is ignorant of the degrees and points of external Fire, let him
not set upon the Philosophical Work; for he will never pull light out of
darkness, unless the heats pass through their mediums, like the Elements,
whose extremes are not converted but only by mediums.

102. Because the whole work Four degrees of Fire.
consists in Separation and perfect Preparation of the four Elements,
therefore so many degrees of Fire are necessary thereunto; for every Element is
extracted by the degree of Fire proper to it.

103. The four degrees of Fire are called the Fire of the Bath, of Ashes, of
Coals, and of Flame, which is also called Optetick: every degree has its
points, two at least, sometimes three; for the Fire is to be moved slowly and
by points, whether it be increased or decreased, that Matter (after Natures
example may go on by degrees and willingly unto Information and completion;
for nothing is so strange to Nature as that which is violent; Let the
Philosopher propound to his consideration the gentle access and recesse of the
Sun, whose Light and Lamp indulgeth its heat to the things of the world,
according to the times and Laws of the Universe, and so bestows a
temperament upon them.

104. The first point of the The point of Fire.
Bath of heat is called the heat of a Fever or of Dung; the second, of both
simply. The first point of the second degree is the simple heat of Ashes, the
second is the heat of Sand: Now the points of Fire, of Coals and Flame, want a
proper Name, but they are distinguished by the operation of the Intellect,
according to intention and remission.

105. Three degrees only of Fire are sometimes found amongst Philosophers,
viz. of the Bath of Ashes and the hot Bath, which comprehends the Fire of
Coals and Flame: the Fire of Dung is sometimes distinguished from the Fire of
the Bath, in degree. Thus for the most part Authors do involve the light in
darkness, by the various expressions of the Philosophers Fire; for the
knowledge thereof is accounted amongst their chief secrets.

106. In the White Work, because Four Elements of the Stone.
three Elements only are extracted, three degrees of Fire also do suffice; the
last, to wit the Optetick, is reserved for the fourth Element, which finisheth
the Red Work. By the first degree the eclipse of Sol and Luna is made, by the
second the light of Luna begins to be restored: by the third Luna attaineth
unto the fullness of her splendor: and by the fourth Sol is exalted into the
highest apex of his glory: Now in every part the Fire is administered acccording
to the rules of Geometry, so as the Agent may answer to the disposition of the
Patient, and their strength be equally poised betwixt themselves.

107. Philosophers have very much set upon their Fire with a desire of Secrecy,
so as they scarce have been bold to touch it, but show it rather by a
description of its qualities and proprieties, then by its name: as that it is
airie Fire, vaporous, humid and dry, clear, star-like, because it may easily by
degrees be intended or remitted as the Artificer pleases. He that desires
more of the knowledge of Fire; may be satisfied by the Works of Lullius, who
has opened the Secrets of Practice to candid minds heartily.

108. Of the conflict of the Eagle Proportion.
and the Lion they write diversely, because the Lion is the strongest animal of
all others; and therefore it is necessary that more Eagles concur, (three at
least, or else more, even to ten) to conquer him: the fewer they are the
greater the contention, and the slower the Victory; but the more Eagles, the
shorter the Battle, and the direption of the Lion will more readily follow.
The happyer number of seven Eagles may be taken out of Lullius, or of nine out
of Senior.

109. The Vessel wherein Philosophers The Vessels of Nature and Art.
decoct their work, is twofold; the one of Nature, the other of Art; the
Vessel of Nature which is also called the Vessel of Philosophy, is the Earth
of the Stone, or the Femella or Matrix, whereinto the Seed of the Male is
received, it putrefies, and is prepared for generation, the Vessel of Nature
is of three sorts: for the secret is decocted in a threefold Vessel.

110. The First Vessel is made of a transparent Stone, or of stony Glass, the
form thereof some Philosophers have hid by a certain Enigmaticall description;
sometimes affirming that it is compounded of two pieces, to wit, an Alembick,
and a Bolts-head, sometimes of three, othertimes of the two former with the
addition of a Cover.

111. Many have feigned the multiplying of such like Vessels to be necessary to
the Philosophical Work, calling them by diverse names, with a desire of hiding
the secret by a diversity of operations; for they called it Solutory of
solution; Putrefactory for putrefaction; Distillatory for distillation;
Sublimatory for sublimation; Calcinatory for calcination, etc.

112. But that all deceit being removed we may speak sincerely, one only
Vessel of Art suffices to terminate the Work of either Sulphur, and another
for the Work of the Elixir; for the diversity of digestions requires not the
change of Vessels; yea we must have a care lest the Vessel be changed or
opened before the First work be ended.

113. You shall make choice of a form of the glassy Vessel round in the
bottom or cucurbit, or at least ovall, the neck an hand breadth long or more,
large enough, with a straight mouth, made like a Pitcher or Jugg, continued and
uncutt and thick in every part, that it may resist a long, and sometimes an
acute Fire: The cucurbit or Bolts head is called blind, because its eye is
blinded with the Hermetick seal, lest any thing from without should enter in,
or the Spirit steal out.

114. The second Vessel of Art may be of Wood, of the trunk of an Oak, cut
into two hollow Hemisphears, wherein the Philosophers Egg may be cherished
till it be hatched; of which see the Fountain of Trevisanus.

115. The third Vessel Practitioners have called their Furnace, which keeps
the other Vessels with the matter and the whole work: this also Philosophers
have endeavored to hide amongst their secrets.

116. The Furnace which is the The Furnace.
Keeper of Secrets, is called Athanor, from the immortal Fire, which it
always preserves; for although it afford unto the Work continual Fire, yet
sometimes unequally, which reason requires to be administered more or less
according to the quantity of matter, and the capacity of the Furnace.

117. The matter of the Furnace is made of Brick, or of fatt Earth, or of
Potters clay well beaten, and prepared with horse dung, mixed with hair, that
it may stick the faster, and may not be chincked by long heat; let the walls be
thick, of three or four fingers, to the end that it may be the better able to
keep in the heat and withstand it.

118. Let the form of the Furnace be round, the inward altitude of two feet or
thereabouts, in the midst whereof an Iron or Brazen plate must be set, of a
round Figure, about the thickness of a Penknife's back, in a manner possessing
the interior latitude of the Furnace, but a little narrower then it, lest it
touch the walls, which must lean upon three or four props of Iron fixed to
the walls, and let it be full of holes, that the heat may be the more easily
carried upwards by them, and between the sides of the Furnace and the Plate.
Below the Plate let there be a little door left, and another above in the walls
of the Furnace, that by the lower the Fire may be put in, and by the higher the
temperament of the heat may be sensibly perceived; at the opposite part whereof
let there be a little window of the Figure of a Romboides fortifyed with
glass, that the light overagainst it may show the colors to the eye. Upon the
middle of the foresaid plate, let the Tripode of secrets be placed with a
double Vessel. Lastly let the Furnace be very well covered with a shell or
covering agreeable unto it, and that always the little doors closely shut,
lest the heat go out.

119. Thus thou have all things necessary to the first Work, the end whereof is
the generation of two sorts of Sulphur; the composition and perfection of both
may be thus finished.

. Take a Red Dragon, courageous, The practice of Sulphur.
warlike, to whom no Natural strength is wanting; and afterward seven or nine
noble Eagles [Virgins,] whose eyes will not wax dull by the rays of the Sun:
cast the Birds with the Beast, into a clear Prison and strongly shut up, under
which let a Bath be placed, that they may be incensed to fight by the warm
vapor: in a short time they will enter into a long and harsh contention,
until at length about the 45 day or 50. the Eagles begin to prey upon and
tear the beast to pieces; this dying it will infect the whole Prison with its
black and direful poison, whereby the Eagles being wounded, they will also be
constrained to give up the ghost. From the putrefaction of the dead Carcasses a
Crow will be generated, which by little and little, putting forth its head, and
the Bath being somewhat increased it will forthwith stretch forth its wings and
begin to fly; but seeking chincks from the Winds and Clouds, it will long hover
about; take heed that it find not any. At length being made white by a gentle
and long Rain, and with the dew of Heaven it will be changed into a White
Swan, but the newborn Crow is a sign of the departed Dragon. In making the
Crow White extract the Elements, and distill them according to the order
prescribed, until they be fixed in their Earth, and end in Snow-like, and most
subtle dust, which being finished thou shall enjoy thy first desire to the
White Work.

120. If thou intendest to proceed further to the Red, add the Element of
Fire, which is wanting to the White Work: the Vessel therefore being fixed,
and the Fire strengthened by little and little through its points, force the
matter until the occult begin to be made manifest, the sign whereof will be
the Orange color arising: order the Fire of the Fourth degree by its points,
until by the help of Vulcan purple Roses be generated of the Lilly, and
lastly the Amaranthus dyed with the darkish Redness of blood: but thou may
not cease to bring out Fire by Fire, until thou shall behold the matter
terminated in Reddest ashes, and insensible to the touch. This Red Stone may
rear up thy mind to greater things, by the blessing and assistance of the
holy Trinity.

121. They that think they have brought their work to an end by perfect
Sulphur, not knowing Nature or Art; and to have fulfilled the Precepts of the
secret; are much deceived, and will try their Project in vain: for the Praxis
of the Stone is perfected by a double Work; the First is, in creating the
Sulphur, the other in making the Elixir.

122. The Philosophers Sulphur is most subtle Earth, most hot and dry, in the
belly whereof the Fire of Nature abundantly multiplied is hidden; Moreover,
Fire deserves the name of the Stone; for it has in it self the virtue of
opening and penetrating the bodies of Metals, and of turning them into their
own temperament and producing something like it self, wherefore it is called a
Father and Masculine seed.

123. That we may leave nothing untouched, let the Students in Philosophy know
that from that first Sulphur, a second is generated which may be multiplied in
infinitum: let the wise man, after he has got the everlasting mineral of that
Heavenly Fire, keep it diligently. Now of what matter Sulphur is generated, of
the same it is multiplied, a small portion of the first being added, yet as in
the Balance. The rest may a freshman see in Lullius, this may suffice only to
point at it.

124. The Elixir is compounded of a threefold matter, namely of Metallic Water
or Mercury sublimated as before; of Leaven White or Red, according to the
intention of the Operator, and of the Second Sulphur, all in Weight.

125. There are Five proper Composition of the Elixir.
and necessary qualities in the perfect Elixir, that it be fusile, permanent,
penetrating, coloring and multiplying; it borrows its tincture and fixation
from the Leaven, its penetration from the Sulphur, its fusion from Argent vive
which is the medium of conjoyning Tinctures, to wit of the Ferment and Sulphur,
and its multiplicative virtue from the Spirit infused into the Quintessence.

126. Two perfect Metalls give a perfect Tincture, because they are dyed with
the pure Sulphur of Nature, and therefore no Ferment of Metals may be sought
besides these two bodies; dye thy Elixir White and Red with Sol and Luna,
Mercury first of all receives their Tincture, and having received it, does
communicate it to others.

127. In compounding the Elixir take heed you change not or mix any thing with
the Ferments, for either Elixir must have its proper Ferment, and desires its
proper Elements; for it is provided by Nature, that the two Luminaries have
their different Sulphur and distinct tinctures.

128. The Second work is concocted as the First, in the same or like Vessel,
the same Furnace, and by the same degrees of fire, but is perfected in a
shorter time.

129. There are three humors Three humors in the Stone.
in the Stone, which are to be extracted successively; namely, Watery, Airy,
and Radical; and therefore all the labor and care of the Workman is employed
about the humor, neither is any other Element in the Work of the Stone,
circulated, besides the humid one. For it is necessary in the first place, that
the Earth be resolved and melted into humor. Now the Radical humor of all
things, accounted Fire, is most tenacious, because it is tied to the Center of
Nature, from which it is not easily separated; extract therefore those three
humors slowly, successively, dissolving and congealing them by their Wheels;
for by the multiplied alterne reiteration of Solution and congelation the Wheel
is extended, and the whole work finished.

130. The Elixir's perfection consists in the strict Union and indissoluble
Matrimony of Siccum and Humidum, so that they may not be separated, but the
Siccum may flow with moderate heat into the Humidum abiding every pressure of
Fire. The sign of perfection is, if a very little of it cast in above the Iron
or Brazen Plate being very hot, it flow forthwith without smoke.

131.. Let three weights of Red Earth, or Red Earth, or Red Ferment, and a
double weight of Water and Air, well beaten, be mixed together: let an Amalgama
be made like Butter, or Metalline Paste, so as the Earth being mollifyed may be
insensible to the touch; Add one weight and an half of Fire: Let these be
ordered in their Vessel, the Fire of the first degree being most closely
sealed; afterward let the Elements be extracted out of their degrees of Fire
in their order, which being turned downwards with a gentle motion they may be
fixed in their Earth, so as nothing volatile may be raised up from thence, the
matter at length shall be terminated in a Rock, Illuminated, Red and
Diaphanous; a part whereof take at pleasure, and having cast it into a Crucible
with a little Fire by drops give it to drink with its Red Oil, and incere it,
until it be quite poured out, and go away without smoke. Nor may thou
fear its flight, for the Earth being mollifyed with the sweetness of the
Potion will stay it, having received it, within its bowels: then take the
Elixir thus perfected into thine own power, and keep it carefully. In God
rejoice, and be silent.

132. The order and method of composing and perfecting the white Elixir is the
same, so that thou usest the white Elements only in the composition thereof;
but the body of it brought to the term of decoction, will end in the plate;
white, splendid, and crystalllike, which incerated with its White Oil will
obtain the help of Fusion. Cast one weight of either Elixir, upon ten weights
of Argent vive well washed, and thou will admire its effect with astonishment.

133. Because in the Elixir the Multiplication of the Elixir.
strength of Natural Fire is most abundantly multiplied by the Spirit infused
into the Quintessence, and the naughty accidents of bodies, which beset their
purity and the true light of Nature with darkness, are taken away by long and
manifold sublimations and digestions; therefore Fiery Nature freed from its
Fetters, and fortifyed with the aid of Heavenly strength, works most
powerfully being included in this our fifth Element: Let it not therefore be a
wonder, if it obtain strength not only to perfect imperfect things, but also
to multiply its force and power: Now the Fountain of Multiplication is in the
Prince of the Luminaries, who by the infinite multiplication of his beams,
begets all things in this our Orb, and multiplyeth things generated, by
infusing a multiplicative virtue into the seeds of things.

134. The way of multiplying the Elixir is threefold: By the first; Mingle one
weight of Red Elixir, with nine weights of its Red Water, and dissolve it into
Water in a solutory Vessel, curdle the matter well dissolved, and unite by
decocting it with a gentle Fire, until it be made strong into a Rubie or Red
Lamell, which afterward incere with its Red Oil, after the manner prescribed
until it flow; so shall thou have a medicine ten times more powerful then the
first. The business is easily finished in a short time.

135. By the Second manner The Practice of Multiplication.
what Potion thou please of thy Elixlr mixed with its Water, the weights
being observed; seal it very well in the Vessel of Reduction, dissolve it in
a Bath, by inhumation, being dissolved, distill it, Separating the Elements by
their proper fires, and fixing them downwards, as was done in the first and
second work, until it be a Stone; lastly, incere it and project it. This is
the longer, but yet the richer way, for the virtue of the Elixir is increased
unto an hundred fold; for by how much the more subtle it is made by reiterated
operations, by so much more both of superior and inferior strength it
retains, and more powerfully operates.

136. Lastly, take one Ounce of the said Elixir multiplied in virtue, and
project it upon an hundred of purifyed Mercury, and in a little time Mercury
made hot amongst burning Coals, will be converted into pure Elixir; whereof if
thou castest every ounce upon an other hundred of the like Mercury, Sol will
shine most purely to thine eyes. The multiplication of White Elixir may be made
the same way. Take the virtues of this Medicine to cure all kinds of diseases,
and to preserve good health, as also the use thereof, out of the Writings of
Arnoldus de villa nova, Lullius and of other Philosophers, may be fetched.

137. The Philosophers Signifer will instruct him that seeks The Times of the
Stone.
the times of the Stone; for the first Work ad Albu^ must be terminated in the
House of Luna; the Second, in the second House of Mercury; The first Work ad
Rubeum, will end in the Second House of Venus, and the last in the other Regal
Throne of Jove, from whence our most Potent King shall receive a Crown decked
with most Precious Rubies:

Sic in se sua per vestigia volvitur Annus.
Thus does the winding of the circling Year
Trace its own Footsteps, and the same appear.
138. A three-headed Dragon keeps this Golden Fleece; the first head proceeds
from the Waters, the second from the Earth, the third from the Air; it is
necessary that these three heads do end in one most Potent, which will devour
all the other Dragons; then a way is laid open for thee to the golden Fleece.
Farewell diligent Reader, in Reading these things invocate the Spirit of
Eternal Light; Speak little, Meditate much, and Judge aright.

To the Lovers of Hermetick Philosophy I. C. Chymierastes wishes prosperity.
SUch is the difference between the Hermeticks living Philosophy, and the dead
Philosophy of the Ethnicks; that the former has been Divinely inspired into
the first Masters of Chemistry [the Queen of all Sciences,] and therefore may
challenge the Holy Spirit of Truth for its only Author; who by breathing where
he lists, does infuse the true Light of Nature into their minds; by virtue
whereof, all the darkness of errors is straight-wayes chased away from thence
and utterly expelled: but the latter may ascribe its Invention unto Pagans, who
having left, or rather neglected the pure Fountains of Learning, have
introduced false Principles and causes, (proceeding from their own brain) for
true ones, to the great damage of the Reipublique of Learning. And indeed what
good were they able to do, upon whom the Day Star of Truth, the Eternal
Wisdom of God, the Fountain of all Knowledge and Understanding Christ Jesus
has never risen? We cannot wonder therefore, that they have only proposed old
wives Fables, and foolish toys, that they have introduced pure dotages, and
innumerable inventions of lies, whereby they have so bedawbed holy Philosophy,
that we can find nothing of Native beauty in it.

But you will object that Hermes himself the Prince of Vital Philosophy was an
Heathen also, yea and lived before other Authors many ages, by whose decrees
Philosophy in every place entertained, with greatest applause of almost all
men, now flourishes. But granting that, what follows? This Hermes
Trismegistus indeed was borne in an Heathen Country, yet by a peculiar
privilege from God he was one, who worshipped the true God in his life,
manners and Religion especially; who freely confessed God the Father, and that
he was the Creator of Man, and made no other partaker of Divinity with him: He
acknowledged the Son of God the Father, by whom all things which are existent,
were made; whose name because it was wonderful and ineffable was unknown to
Men, and even to Angels themselves, who admire with astonishment his
generation. What more? He was our Hermes who by the singular indulgence and
revelation of the most great and gracious God, foreknew that the same Son
should come in the Flesh, and that in the last ages, to the end he might bless
the Godly for ever. He it was who so clearly taught, that the mystery of the
most Holy Trinity ought to be adored, as well in the Plurality of Persons, as
in the Unity of Divine Essence, in three Hypostases, (as any quick-sighted and
intelligent man may gather from that which follows;) as that it can scarcely
be found any where more clearly and plainly: for thus he: There was an
Intelligent Light before the Intelligent Light, and there was always a clear
Mind of the Mind: and the Truth hereof, and the Spirit containing all things,
was no other thing: Besides this God is not, nor Angel, nor any other Essence;
for he is Lord of all, both Father, and God, all things are under him, and in
him. I beseech thee O Heaven, and the wise work of the great God; I beseech
thee thou voice of the Father, which he first spoke, when he formed the whole
world: I beseech thee by the only begotten Word, and Father containing all
things, be propitious unto me.

Now ye sons of Hermes, turn over and over again, both night and day the
Volumes of Heathen Philosophers, and inquire with what diligence you possibly
can, whether you are able to find such Holy, such Godly and Catholic things in
them.

Our Hermes was an Heathen, I confess, yet such an Heathen as knew the power
and greatness of God, by other creatures and also by himself, and glorified
God, as God: I shall not spare to ad, that he far excelled in godliness most
Christians now a days in name only; and gave immortal thanks unto him as the
Fountain of all good things, with a deep submission of mind for his benefits
received. Hear I pray, ye sons of Learning, whether God was as much
conversant, and wrought as equally in the Heathen Nation, as amongst his own
people, when he says: From the rising of the Sun unto the going down thereof
his name is great amongst the Gentiles; and in every place a pure oblation is
sacrificed and offered unto my name, because my name is great amongst the
Nations, says the Lord of Hosts by his Prophet.

Rub up your memory, I entreat you, and speak plainly; were not the Magi
Heathens, which came from the East by the guidance of a Star, that they might
worshhip Christ, whom nevertheless the unbeleeving people hanged upon a Tree.
Lastly consider well I beseech you, ye faithful favorers of true Wisdom
only; from what Fountain other Heathens besides Hermes have taken the
Principles of their Learning. Wear and better wear out their Volumes with
diligence, that ye may discern them to refer their wisdom not unto God, but
to attribute it, as gotten by their own Industry. On the contrary cast your
eyes upon the beginning of the admirable Tractate having seven Chapters of your
Father Hermes concerning the Secret of the Physical Stone, and observe how
holily he thinks of God the bestower of this Secret Science: for Hermes
says: In so great an Age I have not ceased to try experiments, nor have I
spared my Soul from labor: I had this Art and Science by the Inspiration of
the Living God only, who has vouchsafed to open it to me his servant. It Is
true, he has given power of judging to rational creatures, but has not left
unto any an occasion of sinning. But I, unless I feared the day of Doom, or
the souls damnation for the concealing of this Science; I would make known
nothing of this Science, nor prophetize to any. But I have been willing to
render to the Faithful their due, as the Author of Faith has been pleased to
bestow upon me. Thus Hermes: then which nothing could have ever bin said more
wise, or more agreeable to Christian Religion. And hence it is, that so many as
are or have been of a more sublime wit and manly judgment, have embraced the
Living Holy, and Divine Philosophy of Hermes, with all their Soul and Strength
(rejecting that dead, profane, and humane Philosophy of the Ethnicks) and
have commended and illustrated it in diverse of their Writings and Watchings. Of
all which, that I may confess ingenuously, seeing that I could never read unto
this day any Writer more true, neat, and clear, then the Author of this
Tractate, Anonymus indeed, yet one that truly deserves the name of an Adepted
Philosopher; I have thought it worth my pains, and have deemed hereby to confer
not the least favor upon the sons of Hermes, if I shall again publish the
hidden Work of Hermetick Philosophy, with the Philosophers Signifer, according
to the intention of this most wise Author.

Farewell.
The Signifer of Philosophers with the Houses of the Planets.
NORTHERN SIGNS. Sumer.

EASTERN SIGNS. Spring.

SOUTHERN SIGNS. Winter.

WESTERN SIGNS Autumn.



woodcut astrological signs and their corresponding seasons

THE TIMES OF THE STONE.
The Figure described is the The Interpretation of the Philosophers Scheme.
Philosophers Signifer. To every Planet a double House is assigned by the
Ancients, Sol and Luna excepted; whereof every one borrows one House only,
both of them adjoining. In the said Figure every Planet possesses its proper
Houses. Philosophers in handling their Philosophical work, begin their year in
Winter, to wit, the Sun being in Capricorn, which is the former House of
Saturn, and so come toward the right hand. In the Second place the other
House of Saturn is found in Aquarius, at which time Saturn i. e. the
Blackness of the Dominary work begins after the 45 or 50. day. Sol coming into
Pisces the work is black, blacker then black, Lullius cap. 49. Merc.
and the head of the Crow begins to appear. The third month being ended, and
Sol entering into Aries, the sublimation or separation of the Elements begins.
Those which follow unto Cancer make the Work White. Cancer adds the greatest
whiteness and splendor, and does perfectly fill up all the days of the Stone
(...) white Sulphur, or the Lunar(...)rke of Sulphur, Luna sitting and reigning
gloriously in her House. In Leo the Regal Mansion of the Sun, the Solar work
begins, which in Libra is terminated into a Rubie-Stone, or perfect Sulphur.
The two Signs Scorpius and Sagitarius which remain, are indebted to the
completing of the Elixir. And thus the Philosophers admirable young takes its
beginning in the Reign of Saturn, and its end and perfection in the Dominion
of Jupiter.

FINIS.

