A DECLARATION OR Remonstrance, TO HIS MAJESTY'S Loyal and Faithful Subjects;
TOUCHING Brokers, Usurers, Scrivenors, And Solicitors:


For, and in behalf of all Merchants, Citizens, Contrymen, and other His
Majesty's good Subjects, within the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Dominion of Wales.

London, Printed for George-Horton, 1660. Sept 4

A DECLARATION TO All His Majesty's loving Subjects, touching Brokers Usurers,
Scrivenors, and Solicitors; For, and in behalf of all Shoo-makers, Weavers
Butchers, Victuallers, Chandlers, Drapers, Clothworkers, Tailors, Wire-drawers,
Gold Smiths, and Silver-Smiths.
AMongst the rest of His Sacred Majesty's many Illustrious Titles, which like
fair and beautiful Flowers, do adorn and bedeck His Royal Crown, there is ^one
exc^eds and excels all the rest, as well in Virtue as in Beauty, and that is His
Title of Defender of the Faith, etc. And, indeed, as that Title is his
Majesty's Honor, so the Truth of it is His Subjects Happiness. For, neith^r
the highest Prov^c tions, nor the strongest Tempt^tions that ever Prince met
withal, has been able to slake his ^ictorious Faith, nor abate his holy Zeal:
Witness his Gracious Majesty's first Act, after his Return ^o the Exercise of
his Regal Power, in his early and timely suppressing Profaneness and
discountenancing debaucht persons, who know not how to express their
Thankfulness unto GOD for Mercies, but by a sinful drinking them away; a
practice his Majesty's Soul a^hors.

These his eminent Virtues, and excellent Qualifications that God has bestowed
upon Him, to make him every way wo^thy and fit for Government, invit^d the
Parliament, with joyful ^earts, to make their humble Addresses to his Majesty
for his Royal Assent to several Bills; Amongst which, the Bill entitled, An
Act to prevent the taking of excessive Usu^y, was by his Majesty signed, to the
great contentment of all Loyal and Faithful Subjects.

The restraining men of avaritious minds whose Consciences are as large as
their Bags, will be a great ease to the People, and an inablement to the
Merchants the better to go on with their Trades. They are the laborious Bees
that bring in Honey into his Majesty's Hive; and Usurers are the lazy, idle
Dron^s, that rob this precious Hive of the honey.

For preventing all such Abuses for the Future, It is Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the 29th day of
September, 1660. upon any Contract, shall from and after the said Day, take
directly o^ indi^ectly for Loan of any Mo^ies, Wares, Merchandise, or other
Commodities whatsoever, above the value o^ six pounds for the Forbearance of
one hundred pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser
sum or for a longer or shorter time. And that all Bonds, Contracts, and
Ass^r^nc^'s whatsoever, made after the time afore^aid, for payment of any
Principal or Money to be lent or covenan^ed to be personmed upon or for any
Usury.

Whereupon or whereby there shall be reserved or taken above the rate of six
pounds in the hundred as aforesa^d shall be utterly void.

And all persons what^oever, who shall after the 29 day of September, are
hereby desired to take notice, That if any person or persons shall take,
accept, and receive, by way or means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange,
Shift, or Interest of any Wares or Merchandise whatsoever, or by any deceitful
way, or conveyance, for the forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole
year, of and for their Money, or other thing, above the sum of six pounds for
the forbearing of one hundred pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a
greater or lesser sum, or for a longer and shorter Term, shall forfeit and
lose for every such Offense, the treble value of the Moneys, Wares,
Merchandise, and other things so lent, bargained, sold, exchanged, or shifted.
And all Scrivenors, Brokers, Solicitors, Drivers of Bargains for Contra^ts, who
shall after the said 39. day of September, take or receive, directly or
indirectly, any Sum or Sums of Money, or other Reward or Thing for Brokage,
Soliciting, Driving, or procuring the Loan, or forbearing of any Sum or Sums of
Money, over and above the Rate or value of five shillings for the Loan, or
forbearing of one hundred pounds for a year, and so rateably, or above twelve
pence for making or renewing of the Bond or Bill for the Loan, or for
forbearing thereof, or for any Counterbond or Bill concerning the same, shalll
Forfeit for every such Offense twenty pounds, and have imprisonment for half a
year: The one moiety of all which Forfeitures to be to the King our Sovereign
Lord, His Heirs and Successors; And the other moiety to the persons that shall
sue for the same, in the same County where the several Offenses are committed,
and not elsewhere.

FINIS.

