Decrees and Orders OF THE Committee of Safety. OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF OCEANA.

Ordered that these Decrees be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Harrington, Clerk to the Committee.

London, Printed in the Year, 1659.

Twenty three DECREES FROM THE Committee of Safety in Oceana.
I.
THat the Politic Casuists of the Coffee Club in Bow Street appoint some of
their number to instruct the Committee of Safety at White Hall how they shall
End an Invention to escape Tyburne, if ever the Law be restored.

II.
That Haringtons Aphorisms and other Political slips be recommended to the
English Plantation in Jamaica, to try how they will agree with that Apocryphal
Purchase.

III.
That a Levite and an Elder be sent to Survey the Government of the Moon, and
that Warreston Johnston, and Parson Peter's be the Men, as a couple of Learned
Rabbis in the Lunaticks.

IV.
That the Kings of Spain and France shall be bound to the Peace at Hickes's
Hall, for entertaining Neighbourly thoughts of restoring King Charles.

V.
That Don Lewis d' Haro, for his saucy expressions to the English Ambassador be
concluded a Malignant, and incapable of bearing charge in the Government
Militant of England.

VI.
That the present Lord Mayor Allen, be put out lest he be peremptory in
preserving the Privileges of the City Charter.

VII.
That the Speakers Gown, and the Magna Charta be hung up in Westminster Hall,
as Trophies of Jack Straw's Conquest over England.

VIII.
That John of Leyden's cruelty in West-flanders shall be no Scarecrow, why the
People of England, may not entrust their Government, and all that is precious to
them in the hands of the merciful Anabaptists.

IX.
That the Judaical Law will be most proper for England, since they Crucified
their Master as well as the Jews.

X.
That the money which was taken out of the Orphans portions to Feast the late
Parliament and Officers of the Army, be repayed out of the Contributions which
were gathered for the relief of the distressed Protestants in Savoy.

XI.
That whoever shall report that Bradshaws Nurse hindered his Lordship from
executing justice upon himself, shall be incapable of being a Member of the
Senate that is now Hatching.

XII.
That Politicus be appointed to make This word will puzzle the lay Elders.
Threnothriambeuticks, upon the Lord Lambert, and the other Macchabees, that
accompanied him, in regard he was so happy in his Flogium, upon the pious and
loyal Bradshaw.

XIII.
That General Pleetwoods staying at home, and sending out Lambert be thought no
Cowardice in his Lordship, but only a little bashfulness, which he is subject
to before a smart Enemy.

XIV.
That if General Monk will Repent for his Relapse, in turning a true
Englishman; he shall only be decimated in his fortune, and a little abbreviated
in his person.

XV.
That if the Soldiers of both Armies will be so discreet as to stand aside,
and suffer their Officers to debate their own Capricio's, they shall be Listed
into the Cabal of Philosophers.

XVI.
That the Celebrating the fifth of November over all England for the Delivery of
King James is no hypocrisy, though the Parliament their Religious
Representative, had the impudence to cut his Sons throat at his own Palace Gate.

XVII.
That the private Soldiers of Lamberts Army; However their Officers usurp the
Title of Saints, yet they (the Instruments by whom they act) being such
Mercenary Heathens, that for hopes of gain they will deface the glory, and
murder the Interest of their Nation; and for that very reason, if they do not
put a stop to their mischief they shall be as surely blotted out of the Records
of Fame, as they are sure to be blotted out of Gods register Book in Heaven.

XVIII.
That all those Ministers who now pray for the King since the Voting down of
Tithes, be esteemed a bunch of self-seeking Knaves.

XIX.
That the Earl of Pembrook take a dose of Jacob Beahmens spiritual Philosophy,
called, Panchymagogon to purge away his in^^^^^ed corruptions, and
particularly, that of his barbarous and injust jealousy to his incomparable
Lady.

XX.
That if Sir Arthur Haslerig acquire his summum bonum, which is to die with his
Arse toward Wallingford House, his Heirs may have the Liberty to wipe his
breech with the Commission he gave himself.

XXI.
That the Country Host who served Protector Richard, and his Brother, with a
couple of Calves heads, and a dish of Mushrooms, be preferred to be Cook to the
high and mighty Friend Sultan Sardanapalus Lumley, as a Learned and well
qualified Philosopher of the Kitchen.

XXII.
That Iretons Wifes Farting-dispensation in time of prayer, be imputed to the
Flatuosities of her Matrix.

XXIII.
That if any shall discover Alderman A kins without a Nosegay in his hand, or a
Box of Incense in his pocket, he shall have the plunder of his chain, and the
said Alderman shall be turned out of his Treasurership in Tom-Turds Hall.

Reader farewell: Stink parts Company.

FINIS.

