A DECLARATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Parliament and Army; AND The
Resolution of the Soldiery: WITH The Remonstrance, Grounds, and Reasons, of
these unexpected Changes, and sudden Interruptions; the shutting up of the
Parliament House Doors, and the Absenting of the Members.

Also, the Mediation and Interposing of diverse Honorable Members of the
Council; And the Accord and Proposals, to be presented from the General-Council
of Officers.

London, Printed for Emanuel Richardson, 1659.

A DECLARATION OF The Proceedings of the Parliament and Army.
WHereas there is arose some Misunderstanding betwixt the Parliament and Army,
notwithstanding the late Representation and Petition of the Officers and
Soldiers; wherein was made manifest, their Desires to remove all occasions of
jealousy and surmize, and to frustrate the expectations of any, who by blowing
up the Coals of Dissension, hope to warm themselves thereby: Declaring their
faithfulness and integrity toward the peace and welfare of these Nations, and
their endeavoring to render themselves serviceable to a well-regulated
Commonwealth, wherein the Liberties of the people both spiritual and civil may
be fully secured, and persons of known integrity, piety, and ability, employed
in places of public trust and conternment; resolving to be instrumental in
bringing forth such a foundation of Government, whereby all the good people of
these Nations may rationally expect that such Liberties and Rights shall be
preserved to them and their Posterities; and that there may be such a
settlement, as may not be liable at every change of Governors to have the
peace thereof disturbed, by introducing new Governments.

And it being judged necessary, for the keeping of the Army under such a
Conduct as may render the same serviceable to the Government of the
Commonwealth, a Committee of Nomina ion was desired, for the electing of
Offi^^r^; and a Commander in Chief was remonstrated for: But the Parliament was
so far from condescending hereunto, that they passed a Bill for the appointing
7 Commissioners for the Government of the Army; and voted null the several
Commissions of the Lord Lambert, Col. Disborow, Col. Berry, Col. Kelsey, Col.
Ashfield, Col. Cobbet, Col. Packer, Col. Barrow, and Major Creed, and
discharged them from all Military Employment, disposing of their Regiments to
other Officers, and giving them Commissions.

This Resolve of the House rendered the Members unserviceable Patriots; for
most of the Officers and Soldiers declared for the Lord Lambert, and the
aforenamed Colonels, and were commanded to their arms on Wednesday Night.

The like Orders were issued to those Regiments that adhered to the Parliament,
viz. Colonel Moss, and Colonel Morleys Foot, who were commanded to Westminster,
where they kept guard in the Palace-yard, the Court of Wards, and parts
adjacent; but late in the Evening the House rose, being adjourned till the next
morning, at which time they were prevented from sitting: for the Speaker coming
in his Coach (according to his usual manner) was turned back again in
Kings-street, and not permitted to come to the House; many others also were
denied entrance, and received interruption; there being strong Guards mounted
in several parts, and diverse Regiments placed in Kingstreet, and the Abbey;
amongst the rest, the Lord Lamberts Regiment of Foot had the Avant-guard near
Kings-Gate; and Colonel H^wson his Regiment maintained the Out-guard at the
Palace-yard gate, and within lay a pa^ty of Colonel Moss his men, and in the
Tower some of Colonel Morleys.

These continued within Pike length of each other for many hours, not striking
one blow, and very indulgent they were in observing their Duty.

Several Troops of Horse were also drawn up in the Cities of London and
Westminster, and had Orders to randevouz, proceeding very moderately; not
dreading, but contemning all Plots of Treachery. Lofty Actions, and high
Results; and the World may in time tremble at their Attempts: for the soldiery
are very unanimous, with whom are joined sevenscore gallant horse, formerly the
Parliaments Lifeguard, commanded by Major Evelin, who was detained in
White Hall most part of Wednesday; but his Lieutenant, with the rest of the
Officers, adhered to the Lord Lambers, and dissented even in the first Juncture
of these Interruptions.

So that the Interest of the Parliament many declined, notwithstanding the
endeavors of some to promote and carry on the Work in London, and to have
raised the Militia and Trained Band of the City; but it proved succesless, and
(contrary to the Citizens Address) their expectations were frustrated: for the
Commissioners of the Militia were much divided in their Consultations at
Guild Hall, and could not accord to raise or put in a posture their Military
Forces, either in an offensive or defensive way. Only thus much they seemed to
acquiesce in, To use all possible means for the interposing and begetting a
right understanding betwixt the Parliament and Army. The like Orders being sent
to the Commissioners in Southwark, and being read and communicated to them at a
General Meeting, it was agreed and assented to, That the Militia and Trained
Bands should be forthwith raised, which was done accordingly, and about eight
of the clock in the morning 8 gallant Companies appeared in their Arms
(consisting of one thousand men) with Yellow-Colours, and the Bible, and
continued in the Park near St. Georges Fields till the Evening; at which time,
two of the Lord Lamberts Troops of Horse, and a party of Foot faced them, but
in a friendly motion, exchanging only words, and countermarching to each other
without blows.

In this Intervale and grand Affair, most of the Boats about the River of
Thames were seized by the Soldiery, from London Bridge to Westminster, and
diverse small Vessels manned, and the Wharfs and Water side guarded; till at the
last, by the in erposing of some honorable Members of the Council of State, a
Mediation was assented to, and Proposals to be offered by the Council of
Officers, in order to the cementing and making up of these unhappy breaches.

And for the better facilitating and carrying on so expedient a Work, the
respective Regiments that were in arms on both sides, were ordered on Thursday
night to repair to their several Quarters, which accordingly was performed: And
upon the drawing off of Colonel Mosses Regiment of Foot from Westminster, the
Lord Lambert took a view of them, riding through their Ranks and Files, who was
saluted with several Vollies.

The next morning, being Friday, the Parliament was expected to meet at
Westminster, but it proved otherwise, their Re^olutions being at that to
decline sitting at present: so that now the Doors of the Parliament House are
shut, and a Guard of soldiers kept in the Lobby and other places.

And whereas the people are much amuzed and discontented in these unsettled
Times, at the various Changes and Revolutions, yet it is hoped all things will
center in a well regulated Government, for the just Rights, Liberties, and
Privileges of the People. For effectuating whereof, several Proposals are to be
presented to the Council by the Council of Officers, together with the Ground
and Reasons of their present Transactions. In the interim, the Soldiery are
united, and proceed in a cordial and affectionate Agreement and Union, for a
General: adhering to the Lord Lambert, and other their superior Officers, who
have sincerely professed, That they have no other then faithfulness and candor
in their hearts and actions toward the people, in order to a true and firm
settlement of these poor distempered and distracted Nations.

The General Council of Officers have had several Meetings at Wallingford
house, in order to their modelling and drawing up of certain particulars
touching these unexpected Transacts: Lieutenant General Fleetwood sits in
Council; and it is hoped there will be a happy reconciliation, and mutual
accord, for the preventing of all abuses, interruptions, and irregularities for
the future, and the settling of these Nations in Peace and Tranquillity.

FINIS.

