A DECLARATION Of the well-affected Common-councel-men Of the CITY of LONDON,
IN The name of themselves, and the Inhabitants thereof, concerning the injustice
and oppression which is unequally cast and laid upon the distressed Citizens.
Wherein they remonstrate a speedy and just way, for the taking off of all heavy
burdens, relieving the oppressed, the mittigating of Taxes and Assesments, and
laying it upon rich Merchants and others, who are able to bear it, to the end
that those who have bin oppressed may now go free. Extracted out of the
Original, and published according to Order; to the end, that all Cities and
Towns within this Nation, may take it as a president for their future ease and
freedom, against all Oppressors whatsoever.

arms of the city of London

London, Printed for G. Laurenson April 18. 164

A DECLARATION OF The Common Council men of the City of London, within the
Ward of Walbrook, setting forth the great injustice, and oppression of these
present times, etc.
Whereas by order of the late Lord Major and Commissioners, a precept came to
the Deputy and Common Council men of the Ward of Walbrook, requiring them to
call tr their assistance, such able persons as they shall think meet, to assess
upon the Inhabitants of their Ward, the sum of 50. l. which was in arrears of
the 4. former assesments of the 12, 10, 6, and 4 months, for the L. Genesis
Fairfax his army, the Common counsel men in obedience to that precept, did
call to assistance 8. other persons Inhabitants in their Ward, for the more
equal rating and assessing of the aforesaid sum, and after long and serious
consultation and debate, did find that the real estates, viz, the Rents of
houses had not been rated at all, or not considerable in those 4 assessements;
did therefore adjudge it, to be just to lay some considerable part of the 500.
l. upon the aforesaid Rents, and they also finding that the Assessors in those
4 assesments, had exceeding overrated the poor people of small estates, and
also had exceedingly under rated themselves, and the men of great Estates in
the Ward. The now Common council men finding this great partiality and
inequality, did judge it just before God, and all just men, to lay the greatest
part of that which remained and not laid on the real estates, upon those of
great estates that had bin so much under-rated, that if the rich men had bin
rated, proportionably to those of small estates, there would have bin little or
none of those arrears, judging it very unjust and contrary to Gods command, to
add oppression to oppression, also contrary to the true intent and meaning of
the Ordinances of parl. Having taken this course for the more spedy getting in
of the aforesaid arrears, and also to prevent future arrears, did finish the
books, and according to order sent them in. But upon the complaint of some of
the Ward, together with such of the Comoncouncel as were assessors of those
unequal assesments, to the Lord Mayor and Commis. We the now assessors were
sent for before them, and notwithstanding we made it clear to the commis. that
we had so assessed it as was most agreeable to Gods command to take of heavy
burdens, and to relieve the oppressed, which we also declared was the true
intent and meaning of the Ordi. of parl. and also discharge our trust; yet were
we overawed and commanded to take the book and alter it, to take off from the
rich, and to lay it on such as we knew to be over-rated before, and yet had
paid which we judged unreasonable, we also told the Aldermen, that their evil
example in rating themselves so low in every assesment did occasion that no
rich men in any Ward, would be rated proportionably to the estates, and did
plead and do sin plead that an Alderman was but so much, and should they be
rated equally with, or more then an Ald. We also told them that we did expect
that as it was their duty, so they would have given us in command all the
assessors of every Ward in London, to have considered such as had bin
over-rated to have eased them, and also such as had been under-rated, to have
laid the more on them. This was much stood upon, and by some answred with
bitter expressions, and angry countenances; but our conclusions was with them
thus. That we did hope in the sincerity of our hearts we had obeyed Gods
command, in taking off heavy burdens, and in relieving of some of the
oppressed, and letting others that were more oppressed go free, and that if
they (the Commissioners) did say those burdens on again, the sin should lie at
their doors, and they should answer for it, we had discharged our trust. We
know it to be just, that he that is worth 1000. l. should be rated ten times so
much as he that is worth 100. l. and so proportionably from the least estate
to the greatest, and he that has the greatest estate has the greatest
advantage by this Rule of proportion, and if the Wards men be wise in their
elections of common council men, let them look upon such as are godly, wise
men, of the middle rank of men, and make choice of such men they will find will
act most and best for them and the public. What injustice, unequality; and
oppression has bin used and exercised upon the poor and men of small estates
in all former assesments the like has been in a great measure in every Ward in
levying men and arms to attend their Captains and Commanders in the Trained
Bands, as an Alderman, or great rich man to send three men and peradventure
sends but one, it may be none at all; when a poor man of small estate shall go
forth, and find his own arms; this is also a great injustice and oppression.

SIR,
THe Earl of Brainford has had audience, with the most high and mighty
Princess the Queen of Sweden, and has given an account to his young master
the Prince, of the representing his Embassy to her Majesty, purporting, That
there are matters of great consequence, to be maturely debated before there can
be an Army of Zwitzers obtained, which gives a great demur to the new Game in
agitation; so that if their Cards be not well played upon the first leading, the
Game is in great halard of being utterly lost and frustrated in the conclusion.
And the rather, by reason of the uniting of the two most famous and renowned
Princes of Europe, which in all probability will soon be made manifest to all
Christian princes, through out their several Teritories: For the most
illustrious Queen of Sweden, has declared prince Charles palatine, etc. (her
Cozen German) to be her rightful Successor to the Crown, in case she die
without Issue: the States having with a great deal of joy and triumph approved
thereof, and for the further confirmation thereof, humbly besought her Majesty
to be pleased to accept of him also for her husband; to which she answered,
That if they did make propositions to Her of that nature, she would take them
into serious consideration, and speedily give them a positive answer, etc. so
that there is so much probability in this, that it is taken for granted, that
the Solemnization of Marriage will suddenly be accomplished, between his
Highness, and her Majesty, the most virtuous and illustrious Queen now
reigning in Europe, the Worlds Mitrour, Religion's Banner, and a second Star to
the late glorious Comet of England, the most high and mighty Princess Queen
Elizabeth of happy memory.

Hague 14. April, 1649.

Other Letters from Holland say. That the Scots Commissioners have had audience
with the Prince, they presented Letters unto their declared King, upon the
knee, and said that was their endeared affection that moved them to that
posture of obedience and loyalty: they tell their King he knew Scotlands mind
by some sent before, and they desire to treat about it, but first Montrosse
must depart, they bewailed the death of his late Royal Father, uttering many
inveterate expressions against the causers of it: as yet no treaty has been,
nor answer given, and though it was declared, by their declared King to them,
at the delivery thereof, that within few days he would return a satisfactory
answer; yet he now seems to vary, determining to take some respite of time in
consultation thereon, and desires likewise to take the advice of the States
General; and to that end has given Sir Edward Hide directions to bring in a
Declaration, to be presented to the said Council, the sum and abstract whereof
follows.

That he desires a treaty with some of the States General, in reference to the
present transaction of affairs, touching his remove from the Hague to the
Kingdom of France, before he take his journey for Ireland.

2 That the chief motives of his inducement hereunto, are, by reason of the
distractions breaking out anew in the Kingdom of Scotland; which divisions
causes him to despair in the safety of his person, etc. But these
conjecturations in all probability will soon be frustrated, for we conceive he
will make his abode here, as the best center of his affairs, and that some of
the States may possibly be advisers, in giving assistance to his resultations,
in case his Council be not over violent to to the contrary.

A Declaration of the proceedings between the Scots and their Declared King.
Sir, Col. Laighton is designed for Holland, with Letters from the Lord
Seaforths brother to their young titular King, inviting him to Sea, and to give
commission to Montrosse to be Lieut. General, which will soon cause the
increase of a potent Army in those parts, the Lord Plustarty being already very
numerous, and has declared for Charles the second, remonstrating the grounds
and reasons of his present engagement, and stirring up the people to join with
them therein, but its probable their design may be frustrated, for there are
two thousand Horse and eleven thousand Foot raised of the new Establishment by
the Estates, who are resolved not to act or comply with them, for the investing
of the declared King upon their terms or principles. Some great Batteries are
raising near the Cliffs of Leith, and the Fortications about the said town go
on apace. Here is some whispering of the near approach of a period to all
differences and disputes at the Hague, and that the young King and the
Commissioners are upon a conclusion for peace, which gives popular satisfaction
to many in this City.

Edinburgh 13. April, 1649.
Imprimatur,

T. J.


