A DECLARATION Of the Officers and Company of Seamen abord His MAJFSTIES
Ships, The Constant Reformation, the Convertine, the Swallow, the Antelope, the
Satisfaction, the Hynd, the Roe-buck, the Crescent, the Pelican, the Blackmore
Lady lately rescued for His MAJESTY'S service, with an Invitation to the rest
of the Fleet, and their Brethren on Land to join with them in their just
undertakings.
WE have long expected with great impatience, an happy end of our wasting
divisions by means of a Personal Treaty, so often pressed by our Brethren of
Scotland, and earnestly desired by the Generality of the Kingdom, as appears
by the late several Petitions of the respective Counties to that purpose. But
we find by sad experience that the Independent party, instead of applying
themselves to the settlement and composure of differences, according to their
faith publicly given to the whole Kingdom, (But most shamefully violated in
their proposals of the Army) have seized into their hands, and Garrisoned all
the strong places of the Kingdom, overrunning, disarming, and plundering the
Country, as if it were a Conquered Nation. And all this for no other cause: But
that they in an humble way had manifested their desires of Peace, and to have
an end of those heavy pressures; which lay upon them, by the arbitrary power of
Committees, and the unjust continuation of the Accise and Land-taxes, after the
utter defeat of the Kings party; from whose fines and Compositions they drew
money enough to have satisfied most part of the debtes of the Kingdom. And
seeing likewise that the Power and affairs of the Navy, were put into such
hands, as were not only enemies to the King and Kingdom, but even to Monarchy
it self, that the style of Commissions at Sea were lately altered, leaving out
the Kings name, and mentioning only the Parliament and Army, which we
understood to be a disinherison of His Majesty and His Children, that we had no
settled form of Divine worship, no Communions, little or no Preaching on board
but by illitterate and mechanique persons, that there was a design of
introducing Land Soldiers into every Ship to master and overawe the Sea men,
things so contrary to the ancient Customs and orders of the Sea, that we
thought our selves bound in Conscience to do something for the recovery of our
own right and re-stablishment of Religion according to the word of God, and
the Covenant solemnly taken, the Honor, preservation, and freedom of His
Majesty, the Privilege of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject, and not
be made any longer the unhappy Instrument of the misery of King and Kingdom,
at which time God put it into our minds, and encouraged our hearts, and
strengthened our hands, to remove Colonel Rainsburrow from the command of the
Fleet, a man of most destructive Principles both in Religion and Policy, and a
known enemy to the Peace and Ancient Government of this Kingdom, which we have
sworn to uphold and maintain with our lives and fortunes, desiring all honest
Seamen not to be deluded any longer with words, but one and all, to join with
us, and to put too their hands to so honest a work, the glory whereof (next
under God) will be imputed to them, and the reward no question will be
proportionable, both in this world, and the world to come, we have been long
pressed in the Kings Name though against His will and Interest, let us now do
Him some real service in this time of His great affliction, which God has
wonderfully enabled Him to bear, and will doubtless in his good time restore
Him to us, and us to our known Laws and Liberties, look upon the Prince of
Wales heir apparent of the three Crowns, and Generalissimo under His Royal
Father of all Forces by Sea and Land. Look upon the Duke of York Lord high
Admiral of England, Princes of so much hope and forwardness, that the world
not the like, extracting from the highest blood in Christendom, allied to, and
befriended by all foreign Potentates, invited by the Scottish Nation, and by
the best part of ours to the recovering of their own, who have had no hand in
the miseries of this Kingdom, and consider with your selves by what Law of God
or man they can be thrust out of their just Possessions into exile there to
live as it were upon the alms of strangers; Come in and join with us, and you
shall want nothing, we have good Ships, good hearts, good hands, and which is
worth all, God, and the Law on our side. And the Almighty searcher of all
hearts so prosper us in our undertakings as we intend the advancement of his
glory in the settlement of the true Protestant Religion, according to his holy
word, the Honor freedom and just rights of His Majesty, the confirmation of
the Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject by an equal and
well grounded Peace.

Printed at Holland, and reprinted at London, 1648.


