A DECLARATION OF THE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY, Inviting the MEMBERS OF THE LONG
PARLIAMENT, WHO Continued Sitting till the 20th of April, 1653. to return to
the Exercise and Discharge of their TRUST.

Friday 6 May, 1659.

Ordered by the Lord FLEETWOOD, and the General Council of the Officers of the
Army, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas Sandford Secretary.



LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, for him and William Mountfourt, 1659.

A Declaration of the Officers of the Army, inviting the Members of the Long
Parliament, who continued sitting till the 20th of April 1653 to return to the
exercise and discharge of their trust.
THE public concernments of this Commonwealth being, through a vicissitude of
dangers, deliverances and backslidings of many, brought into that state and
posture wherein they now stand, And our selves also contributing thereunto, by
wandering diverse ways, from righteous and equal paths; and although there has
been many essaies to obviate the dangers, and to settle these Nations in peace
and prosperity, yet all have proved ineffectual; The only wise God in the
course of his providence disappointing all endeavors therein.

And also observing to our great grief, that the good Spirit which formerly
appeared amongst us, in the carrying on of this great work, did daily decline,
so as the Good old Cause it self became a reproach; We have been led to look
back and examine the cause of the Lords withdrawing his wonted presence from
us, and where we turned out of the way; that through mercy we might return and
give him the glory.

And amongst other things, calling to mind, that the long Parliament
consisting of the Members which continued there sitting until the 20th of
April, 1653 were eminent Assertors of that Cause, and had a special presence of
God with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many good
people concurring with ours therein) we judge it our duty to invite the
aforesaid Members to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, as
before the said 20th of April, 1653.

And therefore we do hereby most earnestly desire the Parliament consisting of
those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648, until the 20th of
April, 1653. to return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust, and we
shall be ready in our places, to yield them, as becomes us, our utmost
Assistance to sit in safety; for the improving present opportunity for settling
and securing the Peace and Freedom of this Commonwealth; praying for the
presence and blessing of God upon their endeavors.

6 May, 1659. Signed by direction of the Lord Fleetwood and the Council of
Officers of the Army. Tho. Sandford Secret.
Which Declaration was this day presented to the Speaker by The Lord Lambert.
Lord Berry. Lord Cooper. Sir Arthur Hesilrig. Major General Lilb^^^e. Colonel
Ashfield. Colonel Salmon. Sir Jerome Sankey. Major General Kelsey. Colonel
Okey. Captain Blackwell. Major General Haynes. Lieutenant Colonel Allen. Major
Packer. Lieutenant Colonel Pierson.




FINIS.

