A DECLARATION of the Officers and Soldiers under the Command of Colonel
Twisleton, Governor of the Castle of Denbigh in Wales.
KNowing the distempers that are already and the practices of our Enemies, both
secret and open to distrube the peace of the Kingdom, thereby to suppress the
Authority of Parliament, and in it to invade and destroy all that is dear unto
us, our Religion, Laws, and Liberty, and instead thereof to bring a Tyranny
under the pretense of the Kings rights, and taking notice to the great grief
of our hearts, how many Persons and Countries have been by their Insinuations
and pretenses drawn into a second Engagement against the Parliament and their
Army; We do therefore out of the sense of our duty to God, the Kingdom and
Parliament, unanimously declare as well for the satisfaction of each other, as
others that are true friends to the Parliament and Kingdom, that we will
according to our National Oath and Covenant which we have Solemnly taken in
our places and callings, and to the utmost of our power defend and maintain
this Hold and Garrison of Denbigh and each other in pursuance thereof, under
the command of the present Governor Colonel George Twisleton, against any
power whatsoever that is not derived by Commission from his Excellency the Lord
Fairfax and the Parliament to demand the same, and will neither for fear nor
favor desert this our duty, nor in the discharge thereof desert nor forsake
each other, in the performance of all mutual duties proper to our places, in
which no extremity whatsoever by Gods assistance shall make us unfaithful or
inconstant in our resolutions or means to discover them, so to bring them to
condign punishment, which baseness or Treachery we abhor the very thoughts
of, and this Declaration as we make it freely from our hearts, so we as freely
subscribe it under our hands.

Denbigh this 12. of June, 1648. George Twisleton. etc.

London Printed for John Wright, at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley, 1648.


