A DECLARATION OF THE Officers belonging to the Brigade OF Col. John Lambert,
Commander in chief in the Northern Parts, now lying Leaguer before Pontefract
Castle, At a General Meeting of them, to advise upon (and declare their sense
of) the present condition of Affairs of the Kingdom, To his Excellency the Lord
General FAIRFAX and his General Council.

As also Col. LAMBERT'S Letter to the General concerning the same.

BY the Apointment of the Officers at a General Meeting.

Pontefract, December. 12. Signed, THO. MARGETTS.



LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for JOHN PARTRIDGE. 1648.

A Declaration of the Officers of Colonel Lamberts Brigade, etc.
May it please your Excellency,
Diverse of us at a late meeting, did make a short address by Letter unto your
Lordship, and your General Council, of what was thought fit at that present,
until a more general meeting and consideration might be had, of those things,
we, both before and then, had in our thoughts to present unto you. And being
now convened at a full meeting, deeply sensible, and clearly satisfied in our
judgments, of the present dangerous posture, and sad condition of the Kingdom,
in relation to the Treaty, and other public affairs; We have agreed, on the
behalf of our selves, and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers under our
Commands, to express unto you that sense and those humble desires, which God
has been pleased to put into our hearts thereupon, as follows.

At the beginning of these late differences, the Parliament having acquainted
the Kingdom, with the Kings Intentions to draw the Sword of War against them,
for the maintaining of His Own Arbitrary Power, and by their several
Declarations, Remonstran^^s, etc. given clear satisfaction to all the well
affected, of the justness of a defensive War; and thereby inciting and
encouraging all, as they tendered their Native Rights and Freedoms, to rise in
Arms for their defense. We were induced out of judgment and conscience, to
appear accordingly, and have ever since employed, and used our utmost
endeavors, to the great hazard of our lives, estates, and all that was dear
unto us, in that just and necessary work.

In prosecution whereof, this poor Kingdom, has long lain under most heavy
burdens, and oppressions, vast sums of money have been raised by the
Parliament upon Excise, Sequestrations, Compositions of Delinquents,
Assessments, Bishops Lands, King and Queens Revenues, etc. besides the great
debts of the Kingdom unsatisfied, many Towns and Countries much depopulated and
destroyed, thousands of our dear friends and fellow-laborers, have lost their
lives and perished in this great service, their wives and children been undone,
and many of us yet alive, lost much of our dearest blood.

All which, would yet not seem so grievous to us, the common enemies, being (by
the blessing of God upon the Armies) twice vanquished, brought under, and
capital offenders apprehended, if after all this (when no visible power has
appeared, or been left, to oppose or hinder the Parliament, from settling the
Kingdom, in Peace and Freedom; redeeming it from injustice, slavery,
unnecessary taxes, oppressions, and executing Justice upon Offenders) we could
once have seen a right use made of those opportunities, which God has several
times put into their hands for doing thereof.

But; to the great grief of our souls, we see not any probable means by them
used, to bring about this necessary work: On the contrary, it is apparent, that
private designs are carried on, by pretended, even Parliament, friends, with
common enemies, (depriving the Nation of reaping the fruit of all the eight
years labors and services) to introduce that very Tyranny and Oppression, which
we were by them invited to oppose; and establish by Treaty, and Act of
Parliament, a stronger foundation for (and clearer way to) advancing the Kings
destructive design and tyrannical vill, then formerly he had, thereby to
subject the whole Kingdom, to a mass of perpetual oppression and injustice; and
betray all the well affected in the Kingdom, (especially those who had been
most actively engaged against the same) to sudden destruction without remedy.

For proof whereof (omitting many particulars) we need but take a revie^ of the
several former Treaties, especially this last, most dangerous, Personal Treaty;
having all been gained, by the apparent treachery of the said pretended
friends, and the cunning policy of the common enemies, upon the loss or
weakness of their power in the field; and so pursued upon the plausible
pretense of Peacemaking, truly intending nothing but slavery and destruction.

To bring about this great unparaleld design, these treacherous designers did
not only raise several great Armies and Forces in all parts (almost) of the
Kingdom (to the great hazard of the ruin thereof,) but also invited and
procured a numerous and powerful army out of Scotland, that they might the more
plausibly, and upon fairer pretenses, carry on their destructive design;
suggesting to the Kingdom, that there was no other way for prevention of War,
and settling of Peace, then by this Personal Treaty, when they themselves were
the causers of the War, and the Kingdoms unsettlement.

To this purpose they endeavored (the Lords especially, who refused to join
with the Commons in declaring the Scottish Army, invading the Kingdom under the
Conduct of Duke Hamilton, to be Enemies) all they could to procure a Cessation
of Arms with that (and the English Malignant) Army, when they were in the
bowels of the Kingdom, and we were ready to engage with them, that they might
thereby get to themselves the greater advantage to carry on their work; Which
had they effected, and the good providence of God not prevented, would, in all
probability, have brought to pass that their intended Compliance with the King,
upon his own terms, and their interest only, which now, after the defeat and
absolute breaking of those Forces and Armies, they still labor all they can to
bring about, contrary to the earnest desires and frequent Petitions presented
to the Parliament from the well-affected in all parts of the Kingdom; and
struggling, to the utmost, to put the Kings partee, and all the Malignant
disaffected people, into a better condition, after their last Rebellion, then
they were at the beginning, and all the well-affected, that have done and
suffered so much, into a ready way of ruin.

And notwithstanding your Excellency, and your general Council, had most
clearly represented to the Parliament the dangers and evils of this personal
Treaty, your Remonstrance and Desires were neglected and refused, so much as to
be taken into consideration; But on the contrary, (as we have been informed)
the Kings Answers upon the whole Treaty were voted by the Lords to be
satisfactory, and by the House of Commons, to be sufficient for a safe Peace to
be grounded upon: Which gives us just cause to believe, that this Treaty is a
clear design to betray the Kingdoms just Cause (which God has twice pleaded,
and judged for them in the sight of all men) into their enemies power again,
leaving the unlimited supremacy where it was, as if we had engaged altogether
without Cause, and gained nothing by all our losses, hazards and sufferings,
but to be thrown, at last, into the cruel hands of our most implacable enemies.
And therefore conclude, that all Members of Parliament, or other public
persons, acting such designs, are betrayers of their trust, and perverters of
the very end and essence of the power committed to them; charging upon them the
cause of the Kingdoms present unsetledness, distraction, oppression, and of all
our, and their, fears and miseries. So that,

We cannot longer be silent Spectators of the Kingdoms impending ruin, nor
upholders of those that seek it, least thereby we should be involved in their
guilt, and make defection from our first principles, but humbly conceive, that
we are still bound in duty and conscience to prosecute and pursue to the utmost
of our powers, with our lives and fortunes, those principles of Freedom and
Justice, that by the Parliaments Declarations, Remonstrances, etc. we were at
first called forth to act upon, in opposition the Kings unjust unlimited will,
for the recovery and defense of the common Rights and Freedoms of the people,
greatly rejoicing to see so general a sympathy in all your Forces (and the
well-affected) by their several Addresses to you, and cannot but take special
notice of Gods great goodness to this poor Nation, in preparing, and
providentially disposing a people, in the several corners thereof, to stand up
for Truth and Justice, in a time of such woeful corruption and apostasy, wherein
many men in public trusts and places (perverting the true end of the power
they are entrusted with) study nothing more then the advancing of their own
ends and interests.

Neither will the same Ground and Principle, which led us forth at the
beginning of the Wars, to oppose Tyranny and Oppression, in the King and his
Adherents, now give us leave to sit down quietly, as long as we see the
Authority and Power of the Kingdom setting up the same Tyranny and Oppression,
(in their own or any other Interest whatsoever,) or the Parliament taking away
that due and just Liberty of the Peoples chosing their own Representatives, by
making themselves perpetual, and thereby in a short time, the little finger of
this latter, heavyer then the loins of the former Oppression.

All which having seriously considered, and that all ordinary means, by the
Petitions and cries of the well-affected, have been tried in vain, (when
nothing was expected by us and them but sudden destruction,) we received and
perused a Copy of your late Remonstrance, presented to the Parliament, wherein
we find the grand Case of the Kingdom very faithfully and discerningly stated
and laid open, together with a wise and full discovery of the chief Maladies,
Distempers, with suitable Prescriptions for its cure and recovery. We could not
but express one full approbation of, and free concurrence in the said
Remonstrance, what cause we have to bless God, who has raised in you such a
Spirit of discerning Wisdom and Justice, which we hope proceed from Principles
of Common Right, for the public Good and Interest of the Kingdom; together
with our humble Opinions, that the matters therein contained are most necessary
to be prosecuted and obtained, as the most visible and probable means for
releeving and settling the Nation.

And though they may seem (as civil things) not so properly to come from the
Army, yet seeing deliverance no other way, and providence calling in a
necessary and extraordinary Case, to walk in an extraordinary Way: We know that
God, by whom you are called, who has so often, so eminently, so experimentally
appeared, both to you and us in our faithful endeavors, and great hazards for
the Kingdoms Rights, will as^uredly (upon your walking after him in the way of
his Providence, and humble waiting on him, in the way of his Judgments, without
impatiency and distemper of spirit,) make your way plain before you, carry you
through, and honor you with being the happy Instruments of Redemption and
Deliverance to a poor dying Kingdom.

Our great desire therefore is, That the said Remonstrance may be speedily and
effectually acted upon, with such Wisdom, Caution, Self-Denial, Care and
Consideration, as that both the common, and bosom Enemy may be prevented in
their present, or future, obstructing, opposing; Designs, may not have time and
advantage to raise new divisions, troubles; and these good conceptions, which
God has thus begotten in you, and (through you) Remonstrated to the Kingdom,
(in which all the well-affected, free, ingenious spirits, will most readily
close, and freely act, with you,) may not become an untimely birth (as
heretofore,) but prosecuted to the life, so as the whole Kingdom may reap the
fruit of all our labors, and its own sufferings.

Though we shall not take upon us to advise or direct your Council in the
prosecution thereof, yet we take the boldness to offer our sense and thoughts,
desiring,

That, as on the one hand, your actings may be full and effectual; so on the
other, care may be taken, that they may be, with as much satisfaction as can,
to all such tender spirits as do agree with you in the justness and goodness of
the things proposed, but notwithstanding are not so clear in using of that
means, that you may be forced to take for that end.

That the same care may be had for the taking away of all present and future
objections of wilful and unnecessary force, and that all impartial men may be
satisfied, that your actings proceed not from your Wills or Interest, nor shall
extend further, then singly and clearly to the redeeming of the just Liberty of
this Nation, and the settling of it in peace and quietness.

To all which we we shall humbly and briefly offer; That only such things may
be insisted on as may put a reasonable and certain period to this present
Parliament, and may, for the future, establish free, successive Parliaments,
duly elected according to the Provision in the Remonstrance. That there may be
a sure provision made for the more equal distributions of Elections, through
the whole Kingdom. That no persons engaged in this War against the Parliament
may either elect or be elected to be members of Parliament. That some certain
Provision may be made, that no persons that may be elected Members of
Parliament, contrary to the Provision in the Remonstrance, may be admitted
thereto before they are tried whether duly elected accordingly, and approved by
some faithful men, to be carefully chosen, appointed and authorized to judge
thereof. All which being settled, the Army provided for, so as no free Quarter
may be taken, and such other common and ordinary things as concern the
administration of common Justice, the present quiet of the Kingdom, and all
other things whatsoever, may be left to the power and disposal of the next free
and duly elected Parliament, which we conceive may be the most proper
instrument in the hand of God for setting the Kingdom. These Ends and
Principles, so long as you are carried forth to pursue (which we hope you never
will forsake) you may be assured of our concurrence and assistance to the
utmost of our powers.


Pontefract, December. 12. 1648. By the Appointment of the Officers at a general
Meeting. Signed, THO. MARGETTS.
May it please your Excellency,
THis day, according to former appointment, there was a general Meeting of
Officers here, who resolved upon a Declaration to be presented to your Lordship
and your general Council, and appointed Captain Bayns with Captain Bradford to
wait on your Excellency therewith, and to give you an account of their
proceedings. They have desired me to acquaint your Excellency, that they have
appointed a standing Council of Officers, to meet on Friday every week, to
receive, consult, and advise upon such public affairs as your Excellency or
your general Council shall think fit from time to time to communicate to them,
for keeping a right understanding and mutual correspondency between the Forces,
that there may be a joint acting in this public Service.

They also desire those Officers may be admitted to sit with your general
Council, to the end they may receive the better information, and have account
of such public affairs wherein they may be concerned.

And this is all at the present from

Pontefract, Dec. 12. 1648. My Lord, Your Excellencies humble and faithful
Servant, J. LAMBERT.




