A DECLARATION OF THE Proceedings of the New Moddel'd Army in the Kingdom of
Scotland, against the Irish Army under the Command of General Kilketto;
Declaring the manner of their retreat to the Mountains, and the Warlike
Preparations of the Northern Army, by cutting off Passages, and planting of
Ordnance.

Whereunto is annexed, the New Oath taken by the Scottish Chivalry, concerning
the Kingdom of England, and General Kilketto: Together, with their resolution
and proceedings thereupon.

PUblished by Authority; And communicated to the English Chivalry, for general
satisfaction of the Kingdom of England, March. 1. 1647.

LONDON: Printed Anno Domini, 1647.

A TRVE RELATION OF The proceedings and advance of the Scottish Army, toward
the North of Scotland, under the Command of his Excellency General Leven.
SIR,
MY best respects to you recommended etc. Yours, by the last, I received, and
the enclosed papers; and according to your request, I thought it requisite, to
satisfy your desire, concerning the proceedings of the new modelled army in
Scotland, upon their Design Northwards, against Kilketto and his adherents, who
not long since, were within thirty miles of the City of Edinburgh* ^lundering
most of the Inhabitants thereabouts, and driving many Heads of Cattle toward
the North; but were frustrated of their Design: for, upon an alarm, that
Lieutenant General David Lesley, and Major General Brown, were advanced over
Tweed, and upon their march toward the North of that Kingdom, with a strong
party of Horse and Dragoons, immediately took his retreat toward the North,
leaving most of the Cattle behind him.

Sir, not long since, Major General Middleton fell upon a party of the
Kilkettonians, as they were ranging the Country, killed many of them, and took
diverse prisoners, and some few days after that, he fell upon two or three
Garrisons, which were kept by the Irish Rebels, stormed them, and put many to
the sword.

Kilketto is supposed to be about four thousand strong, his army consisting of
one thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot, most of them completely armed, and
very expert Soldiers; yet some what timorous of spirit, and fearful of
maintaining the Holds, now in their possession: for, by a Messenger from those
parts, it is declared unto us, that the Irish have deserted several Garrisons,
and have drawn up their whole Body toward the high Mountains, fortifying, and
planting their Ordnance, upon several convenient Hills, cutting off several
passages, and making great preparations of war, yet (its verily believed) to
little purpose; for Lieutenant General David Lesley, lets no opportunity slip,
for the putting an end and period to the distractions of that Kingdom, having
declared himself very nobly and gallantly to the new modelled army for the
expediting of that Design, by encouraging the Soldiery, who have expressed
themselves freely and resolutely to their General; saying, they will live and
dye with him, and hazard both life and limbs against the public enemy of
both Kingdoms. Thus (in brief) have I given you, an exact relation, of the
Occurrences of Scotland, remaining

Barwick Feb. 22. Your affectionate Friend W. Bode

SIR,
Thursday the 11. instant, the Rear of the Scotch Army marched over Tweed at
Kelsey and Barwick, and the next day the town of Barwick was quitted, and the
Garrison dismantled, according to agreement: the six Regiments of their horse,
which were appointed to disband, had their Rendezvous at Kelsey, where they
were required. 1. To deliver up their Arms. 2. To take an oath to this effect:
To offer no injury to the Country in their passage to their several Homes; to
be faithful to the Covenant and cause of both Kingdoms, and not to engage
with any against them: At first, they refused; but at last were induced to
accept of them; partly by the means of their Lieut Genesis David Lesly, and
partly by the incitements of their Ministers.

Both of these were necessary, if we consider the constitution of some of those
who were disbanded, who resolved to join with Kilketto, being much incensed at
their proceeding.

Upon the taking the Oath, and delivering up their pistols, they had pay upon
the place, some one, some two, some 3 months pay, according to the years of
their service. This done, the Lieut. Genesis very nobly and freely required of
them, if they had any thing to say of him, or any other of their Officers; they
answered no: thereupon they broke the Standards of every Regiment, and so were
all dispierced toward their several homes; except those who were selected for
a New Model, who chose the best pistols (of those delivered up) for themselves.
Most of these are of the Arguile party, officers and soulditrs, yet some of
them unwilling to continue in arms.

The new Model is fourteen hundred Horse, and five thousand Foot. The
Hamiltonians are much discontented at this.

I might acquaint you with the spoil and plunder they made in Northumberland,
and their not paying of quarters from the coming of the first 100000. l. till
this time; but I had rather these and the like complements were buried: there
will be disorders in the best governed Bodies, Courts, Camps, City, and
Country, none are exempted: the best Instrument is sometimes out of tune: Love
covers a multitude of sins: its the want of that which first occasions the
offense; and then in others raises slanders, whence arise all the clamors and
scandals against this Army, but only from want of affections: sure the army
has deserved better from them, and might have had better words a year since
when an Enemy was in the field. But now the work is done, how are they
slighted: the general cry is now for a disbanding; and for my part (and I
think diverse others of quality in the Army would be of my mind) it should be
the first thing I would petition for, seeing now it is only set up as a mark
for every tongue set on fire to dart forth their malice against, and every
Malignant Priest, and upstart Levite, to raise and write slanders, to fill
Gangrenaes Volumes. Sir, I have no more at present, only I remain,

Nottingham, Feb. 19. Your affectionate friend, W. C.


