SUITABLE COMFORTS FOR Suffering Sion; OR, SAINTS INTEREST in GOD, their
Chiefest SUPPORT in times of greatest Straits. BEING A Brief DISCOVERY of what
GOD is to his People in all Ages: Which is of great Weight and Use to His in
these Trying Times. Written by EDWARD DELAMAINE, at present under Restraint,
and a PRISONER of HOPE.

ISAIAH 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my People, says your God; Speak
comfortably to them.

LONDON, Printed by Simon Dover, and are to be Sold at his House in
Christophers Alley, in Martins Le Grand. 1661.

SUITABLE COMFORTS FOR Suffering Sion; OR, SAINTS INTEREST in GOD their Chiefest
Support in times of greatest Straits.
DEar Brethren, and fellow Companions of the Kingdom of God; This is the day of
Jacobs Trouble, of Joseph's Affliction, of Zions Trials, and of the Calamities
of the whole Israel of God; And I find that the People of God in general, are
very prone and incident to be Troubled, Cast down, and Disquieted; And I find
that it is the Design of God that his People should be Comforted, Consolated,
and Refreshed. Therefore in order thereunto, I shall offer something, that may
answer the End and Design of God; And the Portion of the Word of God, which I
intend to make the Ground of my Discourse, for my own and others Edification,
is Recorded in that precious Scripture,

Exodus 3.14, and the last part of Verse. 15. And God said to him, I AM THAT I
AM: Say unto them, I AM has sent thee: This is my Name for Ever, and my
Memorial unto all Generations. In order to these Words, we may consider Three
things: 1. The Author of these Words. 2. The Person to whom they were Spoken.
3. The Occasion why they were Spoken.


For the First, The Author of them was the great God of Heaven, the Disposer of
all things, the Judge of the whole Earth, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;
and therefore considering the Greatness and Worthiness of Him that speaks, we
should have the higher esteem, and give the more diligent heed to what he says.

2. The Person to whom these Words were spoken, and that was Moses; of whom,
Three things are mighty Remarkable and Considerable.

First, His Love to God, in that he forsook all earthly Pleasures and Delights,
and Chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God. Ah! there be few
that take Moses Choice, that choose Goodness more than Greatness, esteeming
Poverty better than Riches, and count Godliness more Gain than Wickedness, and
rather hazard Bonds and Sufferings, than the Violation of their Consciences
with false Swearing, etc. That account Rags with Christ, though on a Dunghill,
more than Robes without Christ, though on a Throne.

Secondly, Another thing Considerable in Moses, was his Meekness; which is much
commended in him, Numb. 12.3. Now the man Moses was very Meek above all the men
that were in the Earth; this is a Christ-like Spirit, a Mild Gentle Spirit, and
to exercise such a Spirit to those that are of a Froward, Peevish, Proud
Disposition, is an excellent Frame; not to return evil for evil, but good for
evil; to use gentleness and mildness, for bitterness and frowardness, is a
Carriage that makes Christians look most like God: Now Moses was not only
Meek, but very Meek, and that above all the men that were upon the Earth.

A Third thing Remarkable in Moses, was his Faithfulness for God; See how it is
spoken to his Praise, Numb. 12.7. compared with Heb. 3.2.

Touching his Faithfulness you have Three things.

First, His being Faithful to declare to the People the whole mind of God, as
God communicated it to him; Now when God took him up into the Mount, he might
have taken liberty to have varied (and no body have questioned him) either to
have added or to have diminished, to what God had left in charge with him, no
he does not, but is Faithful to that Trust delivered to him.

Secondly, He was Faithful in doing what God Commanded from him, in performing
Gods Requirements to him, Exodus 11.26. and therefore when he tells Pharaoh,
That God would have the Children of Israel and all they had, go up with them to
Worship; Pharaoh was not willing that their Cattle and Flocks should go: Nay,
says Moses, We must not leave a hoof behind. So Faithful was he for God, that
not a tittle of the Service of God, must be omited or left undone.

Thirdly, His Faithfulness to God appeared, in that he closely followed and
served the Lord even to his last day; He persevered to the last, in a full and
faithful following of the Lord, and therefore the Lord writes this praise and
commendation on Moses, He was faithful in all things.

Thus much shall suffice as touching the Person, to whom the Words were spoken.
Now I come to the Third thing, the Occasion; Why the Words of my Text were
spoken? And in that we shall consider many things very Remarkable.

First, Moses goes to tend upon his Father-in-Law's flock, and in his way, sees
a Bush burning, and turning about, said, I will see this great sight, why the
Bush burns and is not consumed. The Admiration or Wonder in Moses, was not so
much, that the Bush burned, but that it burned and was not consumed; this was
the Wonder then, and it is the Wonder now, yea, and will be in all Ages.

Give me leave to enlarge a little upon it; This Bush I compare to the People
of God, and the Fire, or Burning, to Afflictions and Persecutions. Now it has
been the Marvel in all Ages, that the Bush has burned, and has not been
consumed, that the People of God have been wonderfully carried forth in the
midst of fiery Trials, that they have seemed rather to overcome then to be
overcome, rather conquerers then conquered, to be living daily though dying
daily; and this has occasioned marvel and wonder to the men of the World;
Witness those three Children in Daniel, that were in the burning Furnace, and
yet not consumed; Witness those worthy Martyrs of late days, whose life and
liveliness in Suffering made their Adversaries amazed, that the Bush burned,
and was not consumed, when they saw their inward man lived and renewed, in the
midst of their dying and bitter deaths. Now if the men of the World would do
like diligent Moses, turn aside and be inquirous to behold this great sight, to
search into the cause thereof, they might have their marvel taken away, and
their wonder removed; Moses looked, and belold the Lord was in the midst of the
Bush. Hence see the cause that the People of God have been most Eminently
preserved in the Inward-man, and have been born up above and beyond all
speakings; in the midst of all Trials and Sufferings, God was in the midst of
them; there was, and is, a very gracious Presence of His, accompanying and
assisting of them; This is the Reason, this is the Ground why the Bush burns
and is not consumed; So they in the fire were preserved, Dan. 3.24, 25. Now
when the Lord out of the Bush had called to Moses, He said, in the seventh
Verse, I have surely seen the Affliction of my People in Egypt. Hence observe,
That God takes notice of his Peoples Affliction, yea, special notice; I have
surely seen, says God. Oh suffering Souls! your Consolations are not small,
the Eyes of Heaven are upon you, and your sufferings; the Eye of Love, and the
Eye of Pity, is not only President over you, but Present with you; be you
never so remote, or obscure in Suffering, that Eye of Divine Majesty that runs
to and fro throughout the whole Earth, will be first on you; I have, says God,
surely seen the Affliction of my People in Egypt. This is a sweet Word of God,
My People, though Afflicted, yet Mine; though Oppressed and Hated, yet My
People; It Is not their Sufferings, their Miseries, their Afflictions, that can
un-people them, that can break that great cord of Union and Relation, between
God and his People; My People, though Oppressed and Persecuted, yet My People;
They are never the more Unlovely in my Eyes, never the more Uncomely, though
they are trampled upon as dirt, and made as the offscouring of the World, yet
I am not ashamed to own them, I am not ashamed to acknowledge them to be My
People, and therefore I will own them and stand by them: They are indeed by
their Oppressors and Persecutors (having the rod of the wicked over them,
making surrows upon them) represented very Unlovely, very Uncomely, very
Despicable and Contemptible; yet nevertheless there is not a tittle of my
Affection and Love, that I bear to them, abated or diminished, they are My
People, yea, and in Egypt. God does not only own his People in the worst of
Conditions, but in the worst of Places also; And therefore he says, I have
surely seen the Affliction of my People in Egypt; Egypt was called The House of
Bondage: The Nation of their Oppression: The Land wherein they were Slaves and
Strangers. Yet there God owns them, My People in Egypt. It is not Places that
makes God at all Disaffected with his People, though they be thrown into
Newgate, or elsewhere, the shamfullest of Goals, by his cruelty, whose tender
mercies are no better, nor nothing else; yet there will God own them; the
loathsomest Dungeons, shall not at all keep God from Communion with his People,
He will own them though in Egyt; and says God, I know their Sorrows; Know
their Sorrows he does, and will he not remedy it? Yea surely: As if the Lord
should say, I am acquainted with all their Griefs, I am concerned in all their
sufferings: Oh Christians believe this Truth, That God sees all the Afflictions
of his People, and knows their Sorrows; God sees for this end, and knows for
this end, that he might the better communicate seasonable good to his People.
And in Verse 10. says God, Come now therefore, that thou may bring the
Children of Israel out of Egypt; Come now, says God, now is my Time, now is my
Opportunity, now is my fit Season to Deliver My People. God's Time of working
Deliverance for his People, is when they are in the midst of the greatest
straits and sufferings. Now the Lord is employing and sending Moses with a
Message both to Pharaoh, and to his People. Moses very much opposes it, and
with the Lord pleads two things.

1. His own Unworthiness, Who am I, says he, that I should go to Pharaoh, that
I should be employed in the service of the great God of Heaven? The Lord takes
off this Objection by Answering, I will be with thee. The Worthiness of Gods
assisting Presence, will far surmount and exceed Moses his Unworthiness. One
thing here you have worth observing, and that is, That it is not the Meanness,
Lowness, Unworthiness, (simply considered) of poor creatures, that does exclude
or exempt them from Gods service or acceptance; but sin will hinder from both.

A Second thing that Moses pleads against his being employed, is, Ignorance of
Gods Name; He did not know what Name of God he should carry to his poor
suffering People; This God answers and declares, and so I come to my Text.

I AM THAT I AM, I AM has sent unto them; this is my Name for Ever, and my
memorial unto all generations. In which Words you have Three things.

1. A Description or Discovery of the Name of God, I AM THAT I AM, or what I
ever was.

2. The Perpetuity and Continuance of His Name; This is my Name for EVER.

3. The use of it to his People; This is my Memorial unto all generations.

From the Occasion of the Words, you have this Observation.

That God Proportions out Suitable and Seasonable Mercies and Comforts, to his
Peoples State and Condition. You may see that this Truth arises naturally from
the occasion of these Words, if you consider that these were a People under
great Promises from the Lord, and also from Men under great Sufferings and
Oppressions; Now to this Afflicted, Oppressed People, God sends this Message,
this errand, I AM THAT I AM: No Name of God had been so Suitable, so Seasonable
as this, I AM the same that ever I was. I shall show anon, in due place, how
Seasonable, how Suitable this Name of God is, to his Suffering People. If God
had sent to his People his Name Jah, or Jehovah, it had been something, but it
had not been so seasonable as I AM. God usually stays and delays Deliverance,
that it may come most Seasonable and Suitable to his Peoples Conditions; Why
must they be four hundred years in Affliction? May not two hundred years serve?
No, at the end of four hundred years, is Gods time for Deliverance, then will
his Mercies come most Seasonable. And truly this I am persuaded, is the very
Reason why God seems to keep away deliverance from his People, they are not yet
come to the greatest of straits; the Mercy will not come so Seasonable and
Suitable as God would have it. I might be large upon this Point, but I shall not
at this time, though it is a Truth of great concernment, I shall only prove it
with an Instance or two, with some Reasons, and then proceed to what remains,
which is much upon my heart.

See Genesis 21. from verse. 15. to 21. Poor Agar was in great distress, she and
the Babe was like to perish for want of water, she was in the greatest of
Straits, gave her self and babe over for death, past all hope of life; Oh then
was Gods time, then was his time to appear, and that with a Suitable and
Seasonabe Mercy to her State and Condition; and pray, What was that? Her
condition was such that she had like to have died with Drought, want of Drink,
for she was in a Remote and barren Wilderness, and behold God communicates to
her a Well of Water. From hence see, That God proportions out Seasonable and
Suitable Mercies and Comforts to his Peoples Wants and Necessities. From this
Remarkable instance in Agar, you have many considerable things.

1. That Gods People in their greatest Straits and Wants, make their recourse
by Prayer to God: this good Agar did. The times of tribulation ought especially
then to be the times of supplication. Christ's Suffering hour was his praying
hour. Times of Afflictions puts Saints upon Petitions at the Throne of Grace.

2. Strange and unexpected ways and means of Deliverance has God for his
People. This is a glorious Truth, but I must but name it: Little did poor Agar
think to find Supplies in the Wilderness, no visible means attainable.

3. Observe, That there are such Bowels of Mercy and Love in God toward his,
that he usually, yea frequently, not only grants their Desires, but gives them
more, yea over and above. Poor Agar begs a little Water of God to preserve the
life of her and her little babe, and lo, God gives her a Well of Water. So
Solomon asked for Wisdom; God did not only give him That, but Riches, and
Honor also. I must proceed.

A Second notable Instance you have, is, concerning Sampson, Judge. 15.18, 19.
He having a very great thirst, like to die, the Lord in a miraculous manner
preserved him, and communicated a Suitable Mercy to him, and gave him Water out
of the Jaw Bone of an Ass. One thing here I shall mind unto you, that is,
Sometimes I have marvelled at the exceeding Drought and Thirst that came upon
Sampson, immediately after the Deliverance obtained, by the help of the Lord
against his Enemies. I suppose that his great Thirst came not by reason of his
great Fighting; He might be thirsty, but not upon that account unto death,
considering the Lord helped him; But now for him to be by thirst, near death,
there lies something in it; and therefore I humbly judge, that this thirst was
sent as a Judgment from the Lord, and that upon two accounts:

1. His too much Vaunting, Applauding and Praising of himself for this Victory;
See his high proud Words, With the Jaw of an Ass have I slain a thousand men.

2. Not returning the Praise and Honor to whom it was due, and therefore the
Lord might be angry and displeased with him, and to show him his own weakness,
frailty and infirmity, that he might not glory in himself, but to see that
without the Lords assistance, he was but a dead man, and therefore I conceive
this thirst came: And then betook himself to prayer; and though after mercy
received, he was unmindful of his duty, yet now his great wants and straits
make him mind his duty, and help; and when Sampson had tasted of Gods anger,
then you shall have him acknowledge God having a hand in the Deliverance, but
not before.

So likewise the Prophet, having fled into the Wilderness, being driven to
great wants, the Lord administered food to him by Ravens; and so the Lord
communicated Suitable Comforts to his Servant. I might name many more, but I
would hasten, and briefly now give you the Reasons of it. I shall at present
name but two; Why God proportions out Suitable Mercies to his Peoples Conditions.

The First is, To enlarge their Experiences of Him. Not a Suitable Mercy or
Comfort comes to us from God, but it is to stock us with Experience; for
Experience of God's goodness is of great use to a dependence on God.

Secondly, It is To heighten our Praises to Him, that we may much be carried
forth in new Songs of Praises to the Lord. A word of Use to this, and so
proceed and come to the thing I aim at.

Seeing God does proportion out Suitable Comforts to his Peoples Conditions;
then be Exhorted, To walk Suitable to such a God as this is, be persuaded to
walk answerable to a God of such Suitable Comforts, and seasonable Mercies. Oh
the Suitable Comforts that his poor Servants have enjoyed in their Bonds and
Sufferings! that when all the World shall frown, then to have the God of Heaven
smile; that when the World strips us of all outward Enjoyments, then to have
them made up with inward and special Enjoyments; when the men of the World put
a bitter cup into our hands, then for our Father to sweeten it for us; when we
hear the worst news from Earth, we can then have the best news from Heaven: Oh
this is Seasonable and Suitable Comfort: It Is true we want our Liberties, but
yet we have the blessed Liberty of the Sons of God: It Is true we are in Bonds,
under Restraint, Oh but yet our souls are not in bonds, our Consciences are not
captivated to sins and lusts: it is true we are in the hands of cruel and
unreasonable men, but yet we are in the hands of a faithful Creator.
Fellow Sufferers, consider it and believe it, you that experience Gods
goodness, in Suitable Comforts to you, know, that he expects that it should work
rare effects in you, and produce eminent and suitable walkings toward him. Thus
much for the first thing, being occasional from the Words; I shall now come to
the chief thing I aim at.

I AM THAT I AM, this is my Name for Ever, and my Memorial unto all
Generations. The Doctrine, Conclusion, or wholesome Truth, which arises from
these Words, is this;

That the great and serious Consideration of Gods Name, I AM, being the same to
his People in all ages, is of mighty use and benefit to Comfort and Consolate
the hearts and spirits of his People, in the midst of all their Troubles and
Sufferings. This is a great and weighty Truth, and there lies much sap and
marrow in it, and therefore I do earnestly desire that it may dwell in the
hearts of all the Suffering sons of Sion this day; and this Truth I judge
arises naturally from the Words; for in the Doctrine you may observe these
several Branches.

1. That Gods Name is, I AM. 2. That it is so for EVER to his People. 3. That
the serious consideration thereof, is of use to Comfort and Consolate the
People of God in their Sufferings.
Now consider well the Text, and you shall find this Truth couched in it; And
consider the Persons to whom it was communicated, being the People of the Lord
under great Sufferings and Troubles, and you may plainly perceive, that the
great aim, and design of God here is, that his People through a serious
Consideration of his Name, I AM THAT I AM, should be much consolated and
refreshed, in the midst of their Troubles and Sufferings.

In the managing of this weighty Truth, I shall lay down Four Things.
I. Prove it to you, and show you what is Gods Name, and how it endures for
Ever. II. Declare how, and wherein Gods Name, I AM, is the same to his People
in all ages; and show you that this Truth is of mighty use and benefit to bear
up their hearts in Suffering. III. Give you the Reasons of this Truth, which
are very considerable, Why the Lords Name, I AM THAT I AM, is his Name for
EVER, and continued to his People to all Generations. IV. Give you the wholesome
and seasonable Uses and Conclusions of this Subject.
I. What Gods Name is, and the Duration of it. This Name of God, I AM THAT I
AM, is wrapped and bound up in His most glorious Attributes; See that notable
Text in Exodus 34.5, 6. And proclaimed the Name of the Lord; Now what was the
Name of the Lord? See, and you shall find it declared, and held forth in His
Attributes, The Lord, the Lord God, Long-suffering, Merciful and Gracious; Here
is the Mercy of God, keeping Mercy for thousands, for giving iniquity,
transgression and sin; Here is the Faithfulness of God, and by no means
clearing the guilty; Here is the Justice of God. Now that the Name of God
endures, see Psalm. 102.26, 27. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; thou
art the same, and thy years shall have no end. Here you see that this God, who
has declared himself I AM, is of continuance, he endures, he is the same and
changes not. Oh it is a blessed thing to consider, that God is now the same that
ever he was, His Name is I AM, and this is his Name for Ever, Psalm. 72.17. His
Name shall endure for Ever, His Name shall be continued as long as the Sun, and
Men shall be blessed in him. Oh this Name of God, I AM, is the Name that shall
continue and endure, and whereby men shall be blessed, Mal. 3.6. For I am the
Lord, I change not. From hence you may see the nature of Gods Name to his
People, He is the same, and changes not, Psalm. 135.3. Thy Name, O Lord,
endures for ever, and thy Memorial, O Lord, unto all generations. From hence
you may observe the sweet harmony and joynt-agreement, the Spirit of God has
here with my Text, the self same language expressed.

But Secondly, take notice, with what Zeal and Affection, and Cordial desire,
the Prophet Declares the Name of the Lord. Oh Lord, says he, thy Name endures
for ever; and when he speakeh of Gods Mememorial, O Lord, says he, it endures
to all generations, he falls as is were into admiration of the Name of God. The
next Verse declares part of Gods Name. First, His Faithfulness, He will judge
His People, or plead for them. Secondly, His Mercy, And He will repent Himself
concerning His servants, and that is in keeping back the intended evil, and
giving them the promised good. One text more, and then I have done with this,
Isaiah 63.15, 16. The People and Church of God at that time, as it is now, were
in a very miserable and deplorable state, as may be discerned by their
expressions in their requests: Look down from Heaven, and behold from the
habitation of Thy Holiness and Glory. And the Church seems to remind the Lord
of some remisness in some things, as if God had been wanting to some of his
distressed People, and so had forsaken them, and therefore in vehement sorrow
says, Where is Thy zeal, Thy strength, the sounding of Thy bowels and of Thy
mercies, are they restrained? As if this poor People should say, Ah Lord, Our
Condition is sad, our State miserable, and Thou seem to be a stranger, Where
is Thy zeal, Thy affection to Us? How does that seem to decline and decay?
Where is Thy strength that should be most helpful to us now? Oh where is the
sounding of Thy bowels and mercies, where is that yearning of bowels, that
sympathizing, that compassionate, melting, commiserating of thy Peoples
miseries? Ah Lord, say they, are they restrained, are they bound up, art Thou
grown obdurate against Thy poor People? Now do but observe what Arguments this
poor afflicted People use, and from thence draws comfort.

First, The Interest they had in God; Donbtless, say they, without all doubt
Thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and thou art our Father,
though Israel acknowledge us not. From hence you may observe three Things.

1. That Saints in the greatest of miseries have an eye to the Interest they
have in God.

2. Interest in God is of great support to Saints in times of greatest straits.
This has born up the Spirit of Gods People in their trials and sufferings;
what if all the men of the World were mine enemies, and all the malice and envy
of men my accusers, and all the devils my tormentors? yet if God be my Father,
if I have an Interest in Him, I have all unspeakable Help, Relief and Support.

3. The certain assured knowledge of the Interest in God affords great Comfort,
Satisfaction and Contentment to such, though others know it not or be ignorant
of it; Though Abraham be ignorant of us, yet thou art our Father.

A Second Argument that these People sucked Comfort from, was the remembrance
of Gods Name, and therefore says, Thy Name is from Everlasting; as if the
Church should say, though I am afflicted and suffer, yet the Name of my God
remains, yea it is from everlasting. Hence observe, That Gods everlasting Name
afords lasting comfort to his People.

The third Argument was, the Relation they had to God, and that is in the last
Verse, We are Thine, Thy peculiar People in Covenant with Thee, and Thou never
rulest over the heathen, Thou never had that rule and reign in their hearts
and consciences, as thou did over and in us, and we are called by Thy Name,
we do represent Thee to the World. Thus much shall suffice for the first thing
premised.

Now I come to the Second thing proposed, and that was, to Declare how or
wherein Gods Name, I AM, is the same to his People in all ages; and that this
Truth is of such weight and concernment, that it is able to comfort and
consolate the hearts and spirits of Gods People in the midst of their troubles,
and sufferings: In the proof of this I shall endeavor to show wherein Gods
Name is the same to his People.

And first, as touching Gods Power; His power and strength is very great, that
let the troubles be never so many, and never so great, yet Gods Power is as
great yea greater. We will first consult with some Scriptures, that speaks
aloud to this Truth, and then apply it, Nahum 1.3. The Lord is great in Power;
Oh believe this Truth and it will administer comforts in your Straits; Are your
sufferings great, remember The Lord is great in Power, Deuteronomy. 9.29. Speaking of
the Children of Israel, says, Thou broughtest them out by thy mighty Power; as
God has Mighty Power, so it is engaged for the good of His People, Luke 9.43.
And they were all amazed at the mighty Power of God: Gods Power is so Mighty,
that it amazes the very Adversaries of his People, Psalm. 147.5. Great is our
Lord, and of great Power; We have a peculiar Relation to Him that has this
great Power, He is our Lord, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me
and be thou perfect; God has here declared himself to be the Almighty God, the
Alsufficient God, able to answer and supply all wants and necessities, as if
God should say to Abraham, Walk thou before me and be thou perfect. Now lest he
should object and say, Ah Lord, They that do walk perfectly before thee, will
meet with many troubles, be exposed to many hardships and losses; well, says
God, matter it not, I am the Almighty God, the Alsufficient God; Let the
Troubles of his People be never so great, yet the Lord is Almighty, great in
Power and strength. Now seriously consider this first thing, as part of the
Name of God, remember Gods Name, I AM, He is the same now as ever he was, as
Powerful as ever, as Strong as ever, as Mighty as ever, This is his Name for
Ever, and his Memorial unto all generations. Oh suffering Christians, give me
leave to tell you, that your Fathers Power is your greatest Pillar of support
in times of difficulties. See that precious Text in 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The eyes of
the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in
the behalf of those whose hearts are perfect toward him. From hence note, That
there is Mighty Power and strength in God, handed forth and exercised for the
good of his People. This truth really believed how mightily would it caution
the Lords People, to take heed of fears, and to live above them. One word of
Use, and I conclude this.

Oh let us sing Songs of praise of our Gods Power, it is true Gods Power is
matter of fear and terror to the wicked, but its matter of comfort and joy to
the Saints, Psalm. 59.16. I will sing of thy Power, when the soul is in great
troubles, and sufferings; and consider what God is, what his Name is, that he
is the Mighty Powerful God, and then consider that he is the same, His Name is,
I AM, that the poor soul is ready to sing forth of Gods Power; Believe it
fellow Christians, you are in the hand of God, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Observe all his
Saints are in his hand, not some but all; oh you be safe enough, there is none
can pluck you out of your fathers hand; and besides he has all Power in his
hand, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Oh then my dear Brethren, be not hopeless, for God leaves
you not helpless; What can harm you? you have the Power of God to arm you; then
labor to undergo all here, for you shall not only be delivered from all, but
be conquerors over all. This is the first thing.

A Second thing relating to Gods Name, wherein he is the same now as ever, and
that is his Wisdom; He is as Wise now as ever, and as Prudent in managing his
Peoples concernments, as ever. Oh the great Wisdom of our God, in ordering our
affairs, it is matter of great Comfort and Consolation. But first we will see
what the Scripture says concerning Our Gods Wisdom, Romans 16.27. To God only
Wise be glory; As God is Wise, so He is only Wise, none like Him, 1 Timothy 1.17.
To the only Wise God be glory. Col. 2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge; In our God are treasures of Wisdom; Consider this dear
friends, is there any Trouble or Calamity befalls you, that you know not how to
come out of it, or be rid of it, well remember that your God has Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. Isa. 40.28. There is no searching of the Lords
Understanding, it is so deep and large, and therefore though that cannot be
searched, yet it can search all things, God is the alone and only Wise God,
now in 1 Cor. 1.25. there is a saying something strange, that the Apostle
speaks, and some would be apt to conclude, that it was something contradictory
to what has been said; his words are, that the foolishness of God is wiser
then men; intimating, as if there were some Foolishness in God; the Apostle
does not speak nor intend it in the least, but he was speaking of upbraiding
men's wisdom, that to such the foolishness of God was wiser, he does not say,
the foolishness in God, but of God; but had allusion to the Saints, whom as
foolish things of God, were chosen to confound the Wise; Now God is so perfect
in Wisdom, that the very Angels he charge with folly, and it is said of the
Lords Understanding that it is Infinite.

Now consider this seriously, God is great in Wisdom, and as he was always so
he is now, I AM THAT I AM, that is His Name for Ever, a Wise God, that by his
wise disposing of things, can make all things work for good, and can turn all
your troubles and sufferings, to the best advantage or profit, that you shall
reap the fruit thereof with great gain and increase; He by His Wisdom can order
the Saints troubles and sufferings to be further footings to glory and
happiness, that by his Wisdom can allure His People into the Wilderness, and
there speak comfortably to them; Now what a comfort is it to consider, that our
Gods Name is I AM, still the same to His People as ever He was. A word to Apply
this, Is our God only and alone Wise, Then let us leave all our Concernments
and affairs to his dispose; Our Father knows what is best for us, and what will
conduce to our good and His glory.

Well, to proceed to the Third thing, and that is the Faithfulness of God; Gods
Faithfulness is of mighty weight and concernment, that His Name is, I AM, the
Faithful God, as Faithful now as ever. Gods Faithfulness consists chiefly in
fulfilling and performing and making good all Promises and Prophesies; See the
voice of the Scripture concerning this Truth, Deuteronomy. 7.8, 9. But because the
Lord God loved you, here was the Mercy of God, and because He would keep the
Oath which he swear unto your Fathers, here was the Faithfulness of God, the
Lord has brought you out with a Mighty hand, here is the Power of God, and
redeemed you from the house of bondmen, and out of the hand of Pharaoh king of
Egypt, here is declared the Justice of God: Thus consider, see, and observe
here you have His Name, which he sent by Moses to his People, I AM THAT I AM,
this is my Name for Ever; See what the Lord says further in the ninth Verse,
Know therefore that the Lord thy God He is God, What God? A Faithful God, which
keeps Covenant and Mercy, with those that love Him and keep His Commandments
to a thousand generations. The Lord is not only exactly, completely, and
perfectly Faithful, but he is mighty large in his Faithfulness, the extent of
it reaches to a thousand Generations; Here the Lord includes and intends all
his People, that are, or ever will be in the World: One Generation continues
about a hundred years if not more. Now its not reasonable to imagine, that
there would be from that time these words were spoken, to the end of the World,
a thousand Generations; Only this Scripture shows the large extent of the
Faithfulness of God, it reaches all Saints in all Ages, even to a thousand
Generations, if it be possible there may be so many, while the World
continues. Oh lay up this Word of God in your hearts, our God is a Faithful
God, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is Faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
what you are able, but will with the temptation, make a way to escape, that ye
may be able to bear it: The faithfulness of God is as much engaged in his
Peoples sufferings, as any other of His Attributes. In His Peoples Sufferings
His Faithfulness is engaged Three ways.

First that their Sufferings shall not exceed, 1. His Precepts to them. 2.
Other Saints before them. 3. The strength he gives them.


Secondly, His Faithfulness is engaged, that in their Sufferings for Him, He
will stand by them, own them, and be with them.

Thirdly, His Faithfulness is engaged to make good his Promises to them, in
delivering and freeing them from troubles. Oh Christians are your troubles and
Sufferings great, and like to be greater, and you are even ready to sink under
them; well remember your Gods Name, I AM THAT I AM: He is the Faithful God, as
Faithful now as ever, Psalm. 36.5. Thy Mercy O Lord is in the Heavens, and thy
faithfulness reaches to the clouds. This Scripture holds forth the multitude
or abundance of Gods Faithfulness, that it reaches to the clouds; As wicked
men's sins, when they are multitudes and numerous, they are said to reach up to
Heaven; so the Faithfulness of God is so continued to his, that it even
reaches up to the clouds, Psalm. 119.90. Thy Faithfulness is to all
generations; This also is a precious Scripture, that no soul in no age, though
in the last days, and in the latter end of the World, when wickedness will
abound, and strange and dark Providence, with desmal dispensations will be
seen in the earth, yet Gods faithfulness abides still, it endures unto all
generations; therefore no soul, in what age or state soever, should be cast
down or troubled, but to mind the Name of God, I AM THAT I AM, the Faithful
God: Oh that Christians in all their troubles and sufferings would have an eye
to the Faithfulness of God, and unfeignedly believe it, for it is of mighty use
to bear up your hearts in the midst of troubles; and truly I am persuaded, that
when God sent Moses with his Name I AM, to his afflicted People, he had thus
much in his eye, and upon his heart, His Faithfulness in keeping Covenant with
them, and performing His Promises to them: The Faithfulness of God is one of
his principal Attributes, and the great splendour and beauty of his Name, though
all the Attributes of God are Perfect; What were it (if I may speak with holy
reverence) for God to be Powerful and Wise, if not Faithful? The Faithfulness
of God is the great Bulwark of his People in their Troubles. Consider that in
no age, there was no Saint whatsoever to whom God was unfaithful: If some say,
there may be some one or other; show me that man or woman, what is their Name,
where dwell they, when was it, or where was it, that God was not Faithful? I
dare engage my soul, and its eternal welfare, that God is not unfaithful to any
of his; Far be it from me, or any to think that there is unfaithfulness in God;
His People may be unfaithful to Him, but He will not be so to them; If there be
any of Gods Promises not performed, it is not His fault, but His Peoples; His
Promises being Conditional, they breaking, or not keeping the Condition, and so
miss of the Promise to which the Condition is annexed; They break their Words
and Promises with the Lord, but as for God, Let Him be true, and every man a
liar; nay, it is impossible for God to lie. Thus much for the Third thing.

A Fourth thing concerning Gods Name, is His Justice; God is very Just and
Righteous, and that is, in rendering punishment on his Enemies.

Dear Friends, your Enemies are great, and they are many, and their malice,
cruelty and oppression, is very much, and increased; Well, be not troubled,
remember you the Name of your God, I AM, He is Just, yea and as Just now as
ever, in punishing his enemies; Turn to the Testimony, Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is
known by the Judgments which he executes, the wicked are ensnared in the work
of their hands. Higgaion Selah. This is a Scripture of great weight. There are
two ways whereby he is known to the World.

1. By His Mercies.

2. By His Judgments: And they that will not know Him the former way shall
know him the latter. But what shall the wicked know of God by his Judgments,
that he is a Just God, a Righteous God, and says the Spirit of God, The wicked
are ensnared in the work of their own hands. This is a certain and assured
truth, That wicked men's handy-works, or their actions, prove their own
ensnaring; This was true in Ahithophel, Haman, and Judas, and therefore the
Lord writes upon this Scripture, Higgaion Selah, that is, to be often
Observing, and diligently Meditating on it, to see the Justice and Equity of
God to the wicked, in that their own works should ensnare them: Job 34.17. God
is called there, most Just, exactly and completely Just; as God is faithful in
rewarding His People, so he is as faithful and Just in punishing the Wicked. I
will make a little Use of this, and so hasten.

Fret not your selves at the Prosperity and welfare of the wicked, your
enemies, neither do you seek after revenging your cause on them, commit that to
the Lord; Vengeance is His, and he is both Mighty and Able to deal with your
adversaries, and He will do it in His due time; For He will plead the
controversies of His People, against their enemies. And believe it, the Lord is
cutting short the work, and hastening the ruin and destruction of his enemies,
by their filling up the measure of their iniquities, and ripening their sins;
and the deliverance of His People draws nigh, by his casting them into the
Furnace of Affliction, to purge and purify them, that they may come forth like
Gold. Again,

The Fifth and last thing relating to the Name of God, I AM. He is the God of
all comforts and consolation; Oh this Name, I AM, is a precious Name, there is
exceeding great Comforts and Cordials in God for the refreshing of his poor
Peoples Spirits, 2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed the God, the God of our Lord Jesus, the
Father of Mercies, and God of all Comforts. There is in our God such a
Storehouse and Fountain of Mercies and Comforts, that is able to supply all His
Peoples wants and necessities, Zechariah 1.17. The Lord shall yet Comfort Zion.
Notwithstanding the great discouragements and distresses of Gods People, yet
Comforts God has in store for poor bleeding and languishing Sion, 2 Cor. 7.6.
Nevertheless, God that Comfort those that are cast down, Comfort us. Oh
the choice Comforts that God has for his dejected People! Though God has in
all ages, been open handed and hearted in the dispensing of his Comforts to his
People, yet He is as full, and as rich now as ever, His Name is I AM, this is
His Name for Ever, God has choice and variety of Comforts, which he
communicates, as he sees most necessary; I hope by this time, that God has
taught his People by experience, that there is no comfort in outward
enjoyments, creatures nor relations, but only in their Lord God, that they may
delight themselves in His Comforts, and not in borrowed, feigned, perishing
Comforts. Hence see, There is no reason why Saints should be sorrowful or cast
down, there is bread enough in their Fathers house, He is the God of all
Comforts, His Name is, I AM.

A little to Apply this, and so proceed.

Hence see your Privileges, Excellency and Prerogative, that this God that I
have been treating of, whose Name is I AM, is your God, poor suffering Sions
God; Oh Sion, though now miserable, yet thy condition, thy state, so good, so
glorious, that the state of Potentates is not fit to be compared with it; thy
bonds and iron chains, are of far greater value than Crowns and Diadems; there
is not a step of Misery or Suffering, that does befall Sion upon Jehovah's
account, but it conduces a footstep to its further happiness and glory: And all
this, because this God, whose Name is I AM, is theirs; though Sions foes which
are many and mighty may bereave her of all comfortable things here, yet this
God of Comforts they cannot take away.

2. Take heed my Brethren and fellow Citizens of Glory, of sinning and
offending such, such a God as this is, be careful of grieving of Him, lest He
withdraw himself, and hide his face from you; Oh remember and fear that sad
Lamentation, in Lamentation 1.16. This Church of God had very much sinned
against the God of Comforts; See verse. 8. Jerusalem has grievously sinned: but
see the sad complaint she makes, verse. 16. For these things I weep, mine eye,
mine eye runs down with water: Why what was the matter, that this Church
does so sorrow and lament? Mark, because the Comforter that should relieve my
soul, is far from me: Oh let their falls be your warnings.

But Thirdly consider, if God be so to his People now, as I have declared, and
continues his Name I AM to them in an afflicted state, suffering state, low and
miserable state; Oh do but consider and that with astonishment, what will he do
for them, and be to them, when they are in a glorified state, perfected state?
Does he do thus to them now they are uncomely, now they wear rags, now they
are the offscouring, now they have their imperfections, and failings toward
Him? Oh, oh, what will his Name, I AM, be to them then, when they shall be very
comely, when they shall shine as the Sun, be equal with Angels, full of
holiness and perfection? Consider this and stand in admiration.

If God afords a mighty presence to a burning Bush, to a suffering creature, oh
what will he do to a glorified Saint! Thus much for the Second thing.

Now the Third thing proposed was, The Reasons and Grounds why the Lord
continues his Name, I AM, the same to his People.

First, That they might not be destroyed nor consumed. Gods unchangableness to
us, is the cause of our not changing from our condition to worse. See Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed; as if
the Lord should say, I am the Lord, I AM THAT I AM, this is my Name for Ever, I
change not; for this cause my People are not consumed. Ah my friends, if God
were changable as man, and as mutable as man, where should we have been at this
time? how soon would our condition be far worse then it is? Really, if God
should not continue his Name to his People, I AM, His Power, His Faithfulness,
His Wisdom, His Comforts, their state would be very miserable.

But Secondly, Why this Name of God is continued for ever to his People? It is
to engage them to Him, to draw up the hearts and affections of His People close
to Him: If any Truth is of an engaging nature, this is; it engages the Saints
in their whole man for God, their life and all for God, yea and that in the
worst of times; If the very Name of God be engaged for me, there is all the
Reason, why my All should be engaged for God. And therefore Christians look to
it, that wherein you come short in this particular, you come short in answering
the end of Gods Name to you. I must but name the Reasons of this Truth, because
of time.

Thirdly, to show, Why God continues his Name for Ever; because that there is
none like him, nor none to be compared to him; he is indeed the chiefest of ten
thousand: there is no King like Him, nor no Potentate like Him, a man may be in
their favors to day, and, at a little displeasing of them, be turned out to
morrow; but its not so with our God, whose Name is, I AM, its not a small
matter that moves Him to take hold of Judgment: He is said to be slow to
anger, though its true, a small matter (moves Him to Mercy) and when His People
do sin against him, yet he is loath to use the rod, if Mercy may prevail, yea
He waits to be gracious; there is no Fathers, nor Husbands like to our God, for
they are momentary and perish, but our God endures, and his Name to all
Generations. This being seriously considered, is it not reasonable to leave and
forsake all to cleave to this God: What have we to do, to own or stand by any
earthly Monarch, but only that Monarch KING JESUS, Who in Scripture is
declared to be, The only Potentate, and all near and dear Relations are to be
forsaken, when they come in competition with our God.

But Fourthly, Because of the near Relation between God and his People, He
therefore continues his Name to them; God is related to his People, not only
as a Father, and they his Children, but He as their Bridegroom and Husband, and
they His Wife and Spouse; and so from that near Relation to them, he reserves
entire affection for them.

But Fifthly, Why God continues his Name for Ever to his People; Because of the
great need and necessity His People stand in of him: whilst His People are
here, they are subject to wants and necessities, both to the outward and inward
man, and therefore the Lord continues his Name.

But Lastly, Because of the sweet Promises of the Lord, to his People. See the
28. Matthew. 18, 20. All Power in Heaven and Earth is mine, and lo I am with you
to the end of the World, This I AM has promised to be with them to the end of
the World, and therefore continues his Name to them for ever.

Now I shall come to the last thing I proposed, and that was, The wholesome Uses
and Conclusions of this Truth; which are ten.

First is, Gods Name, I AM. Is He the same to his People now that Ever He was,
does he not change? Then let His People be exhorted in the fear of the Lord to
be always the same to the Lord, as they have professed, and not change in
their love, and service to Him. Oh my friends, this that I speak is but your
reasonable service. God is unchangable to you, be you so to him, though not in
the quantity of it, yet in the quality of it; the Lord is as Powerful for you
now as Ever, Oh be you so to Him, lay out all your strength and might for him;
the Lord is as Wise now to order things for your good as ever, be you therefore
Wise for Him, let your care and prudence be to please Him, and your wisdom to
walk so, that he may be honored; the Lord is as Faithful for you now as ever,
be you therefore Faithful for Him, and manifest your Faithfulness;

1. In a due observance of all his known Commands. 2. In a circumspect Walking
before Him. 3. In a faithful Testimony against the Abomination of the Day. 4.
In a close and full Following of the Lord, through all Trials and Sufferings.
Consider that precious Scripture, Heb. 10.32. But call to remembrance the
former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of
Afflictions; How seasonable might this word of Alarm be given to the Churches
of Christ in these Isles? how are they degenerated? how have they declined, and
turned their backs upon the great and holy Commands of God, that at the Command
of a mortal man, omit, and lay aside the Worship and Service of God? It Is my
earnest desire, that the Lord would rouse and waken his poor shattered and
decayed Churches, that they may remember from whence they are fallen and
repent, and remember their former days, the days of Liberty and freedom,
wherein they were very zealous and courageous for God, and made solemn Promises
and Engagements, what they would do, and be for God, in an evil day: Let all
the Lords People seriously consider and examine. Oh be exhorted to be as
zealous for God now as ever, be as faithful for Him now as ever, seeing Gods
Name is the same now as Ever.

A Second Conclusion of this point is; Is Gods Name I AM, the same to his
People as ever? Then This Doctrine speaks terror to the wicked, Gods enemies;
and that upon two accounts.

1. This God is none of theirs, they have no Interest in His Name, and all that
I have spoken, they are not at all concerned in it; its true Gods Name is
precious, but its only to his People, the dearly beloved of his Soul.

2. This speaks terror to the wicked, in that, as God is not theirs, so he is
their enemy, their foe, His Power, His Wisdom, His Faithfulness, His Justice,
is all engaged against them; God is not become their enemy upon the account of
the first man's transgressions, for all that is pardoned, justified, and
acquitted, and reconciled. God stands an enemy to men now, by reason of their
actual sins, their rebellion against God, opposing his ways, hating his People.

A Third Conclusion of this truth is; Is Gods Name I AM? Is He the same to his
People now as ever, and that for ever? Then let this teach us to live by faith,
to look now on invisibles, to live no more by sense, but to act faith in a high
measure; for Gods Name is I AM, Romans 1.28.

There are Three principal Things in living by Faith.

1. You answer the work of the day; the very work of this day calls loudly to
Saints for a living by Faith; the very dealings and dispensations of God,
intend no less then a living by Faith: Did ever poor Sion see such a day as
this? They who are awakned, and right sensible, know my meaning; It Is not for
you Christians now to live by sense, but to look up higher.

2. Your living by Faith, makes you more singular and peculiar in your life
than others; this will eminently distinguish the sincere from the hypocrite,
the precious from the vile: If the carnal and lukewarm professor live by sense,
let not the Spiritual Christian do so; Oh you must live more singular than
others, for to you this Name of God, I AM, is for ever.

3. Living by Faith frees you from fears; I never wonder that men are so full
of fears, they live so much by sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by Faith and not by
sight; It Is the living too much upon sight and sense that produces fears, but
the living by Faith, does prevent fears and doubts. See 2 Cor. 4.16. The
Apostle is declaring there, that notwithstanding all their troubles and trials,
yet they fainted not, they were not possessed with fears; And what was the
reason of it? pray see verse. 18. While we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things that are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. Hence see the reason
and ground, why these precious souls did not fear nor faint in their trials,
they lived by Faith and not by sense; and this is a great cause and ground of
fears and doubts this day, in the hearts of many of the Lords People; They look
upon seen things, things that are; they see and behold great men are against
them, the Nobles, the Gerals, the Mayors, the Army is against them; they look
and see themselves all weak and impotent, most of them in strong Prisons; I but
this was not the Primitive Saints practice, for they did look not at things
seen, for says the Apostle, they are temporal, all perishing: Kings are
temporal, Generals, Mayors, and Armies are temporal and perishing; Well, says
the Apostle, We look at things which are not seen, and that looking was by
Faith, and the things not seen, were the great King of kings, the Lord of
hosts, all the powerful and mighty Angels, and the like; And this was Eternal,
God Eternal, His Name Eternal, his Power and Faithfulness Eternal.

A Fourth Conclusion from these Words is, Seeing Gods Name is I AM, the same
that ever he was to his People; Then Take heed of casting dirt on the Name of
God, be careful of villifying of it; It Is very sad to consider that many
professing themselves Children of God, should be instrumental to help the
blaspheming of Gods Name; Oh that this precious Name should be blemished by any
of His People! Romans 2.24. For the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles,
through you; They were the cause. How tender are men of their own Name and
Reputation? how much more then should they be of Gods? Oh me thinks how sad is
it to consider, that the wicked daily reproach Gods Name, and villifie it, and
yet for his own Children to add and help to it? Jam. 2.7. The Apostle calls it,
A worthy Name, which men blaspheme: And believe it, of all things, God takes it
most heinously from his People; He expects little else from his Enemies, but
far better from his People: To receive a wound from a dear friend, pierces
inward. And one thing you may observe by the way, That God deals more speedily
and severely with his People, for occasioning his Names blaspheming, than with
the wicked: Witness David and others.

A Fifth Conclusion of this Point; Seeing Gods Name is I AM, the same to his
People for Ever: Then Endeavor to hold fast the Name of God; Let there be a
close keeping of it, not only hold it, but hold it fast: See Revel. 2.13. The
great Praise and Commendation of this People was, in that They held fast the
Name of God, and did not deny his Faith; but their greater glory, and
excellency was, They held fast his Name in bad times, and bad places; Thou
dwell, says God, where Satan dwells, where Satan's seat is, and there, yea
in that place, thou heldest fast my Name; And besides, thou heldest fast my
Name in a very bad time, even in those days wherein Antipas My faithful Martyr
was slain: It was a great day of trial and trouble, a day of much Persecution,
yet in such a day as this did these souls hold fast the Name of God. And
concerning Antipas, you have Two things remarkable from the Lords mouth:

First, that of all his virtues and graces, which were many, God commends and
takes notice chiefly of his Faithfulness; Antipas my Faithful servant: Oh God
chiefly eyes, principally minds, and eminently will reward His Peoples
Faithfulness toward Him. Antipas being a great Pillar in the Church, abounds
in many virtues, his love to God, to his People, to the souls of men; his
Faith, Meekness, Prayer and Sincerity; Oh but Perseverance crowns all; it is
Faithfulness that Gods heart is much affected with.

But Secondly, The Lord calls Antipas his faithful Martyr, My Martyr; though
it is possible he died as an Evil-doer, as an Heretic, and Blasphemous Heresy;
It Is no matter, how men put him to death, how men called him, God owns and
calls him, His Martyr. This should encourage Saints, not to matter how
ignominiously and shamefully they suffer, stigmatized with dreadful Names, yet
God speaks otherwise, His thoughts are not as men's thoughts. Now in Three
Things the Lords People may be said to hold fast His Name.

1. By a holy and reverend esteem thereof, there should be reverence to it.

2. By a heavenly and special walking suitable to it, to the honor and praise
thereof.

3. By not counting any thing dear to it, our own Names and Lives meet to be
given up for it.

A Sixth Conclusion of this Subject is; Is Gods Name, I AM, to his People the
same for Ever? Oh then Praise and Prize this God, let your hearts be drawn
forth in Praising of Him; Here is matter and ground of Praise for His People to
all generations, Psalm. 68.4. Sing unto God, sing Praises to his Name. And Psalm.
96.8. Give unto the Lord the glory due to his Name: Praises are due to the Name
of God, Oh therefore Praise this Name of God: And that upon a Fourfold account.

1. He is yours peculiarly, you have a peculiar Interest and right to him.

2. He is yours freely, the Interest you have in him, came freely to you,
though dear to Christ.

3. He is wholly yours, you have a whole God, and a whole Christ, nor a part:
Every particular and individual Saint in the World can say properly and truly,
I have a God, I have a Father.

4. He is Eternally yours; Oh this is the chiefest of all, and therefore Prize
the Lord.

A Seventh Conclusion from this Truth, that seeing Gods Name is I AM, the same
now as ever; Be persuaded then to suffer and dye for His Name. I am verily
persuaded, that had we a right sense and feeling of this Name of God to us, we
should be mightily drawn forth, with the Apostle Paul, not only to suffer
bonds, but to die for His Name; And truly God is not wanting, but will do great
things for those that Suffer for his Name: See Psalm. 119.132. David Beggs, That
the Lord would do for him, as He used to do for those that loved his Name;
Implying, the Lord did wonderfully for them; And what greater love can be
manifested to Gods Name, than suffering or dying for it?

The Eight Conclusion from this Point, is God's Name I AM: Is he the same to
his People now as ever? Then let this serve to quiet, still and satisfy the
Spirits of God's People in the midst of Troubles, of the Lords Dispensation,
and of the Worlds Destraction: Oh this Precious Cordial, I AM! the same God,
rightly believed and rightly applied, is able to make a Calm in the greatest
Storm, to afford Peace in the midst of Trouble; it is the true Balm for every
disquieted and dejected Mind. See that precious Text, Psalm. 46.10. speaking
before of great Troubles in the World, great Destractions, and strange
Dispensations, he comes in the 10. verse. and speaks to the People of God: Be
still, do not you be troubled, be not you cast down nor disquieted, but know
that I am God: What God? a powerful God, a wise God, a faithful God, the God of
Comforts; I AM THAT I AM; This is my Name for Ever, and my Memorial unto all
Generations.

The Ninth Conclusion I draw from this Truth: That seeing Gods Name is I AM,
the same that ever He was; Then let your spiritual Wisdom be improved, in
turning bad Sights into good Signs: Do you see dark and dismal Sights? Oh
remember God's Name, and make good Signs of them: Do you see the Sun stand
still? Remember it was for the Deliverance of God's People by the hand of
Joshua? Does the Dyal of Ahaz go backward fifteen degrees? Oh remember it was a
Sign to add fifteen Years to the life of good Hezekiah. Oh improve God's
Dispensations by acting Faith in the Remembrance of his Name; and all sad
Sights that may be presented to your view, be as Tokens of future good Signs.
Luke 21.28. When these things come to pass, (the verses before-going, show
what things they were) Well, what must we do when they come to pass? then do
you look up, and lift up your heads; for your Redemption draws nigh. The
worst of Dispensations affords matter of Consolation for Gods People; and the
Reason lies here, their God is I AM.

The Tenth and last Conclusion of this Subject: Let all the Sons and Daughters
of Sion be entreated to let this Truth, briefly touched upon, dwell in their
souls, and sink deep in your hearts and minds, when you are compassed about
with greater Troubles, with greater Fears, with greater Trials and Sufferings
than now you have: Oh fix your heart and eye upon this Truth; know that the
Lord is God, His Name is I AM; That is His Name for Ever, and His Memorial to
all Generations.

To Conclude, Lay up in your hearts these Scriptures, Prove. 18.10. Psalm. 20.7.
Psalm. 124.8. And the Lord give you understanding and blessing in these things.

THE END.

