A DECLARATION OF THE VVEL-AFFECTED In the County of Buckinghamshire.

BEING A Representation of the middle sort of Men within the three Chilterne
Hundreds of Disbrough, Burnum, and Stoke, and part of Alisbury Hundred, whereby
they Declare their Resolution and Intentions, with a Removal of their
Grieva^^^s.

printer's or publisher's device

May 10th Printed in the Year. 1649.

A DECLARATION OF THE VVell-affected in the County of BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
WE have for this eight years waited with much patience, and great expense of
Treasure, besides the loss of many our dear friends, in the pursuance of our
just Rights, and Freedoms, which God had invested us withal, and the whole
Nation, and kept from us by the Arbitrary Powers, and tyrannical Factions of
the Nobility, Courtiers, Episcopal Priests, and wicked cheating Lawyers,
besides Impropriators, Patentee-men, Lords of Manors, and all illegal Courts,
etc. and other diabolical Interest parties, that had all their Licenses,
Patents, Grants, Commissions, from the late King, whose first Predecessor was
that outlandish Bastard, William the Norman Conqueror; from whence does
proceed the original of all our slavery, both in Tenures, Terms, tyrannical
Laws, Customs, etc. whereby we, the lower sort of People, are made slaves to
the wills of Tyrants, by reason the Law, being in an outlandish Tongue, and
withal bought and sold by the Lawyers, who judge the Causes according to the
Purse, and will do no Justice without money; so for filthy lucre, will stand to
justify and maintain any unjust, and wicked, and tyrannical Custom, or
illegal persecutions of any Tyrants whatsoever, although to the utter
deprivation and undoing of the poor widows, fatherless, etc. and to the
advancing the Wills of merciless Tyrants; and which said parties, especially
the Lawyers, was the chief instruments of procuring all that miserable effusion
of bloodshed, and ruin in this Nation, by the Judges giving their Verdict for
ship-moneys, and other Monopolies over all sorts and trades, and which does
still strive to hinder all good, and godly, honest and just Reformation, they
striving rather to uphold their own theft and deceit, then admitting any just
composure and agreement of the People, lest all trials should be by twelve men
of the neighborhood in every Hundred; without expense and charge, which would
be the ruin of their needless Calling, and a full ease to the People, who are
now vexed and undone by their Removes, Demurs, and needless journeys to their
Terms, whereby they live upon the only Dissentions, and Differences of the
People, and by whose Subtilties, Counsels, and Delusions, the whole Nation has
been inslaved ever since the foresaid Conquest, by whose strategems all the
middle sort, and poor People has been pursued by merciless Privileges, great
men, as Lords, Gentlemen, and extorting Lords of Manors, whereby all wicked
Customs, as Fines; Hariots, Quit-rents, and Headsilvers, with all slavish and
base Tenours, Tyths, Impropriations, and Patents, Prerogative Charters; the
said Lawyers being always Judges and Stewards of those Arbitrary Courts, and
are chosen by those Prerogative Borough towns to be Burgesses of Parliament,
which have been the great obstructors and hinderers of all our Liber^ies,
Freedoms, and natural Rights.

But when we received so many Promises, Declarations, and Remonstrances from
the Parliament, that so soon as God should make them capable, and overthrow
their ene^ies that were in arms against them, they would make us the absolute
freest People in the world, removing all Oppressions; all which did engage us
to assist them: and find^ng them to apostatize from their principles in their
Treaties, the Army promising to stand by us that we might have our Freedoms;
but finding both the Parliament and Army to break their promises and to be as
Arbitrary as those that were before them, in maintaining all the foresaid
oppressions upon us, with new vexations, as Excise, Taxes, Free Quarter, etc.
suffering their Committees to domineer over us, the same Terms, Lawyers,
Courts, remain as corrupt as formerly, Tithes, slavish Tenures, Tolls, Patents,
etc. still in force, our friends most unjustly, and Starchamber-like imprisoned
by a new Committee, called the Council of State, which was never desired to be
set up or allowed to tyrannize over the People, yet no less then four of our
worthy friends, as Mr. Lilburn, Mr. Walwin, Mr. Prince, Mr. Overton, must be by
them sent to the Tower at their pleasure, for not answering Interogatories; the
Parliament approve of it, some of our friends cast into other prisons, as
Captain Bray, and an honest faithful soldier murdered, and shot to death by
the audatious and perfidious proud Officers of the Army, who in a Council of
War condemus him, the General refusing to pardon or repleeve him, the Janisary
soldiers murder him, so that even the old conquest of William the Norman is
now revived again; the forenamed Lawyers, with the Impropriators, Lords of
Manors, Patentee men, and chief Officers of the Army, with the Judges, wicked
Peers, etc. being compacted all in one, and minding utterly to betray, inslave,
and undo us, more then those former Tyrants before them, does still keep up the
Kingly power, altering the title, and all that Diabolical Interest that does
belong unto it, etc. so that Quitrents, Fines, and Hariots, Tolls and Customs
are still forced upon us, and the Impropriators suing us for Tithes; no right
Justice to be had for the meaner and poor people, many undone, ready to famish
and starve, yet no effec^uall course taken for them, as their need requires,
all our honest Petitions slighted, and disregarded.

All which tyranny, oppression, and arbitrary proceedings of theirs, makes us
doubt of any true Reformation, or just Freedom and Liberty to come from them,
so long as those wicked Lawyers and impropriators, etc. are amongst them, and
until all those Lawyers and Impropriators be purged out from amongst them it
will be to little purpose to make any more addresses to them.

Likewise finding the Grandees of the Army to be the men that hinder both the
honest soldiery, that stands for absolute Freedom, and does imprison, and put
them to death, that are for just principles of common Right and Equity, so that
those honest men are by those proud Commanders persecuted by the name of
Levellers.

By all which, we see those chief Commanders are grown to an extreme height of
avarice, pride, hypocrisy and apostasy, mere arbitrary Politicians prefering
their filthy lucres, and diabolical interests, gain and ugly honor, more then
the common Freedom of us and the soldiery, for a great part of them to be so
barbarous, as to subject themselves to those Commanders wills, although it be to
murder their fellows that are godly, honest, and conscientious, etc.

All which, both by Parliament, and Grandees of the Army, there can be but
little good expected from them, and bootlesse for us any longer to wait for
their delivering us, notwithstanding their flattering delusions, and
hypocritical Fasts, making us believe they would take off our oppressions, when
they lay more on us, not at all removing the Roman power, but allowing Law to
be bought and sold still, and yet will not suffer our imprisoned friends to
have it for their money, but to lie in prison during pleasure, etc. inventing
new ways to try them; others tried, sentenced, condemned, killed, etc. even by a
Court Martial, contrary to the diabolical Norman Laws themselves.

ANd therefore we declare our intentions, that the World may take notice of our
Principles, which are for common right and freedom. And therefore, 1. We do
protest against all Arbitrary Courts, Terms, Lawyers, Impropriators, Lords of
Manors, Patents, Privileges, Customs, Tolls, Monopolizers, Incroachers,
Inhancers, etc. or any other interest-parties, whose power are Arbitrary, etc.
as not to allow, or suffer our selves to be inslaved by any of those parties,
but shall resist, as far as lawfully we may, all their Arbitrary proceedings.
2. We protest against the whole Norman power, as being too intolerable a
burden any longer to bear. 3. We protest against paying Tithes, Tolls, Custom,
etc. 4. We protest against coming to Westminster Terms, or to give any money to
the Lawyers, but will endeavor to have all our controversies ended by 2, 3, or
12 men of our own neighborhood, as before the Norman Conquest. 5. We protest
against any trial by a Martial Court, as Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Wicked; and
not for a free people to suffer in time of Peace. 6. We shall help to aid and
assist the poor, to the regaining all their Rights, dues, etc. that do belong
unto them, and are detained from them by any tyrant whatsoever. 7. And likewise
will further and help the said poor to manure, dig, etc. the said Commons, and
to fell those woods growing thereon to help them to a stock, etc. 8. All
well-affected persons that join in community in Gods way, as those Acts 2. and
desire to manure, dig, and plant in the waste grounds and Commons, shall not be
troubled or molested by any of us, but rather furthered therein. 9. We desire
to go by the golden rule of equity, viz. To do to all men as we would they
should do to us, and no otherwise; And as we would tyrannize over none, so we
shall not suffer our selves to be slaves to any whosoever.


FINIS.

