A DECLARATION Of the proceedings of the Prince of Wales, And His coming to
the Isle of JERSEY WITH His Resolution and Intentions thereupon, and a Message
to be sent to the London Merchants, containing several Demands and Proposals,
in relation to the NAVY.

ALSO, The Votes of the Parliament of England, concerning Lieut. Col. Jobn
Lilburn; and their adjudging the paper, entitled, The second part of England
's new Chains, treasonable and destructive.

TOGETHER With a Proclamation of the States of Holland, touching the Prince and
the Parliament; and the taking of 21. English ships richly laden, their Custom
amounting to above 20000. pounds.

And a List of the Parliaments Navy which are to be employed in this present
Expedition.

Imprinted at London for R. W. 30. March, 1649.

A DECLARATION Of the Prince of WALES AND His remove from the Hague in Holland,
to the Isle of Jersey; with his Resolution and intentions thereupon.
SIR,
ON the 26 of this instant, the Prince of Wales came to Helver-fluce,
accompanied by the prince of Orange, and many other Gentlemen of eminency, and
after some conference between them, his Highness took his leave, and took
shipping for Jersey, who going aboard the Convertine, lanched forth into the
Ocean with a pleasant Gale, the great Guns bidding Vale to his departure; there
are gone with him the Marquess of Newcastle, the Lord Culpepper, the Lord
Wilmot, Major Genesis Massey, and many others; and from Jersey its said they are
resolved for Ireland, where the Prince intends to set up his Standard against
the parliament of England, evil Council prevail much: the ships who
transported them from hence were all Men of war, being 8 in number, His
Highness is very potent, and numerous in shipping, who seize and take several
prizes at Sea, which does much propagate their design; insomuch, that many
Engiish Factors, have solicited Him, desiring that speedy care may be taken for
prevention thereof, and after some consultation with his Council in reference
to the same, He declared, and promsied, That if the Merchants of the City of
London would gather and advance the sum of 40000. l. for the maintenance of his
Navy at Sea, the like should be prevented for the future; and to the end there
might be free trading and commerce at Sea, He was resolved to send a message,
to acquaint them with these his desires, etc. The Clergy are exceedingly
enraged at the transactions in England, and do incite the people to desperate
engagements for revenge of the Royal blood, and investing Charles the second
in his Throne: But the States at a general council resolved, That proclamation
should be made through out the United Provinces, That such Ministers as should
hereafter preach either publicly or privately, any thing concerning State
affairs, either in relation to the differences of England, Scotland, France, or
elsewhere, or should hold any private correspondency from England, or else
where, as to that purpose should be forthwith banished. This Proclamation was
proclaimed by Order from the States.

Brill 27 Martii, 1649.

On the 26 of this instant we received intelligence that 21 English ships are
lately seized on at Sea, by Pr. Rupert and his Associats; some of whom were of
great value: the custom thereof, and the two the French took in the straits
amounting to above 20000.l. Diverse other ships have been also seized on near
Rye, Hastings, and other places.

On the 28. a great storm arose in the hearts of many throughout the Cities of
London and Westminster, occasioned by the apprehending of Lteut. col. Joh.
Lilburn, Mr. Overton, and others, upon suspicion of being authors or dispersers
of a book, entitled The second part of Englands new Chains, lately prin^ed and
dispersed by those called Levellers: the House after many hours debate
thereupon, voted the said Book treasonable, pernicious and of dangerous
consequence.

Upon the apprehending of the aforesaid persons many jealousies arose in
relation to a rising within the city for the rescuing of them from the power of
the Soldiers; but their Guardiants conducted them safe to White Hall, where
they now remain under restraint. Lieu. col. Lilburn shows a great deal of
courage and seems not to be danted in the least, saying; That He is resolved to
sacrifice his life for the liberty and freedom of the people of England. But if
this be freedom, to divide the people, and level estates, let all rational
men judge.

Sir,
our Treaty with this desperate enemy is now ended and the Castle delivered up
to us, I shall give you a brief relation of the whole proceed thereupon. Upon
Monday morning last their Commissioners (according to leave given them) came
out of the Castle, our Commissioners showed them the Articles that we would
grant them upon surrender thereof; which when they had read, one of them did
swear (and the rest concurred therein) that they would hold it out to the last
moment thkt their provisions lasted, and when those were done, they would eat
their horses, and after them their prisoners, before they would be so
perfidious to deliver their Governor, or any other of the six demanded by them
to Justice; but this they offered (upon a second debate) that they would
surrender the Castle on Wednsday next, and if the six persons demanded could
escape by force or othrrwise, that it should be adjudged lawful, and no breach
of the Art cles, which at last was assented unto, the Articles were then that
night wholly concluded on by the Commissiners on both sides; the substance
thus: that all Officers and soldiers, except the six persons before excepted)
should have passes to go to their several homes, there to live quietly without
molestation, and protections for so doing, they submitting to all orders
ordinances, and Acts of Parliament; and so many of them as have estates to
compound for, to have the Major Generals Letter of recommendation to
Parliament, or Committee of Goldsmiths-hall, for their moderate and easy
compositions; they engaging by particular subscriptions before their departure,
never to act, Council or abet any thing prejudicial, to the Parliament or
State of England. The articles signed, and sealed, and hostages given; the
endeavor of our Soldiery was to look nar^^owly to the escape of the
Governor, and the five other excepted persons (they having notice that they
intended to make a speedy and bold attempt for that purpose) on Thursday about
the dusk of the evening, these six desperite (but to give the Devils their due)
yet gallant enemies, make a salley three on the one side of the Castle and
three one the other, the Governor, and the two other with him (being gallantly
mounted) leap our works, charge our guards, and enter them in defiance of all
opposition, and force through, with many wounds given to them, and especially
their horses having no sooner past through this extreme hot service, they were
forced to engage with a strong party of our forces, that were coming to relief
the guards, and though themselves and their norses were so exceedingly wounded
before they armed their selves, with their first resolu^ion, and with a most
desperate charge forced through, though much wounded again by this party. No
sooner had they cleared themselves of this second engagement, but a party of
our horse pursue them, and having no way to avoid these foot who took our horse
to be another part of the enemies, fired upon them, and before they could make
themselves known to be friends, the Governor, and the other two were quite
escaped, but pursuing them about a mile by blood, found two of their horses
mortally wounded, and the riders forsaken them, and escaped with the Governor
none of them being isnce heard of. The three that sallied out on the other side
were repulst, and that night hid themselves in a private vault in the Castle,
hoping to work themselves out before, they be discovered. Wednsday morning the
Castle was surrendered and the Articles exactly performed, they found forty
barrels of powder, fish and flesh in abundance, with much corn, which might
have preserved these three hundred enemies three months longer, if the private
soldiery would have stood it out.

Pontefract, March, 26.

A List of the Navy designed for this present Expedition to beset forth by the
Parliament of England.
TFyumph 56 Guns, Capt. Robert Moulton. Bonadventure 46.Captain Hackwell.
Happy Entrace 46 Captain VVildy. Victory 56 guns. Leopard 46. Garland 46.
Mary-Rose 30. Hector 30. Tenth VVhelp 22. Greyhound 22. Nichodemus 20. Weymouth
Frigate 16. True-Love 22. Increase 22. Eighth Whelp 22. Globe 22. Discovery 22.
Faulcon 22. Delight 30. Dove 12. Robert 12. Hunter 12. Eagle 13. Samuel 8.
Scout 8. Spy 8. Fly 8. Fortune 8. 12 Merchants ships hired with diverse others
Ships for the Coast of Ireland.
St. Andrew 56 Guns, capt. Sir George Aschew. Lion 46 Captain Pen. Elizabeth 38
Capt. Reves. Dragon 38 Cap. Young. Tiger 38 Cap. Peacock. Nonsuch 36 Cap.
Willoughby. Adventure 36 Capt. Ball. Assurance 36 Ca. Tailor. Expedition 30 C.
wheeler. Phoenix 36 Cap. Harrison. Providence 30. Signet 32. Star 22. Cressent
22. Constant Warwick 30. Hynd 22. Dolphin 22. Lilley 12. Cavaleer 10. Charles
26. Swan 26.

Imprimatur

T. JENNINGS.

FINIS.

