seal or coat of arms of the Commonwealth
AN ACT For punishing of such Persons as live at high Rates, and have no
visible Estate, Profession or Calling answerable thereunto.
WHereas diverse lewd and dissolute Persons in this Commonwealth, live at very
high Rates and great Expenses, having no visible Estate, Profession, or Caling
(answerable thereunto) to maintain themselves in their licentious, loose and
ungodly practices, do make it their Trade and Livelihood to Cheat, Deboyst,
Cozen, and Deceive the young Gentry, and other the good People of this
Commonwealth; Be it Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all and every Justice of Peace, in
any County, and all and every Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other head Officer,
in any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, shall, within their respective
Limits, have power and Authority, by Warrant under his or their hands and
Seals, to send for every such person or persons, and to require of him or them
sufficient Sureties, as well for his as their appearance at the next General
Sessions for the Peace, to be held in such County, City, Borough or Town
Corporate, as for his or their good abearing; And in case such person or
persons shall refuse or neglect to find such sufficient Sureties, then to send
such person or persons to the Common Goal, there to remain until he or they
shall find Sureties as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at such General
Sessions for the Peace, to be held within such County, City, Borough, or Town
Corporate as aforesaid, such person or persons, shall be Indicted for so living
at high Rates and great Expenses, having no visible Estate, Profession, or
Calling answerable thereunto, upon which Indictment if he or they shall be
legally convicted of the said Offense or Offenses, then every such person or
persons shall be sent to the house of Correction, there to be punished and set
on work according to the Law, and there to continue for the space of three
months; And if such person or persons shall be convicted as aforesaid a second
time for the like Offense, then such person or persons, shall be committed to
the house of Correction, there to be punished and set on work, and there to
continue until he or they shall be discharged by the Justices in open Sessions.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, at any time after the first day of August, which shall be in the year
of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty and seven, shall, (by playing at
Cards, Dice, Tables, Tennis, Bowls, or Shovelboard, Cockfighting, or by
Horse-races, or any Game or Games, or by bearing any part in the Adventure, or
by betting on the sides or hands of such as do or shall play as aforesaid)
directly or indirectly, win or gain unto him or themselves, any sum or sums of
money, or other thing valuable whatsoever, That then every person and persons,
so winning or gaining as aforesaid, shall forfeit double the sum or value so
won or gained; One Moyty thereof to the Protector, the other Moyty unto the
person or persons who shall lose ye same, so as such loser do or shall
prosecute or sue for the same within three Months next after such Forfeiture;
And in default of such prosecution, the said other Moyty to such person or
persons who shall or will prosecute or sue for the same at anytime within six
Months next after the said three Months expired.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several
Forfeitures in this Act before mentioned, shall or may be recovered by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of the four Courts of Record at
Westminster, wherein no Essoign or Wager of Law shall be allowed: And that all
and every such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, Informer or Informers, shall in every
such Suit, recover his or their double Costs; Any Law or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Judgments,
Statutes, Recognizances, Mortgages, Bonds, Bills, Promises, Covenants, Decrees
and other Assurances and Engagements whatsoever, that any time, since the four
and twentieth day of June, in the year One thousand six hundred forty seven,
have been, or shall hereafter knowingly be obtained by, or otherwise Made,
Given, Acknowledged, or Entered into, to any Scrivener or Scriveners, or to any
other Person or Persons, for security, or in satisfaction of money, or other
things, since the time aforesaid, Played for, or hereafter to be Played for, or
Lost at Cards, Dice, Tables, Tennis, Bowls, Shovel-board, or by Cock-fighting,
or by Horse-races, or by any Game or Games, or by bearing any part in the
Adventure, or by Betting on the sides or hands of such as Do or shall Play as
aforesaid, shall be utterly void and of none effect.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.


