THE DEMANDS AND DESIRES Of His Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, AND His
General Council of Officers. TO The Right Honorable the Lord Major, and Court
of Aldermen, and their Resolution touching all other Officers and Citizens, who
shall oppose or neglect the said Demands and Desires. WITH His Excellencies
Message and Proposals to the Lord Major, showing the grounds and reasons of the
Armies entering the said City, and upon what terms and conditions he will remand
them back again. LIKEWISE, The Impeachment, Demands, and Proposals of the Army,
concerning Major General Brown.

BY the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax Lord General, and His
General Council of Officers,

Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN WOOLRIDGE, 1648.

THE DEMANDS OF THE ARMY, TO The Lord Major of London, concerning Major Genesis
Brown, and the City.
ON Friday December. 7. Col. Dean entered the City of London with a party of Horse
and Foot, and seized on the Treasuries in Goldsmiths Hall, and Weavers Hall,
for the payment of the Soldiery, during their residence hereabouts; another
party also marched to the Sessions house in the Old Bayley, where they demanded
the person of Major Genesis Brown; but the Lord Major engaged for his forth
coming, and gave a satisfactory answer to the Officers who came to seize his
person; from thence they marched to Guidl-hall, and other places in the City,
deporting themselves with great civility, and (in obedience to the Command of
the Lord General) quartered at Paul's, Blackfriars, and other places adjacent.

His Excellency likewise sent a declaratory message to the Lord Major, in order
to the proceedings of the Soldiery, a copy whereof follows.

My Lord,
HAving sent so often to you for the arreares due from the City, and desired
sums of money to be advanced by you, far short of the sums due from you, yet I
have been delayed and denied, to the hazard of the army, and the prejudice of
others in the Suburbs upon whom they are quartered; wherefore I thought fit to
send to seize the said Tresuries, and to send some forces into the City to
quarter there, until I may be satisfied the Arrears due unto the Army: and if
this seem strange unto you, it is no less then that our forces have been
ordered to do by the Parl. in the several Counties of the Kingdom where
assesments have not bin paid, and there to continue until they have bin paid:
and here give me leave to tell you, the Counties of the kingdom have born free
quarter, and that in a great measure, for want of your paying your Arrears
equally with them; wherefore, these ways if they dislike you, yet they are
merely long of your selves, and are of as great regret to me and to the Army as
your selves, we wishing not only the good and prosperity of your City, but that
things may be so carried toward you, as may give no cause of jealousy: I
thought fit to let you know, that if you shall take a speedy course to supply
us with 40000. l. forthwith, according to my former Desire, and provide
speedily what also is in Arrear, I shall not only cause the moneys in the
Treasuries to be not made use of, but leave them to be disposed of as right
they might, and also cause my Forces to be withdrawn from being in any sort
troublesome or chargable to the City; And let the world judge whether this be
not just and equal dealing with you.

I rest, My Lord, Your affectionate servant, T. FAIRFAX.

May it please your Excellency,
WE your Excellencies Servants, not stirred up by any affection to meddle with
matters besides the business of our respective Employments, nor any way
favoring distempers amongst our selves, or others, but singly and faithfully
we come to your Excellency in this petition abundantly pressed thereto from the
conscience and sense we have of the near approach of Ruin to all honest
parties of the Kingdom; and your self and the Army amongst the rest, whereof
the present transactions with the King, the late transactions of the Scots, and
of a prevalent party in the Houses, are palpable and unhappy evidences to all
the word, a-moulding such a closure of the present differences, as we apprehend
most certainly strengthen all the old corruptions in the former Government and
so leave the Kingdom in a more desperate bondage then yet it ever felt. Amongst
all which generals we further present your Excellency with these ensuing
particulars.

1 By what evidences and proofs, or upon what Reasons and grounds the King
stands acquitted of the charge of the Houses against him, in their late
Declaration to the Kingdom.

2 What persons especially what members of either Houses have played the
Traitors, by inviting the Scots to invade this Kingdom, or gave them
countenance, or encouragement in that perfidious attempt.

3 That the promoters of the first and second war be brought to Justice.

4 That the arrears and debts of the Kingdom be secured and satisfied, and that
the public faith be not made a public fraud to the Kingdom,

Signed by the Officers and Soldiers in the West of England.

The Armies Impeachment.
THat whereas Denzil Hollis Esquire; Lionel Copley Esquire; Maj. Genesis Massy, and others
of your members, were in the year 1647. impeached by your selves for treason or
for high crimes and misdemeanors, in relation to the treasonable Engagement of
the city of London, etc. and upon clear proofs against them, were by your
censure expelled the House; yet by the prevalency of their Faction the same
persons were afterwa^ds readmitted to sit in the House, and vote as formerly,
without any trial or satisfaction in the things whereof they were accused: We
demand that all those members so impeached may be forthwith secured, to be
brought to justice or trial for their said crims, and that such others of their
faction, may be secluded from the House, etc.

That whereas by the confederacy of Major Genesis Brown (now Sheriff of London)
with the said impeached members, and others, the Scots were invited and drawn
in to invade this Kingdom the last Summer, insomuch as when upon the actual
Invasion the House proceeded to declare them enemies, and those that adhered to
them traitors; yet the said confederates and other treacherous members (to the
number of ninety and odd, as upon the division of the House appeared) did by
their Councels and Votes endeavor to hinder the house from declaring against
their confederate invaeers; We desire, that the said M.G. Brown may be also
secured and brought to judgment, and that the rest of the ninety and odd
persons dissenting in the said vote, may be excluded the house, and not
trusted further in your Councels.

That whereas in a continued Series of your proceedings for many months
together, we have seen the prevalence of the same treacherous, corupt, and
divided councels, through factions and private interests, and in their late
Votes declaring the Kings past concessions to be a ground for the house to
proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the kingdom, notwithstanding
the visible insufficiency and defects of them in things essentially concerning
the public interest and liberties of the Kingdom.

That such as by faithfulness have retained their trust, being set in a
condition to pursue and perform the same, with out such interruptions,
diversions and depravations of councels, as formerly, We shall desire and hope
you will speedily nnd vigorously proceed, 1 To take order for the execution of
Justice, 2 To set a short period to your own power, 3 To provide for a speedy
succession of equal Representatives, according to our late Remonstrance,
wherein differences in the kingdom may be ended, and we and others may
comfortably acquiese; as (for our parts) we hereby engage, and assure you we
shall.

By the Appointment of his Excellency the Lord Falrfax, Lord General, and his
General Council of Officers. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.
Col. Pride having received Orders from the General, to secure a certain
number of the Parliament, on Wednesday last marched with his Regiment to
Westminster, and took diverse of them into custody, viz. Sir William Waller,
Major Genesis Massey, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Col. Hollis, Col. Fines, and about 30
more who are committed to safe custody, and whether they shall have their
inlargment upon paroll, or be continued prisoners is uncertain.



His Excellench has sent a message to the Aldermen of London, riquiring them
to provide and make provision for the Soldiery, in order to their
accommodation for Bedding, etc. to be equally apportioned upon the several
divisions within their Wards, and upon the several Householders that are of
ability to furnish the same.

And in case that any shall neglect therein, his Excellency does declare, that
he shall be necessitated to send Soldiers, either to fetch such proportions of
Bedding from them that fail, or else to quarter with them; and must take such
course against either those Aldermen, and other Officers in the City, who shall
neglect to rate and bring in the proportions required from their respective
Wards and Divisions, or against those Inhabitants who shall refuse to supply
the proportions rated upon them, as shall be fit to use toward such obstinate
opposers of that orderly supply, which is so necessary for the ease and quiet
of the City, and for the subsistence of the Army.

FINIS.

