THE East India TRADE.
BEing a Jewel not enough to be valued, Or to say the least can be said of it,
not fit to be thrown away, has many Sessions of Parliament much troubled the
House, occasioned by two Interests, both striving to get the same Thing; the
one being the Interest of the Old Company, the other being the Interest of many
other Rich Men, who very fain would be a New. This together with some Clauses
in the Old Company's Charter, which say, there shall Three Years Notice be
given, before that Charter should determine, so puzzled the Cause, that the
whole was referred to the King; but before any thing was done by His Majesty
in it, Providence so ordered the Matter, that the Old Company's Charter by Act
of Parliament became Null and Void; and the Prudence of Their Majesty's
thereupon so ordered the Matter, that in the New Charter given them, there is
(among other things) Power reserved till Michaelmas 1694. to even Determine
that Charter.

So that this Matter seems to come plainly before the House to Advise in it as
they shall see best: And if the House does not now so Order the Matter, that
these Mighty great Riches to be hoped from ^he Indies, so strove for by some,
may be given to all, according (...) their respective Interests they have in
the Lands and other Rents of this Kingdom, the Generations to come in every
Parish of England, when they shall come to know the Advantage they might have
had by being concerned in this Trade, and find themselves excluded from it,
will say at the least, there was an Opportunity slipped; whereas if the Matter be
but so ordered, as that the Benefit of that Trade may in General as aforesaid
accrue unto all, all must be certainly pleased with it: Besides which, at this
time it may possibly further Advantage the Public, in case they Resolve to
raise the Tax on Land by way of a Pound Rate, by making the Land-Owners the
more willing to let their Estates be Taxed to the true Value, that so they may
accordingly be concerned in this Trade, which in few Years will make them
Amends, if settled in some Method, like what is herein after proposed, which
being Printed last Year, is at the desire of some (who then seemed to be
pleased with it) reprinted in the very same words, as follows. To preserve the
East India Trade, in such sort as to make it National truly for the good of the
Public, and so that the Landed Men of the Kingdom, who are most burdened with
Taxes, and are the only Persons can and will suffer in their Rents and Estates,
unless concerned some way in Interest by the now intended Increase of this
Mighty East India Trade may not be prejudiced, but rather much Advantaged
thereby, and without paying down any thing for it.

It Is Proposed,
That this Trade should be settled by Parliament, so as to be carried on by a
Joynt-Stock Exclusive to others, and under such Regulations as shall be
expressed in the Act.

That this Trade should be Managed by a Number of Persons (less than Fifteen
enough) to be chosen by Parliament, to whom they should be accountable, and
that upon Oath, when required.

That that Number of Persons shall (by a common Seal) be Empowered to take up
Money at Interest, not exceeding 1400000 l. for carrying on of this Trade, at
such time, and in such proportions as shall by them be found needful for it.

That the Money so taken up and employed in this Trade, shall always be liable
to pay Principal and Interest to the Lenders thereof as the same becomes due,
and be required. And,

That there may be no fear of borrowing Money enough to thus carry on well this
New intended East India Trade, it is farther Proposed,

That there should be settled for ever, one single Months Tax in a Year, after
the rate of 70000 l. per Mensem, as a Fund to a perpetual Interest at 5 per
Cent. of 1400000 l. but not to be raised but when found needful by the Persons
appointed to Manage the Trade.

So that besides the Money employed in this Trade, and the Profit of it, out of
which the Interest of the Money to be Borrowed for the carrying it on, may be
easily paid, here will be Land Security as a perpetual Fund for the Interest
settled, so that should the Stock fail, the Lenders will be secure, which will
give the Company such a Credit, they can never want Money at the lowest
Interest that any where it can be had. And,

Thus the Profits first arising, may go to clear the Money first Borrowed, and
after that is paid, to the Owners of Land in Proportion to their Estates as
Rated to this single Months Tax; and to make this effectual, the whole Stock
and its Proceed must for ever remain so fixed to the Land it self, that it
shall be in the Power of no Man to sell the one, without selling the other at
all, and it may be hence hoped, that after the first five or six years (without
paying one Penny) the Landed-men of the Nation may have the whole Benefit of
this great East India Trade. And,

When any Dividend (after the Money borrowed to carry on the Trade is repaid
shall be made of the Profits, it ought never to be under 15 per Cent. which
(upon a Stock of 1400000 l. to be kept always entire) amounts to 2^0000 l. and
that at the rate of 70000 l. per Mensem will be a just three Months Tax, which
on such Dividend (to yearly be hoped for) should be paid to the Sheriff of the
County, and by him be sent to each Division or Hundred of his County, and
thence to each Parish, where the owner of Land will receive as much Money as
his Land would be assest at for a three Months Tax, after the rate of 70000 l.
per Mensem on every such Dividend made. And this way of deviding will be very
easy and safe. And,

This would make it National truly, and a great Advantage to all, and Landed
Men only being therein concerned, and such a Fund of Security settled, the Stock
might at any time be easily enlarged (if found needful) for the Public
Advantage and Profit; so that 'twould quickly outdo all Companies that ever
set up in England, be a general Good, and to be never complained of, which any
other (on a Stock raised by Subscriptions) will very soon be, and by especially
such who may after have Money, they would gladly put into it, having not at the
first Subscribed to it.

To this it may and will be objected and said,

This is a matter of Trade, and best managed by Merchants who know one another,
and so are only able to choose fit Managers for it, whose Interest in a Stock
(to be raised by Subscriptions) will always oblige them to act the best they
can for it; and Merchants being this way Excluded, where will you find able and
honest Men to undertake it, that will mind and manage the Trade to the best
advantage, so well as such Merchants would do that might have great Stocks
themselves in that Trade.

Answer,
Merchants are not so Excluded, but that they may be chosen for the Managers of
it, and it is not to be doubted, but that the Parliament may choose as able and
honest Men as Subscribers can, for a Committee to manage this Trade, and those
chosen by Parliament, being made Accountable to it upon Oath, are likely to act
as honestly at least as a Committee chosen by Subscribers will do for the
general good of this Stock, to the best of their knowledge and skill, and it is
fit they should have (besides a Sallery of two Cuinies Weekly) the same
Encouragement so to act for the good of the Stock, as if they themselves had
considerable Stocks in the Trade, all which may well thus be contrived.

Suppose these Managers are obliged to meet twice a Week certain, and oftener if
needful to take care of this Stock, and that for such day of the two which they
Personally appear, to have one Guiney paid them, in lieu of a Sallery of 100 l.
yearly, but not to be paid, but only for the days they appear, which will make
them more duly attend. And

That for every Dividend made (which it is hoped may be yearly) of 15 per Cent.
as aforesaid, that there should be paid two per Cent. for that Dividend, which
as aforesaid supposing it to be 15 per Cent on a 1400000 l. Stock, makes 210000
l. and for such Dividend supposing 2 per Cent paid to the Managers, makes 4200
l. which if divided twixt fourteen Manygers, makes 300 l. each, and is equal
advantage to them, and will make them act full as well for the Common good, as
if they had each 2000 l. Stock in the Trade, and yet that advantage of 2 per
Cent. for each Dividend (supposing 210000 l. which is 15 per Cent. each year
divided) together with a Sallery of 100 l. yearly for 14 Managers of it,
amounts to but 2 s. in the 100 l. unless a Dividend made, and then but to
yearly 5600 l. which is 8 s. in each 100 l. only on the whole Stock (supposed
1400000 l.) for taking this care of the Trade, which most easily will bear such
a Charge.

Other Objections no doubt may be made, and so will by the Merchants, and such
whose Interest and Care is either to maintain the Old Company, or else by way
of Subscription (...) their own sakes to set up a New, but those and all other
Objections may, it is hoped, be easily Answered when made, and Gentlemen are
desired to take notice, that if this be not done now, it will be after this
Sessions too late.

December 29. 1693.

