Anno Regni GULIELMI III. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Septimo and Octavo.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Two and twentieth Day of November,
Anno Dom. 1695. In the Seventh Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM
the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DOIT royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. M DC XCVI.

Anno Septimo and Octavo Gulielmi III. Regis.
An Act for Erecting of Hospitals and Workhouses within the City of Bristoll,
for the better Employing and Maintaining the Poor thereof.
WHereas it is found by Experience, That the Poor in the City of Bristoll do
daily multiply, and Idleness and Debauchery amongst the meaner Sort does
greatly Increase, for want of Workhouses to set them to Work, and a sufficient
Authority to Compel them thereto, as well to the Charge of the Inhabitants and
Grief of the Charitable and Honest Citizens of the said City, as the great
Distress of the Poor themselves; for which sufficient Redress has not yet been
Provided: For Remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That from and after the Twelfth Day of May, which shall be in the Year of
our Lord, One thousand six hundred ninety and six, there be, and shall be a
Corporation to continue for ever, within the said City of Bristoll, and the
County thereof, consisting of the several Persons herein after mentioned (that
is to say) of the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, and of Eight and forty
other Persons, to be Chosen out of the Honestest and Discreetest Inhabitants of
the said City and County, by the Eleven Wards in the said City, and the Castle
Precincts there, which to all Intents and Purposes, shall be from henceforth
for ever a Ward within the said City (that is to say) Four out of each Ward,
and of such other Charitable Persons as shall be Elected and Constituted
Guardiaus of the Poor of the said City, in manner as is herein after Expressed:
And the said First Eight and forty Persons shall be Elected at a Court for that
Purpose to be held within each Ward, by the Alderman of the same, or his
Deputy, by the Votes of the Inhabitants of such Ward, Paying One Penny per Week,
or more, in his own Right, for and toward the Relief of the Poor of the said
City, or of the major Part of them then present.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Eight and
forty Persons shall be chosen in manner, as aforesaid, the said Twelfth day of
May next following, and shall continue in their Office until others shall be
Elected in their Rooms, according to the direction herein after mentioned; And
in case any of the said Persons so Elected, or any other Person Elected in
their Room, shall, after their respective Elections, happen to die, That then
it shall and may be Lawful, (...), and for the Alderman of the Ward, for which
such Person so Dying was Elected, or his Deputy, at a Court to be held within
the said Ward for that purpose, within the space of Ten days next after the
Death of such Persons, to Elect others in their place, in manner, as aforesaid;
which Court and Election, such Alderman or his Deputy is, and are hereby
required to Hold and Make: Which said Mayor and Aldermen, and Forty eight
Persons, and such other Charitable Persons so Elected and Constituted for the
time being, shall be called Guardians of the Poor of the City of Bristoll.

And to the intent that the said Guardians so Elected out of the said Wards,
may have perpetual Succession, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said respective Aldermen for the time being, or their
respective Deputies, shall and may, and are hereby required, on the First
Thursday in April, in every Second Year, from henceforth, to hold a Court in
their respective Wards, and then and there, by the Votes of the Inhabitants of
such Ward, so qualified, as aforesaid, or of the Majority of them then present,
to Elect and Choose Two of the Honestest and Discreetest Persons out of the
said Inhabitants of the said City, to be Guardians of the Poor of the said City
for the said Ward; which said Two Persons, so Elected, shall be Guardians, and
shall Succeed the Two Persous before that time first Elected, and then being
Guardians for the said Ward; and the said Two Persons so first Elected, shall
immediately, upon such Election, and Notice thereof given to them cease to be
Guardians.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayor, Aldermen,
Eight and forty Persons, and such other Charitable Persons Elected and
Constituted, as is herein mentioned and expressed, for the time being, shall
for ever hereafter in Name and Fact, be One Body Politic and Corporate in Law,
to all Intents and Purposes, and shall have a perpetual Succession, and be
called by the Name of the Governor, Deputy Governor, Assistants and Guardians
of the Poor in the said City of Bristoll; And that they shall be Enabled to
Plead and Sue, and to be Sued and Impleaded by that Name, in all Courts and
Places of Judicature within this Kingdom; and by that Name shall and may,
without License in Mortmain, Purchase, Take, or Receive any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, of the Gift, Alienation or Demise, of any Person or Persons, who
are hereby, without further License, Enabled to Transfer the same, and any
Goods and Chattels whatsoever, for the Use and Benefit of the Corporation
aforesaid. And for the better Governing of the said Corporation, the said
Mayor, Aldermen, and Eight and forty Persons, or the Majority of them, shall
have, and hereby have Authority, to meet on the Nineteenth Day of May next
following, in St. Georges Chapel in the said City, or in some other convenient
Place there, and shall on that Day, or any other Day or Time, that to them
shall seem convenient, Elect and Constitute out of, and from amongst
themselves, the several Officers following (that is to say) One Governor, One
Deputy Governor, One Treasurer, and Twelve Assistants, to continue in the said
Office for One Year, and no longer; And from thenceforth the said Governor,
Deputy Governor, Assistants, Treasurer, and other Officers, shall yearly, and
every Year, by the said Mayor, Aldermen, Forty eight Persons, and such other
Charitable Persons as shall be Elected and Constituted, as is herein mentioned
and expressed, or the Majority of them, be Elected and Constituted out of, and
from amongst themselves, on the Second Thursday in the Month of April, or any
other Day or Time, as they shall think convenient to continue in their
respective Offices, for One Year, and no longer; And the said Mayor, Aldermen,
and Forty eight Persons, and such other Charitable Persons that shall be
Elected and Constituted, as is herein mentioned and expressed, for the time
being, or the Majority of them* shall have Power, in case of the Death of any
such Officer so Elected and Constituted, before their said Year expired, to
Elect and Constitute others in their Room, to hold the said Office for the
Remainder of the said Year, and shall have Power and Authority at any time or
times, for just Cause, to remove, displace and put out any such Officer out of
his said Office, and to Elect and Constitute another in his room.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Governor,
or in his Default, the said Deputy Governor, or in both their Defaults, Six of
the said Assistants for the time being, shall have, and hereby have Power and
Authority, and are hereby Enjoined and Required from time to time, upon the
Second Thursday in every Second Month in every Year, accounting January for the
First Mouth, to hold and keep a Court or Assembly of the said Corporation
within the said City of Bristoll of One and twenty of the said Guardians at
least, on the days and time, and in manner, and for the ends in this Act
mentioned; (that is to say) The said Governor shall hold the said Court or
Assembly between the hours of One and Two in the Afternoon; and in his Default,
the said Deputy Governor, or any Six of the said Assistants, shall, after the
hour of Two, hold the same; And also, the said Governor for the time being,
shall have, and hereby has Power and Authority, at any such other time or
times as to him shall seem meet, to Summon, Assemble and Hold a Court or
Assembly of the said Corporation upon Two days Notice or Warning at the least
to be given of such Court or Asiembly to be held; And in case any Twenty of the
said Guardians upon any Emergeney, signifying it under their Hands to the
Goveruour for the time being, That it is their Desire that an Extraordinary
Court or Assembly of the said Corporation may he Called and Held, the said
Governor shall be Bound, and is hereby Enjoined and Required to Call and Hold
such Court or Assembly at such time as the said Twenty Guardians shall so
desire; and on his Refusal, the said Deputy Governor for the time being on
such signification, shall be Bound, and is hereby likewise Enjoined and
Required to Call and Hold the said Court or Assembly, and on his Refusal, any
Six of the said Assistants shall have, and hereby have Authority to Call and
Hold the said Court or Assembly; at all which Courts or Assemblies all and
every Member and Members of the said Corporation for the time being, are hereby
Enjoined to appear and be present, and not to depart from the same without the
License of the said Court or Assembly, on pain to Forfeit such reasonable Sum
and Sums of Money, not exceeding Five Shillings, to the Use of the said
Corporation, as by the said Court or Assembly, or any succeeding Court or
Assembly shall be Assessed upon them, unless they can show some reasonable
Excuse to be allowed of by the said Court or Assembly; And the said Court or
Assembly are hereby Empowered to Summon to appear before them any of the
Inhabitants of the said City to answer to Matters relating to the said
Corporation, who are hereby Required to appear upon such Summons, and answer
such Questions, on Forfeiture, to the Use of the said Corporation, of a Sum not
exceeding Two shillings and Six pence for every Default, to be Levied as is
herein after Directed.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Corporation, at the said Court or Assembly, shall have, and hereby have Power
and Authority from time to time to make and appoint a Common Seal or Seals for
the Use of the said Corporation, and to Make and Ordain Bylaws, Rules and
Ordinances for and concerning the better Governing the said Corporation, and
the Poor of the said City, and shall have, and have hereby Power to Purchase,
Buy or Exect an Hospital or Hospitals, Work house or Work houses, House or
Houses of Correction, and to provide what other Necessaries they shall think
convenient for the Seeting to Work the Poor of the said City, of what Sex or
Age soever they be, and shall have, and hereby have Power and Authority to
Compel such Idle or Poor People begging or seeking Relief, who do not betake
themselves to some lawful Employments, and such other Poor who do or shall
hereafter Receive Alms of the respective Parishes or Places where they Inhabit
or Seek the same, or by any of the Laws now in Force ought to be Maintained or
Provided for by any Parish or Place within the said City, to Dwell and Inhabit
in such Hospital or Hospitals, Work house or Work houses, and to do such Work
as they shall think them Able and Fit for; and to detain and keep in the
Service of the said Corporation, until the Age of Sixteen Years, any Poor Child
or Children of the said City, left to be Maintained by the said City, or any
Parish or Place in the same, or begging or seeking Relief, or which by any of
the Laws now in Force ought to be Maintained and Provided for by any Parish or
Place within the said City, or the Child or Children of any other Person or
Persons that are or shall be willing or desirous to place or put their Child or
Children in such Hospital or Hospitals, until their said Age of Sixteen Years;
and after they shall have attained their said Age of Sixteen Years or sooner,
the said Corporation, by Indenture, shall have Power to Bind and put Forth such
Child or Children Apprentices, to any Honest Person or Persons within the
Kingdom of England for any Number of Years, not exceeding Seven Years, as they
shall think convenient; which Indenture shall be binding to such Child or
Children.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Court or
Assembly so Constituted, as aforesaid, shall have, and hereby have power to
inflict such reasonable Correction and Punishment, on any Poor Person or
Persons within the said Hospital or Hospitals, Work house or Work houses, House
or Houses of Correction, that shall not conform to such Rules, Orders and
Ordinances so made, as aforesaid, or misbehave themselves in the same; And that
the said Court or Assembly so Constituted, as aforesaid, shall have, and hereby
have Power to appoint a Committee to consist of One and twenty of the Guardians
at the least, who, or any five of them* of which Two shall be Assistants, shall
from time to time, or at any time until the next Court, have Power to inflict
such reasonable Correction and Punishment, as aforesaid, on any such Poor
Person or Persons offencing, as aforesaid.

And for the better Carrying on so Pious and Charitable a Week, Be it Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be Lawful for the said
Corporation, in their said Courts or Assemblies, from time to time, to set down
and ascertain what Sum or Sums of Money shall be needful for the Building and
Erecting of such Hospitals, Work houses, or Houses of Correction, so that the
same do not exceed the Sum of Five thousand Pounds, to be raised within the
space of Three Years, or any longer time, as to them shall seem meet, by such
Quarterly or other Payments, as they in their discretion shall think fit; And
also from time to time, to Set down and Ascertain what Weekly, Monthly, or
other Sums, shall be needful for the maintenance of the Poor in the said
Hospital or Hospitals, Workhouse or Workhouses, House or Houses of
Correction, or within the Care of the said Corporation, so that the same do not
exceed what has been Paid in the said City toward the maintenance of the Poor
thereof, in any one of the Three last Years; And shall and may under their
Common Seal, certify the same unto the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City for
the time being; which said Mayor and any Two of the Aldermen, or any Five of
the said Aldermen without the Mayor, may, and are hereby Required from time to
time, to cause the same to be Raised and Levied by Taxation of every
Inhabitant, and of all Lands, Houses, Tithes impropriate, Appropriation of
Tithes, and all Stocks and Estates in the said City and County of the same, in
equal proportion, according to their respective Worth and Values: And in order
thereunto, the said Mayor and any Two of the said Aldermen, or any Five of the
said Aldermen without the Mayor, shall have Power, and are hereby Required
indifferently, to proportion out the said Sum and Sums upon each Parish and
Precinct within the said City, and by their Warrants under their Hands and
Seals, to Authorize and Require the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of
each respective Parish and Precinct, to Assess the same respectively; And after
such Assessment made, by like Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to Authorize
the said respective Churchwardens and Overseers, to Demand, Gather and Receive
the same, and for Non-payment thereof (being Lawfully Demanded) to Levy the
same by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the Offender, restoring the
Surplusage to the Party so Distrained; And if no Distress can be found, then it
shall and may be Lawful, to, and for the said Mayor and any Two of the
Aldermen, or any Five of the said Aldermen without the Mayor, to commit such
Offender to Prison, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, till the same
shall be Paid: And after the same shall be Received, to Pay the same unto the
Treasurer of the said Corporation for the time being. Provided always, That if
any Person or Persons, Parish or Precinct, find him or themselves to be
unequally Taxed or Assessed, he or they may Appeal to the Justices of the Peace
of the said City and County, at their next General Quarter Sessions after such
Assessment made and demanded, who shall and hereby have full Power and
Authority, to take and make a final Order therein.

And for the Encouragement of such as shall be Benefactors to so good a Design,
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Man Charitably Disposed,
shall give One hundred Pounds, or more, toward carrying on the said Work, It
shall and may be Lawful for the said Corporation, at a Court, where there shall
be present Three and thirty of the said Guardians at the least, to Elect and
Constitute such Charitable Person to be a Guardian of the Poor of the said
City, and to continue in the said Office, as long as to the said Corporation
shall seem meet.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Corporation shall have the Care of, and Provide for the Maintenance of all the
Poor of the said City, of what Age or Kind soever they be, except such as shall
be otherwise sufficiently Provided for, by the Charitable Gifts of other
Persons, or in Hospitals or Almshouses within the said City already Erected;
And in order thereunto shall have full Power to Examine, Search and See what
Poor Persons there are come into, Inhabiting or Residing within the said City,
or any Part thereof; And shall have Power to Apprehend, or cause to be
Apprehended, any Rogues, Vagrants, Sturdy Beggars, or Idle or Disorderly
Persons within the said City and the County thereof, and to cause them to be
kept and set to Work in the said Workhouses, Hospitals or Houses of
Correction, for the Space of Three Years.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act,
or any thing herein contained, shall not any ways extend to give the said
Corporation any Power or Authority over any Almshouse, or Hospital, or any
other Charitable Gift or Use, within the said City already Given, Settled or
Erected, but that the same shall be wholly exempted therefrom, any thing herein
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Corporation in their said Court or Assembly, shall have hereby Power to Choose
and Entertain all such other Officers as shall be needful to be Employed in and
about the Premises, and them, or any of them, from time to time, to remove, as
they shall see Cause; and upon the Death or Removal of them, or any of them, to
choose others in their place, and to make and give such reasonable Allowances
to them, or any of them, out of the Stock or Revenue belonging to the said
Corporation or Hospitals, as they shall think fit.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Officer or Officers, who shall be Elected, Chosen, Appointed or Employed, in
the Execution of, or by Virtue of this Act, or any of the Powers or Authorities
thereby given, shall be liable for, or by reason of such Office or Execution,
to any of the Penalties mentioned in an Act made the Five and twentieth Year of
the Reign of King Charles the Second, for the preventing the Dangers which may
happen from Popish Recusants.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Treasurer
for the time being, and all other Officers belonging to the said Corporation,
Hospitals, Workhouses, or Houses of Correction, shall from time to time,
before such Person or Persons as the said Corporation shall thereto appoint,
Account for such Moneys, Stock, and other Things belonging to the said
Corporation, Hospitals, Workhouses, or Houses of Correction, as shall come to
their respective Hands, or be under their respective Care, upon every
reasonable warning and notice thereof, by the said Corporation to them
respectively given; And on their Neglect or Refusal to Account, as aforesaid,
shall or may be by the said Mayor, or any Two of the said Aldermen, Committed
to the County Goal for the said City and County of Bristoll, there to Remain
without Bail or Mainprize, until they shall become Conformable, and account, as
aforesaid; And if upon such Account there shall appear any thing to be in their
Hands belonging to the said Corporation, Hospitals, Work houses, or Houses of
Correction, they shall Pay and Deliver the same, as the said Corporation shall
Direct, or Give such Security for the same, as the said Corporation shall
approve of, on pain to Forfeit Double the Value thereof, to be Recovered by the
said Corporation by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in which no
Protection, Essoign or Wager of Law, or any more than One Imparlance shall be
admitted or allowed.

And it is further Enacted, That all other Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures by
this Act appointed, shall be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the said Treasurer for the time
being, Restoring to the Offender the Overplus.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons shall be Sued for any Matter or Thing which he shall do in Execution of
this Act, he may Plead the General Issue, and give the Special Matter in
Evidence; And if the Verdict shall Pass for the Defendant, or the Plaintiff
shall be Nousuited or Discontinue his Suit, the Defendant shall Recover his
Treble Costs. And this Act shall be Taken and be Allowed in all Courts within
this Kingdom as a Public Act; And all Judges and Justices are hereby Required,
as such, to take notice thereof, without specially Pleading the same; And all
Mayors, Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other Officers and
Ministers of Justice, are hereby Required to be Aiding and Assisting to the
said Corporation, and to all such Officers as shall be Employed by them, or any
of them, in the Execution of this Act, or any of the Powers or Authorities
hereby given.

FINIS.

