The East India TRADE
BEING lately Proposed by a Paper in Print to be carried on by a Stock of
1400000 l. to be took up at Interest on the Credit of it self, and upon one
Months Tax of 70000 l. to be settled for ever to Answer the Interest of so much
of that Money as the Produce of that Trade should at any time fail to afford,
(which without a mighty Misfortune can be none) and the Profit after to Redound
to the Landed Men of the Kingdom proportionable to their Respective Interest
(as more at large by that Paper appears) seeming very hard upon Merchants, and
such as only have Money, and so by that Proposal can come to have no Advantage
from that Trade, of the Benefit of which all England ought to partake: It seems
much more Reasonable it should be divided between the Owners of Money and Land,
which may be done thus.

Suppose as aforesaid the Stock for this Trade 1400000 l. to be took up at
Interest as need shall require, and the Stock it self, and one Months Tax of
70000 l. per Month for ever to be settled to secure it, which Security as
aforesaid, and a Committee to Manage (as in the Paper proposed) being settled,
let Books for Subscriptions be opened, and let 700000 l. of the 1400000 l.
Stock be Subscribed in the very same way as other Stocks are Subscribed for,
and so to always remain one half of that 1400000 l. Stock, with this for Ever
Advantage above the other half of it, viz. out of the Profits arising by the
Trade 35000 l. which is 5 per Cent. Yearly for the 700000 l. Subscribed, to be
always paid in the first place to whoever shall be the Owners of the said
700000 l. first Subscribed. And after payment of that Interest, and the
Interest of such other Money (if any) as shall more be took up for the Use of
the Company, is paid.

The remaining Profits to be divided as upon a Stock of 1400000 l. the one
Moiety to those that Subscribed the 700000 l. and the other Moiety to the
Landed Men of the Kingdom, to each according to their Respective Interests. And
if no Dividend be made till 30 per Cent. may be divided, such Dividend on
1400000 l. stock will amount to 420000 l. whereof 210000 l. will answer and pay
a three Months Tax, after the Rate of 70000 l. per Month, to be paid to the
Sheriff, and by the Sheriff to the Hundred, and thence to the Parish, and there
to every Owner of Land, as his Proportion there stands. And the other 210000 l.
will answer and pay to every Subscriber 30 also per Cent. for his Money
Subscribed, in the very same manner as Dividends in the East India Company have
been at any time heretofore made.

And thus this may be settled betwixt the Merchants, who furnish the Money, and
the Landed Men, who lay down no Money, and who for half the Profit of the whole
Trade do secure it.

This way brings in as much fresh Money to carry on the Trade as is now ta^^'d
of to be Subscribed in, and will be secure (past all dispute) to whoever
Subscribes it, as far as 5 per Cent. always, besides one Moiety of all other
Profit to be reasonably hoped from the Trade.

This from time to time lets in all such as will buy themselves in, and removes
the Mighty Objection against the other Proposals, That Merchants would be by it
left out. And when any other Objection (that seems to have weight) shall
further be raised, it may be probably answered, and by the Proposer of this,
who you see is desirous that something at least for the General Good should at
this time be done in this Thing.

And Gentlemen are desired to take Notice, That in the late Charters from the
Crown to the Company (which is the only now Title they have to insist on) Power
is thereby reserved to Their Majesty's to determine those Charters at any time
before Michaelmas 1694. if so be that Their Majesty's in their Princely Wisdom
shall so please to think fit. So that whatever Alterations relating to the
East India Trade, His Majesty by Act of Parliament or otherwise, shall please
to make before Michaelmas 1694. may be made before that time without any
Injustice or true color for Clamor; whereas after that time no Alterations in
those Charters can be made without just Reason for both for One and Twenty
Years forward to come.

January 3 d. 1693 / 4.

