AN ACT For Impresting of SEAMEN.

seal of the Commonwealth

June 28. 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD and HENRY HILLS, Printers to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT For Impresting of SEAMEN.
WHereas in this time of Action the Affairs of the Commonwealth require that
there should be sufficient and full numbers of Seamen for the timely furnishing
and setting forth of the Fleets to Sea for Public Service, Be it therefore
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That the
Council of State, or Commissioners for Ordering and Managing of the Affairs of
the Admiralty and Navy, or the Generals of the Fleet, or the Commissioners of
the Navy, shall hereby have Power within the Commonwealth of England, and
Dominions thereof, at any time or times from the Five and twentieth day of June
One thousand six hundred fifty nine, by their Commissioner or Commissioners,
Officer or Officers Authorized thereunto by Warrant under their or any of their
Hands and Seals, Raise, Leavy and Impressed, such and so many Mariners, Sailers,
Watermen, Chirurgions, Gunners, Ship-Carpenters, Cawkers, Coopers, Hoymen or
Carmen, for Carriages of Provisions, as also Ships, Hoys, and other Vessels, as
shall be requisite and necessary for the Service, paying reasonable Rates for
the same whilst Employed in the Service of this Commonwealth: And the said
Mariners, Sailers, and such other persons so to be Leavied and Imprested as
aforesaid, and every of them, shall have paid and delivered to him or them upon
his or their Impresting, by the person that shall so Impressed him for Conduct
money for every mile from the place where he shall be so Impressed, to the Ship
or place where he shall be appointed to make his repair, the sum of One penny
half penny per mile, and the like sum of One penny half penny for every mile, from
the place of his Discharge, unto the place of his Abode, and shall be allowed
for his Service the same Wages and Entertainments in all respects, which is
allowed by the Parliament to any such person or persons employed in the said
Service, according to their respective Places; And if any Mariner, Sailer,
Waterman, Surgeon, Gunner, Ship-Carpenter, Cawker, Hoyman or Carman shall
refuse to be Imprested in and for the said Service, or shall hide or absent
himself at the time of the Press to avoid the said Service, he or they shall be
Committed to Prison, and there remain for the space of Six Months, unless the
Council of State, or Commissioners for Ordering and Managing the Affairs of the
Admiralty and Navy, or the Generals or Commissioners for the Navy shall see
cause to release them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Mariner and Seaman that shall be Impressed, and receive Impressed or Conduct-Money,
or shall be retained or received into the Hire or Service of this Commonwealth
to serve in any part of the Fleet or Navy, or Ship or Ships of this
Commonwealth, shall be bound, and is hereby required to appear personally at
such place and time, as by Tickets delivered to every such Mariner or Seaman,
under the hand of the person thereto Authorized, shall be set down, nominated
and appointed, and shall make his or their personal and speedy repair to such
Ship and Ships respectively, as he and they shall be directed and ordered unto,
and go on board such Ship accordingly, and continue on board the said Ship, and
do and perform his service therein, without either withdrawing or absenting him
or themselves from such Ship and Ships, or removing from one Sh^p to another,
without License in writing thereto obtained, upon pain of death; And all and
every such offense and offenses shall be by virtue of this Act, tried before
the Judges of the Admiralty for the time being, and their Associates
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer for trial of Maritine offenders, upon
directions in writing sent unto them from the Council of State, for the trial
of all and every such person and persons as shall be proceeded against for his
or their lives by virtue of this Act.

And thereupon, the said Judges of the Admiralty and their Associates
Commissioners aforesaid, by virtue of this Act, are Authorized and Required to
hear and determine the said offenses, and to arraign and try all such criminous
Delinquents for the Matters in this Act contained; And being found guilty, to
give Judgment of death upon them respectively for the same, and to cause
execution thereof to be done according to the usual course and forms of
criminal Trials, before the said Judges and Commissioners in cases of Maritine
Delinquency: And for all and every such person or persons offending in the
Premises, as shall not by such directions in writing from the Council of State
be directed to be tried before the said Judges of the Admiralty and their
Associates as aforesaid, they and every of them shall stand committed to Prison
as aforesaid, there to remain by the space of six Months without Bail or
main-prize.

And be it likewise Enacted, That all and every person and persons that shall
oppose, or resist any of the Officers entrusted for Impresting as aforesaid, in
their execution of that service, or abet or set on any others so to do, shall
for the same offenses incur the penalty of death, and be tried and adjudged,
and executed in manner and form aforesaid, by, and before the Judges of the
Admiralty and their Associates, upon like directions in writing to be sent unto
them from the Council of State; And if no such directions shall be sent for
their trial by the Council of State, that then nevertheless they the said
Offenders respectively stand committed to Prison without Bail or main-prize for
the space of six Months. And all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, and all other Officers are hereby required and enjoined to be
aiding and assisting from time to time to the Persons Authorized by virtue of
this Act, for the better putting in execution the same according to the true
intent and meaning thereof. And in case any Person or Persons employed, or to
be employed in the Impresting of any Mariner, Saylor, Waterman, Chyrurgion,
Gunner, Ship-Carpenter, Cawker, Hoyman, or Carman, shall directly or indirectly
take or receive any Money, Gratuity or Reward, for presting, changing, sparing,
or discharging of any Person or Persons so Impressed, or to be Imprested as
aforesaid; All and every such Person so offending against this Act, shall
forfeit and pay the sum of ten Pounds for every such offense, the one moiety
thereof to the use of the Commonwealth, and the other moiety to the use of such
Person or Persons who shall sue for the same in any Court of Record. Provided
always, That this Act shall not extend to the Presting any Master,
Masters-mate, Gunner, Carpenter or Boatswain, of any Ship or Vessel that is or
shall be in employment.

And lastly, For the further and better encouragement of Seamen and Watermen,
to apply themselves the more willingly to the Service, It is further Enacted
and Ordained by this present Parliament and the Authority thereof, That all
Mariners, Saylors, and likewise all Watermen, who have served an Apprentiship
by the space of seven years in their said professions, or that are Servants and
Apprentices by Indenture to any such Waterman, shall be, and are hereby freed
and exempted from being prested to serve as Soldiers in any Land-service.
Provided That no Seaman or Waterman above the age of fifty, or under the age of
fifteen years, shall be Imprested by virtue of this Act.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and be in force, until the first day of
December, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and no longer.

June 28, 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.


