AN ACT For Constituting COMMISSIONERS For Ordering and Managing the Affairs of
the Admiralty and Navy.

Thursday, February 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



royal Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

AN ACT For Constituting COMMISSIONERS For Ordering and Managing the Affairs of
the Admiralty and Navy.
FOr the better Ordering and Managing of the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy
of this Commonwealth. Be it Enacted by this Present Parliament, and by the
Authority of the same, That Robert Reynolds Esquire Attorney General of the
Commonwealth, Col. Valentine Walton, Col. Herbert Morley, Edmond West Esquire
Thomas Boon Esquire Sir Michael Livesey Baronet, Col. George Thompson, Carew
Raleigh Esquire Thomas Challoner Esquire John Lenthal Esquire Henry Darley Esquire John Weaver
Esquire John Dormer Esquire John Lisle Esquire late one of the Commissioners of the Great
Seal, General George Monck, Vice Admiral John Lawson, Richard Bradshaw Esquire Col.
Thomas Middleton, Edward Bushel Esquire Slingsby Bethel Esquire and George Cooper Esquire
or any five or more of them, whereof two of them to be Members of this
Parliament, shall be, and are hereby Constituted and Appointed Commissioners
for the Ordering, Managing, Directing, and Carrying on of the Affairs of the
Admiralty and Navy of this Commonwealth, and shall have, and hereby have
Committed unto them the full care of, and inspection into, and Directive Power
of all the things that concern or are necessary to the providing and furnishing
the ships belonging to the Commonwealth for service, and supplying them from
time to time: And the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, are
hereby Authorized and Empowered to Administer an Oath to any Persons for
examination of any matter in relation to the business of the Navy. And the said
Commissioners are Authorized to make such Orders, and issue such Warrants for
the repairing and preserving the Ships and Vessels of the Commonwealth, and for
the furnishing of them with Stores and Ammunition, for the Arming, Victualling,
Manning, Setting them forth, with all things belonging to them, and every of
them, as they shall Judge fit or the service of the Commonwealth, according to
such Orders and Directions as they from time to time shall receive from the
Parliament or Council of State. And for the Sale and Disposal of old and
unserviceable Ships and Vessels belonging to this Commonwealth, the Proceed
thereof to be paid into the Treasury of the Navy, for the use of the Navy: And
also for the New Building, Preparing, Fitting, Furnishing, Arming, Victualling,
Manning, and setting forth, such Ships and Fleets, as they shall receive
directions for, either from the Parliament or from the Council of State
appointed by Authority of Parliament. And the said Commissioners are hereby
Authorized and required from time to time, as the service of the Commonwealth
shall require, and as they shall receive Orders from the Parliament or Council
of State, to prepare a List of the Names of such Captains and Lieutenants, and
other Officers of any Ship, Frigot, or Vessel belonging to this Commonwealth,
as they shall Judge fit and able for that service. And also what Sallaries and
Wages they shall conceive just and fit to be given by the Parliament unto all
Captains, and Masters, and other Officers of any Ship, Frigor, or Vessel
belonging to this Commonwealth; and also to such Mariners, Workmen, and to all
Officers and Persons, who are and shall be employed in the Service of the
Navy. The said Lists of the Names of Captains and Masters, and other Officers
of any Ship, Frigot or Vessel, belonging to this Commonwealth; and of all
Salaries and Wages, to be presented by the said Commissioners in Writing to the
Parliament for their approbation. And the said Commissioners are hereby
Authorized and Empowered from time to time, to remove, displace, and discharge
from their Offices and Employments belonging to the Navy, or to any Ship, or
Vessel of this Commonwealth, any Officers under the Degree of Captains of
Ships, and any Mariners, Workmen, or other Persons, Employed, or to be Employed
in the Service of the Navy, or of any Ship or Vessel of this Commonwealth, and
to place such other able and fit Persons in the said Services and Employments,
in the Rooms and Places of the Persons who shall be so Discharged or Removed,
as by the said Comissioners shall be judged and thought fit for the Advantage
and Service of the Commonwealth.

Provided, That nothing in this Act shall Impeach or Alter the Power given unto
the Generals at Sea, for the Removing or Displacing of any Officer or Mariner
at Sea, and placing others in their Rooms, in case of Exigency.

And the said Commissioners are hereby Authorized and Required, by themselves,
or any other such fit Persons whom they shall for that purpose make choice of,
and appoint, with all convenient speed, to take, or cause to be taken, a true
and perfect Surveigh and Account of all the Ships, Frigots, Pinnaces, and
Vessels of or belonging to the Navy; and of all the Ammunition, Tackle,
Furniture, Cordage, Timber and Stores, belonging to them, or any of them, or in
the Docks, Yards, Storehouses, or other places belonging to the Commonwealth,
of all sorts; and also of all courses now held in the Manageing, Ordering, or
Governing of the Navy; and Deliver the same so made and taken in Wrighting,
unto the Parliament, or such as they shall Appoint to Receive the same; and
therein likewise to propound such ways and means for the establishing such
Orders and Instructions for Regulating the same, as shall be found agreeable to
the service of the Commonwealth, and may increase the Power and Forces thereof
by Sea, and to remove such corruptions and abuses as may prejudice the same,
and especially may Reduce the Mariners, Seamen, and Sea-services to good Order
and Obedience, that thereupon such speedy and effectual course may be taken by
the Parliament or Council of State, for the supplying of all defects, and
reforming of all abuses, as shall be necessary and behooveful to make and
continue the Navy serviceable and powerful (by the Blessing of God) for the
Safety and Honor of this Commonwealth: And all Officers and Ministers of or
belonging to the Navy and Ships, and every of them, from time to time, and all
others whom it may concern, are hereby enjoined and required, that they and
every of them, from time to time, be attendant upon the said Commissioners, and
do carefully and diligently observe, execute, and perform all such Orders,
Warrants, and Directions, as the said Commissioners shall make, give or direct
touching the Premises, and in pursuance of this Act: And the said Commissioners
at Land, or any one or more of the Generals, Commissioners or Commanders in
chief at Sea, are hereby Authorized and Empowered, at such time or times as they
shall judge expedient for the service of the Commonwealth and Government of
the Navy and Army at Sea, to call a Council or Councils of War of Captains or
other Officers, as to them shall seem meet, and to appoint a Judge Advocate to
attend the said Councils of War, and to do and perform the Duties of that
place, who is hereby Authorized to Administer an Oath to any Person or Persons
for the examination of any matter, which shall be depending before the said
Councils of War. And the said Councils of War are hereby Authorized to cause
any Persons belonging to the said Navy and Army at Sea to be summoned, and to
appear before them, and there to proceed to the Trial of any Offenders against
the Articles, Orders, or Ordinances of War for the Sea, by examinations of
Witnesses upon Oath, and to give Judgment, and to cause execution to be done
upon such Offenders, according to the Orders, Articles, and Ordinances of War
established by Parliament. And the said Commissioners are hereby Authorized and
empowered to do, execute and perform, all and every such farther and other
Authorities, Powers and Instructions, as shall from time to time be given unto
them by the Parliament. And be it farther Enacted, That the said Commissioners
be and are hereby Authorized and Required to Inspect the Office of the
Ordnance, and to contract or give Order for such Contracts to be made from time
to time, for all such provisions of Stores and Ammunition, as shall be
requisite for supply of the Fleets, Armies and Garrisons of this Commonwealth,
And to give Warrant from time to time to the Treasurer of the Navy, for the
payment of all such Moneys as are already Due, or shall hereafter become Due,
and owing for any such Stores or Ammunition so contracted or to be contracted
for as aforesaid: And the said Commissioners have hereby Power to make use of
the Seal of the Anchor for their Warrants, Commissions, Orders, and other
Transactions, and to make choice of and appoint such Clerks and other Officers
under them as they shall think meet, with Fitting and Competent Sallaries to
each of them, and to Direct Payment to be made by the Treasurer of the Navy of
all such Moneys as is, or shall, from time to time, grow due for any Navall
provisions to be delivered into the Public Stores. As also of the Salaries
and Wages which now are, or hereafter shall grow due to the Commanders,
Officers, and Seamen serving in the Fleet, And to any of the Officers and
Ministers relating to the Admiralty and Navy, and Yards, and to the Office of
the Ordnance, as it shall from time to time become due and payable to them or
either of them respectively; And likewise of all incident Charges, that shall
be requisite for carrying on the service by this Act entrusted with them: And
the said Commissioners are hereby Authorized and required to put in Execution
the Votes and Resolutions of Parliament passed the two and twentieth of
December, One thousand six hundred fifty two, concerning encouragement to be
given to Mariners and Seamen in the service of the Commonwealth, and all the
particulars therein, and to give such Orders from time to time as shall be
requisite for effecting thereof. And the said Commissioners are required to
Inspect, Manage and Order the preservation of the Timber and Wood, in the New
Forest, Holt Forest, and Forest of Dean, and the Works and Concernments
there, on behalf of the Commonwealth: And to give order for the Felling,
Cutting down, and making use of such and so many Timber Trees or Timber as they
shall think fit and necessary for the service of the Navy, either in the
Forest of Dean, or in the New Forest, or Holt Forest; And to order the Use
and Disposal of such Timber Trees, or other Timber, as are reserved and
excepted upon sale of the late Kings or other Lands for the Navies use: And the
said Commissioners are to Direct and Order the Managing and Working of the
Iron-Works lately erected in the Forest of Dean, for the Casting of Round
Shot, Iron Ordnance, and making of Iron for the use of the Navy, the best
manner as may conduce to the Public Service. And the said Commissioners are
hereby further authorized and empowered to issue their Warrant from time to time
to the Commissioners for Prize Goods (for the time being) to Deliver to the
Commissioners for the Navy, or to whom else the said Commissioners for the
Admiralty and Navy shall appoint, such Prize-Ships or Vessels, with their
Tackle, Furniture, Ordnance, Ammunition, or other Provisions, after they shall
be adjudged Prize, as the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them,
whereof two of them to be Members of this House, as aforesaid, shall judge fit
and necessary for the Use and Service of the Navy.

And the said Commissioners are further authorized and required to use their
utmost Endeavors, to preserve the Navall and other Public Stores, within
their Inspection and Management, from all Wastes, Spoils, and Imbeziements. And
to that end, they are hereby Empowered to cause inquiry or search to be made (as
they shall judge needful) in any Ships, Hoyes, Vessels, Houses, Shops,
Cellars, or other place or places whatsoever; And to seize or cause to be
seized and secured, all such Stores as are or shall belong to the State.

And the said Commissioners are authorized to summon and send for, and cause to
be brought before them, such person and persons as shall be suspected or found
to have Imbezelled any of the Navall Stores, and to cause such person or
persons to be committed to Prison, to be proceeded against according to Law, or
to make such speedy and due satisfaction for such Injury and Prejudice, as the
Commonwealth shall receive thereby.

And where the said Commissioners shall find any Person or Persons to have
abused or falsified their Trusts by stealing or imbezelling, buying or
receiving any of the States Stores, or countenancing or abetting the same,
They, or any five or more of them, whereof two of them to be Members of this
Parliament, have hereby Power to commit such person or persons to Prison,
during such time as they shall think fit, not exceeding the space of four
months.

And whereas there may happen to be a failer of moneys in the Prize-Office,
which by the Votes of Parliament of the two and twentieth of December, one
thousand six hundred fifty two, are assigned for relief of Sick and Wounded
Seamen, and other occasions mentioned in the said Votes, It is hereby further
Enacted, That the said Commissioners for the Admiralty be hereby empowered and
authorized to give Order to the Commissioners for the Navy, to issue their
Warrants to the Treasurer of the Navy for payment of such moneys for supply of
the said occasions, as the said Commissioners for the Admiralty shall think
fit, the said moneys to be reimbursed into the Treasury of the Navy out of the
Tenths of Prizes as they shall arise.

And in like manner the said Commissioners for the Admiralty and Navy, are
hereby Empowered from time to time to give Warrants to the Commissioners or
Treasurer for Prize Goods, for the issuing and payment of such moneys as they
shall judge necessary for maintenance and Charges of Prisoners that now are
remaining in Custody, or which hereafter shall happen to be taken in Hostility
against this Commonwealth during the time of such their Imprisonment. And the
said Commissioners have power to make Exchange of Prisoners taken at Sea, as
they, or any five of them shall think fit, whereof two to be Members of
Parliament.

And in case of failer of Moneys in the Prize-Office, the said Commissioners
for the Admiralty are to give Warrant to the Commissioners of the Navy, to make
out Bills for payment of such moneys out of the Treasury of the Navy, the same
to be reimbursed into the said Treasury of the Navy as moneys shall arise and
be paid into the Prize-Office.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Encouragement and Security of Trade and Commerce, the said Commissioners shall
from time to time, order and appoint such Ships, Frigots, and Vessels of, or
belonging to the Navy as they shall think fit, for the Conveying of the Ships
and other Vessels of Trade of this Commonwealth. And in case the Captains or
other Officers of any such Ships, Frigots or Vessels of or belonging to the
Navy, shall neglect to obey such Orders as they shall from time to time receive
in this behalf, or shall Delay the Execution thereof, or directly or indirectly
take or receive any Reward or Gratuitie for the performance of their Duty
therein, the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, whereof two of
them to be Members of this House, shall be and are hereby authorized upon proof
thereof, to displace and remove every such Captain or other Officer, so
offending as aforesaid.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and stand in Force until the tenth Day
of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty.

Thursday, Febr. 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.


