Preston, November. 17. 1646.

The deliberate RESOLUTION of the Ministers of the Gospel within the County
Palatine of LANCASTER With their grounds and Cautions according to which they
put into execution the Presbyteriall Government upon the present ORDINANCES OF
PARLIAMENT.

Jan: 1^th 1646 LONDON, Printed for LUKE FAVVNE, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Parrot in Pauls-Church-yard 1647.

Preston November. 17. 1646.
The deliberate Resolution of the Ministers of the Gospel within the County
PALATINE of LANCASTER, etc.
WE Ministers of Christ residing within the County of Lancaster, seriously
weighing, How that by the merciful assistance of God, the Parliament has
removed the book of Common Prayer with all its unnecessary and burdensome
Ceremonies, and est^blished the Directory in the room thereof; and has
abolish^d the Prelaticall Hierarchy by Archbishops, Bishops and their
Dependents and in stead thereof laid the foundation of a Presbyteriall
Government in every congregation, with subordination to Classical Provincial
and National Assembly (that government we apprehend most agreeable the Word
of God, and which is practiced by the best Reformed Churches, keeping a golden
mean betwixt Prelaticall Tyranny, and Popular Anarchy, strengthened by the light
of Nature, the most suitable to the civil Government of this Kingdom, a
Government that the old godly non-conformists who were in their times Pillars
in the Church, and the moderate conscionable conformists, did pray for, contend
for, write for, suffer for, and who if they had lived to see what we see, would
have sung old Simeons Song, and also considering, That the Parliament has
enabled the Elderships by their authority to keep away from the Lords Supper
all ignorant persons and many scandalous, with a Declaration of their
Resolution, that all sorts of notorious scandalous offenders should be
suspended from the Sacrament, and likewise authorized the Classical presbyters
to Ordain Ministers within their respective bounds: (For all which we desire
unfeignedly to be thankful to Almighty God and do hereby testify our due
acknowledgement of the wisdom, zeal, and piety of our Honorable Houses
therein;) And when also with sad and bleeding hearts we cannot but observe the
lamentable breaches, miserable confusion, disorder and unsettlement under which
this poor distressed Church groans, the increase and spreading of all kind of
errors, heresies, blasphemies, schism, and profaneness, tending to the utter
ruin of many thousand souls, and that so flatly contrary to our solemn
Covenant, and that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to the great grief and
spiritual damage of the godly has been much disused for want of a regular
and effectual means to keep back the ignorant and scandalous, and also that
sundry Congregations lie waste and desolate for want of Pastors for lack of
Ordination being all of them the woeful and sad effects of Ecclesiastical
Anarchy, and that therefore urgent and pressing necessity is incumbent upon
every one in their place, to their utmost to endeavor the putting
Church Government into execution, that so an effectual means might be applied
for the healing of this sick Church of her dangerous distempers, the remedying
whereof when in any just and lawful sort it may be obtained, may admit no
longer delay:

And whereas we have received the Votes of both Houses of Parliament, approving
the division of our County into nine Classical presbyteries, and also
approving of the Ministers and other persons represented from this County as
fit to be of the several respective Classis, for the better constituting of
Elderships in the particular congregations, and which in this extraordinary
case before government be set up we conceive very useful, (and for which we
return most humble and hearty thanks to the honorable Houses and take the same
as a real testimony of their favorable and kind acceptance of our
County-Petition lately presented to them, being hereby encouraged to hope they
also will in due time take the other particulars of that Petition into their
consideration) We do conceive it our duty, and accordingly resolve to lay hold
on this happy opportunity put into our hands, of beginning to actan reference
to Church Government, by congregationall Classical Provincial and National
Assemblies.

But yet because having perused all the several Ordinances of Parliament
concerning Church Government, we find sundry things wanting (to instance only
in excommunication for one particular) which we apprehend necessary, and that
we are as yet unsupplied or incompetently furnished with remedy against that
which may greatly annoy the Church, and also remain unsatisfied in our
consciences concerning the warrantableness of other things established; that we
may approve our selves faithful unto God, justify our actions before men, and
preserve the peace of our own consciences, we have thought it necessary in all
humility and faithfulness to declare our resolutions and the grounds we go upon.

As it is that which has hitherto preserved our fainting spirits in patience
under hope, that shortly there would come forth such a complete form of
Church Government and Discipline established by public authority as would be
in every point fully satisfactory, so in this our beginning to enter upon this
weighty business, it would have been much more to our comfort and encouragement
if our desires herein had been accomplished; yet considering, that many things
have hitherto retarded the work of reformation now in hand, and not knowing how
long it may be before it be completed, we do not apprehend we can acquit our
selves either, before God or men, therefore to do nothing at all, because we
have not every thing yet so full as we could desire, especially when we also
call to remembrance, what it has pleased the Honorable Houses to declare, so
that it cannot be expected that a present rule in every particular should be
settled all at once, but that there will be need of supplyments and additions and
happily also of alterations in some things as experience shall bring to light
the necessity thereof: But rather because we find several things established
in the present Ordinances, agreeable to the Word of God (notwithstanding our
non-satisfaction in other particulars) we conceive the discharge of our duty
toward God, the edification of our people committed to our charge, the
preventing the growth of the spreading mischiefs of the times for want of
Church Government, do require of us, that we should for the present put in
execution what we apprehend in them correspondent to the rule of Gods Word, and
pray and wait on God for the altering of what hereafter we hope may appear to
the Parliament to be otherwise, and also for the perfecting of them to an
entire model of Church Government, and Discipline in all the parts thereof,
when Gods time shall come, and he have fitted us for the receiving so great a
mercy.

Here also we do freely acknowledge that it concerns the civil Magistrate to
have his conscience satisfied, concerning the lawfulness of all those things to
which the Church craves the adding of his civil sanction. And however we
believe, all the Officers of the Church do hold their Office and Authority
immediately from Jesus Christ as Mediator, who when he ascended on high gave
gifts unto men, and who is the only spiritual King, Governor, and Monarch of
the Church, the sole head of all Ecclesiastical Power and Spiritual
Jurisdiction; and in whose name, and by whose authority the Church Officers, by
way of immediate subordination, exercise their function; And though also with
our reverend and godly brethren the Ministers of London and Westminster we hold
that the power of Church censures, and in particular the keeping of ignorant
and scandalous persons from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be in Church
Officers by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ; that is, in the Elders
that rule and those that labor in the Word and Doctrine: yet we do most readily
grant that the peaceable freedom of exercise of their office they enjoy from
the civil Magistrate, who being Christian and godly as he knows he is in duty
bound (being himself also to give an account to God how he has discharged the
duty of his place) so he also will be ready to assist, maintain, and fortify,
the jurisdiction of the Church in which respect we have conceived our selves
bound in conscience (condemning the contrary practices of our dissenting
brethren) patiently to wait upon this Reforming Parliament (who for their
assistance in matters of such high concernment have called together a reverend
and learned Assembly of godly Divines of both Kingdoms to advise withal) that
so Church Government might be set up by their authority.

And as we do take our selves bound to yield all due subjection to the civil
Power not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake; so we hope in the
exercise of our office, so to carry our selves, as not only to give no just
occasion of offense unto the Magistrate, but also to enjoy his concurrence with
us on all occasions, and to be countable to him whenever he shall call us
thereunto: as also considering the great trust reposed in us by Jesus Christ
(to whom, having received our Commission from him, we are to give an account
how we have fulfilled our Ministry in every part thereof) we conceive it our
duty, and by the grace of God resolve, to make his Word our rule, in all such
things as concern the discharge of our Spiritual functions, and shall
carefully walk according to these present Ordinances so far as we apprehend
them agreeable to the un-erring pattern and (holding our selves by manifold and
deep engagements most strictly bound to pray daily for the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, that this great work of Reformation being by them so happily begun,
may also by them with the advice of the reverend Assembly of Divines, to the
exceeding great rejoicing of all the Churches of God, be as gloriously
finished) do most humbly beseech the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God
of wisdom and might, so to direct, guide, assist, and strengthen us by his holy
Spirit in this great and weighty undertaking, as may be to the glory of his
name, the advancement of the power of godliness, the suppression of errors,
schisms, and profaneness, the edification, peace, and establishing of the
Church, the just and due content of the Christian Magistrate, the peace and
comfort of our own souls here, and that when the chief Shepherd shall appear we
may receive a crown of glory that fades not away.

FINIS.

