AN ACT For further CONTINUANCE Of the Customs and Excize.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Tuesday the 27th of December, 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this ACT be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN STREATER, 1659.

AN ACT FOR Further Continuance of the Excize and Customs.
BE it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted and Declared by this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof That the Duties and Revenue of Excise and
New Impost, Customs and Subsidies, shall be, and are hereby continued to be
paid every Person and Persons within the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Islands and Territories to them or any of them belonging from
and after the One and Thirtieth Day of December One Thousand six hundred fifty
and nine, until the First day of March, 1659, in such Manner, and according to
such Rules Rates, and Proportions as the same were paid or payable at any time
within six Months next before the sixth day of May last past, or any time
since. And that all Acts, Ordinances. Orders, and Powers made and exercised
under any Authority or Power whatsoever, for or concerning the paying,
collecting, levying, and enforcing the said Duties before the Sixth day of May
last past, or any time since, are hereby Enacted, Appointed, and Declared to be
in full Force for Paying Levying, Collecting, and Bringing in the said Duties,
with all their Arrears, to all Intents and Purposes, as if the same had been
Enacted and made by Authority of this present Parliament.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
William Harrington, John White, James Wainwright, Esquires, Mr. George
Foxcroft, and Mr. Alderman Love now one of the Sheriffs of London, or any two
or more of them, and no others, are, and shall be, Commissioners and Collectors
for the said Duties of Customs and Subsidies, and by Themselves, their Deputy
or Deputies, to Manage and Collect the same in such manner, and according to
such Authorities and Powers as in the said Acts Ordinanzes Orders, and Powers,
are set forth, limited, and appointed, and shall retain unto Themselves out of
the Receipts thereof, the sum of two pence in the pound for their Salaries and
Pains therein. And that Tho. Atkins Alderman of London, Tho: Bulstrode, Jo.
Pargeter, Benjamin Goodwin, and Thomas Lenthall, Esquires, or any Two or more
of them, and no others be, and are hereby Constituted and Appointed
Commissioners and Governors of the Excise and New Impost to all Intents to
Govern and Manage the same according to the Authorities and Powers aforesaid:
And shall have, retain, and take to their own use out of the Receipt thereof,
the sum of two pence in the pound for their Salary. And that all and every the
Sub-Commissioners, and other Inferior Officers and Persons which were employed
upon the Six and Twentieth day of December One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and
Nine, for Managing and Collecting the said Duties and Revenue, shall Remain and
Continue in their several Employments in such manner, and under such
Regulations Alterations and Controles as by the said Acts, Ordinances, and
Powers, is Declared and Appointed. And Colonel William White Luke Robinson,
Adam Baines, Doctor William Parker, and John Jackson, Esquires, or any Three or
more of them and no others, are hereby Authorized and Empowered, to Exercise and
put in Execution all and every the Acts, Ordinances, Orders, Declarations and
Powers, for the Paying, Collecting, or Levying the said Duties, and all Arrears
thereof from time to time; And for Indemnity relating to all Officers or
Persons employed, or which shall be employed, in and about the same, in as full
and ample manner as any Committee of Parliament: for Regulating the Excise,
Committee for the Navy, Commissioners for Appeals, or Committee for
Preservation of the Customs, were appointed to do, or might have done. And it
is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Colonel William White, Luke Robinson, Adam Baines, Doctor William Parker, and
John Jackson, Esquires, shall receive the sum of One Penny in the pound out of
the Receipt of the said Duties of Customs and Subsidies; and the like sum of
One penny in the pound out of the receipt of the Excise and New Impost for
their Salaries and Pains, which shall be paid from time to time by the
Commissioners of the Customs and Excise respectively.

Provided Nevertheless, and be it Enacted and Declared by the Authority of
this present Parliament, That no Merchant or Importer whatsoever, that has or
shall have any Import Account depending in the Office of Excise within the Port
of London, or in any the Out-Ports of this Commonwealth, for Goods and
Merchandises formerly entered; who shall refuse or neglect from time to time to
clear his said Accounts when duly summoned and required thereunto by the
Commissioners for Exise and New Impost, or their Sub-Commissioners
respectively, within their several Divisions (as by the Laws of Excize they are
enjoined be permitted or allowed by the said Commissioners, or
Sub-Commissioners, to have any further Credit for the said Duty, until he or
they respectively shall have duly cleared and balanced all their Accounts, in
relation to the Excise. But all and every such Merchants and Importers shall
pay the Excise for all Goods, Merchandises, and Commodities, he or they shall
import from time to time, upon the first Entry, until they shall have fully
cleared and paid in the Arrears and Balance of their Accounts, as aforesaid,
Any Law, Statute, Ordinance, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, That no Powers or Authorities
shall be Exercised by any Justice or Justices of the Peace whatsoever, for the
Levying or paying of any of ths Penalties. Fines, or Forfeitures, set or
imposed for, or concerning the Duty or Excise or New Impost, other then such
Powers as are mentioned and contained in one Act of this present Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the speedy Raising and Levying of Moneys by way of New
Impost or Excise; But that the Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners of Excise
and New Impost put the same Powers in Execution, they did might, or ought to
have done, by virtue of the said Act, or any other Act or Ordinance of this
present Parliament, Any thing to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted and Declared by this Parliament, and
the Authority thereof, That such Customs and Impost be imposed and taken for;
and upon the Tynn and Fishery of this Commonwealth, as have heretofore been
imposed or taken by Authority of this Parliament, at, or before the Twentieth
Day of April, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty Three, and no other:
Any thing in this Act or in any other Act or Ordinance to the contrary
notwithstanding.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.


