To the Parliament of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
The humble Petition of Edward Dendy.
SHOWS,
THat upon Saturday the 30. of July 1653. the Parliament then sitting they were
pleased to Order, That your Honors Petitioner should immediately take care of
the Prison and Prisoners of the Upper Bench, and have the like charge of, and
power over the Prisoners and Officers there, as the Marshal of the said Upper
Bench at any time had or ought to have had.

That in obedience to the said Order of Parliament, your Honors Petitioner
accordingly repaired thither, and the day following, being Monday, gave the
Parliament an Account of the Condition of the said Prison, and particularly of
the place called the Rules of the Upper Bench Prison, where (for want of Room
in the Prison houses) Prisoners are lodged, and where your Petitioner found
that nothing was of force to keep the Prisoners there lodged within their
bounds, but the securities which they usually gave to the Marshall of the said
Prison; which securities being refused to be delivered to your Petitioner, your
Honors Petitioner thereupon declared to the Parliament, That he had no more
power over the Prisoners lying in the Rules, than he had of the Birds in the
air; and therefore besought the Parliament, that he might not stand charged with
that Trust, which your Petitioner never sought, and being imposed upon him, was
not able to give an Account of.

That the Parliament thereupon (being Monday the first of August) Ordered, That
the Prisoners of the Upper Bench should continue in the same places as formerly
till further order; by which Order your Petitioner supposed himself
indempnifyed. Nevertheless, since the dissolution of the late Parliament, your
Petitioner has been sued from all points of the Compass for the escape of
Prisoners lying in the Rules, though your Honors Petitioner was not able to
secure them for the reason aforesaid; neither could your Petitioner receive so
much as a List of the said Prisoners names, till about a month after your
Petitioner had been there.

That your Petitioner for the better looking to the Prisoners in the Prison
houses did (as empowered by the Parliament) make choice of several servants to
the number of twenty (being fewer than the Marshall usually employed) who
continually attended, often watching whole nights; and with much faithfulness
and diligence discharged the said trust for about the space of eight months,
during which time these poor men received not one penny of salary, because your
Petitioner received not the benefit of Chamber Rents (the chief profits of the
place) which the Prisoners refused to pay till further order of the House, nor
any other way so much as your Petitioner expended in that service; although
according to the known Maxim, Qui sentit onus, sentire debet commodum.

Wherefore your Honors Petitioner with all humble earnestness prays, That your
Honors will be pleased to put on bowels of speedy Compassion for the relief of
your Petitioners poor Servants, who, maintaining themselves at their own charge
for so long time together, in the service of the Parliament, have thereby
reduced themselves and families to so great need and misery, as your Petitioner
wants words to express the sadness of their condition.

Lastly, in as much as your Honors Petitioner never sought the said place; and
yet has undergon great charge and trouble in obeying the Parliament:

Your Petitioner most humbly prays, that according to your Honors justice he
may be relieved from all further troubles, arrests, and suits at Law, for the
escape of Prisoners, which, as your Petitioner has humbly declared, was
impossible for him to secure; and to this end your Petitioner humbly prays that
your Honors will be pleased to grant your Petitioner an Act of Indemnity, and
that your Honors will permit your Petitioner, with the advice of his Council
to draw the said Act; which your Petitioner humbly submits to your Honors
consideration.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall pray. Edward Dendy.


