blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT For liberty to Transport Spices Vngarbled.
Whereas by an Act of Parliament, made the first year of King James, for
prevention of abuses committed in putting to sale of corrupt, unclean, and
mingled Spices, Drugs, Wares, and other Merchandises Garbleable; It was thereby
for remedy thereof Enacted, that sundry sorts of Spices, Drugs, Wares and
Merchandises, in the said Act mentioned, and brought into London, and there
sold and uttered, should be sufficiently cleansed and garbled, before the same,
or any part thereof should be sold, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Spices,
Drugs, Wares and Merchandises, or the value thereof which should be sold: And
whereas a great part of the Trade of the Merchants of this Nation, Importing
and Exporting of Pepper and other Spices, Drugs, Wares and Merchandise, into
and out of this Commonwealth, in their course and return of Trade, do Import
far greater quantities thereof, then are expended and consumed in this Nation;
the overplus whereof (if lying dead) will be no advantage, either to the
Merchants, or to this Commonwealth; and if allowed to be exported ungarbled,
would tend to the great advancement of Trade and Commerce in general, the
strengthening and securing of the State by the increase of Navigation, Warlike
Ships and able Seamen, and also the great augmenting of Custom and Excize: All
which the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, seriously considering, Do
think good to Declare, Enact and Ordain, And it is hereby Enacted, Ordained and
Declared, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Merchants and
People of England, and every of them, from time to time, and at all times from
and after the Eight and twentieth of August, One thousand six hundred forty
nine, to Vend, Trade with, and Export out of this Commonwealth of England, into
any the parts beyond the Seas, any quantity or quantities of Pepper, Spices,
Wares, and Drugs, and Merchandises ungarbled, which are or shall be hereafter
by them Imported as aforesaid, without any severing, sifting, cleansing,
dividing, or garbling of the same. And be it furthermore Enacted by the
authority aforesaid, That the said Merchants and People of England, and every
of them, may likewise from time to time, and at all times hereafter, utter and
put to sale any Pepper or Spices, Drugs, Wares and Merchandises, which shall be
so severed, or that are or shall be uncleansed, undivided, or ungarbled, to any
person or persons whatsoever within this Realm, to be Exported to any part or
parts beyond the seas; and that all and every person and persons which shall so
buy any Pepper or other Spices, Drugs, Wares or Merchandises to Transport,
shall and may Transport the same Pepper or other Spices, Drugs, Wares and
Merchandises, without any severing, cleansing, dividing, or garbling of the
same, The said Statute, or any thing to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Hen Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England, October. 13. 1649.


