DEMOCRITVS TURNED STATESMAN: OR TWENTY QUAERIES Between Jest and Earnest,
proposed to all true hearted Englishmen.

Semper ego auditor tantum? nunquam ne reponam vexatus toties?
Si natura negat, facit indignatio --
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci.
LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLIX.

DEMOCRITVS TURNED STATESMAN: OR Twenty Queries between Jest and Earnest, etc.
I.
WHether it be not convenient that the doctrine of Copernicus, who held that
the world turns round, should be established by Act of Parliament, which our
late changes, alterations, and revolutions, in part have verified; and that
Tycho Brache, with the Gang of the contrary opinion be adjudged Heterodoxal,
and that from henceforth it be enacted, that what persons soever do profess,
publish, or hold forth any other Tenent contrary thereunto, be adjudged
Anathema, Maranatha, and that public thanks be given to Vrncent Wing, for the
great pains he took in the composure of that excellent piece called Harmonicon
Coeleste?

II.
Whereas it is humbly conceived fit by Machiavil and his Pupils, that all the
Gangrened Members of the body Politic be cut off, lest putrefaction of the
whole should ensue. It is therefore worthy the consideration, whether it be not
expedient to employ an Ambassador to the man in the Moon, to procure
habitations for our new Courtiers, (greater Antipodes to the present
Government, than the old constant Cavaliers:) And for the better effecting
thereof, it is deemed necessary, that the great Clerk Doctor Wilkins, Warden of
Wadham College in Oxon, in regard he has the greatest knowledge in that new
Plantation, be desired with all speed, to provide his winged Chariot for their
convenient carriage, and that he undertake the employment of a Coachman to
conduct them thither?

III.
But if that design fail, Whether it be not expedient to ship them all for
Oceana, and that Mr. Harrington our famous modern Columbus discoverer of that
floting Te^ra incognita, be desired to be the Pilot to conduct them thither,
who for his pains deserves to be made Knight of the Sun, and that in a
grateful remembrance of his good service, it should always be called after
his name, (viz.) Harringtonia?

IV.
Whether it be not convenient, or rather necessary, to call all persons to an
account that have any way contributed their assistance for the establishing of
the late deceased Tyrant as chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth? and whether
any person, or persons, who have any way abetted him, and endeavored to
confirm him in his Tyranny, or Acted under him in any places of trust, Power,
or sat in any Parliament, or Convention summoned by his Writ; be fit to be
entrusted with any office in the Commonwealth as it is now settled?

V.
Whether it be not a great contempt of the law enacted by this Parliament, that
made it Treason for any one person to aim at the sole Government of this
Commonwealth, to suffer such person to go unpunished, in despite of the said
law; and whether it be not prudence to have such person brought to cond^gn
punishment, that has transgressed that law, to terrify others for the future,
for making the like attempt?

VI.
Whether those Apostate Officers of the Army, that were Active, and grand
Instruments in suspending and disturbing this Session of Parliament, as well as
secluding, imprisoning, and injustly detracting several members of the same
Parliament before, that were eminent assertors of the peoples liberties,
against Tyranny and oppression, conscientious propagators of the Gospel, and
establishers of the fundamental, municipal law of the Land, and Valiant
Champions of the (true Old Cause;) And by their Declaration of Aug. 22. Anno
Dom. 1653. as also by a pasquil called the true State of the Commonwealth, An.
1654. declared this session of Parliament to be actually and finally dissolved
from being any more a Parliament, (by an extraordinary providence) but also
branded the members thereof ignominiously for a corrupt party, carrying on
their own ends, to perpetuate themselves as supreme Authority, never answering
the ends which God and his People expected from them, exercising Arbitrary
power, and swallowing up the ancient liberties, and properties of the people,
and to perpetuate their miseries, vexations, and oppressions through the
multitude of unnecessary Laws, and Ordinances, concerning their own particular
interest as they there at large remonstrated, be fit persons to have any
employment either Military or Civil within this Commonwealth?

VII.
Whether a Weathercock, a King-fisher, a plyant Willow, a piece of Wax capable
of all impressions, a time Server, A Persian still sacrificing to the rising
Sun, a Lord President under the late Tyrant, of his High Court of Injustice, a
man that has made Justice quick sighted, and redeemed it from blindness, be a
fit Keeper of the Commonwealths conscience?

VIII.
Whether a hot brained Parrot, that multiplies words without matter, a new
Courtier, an Apostate from his first principles, and the Good Old Cause, as
appears by a Speech he made in the last Parliament in the behalf of R. C. be
fit to be restored to his place of Attorney general for South Wales.

IX.
Whether Pride and arrogance, one who is of yeasterday and knows nothing, a
Clark, or Barrister of nine years standing, in his heart a Quaker, yesterday a
Protectorian, this day a Republican, to morrow what you please, a favourer of
levelisme, and one that is not constant in any thing but inconstancy (save only
in the opinion that there are no witches, nor can deserve death, though an Act
of Parliament be made to that end) be fit to be a Judge in Wales.

X.
Whether a Debaucher of both the Protectors, an oppresser of his Country, a
persecutor of the Godly, one that sacreligiously robbed Gods house, to build
himself sumptuous Palaces, and has purchased 5000 l. per annum, who never
fought nor drew a sword in anger, be fit to sit in that venerable assembly of
the Commonwealths representatives; or whether it be not fitter for him to be
rejected and his estate fold to pay just public debts?

XI.
Whether it be lawful for an ignorant Scribler to vent his pettish humor,
malice, and reproaches against those persons, who in the Seat of Judicature
have behaved themselves upright, just, and honest, and done the Common wealth
singular good service during both the late Protectors Government?

XII.
Whether, Levellers, Dippers, Independants, Presbyterians, Jesuits, Donatists,
Manaches, Pelagians, Enthusiasts, Schismatics, Heretics, Hypocrites, Devils
incarnate, yea what ever the present power will have them to be, of any
Religion, of all Religions, of none at all; the true Orthodox and learned
D^vines Ordaels; Knaves, Fools, yea favoure^s of their brethren learned in the
same faculties; and Telenus house of Correction in a Mercurial new found Land;
Be fit persons to be entrusted with the power over the Consciences of honest
and religious men; And whether some of them, that are so well acquainted with
(...) sterious Art of Bribery and Symony; And such Simon M^gus as by (...)
^^nack of Registry has increased his estate from a Parsonage of 100 ^ per
annum, to 1200 l. per annum land of inheritance, ought not in Justice and
prudence be called to an account, and their Estates acquired by the ruins of
the Church and several poor Ministers, be sold toward the payment of arrears
due to the poor banckrupted common Soldiers, that suffer hunger, and want,
while such enjoy the streams of Tagus in their coffers?

XIII.
Whether it be not a matter of dangerous consequence to permit, a crop-Eard
Pettifogger, a reviler of the Saints, a constant opposer of powers, an
unwearied Scribler, a Demoniack, possessed with a legion of hellish Fiends, the
Spirit of contradiction to publish a scandalous libel against the Good Old
Cause, and the defenders thereof in such a juncture of time, wherein most
Spirits are factious and apt to take fire? like tinder at the least spark of
encouragement dropping from a fiery pen.

XIIII.
Whether a Plagiarius, a Demetrius, a Jailer of our liberties, and one who in
the last assembly was in a probability to suffer for his unparalleled crimes,
be fit to be trusted with the command of the most important place of the
Nation, and whether it be not necessary to expose him to he sword of Justice,
who has so much abused the sword of the Commonwealth?

XV.
Whether it will not be wisdom to look back to the occasion of the late bloody
and unhappy war, and gradually to the prosecutions thereof; and the end that
was proposed at the beginning: and when the continuance of the medium conducing
to that end was everted; And then to return to the place where passion
captivated reason, and there to build a happy Government upon the Basis of the
True Old Cause, according to the first principles that were owned by all good
people?

XVI.
Whether it be not the purest and safest kind of free State, to have a free
Parliament elected annually, or twice a year as it was before the Conquest, and
after many years; without restraint on the wills of the free People of the
Nation; which Parliament may constitute and elect a Senate that shall act
according, and subject to the Law of the Land, in the interval of Parliament,
and so to be elected from year to year by each Parliament; which Parliaments
being the free people of Englands representatives, ought not to be restrained,
or curbed, by any sort of Court Convention, or Coun^el enjoying Coordinate
power, for that will be, to abolish the grand inconvenience of one negative
voice so much braid against, and to set up a monstrous Hydra of Negatives, (for
great care ought to be taken to preserve unity in a Republic, which lies most
obnoxious to popular commotions, and factions) [the Epidemical disease of this
Schismatical age;] And further that such men may be elected for representatives
in Parliament Councils and Senats as be wise, honest, prudent, and religious;
and not factious sectaries, or such as wear both Law, Equity, Reason, and
Religion in their Scabards, and Father all their prodigious wilful and
exorbitant actions on providence?

XVII.
Whether the Armies Declaration, and Seclusion of the Parliament in 1653 were
an absolute dissolution of that Session, and whether the people making new
Elections by virtue of O. P. his writ, and also most of the Members of the said
Parliament owning the said elections to be legal by their endeavors to be
elected, and sitting by virtue of such Election, was a confirmation thereof;
And moreover whether they can be remitted to their ancient right, by getting
possession without the concurrence of an ancient remediable right, which is
absolutely necessary to work a remitter.

XVIII.
Whether it consists with policy and national prudence to keep such a lawless
Army on foot, who are carried away with a whirl wind or tempest of ambition,
and walk Antipodes to all settled and peaceable Government, and are ready
instruments for any insolent Apostate, or tyrannical Dictator, that will equal
them in pretenses of Religion (yet denying the power thereof) and like Pompey,
will make it his design by secret engines, to cast the State into an absolute
Anarchy and confusion, that the State might cast it self into his Armies, in
necessity for a protection, and so the sovereign power be ca^^ on him, who
probably has neither reason nor law on his side, save only to make good the
saying of S^lon, who when Croesus showed him his treasury of Gold, said to him,
(that if another came that had better Iron, he would be quickly master of his
Gold?

XIX.
Whether it be not safer and more agreeable to the present Government of this
Commonwealth, and all other free States, where due course of Law is admitted
for recovery of rights, or deciding of meum and tuum, and liberty of Subjects
favored, which we have with great expense of blood so long fought for, to
raise the Militia in each County, under the command of prudent and religious
men, that have interest in their Country, and are concerned in the welfare of
the Commonwealth, and not mere hirelings, that will be apt to take any
impression, to the disturbance of the public peace, for their own private
ends, and will make their swords Patronize intolerable rapine?

XX.
Since the Apostles call Religion (our reasonable service to God) insomuch as
the very ceremonies, and figures of the old Law were full of reason and
signification, but more especially the Christian Faith under the Gospel; as in
all things, so in this, deserves to be highly magnified; holding forth the
Golden Mediocrity in this point, between the law of the heathen, and the law of
M^humet, which have embraced the two extremes, (for the first had no constant
belief or confession, but left altogether to the liberty of professors; and
the last on the other side interdicteth all arguments about the matter, and
enjoyneth unity in the manner of the profession of Religion, the one having the
very face of error, the other of imposture, whereas the faith does both admit,
and reject disputations and professions with difference;) Whether then it be
not requisite to sertle such a Religion in this Nation, as may consist with the
Apostles words, and such a mediocrity that we be neither tied on the one hand
to a Mahumetan unity of accidental discipline, and manner of worship, nor on
the other hand be left to a Heathenish liberty both in the Articles and
Principles of Religion, and also in the substantial matter of belief, and
decent manner of discipline and confession, since such boundless liberty is
the mother of all Sects, Heresies, and Atheism (which this age abounds with,
though veiled under the specious garment of tender conscience, who are enemies
to all settled Government, whether Monarchy or Oligarchy) except their heretical
opinions be favored, and themselves mounted to the Zenith of preferment, and
Stern of Government, which is hoped will never be, though highly at present
endeavored?

FINIS.

