AN ACT For Constituting COMMISSIONERS For Ordering and Managing the Affairs OF
THE Admiralty and Navy.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Passed May 31. 1659. THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT For Constituting COMMISSIONERS For Ordering and Managing the Affairs OF
THE ADMIRALTY and NAVY.
FOr the better ordering and managing of the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy
of this Commonwealth, and by the Authority of the same, Be it Enacted by this
present Parliament, That Sir Henry Vane Knight, George Thompson, John Carew,
Richard Salwey, Esqs; Colonel Wauton, William Say, John Langley, Thomas Boon,
Esqs; Colonel Morley, Colonel Salmon, Colonel Kelsey and Colonel Clerk, or any
four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, shall
be, and are hereby constituted and appointed Commissioners for the Ordering,
Managing, Directing, and carrying on of the Affairs of the Admiralty and Navy
of this Commonwealth, and shall have, and hereby have committed unto them, the
full Care of, and Inspection into, and directive Power of all the things that
concern, or are necessary to the providing and furnishing the Ships belonging
to the Commonwealth for Service, and supplying them from time to time. And the
said Commissioners, or any two or more of them are hereby Authorized and
Empowered to Administer an Oath to any Persons for the examination of any
matter in relation to the business of the Navy. And the said Commissioners, or
any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, as
aforesaid, are Authorized to make such Orders, and issue such Warrants for the
Repairing and Preserving the Ships and Vessels of the Commonwealth, and for the
Furnishing them with Stores and Ammunition, and for the Arming, Vietualling,
Manning, Setting them forth with all things belonging to them, and every of
them, as they shall judge fit for the service of the Commonwealth, according to
such Orders and Directions as they from time to time shall receive from the
Parliament or Council of State, and for the Sale and Disposal of old and
unserviceable Ships and Vessels belonging to this Commonwealth, the Proceed
thereof to be paid into the Treasury of the Navy, for the use of the Navy, And
also for the new Building, Preparing, Fitting, Furnishing, Arming, Victualling,
Manning, and Setting forth such Ships and Fleets as they shall receive
directions for, either from the Parliament, or from the Council of State,
appointed by Authority of Parliament. And the said Commissioners, or any four
or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, as
aforesaid, are hereby Authorized and required from time to time, as the Service
of the Commonwealth shall require, and as they shall receive Orders from the
Parliament, or Council of State, to prepare a List of the Names of such
Captains, and Masters, and other Officers of any Ship, Frigot, or Vessel
belonging to this Commonwealth, as they shall judge fit and able for that
Service; and also what Salaries and Wages they shall conceive just and fit to
be given by the Parliament unto all Captains and Masters, and other Officers of
any Ship, Frigot or Vessel belonging to this Commonwealth, and also to such
Mariners, Workmen, and to all Officers and Persons, who are or shall be
employed in the Service of the Navy, the said Lists of the Names of Captains
and Masters, and other Officers of any Ship, Frigot or Vessel belonging to this
Commonwealth, and of Salaries and Wages, to be presented by the said
Commissioners in writing unto the Parliament for their Approbation. And the
said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a
Member of this House, as aforesaid, are hereby Authorized and Empowered from
time to time to Remove, Displace, and Discharge from their Offices, and
Employments, belonging to the Navy, or to any Ship or Vessel of this
Commonwealth, any Officers under the Degree of Captains of Ships, and any
Mariners, Workmen, or other Persons employed or to be employed in the Service
of the Navy, or of any Ship or Vessel of this Commonwealth, and to place such
other able and fit Persons in the said Services and Employments, in the Rooms
and Places of the Persons who shall be so discharged or removed, as by the said
Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member
of this House, as aforesaid* shall be judged and thought fit for the Advantage
and Service of the Commonwealth. Provided that nothing in this Act shall
impeach or alter the Power given unto the Generals at Sea, for the Removing or
Displacing of any Officer or Mariner at Sea, and Placing others in their Rooms,
in case of Exigency. Provided also that nothing in this Act shall any way
impeach or alter the Power and Authority given by the Parliament unto the
Judges of the Admiralty, in all Marine Causes, and Causes within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, which shall or may happen. And the said
Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member
of this House, as aforesaid, are hereby Authorized and Required by themselves
or any other such fit Persons whom they shall for that purpose make Choice of,
and Appoint with all convenient Speed, to take or cause to be taken, a true and
perfect Survey and Account of all the Ships, Frigots, Pinnaces, and Vessels, of
or belonging to the Navy; and of all the Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture,
Cordage, Timber, and Stores belonging to them or any of them, or in the Docks,
Yards, Storehouses, or other Places, belonging to the Commonwealth, of all
sorts; and also of all Courses now held in the Managing, Ordering, or Governing
of the Navy, and to deliver the same so made and taken, in writing unto the
Parliament, or such as they shall appoint to receive the same, and therein
likewise to propound such ways and means for the establishing of such Orders
and Instructions for regulating the same, as shall be found agreeable to the
Service of the Commonwealth, and may increase the Power and Forces thereof by
Sea, and to remove such Corruptions and Abuses as may prejudice the same, and
especially may reduce the Mariners and Seamen, and Sea-Services to good order
and obedience; that thereupon such speedy and effectual course may be taken by
the Parliament or Council of State, for the supplying of all defects, and
reforming of all abuses, as shall be necessary and behoofful to make and
continue the Navy serviceable and powerful (by the blessing of God) for the
safety and honor of this Commonwealth. And all Officers and Ministers, of or
belonging to the Navy and Ships, and every of them, from time to time, and all
others whom it may concern, are hereby enjoined and required, That they, and
every of them, from time to time be attendant upon the said Commissioners, and
do carefully and diligently observe, execute and perform all such Orders,
Warrants and Directions, as the said Commissioners, or any four or more of
them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, as aforesaid, shall
make, give or direct touching the premises, and in pursuance of this Act; And
the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be
a Member of this House at Land, or any one or more of the Generals at Sea, are
hereby Authorized and Empowered at such time or times as they shall judge
expedient, for the Service of the Commonwealth, and Government of the Navy and
Army at Sea, to call a Council or Councels of War, of Captains or other
Officers, as to them shall seem meet, and to appoint a Judge Advocate to attend
the said Councels of War, and to do and perform the Duties of that Place, who
is hereby Authorized to Administer an Oath to any person or persons, for the
examination of any matter which shall be depending before the said Councels of
War: And the said Councels of War are hereby Authorized to cause any persons
belonging to the said Navy and Army at Sea, to be Summoned, and to appear
before them, and there to proceed to the Trial of any Offenders against the
Articles, Orders or Ordinances of War for the Sea, by Examinations of Witnesses
upon Oath, and to give Judgment, and to cause Execution to be done upon such
Offenders, according to the Orders, Articles and Ordinances of War established
by Parliament. And the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof
one of them to be a Member of this House, as aforesaid, are hereby Authorized
and Empowered to do, execute and perform, all and every such further and other
Authorities, Powers and Instructions, as shall from time to time be given unto
them by the Parliament.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any four or more of
them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, be, and are hereby
Authorized and required to Inspect the Office of the Ordnance, and to Contract,
or give order for such Contracts to be made from time to time for all such
Provisions of Stores and Ammunition, as shall be requisite for supply of the
Fleets, Armies and Garrisons of this Commonwealth, and to give Warrant from time
to time to the Treasurer of the Navy, for the payment of all such Moneys as are
already due, or shall hereafter become due and owing for any such Stores or
Ammunition so contracted, or to be contracted for, as aforesaid: And the said
Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member
of this House, have hereby Power to make use of the Seal of the Anchor, for
their Warrants, Commissions, Orders, and other Transactions, and to make choice
of, and appoint such Clerks and other Officers under them, as they shall think
meet, with sitting and competent Salaries to each of them And to direct Payment
to be made by the Treasurer of the Navy, of all such Moneys as shall from time
to time grow due for any Naval Provisions to be delivered into the Public
Stores: As also of the Salaries and Wages which now are, or hereafter shall
grow due to the Commanders, Officers and Seamen serving in the Fleet, and to
any the Officers and Ministers relating to the Admiralty and Navy, and Yards,
and to the Office of the Ordnance, as it shall from time to time become due and
payable to them or either of them respectively: And likewise of all incident
Charges that shall be requisite for carrying on the Service by this Act
entrusted with them. And the said Commissioners, or any four of them, whereof
one of them to be a Member of this House, are hereby Authorized and required to
put in execution the Votes and Resolutions of Parliament Passed the Two and
twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred fifty and two, concerning
encouragement to be given to Mariners and Seamen in the Service of the
Commonwealth, and all the particulars therein, and to give such Orders from
time to time, as shall be requisite for effecting thereof. And the said
Commissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member
of this House, are hereby Authorized and required, to Inspect, Manage and Order
the preservation of the Timber and Wood in the Forest of Dean, and the Works
and Concernments there on behalf of the Commonwealth: And to give order for the
Felling, Cutting down, and making use of such and so many Timber Trees or
Timber, as they shall think fit and necessary for the Service of the Navy,
either in the Forest of Dean, or in the New Forest; and to order the use and
disposal of such Timber Trees, or other Timber, as are reserved and excepted
upon sale of the late Kings, or other Lands for the Navies use: And the said
Commissioners are to direct and order the managing and working of the
Iron-works lately Erected in the Forest of Dean, for the casting of round shot,
Iron Ordnance, and making of Iron for the use of the Navy, in the best manner as
may conduce to the Public Service. And the said Commissioners, or any four or
more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, are hereby
further Authorized and Empowered to issue their Warrants from time to time to
the Commissiioners for Prize Goods for the time being, to deliver to the
Commissioners for the Navy, or to whom else the said Commissioners for the
Admiralty and Navy shall appoint, such Prize Ships or Vessels, with their
Tackle, Furniture, Ordnance, Ammunition, or other Provisions, after they shall
be adjudged Prize, as the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them,
whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, as aforesaid, shall judge fit
and necessary for the use and service of the Navy: And the said Commissioners
are further Authorized and required, to use their utmost endeavors to preserve
the Naval and other public Stores within their Inspection and Management,
from all Wastes, Spoils, and Imbezelments; and to that end they are hereby
empowered to cause enquiry or search to be made (as they shall judge needful)
in any Ships, Hoyes, Vessels, Houses, Shops, Cellars, or other Place or Places
whatsoever, and to Sieze or cause to be Siezed and Secured all such Stores, as
are or shall belong to the State. And the said Commissioners, or any four or
more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House, as aforesaid,
are Authorized to summon, send for, and cause to be brought before them such
Person and Persons, as shall be suspected or found to have imbezelled any of
the Naval Stores, and to cause such Person or Persons to be committed to
Prison, to be proceeded against according to Law, or to make such speedy and
due Satisfaction for such Injury or Prejudice as the Commonwealth shall receive
thereby. And where the said Commissioners shall find any Person or Persons to
have abused or falsified their Trusts, by Stealing, Imbezelling, Buying or
Receiving any of the States Stores, or Countenancing or Abetting the same, they
or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House,
have hereby power to commit such Person or Persons unto Prison, during such
time as they shall think fit, not exceeding the space of four Months.

And whereas there may happen to be a failer of Moneys in the Prize Office,
which by the Votes of Parliament of the 22th of December, 1652. are Assigned
for Relief of Sick and Wounded Seamen, and other occasions mentioned in the
said Votes; It is hereby further Enacted, That the said Commissioners for the
Admiralty, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of
this House, be hereby Empowered and Authorized, to give Order to the
Commissioners for the Navy to issue their Warrants to the Treasurer of the Navy
for payment of such Moneys, for supply of the said occasions, as the said
Commissioners for the Admiralty shall think fit, the said Moneys to be
re-imbursed into the Treasury of the Navy, out of the Tenths of Prizes, as they
shall arise. And in like manner the said Commissioners for the Admiralty and
Navy, or any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this
House, are hereby Empowered from time to time, to give Warrants to the
Commissioners or Treasurer for Prize Goods for the issuing and payment of such
Moneys, as they shall judge necessary for Maintenance and Charges of Prisoners
that now are remaining in Custody, or which hereafter shall happen to be taken
in Hostility against this Commonwealth, during the time of such their
Imprisonment. And in case of failer of Moneys in the Prize-Office, the said
Commissioners for the Admiralty, are to give Warrant to the Commissioners for
the Navy, to make out Bills for payment of such Moneys out of the Treasury of
the Navy, the same to be re-imbursed into the said Treasury of the Navy, as
Moneys shall arise, and to be paid into the Prize-Office.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
encouragement and security of Trade and Commerce, the said Commissioners, or
any four or more of them, whereof one of them to be a Member of this House,
shall from time to time order and appoint such Ships, Frigots and Vessels, of
or belonging to the Navy, as they shall think fit, for the Convoying of the
Ships and other Vessels of Trade of this Commonwealth; And in case the Captains
or other Officers of any such Ships, Frigots or Vessels, of or belonging to the
Navy, shall neglect to obey such Orders as they shall from time to time receive
in this behalf, or shall delay the execution thereof, or directly or indirectly
take or receive any reward or gratuity for the performance of their Duty
therein, the said Commmissioners, or any four or more of them, whereof one of
them to be a Member of this House, shall be, and are hereby Authorized upon
proof thereof, to displace and remove every such Captain or other Officer so
offending as aforesaid.

Provided that this Act shall continue and stand in force until the First day
of December One thousand six hundred fifty and nine.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Passed May 31. 1659. THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.


