Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.

Cum Privilegio. Aug 31

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
AN ACT For Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings.
BE it Enacted, and it is Enacted by His Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Fines, nor
final Concords, Chirographs, nor Proclamations of Fines, nor any Recoveries,
Verdicts, Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, nor Inrolments of any Deeds or
Wills, or of any such Fines, Proclamations, Recoveries, Verdicts, Judgments,
Statutes, or Recognizances, nor any Exemplifications of them, nor any of them,
nor any Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentiments, Informations, Decrees,
Sentences, Probats of Will, nor Letters of Administration, nor any Writs nor
Actings on, or Returns of Writs, Orders, or other Proceedings in Law or Equity,
had, made, given, taken, or done, or depending in the Courts of Chancery, Kings
Bench, Upper Bench, Common Pleas, and Court of Exchequer, and Courts of
Exchequer-Chamber, or any of them Sitting at Westminster, or in the Courts of
the Great Sessions in Wales, the Courts of any Counties Palatine, or Duchy of
Lancaster, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in any other inferior Courts of
Law or Equity; or by any the Judges, Clerks, Officers, Sheriffs, Coroners or
Ministers, or others, Acting in Obedience to them, or any of them, or by any
the Coutts of Admiralty, Delegats, Justices of Assize, Nisi Prius, Oyer and
Terminer, Jail-delivery, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners of Sewers,
Bank-rupts, or Charitable Uses, nor any Actings, Process, Proceedings, nor
Executions thereupon had, made, given, done, or suffered in the Kingdom of
England, since the First of May, One thousand six hundred forty two, shall be
avoided for want or defect of any Legal Power in the said Courts, Judges,
Commissioners, Justices, or any of them; or for, or by reason that the
Premises, or any of them were Commenced, Prosecuted, Had, Made, Held, or Used
in the Name, Style, or Title of the late King, or in the Name, Style, Title or
Test of Custodes Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti; Or in the Name,
Style, Title, or Test of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament; Or the Name, Style, Title or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; Or of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging;
Or the Name, Style, Title or Test of Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, or for, or by reason of any alteration of the said Names, Styles, or
Titles; Or for that the said Fines, Recoveries, Process, Pleadings,
Proceedings, and other things before mentioned, Or the Entry and Enrolment of
them, or any of them, were in the Latin or English Tongue, But that all and
every such Fines, Recoveries, and other things above mentioned, and the
Actings, Doings, and Proceedings thereupon, shall be of such, and of no other
Force, Effect and Virtue, then as if such Courts, Judges, Justices,
Commissioners, Officers and Ministers, had Acted by virtue of a True, Just, and
Legal Authority, and as if the same, and the Entry and Enrolment thereof were
in Latin, and as if the several Acts and Ordinances, or pretended Acts or
Ordinances made by both or either Houses of Parliament, or any Convention
assembled under the Name of a Parliament, or by Oliver Cromwell late Styled
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereto belonging, and his Council Warranting or Directing such
proceedings, had been Good, True, and Effectual Acts of Parliament.

And whereas, since the death of the late King, several Fines have been Levied
without any Entry, or due Entering of any sum paid pro licentia concordandi,
commonly called the Kings Silver, and without Entry, or due Entry of any sum
given to the Party for the Concord: And also whereas in the Term of S. Michael
last past, several Fines were Levied and Recorded in the Court of Common Pleas,
before One Judge only of the said Court,

Be it Enacted, That the said Fines and Proclamations thereupon, and every of
them shall be good and effectual, notwithstanding the defects aforesaid.

And be it also further Enacted, That all Fines, Proclamations of Fines,
Recoveries, and other Judicial Proceedings in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, since the death of His late Majesty King Charles the First, had,
Levied, or Suffered of any Lands lying in the County Palatine of Durham, shall
be good and effectual, notwithstanding the said Lands were lying in the said
County Palatine.

Provided, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be
Construed, Deemed, or Adjudged to make good, allow, confirm or countenance any
the Proceedings in the late Illegal and Vn-warranted High Courts of Justice, or
so called, or any of them. And whereas since the First day of May in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty one, and before the Five and
twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and
sixty, there were diverse persons that adhered to both Houses of Parliament,
who, for, or in respect of such their adherence, were Indicted, Charged, or
Impeached of Treason: And whereas since the said First day of May, in the year
of our Lord One thousand six hundred forty one, and before the said Five and
twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, diverse persons who adhered to His Majesty, or to the late King, were for
such their adherence Charged, Impeached, or Indicted of High Treason,

Be it further provided and Enacted, That the said Charges, Impeachments,
Indictments, and all Exigents, Outlawries, Convictions, and Attainders
thereupon, and all Letters Patents and Grants thereupon made, of any Manors,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Escheated or Forfeited by reason of such
Attainder, and all Title to any measn Profits by reason of such Conviction,
Outlawry, Attainder or Grant, be from henceforth repealed and discharged: And
that all Escheats, Forfeitures and Confiscations by reason of such Outlawries,
Conviction or Attainder, Be and are hereby restored unto such Persons so
Outlawed, Convicted or Attainted, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators
respectively, as if no such Attainder had been.

Provided Nevertheless, And be it Enacted, That this Act or any thing herein
contained, shall not extend to avoid or confirm any Sales or Estates made by
virtue or pretense of any Act, Order or Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or
Ordinance of Parliament, since the first day of May in the year of Our Lord,
One thousand six hundred forty two, nor any confirmation thereof made, or to be
made thereof in this present Parliament, But that such Sales stand and be in
the same plight and condition as they should or might have done if this Act had
not been made.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Recognizances,
Obligations or other securities, made or given to the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament, Or to Oliver Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, or to Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, or to
Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and not pardoned, or
discharged by any Act passed or to be passed this present Parliament, or
otherwise, other then such Recognizances, Obligations and Securities as have
been made or given (to any the pretended powers or persons aforesaid, or to any
deriving or pretending to derive Authority from them) by any person or persons,
for or by reason of their adherence to His Majesty, or His said late Royal
Father, or relating to, or arising only upon or in respect of the late
troubles, All which are hereby declared to be void, and to be delivered up to
be Cancelled, And all Judgments, Extents, Inquisi^ions, Executions and
Seizures had for the said Keepers or Protectors, or any of them, and not
likewise pardoned or discharged, other then as aforesaid, shall and may be had
and prosecuted in the name and to the use of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors; and also excepting all Obligations, Bonds, or Recognizances entered
into to the said Keepers or Protectors, or any of them, by any Person or
Persons, by Order, or direction of any Council of State, Committee of Safety,
Major Generals, Decimators, or any Officer or other Person under them, or any
other Military power, all which Obligations, Bonds and Recognizances are hereby
discharged and declared to be null and void, to all intents and purposes.

Provided also, And be it Enacted, That this Act nor any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to continue after the eight day of May in the year
of Our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, any Justice or Justices of one
Bench or the other, or Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants at Law, Commissions
of Sewers, Commissions of Bank-rupts or of Charitable uses, made or
constituted, by or in the name or style of any the late pretended powers or
Authorities.

Provided always, That it shall and may be Lawful to and for every Person and
Persons, who shall find themselves grieved or damnified by any Judgment,
Fine, Recovery, Decree or Sentence given, made, levied, granted, or pronounced
in any of the said Courts, to proceed in due form of Law, either by Writ of
Error, Bill of Review, Appeal, or other Lawful remedy, for the Reversing,
Annulling or Revoking of the same, in such manner as they might at any time
heretofore have done, if the said Courts had been Established by Lawful
Authority, other then for those Errors and defects which are remedied or
provided for by this Act.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
no Non-claim upon or after any Fine or Fines hereby made good or confirmed,
shall extend, or be construed to Bar or Prejudice any Person or Persons, their
Heirs or Successors, or their Feoffees or Trustees (other then the parties to
the said Fines and their Heirs general and special, and his and their Trustees)
as concerning such Right Claim and Interest, as they had in or to any Lands,
Tenements or other Hereditaments, which by color of any Act, Order or
Ordinance of both or either Houses of Parliament, or any Convention sitting at
Westminster, under the name or style, or assuming the name or style of a
Parliament, since the first day of May in the year of Our Lord One thousand six
hundred forty and two, and before the five and twentieth day of April, in the
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and sixty, were sold, conveyed or
disposed, as then, or late the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the King,
Queen or Prince, or of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, or
other Ecclesiastical persons, or as the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of
any other persons, for their Adherency to the late King, or His Majesty that
now is, or for any their Actings relating to, or in respect of the late
Troubles, so always that the said person or persons aforesaid, their Heirs or
Successors, pursue their Title, Claim, or Interest, by way of Action or lawful
Entry, within Five years next after the Nine and twentieth day of May, in the
year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty.

And although in this Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings, it was necessary to
mention diverse pretensed Acts and Ordinances, by the Names and Styles which
those persons then Usurped, who took upon them to pass the same, Namely, some
by the Style and Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament, and others by the Name and Style of Protectors of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; Yet this present Parliament does Declare, and it is Enacted by
Authority of the same, That the Names and Styles aforesaid, and every of them,
are most Rebellious, Wicked, Traiterous, and Abominable Usurpations, Detested
by this present Parliament, as opposite in the highest Degree to His Sacred
Majesty's most Just and Undoubted Right, to whom, and to His Heirs and Lawful
Successors, the Imperial Crowns of the Realms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, with their, and every of their Dominions and Territories do of Right
appertain, and as Violating and Infringing the Just Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and of both Houses thereof now Assembled, or that hereafter shall
be Called and Assembled.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That all and every pretended Indictment or
Indictments, Outlaws, Inquisitions, and all Proceedings thereon of High
Treason against any person or persons whatsoever, for Levying War against the
late Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, the pretended Keepers of the Liberty of England, or
any other Usurped Power, shall be from henceforth void and of none effect in
Law. And that all Grants, Conveyances, Leases, Devices, Assurances, Statutes,
Recognizances, and Judgments for Debt, Damages heretofore Had, Made, or
Suffered by any person, or his Heirs, whose Conviction, Vtlagary, or Attainder
is by this Act discharged or made void, shall be of the same Force and Effect,
as if no such Conviction, Out-lawry, or Attainder had been.

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. 1660.


