THE DEMANDS, RESOLUTIONS, AND INTENTIONS, Of the ARMY; Under the Command of
General Fairfax, and Major General CROMWELL:

For the speedy settlement of the State in Peace, according to Truth, without
Treating with those whom we have already conquered.

Commanded to be Printed and communicated to all the Freeborn people of
England, Tuesd. September 26. 1648.

Printed in the Year 1648. Sept ye 26

The Resolutions of the Army, etc.
HAving once by the blessing of God upon our endeavors dissipated and reduced
most part of the adverse Party that but lately were both strong and prevalent
in the Parliament and Kingdom; yet whilst we have been busied abroad
(fighting with the Common Enemy) a new Party have combined together, both in
the City and Parliament (not only to frustrate all that has been already acted
by us with incessant labors, to the hazard and loss of our lives and estates)
but have made use of their power to obstruct and prevent Justice, to injure,
oppress, and crush the peaceable and well affected people of the Kingdom, to
abridge and overthrow all just freedom and liberty, and to drive on designs
to set up that Party at home, which we are pulling down abroad; the ready way
not only to cast an Odium upon all we have done hitherto, but to enslave both
us and the whole Kingdom to all Posterity hereafter.

We therefore being very sensible of a very powerful Party in the City of
London, that have not only to strengthen themselves, and their pernicious
designs, closed with a desperate and Malignant Party; but sought to new
moddell the Common-Counsell, and to get the power of the Militia into their
own hands, have stirred up the poor abused people to set their hands to, and
Petition for they know not what, under the notion of a Personal Treaty; and by
their continual, violent, and pressing importunity at the Parliaments doors,
have forced them not only to revoke their former Votes, but to recall their
Declarations, concerning of making no more Addresses to the King; because
guilty not only of all the innocent blood that has been shed, but has also
remained obstinate, even for all he has lost all, and is in no condition and
power to raise or help himself; yet even at that time, when our Conquest is
near complete, to sue to, and make Addresses too, and Treat with Him that we
have already subdued; making our selves guilty of our own Acts, and of
intailing innocent blood, and slavery upon us and our children for ever
hereafter, making our selves guilty of those crimes we fight against; namely,
Tyranny, Persecution, and the like.

But Treat they will, that is their pretense; but their intent seems to be no
other then to make use of many ignorant, giddy-brained, and idolatrous people,
to throng in Multitudes to him, and so overpower themselves and theirs; yea,
and the whole Kingdom with their weight and levity. Does not Nature and
Reason, therefore teach us to prevent the mischiefs that are coming upon us,
as well as to secure our selves? And how can it be but by dissipation of them
at the first, before they have bodied, or grow numerous? The Nature and
Malignity of their Petition for a Treaty, shows the Nature and composition of
the Leaders that lead the same, whose glittering pretenses are not gold, but
lead gilded over; their words, expressions, and postures, showing the intended
ruin and postration both of us, and all we have so long, and so succesfully
achieved; yet so mad they are, that this they will do, though we are assured
they will by these courses prostrate themselves and their own in the
conclusion: Who offends them so, as such offensive defense needs to be? Does
not their arming enforce arming? Does not their universal violence, as they
will have the King home right or wrong, import them virulent? and what can be
presaged from such depravids, but prabities? Much more might be inferred from
the contence of their discontented Petition for a Treaty; so from the Leaders,
and the lead; so from their words, expressions, and postures; but comprehensive
understandings will save us a labor, and incomprehensive and wilful ones,
will make us a labor.

Therefore for diverse weighty Reasons, and to hold you no longer in suspense:
We do now declare to all people our Resolutions and Intentions:

That we cannot comply with any in their prepostrous pretended Treaty with the
King, intending siding with him, to enslave our selves and our Posterities, and
the whole Kingdom, before these Particulars following be ascertained us.

1. That they make good the Supreme of the people from all pretenses of
Negative Voices, whether it be in King or Lords, or any that shall lay
challenge to claim any such Titles.

2. That Laws be forthwith made for electing of Representatives yearly without
Writ or summons.

3. That the time of their sitting shall not exceed fifty days at the most;
and that this present Parliament end within 20. days.

4. That matters of Religion be exempted from all compulsive or restrictive,
power of any authority whatsoever.

5. That none shall be forced (or pressed) to the Wars.

6. That both Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and all Persons,
shall be alike liable to every Law of the Land.

7. That all Commoners shall be freed from the jurisdictions of the Lords in
all cases; and that all trials shall be by twelve sworn men, and no conviction
but upon two or more sufficient witnesses.

8. That none be examined against themselves, or punnished for doing that
against which no Law is provided.

9. That all Trade and Merchandising be made free from all monopolizing, and
ingrosing, by Companyes, or otherwise.

10. That all Exize, and all other kind of Taxes (except subsidies) be taken
off.

11. That all enclosures of Fennes and other Commons be laid open for the
benefit of the poor.

12. That hereafter there be no more imprisonment for debts, and that Provision
be made for the enlargement of those that are already imprisoned for the same.

13. That a way be speedily found out to set all manner of poor people on
work according to their several professions, or otherwise.

14. That the tedious burden of Tithes be taken off the people, and a more
equal way of maintenance allowed for poor Ministers.

15. That it be declared what the duty of a King, or Kingly Office is, and what
not; the Revenue ascertained; past increase or diminution.

16. That public Officers for the City of London be duly elected out of every
particular company therein, for restoring the Comonalty thereof to their just
Rights.

17. That full and ample satisfaction be made to all manner of persons that
have been oppressed by sentence of High Commission, Starchamber, or Counsel
board, or by any kind of Monopolizers or Projectors, and that full
satisfaction be made out of the estates of those that were Authors, Actors or
Promoters of so Intolerable mischieves.

18. That all C^mmittees be abolished, and all trials be referred to the true
method in every respective County.

19. That constant pay be provided for us, and Rules given to all Judges and
all other public Officers throughout the Land for our indempity, and saving
harmless all that have any ways assisted us, or that have said or done any
thing against the King, Queen, or any of his Party since the beginning of the
Parliament to the end thereof.

20. That with our lives and powers we defend the Common Liberties of the
Nation in opposition of all kind of tyranny and oppression whatsoever, be it
in King, Lords, or Commons.

21. That satisfaction be made to all the well-affected people for the loss
of limbs, or havoc and spoil of goods or the like.

Whilst these things be passed; We the Commanders and Officers of the Army
cannot in conscience disband, and are so far from accepting of an Act of
Oblivion, or In^em^ity for what we have already done for the good ^f the
Kingdom, that we rather expect that an act of Parliament should be made; that
the Armies under our command should be had in perpetual memory, and some mark
of honor fixed upon them for their great and uncessant labors, and hazards
both of lives and estates, for the preservation of the liberties of the people,
and freeing of the Kingdom from Tyranny, Popery, and the like; then to bring
us and them under an offense by the acceptance of an odious act of Oblivion,
or Indemnity; as if we were Traitors or Thieves, or had committed some great
crime against the Kingdom, or that all the innocent blood shed should lie upon
us, which we utte^^y denounce.

And furthermore we declare unto all well-affected to the Kingdom, that it
shall be our greatest care to preserve them from Tyranny, violence, and
oppression, both of our own Armies, or any forces that shall be raised against
them; and whosoever of the well-affected party shall suffer in this expedition
(doing any thing for the common good) we do promise a recompense for their
losses, and full satisfaction.

The Copy of this was sent from a great Commander in the Army, and desired to
be printed and published in the name of the Rest.

Signed, I. R.



FINIS.

