AN ACT For Enabling JUDGES To hold an Assize at Durham.

blazon of the Commonwealth

W^dnesday July 13. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament. That this Act be forth with Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT For Enabling JUDGES To hold an Assize at Durham.
BE it Enacted by Authority of Parliament, and it is hereby ordained and
appointed, That a Sessions for the County of Durham shall be holden and kept at
the City of Durham in the said County, upon the Eighth day of August now next
coming, being in this present year One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, and
that Francis Thorpe, one of the Judges of this Commonwealth, and John Parker
one other of the Judges of this Commonwealth, shall be Justices of the said
Sessions for the said County, and that all Actions, as well real as personal,
and all other Actions mixed or otherwise, and all Pleas, Procepts, Writs,
Process, Demurrers, Recognizances, Fines, Recoveries, and all other
Proceedings, matters and things which were depending in the Court of Pleas at
Durham, upon the Two and Twentieth day of August One thousand six hundred forty
two, or at any time since, and are now discontinued and put without day by not
coming of the Justices, or otherwise, shall be and stand revived, continued,
and of as fall force and effect in Law, to all intents and purposes, as they
were the said Two and Twentieth day of August, One thousand six hundred forty
two, or at any time since, and as if the same had been taken and proceeded in
before lawful Justices. And that all such Process, Pleas, Demurrers, and
Proceedings in every such Action, Actions, Suits, Bills or Plaints, which were
depending upon the said Two and Twentieth of August, One thousand six hundred
forty two, or any time since, shall stand good and effectual, and be proceeded
in, and sued forth, in such manner and form, and be in the same plight, estate,
condition and order, as if the same discontinuance, obstruction or hinderance
had never happened, any discontinuance, miscontinuance, putting without day, or
not prosecuting of the same to the contrary notwithstanding. And that the said
Justices so assigned, or one of them, after such time as they shall have the
Records of the same Pleas and Process before them, shall have full Power and
Authority to continue the said Pleas, Process, and all things that depend upon
them, and to hear and finally determine thereupon according as any other
Justice or Justices of any Sessions heretofore held at Durham, before the said
Two and Twentieth day of August, One thousand six hundred forty two, might or
ought to have done, in case there had not been any obstruction,
discontinuances, or not coming of the said Justices as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That in all Actions now depending in the Court of
Exchequer at Westminster, for any Matter or Cause arising within the said
County of Durham, and now at Issue, or which shall be brought to Issue, before
the said Eight of August, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, the tenor of
the Record thereof shall be sent by Mittimus, directed to the said Justices of
the said County of Durham, to be there tried according to the Law, and further
to be proceeded in as the Law requires. And likewise that all Writs and
Process, which have since the said Two and Twentieth day of August, One
thousand six hundred forty two, Issued forth out of the several Courts of Upper
Bench, and Common Pleas at Westminster, directed to the Sheriff of the County
of Durham, and all other Returns and other Proceedings thereupon, shall be as
good and effectual in Law, to all intents and purposes, as any of the like
Writs and Processes directed to other Sheriffs of any other Counties of
England, and Returns and other Proceedings thereupon are or ought to be; and
that such further Process, Proceeding, Trial, Judgment, and Execution may be
had thereupon, as in other Counties upon like Writs, Process, and Actions. And
that they the aforesaid assigned Justices, or either of them, shall likewise
hear and determine all and all manner of Treasons, Petty Treasons, Murders,
Manslaughters, Felonies, Burglaries, Rapes, Trespasses, Riots, Routs, Unlawful
Assemblies, and all other Offenses and Injuries whatsoever, tryable, done or
committed by any person or persons whatsoever within the said County of Durham,
against the Statutes and Laws of this Nation, in such cases made and provided:
and also to make or cause to be made a Jail-deliver there, according to the
Law and Custom of England. And that the said Justices shall act, do and perform
all other matters and things, in such manner and form as any other Justice or
Justices of Assize, or other Justice at Durham, and of the Pleas of Crown,
Common Pleas, and other Pleas, have usually and respectively acted, done and
performed at any time heretofore. And the Lords Commissioners appointed for the
Custody of the Great Seal of England, are hereby required and Authorized to
Issue forth to the said Assigned Justices of Assize and Jail-deliver, for the
Execution of the Premises, such Commission or Commissions, as in such Cases
into other Counties of England are now Issued, and commanding and enjoining
likewise the Sheriff of the said County of Durham, that he cause forthwith
Proclamation and notice to be given in all places within the said County, as
well within Liberties as without, to all Earl, Barons, Knights, Justices,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Stewards, Officers, Ministers, and other Persons whatsoever,
dwelling and residing within the said County, having any thing to do at the
same Sessions, that they then and there attend upon the said Justices, and be
in all things requisite to them aiding and assisting.

And it is further Enacted, Ordained, and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That as well all such Fines and Common Recoveries of any Honors, Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, lying or being within the said County of Durham, as
were taken before the Justices of Assizes, or either of them at the last
Assizes, holden at Durham aforesaid, the Twelfth day of August, One thousand
six hundred and fifty, or at any other time or times before the said Assizes,
since the said Two and Twentieth day of August, One thousand six hundred forty
two, or which have been had or suffered before the Thirtieth of August, One
thousand six hundred fifty nine, and as if the same had been taken or suffered,
or hereafter shall be taken or acknowledged at the said Assizes, so by this Act
appointed to be holden at Durham as aforesaid, or which shall be taken and
acknowledged by virtue of any Commission directed to any Judge of either Bench,
Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeant at Law, and other Special Commissioners,
according to the Accustomed manner of taking Fines and Recoveries of Lands,
lying in any other County within the Commonwealth of England, shall be Ordered,
Entered, Engrossed, and otherwise proceeded in perfecting thereof in the Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster, and in such Offices and Places, and in such
manner and form, and by and before such Officers, as other Fines and Recoveries
respectively taken of, or for Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, lying
within the Counties of Monmouth and Hereford, or any other County or Counties
of England, which are not or have not been Counties Palatine, are and have been
usually Entered, Enrolled, Engrossed, Ordered, and otherwise proceeded in. And
that all Writs of Covenant, Writs of Entry and Dedimus Potestatems, to take the
Captions or Acknowledgements of Fines, and Warrants of Attorney for Recoveries
within the said County of Durham, shall be Issued and made by the present
Cursitor of the said Counties of Monmouth and Hereford, who is already sworn
and admitted Cursitor for the said County of Durham, by the Lords Commissioners
of the Great Seal, in as full and ample manner and form as any Writs of the like
nature are or have been heretofore usually Issued and made by any of the
Cursitors of the Chancery of England, in any other of the Counties of England.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained, That the several Officer and Officers
of the several and respective Offices and Places aforesaid, shall receive and
take the said Fines, Recoveries, and all Writs and other Writings and
Immuniments concerning the same, without exacting or taking any reward for, or
duty for any Post Diem, or Post Terminum thereof; which Fine and Fines, and all
and every Recovery and Recoveries heretofore Levied or Suffered, or hereafter
to be Levied or Suffered, of any honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments lying or being in the said County of Durham, in manner and form
aforesaid, or hereafter passed in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, of
any Lands or Tenements in the said County, shall be of the same and the like
force, strength and effect in Law, to all intents, constructions and purposes,
as any other Fine or Fines Levied, and Common Recoveries suffered in the said
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, of Lands lying in any other County, are
or is, any Law, Statute, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Wednesday, July 13, 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.


