THE SPEECH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY Earl of VVarrington, Upon his being
SWORN MAYOR of Chester, In NOVENBER 1691.
GENTLEMEN,
I AM much obliged to you, for the respect you have done me, by putting this
trust into my hands; and your Kindness is the greater, because you did it
without any Solicitation on my part; for I did so little expect it, that I was
extremely Surprised when I Read my Predecessors Letter, which gave me to
understand, That your Choice of a Mayor for the Year ensuing was fallen upon
me; it is a great Trust that you repose in me, and I hope I shall not
Disappoint you in the Confidence you have of me.

It is with some Inconvenience to my private Affairs, That I have taken this
Journey; yet had my particular occasions suffered more, I should have made no
difficulty in postponing them, when an opportunity offers it self of doing any
Service to the Public, or to this Corporation; neither could I have been
excusable, if I should have put so great a slight upon the respect and good
will of my Friends, as to refuse to Serve then in this, or any other Capacity.

By the Oath I have now taken, I have obliged my self before God and the World,
to that, to which my own inclinations did zealously dispose me; for it was with
extreme Grief, when in the late Reigns I beheld your Liberties and Franchises
were Ravished from you: What in me lies, shall not be wanting to repair those
Breaches that have been made, and to prevent the like Invasions for the Future.

I hope during this King's Life we are out of such Dangers, since the offering
up of Charters can be no acceptable Sacrifice to him, because he came to the
Crown upon English Principles, and Governing by such Politics, is that alone
which can make him Safe and Glorious. But you may remember that lately we had
Two Kings, to whom nothing was so acceptable, as the submitting our Religion
and Liberties to their Arbitrary Wills and Pleasure; and this Nation was then
so unfortunate, as to have a Party in it, tho much the least, who were
industrious to comply with those two Kings in their wicked Desires

The first step made by that Party was in their fulsome Addresses, where they
delivered up themselves and all they had, to be disposed of at the Kings
Pleasure: Making no other claim to their Liberties and Civil Rights, but as
concessions from the Crown; telling the King withal, That every one of his
Commands was Stamped with God's Authority, and a great deal of such nauseous
Stuff, much fitter to be offered to some Eastern Monarch, or the French King,
than to a King of England governing by the Laws of the Realm.

Well had it been, if their Falsehood and Flattery had gone no further; but
contrary to their Oath, and the Trust reposed in them, they proceeded to the
Surrendering of Charters; a thing so contrary to Justice, and inconsistent with
the Fundamentals of the Government of England, that if such Surrenders can be
justified, I don't see what can be Dishonest or Unlawful: yet such Proceedings
became a Test of Loyalty, by which they thought to recommend themselves to the
Kings Favor, whilst those who dissented in this point were accounted
disaffected to the Government, and were loaded with all manner of Reproaches:
But Gentlemen, till then it never was accounted Liberality, to be generous at
the expense of others; nor the usual way of recommending a man's Fidelity, by
betraying of a Trust; nor to bring a man's word into credit by making Light of
an Oath.

These things I mention, not that I desire to keep up divisions amongst us, or
to discourage any that are sorry for what they have done, and are willing to
come into the Interest of this Government; for I wish from my Soul that we were
all of a mind; but I mention these things, to testify my dislike of such
Proceedings, and to show how much I desire to prevent the like for the future.
For I am sure no man can be hearty for this Government, who does not abhor such
Proceedings as these were. And saying this, it puts me in mind of an
Observation which I have made for some time, which is this, That generally
those people who refuse to take the Oaths to this King and Queen, are such as
were active in, or consenting to the surrendering of Charters, which shows they
are men of extraordinary Consciences, who think it unlawful to Swear to this
Government, and yet could think it not only lawful, but an act of unshaken
Loyalty, to break their Oaths, and betray their trust.

If there be any such in this Corporation, I hope they are but few and will
serve as Examples, not of Imitation, but Admonition, to put others in mind of
their Oaths and Duty.

Gentlemen, Let us Preserve our Liberties and Freedoms; he is the most Loyal
Subject that walks the nearest to the Laws; he that preserves his Freedom and
Birthright, is better able to Serve his King and Country, than he that has
parted with them. Had not our Forefathers observed this Rule, we had had no
Liberties to boast of; and surely we are bound to leave our Posterities in the
same Freedoms which we received from our Forefathers. Therefore let us bless
God and the King for our Wonderful Deliverance; and let not the Aversion of
some to this Government, make us remiss in our Duty.

But Gentlemen, in saying this, I don't design to persuade any man to Rigorous
Courses, or to stretch the Law beyond its Fair and Natural Construction, to
serve a turn; I will never practice it my self, nor advise another to it; I
utterly disliked such Proceedings in the Two late Reigns, and I am not now
better reconciled to them. Let every man have Right according as the Merits of
his Cause shall deserve: Let no man's Complexion or Opinion weigh at all. This
Impartial Method will best support the Honor and Peace of the City: Such fair
Treatment will convince many, of the Reasonableness and Justice of this
Government; at least it will in a great measure stop the mouths of Gainsayers,
and cannot fail to meet with good effect. What I have more to tell you is, That
I shall ever Pray for, and Endeavor the Prosperity of this City.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1691,


