Anno Regni CAROLI II.

REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660.

Cum Privilegio.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis. AN ACT FOR THE Encouraging and Increasing OF
SHIPPING AND NAVIGATION.
FOr the increase of Shipping, and encouragement of the Navigation of this
Nation, wherein, under the good Providence and Protection of God, the Wealth,
Safety, and Strength of this Kingdom is so much concerned, Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and the Authority thereof, That from and after the First
day of December, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and from thenceforward, no
Goods or Commodities whatsoever shall be Imported into, or Exported out of any
Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories to His Majesty belonging, or in His
possession, or which may hereafter belong unto, or be in the possession of His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, in Asia, Africa, or America, in any other
ship or ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such ships or Vessels as do
truly and without fraud belong only to the people of England or Ireland,
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or are of the built of, and
belonging to any the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories, as the
Proprietors and right Owners thereof, and whereof the Master and three fourths
of the Mariners at least are English, under the penalty of the Forfeiture and
Loss of all the Goods and Commodities which shall be Imported into, or Exported
out of any the aforesaid places in any other Ship or Vessel, as also of the
Ship or Vessel, with all its Guns, Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel,
one third part thereof to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, one third part
to the Governor of such Land, Plantation, Island, or Territory, where such
default shall be committed, in case the said Ship or Goods be there seized, or
otherwise that third part also to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and
the other third part to him or them who shall Seize, Inform, or sue for the
same in any Court of Record, by Bill, Information, Plaint, or other Action,
wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed; and all
Admirals, and other Commanders at Sea of any the ships of War, or other ship,
having Commission from His Majesty, or from His Heirs or Successors, are hereby
Authorized and strictly required to seize and bring in as Prize all such Ships
or Vessels, as shall have offended contrary hereunto, and deliver them to the
Court of Admiralty, there to be proceeded against; and in case of condemnation,
one moiety of such Forfeitures shall be to the use of such Admirals or
Commanders and their Companies, to be divided and proportioned amongst them
according to the Rules and Orders of the Sea in case of Ships taken Prize, and
the other Moiety to the use of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors.

And be it Enacted, That no Alien or Person not born within the Allegiance of
Our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, or Naturalized, or made
a free Denizen, shall from and after the First day of February, which shall be
in the year of Our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty one, exercise the Trade
or Occupation of a Merchant or Factor in any the said Places, upon pain of the
Forfeiture and Loss of all his Goods and Chattels, or which are in his
possession, one third to His Majesty His Heirs and Successors, one third to the
Governor of the Plantation, where such Person shall so offend, and the other
third to him or them that shall inform or sue for the same in any of His
Majesty's Courts in the Plantation, where such offense shall be committed: And
all Governors of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations or Territories, and every
of them are hereby strictly required and commanded, and all who hereafter shall
be made Governors of any such Islands, Plantations or Territories, by His
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, shall before their entrance into their
Government take a Solemn Oath to do their utmost, that every the before
mentioned Clauses, and all the matters and things therein contained, shall be
punctually and bona fide observed, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof: And upon complaint and proof made before His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, or such as shall be by Him or them thereunto Authorized and
appointed, that any the said Governors have been willingly and wittingly
negligent in doing their duty accordingly, that the said Governor so offending
shall be removed from his Government.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Goods or
Commodities whatsoever of the Growth, Production, or Manufacture of Africa,
Asia, or America, or of any part thereof, or which are described or laid down
in the usual Man's or Cards of those Places, be imported into England, Ireland,
or Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in any
other Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly and
without fraud belong only to the people of England or Ireland, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or of the Lands, Islands, Plantations or
Territories in Asia, Africa, or America to His Majesty belonging, as the
Proprietors and right Owners thereof, and whereof the Master and three Fourths
at least of the Mariners are English, under the penalty of the forfeiture of
all such Goods and Commodities, and of the Ship or Vessel in which they were
Imported, with all her Guns, Tackle, Furniture, Ammunition, and Apparel, one
moiety to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or
them who shall seize, inform, or sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Bill, Information, Plaint, or other Action, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or
wager in Law shall be allowed.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Goods or
Commodities, that are of forain Growth, Production, or Manufacture, and which
are to be brought into England, Ireland, Wales, the Islands of Guernsey and
Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in English-built shipping, or other
shipping belonging to some of the aforesaid Places, and navigated by English
Mariners as abovesaid, shall be shipped or brought from any other Place or
Places, Country or Countries, but only from those of their said Growth,
Production, or Manufacture, or from those Ports where the said Goods and
Commodities can only, or are, or usually have been first shipped for
transportation, and from none other Places or Countries, under the penalty of
the forfeiture of all such of the foresaid Goods, as shall be Imported from any
other Place or Country contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, as also
of the ship in which they were Imported, with all her Guns, Furniture,
Ammunition, Tackle and Apparel, one Moiety to His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, and the other Moiety to him or them that shall seize, inform or sue
for the same in any Court of Record to be recovered as is before expressed.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any sort of Ling,
Stockfish, Pilchard, or any other kind of dried or salted fish, usually fished
for and caught by the people of England, Ireland, Wales, Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or any sort of Codfish or Herring, or any Oil or Blubber, made or that
shall be made of any kind of Fish whatsoever, or any Whale-fins or
Whale-bones, which shall be imported into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, not having been caught in vessels truly and properly
belonging thereunto as Proprietors and right Owners thereof, and the said Fish
cured, saved or dried, and the Oil and Blubber aforesaid (which shall be
accounted and pay as Oil) not made by the people thereof, and shall be imported
into England, Ireland, or Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall pay
double Aliens Custom.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth it
shall not be lawful to any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Load or cause to be
Laden and carried in any Bottom or Bottoms, Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
whatsoever, whereof any Stranger or Strangers born (unless such as be Denizens
or Naturalized) be Owners, Part-owners, or Master, and whereof three fourths of
the Mariners at least shall not be English, any Fish, Victual, Wares, Goods,
Commodities, or things of what kind or nature soever the same shall be, from
one Port or Creek of England, Ireland, Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, to another Port or Creek of the same or of any of
them, under penalty for every one that shall offend contrary to the true
meaning of this branch of this present Act, to forfeit all such goods as shall
be laden and carried in any such Ship or Vessel, together with the Ship or
Vessel, and all her Guns, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture and Apparel, one Moiety
to His Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to him or them
that shall Inform, Seize or Sue for the same in any Court of Record to be
recovered in manner aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority a foresaid, That where any Ease,
Abatement or Privilege is given in the Book of Rates to goods or Commodities
Imported or Exported in English built Shipping, that is to say, shipping built
in England, Ireland, Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, or in any the Lands, Islands, Dominions or Territories to His
Majesty in Africa, Asia or America belonging or in his possession, That it is
always to be understood, and provided that the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners of the said ships, at least, be also English; And that where it is
required that the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners be English, that the
true intent and meaning thereof is, that they should be such during the whole
voyage, unless in case of sickness, death, or being taken Prisoners in the
voyage, to be proved by the Oath of the Master or other chief Officer of such
ships.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no goods or
Commodities of the growth, production or manufacture of Muscovy, or of any the
Countries, Dominions or Territories to the great Duke or Emperor of Muscovy or
Russia belonging, As also that no sorts of Masts, Timber or Boards, no foreign
Salt, Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Hemp or Flax, Raizins, Figs, Prunes, Olive Oils, no
sorts of Corn or Grayn, Sugar, Potashes, Wines, Vinegar, or Spirits called
Aquavite or Brandy wine, shall from and after the first day of April, which
shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty one, be
imported into England, Ireland, Wales or Town of Berwick upon Tweed in any ship
or ships, vessel or vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly and without
fraud belong to the people thereof, or of some of them as the true Owners and
Proprietors thereof, and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners
at least are English, and that no Currants nor Commodities of the growth,
production or manufacture of any the Countries, Islands, Dominions or
Territories to the Othoman or Turkish Empire belonging, shall from and after
the first day of September which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand
six hundred sixty one, be imported into any the forementioned places in any
ship or vessel, but which is of English built and Navigated as aforesaid, and
in no other; Except only such forain ships and vessels as are of the built of
that Country or place of which the said Goods are the growth, production or
manufacture respectively, or of such Port where the said Goods can only be, or
most usually are first shipped for transportation, and whereof the Master and
three Fourths of the Mariners at least are of the said Country or place, under
the penalty and forfeiture of ship and Goods to be disposed and recovered as in
the foregoing Clause.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the prevention of the great frauds daily used in coloring and concealing of
Aliens Goods, all Wines of the growth of France or Germany, which from and
after the Twentieth day of October One thousand six hundred sixty, shall be
Imported into any the Ports or places aforesaid, in any other ship or vessel
then which does truly and without fraud belong to England, Ireland, Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Navigated with the Mariners thereof as
aforesaid, shall be deemed Aliens Goods, and pay all Strangers Customs and
duties to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, as also to the Town or Port,
into which they shall be Imported; And that all sorts of Masts, Timber or
Boards, as also all forain Salt, Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Hemp, Flax, Raizins, Figs,
Prunes, Olive Oils, all sorts of Corn or Grain, Sugar, Potashes, Spirits
commonly called Brandy wine or Aquavite, Wines of the growth of Spain, the
Islands of the Canaries or Portugal, Madera or Western Islands, and all Goods
of the growth, production or manufacture of Moscovy or Russia, which from and
after the First day of April which shall be in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred sixty one, shall be Imported into any of the aforesaid
places in any other then such shipping, and so Navigated, and all Currants and
Turkey Commodities which from and after the First day of September One thousand
six hundred sixty one, shall be Imported into any the places aforesaid, in any
other then English built shipping and Navigated as aforesaid, shall be deemed
Aliens Goods, and pay accordingly to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
and to the Town or Port into which they shall be Imported.

And for prevention of all Frauds which may be used in coloring or buying of
Forain Ships, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby
Enacted, That from and after the First day of April, which shall be in the year
of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty one, no Forain built Ship or Vessel
whatsoever shall be deemed or pass as a Ship to England, Ireland, Wales, or
Town of Berwick, or any of them belonging, or enjoy the benefit or privilege
of such a Ship or Vessel, until such time that he or they claiming the said
Ship or Vessel to be theirs, shall make appear to the chief Officer or Officers
of the Customs in the Port next to the place of his or their abode, that he or
they are not Aliens, and shall have taken an Oath before such chief Officer or
Officers, who are hereby Authorized to administer the same, That such Ship or
Vessel was bona fide and without fraud by him or them bought for a valuable
consideration, expressing the sum, as also the time, place, and persons from
whom it was bought, and who are his part-owners (if he have any) all which
part-owners shall be liable to take ye said Oath before the chief Officer or
Officers of ye Custom-house of the Port next to the place of their abode, and
that no Forainer directly or indirectly has any part, interest, or share
therein, and that upon such Oath he or they shall receive a Certificate under
the Hand or Seal of the said chief Officer or Officers of the Port where such
person or persons so making Oath do reside, whereby such Ship or Vessel may for
the future pass and be deemed as a Ship belonging to the said Port, and enjoy
the privilege of such a Ship or Vessel; And the said Officer or Officers shall
keep a Register of all such Certificates as he or they shall so give, and
return a Duplicat thereof to the chief Officers of the Customs at London for
such as shall be granted in England, Wales, and Berwick, and to the chief
Officers of the Customs at Dublin for such as shall be given in Ireland,
together with the Names of the person or persons from whom such Ship was
bought, and the sum of Money which was paid for her, as also the Names of all
such persons who are part-owners of her, if any such be.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Officer of
the Customs shall from and after the said First day of April, allow the
privilege of being a Ship or Vessel to England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of
Berwick, or any of them belonging, to any Forain built Ship or Vessel, until
such Certificate be before them produced, or such Proof and Oath taken before
them; or if any Officer of the Customs shall allow the privilege of an English
built Ship, or other Ship to any the aforesaid places belonging to any English
or Forain built Ship coming into any Port, and making Entry of any Goods, until
Examination whether the Master and three fourths of the Mariners be English, or
shall allow to any Forain built Ship, bringing in the Commodities of the Growth
of the Country where it was built, the privilege by this Act to such ship
given, until Examination and Proof whether it be a ship of the built of that
Country, and that the Master and three fourths of the Mariners are of that
Country; or if any person who is or shall be made Governor of any Lands,
Islands, Plantations, or Territories in Africa, Asia, or America, by His
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, shall suffer any Forain built Ship or Vessel
to load or unload any Goods or Commodities within the Precincts of their
Governments, until such Certificate be produced before them or such as shall be
by them appointed to view the same, and Examination whether the Master and
three fourths of the Mariners at least be English, that for the first Offense
such Officer of the Customs and Governors shall be put out of their Places,
Officers or Governments.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, extend not, or
be meant to restrain and prohibit the Importation of any the Commodities of
the Straights, or Levant Seas, laden in English built shipping, and whereof
the Master and three fourths of the Mariners at least are English, from the
usual Ports or Places for lading of them heretofore within the said Straights
or Levant Seas, though the said Commodities be not of the very Growth of the
said places.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, extend not, or
be meant to restrain the Importing of any East India Commodities, laden in
English built shipping, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners at least are English, from the usual place or places for lading of
them in any part of those Seas, to the Southward and Eastward of Cabo bona
speranza, although the said Ports be not the very Places of their Growth.

Provided also, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any of the people of
England, Ireland, Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, in Vessels or Ships to them belonging, and whereof the Master and three
fourths of the Mariners at least are English, to load and bring in from any of
the Ports of Spain or Portugal, or Western Islands, commonly called Azores, or
Madera, or Canary Islands, all sorts of Goods or Commodities of the Growth,
Production, or Manufacture of the Plantations or Dominions of either of them
respectively.

Provided, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, extend not to
Bullion, nor yet to any Goods taken, or that shall be bona fide taken by way of
Reprisal by any Ship or Ships belonging to England, Ireland, or Wales, Islands
of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and whereof the Master
and three fourths of the Mariners at least are English, having Commission from
His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, or be construed to extend to lay Aliens Duties upon any Corn of the
Growth of Scotland, or to any Salt made in Scotland, nor to any Fish caught,
saved and cured by the people of Scotland, and Imported directly from Scotland
in Scotch built Ships, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the Mariners
are of His Majesty's Subjects, nor to any Seal Oil of Russia, Imported from
thence into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in shipping
bona fide to some of the said places belonging, and whereof the Master and
three fourths of the Mariners at least are English.

Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, That every Ship or Vessel belonging
to any the Subjects of the French King, which from and after the Twentieth day
of October, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall
come into any Port, Creek, Harbor or Road of England, Ireland, Wales, or Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, and shall there lade or unlade any Goods or Commodities,
or take in or set on shore any passengers, shall pay to the Collector of His
Majesty's Customs in such Port, Creek, Harbor or Road, for every Tun of which
the said Ship or Vessel is of burden, to be computed by such Officer of the
Customs as shall be thereunto appointed, the sum of Five shillings current
Money of England: And that no such Ship or Vessel be suffered to depart out of
such Port, Creek, Harbor or Road, until the said Duty be fully paid; And that
this Duty shall continue to be Collected, Levied, and Paid for such time, as a
certain Duty of Fifty Solls per Tun, lately imposed by the French King, or any
part thereof, shall continue to be Collected upon the shipping of England
lading in France, and three Months after, and no longer.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
First day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty one, no Sugars, Tobacco, Cotton-wooll, Indicoes, Ginger, Fustick,
or other dying wood, of the Growth, Production or Manufacture of any English
Plantations in America, Asia, or Africa, shall be shipped, carried, conveyed or
transported from any of the said English Plantations to any Land, Island,
Territory, Dominion, Port, or Place whatsoever, other then to such other
English Plantations as do belong to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or
to the Kingdom of England, or Ireland* or Principality of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, there to be laid on shore, under the penalty of the
forfeiture of the said Goods or the full value thereof, as also of the Ship
with all her Guns, Tackle, Apparel, Ammunition and Furniture, The one moiety to
the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or
them that shall seize, inform, or sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or wager of Law
shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for every Ship or
Vessel, which from and after the Five and twentieth day of December, in the
year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall set sail out of or
from England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, for any English
Plantation in America, Asia, or Africa, sufficient bond shall be given with one
surety to the chief Officers of the Custom-house of such Port or Place from
whence the said Ship shall set sail, to the value of One thousand pounds, if
the Ship be of less burden then one hundred Tuns; and of the sum of Two
thousand pounds, if the Ship shall be of greater burden, That in case the said
Ship or Vessel shall load any of the said Commodities at any of the said
English Plantations, that the same Commodities shall be by the said ship
brought to some Port of England, Ireland, Wales, or to the Port or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, and shall there unload and put on shore the same, the
danger of the seas only excepted: And for all ships coming from any other Port
or Place to any of the aforesaid Plantations, who by this Act are permitted to
Trade there, that the Governor of such English Plantations shall before the
said ship or vessel be permitted to load on board any of the said Commodities,
take Bond in manner and to the value aforesaid for each respective ship or
vessel, That such ship or vessel shall carry all the aforesaid Goods that shall
be laden on board in the said ship to some other of His Majesty's English
Plantations, or to England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed: And
that every ship or vessel, which shall load or take on board any of the
aforesaid Goods, until such Bond given to the said Governor, or Certificate
produced from the Officers of any Custom-house of England, Ireland, Wales, or
of the Town of Berwick, that such Bond have been there duly given, shall be
forfeited with all her Guns, Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, to be employed and
recovered in manner as aforesaid. And the said Governors and every of them shall
twice in every year after the First day of January, One thousand six hundred
and sixty, return true Copies of all such Bonds by him so taken, to the chief
Officers of the Custom in London.

Anno Regni CAROLI II. AN ACT To Prevent FRAUDS AND CONCEALMENTS OF His
Majesty's CUSTOMS and SUBSIDIES.
BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That if
any person or persons at any time after the First day of September, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, shall cause any Goods for which Custom,
Subsidy, or other Duties are due, or payable by virtue of the Act passed this
Parliament, (Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage,
and other sums of Money, payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported) to be
landed or conveyed away without due entry thereof first made, and the Customer
or Collector, or his Deputy agreed with, That then and in such case upon Oath
thereof made before the Lord Treasurer, or any of the Barons of the Exchequer,
or chief Magistrate of the Port or Place where the offense shall be committed,
or the Place next adjoining thereunto, it shall be lawful to and for the Lord
Treasurer, or any of the Barons aforesaid, or chief Magistrate of the Port or
Place where the offense shall be committed, or the Place next adjoining
thereunto, to issue out a Warrant to any person or persons, thereby enabling
him or them with the assistance of a Sheriff, Justice of Peace, or Constable to
enter into any House in the day time where such Goods are suspected to be
concealed; and in case of resistance to break open such Houses, and to seize
and secure the same Goods so concealed: And all Officers and Ministers of
Justice are hereby required to be aiding and assisting thereunto.

Provided always, That no House shall be entered by virtue of this Act, unless
it be within the space of one Month after the offense supposed to be committed.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue in force unto the end of the First
Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.

Provided also, That if the Information whereupon any House shall come to be
searched, shall prove to be false, that then and in such case the party injured
shall recover his full Damages and Costs against the Informer, by action of
Trespass to be therefore brought against such Informer.

(...)
