AN ACT For the Abolishing the KINGLY OFFICE IN ENGLAND, IRELAND, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging.
WHereas Charles Stuart late King of England, Ireland, and the Territories and
Dominions thereunto belonging, has by authority derived from Parliament, been,
and is hereby declared to be justly condemned, adjudged to dye and put to
death, for many treasons, marthers, and other heinous offenses committed by
him, by which Judgment he stood and is hereby declared to be attainted of High
Treason, whereby his Issue and Posterity, and all others pretending Title under
him, are become incapable of the said Crowns, or of being King or Queen of the
said Kingdom or Dominions, or either or any of them: Be it therefore Enacted
and Ordained, and it is Enacted, Ordained and Declared by this present
Parliament, and by authority thereof, That all the people of England and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, of what degree
or condition soever, are discharged of all Fealty, Homage and Allegiance which
is or shall be pretended to be due unto any of the Issue and Posterity of the
said late King, or any claiming under him; and that Charles Stuart eldest son,
and James called Duke of York, second son, and all other the Issue and
Posterity of him the said late King, and all and every person and persons
pretending Title from, by or under him, are and be disabled to hold or enjoy
the said Crown of England and Ireland, and other the Dominions thereunto
belonging, or any of them; or to have the Name, Title, Style or Dignity of King
or Queen of England and Ireland, Prince of Wales, or any of them; or to have
and enjoy the power and Dominion of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of
them, or the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions and Hereditaments
belonging or appertaining to the said Crown of England and Ireland, and other
the Dominions aforesaid, or to any of them; or to the Principality of Wales,
Duchy of Lancaster or Cornwall, or any or either of them, Any Law, Statute,
Ordinance, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding:
And whereas it is and has been found by experience, that the Office of a King
in this Nation and Ireland, and to have the power thereof in any single person,
is unnecessary, burthensom and dangerous to the liberty, safety and public
interest of the people, and that for the most part, use has been made of the
Regal power and prerogative, to oppress, impoverish and enslave the subject;
and that usually and naturally any one person in such power, makes it his
interest to incroach upon the just freedom and liberty of the people, and to
promote the setting up of their own will and power above the Laws, that so they
might enslave these Kingdoms to their own Lust: Be it therefore Enacted and
Ordained by this prefent Parliament, and by Authority of the same, That the
Office of a King in this Nation, shall not henceforth reside in, or be
exercised by any one single person; and that no one person whatsoever, shall or
may have, or hold the Office, Style, Dignity, Power or Authority of King of the
said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them, or of the Prince of Wales, Any
law, statute, usage or custom to the coutrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And it is hereby Enacted, That if any person or persons shall
endeavor to attempt by force of arms or otherwise, or be ayding, assisting,
comforting or abetting, unto any person or persons yt shall by any ways or
means whatsoever, endeavor or attempt the reviving or setting up again of any
pretended Right of the said Charles, eldest Son to the said late King, James
called Duke of York, or of any other the Issue and Posterity of ye said late
King, or of any person or persons claiming under him or them, to the said Regal
Office, Style, Dignity or Authority, or to be Prince of Wales; or the promoting
of any one person whatsoever, to the Name, Style, Dignity, Power, Prerogative
or Authority, of King of England and Ireland, and Dominions aforesaid, or any
of them; That then every such offense shall be deemed and adjudged High
Treason, and the offenders therein, their counselors, procurers, ayders and
abettors, being convicted of the said Offense, or any of them, shall be deemed
and adjudged Traitors against the Parliament and people of England, and shall
suffer, lose and forfeit, and have such like and the same pains, forfeitures,
judgments and execution, as is used in case of High Treason: And whereas by
the abolition of the kingly Office provided for in this Act, a most happy way
is made for this Nation (if God see it good) to return to its just and ancient
right, of being governed by its own Representatives or National meetings in
Council, from time to time chosen and entrusted for that purpose by the people,
It is therefore Resolved and Declared by the Commons assembled in Parliament,
That they will put a period to the sitting of this present Parliament, and
dissolve the same so soon as may possibly stand with the safety of the people
that has betrusted them, and with what is absolutely necessary for the
preserving and upholding the Government now settled in the way of a
Commonwealth; and that they will carefully provide for the certain choosing,
meeting and sitting of the next and future Representatives, with such other
circumstances of freedom in choice and equality in distribution of Members to
be elected thereunto, as shall most conduce to the lasting freedom and good of
this Commonwealth: And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared,
notwithstanding any thing contained in this Act, no person or persons of what
condition and quality soever, within the Commonwealth of England and Ireland,
Dominion of Wales, the Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, shall be discharged from the obedience and subjection which he and they
owe to the Government of this Nation, as it is now Declared, but all and every
of them shall in all things render and perform the same, as of right is due
unto the supreme authority hereby declared to reside in this and the successive
Representatives of the people of this Nation, and in them only.

Die Sabbathi, 17 Martii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobel, Cleric' Parliament'.

London, printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
March 19. 1648.


