AN ACT For the taking away the COURT OF Wards and Liveries.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th Day of Scptember, Anno Domini,
1656.



LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector. 1657.

AN ACT For the taking away the COURT OF Wards and Liveries.
WHereas the Four and twentieth day of February, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred forty five, the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all
Ward-ships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and Oustrelemaines, and all other Charges
incident or arising for, or by reason of Ward-ships, Livery, Primer-seizin, or
Oustrelemain; And all Tenures by Homage, and all Fines, Licenses, Seizures, and
Pardons for Alienation, and all other Charges incident thereunto, was by the
Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament, taken away; And all Tenures by
Knights Service, either of the King or others, or by Knights Service, or
Capite, or Soccage in Capite of the King, were turned into free and common
Soccage; For the further establishing and confirming the same, Be it Declared
and Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Parliament, That the
Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Ward-ships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and
Oustrelemaines, and all other Charges incident and arising, for, or by reason
of any such Tenure^, Ward-ship, Livery, Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemaines, be
taken away, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty five: And that all Homage, Fines, Licenses, Seizures, Pardons for
Alienation, incident or arising, for or by reason of Wardship, Livery,
Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemain, and all other Charges incident thereunto, be
likewise taken away, and is hereby adjudged and declared to be taken away, from
the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty
five: And that all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service of the late King,
or any other person, and all Tenures by Soccage in Chief, be taken away; And
all Tenures are hereby Enacted and Declared to be turned into free and common
Soccage, from the said four and twentieth Day of February, one thousand six
hundred forty five; and shall be so Construed, Adjudged, and Declared to be for
ever hereafter turned into free and common Soccage.

Nevertheless, It is hereby Enacted, That all Rents certain and Heriots, due to
Mean Lords or other private Persons, shall be paid; And that where any Relief,
or Double ancient yearly Rent, upon the death of an Ancestor, was in such Cases
formerly due and payable, a Double ancient yearly Rent only in lieu thereof,
shall now be paid upon the death of an Ancestor, as in free and common Soccage;
And that the same shall be recovered by the like Remedy in Law, as Rents and
Duties in free and common Soccage.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.


