blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)AN ACT
For setting apart Wednesday the Thirteenth day of October, 1652, For a Day of
Public Fasting and Humiliation.
WHereas the most wise God, whose Judgments are unsearchable and ways past
finding out, has by his overruling Providence made a breach upon that Amity
(which the Parliament has in all sincerity endeavored to conserve) between
this Commonwealth and the United Provinces; The Parliament of England well
knowing it to be their duty, in all the turns of Providence to acknowledge God,
and to seek unto him to direct their Paths; and also considering the Word of
Truth does teach, That Sin only does separate between God and a People, Have
thought fit to admonish and stir up the People of this Nation to confess their
sins unto the Lord, and to seek his Face, That he would be pleased to grant
unto us Repentance and Pardon through the Blood of his dear Son Jesus Christ
who is our Peace, and by the Blood of his Cross reconciles all things in Heaven
and Earth: And humbly to beseech him to direct and bless the Councels and
Actions of the Parliament, to the spiritual and temporal welfare of the people
of this Commonwealth; and more particularly* That he will be pleased to show
them the way how the saving truth of the Gospel may be best advanced and
propagated, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
Godliness suppressed: And likewise, That he would vouchsafe his Presence with,
and Blessing upon the Forces and Navy of this Commonwealth, and out of all the
Troubles wherewith he is pleased to exercise us, to bring forth a righteous and
lasting peace to his People to his own Glory: And to the end the People of this
Nation may have an opportunity for this purpose, Be it Enacted by this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That Wednesday the Thirteenth day of
October, 1652. be set apart to be observed as a day of solemn Fasting and
Humiliation in all Cities, Towns and places within England, Wales, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed; and that the Ministers of the respective Parishes and
places aforesaid, upon the Lords day next preceding the day so to be observed,
do give notice hereof, that the people may the better attend the Exercises of
that day. And for the more full observation thereof, The Parliament does forbid
the holding or using of any Fairs, Markets, and servile Works of men's ordinary
Callings on the Day thus set apart: And all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace, Constables and other Officers, are hereby enjoined to take special care
for the observation of the said Day accordingly.

Wednesday the First of September, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.


