Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1660.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for raising Sevenscore thousand pounds, for the complete Disbanding of
the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament do give and grant unto Your most Excellent
Majesty, the Sum of Sevenscore thousand pounds to be raised and levied in
manner following, and for the uses and purposes herein after declared: And do
therefore humbly pray Your Majesty, That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted
by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the sum of
Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the Month, for Two Months, beginning
from the First day of November One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall be
assessed, taxed, collected, levied, and paid in the several Counties, Cities,
Boroughs, Towns, and places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick
upon Twede, according to such Rates, Rules and Proportions, and by the same
Commissioners (excepting such as stand disabled by a certain Act passed this
present Parliament, Entitled, An Act of Indemnity, Free Pardon and Oblivion)
and with like Powers and Authorities, as in and by a certain Ordinance,
Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for an Assessment of Seventy
thousand pounds by the Month upon England for Three Months, for the supply of
the present occasions of the Kings Majesty, and for and toward the payment and
satisfaction of the Armies and Navies, continued for the defense of this
Kingdom; and for other the necessary and urgent occasions thereof. Together
with a certain Act passed this Parliament, Entitled, An Act for putting in
execution an Ordinance mentioned in the said Act, are expressed, declared, and
appointed; which said Commissioners shall meet on or before the Sixth day of
November One thousand six hundred and sixty, and are hereby enabled to use and
execute all and every the like Rates, Rules, Proportions, Powers and
Authorities, as in and by the said Ordinance and Act are mentioned and
expressed, as fully and amply as if the same had been particularly inserted in
this present Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Sums to be collected and raised by virtue of this present Act, shall be paid at
the Guildhal of the City of London, unto Sir Richard Brown, Sir John Langham,
Sir William Wheeler, Sir William Vincent, Thomas Rich, and the Chamberlain of
the City of London for the time being; who are appointed Treasurers of the
money to be raised by virtue of another Act passed this present Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the speedy provision of Money for disbanding and paying
off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea. And the Acquittance of
them, or any three of them, shall be a sufficient discharge for so much money
as shall be received by virtue of this Act, to any person or persons who shall
pay in the same.

And be it further Enacted, That the Treasurers by this Act appointed shall
receive for them; and those to be employed under them in this service, one
penny in the pound, in such manner as they ought to receive by the Act last
beforementioned.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every the Sums of Money, which by
virtue of this present Act shall be paid to, or received by the Treasurers
aforesaid, shall from time to time be issued out according to such Warrants and
Directions only, as they or any three of them shall receive from the
Commissioners named in one Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for the speedy disbanding of the Army and Garrisons of this Kingdom: Who are
hereby required and enjoined at their perils to take care and provide, that the
Moneys so as aforesaid to be issued out, be applied only to the uses, intents,
and purposes hereafter following, and to no other use, intent, or purpose
whatsoever; that is to say, Principally, and in the first place, for and
toward the total disbanding of the present Army, until that work be fully
perfected and completed according to such Rules and Instructions as touching
the disbanding of the Army in the said Act last mentioned are contained: And
after the Army shall be wholly disbanded, then the residue of the Moneys to be
raised by virtue of this present Act, shall be employed for and toward the
paying off such part of the Fleet and Navy that shall be returned into Harbor,
on or before the Eighth day of September One thousand six hundred and sixty,
according to such Rules, Orders, and Instructions, as touching the payment off
of the Navy, are in the said last mentioned Act contained, and not otherwise.

And be it further Enacted, That an Account of all the Moneys by virtue of this
Act to be received, shall be given by the said Treasurers to this or any other
succeeding Parliament, which shall require the same, or to such person or
persons, as by this or any other succeeding Parliament shall be thereunto
appointed.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That if any person or persons, shall
lend unto the Treasurers aforesaid, any sum or sums of Money, to and for the
uses and purposes in this present Act mentioned, such person shall do very good
and acceptable service to the King and Kingdom; and shall likewise be repaid
the same, with consideration for the forbearance thereof, after the rate of Six
pounds per Cent. out of the first Moneys which after such Loan shall come in
upon this present Act. And the said Treasurers or any three of them, shall be
and are hereby enabled to repay the said Moneys accordingly to the party so
lending the same, whose Acquittances shall be unto them a sufficient Discharge,
and the Money so advanced by way of Loan, shall be employed to the uses in this
Act mentioned, and not otherwise.

And be it further Enacted, That this whole and entire Sum of Sevenscore
thousand pounds, intended by this Act to be raised, shall be fully paid in, and
completed upon or before the Twenty fifth day of December One thousand six
hundred and sixty: And that the Commissioners for the said Monthly Assessment,
or any two or more of them in their respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs,
Towns and places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Twede,
shall Sign and Seal a "duplicate" EXTENT="1 page" of the said Assessments, and
the same before the said Five and twentieth day of December, shall certify
into the Guildhal of the City of London, unto the Treasurers aforesaid,
together with the names of the respective Receivers General, who shall be
appointed to receive the same.

An Act for the speedy raising of Seventy thousand pounds for the present
supply of His Majesty.
WHereas in the absence of His Majesty an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament was made, entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for an
Assessment of Seventy thousand pounds by the Month upon England for Three
Months, for the supply of the present occasions of the Kings Majesty, and for
and toward the satisfaction of the Armies and Navies, to be continued for the
defense of this Kingdom, and for other the urgent and necessary occasions
thereof. Which said Assessment was to continue for three months to be
accounted from the Twenty fourth of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
And whereas it was afterward enacted by this present Parliament, That all and
every of the Clauses, Powers, and Provisoes in the said Ordinance mentioned,
should be put in full execution. We your Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Subjects,
the Commons in Parliament assembled, taking notice of Your Majesty's urgent
occasions, whilst Your Majesty's Revenue stands unsettled, and Your just Rights
and Prerogatives in point of Tenures, and the use of the Court of Wards are for
borne, and withal acknowledging Your Majesty's great goodness to us Your
Subjects in the many gracious Acts passed, and other the Messages received this
present Parliament, Do pray Your most Excellent Majesty to accept this our
present Grant of Seventy thousand pounds to be raised and levied in the manner
following.

And that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by Your most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That the sum of Threescore and ten thousand pounds for One month
only, beginning from the Twenty ninth of September One thousand six hundred
and sixty, shall be assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid in the several
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and places within England and Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Twede, according to the several Rates, Rules and
Proportions, and in such manner and form, and by the same Commissioners (other
then such as are disabled by the Act of General Pardon, Indemnity and
Oblivion) as in and by the same recited Ordinance are set down, nominated,
limited and appointed. Which Commissioners shall meet on or before the Fifth
day of October One thousand six hundred and sixty, and are hereby enabled to
use and execute all and every the Powers and Authorities, as in and by the said
Ordinance and Act are mentioned and expressed, as fully and amply as if the
same Rates, Rules, Proportions, Powers and Authorities had been particularly
inserted in this present Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Sums of Money charged by this Act upon the several Counties, Cities, Towns,
Boroughs and places aforesaid, shall be levied and raifed and paid-into His
Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer, upon or before the First day of November
One thousand six hundred and sixty, by the several Receivers-General that shall
be appointed by the said Commissioners; and the said Commissioners or any two
or more of them, in their respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and
places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Twede, are hereby
ordered and required to Sign and Seal a "duplicate" EXTENT="1 page" of the said
Assessments, and the same before the same First of November, to certify into
His Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Westminster, together with the names of the
respective Receivers-General who shall be appointed to receive the same.

LONDON: Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY.
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Blackfriars.


