Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Vicesimo
septimo,

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661.
In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

And there continued by several Prorogations, to the Thirteenth day of October
1675.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XXVII Caroli II. Regis. An Act for the better and more easy Rebuilding
the Town of Northampton.
FOrasmuch as the greatest part of the Town of Northampton has been burnt down
by a sudden and dreadful Fire, which happened in September last, and diverse
Suits and Controversies by reason thereof, are likely to arise between the
several Proprietors, and others claiming under them, tending (if not prevented)
to the great vexation and damage of the Poor Inhabitants, and hindering the
rebuilding the said Town: For remedy whereof, as also for the promoting the
rebuilding of the said Town, Be it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty,
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Judges of Assize for the County of Northampton, and other the Justices
of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Coif of
the Exchequer for the time being, the Justices of Peace for the said County for
the time, being, and the Mayor of the Town of Northampton for the time being,
and Sir John Holman Baronet, Sir Edmund Bray Knight, Thomas Willughby, James
Stedman, Robert Hesslerige, Thomas Andrews, Thomas Ward, Charles Fleetwood,
Daniel Danvers, Salathiel Lovell, and William Kimbold Esquires, or any five or
more of them, sitting at the same time and place together at the Guildhall, or
some other place within the said Town of Northampton, shall be, and by
authority aforesaid are made and constituted a Court of Record, and shall or
may, with, or without Adjournment from time to time, summarily, and without the
Formalities of proceedings in Courts of Law or Equity, by verdict, testimony of
witnesses upon Oath, examination of parties interested, or by all or any of the
said ways, or otherwise at their discretions, shall, and are hereby authorized
from time to time to hear, and to determine all Differences and Demands
whatsoever, which have arisen, or may any wise arise between Landlords,
Proprietors, Tenants, Lessees, Under Tenants, or late Occupiers of any the said
Houses or Buildings with their Appurtenances, or their Courts, Yards or
Grounds, or any person or persons having or claiming any Estate, Right, Title,
Interest in Law or Equity, Charge or Encumbrance of or in the same, or their or
any of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, Successors or Assigns, or any
other persons, for, touching or concerning the repairing, building or not
building of the said Houses or Buildings, Yards, Courts and Grounds, or for or
concerning the payment, defalcation, apportioning, or abatement of any Rent or
Rents, other then Arrears of Rent only, due on or before the Nine and
twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred seventy and five, or for
or touching any Covenant, Condition or Penalty relating thereunto, or for,
touching or concerning the prefixing or limiting of any time for such Repairs,
or new Building, or any Rate or Contribution to be born or paid thereunto by
any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate interested in the
Premises, and all Incidents relating thereunto: And that the definitive Order
of the said Court as aforesaid, shall be final, as well between the said
parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, Successors and Assigns, and
all claiming by, from or under them, as touching the matter contained in such
Orders, from which there shall be no Appeal or Review otherwise then as is
hereafter expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Judges of
Assize for the County of Northampton, and other the Justices of the Courts of
Kings Bench and Common Pleas, and the Barons of the Coif of the Exchequer for
the time being, the Justices of the Peace for the said County for the time
being, and the Mayor of the Town of Northampton for the time being, and Sir
John Holman Baronet, Sir Edmund Bray Knight, Thomas Willughby, James Stedman,
Robert Hesslerige, Thomas Andrews, Thomas Ward, Charles Fleetwood, Daniel
Danvers, Salathiel Lovell and William Kimbold Esquires, or any five or more of
them, as aforesaid, shall have Authority, and are hereby Empowered where they
shall think it convenient, to order the surrendering, increasing, abridging,
ceasing, determining or charging of any Estates in the Premises, or to order
new, or longer Estates to be made of any of the Premises, by the Proprietors
or Owners thereof, or other persons interessed therein, to any Tenant or
Sub-Tenant, or late Occupier of the same, their Executors, Administrators,
Successors or Assigns, at such Rent or Fine as they shall think fit, unless in
such Cases where the Laws of this Realm do forbid the diminishing of ancient
and accustomable Rent; All which Orders, according to the tenors thereof, shall
be obeyed by all persons concerned therein respectively, and shall conclude and
bind them, their Heirs, Successors, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively, notwithstanding any disability in respect of Coverture, Infancy,
Non-sanity of memory, Estate-Tayl, or in right of Church or otherwise: And that
Infants, Femes-covert, Idiots, persons of non-sane memory, or beyond the Seas,
Tenants in Tail, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and other Ecclesiastical persons,
and their Successors, Corporations, and all other person or persons, Bodies
Natural and Politic, their Heirs and Successors, and their respective
Interest, shall be bound and concluded by such respective Order or Orders,
according to the tenor or purport thereof; Any Law, Statute or Custom, or other
matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Court
shall have power and authority to make and appoint from time to time, such
Rules and Directions in the Forms and Orders of Building, to be observed in the
rebuilding of such Houses as were demolished by or by reason of the said late
Fire, or any of them, and for other Buildings made or to be made since the said
dreadful Fire, as they shall think fit and convenient for the better Security
and Ornament of the said Town; And that the new Buildings of the said
demolished Houses, and all such other Buildings, shall be pursuant to such
Rules and Directions so given: And also that the said Court shall and may
appoint and decree the enlargement or alteration of any of the Streets Lanes,
Roads and Passages, and other places of Public use in the said Town, for the
better use and convenience thereof. And to the end that reasonable satisfaction
may be given for all such Ground as shall be made use of, and employed to and
for the uses aforesaid, the said Court shall and may treat and agree with the
Owners and others interested therein; and if any person shall wilfully refuse
to treat and agree as aforesaid, or through any disability by Nonage,
Coverture, especial Entail or other impediment, cannot accept thereof, That in
such cases the said Court are hereby empowered to Impannel and Summon a Jury
before them; which Jury upon their Oaths (to be Administered by the said Court)
are to Assess such Damage and Recompense as they shall judge fit to be awarded,
to the Owners and others interested in the said Ground, for their respective
Interests in the same; and upon payment of the said money so awarded or
tendered, and refusal thereof, the Interest of all persons in the said Ground,
shall be for ever bound, and the same shall for ever after remain to the uses
aforesaid.

And further, That the said Court for the better regulation of the new Building
of the said demolished Houses, or any of them, shall by the authority of this
Act, have power to order or appoint the alteration of the Foundations, or to
take from one House and add to another, or to order or appoint such other
alterations, as shall in their Judgments be expedient for the better rebuilding
of the said Town: And that the said Court shall and may award what sum of money
shall be paid by the person who has any benefit by such alteration, unto the
person or persons who has any loss or damage thereby, in satisfaction for the
same. And in case the said person or persons will not, or through any such
disability or other impediment as is before in this Act expressed, cannot
accept thereof; in such Cases the said Court are hereby empowered to Impannel
and Summon a Jury before them, which Jury upon their Oaths, to be administered
by the said Court, are to assess such Damage and Recompense as they think fit
to be awarded by the person who has benefit by such alteration or addition, to
the person or persons damnified, for his or their loss and damage thereby: And
upon payment of the said money so awarded, or tender, and refusal thereof, the
person or persons damnified shall be for ever barred, and the person having
benefit thereby, his Heirs and Assigns, shall for ever after hold and enjoy
that which shall be so appointed and assigned to him by the said Court, as
aforesaid.

Provided, That the said Rules and Directions do not extend to the taking away
of the Ground or Soil of any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
or others, otherwise then to enlarge the passages at the corners and places
herein after mentioned and to take away the Houses herein after expressed, that
is to say, To enlarge the passage at the Corner which stands in the passage
between the South Street and the Street called the Drapery, the Corner House
there being late in the Tenure of Bartholomew Manning; and at the Corners which
stand in the passage between the said Street called the Drapery, and the Street
called the Sheep Market, on the North end of the said Street called the
Drapery; and to enlarge all the Street or passage between the North side of All
Saints Church, and the Houses to be built over against it, and the Street or
Passage on the South side of the said Church, and the Houses to be built over
against it; and to take away all those Houses which stood between the Row of
Buildings lying on the South side of the Market Hill, called the Mercers Row,
and the Row of Buildings lying on the North side of the said Market Hill; and
to enlarge the North Corner of the Passage between the Marketplace and the
Street called Abington; Street and to enlarge the Passage which went about the
middle of the East side of the Drapery Street into the Marketplace. And
further, in case the Proprietors or Owners of the Houses demolished by or by
reason of the said Fire, or their Assigns, shall not within the space of Three
years next ensuing after the said Fire, lay the Foundations of their Houses to
be rebuilt, and shall not within the time to be limited by the said Court,
rebuild and finish the same, That upon such default, the said Court shall have
Power and Authority by their Order and Decree, to dispose of the said Houses so
to be rebuilt, and of the Soil thereof, one of all Yards, Backsides, Orchards,
Gardens, and other Appurtenances thereunto belonging, to such person as will
rebuild the same, their Heirs and Assigns: And that the said Court shall and
may award what sum of money or other satisfaction the person who undertakes to
be the Rebuilder, shall give for the same, to the Proprietor or Proprietors,
Owner or Owners making such default as aforesaid: And in case the said person
or persons making default, will not, or through any such disability, or other
impediment as is before in this Act expressed, cannot accept thereof, in such
cases the said Court are hereby Empowered to Impannel and Summon a Jury before
them; which Jury upon their Oaths (to be administered by the said Court) are to
assess such recompense and satisfaction as they shall think fit to be awarded
and paid unto the person or persons making default in rebuilding, for the said
Houses to be rebuilt, and for the Soil thereof, and for the Yards, Backsides,
Orchards, Gardens, and other Appurtenances thereunto belonging, by the person
who undertakes to be the rebuilder: And upon payment of the said recompense and
satisfaction to awarded, or tender and refusal thereof, the said person or
persons making default in rebuilding, his Heirs and Assigns, and all others,
shall be for ever barred; and the said Houses to be rebuilt, and the Soil, and
other the Appurtenances thereof, so assigned by the said Court unto the
Undertaker to rebuild the same, shall for ever after be and remain unto the
said Rebuilder, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in such manner as the said
Court shall have assigned and appointed the same.

And for the preventing of future danger by Fire, it is further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all Houses, Outhouses, and other Buildings
demolished by the late Fire, or hereafter to be built within the said Town,
shall be covered with Lead, Slatt or Tyle, and not otherwise; and that no
perilous Trade, in respect of Fire, shall hereafter be used or exercised in the
principal Public parts or Streets of the said Town; and that all Houses and
Buildings hereafter to be built, which shall be covered contrary to this
present Act, and all Houses demolished by the said Fire, built contrary to the
Form, Order and Direction of the said Court, shall be adjudged, and are hereby
declared to be common and public Nusances, and be proceeded against, and
dealt with accordingly.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any such Order
or Decree, as aforesaid, shall be made by a lesser number of the said Judges,
Justices of Peace, and other the persons above named and authorized, then
Seven, It shall be lawful for any person agrieved by such Order or Decree, to
present his exceptions to the same in writing, within Twenty days next after
such Order or Decree made, to one of the Judges of Assize for the said County
of Northampton for the time being, or other the Justices of the Courts of Kings
Bench or Common Pleas, or the Barons of the Coif of the Exchequer for the time
being; and if one of them shall subscribe thereunto, that he finds probable
Cause of Complaint, then it shall be lawful to or for any Seven, or more, of
the Judges of Assize, Justices of the Peace, and other persons above named,
(that made not the said Order or Decree) sitting at the same time together at
the Guildhall, or some other place within the said Town of Northampton, to
review the said former Order or Decree, and thereupon to reverse, confirm,
enlarge, diminish, or otherwise alter any such Order or Decree, as in their
Judgments they shall think fit, or otherwise to award Costs against such
Appeallants, for their vexation and delay, and to levy the same by distress and
sale of his, her, or their Goods, rendering the overplus, if any be. Provided
always, That such Appeals be fully finished and determined within the space of
Six months next following, after the delivering in of such Exceptions as
aforesaid.

And for the better satisfaction of Builders, Purchasers, and other concerned,
It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Judgment,
Order and Decree so made as aforesaid, shall be good, valid and effectual both
in Law and Equity to all intents and purposes, and shall be obeyed by all
persons concerned therein, and shall bind and conclude Infants, Feme-Coverts,
Idiots, persons of Non-saue memory, or beyond the Sea, Tenants in Tail,
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and all other Ecclesiastical persons and
Corporations, and their Successors, and all other persons, Bodies Natural and
Politic whatsoever, and that no Writ of Error or Certiorari shall be for the
removal or reversal of the same. And for the perpetuating the same to all
posterity, that the said Judgments, Orders and Decrees shall be fairly entered
into one or more Books, and be subscribed with the names of the persons that
made the same, and that the said Books be delivered in unto the Mayor and
Aldermen of the said Town of Northampton for the time being, to the end the
same may be safely disposed and kept in the Chamber of the said Town for ever,
amongst their Records and Evidences, and that all persons concerned may have
free liberty of recourse unto the said Books, to peruse the same from time to
time, as occasion shall require. The Powers and Authorities given and mentioned
in this Act, to continue for the space of Ten years, and no longer.

And for the better encouragement of Gentlemen and others to build and reside
in the said Town, Be it Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
the Peace for the County of Northampton from time to time being, who shall be
Inhabitants within the said Town, may for ever hereafter use and exercise their
said Office to all intents and purposes, within the said Town and Liberties
thereof, and in the Sessions of the said Town to be held, as they may or can do
in the said County at large, or in the Public Sessions thereof: And that all
other persons who from time to time shall be Justices of the Peace for the said
County, shall for ever hereafter use and exercise the said Office within the
said Town and Liberties thereof, during the time in which the Assizes and
Public Sessions of the Peace for the said County shall be there kept: And
that all and every such persons as are not free of the said Town, and shall
build any House or Houses in the said Town, to the value of Three hundred
pounds, or upwards (within Seven years) from the Twentieth day of September
last past, by and according to the Order of the said Court, such persons shall
have liberty to exercise any Trade within the said Town, as any Freeman of the
said Town may do.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That all and every person and
persons, before they execute any of the Powers or Authorities in the said Act
mentioned, shall take this Oath following, before any Two Justices of Peace of
the said County of Northhampton for the time being, which they are hereby
empowered to Administer: That is to say, I Do hereby Swear, That I will justly
and truly Execute the Powers and Authorities in this Act contained, according
to the best of my knowledge, without favor or affection to any of the Parties
concerned: So help me God.



And lastly it is Enacted, That if any person or persons shall be Sued or
Impleaded for any matter or thing done in the Execution of this Act, or in
pursuance thereof, he or they may plead the General Issue, and give the special
matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff shall be Nonsuit, or a Verdict do pass
against him, such Defendant shall have and recover his double Cost.

Private Acts.
I. AN Act for the better Enabling of Mary Countess Dowager of Warwick, to
perform the last Will and Testament of her deceased Husband, Charles late Earl
of Warwick.

II. An Act for vesting Lands of Alexander Davyes Gentleman deceased, in
Trustees, for payment of his Debts.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty. 1675.


