AN ACT FOR THE IMPROVEMENT Of the Revenue of the Customs and Excize.
WHereas by the Humble Petition and Advice of the Parliament, it is thought fit
and Declared, That the constant yearly Revenue of Thirteen hundred thousand
pounds, shall be raised and settled for the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies
of this Commonwealth, and for Defraying the Charges of the Government; And
whereas it will be necessary that the Profits of the Excize and Customs, and
other the Public Revenue, be by all good ways and means Improved to the best
Advantage of the Commonwealth, and as much as may be, reduced to a Certainty,
to the end the said Yearly Revenue of Thirteen hundred thousand pounds may be
answered and raised without a Land Tax, according to the Humble Petition and
Advice, without weakening the Securities wherewith the same are already charged;
Be it therefore Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and this present
Parliament, and by Authority thereof, That the Lord Whitlock, Col. Sydenham,
Col. Philip Jones, the Lord Commissioner Fyennes, the Lord Commissioner Lisle,
Mr. Secretary Thurloe, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir William Roberts, Mr. Drake, Mr.
Godfrey, Col. John Clerk, Mr. Bond, Capt. Stone, Sir Christopher Pack, Alderman
Foot, Mr. Lloyd, the Lord Chief Justice Glyn, Sir Charles Wolseley, Sir John
Trevor, Mr. Upton, the Lord Broghil, Genesis Disbrow, Major General Goff, M.
Bodwrda, Mr. Thomas Smith, Col. Twisleton, Mr. Rushworth, Mr. Downing, Sir John
Barkstead, Col. John Jones, Major Beak, Capt. Blackwel, Mr. Highland, Col.
Mildmay, Col. Matthews, Major General Hains, Major General Kelsey, and Mr.
Maidston, or any seven of them shall be, and hereby are Authorized and
Empowered to be a Committee of Parliament, to Treat, Contract and Conclude with
any person or persons for the Farming all or any part of the Duties of Customs
and Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, and of Excise and New Impost, and all or
any part of the Duties mentioned in two several Acts made this present
Parliament, the one Entitled, An Act for Continuing and Establishing the
Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage; And for reviving an Act for the better Packing
of Butter, and for Redress of Abuses therein; The other Entitled, An
Additional Act for the better Improvement and Advancing the Receipts of the
Excize and New Impost, and all or any part of the Duties mentioned in any other
Act or Ordinance touching the said Customs and Excize, which by virtue of the
aforementioned Acts are Revived, Continued, Confirmed or put in force; And what
Contract, Bargain or Agreement, Contracts, Bargains, or Agreements, shall be
made by the said Committee, or any seven of them, with any person or persons
for or touching the premises, or any part of them; which Contract, Bargain or
Agreement, Contracts, Bargains or Agreements being assented unto by His
Highness, with the Advice of His Council, and Ratified and Confirmed by any
Grant or Grants under the Great Seal of England, shall be, and hereby is and
are declared to be and continue Good and Valid to all intents and purposes; and
all and every person or persons that shall be a Farmer or Contractor, Farmers
or Contractors in pursuance of this Act, shall be saved and kept harmless by
Authority of Parliament.

Provided always, That the premises nor any part of them, be farmed for any
Term exceeding Seven years: And the said Committee are hereby required to give
an Account of their Proceedings hereupon to the Parliament at their next
Sitting.

Provided always, That no person appointed by this Act to be of the Committee
of Parliament as aforesaid, shall directly or indirectly be a Farmer, or
Partner in the farming of any part of the Custom or Excise aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That no person or persons
whatsoever, that shall farm the Customs or Excize, or any part of them, or
shall be Commissioner or Commissioners of them or either of them, shall during
the time of such Farm or Commission, trade in any the Commodities which may
fall under the said Farm, or within the Compass of such Commission.

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


