blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)An Act
prohibiting to Brew for Sale any ALE or BEER above Ten shillings the Barrel,
besides the Excize.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by Authority thereof, That no
Brewer or other person that breweth to put to sale, shall after the First day
of October, One thousand six hundred forty nine, brew to sell, directly or
indirectly, any Beer or Ale, or other Drink wherein Malt shall be used, any
Barrel of Beer, Ale, or other Drink as aforesaid, or greater or lesser quantity
proportionably, above the rate of Ten shillings the Barrel, over and above the
Excize payable, accompting Thirty six Gallons to the Barrel for Beer, and
Thirty two Gallons for Ale, Upon the pain and forfeiture for every Barrel the
sum of Five pounds, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, to
be levied by Distress and sale of the Offenders goods, being thereof convicted
by the Oaths of two Witnesses, before any one Justice of the Peace; which Oath
the said Justice has hereby power to administer, and to grant Warrant for
Distress and sale of goods as aforesaid; And in default of sufficient Distress,
then the said Justice shall send such person to the Goal, there to remain for
the space of three Months, without Bail or Mainprise: And if such person shall
offend the second time, and be thereof convicted as aforesaid, Then such
Justice of the Peace shall cause such Offender to be sent to the House of
Correction, and there to get his or her livelihood by labor for the space of
six Months, without he or she shall pay down Ten pounds for every Barrel, or
other greater or lesser quantity so brewed and sold (over and above the price
or rate of Ten shillings as aforesaid) The one moiety of which several Fines,
the said Justice shall give to the Poor of the Parish where the Offense shall
be committed, and the other moiety to the Party that shall make discovery and
prosecute the same. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
it shall and may be lawful for the said Justice, to examine upon Oath any
Victualler, Seller or Retailer of Beer, Ale or Drink as aforesaid, or other
person whatsoever (other then the said Brewer himself) what price or prices,
directly or indirectly have been made, or other indirect practice has been
used with or by the said Brewer, or other person to delude this Act, and the
good intended thereby, to the end the said Brewer or other person may be
brought to condign punishment as aforesaid. And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for any Brewer of Ale or
Beer, to sell Ale or Beer at Ten shillings the Barrel (over and above the
Excize) and so proportionably a greater or lesser quantity, Any Law, Statute or
Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, That this
Act be in full force for the space of one whole year, from and after the First
day of October, One thousand six hundred forty nine, and no longer.

Die Mercurii, 12 Septembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1649.


