C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the 25th day of April, Anno Domini,
1660.

In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
Peers, 1660.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms
ANNO XII. Caroli II. Regis.
An Act for the continuance of Process and Judicial Proceedings.
WHereas the four first Retorns of Easter Term, in the Year 1660. of late
called, from Easter day in fifteen days, from Easter day in three weeks, from
Easter day in one month, and from Easter day in five weeks, or any of them,
cannot be conveniently kept or holden: Now for avoiding all manner of
discontinuances whatsoever, which by occasion thereof should or might happen,
or be in any matter or Cause whatsoever, in any the Courts at Westminster: Be
it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, That no Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints,
Process, Precepts, or other thing or things whatsoever, Pleaded, Returned, or
Depending, or having day or days in any of the said Courts, in or at the said
several Retorns, or any of them, or at any other day or days certam after any
of the said Retorns, shall be in any wise discontinued, or put without day, for
or by reason of the not keeping or holding of the said Retorns, or days, or any
of them; but that all and singular the said Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions,
Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, and other the Premises aforesaid, shall
stand, continue, and be good and effectual in Law, to all Intents and Purposes,
as if the said Retorns and days, and every of them, had been actually kept and
holden in all and every the said Courts; any Law, Statute, Custom, or Usage to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Pleas, Writs,
Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, and other thing or things
whatsoever aforesaid, pleadable, or to be pleaded, Retornable, or to be
Returned, or having day in any manner whatsoever at any of the said Retorns, or
any day or days certain after any of the said Retorns, Be and are hereby
continued and adjourned, unto (and shall or may be Pleaded, Returned, Heard,
and Determined in the Respective Courts aforesaid) at, or on the fifth Retorn
of the said Term, of late called, In the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord,
And that all Parties in any Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints,
Process, or other thing or things whatsoever, having days given them at any of
the said four first Retorns, or at any other day or days certain, after any of
the said Retorns in the said Courts, or any of them, by virtue of this present
Act, have the said Retorn of late called, In the morrow of the Ascension of our
Lord, prefixed them therein; And that all Sheriffs, Officers, and other
Ministers whatsoever, and every of them respectively, keep in their hands all
Writs, Bills, Process and Precepts, and all other things whatsoever to them
directed respectively Retornable, or to be Returned in the several Courts
aforesaid, at the said four first Retorns, or any of them, in or at any day
certain, as aforesaid, until the said fifth Retorn, of late called, The morrow
of the Ascension of our Lord, and then Retorn the same into the said several
Courts respectively, That such proceedings may be then had thereupon, as should
have been had, in case the said four first Retorns had been kept and holden.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Writs, Process,
Plaints, Pleas, Informations, Indictments, or Judicial Proceedings, had,
Commenced, or Prosecuted before the fifth day of May, in the said Year of our
Lord 1660. in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Custodes Libertatis Angliae
Authoritate Parliamenti; or in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of The Keepers
of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament; or in the Name, Style,
Title or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging; or in the Name,
Style, Title, or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging;
or in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Richard Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereto belonging, shall be put without day, abated, quashed, or
discoutinued by His Majesty's most just re-assumption of the actual Exercise of
His Kingly Government in this Kingdom; nor shall the same be cause of Error,
Abarement, or Discontinuance, but that all such Writs, Process, Plaints, Pleas,
Informations, Indictments, and Judicial Proceedings, and all Commissions for
taking of Answers, or Examination of Witnesses, Commission for taking of Fines,
and Warrants of Attorney, Guardians, or Procheinamy, shall stand and be
continued, and shall and may be proceeded upon, prosecuted, and returned,
notwithstanding the same were commenced or prosecuted in English, and
notwithstanding the present happy Change and Restitution of His Majesty's Name
and Style in Judicial Proceedings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one pretended Act
made in the Year of our Lord, 1650. Entitled, An Act for turning the Books of
the Law, and all Process and Proceedings in Courts of Justice, into English,
shall stand and be in force, as if the same had been a good and effectual Act,
from the first Retorn of Easter Term, in the Year of our Lord 1651. until the
first day of August, in the Year of our Lord 1660. and no longer. And whereas
by one other pretended Act, made in the said Year of our Lord 1650. Entitled,
An Act touching Corn and Meal, It was Enacted, or mentioned to be Enacted, That
from and after the 20th day of November, 1650. It should and might be lawful to
and for any Person or Persons, Defendant or Tenant, for or by reason of any
matter to be Pleaded, set forth, or alleged in Bar to any Action Real,
Personal, or mixed in any Court of Record, to plead the General Issue of Not
Guilty, or the like General Issue proper to the Nature of the Action or Suit
Commenced; and for his or their Discharge or Acquitting to give any such matter
in evidence to the Jury that shall try the same, And that the said m^tter shall
be as available to such person or persons Detendant or Tenant to all intents
and purposes, as if the said matter had been specially pleaded, set forth, or
alleged in Bar of such Action.

Be it further Enacted, That the said pretended Act, as touching the pleading
of the general Issue, shall by Authority hereof, stand and be in full force and
effect according to the Tenor thereof, until the said first day of August, as
if the same had been a good and effectual Act of Parliament, and no longer.

Provided always, That where the general Issue has been since the said 20th
day of November 1650. pleaded, or shall before the said first day of August in
the said Year of our Lord 1660. be pleaded in any Action, That then upon the
Trial of the said Cause, such Evidence shall and may be allowed as if the said
pretended Act touching the pleading of the General Issue had been and continued
a good and effectual Act of Parliament not determined or discontinued.

Provided also, That His Majesty's Royal Assent to the passing of this Bill,
shall not extend, or be construed to extend to the determining of the Session
of this present Parliament.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That all Writs, Patents, and
Commissions for Constituting Justices of either Bench, and Barons of the
Exchequer, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery, and Precepts
upon Commissions of Oyer and Terminer and Goal Delivery, and all other
Commissions hereafter to be made by the Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery^,
Charters, and Letters Patens under the Great Seal, of Lands, Liberties,
Honors, or Offices, do or may Issue in the Kings Majesty's Name, in the same
manner as was usual before the making of the said first recited pretended Act,
any thing in this present Act to the contrary thereof before expressed, in any
wise notwithstanding.

Tudor rose, French fleur-de-lis, and Scottish thistle
Imprinted at LONDON by John Macock and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
PEERS.

Anno Domini 1660.


