AN ACT For the Abolishing the KINGLY OFFICE IN England, Ireland, And the
Dominions thereunto belonging.
WHereas Charles Stuart late King of England, Ireland, and the Territories and
Dominions thereunto belonging, has by Authority derived from Parliament, been,
and is hereby declared to be justly condemned, adjudged to dye, and put to
death for many Treasons, Murders, and other heinous Offenses committed by him,
by which Judgment he stood and is hereby Declared to be attained of High
Treason, whereby his Issue and Posterity, and all others pretending Title under
him, are become incapable of the said Crowns, or of being King or Queen of the
said Kingdom or Dominions, or either or any of them: Be it therefore Enacted
and Ordained, and it is Enacted, Ordained and Declared by this present
Parliament, and by Authority thereof, That all the People of England and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, of what degree
or condition soever, are discharged of all Fealty, Homage and Allegiance which
is or shall be pretended to be due unto any of the Issue and Posterity of the
said late King, or any claiming under him; and that Charles Stuart eldest son,
and James called Duke of York, second son, and all other the Issue and
Posterity of him the said late King, and all and every person and persons
pretending Title from, by or under him, are and be disabled to hold or enjoy
the said Crown of England and Ireland, and other the Dominions thereunto
belonging, or any of them; or to have the Name, Title, Style or Dignity of King
or Queen of England and Ireland, Prince of Wales, or any of them; or to have
and enjoy the power and Dominion of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of
them, or the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, and Hereditaments
belonging or appertaining to the said Crown of England and Ireland, and other
the Dominions aforesaid, or to any of them; or to the Principality of Wales,
Duchy of Lancaster or Cornwall, or any or either of them, Any Law, Statute,
Ordinance, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding:
And whereas it is and has been found by experience, that the Office of a King
in this Nation and Ireland, and to have the power thereof in any single person,
is unnecessary, burthensom and dangerous to the Liberty, Safety and public
Interest of the People, and that for the most part, use has been made of the
Regal power and prerogative, to oppress, impoverish and enslave the subject;
and that usually and naturally any one person in such power, makes it his
Interest to incroach upon the just Freedom and Liberty of the People, and to
promote the setting up of their own will and power above the Laws, that so they
might enslave these Kingdoms to their own lust: Be it therefore Enacted and
Ordained by this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, That the
Office of a King in this Nation, shall not henceforth reside in, or be
exercised by any one single person; and that no one person whatsoever, shall or
may have, or hold the Office, Style, Dignity, Power or Authority of King of the
said Kingdoms and Dominions, or any of them, or of the Prince of Wales, Any
Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And it is hereby Enacted, That if any person or persons shall
endeavor to attempt by force of Arms or otherwise, or be ayding, alsisting,
comforting or abetting unto any person or persons that shall by any ways or
means whatsoever, endeovor or attempt the reviving or setting up again of any
pretended Right of the said Charles, eldest Son to the said late King, James
called Duke of York, or of any other the Issue and Posterity of the said late
King, or of any person or persons claiming under him or them, to the said Regal
Office, Style, Dignity or Authority, or to be Prince of Wales; or the promoting
of any one person whatsoever, to the Name, Style, Dignity, Power, Prerogative
or Authority, of King of England and Ireland, and Dominions aforesaid, or any
of them; That then every such Offense shall be deemed and adjudged High
Treason, and the Offenders therein, their Counselors, Procurers, Ayders and
Abettors, being convicted of the said Offense, or any of them, shall be deemed
and adjudged Traitors against the Parliament and People of England, and shall
suffer, lose and forfeit, and have such like and the same Pains, Forfeitures,
Judgments and Execution, as is used in case of High Treason: And whereas by
the Abolition of the Kingly Office provided for in this Act, a most happy way
(...) made for this Nation (if God see it good) t(...) return to its just and
ancient Right, of bein(...) governed by its own Representatives or National
Meetings in Council, from time to time chosen and entrusted for that purpose by
the People, It is therefore Resolved and Declared by the Commons assembled in
Parliament, That they will put a period to the sitting of this present
Parliament, and dissolv(...) the same so soon as may possibly stand with
th(...) safety of the people that has betrusted them and with what is
absolutely necessary for th(...) preserving and upholding the Governmen(...)
now settled in the way of a Commonwealth and that they will carefully provide
for th(...) certain choosing, meeting and sitting of th(...) next and future
Representatives, with such (...)there Circumstances of Freedom in choice an
equality in distribution of Members to be elected thereunto, as shall most
conduce to ye las(...)ing freedom and good of this Commonwealth And it is
hereby further Enacted and Declared notwithstanding any thing contained in
thy(...) Act, no person or persons of what condition equality soever, within
the Commonwealth o(...) England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, th(...) Islands
of Guernsey and Jersey, and Town o(...) Berwick upon Tweed, shall be discharged
from the obedience and subjection which he and the owe to the Government of
this Nation, as i(...) is now Declared, but all and every of them shall in all
things render and perform th(...) same, as of right is due unto the supreme
Authority hereby declared to reside in this and th(...) successive
Representatives of the People o(...) this Nation, and in them only.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.


