AN ACT For settling the MILITIA FOR The City of London, and Liberties thereof.

Thursday, July 7. 1659.



ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by John Field and Henry Hills, Printers to the Parliament. And
are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleet Street, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT For Settling the MILITIA FOR The City of LONDON, and Liberties thereof.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That
Alderman Ireton Lord Mayor, and the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of the City of
London for the time being, Major Richard Salwey, Major General Philip Skippon,
Isaac Penington Esquire Alderman Atkin, Alderman Andrews, Alderman Foot, Alderman
Fowke, Alderman Dethick, Alderman Titchburne, Alderman Thomas Allen, Alderman
Thompson, Alderman Milner, Alderman Love, Alderman Vincent, Alderman Laurence,
Alderman Anthony Bateman, Mr. Nicholas Gold, Mr. Samuel Moyer, Colonel John
Okey, Mr. Theophilus Biddulph, Colonel Owen Roe, Colonel Matthew Sheppard,
Lieutenant Colonel John Fenton, Mr. Praise-God Barebone, Mr. Henry Brandrith,
Mr. John Jackson, Captain Kiffin, Captain Henry Par, Mr. Humphry Cliffe,
Captain John Marriot, Mr. William Jelly, Captain Ostler, Captain Robert
Mallory, Mr. Nicholas Skinner, Stephen Isles, Lieutenant Colonel Charles Doiley,
Major Thomas Randall, Major Blunt Sadler, Mr. Joseph Sibley, Mr. James Rand;
Colonel John Owen, Colonel William Webb, Mr. Robert Offley, Mr. Thomas Benson,
Mr. Hugh Mason, Mr. Edward Raddon, Mr. Slingsby Bethell, Mr. Leppington,
Captain Blenner Hassel, Richard Downs, Captain William Meade, Captain Nicholas
Roberts, Mr. Nicholas Juxon, Mr. Edward Bushel, Mr. William Dashwood, Mr.
George Coney, Major John Child, Methusa Turner, William Smith, Richard
Eccleston, William Zanckey, Major Robert Russel, George Gospright, Samuel
Southen, Deputy Campfield, William Allin, Lieutenant Colonel Robert Price,
Lieutenant Colonel Foach, Lieutenant Colonel John Mew, Captain Thomas Bourn,
Captain Stephen Hemberey, Captain Oram, Major William Clement, Thomas Arnold,
Esquire Henry Barton, Mr. Joseph Holden, Captain John Owen, Major Jervase
Blackwell, Captain Edward Storey, Mr. Abraham Babbington, Mr. James Hughes,
Richard Arnold, Mr. Clement Ireton, Mr. John Lawson, Mr. William Harrington,
Lieutenant Colonel William Puckle, Richard Waring, Esquire William Pennoyer, Esquire
Robert Barret, Nathaniel Manton, Mr. (...) Ross, Colonel Gower, Captain John
Hind, Mr. Richard Baker, Colonel George Langham, Mr. John Langley, Mr.
Alexander Lawson, Captain Mark Coe, and Mr. Thomas Lenthall, Be, and are hereby
constituted and appointed Commissioners for the Militia of the City of London,
and the Liberties thereof: And that they, or any Seven, or more of them, shall
have power, and are hereby Authorized to assemble and call together, all and
every such well affected person and persons, within the said City and Liberties
thereof, as are meet and fit to bear Arms, and them well and sufficiently from
time to time to cause to be Armed, Arrayed and Weaponed, and to form into
Companies, Troops and Regiments, and to Lead Conduct and Employ, or cause to be
Led, Conducted and Employed, as well within the said City and Liberties
thereof, as within and into any other Places of this Commonwealth, for
suppressing of all Insurrections, Rebellions and Invasions that may happen to
be, and to fight with, Kill and Slay such Enemies and Rebels, as they shall
find in Arms against this Commonwealth, and further to act and do according as
they shall from time to time receive directions from the Parliament, or the
Council of State, by the Parliament appointed or to be appointed; and that the
said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, shall have Power and
Authority to present to the Parliament, or Council of State, the names of such
person and persons (having respect to the Qualifications declared by the
Parliament) as they shall think fit, to be Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels,
Majors, Captains and other Commission Officers of the said Persons so to be
Armed, Arrayed and Weaponed, which Persons so presented and Approved of by the
Parliament or Council of State, shall have Commissions signed by the Speaker of
the Parliament as the Officers of the Army have; And, being so Commissionated,
shall have Power to Train, Exercise, and put in readiness, and also to Lead and
Conduct the Persons so to be Armed, Arrayed and Weaponed, by the Directions,
and to the intents and purposes aforesaid. And for the Providing of Horse and
Arms and the Furniture thereunto belonging, for the Arming and Weaponing the
persons aforesaid; And also for the defraying and paying the necessary Charges
thereunto belonging,

Be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of
them, have hereby Power and Authority to Assess and Charge all and every such
Person and Persons, inhabiting, and residing within the said City and Liberties
thereof, or who have any Estate within the said City or Liberties thereof,
proportionably, according to such Estates there, as are and shall be fit and
meet to be Assest and Charged, for the purposes aforesaid, for and toward the
Finding, Furnishing, and Providing, Maintaining, and having in readiness, one
or more Horse or Horses, Arms, or other Furniture, according to the several
Estates and Abilities of the Persons to be Assessed and Charged: Provided that
no one Person, not having an Estate of the clear value of Three thousand
pounds, (of which the said Commissioners are to be Judges) be Charged or
Chargeable with an Horse and Arms, and the Furniture thereunto belonging; and
that no one Person, not having an Estate of the clear value of four hundred
pounds, (of which also the said Commissioners are to be Judges) be charged or
chargeable with a whole foot Arms and the furniture thereunto belonging.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That all and every person or persons
having an estate of the clear value of One hundred pounds, and under the said
value of four hundred pounds, be chargeable by the said Commissioners, for and
toward the finding and providing of Drums, Colors, Powder, Match and Bullet,
so that such charge upon any one person exceed not the Sum of twenty shillings.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons so to be Assessed or
Charged by the said Commissioners shall refuse or neglect by the time to be
appointed by the said Commissioners, to provide and furnish such sufficient
Horse, Horses, Arms, and other Furniture, or to pay such Sum or Sums of Money
toward the providing and furnishing as aforesaid, that then it shall and may
be Lawful to and for the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to
inflict a Penalty upon such person and persons, not exceeding Twenty pounds:
And also by Warrant under their hands and Seals, to commit such person and
persons, so refusing or neglecting, to prison, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize, till he or they shall conform thereunto; and pay such Penalty so
inflicted as aforesaid, or else by like warrant to Levy such Sum or Sums of
Money, or the value of such Horse, Horses, Arms and Furniture, and such penalty
inflicted, by distress and sale of the Goods of the person or persons, so
neglecting, or refusing, rendering the overplus to the party so distrained, all
necessary charges in Levying thereof, being first deducted.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons, so to be Armed,
Arrayed, and Weaponed, shall detain or imbezle his Horse, Arms, or other
Furniture wherewith he shall be Entrusted, that it shall and may be Lawful to
and for the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to Imprison such
Person and Persons, till he or they have made satisfaction, for the Horse,
Arms, or other Furniture, so by him detained, or imbezled: And also, that if
any person, so to be Armed, Horsed, or Weaponed as aforesaid, shall not appear
and serve, Completely Furnished with the Horse, Arms, and other Furniture,
wherewith he is entrusted, at the beat of Drum, Sound of Trumpet, or other
Summons, That then, and so often, it shall and may be Lawful, to and for the
said Commissioners, or any five of them, if the default be in the Person or
Persons so entrusted, to imprison such Person or Persons, for the space of five
days without Bail or Mainprize, or inflict a penalty, if a Horseman, not
exceeding twenty shillings, and if a Footman not exceeding ten shillings, to be
paid down without delay, or forbearance. And if any Person or Persons, so
Assessed, or Charged as aforesaid, shall refuse, or neglect to deliver his
Horse, Arms, or other Furniture, upon such Summons or other notice as
aforesaid, That then, and so often, it shall and may be Lawful to and for the
said Commissioners, and any five or more of them, to inflict a penalty, not
exceeding five pounds, to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods of such
person and persons so refusing as aforesaid, Rendering the overplus to the party
distrained, necessary Charges for Levying being first Deducted. And for the
better discovery of the Ability of the persons to be Assessed and Charged, and
of all Misdemeanors tending to the hinderance of the service, the said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, are hereby enabled to examine upon
Oath such person and persons as they shall judge necessary and convenient. And
for the better and more speedy execution of the premises,

Be it further Enacted, And the said Commissioners are hereby required, to
appoint such and so often General meetings of themselves as they think fit: And
at such General meetings, to appoint one or more Treasurer or Treasurers, for
Receiving such money as shall be Levied by virtue hereof; of all which Receipts
and Disbursements thereof, the said Treasurers and Receivers are every Six
months to give their Account in writing to the Parliament or Council of State.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, shall and may summon all and every Treasurer and Treasurers, of any
former Committee, or Commissioners for the Militia, within the City and
Liberties aforesaid, or any other person or persons, who by virtue of any
authority of Parliament or otherwise, are possessed of any sum or sums of money,
or Arms, in relation to the said Militia, and to require them and every of them
forthwith to pay every such sum and sums of money, and deliver such Arms
remaining in their hands aforesaid, to such person or persons, as the said
Commissioners appointed by this Act, or any Seven or more of them, shall
appoint. And in case of non-payment and delivery of such Arms, to Levy the same
money or value of the said Arms by imprisonment of the person, or by Distress
and Sale, rendering the overplus to the party Distrained. All which moneys so
Levied and Received, and all such Arms as aforesaid to be delivered, are to be
^mployed for carrying on the said Service. And at such General meeting the said
Commissioners are to divide themselves in such proportions and numbers as they
shall judge convenient, and into such Precincts and Divisions, as may most tend
to the speedy and effectual advancement of the Service.

And for the better securing the Peace of this Commonwealth, Be it further
Enacted and Ordained, and the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them,
are hereby enabled and Authorized, from time to time by Warrant under their
hands and Seals, to employ such well affected person or persons as they shall
think fit, of which a Constable within the respective Ward to be one, in the
day time, to search for and seize all Arms and Horses, in the custody or
possession of any Popish Recusant, or other Person that has been in Arms
against the Parliament, or that has adhered to the Enemies thereof, or any
other person whom the said Commissioners shall judge dangerous to the Peace of
this Commonwealth. And with such Arms to Arm such well affected persons as they
shall think fit, or otherwise to secure such Arms for the use of the
Commonwealth; to which purpose the persons so to be employed, are hereby
Authorized and Required to enter into the House, or Lodging of any such Person
as aforesaid, and there to search for, seize and take away such Arms as they
shall find: and thereof from time to time to give account to the said
Commissioners.

And be it Enacted, That all Constables and other Officers and Ministers within
the said City and Liberties thereof, be and are hereby required to be aiding
and assisting to the said Commissioners in Execution of the Premises: And that
all and every Person and Persons, who shall act or do any thing in execution
thereof, shall be saved harmless and Indempnified by Authority of Parliament.

And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be Lawful, to and for the
said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to impose the finding and
providing of Horse and Arms as aforesaid, by joining two, three or more persons
together in the Charge, as to their judgments shall appear most conducible to
the service of the Commonwealth.

Provided, that this Act shall continue in force until the first day of March
One Thousand six hundred fifty nine, and no longer.

Thursday July 7. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.

Thursday July 7. 1659.
ORdered, That the Qualifications set forth by the Parliament the Ninth of May
One Thousand six hundred fifty nine, be Printed together with this Act.

Monday May 9. 1659.
THe Parliament does Declare, That all such as shall be in any place of Trust
or Power within this Commonwealth, be able for the discharge of such Trust; and
that they be persons fearing God, and that have given testimony of their love
to all the people of God, and of their faithfulness to the cause of this
Commonwealth, according to the Declaration of Parliament of the Seventh of May,
One Thousand six hundred fifty nine.

Tho. St. Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.


