AN ACT FOR THE EXPORTATION OF SEVERAL COMMODITIES OF THE Breed, Growth and
Manufacture OF THIS COMMONWEALTH.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.



LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.

AN ACT FOR THE EXPORTATION OF SEVERAL COMMODITIES OF THE Breed, Growth and
Manufacture OF THIS COMMONWEALTH.
FOrasmuch as it is found by long experience, that the prosperous Estate of all
Islands is very much (under God) maintained and supported by a quick and
flourishing Trade, and in a just endeavor and care, that the Exportation of the
Native Commodities overbalance the Importation of Foreign Commodities; And
forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to bless the industry and endeavors
of the People of these Nations, in the great Improvement of Fens, Forests,
Chases and other Lands, with a great redundancy of Corn, Cattle, Butter,
Cheese, and diverse other considerable Commodities, much desired by, and of
great use to other Nations, and the Plantations abroad; And if Liberty were
granted freely to Export the same, and all Restraints taken away, and the
Customs made easy, it would much encourage Manufactures and advance Trade;
Which His Highness and the Parliament duly considering, are pleased that it be
Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and this
present Parliament, and the Authority of the same, That from and after the
First day of January next coming, it shall and may be Lawful to all and every
person or persons, being the Natives of this Commonwealth, or to any other
person or persons whatsoever, only out of such Towns and Ports of this
Commonwealth where are, or shall be resident a Customer or Collector of Tonnage
and Poundage, or one of their Deputies, and not elsewhere, to Load, Carry, and
Transport into the parts beyond the Seas, in Amity with this Commonwealth, and
there to sell the same, Any Law, Usage or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, these several Commodities of the Breed, Growth or Manufacture
of this Commonwealth hereafter mentioned, not paying Custom or any other Duty
for them or any of them, exceeding the Rates herein expressed, limited and
appointed; That is to say, That it shall and may be lawful to transport
Geldings, and that the Custom to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth be
for every Gelding, Twenty shillings the Gelding and by Strangers and Foreiners,
for every Gelding, Thirty shillings the Gelding: Provided, and it is hereby
Enacted, That such Geldings as shall be Transported by the Natives of this
Commonwealth into the Plantations thereof, by Shipping belonging thereunto, pay
only Ten shillings the Gelding: Also, that it shall and may be lawful to
Transport Oxen, Barrel-Beef, Barrel-Pork, Bacon, Butter, Cheese and Candles,
any or either of them, when the Prices of these several sorts of Commodities at
the Times, Havens and Places, when and where they shall be Bought, Shipped or
Laden, exceed not the Rates hereafter following; (viz.) The barrel of Beef,
containing thirty six Gallons, at Five pounds the barrel: The barrel of Pork
containing as aforesaid, at Six pounds ten shillings the barrel: the Flitch of
Bacon, at Six pence the pound: The barrel of Butter containing four Firkins,
and each Firkin containing Fifty six pounds of neat Butter, at Four pounds ten
shillings the Barrel: The hundred weight of Cheese, at One pound ten shillings
the hundred weight: The dozen pound of Candles, at Five shillings the dozen
pound. And that the Custom of the said Commodities be as follows; (viz.) For
the Custom of every Ox, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six
shillings eight pence the Ox; and by Foreiners and Strangers, Ten shillings the
Ox: For the Custom of every Barrel of Beef, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Three shillings the Barrel; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Five
shillings the Barrel: For the Custom of every Barrel of Pork, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Four shillings the Barrel; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, Six shillings the Barrel: For the Custom of every Flitch of Bacon,
to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Eight pence the Flitch; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Twelve pence the Flitch: For the Custom of every
Barrel of Butter, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Three
shillings the Barrel; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Six shillings the Barrel:
For the Custom of every hundred weight of Cheese, containing One hundred and
twelve pounds, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Twelve pence the
hundred weight; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling and six pence the
hundred weight: For the Custom of every dozen pounds of Candles, to be paid by
the Natives of this Commonwealth, Three pence the dozen pounds; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Four pence half penny the dozen pounds: For the Custom
of every Barrel of Candles, containing Ten dozen pounds, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Two shillings six pence the Barrel; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Three shillings nine pence the Barrel.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful for
any person or persons, being Natives of this Commonwealth, to carry or
transport of his own, and to buy to sell again in Markets and out of Markets,
and to keep, or sell, or carry and transport, and for any other person or
persons, to transport any or all these several sorts of Corn and Grain
following; (viz.) Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Malt and Oats, when the
Prices of these several sorts of Corn or Grain at the Times, Havens and Places,
when and where they shall be Bought, Shipped or Laden, exceed not the Rates
hereafter following; (viz.) The Quarter of Wheat, at Forty shillings the
Quarter: The Quarter of Rye, Pease and Beans, at Twenty four shilings the
Quarter: The Quarter of Barley and Malt, at Twenty shillings the Quarter: The
Quarter of Oats, at Sixteen shillings the Quarter. And that the Custom or
Poundage for the above mentioned sorts of Corn and Grain be as follows;
(viz.) For the Custom or Poundage of every Quarter of Wheat, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling the Quarter; and by strangers and
Foreiners, Three shillings the Quarter: For the Custom or Poundage of every
Quarter of Rye, Pease and Beans, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Six pence the Quarter; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One
shilling six pence the Quarter: For the Custom or Poundage of every Quarter of
Barley or Malt, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the
Quarter; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling and six pence the
Quarter: For the Custom and Poundage of every Quarter of Oats, to be paid by
the Natives of this Commonwealth, Four pence the Quarter; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, One shilling the Quarter, which said Quarter of Corn and Grain shall
contain eight Bushels, and each Bushel to contain eight Gallons, according to
the Measure of Winchester: Provided that the Natives of this Commonwealth do
transport the aforesaid Corn and Grain in shipping truly belonging therein.

And it is also Enacted and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful to
transport and carry out Beer, the Custom to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, to be for every Tun of Beer, Two shillings the Tun; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Six shillings the Tun.

And it is also further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
it shall and may be lawful to transport all manner of Calves-skins dressed and
undressed, not exceeding the weight of Thirty six pounds the dozen, and that no
one Skin exceed the weight of Four pound; and that the Custom of the said
Calves-skins to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, be for every Dozen
of Calves-skins, Four shillings the dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners,
eight shillings the dozen: And that the Surveyor of the Customs, or Chief
Waiter in each Port or Town, do oversee the searching, weighing, telling and
packing up of the said Calves-skins to be exported. And also that it shall and
may be lawful to transport Sheepskins dressed without their Wool; and that the
Custom to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, be for every hundred of
the said sheepskins containing containing Sixscore, Two shillings six pence
the Hundred; and by Strangers and Foreiners, for every Hundred of Sheep skins
as aforesaid, Five shillings the Hundred.

And lastly, it is Enacted and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful to
transport beyond the Seas, into any part in Amity with this Commonwealth, all
sorts of Arms; That is to say, Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces,
Pistols, Sword and Rapier Blades, Hilts for Swords, Rapirs, or Daggers,
Bandaliers, Pike-heads, Halbert-heads and Shapes, Iron, Armor, Saddles,
Bridle-bits, Snaffles, Stirrups, Holsters, and Powder: Provided, that no person
or persons do dig within the Houses or Lands of any person or persons of this
Commonwealth for the finding of Salt-peeter, nor do take the Carriages of any
person or persons for the carrying of their Materials or Vessels, without their
leave first obtained and had: Provided moreover that the Price of Powder at the
Times, Havens and Places, when and where it shall be Bought, Shipped or Laden,
do not exceed Five pounds the Hundred weight. And that the said Custom for the
Arms and other Commodities last mentioned, be as follows; viz. For the Custom
of every Score of Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces, and Pistols,
Six shillings eight pence the Score; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Thirteen
shillings fourpence the Score: For the Custom of every Dozen of Sword or Rapier
Blades, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the Dozen;
and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling the Dozen: For the Custom of every
Hundred of Bandeliers, containing Fiveseore to the hundred, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the Hundred; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, Nine pence the Hundred: For the Custom of every Dozen of Pike-heads,
to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Two pence the Dozen; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Thee pence the Dozen: For the Custom of every Dozen of
Halbert-heads and Shapes, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six
pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Dozen: For the
Custom of every Suit of Iron Armor, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth One shilling; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling and six
pence: For the Custom of every great Saddle, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, One shilling the great Saddle; and by Strangers and Foreiners,
One shilling six pence the great Saddle: For the Custom of every other Saddle,
to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the Saddle; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Saddle: For the Custom of every Dozen
of Bridle-bits, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the
Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Dozen: For the Custom of
every Dozen of Snaffles, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, One
penny the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Two pence the Dozen: For the
Custom of every Dozen Pair of Stirrups, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Two pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Three pence
the Dozen; For the Custom of every Dozen Pair of Holsters, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling six pence the Dozen; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Two shillings six pence the Dozen: For the Custom of
every Hundred weight of Powder, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth,
Four shillings the hundred weight; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Eight
shillings the Hundred weight: Which said several Sums so to be had and taken,
as Custom or Poundage, shall be in full satisfaction of all manner of Custom or
Poundage for the said Geldings, Arms, Oxen, Corn, or other the before mentioned
Commodities or Manufactures whatsoever; Any Law, Statute, Usage or Custom for
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That His
Highness and Successors, by, and with the Advice and Consent of His and their
Council, may at any time by his and their writ, and Proclamation to be
published, command that no person or persons shall by virtue of this Act
transport or carry out all or any of the said Geldings, Arms or other
Ammunition last mentioned, for such time as shall be therein limited and
appointed; And that it shall not be lawful for any person or persons to carry
out all or any of the aforesaid Geldings, Arms and Ammunition, contrary to the
tenor of the said Proclamation, upon such Pains and Forfeitures, as by the Laws
and Statutes of this Nation in force, before the making of this Act, are and
have been Provided and Ordained in that behalf; This Act, or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


