Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, DUO
DECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1660.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for the better ordering the selling of Wines by Retail, and for
preventing Abuses in the Mingling, Corrupting, and Vitiating of Wines, and for
setting and limiting the prices of the same.
FOr the better Ordering of Selling of Wines by Retail in Taverns, and other
places, and for preventing of abuses therein, Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or
persons whatsoever, from and after the Five and twentieth day of March One
thousand six hundred sixty one, unless he or they be authorized and enabled in
manner and form, as in this present Act is prescribed and appointed, shall sell
or utter by retail, that is by the Pint, Quart, Pottle or Gallon, or by any
other greater or lesser retail measure, any kind of Wine or Wines to be drunk
or spent within his or their Mansion House or houses, or other place in his or
their tenure or occupation, or without such Mansion House or houses, or such
other place in his or their tenure or occupation, by any color, craft, or mean
whatsoever, upon pam to forfeit for every such offense the sum of Five pounds;
the one moiety of every such penalty to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, the
other moiety to him or them that will sue for the same, by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of the Kings Courts of Record, in which
Action or Suit* no Ess^ign, Wager of Law or Protection shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, to and for His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, from time to time, to
issue out under His or their Great Seal of England, one or more Commission or
Commissions directed to two or more persons, thereby authorizing them to
License, and give Authority to such person and persons, as they shall think
sit, to sell and utter by retail, all and every or any kind of Wine or Wines
whatsoever, to be drunk and spent as well within the house or houses, or other
place, in the tenure or occupation of the party so Licenced, as without, in any
City, Town, or other place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town and Port of Berwick upon Twede; and such persons as from time to time
or at any time hereafter shall be by such Commission or Commissions as
aforesaid in that behalf appointed, shall have power and authority, and hereby
have power and authority to treat and contract for license, authority and
dispensations to be given and granted to any person or persons for the selling
and uttering of Wines by retail in any City, Town or other place as aforesaid,
according to the rules and directions of this present Act, and the true Intent
and meaning thereof, and not otherwise, any Law, Statute, usage or custom to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such persons as
shall be commissioned and appointed by his Majesty, His Heirs or Successors as
aforesaid shall be, and be called His Majesty's Agents for granting Licenses
for the selling and uttering of Wine by retail; And his Majesty's said Agents
are hereby authorized and enabled under their Seal of Office, the same to be
appointed by his Majesty, to grant License for the selling and uttering of
Wines by retail to any person or persons, and for any time or term not
exceeding One and Twenty years, if such person and persons shall so long live;
and for such yearly rent as they can or shall agree, and think fit, so as no
Fine be taken for the same; But that the Rent and sums of Money agreed upon
and reserved, be paid and answered half yearly by equal portions during the
whole Term.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such License shall
not be given or granted, but to such who shall personally use the Trade of
selling or uttering of Wines by retail, or to the Landlord and owner of the
house where the person useing such Trade shall sell and utter Wine by retail,
nor shall the same be assignable nor in any wise beneficial or extensive to
indempnifie any person against the penalties of this present Act, except the
first taker.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to constitute and
appoint such and so many other Officers and Ministers, as a Receiver, Register,
Clerk, Controller, Messenger or the like, for the better carrying on of this
service, as He and they shall think fit, so as the Sallaries and Wages of all
such Officers to be appointed, together with the Sallary or Wages of His
Majesty's said. Agents do not exceed six pence in the pound of the Revenue that
shall hence arise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rents,
Revenues, and sums of Money hence arising, except what shall be allowed for the
Wages and Sallaries of such Officers and Ministers, which is not to exceed Six
pence out of every Pound thereof, shall be duly and constantly paid and
answered into His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, and shall not be particularly
charged or chargeable, either before it be paid into the Exchequer or after,
with any Gift or Pension. And His Majesty's said* Agents are hereby enjoined
and required to return into the Court of Exchequer every Michaelmas and Easter
Terms, upon their Oaths (which Oaths the Barons of the Exchequer, or any one of
them, are hereby authorized to administer) a Book fairly written, containing a
true and full account of what Licenses have been granted the preceding half
year, and what Rents and sums of money are thereupon reserved, and have been
paid, or are in arrear, together with the Securities of the persons so in
arrear, to the end due and speedy Process may be made out according to the
course of the Exchequer, for the recovery of the same.

Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not in
any wise be prejudicial to the privilege of the two Universities of the Land,
or either of them, nor to the Chancellors or Scholars of the same, or their
successors; but that they may use and enjoy such privileges as heretofore they
have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also* That this Act, or any thing therein contained shall not extend
or be prejudicial to the Master, Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of the Mystery
of V^^tners of the City of London, or to any other City or Town-Corporate but
that they may use and enjoy such Liberties and Privileges as heretofore they
have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, or
any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to debar or hinder
the Major and Burgesses of the Borough of St. Albans in the County of
Hertford, or their successors, from enjoying, using and exercising of all such
Liberties, Powers and Authorities to them heretofore granted by several Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, by Queen Elizabeth and King James of
famous memories, for the Erecting, Appointing, and Licensing of Three several
Wine-Taverns within the Borough aforesaid, for and toward the maintenance of
the Free School there; but that the same Liberties, Powers and Authorities
shall be, and are hereby established and confirmed, and shall remain and
continue in and to the said Major and Burgesses and their successors, to and
for the Charitable use aforesaid, and according to the tenor of the Letters
Patents aforesaid, as though this Act had never been made, any thing herein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That it shall not, nor may be lawful to or for any Officer or
Officers to be appointed by His Majesty for the carrying on of this service, to
take, demand, or recei^e any Fees, Rewards, or sums of money whatsoever, for
or in respect of this Service, other then Five shillings for a License, Four
pence for an Acquittance, and Six pence for a Bond, under the ^enalty of Ten
pounds, one moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other moiety to the person
or persons who shall sue for the same, by action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoign or Protection shall be allowed,
Any thing herein, or any other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Merchant,
Vintuer, Wine-Cooper or other person, selling or retailing any Wine, shall
mingle or utter any Spanish Wine, mingled with any French Wine, or Rh^^ish
Wine, Sider, Perry, Honey, Sugar, Syrops of Sugar, Molasses, or any other Syrops
whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass; Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Juice of
Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor nor Ingredients, nor any Clary, or other
herb, nor any sort of Flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vintner,
Wine-Cooper, or other person selling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or
utter any French Wines mingled with any Rhinish Wines or Spanish Wines, Sider,
Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Honey, Sugar, Syrop of Sugar, Molasses, or any
Syrops whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Juice of
Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or Ingredients, nor any Clary or other
herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vintner,
Wine-Cooper or other person selling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or
utter any R^inish Wine mingled with any French Wines, or Spanish Wines, Sider,
Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Honey, Sugar, Syrops of Sugar, Molasses, or any
other Syrops whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins,
Juice of Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or Ingredients, nor any Clary or
other herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever: And that all and every person and
persons committing any of the offenses aforesaid, shall incur the pains and
penalties herein after mentioned: That is to say, Every Merchant, Wine-Cooper,
or other person selling any sort of Wines in gross, mingled or abused as
aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose for every such offense, One hundred pounds;
And that every Vintner or other person selling any sorts of Wine by retail,
mingled or abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose for every such offense,
the sum of Forty pounds; of which forfeitures, one moiety shall go unto the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs and successors, the other moiety to the Informer, to
be recovered in any Court of Record by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That from and after the First day of
September, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, no Canary Wines, Muskie or
Alegant, or other Spanish or sweet Wines, shall be sold or uttered by any
person or persons within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Twede, by retail, for above Eighteen pence the quart:
And that no Gascoigne or French Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by retail,
above Eight pence the quart; And that no Rhinish Wines whatsoever shall be sold
by retail, above Twelve pence the quart; (And according to these Rates, for a
greater and lesser quantity, all and every the said Wines shall and may be
sold) upon pain and penalty that every such person and persons who shall utter
or sell any of the said Wines by retail, that is to say, by Pint, Quart,
Pottle, or Gallon, or any other greater or lesser retail-measure* at any rate
exceeding the rates hereby limited, do and shall forfeit for every such Pint,
Quart, Pottle, Gallon, or other greater or lesser quantity so sold by retail,
the sum of Five pounds; the one moiety of which forfeiture shall be to our
Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and successors, and the other moiety to him
or them that will sue for the same, to be recovered in manner and form as
aforesaid.

Provided nevertheless, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord
Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council,
Lord Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices, or Five, Four, or Three of them;
And they are hereby Authorized yearly and every year between the Twentieth day
of November, and the last day of December, and no other times, to set the
Prises of all and every the said Wines to be sold by retail as aforesaid, at
higher or lower rates then are herein contained, so that they or any of them
cause the Prises by them set to be written, and open Proclamation thereof to be
made in the Kings Court of Chancery yearly in the Term time, or else in the
City, Borough* or Towns Corporate where any such Wines shall be sold; And that
all and every the said wines shall and may be sold by retail at such Prises as
by them, or any Five, Four, or Three of them shall be set as aforesaid, from
time to time, for the space of one whole year, to commence from the First day
of February next after the setting thereof, and no longer, and no greater
prises under the pains and penalties aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid,
and afterward: And in default of such setting of prises by the said Lord
Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council,
Lord Privy Seal, and the Two Chief Justices, or Five, Four, or Three of them,
as aforesaid, at the respective Rates. and Prises set by this Act, and under
the penalties as aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for the Levying of the Arrears of the Twelve Months Assessment
commencing the 24th. of June 1659, and the Six Months Assessment commencing
the 25. of December 1659.
WHereas there are several great sums of money, yet uncollected and in
Arrear, And diverse sums of money in the hands of the Collectors and not paid
in, due upon the twelve months Assessment commencing the Twenty fifth of
December One Thousand six Hundred Fifty nine, for payment of the Arrears of his
Majesty's Army now disbanding, and to be disbanded, notwithstanding all former
Orders, and His Majesty's Proclamation for the speedy levying and collecting
thereof.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That the Commissioners nominated and appointed in the respective
Counties, Cities and Corporations of this Kingdom, the Dominion of Wales, and
the Town of Berwick, in an Act made this present Parliament for the speedy
provision of money for disbanding and paying of the Forces of this Kingdom
both by Land and Sea, do forthwith cause all the said* Arrears to be levied and
collected by such ways and means, as the same was formerly appointed to be
levied and collected; And likewise all such sums of money as remain in any
Collectors hands to be speedily paid in, to James Nelthorp and John Lawson
Esquires late Treasurers at war, for and toward the speedy disbanding and
paying off the said Forces.

Provided always, That the sum of Five Hundred and Twenty Pounds and Twelve
Shillings disbursed by Robert Quarum Receiver General of the County of
Cornwall, by the desire and direction of the Commissioners of Assessments, and
other Gentlemen of the said County, for the public service of the Kingdom.
And also the sum of Seventy Pounds disbursed by the Town of Lyme Regis in the
County of Dorset for the same service, shall be and are hereby discharged and
allowed unto the said Receiver and Town of Lyme Regis, as if the same had been
actually paid in to the Treasurers appointed to receive the same, Any thing in
this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for granting unto the Kings Majesty, Four hundred and twenty thousand
pounds, by an Assessement of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the Month,
for six Months, for Disbanding the remainder of the Army, and paying off the
Navy.
WHereas it was well hoped, That the moneys Enacted to be raised by several
Acts of this Parliament, That is to say, One Act Entitled, An Act for the
speedy provision of money, for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this
Kingdom both by Land and Sea. And one other Act Entitled, An Act for supplying
and explaining certain defects in an Act, Entitled, An Act for the speedy
provision of money for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of this Kingdom
both by Land and Sea. And one other Act Entitled, An Act for raising
Sevenscore thousand pounds for the complete disbanding of the whole Army, and
paying off some part of the Navy, would have effectually sufficed to have
completely disbanded the Armies and paid off the Navy; But by the slow coming
in of the same moneys, the growing charge being still kept on, the same cannot
be effected without further supply; And if no further supply should be made,
the growing Charge would become insupportable: The Commons Assembled in
Parliament, do therefore give and grant unto Your most Excellent Majesty, for
the uses herein after expressed, and no other, the sum of four Hundred and
twenty thousand pounds to be raised and levied in manner following: And do
humbly pray Your most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted, and be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the advice and
consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That the
sum of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the Month, for six Months,
beginning from the first day of January, One thousand six hundred and sixty,
shall be Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied and Paid in the several Counties,
Cities and Buroughs, Towns and Places within England and Wales, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, according to such rates, rules, and proportions, and by
the same Commissioners, as in and by a certain Act past this Parliament,
Entitled An Act for raising of Sevenscore thousand pounds for the complete
disbanding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy, which said
Commissioners shall meet on, or before the twelfth day of January, One thousand
six hundred and sixty, and are hereby enabled to use and execute all and every
the like Rates* Rules, Proportions, Powers and Authorities, as in and by the
said Act are mentioned and referred unto, or expressed, as fully and amply, as
if the same had been particularly inserted in this present Act.

And be it further Enacted, That the sum of Two hundred and ten thousand
pounds, being one moiety of the six months Assessment, hereby imposed, shall be
assessed, collected, levied and paid in to the Receiver or Receivers General,
who shall be appointed by the said Commissioners, upon or before the first day
of February, One thousand six hundred and sixty. And the other Two hundred and
ten thousand pounds residue thereof, upon or before the first day of April, One
Thousand six hundred sixty one.

And be it further Enacted, that all and every the sums to be collected and
levied by virtue of this present Act, shall be paid at the Guild Hall of the
City of London, unto Sir George Cartwright, Sir Richard Brown Lord Mayor of the
City of London, Sir James Bunce, Sir William Wheeler, Sir William Vincent,
Thomas Rich Esquire; and the Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being,
who are hereby appointed Treasurers for the Receipt thereof, and the
Acquittances of them, or any three of them, shall be a sufficient discharge for
so much as shall be received by virtue of this Act, to any person or persons
who shall pay in the same. And whereas there is a present necessity of raising
of Eighty thousand pounds, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any person or persons of the City of London, or any other place, who has or
have advanced any moneys upon the Credit of an Act of this Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for raising Sevenscore thousand pounds, for the complete
disbanding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy, shall
continue the Loan of such moneys upon the Credit of this Act, and Declare the
same under his or their hands, unto the Treasurers by this Act appointed,
before the One and thirtieth day of December, One thousand six hundred and
sixty; And if any other person or persons shall advance one hundred pounds or
upwards upon the Credit of this Act, and before the Tenth day of January, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, pay the same unto the said Treasurers, then
every such person and persons so continuing or advancing as aforesaid, shall
not only do a very acceptable service, but shall also receive from the said
Treasurers out of the last One hundred and ten thousand pounds, which shall be
received upon the second payment appointed by this Act, his and their principal
money, with Interest, at the rate of Ten pounds per cent. per annum, from the
time of such declaration and advancement respectively, any Law, Act or Statute
to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said Treasurers are hereby required to
make payment accordingly, and not to receive any more money to be advanced as
aforesaid, then what with the money so to be continued will amount to Eighty
thousand pounds.

And be it further Enacted, That the Treasurers by this Act appointed, shall
receive for them, and those to be employed under them in this Service, One
penny in the pound, in such manner as they ought to receive by the Act last
before mentioned.

And be it further enacted, That all and every the sums of money which by
virtue of this present Act shall be paid to or received by the Treasurers
aforesaid, shall from time to time be issued out according to such Warrants and
Directions only, as they or any three of them shall receive from the
Commissioners named in one Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for the speedy disbanding of the Army and Garrisons of this Kingdom, or three of
them, who are hereby required and enjoined at their perils, to take care and
provide, that the moneys so as aforesaid to be issued out, be employed only to
the uses, intents and purposes hereafter following, and to no other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, Principally and in the first
place, for and toward the total disbanding of the present Army and Garrisons,
until that work be fully perfected and completed according to such Rules and
Instructions, as touching the disbanding of the Army in the said Act last
mentioned, are contained. And after the Army shall be wholly disbanded, then
the residue of the moneys to be raised by virtue of this present Act, or due,
or behind on any former Act, shall be employed for and toward the paying off
of the Fleet and Navy, according to such Rules. Orders, and Instructions, as
touching the payment of the Navy, are herein aftermentioned, and not otherwise.

And be it further enacted, That an account of all the moneys by virtue of this
Act to be received, shall be given by the said Treasurers to this or any other
succeeding Parliament, which shall require the same, or to such person or
persons, as by this or any other succeeding Parliament shall be thereunto
appointed: Provided always, and it is hereby declared, That no^ Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments which were formerly assessed and taxed for and
toward former Assessments and Land-Taxes, and are now in the possession or
holding of His Majesty, or of the Queens Highness, or of any Ecclesiastical
person or persons, or His, Her, or their Farmers and Tenants, shall be exempted
from the payment of the several sums of money in this Act comprised; but that
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, shall be rated, assessed
and taxed for and toward the said several sums of money in this Act comprised,
in such manner and form as they were of late rated, taxed, and assessed for and
toward the said former Land-Rates, any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided also, that nothing herein
contained shall be drawn into example to the prejudice of the ancient Rights
belonging to the Peers of this Realm. And be it declared and enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that these persons hereafter named shall be added
Commissioners for their several Counties, Places and Precincts respectively,
and shall exercise the same powers as the other Commissioners intended by this
Act are authorized and empowered to do, That is to say;

Berks. For the County of Berks, Peregrine Hobby, Richard Harrison Esqs; John
Fecciplace of FernehamEsq; Samuel Woodcox.

Borrough of New Windsor. For the Borrough of New Windsor, Andrew Plumpton,
Richard Fishburne, Gent.

Bucks. For the County of Bucks, William Tirringham Esquire; Sir T^omas Hampson
Baronet, Sir Philip Palmer Baronet, Anthony Ratcliff Esquire;

Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrel, John Bennet Esquire;
Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Bennet.

Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings Esquire;

Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George Warburton Baronet, Edward
Warren, Jeffery Shakerley, Henry Leigh, Esqs;

City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, The Major for
the time being.

Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, Robert Roberts Esquire; Sir William Tredinham,
Joseph Tredinham, Thomas Penhallow, the Knights and Burgesses that serve for
the said County, and James Eirsey Gent. The Major of Lostwithel for the time
being, John Mollesworth Esquire William Williams of Trenythen.

Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Mr. Anthony Bouch, Mr. Richard
Uriell, Mr. Thomas Croswhat, Mr. Robert Webster.

Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physic, William
Jennens Gent. Edmond Tremayne, William Putt, John Kellond, William Bogan,
George Howard, John Kelly, James Rodd Esquires, Walter Jago, Francis Drew,Esquire;
William Walrond Esquire; John Blagdon Gent. John Hamm Gent. Henry Newte.

York. For the West Riding in the County of York, Welbury Norton, Rob^rt Wivell
Esquires, Richard Roundhil Gent. William Hamond, Walte^ Hawksworth Esquires,
Cuthbert Wade, John Preston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esquire; Edward Atkinson, William
Witham Gent. Samuel SunderlandEsq; Thomas Ward Gent. Sir William Ingram Knight,
Sir John Goodrick Baronet, Sir Tho. Wentworth, Sir Edward Rodes, Knights,
Godfrey Copley of Sprotsbrough, John Clayton, Joshua Horton, Thomas Stringer
Esqs. The Alderman of L^edes for the time being.

York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York,Sir William Caley,
Arthur Caley Esquire. William Wivell Esquire. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas VVorsley,
Charles Tankred Esqs. Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of
Scarboroughfor the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt,Esquire. Thoms Robinson,
Thomas Scudamore Esquire.

York City. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of
the City of York.

Kingston upon Hull. For the Town of Hull, Mr. George Crowle.

Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glascock,Mr. M^les Hubbert, Mr.
John Smart, Capt. Hunter, Dean Tindal Esquire. Isaac Wincall, Thomas Clopton,
Thomas Peck, Peter Johnson, Thomas Manby Esquire.

Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel
Sheppard, Phillip Sheppard, William Morgan, Richard Daston, John TookeEsq.
Robert Lord Tracy, Thomas Morgan Esquire. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Knight,
William Bromage Gent. William VVinter of DimmockGent. Richard Matchen Gent.
John WynnyattGent. Thomas Aylway Gent.

Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert ParretKnight, John Barnaby
of Brookehampton esquire. Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof
Hereford Esquire.

City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esquire. Major, James
Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent.

Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Rawden, James Willimott Junior
Gent. Thomas ArrasDr. of Physic, Richard Coombes Esquire. Sir Robert Ioslyn
Knight, Thomas Cappin, Edward Briscoe, John Halsie Esquire. Mr. Fetherston of
Blackeswere, Edward Brograve, Ralph Gore, Thomas Brograve, Edward Cason, Thomas
Bonest, Henry Becher, Henry Chancey, George Bromley, Alexander Meade, John
Crouch, James Willimort Junior, George Poyner Gent. John Iesson Esquire.

St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William FoxwistEsq. Recorder, Mr.
John New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cawley Senior, Mr. William Marston, Sir
Henry Connyngsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combs Esquire. Thom.
MarstonGent.

Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir William Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas
Peake esquire. Sir Tho. Godfrey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir
William Meredeth Baronet, Sir Thomas Preise Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr.
Thomas Manley.

Sandwich. For the Town of Sandwich, John Verrier, Peter Peke Gent.

Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry BanisterEsq. Ieoffry Rushton
Gent. Richard FleetwoodGent. John Molineux esquire. William Fif^ esquire. Sir George
Middleton Knight and Baronet, Matthew Richardson esquire. Robert Heywood Esquire. Roger
Stowton of the City of London, Thomas Butler, R^chard Farrington, William
Wall, William Turner, Henry Brabin, William HodgkensonGent.

Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, and City and County of the same, Edward
Turney, William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, Sir Charles Dallison
Knight, William Draper, Samuel P^octor, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot,
Thomas Mills, Maurice Dalton, John Watson, William Willoughby, Henry Heron,
Marm^duke Darrel, John Ogle, Anthony Treadway, William Skipwich, Thomas Brown
of Eastkirby; John Almore,Mr. Skinner of Thornton College, Tho. Harrington,
William Whichcot, Charles PelhamIunior, Roger Pelham, Mr. John Lockton, Mr.
John Hobson Junior, Mr. Henry Hall, Mr. Charles Bawdes, Mr. John Colthurst, Mr.
William Bishop, and Mr. Edward Blaw, Aldermen, Mr. William Perkins, Mr. Thomas
Mills, Mr. Peregrine Buck, Mr. William Dowman, Mr. Thomas Dickenson, Mr. John
Thornton, and Richard Wetherel,Aldermen.

London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esquire. Benj^min Albin, Richard
Spencer.

Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir John RobinsonBaronet, Lieutenant
of the Tower, Sir Richard Brown, Thomas Bride, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mins,
Sir William Bareman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfeild Esquire. Robert Peyton,
John Jones, John Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esquire. William Page Esquire.
Roger IennynsEsq. Sir Heneage Finch Baronet His Majesty's Solicitor General,
Cheney of HackneyEsq. Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Cheney of Chelsey, Christopher
Abdy Esquire. Sir Allen Broadricke, John Barton Esquire.

Westminster. For the City of VVestmiuster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck
Esquire. Mr. Graham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknett, Thomas Kirk, Will.
Green, George Farewell, Ralph Darnall.

Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, William Ionesof Frowen Esquire. James
Proger, Charles Proger.

Northampton. For the County of Morthampton, Edward Only John Thorton, John
Willoughby Esqs.

Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Windham, Robert Doughty of
Hanworth, Robert Legar,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Roops, Mr.
Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Blackborne,Gent.

Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert
Steward Esquire; Recorder, Thomas Green, William Wharton, Henry Bell, Robert
Thorowgood, Alderman Holley.

Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James Simons
Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William DoyleyKnight, Sir
Thomas Me^ow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John Carter, Nathaniel
Ashby, Thomas Lucas, John Woodroff, James Johnson Esquires, George Tilyard Gent.

Thetford. For the whole Borough and Corporation of Thetford, the Major for the
time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage Martin, Maurice Shelton, Esquires,
Robert Keddington Gent. Mr. Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of Kilveston.

Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir
Nicholas Cole Knight and Baronet, Sir Francis Bows Knight, Sir Francis Anderson
Knight, Sir John Marley.

Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, Francis Sandi^Esq; Thomas Bristow,
William Newton, Gentlemen.

East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bailiffs for the time
being.

Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, John Coker
Gent. James Herbertesq; Sir Thomas Tippin.

University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr. David Thomas,
Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timothy Horton.

The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, William Cornish.

Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Samuel Baldwin, esquires, Mr.
Moore of Middleton,Mr. Bushop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley.

Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; John Colelough,
Timothy Edge, Gentlemen.

Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; William Bacon
Senior, Gent. John Cridland Gent. Mawdley Samborne, John Carew, Roger
Newborough, James Haise, esquires.

For the City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bristol, The
Major and Sheriffs for the time being, John Knight the elder, William
Coulston, John Bradway, William Coals.

For the City of Bathe. For the City of Bathe, John Vane, John Masters,
Aldermen.

Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr.
Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, esquire;

Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowremanesq; John Oglander of
Newport Gentleman.

Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield,
esquires, Mr. John Brook,Mr. Milton of Ipswich, Mr. Edmond Bedingfield,Mr.
Francis Langley, Mr. Thomas Read, Mr. Rabbit of Bramfield, Isaac Matham
esquire, Gardener Web Gent.

St. Edmunds Bury. For St. Edmonds Bury, Francis Smith, Robert Sharp, Samuel
Hustler.

Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, John Yates, Richard Knipe,
esquires, Mr. John Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple, Sir Thomas Bludworth,Knights,
Thomas Rogers, Charles Good-Harman-Atwood,esquires, John Parker of Rigate.

Rye in the County of Sussex. For the Town of Rye, Samuel Bembrigg, James
Welsh, Thomas Osmonton.

Worcester. For the Town of Worcester, Sir John PackingtonBaronet, Sir Rowland
Berkley Knight, Sir John Winford Knight, Samuel Sandys, Henry Townsend, John
Bearcroft, esquires, Sir Ralph Clare, Knight of the Bath.

Worcester City. For the City and County of the City of Worcester, Edward Soley
Alderman, Samuel Smith, Thomas Twitty, Gentlemen, Henry Townsendesq; Sir
William Mooreton Knight, Humphrey Tyrer, Richard Heming, Stephen Richardson,
Gentlemen, Sir John Packington, Sir Rowland Berkley, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir John
Winford, Samuel Sandys esquire;

Warwick. For the County of VVa^wick, Listerof Alveston Esquire. Richard Bishop of
St^atford Esquire.

Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Coventry,Sir Arthur Caley
Knight, The Mayor of Coventry for the time being, H^nry Smith Alman,Sir Richard
Hopkins Knight, William Iesson, Thomas Norton Esqs. Mr. Thomas Love, Matthew
Smith, Samuel Snell, William Ielliffe, Robert Beak, James Na^er Aldermen.

Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry PuckeringBaronet, Sir
Clement ThrockmortonKnight, (...) Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, John Stanton
Esqs. Lister of Alveston Esquire. Richard Bishop of Stra^ford.

Wilts. For the County of Wiltes, Waltes Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William
Caley esqs. Matthew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Chandler, Robert
Nicholas of Alcainings, William BroomewichGent. Samuel Air Gent. Simon
SpatchurstEsq. Christopher Gardener Gent. Mr. Francis Par^y.

Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Air Gent. Simon Spatchurst esquire.
Christopher Gardener Gent.

Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert Lord Viscount Bulkley.

Brecon. For the County of Brecon, William Jones, John Gwyn, Henry Stedman,
Edward Powell.

Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, James Phillips, Morgan Herbert, Thomas
Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder,
Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Yinshen, Morris Vaughan, John Price, Gent. Thomas
Par^y, Reighnold Ienkins, John Bowin, Thomas Lewis, ^^ector Phillips, Nic^olas
Lewis, William Jones, Abel G^^ffin, Esqs; VVactkin Lloyde, John Griffith of
Noyadd, Gentlemen; The Major of Cardig^mfor the time being, Rees Gwin, David
Morgan,Aldermen.

Carmarthen. For the County of Carmarthen, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde,
Walter Mansell.

Carnarvon. For the County of Carnarvon, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyd^ of
Naugwhnadale, Robert Wynn of Conway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, William
Thomas of Carnarvon, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde, Walter Mansell.

Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis Manly Esquire;

Flint. For the County of Flint, Ken^ick Eaton, Esquire;

Glamorgan. For the County of Glamorgan, John Price,of Courtcarne, Morgan
Morgan, Esquire;

Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery, William Oakely, Edmond VVareing
of Oldbury, David Morris, Esqs; John Matthews, Henry Pu^sel, John Kiffin,
William Price of Lanligan, John Lloyd of Conway.

Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverford-west, Sir Herbert Perrot,
Knight, William Brown, Alderman.

Rules, Orders, and Instructions for the discharging and paying off the Navy,
and other Debts relating thereunto.
I.
THe Commissioners hereby appointed for disbanding of the Army, and discharging
the Navy, shall proceed therein in manner following, viz. First they are to
disband the remaining part of the Army according to the former Rules in that
behalf made; which done, they are then first to discharge and pay off those
Sixty five ships which are now out of Employment, and of them in the first
place, those whose Commanders, Officers and Seamen, have the least pay due to
them; And after them they are to pay off the men aboard those Thirty six ships
now in His Majesty's Service, who entered on his pay the Twenty fourth of June
last.

II.
That all the Commanders, Officers and Mariners who served in person, and were
in Service upon any of the Sixty five of his Majesty's ships, on the Twenty
fifth of April, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and have taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, or shall take the same, when they shall be thereunto
required, and have not since deserted the Service, nor been discharged for
Misdemeanor, shall with all convenient speed have their Accounts stated (by the
Auditors hereafter appointed) and thereupon receive all their Arreats of their
pay from the fourteenth of March One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the
day of their discharge; And the Commanders Officers, and Mariners of the
aforesaid Thirty six ships which were in service on the Twenty fifth of April,
One thousand six hundred and sixty, and have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, or shall take the same as aforesaid, and have not deserted the
Service, shall have their Accounts stated as before, and receive their pay from
the said Fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, until the
Twenty fourth of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty next following. And
the Commissi^ners appointed by this Act, shall upon sight of the Accounts so
stated as before, cause the send Captains, Officers and Mariners Wages,
successively to be paid by the Treasurers appointed by this Act, out of the
money which shall come in of the six Months Assessment, or any other money,
heretofore appointed for the paying or disbanding the Army, and discharging the
Navy. And if any further Arrears shall be claimed and appear to be due to any
such Commanders, Officers or Mariners in service as aforesaid for service at
Sea, from or after the fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred fifty
seven, and to, or before the fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred
fifty and eight, That in such case the Auditors hereby appointed, shall examine
all such Arrears, and draw up a State thereof to be presented to the next
Parliament in order to their satisfaction.

III.
That no money be paid or allowed to any person beforementioned for any short
allowance of Victuals, made or pretended to be made them, either at Sea, or in
Harbor: And if it shall appear, That any Money, Clothes, Goods, Wares, or
Merchandices, have been paid or sold by any Public Minister, Officer, or other
person, to any Commander, Officer, or Seaman of the aforesaid Ships, upon
account of their pay, since the Fourteenth of March, One thousand six hundred
fifty eight; in such case, all the said moneys so paid, and the value of the
Clothes, Goods, Wares, and Merchandices so sold and delivered within the time
of their said service, shall be defaulked out of their pay aforesaid: And the
sums so defaulked shall be paid by Warrants of the Commissioners, charged on
the Treasurers, unto such person and persons to whom the same of right
belongs, out of the money that shall come in of the six months Assessment,
or any other moneys heretofore appointed for paying or disbanding of the Army
and Navy, in course next after the Commanders, Officers, and Seamen are paid.

IV.
That after the accounts of the Commanders, Officers, and Seamen are stated,
then the Auditors shall state the accounts of the Ship-Keepers: And of all
Officers on shore in the Yards, and Storehouses, at Deptford, Woolwich,
Chatham, Portsmouth, Harwich, and other places, to be stated from the
Fourteenth of March One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the Twenty fourth
of June last past; after the Rates accustomed to be paid by His Majesty, and
according to their several Capacities, at which time the said Commissioners are
to give them Warrants, charged upon the Treasurers, to pay them their several
sums out of the money that shall come into their hands of the six months
assessment, or any other money heretofore appointed, for paying or disbanding
of the Army and Navy in course next after the Common Mariners, Seamen,
Commanders, Officers, and their Servants, are discharged and paid, and the
money from them defaulked as before, fully satisfied.

V.
That the said Auditors shall state the accounts of the Victuallers from the
said Fourteenth day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the day
of the several Ships discharge, for as many as are out of employment as before;
and to the Twenty fourth day of June, for the remaining part of the Navy now in
His Majesty's service in the Winter Guard, and assign them payment in course on
the Treasurers beforementioned, to be paid out of the money remaining in their
hands, out of the six Months Assessment, or any other money heretofore
appointed for the paying or disbanding of the Army and Navy, next after the
sums formerly ordered are paid.

VI.
That the Auditors shall from the said Fourteenth of March, One thousand six
hundred fifty eight, state the accounts of all men that shall or may justly
claim any money for Quarters, and Cures of the Sick, and Wounded Seamen ser a
shore out of His Majesty's Ships in any Town or Corporation in this Kingdom;
And for the Quarters and Cures of the Sick and Wounded Soldiers sent over from
Flanders; which being so stated, the said Commissioners shall assign them their
money by Warrant on the Treasurers, to be paid in course next after the
Commanders, Officers, and Mariners aforesaid, and the Officers and
Ship-keepers aforesaid, are paid and satisfied.

VII.
That if in case any Commanders, Officers, or Mariners, shall have died or
been discharged by Ticket out of any the said Ships, and their Arrears of Pay
not satisfied: In such case the Auditors shall state the accounts of the
persons so dead or discharged from the said Fourteenth day of March, One
thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the day of their death or discharge,
according to their several capacities; And the Commissioners shall thereupon
give Warrants upon the Treasurers, by this Act appointed for the payment of the
sums to them, or their Assigns in course, when the Commanders and Officers of
the several Ships, to which they did belong at the time of their death or
discharge, and the debts for curing the Sick and Wounded, are satisfied.

VIII.
That the said Auditors shall also state the several accounts of all other
persons, which can or may justly claim any debt to be due unto him or them, for
any provision, maintenance of Prisoners, Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Stores,
Ammunition, and other necessaries sold and delivered to any Public Minister,
to and for the use of the Navy aforesaid, from the Fourteenth of March One
thousand six hundred fifty eight, to the Twenty fourth of June One thousand six
hundred and sixty, and order them payment in course, after the before mentioned
sums are paid by Assignation on the Treasurers to be paid out of the money
remaining in their hands, out of the six Months Assessment, or any other
mo^eys heretofore appointed for paying or disbanding of the Army and Navy.

IX.
That for the better stating the accounts of the Commanders, Officers, and
Mariners of the said Navy, and the several other accounts before recited, and
hereafter mentioned, Arthur Sprey, William Iessop, Ralph Darnal, Samuel Atkins,
Richard Kingdon, and Bartholomew Fillingham Esquires, and John Walker
Gentleman, shall be and are hereby appointed, constituted, and authorized to
audite, and cast up the accounts of the aforesaid Commanders, Officers,
Mariners, and all other men's accounts relating to the debt of the said Navy as
before, and shall respectively before they enter thereon, take an Oath in these
words following.

I Do swear, that to the best of my skill and judgment, I shall examine, and
truly state all such accounts as shall be committed to my care and trust by the
Commissioners, for disbanding the Army, and discharging the Navy, or any three,
or more of them; and shall and will to the best of my knowledge, make true
Certificates of all such accounts to the said Commissioners, or any three of
them. So help me God. Which said Oath, the said Commissioners, or any three of
them as aforesaid, are hereby authorized to administer accordingly. Which
accounts so certified by the said Auditors, or any two of them, then the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, shall have power and authority, and are
nee^by authorized and empowered to issue out Warrants from time to time, to the
respective Treasurers aforesaid, for the payment of the several sums so
audited, and due as aforesaid: Which Warrants, together with the acquittance of
the persons to whom the same is payable thereupon, shall be to the said
Treasurers respectively a sufficient Warrant and discharge.

X.
That the Chief Officers of His Majesty's Navy do with all convenient speed
deliver unto the Commissioners appointed by this Act, a perfect List of the
names of all the aforesaid Ships that are to be discharged, and the places in
which they lie; And the names and sirnames of the Commanders, Officers,
Mariners, and common Seamen to each ship belonging; and a particular account
of the time that every person has served, and what Money or Goods every or any
one of them has received.

XI.
That the Pursers and Checks of the several Ships of the Navy, do from time to
time when they shall be required thereunto, attend the Auditors aforesaid, and
deliver unto them a true and perfect account of all the Commanders, Officers,
Mariners, and Seamen belonging to the said ships, and shall produce the
original Muster-Book and Pay-books, wherein the names of the said Commanders,
Officers, and Seamen were entered, and give an exact account of what Arrears
is due unto them, and how and in what manner the same becomes due; the which
Books and Accounts, shall by the said Pursers and Checks be delivered upon
Oath, which said Oath the Commissioners aforesaid, or any three of them, are
hereby ordered to administer accordingly.

XII.
That in case any Purser shall be found to make any false Muster, or shall
muster any Captain, Officer, or Mariner by a false name, or make any false
Ticket, Such Purser shall forfeit his or their respective Wages, and be
imprisoned the space of six Months, and in such Case the Commissioners
appointed by this Act, or any two of them, are hereby empowered to commit them
to prison accordingly.

XIII.
That upon discharge of any of the Commanders, Officers, and Mariners of the
Navy aforesaid; all the said Commanders, Officers, and Mariners, shall deliver
up all their respective Ships, Guns, Masts, Sails, Yards, Anchors, Cables,
Tackle, Apparel, Provisions, Ammunition and Stores, which are in their
possessions, for his Majesty's use, unto such person or persons, as his
Majesty, or the Lord High Admiral of England, shall appoint to receive the
same; And if any Commanders, Officers, or Seamen, shall refuse to be
discharged, or to deliver up the Stores aforesaid, or shall be found, upon due
proof, to have embezled any part thereof, or do dissuade others from being
discharged, he or they so offending, shall forfeit all his and their Arrears,
and be further proceeded against, according to their demerit.

XIIII.
That the said Commissioners, or any three of them as aforesaid, shall have
power to nominate, appoint, and employ such Clerks, Agents, Messengers and
Servants, as shall be necessary for the said Work, and to make and give to them
such reasonable Sallaryes, Allowances and satisfactions as they shall think
fit; And also to provide all other necessaries, and to defray all other charges
relating to the fame.

XV.
That the Commissioners formerly nominated by the House of Commons, and by this
Act continued and appointed for this Service, shall have and receive for their
charge and pains in and about this Service, one penny in the pound, and no
more, out of all such moneys as shall be issued by virtue of this Act; and each
of the Auditors aforesaid shall receive for his pains and Charges, in and about
this Service, the sum of twenty shillings per diem, during the continuance of
this Service, which the Treasurers of the aforesaid moneys, are hereby enabled
and required to issue and pay accordingly.

XVI.
That the Commissioners shall direct the said Treasurers from time to time to
grant Assignations (who are hereby required to observe the same) for such and
so many sums of money on the respective Receivers or Treasurers for raising
money by the Act aforesaid in the several Counties, Cities, or places, where
they understand any of the said Money lies, as the Commissioners for disbanding
the Army and Navy, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, shall direct and
appoint to such persons, and in such manner as the said Commissioners, or any
three or more of them as aforesaid, shall direct and appoint.

XVII.
That the Commissioners herein named, or any three of them, shall and are
hereby authorized to call to account the present Treasurers in this Act named:
And James Nelthorpe, and John Lawson Esquires, late Treasurers at Wars, or any
other former Treasurers, or Commissioners of the Army, or Navy; for all such
sums of money, as they or any of them stand accomptable for, and to certify
the same accounts into His Majesty's Exchequer.

Anno Regni CAROLI IJ.

REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,DUO DECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1660. CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis.
An Act for further supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act,
Entitled, An Act for the speedy provision of money for disbanding and paying
off the Forces of this Kingdom, both by Land and Sea.
WHereas through some doubts arising upon or by negligence in the execution of
one Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the speedy provision
of money for the disbanding and paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by
Land and Sea: And also of one other Act, Entitled, An Act for supplying and
explaining certain defects in the aforesaid Act: The same Acts do not answer
the ends aforesaid, in such measure as was expected, without some further
explanation of the sense thereof, and a review of the several Assessments made
thereby, so that some persons may not escape without payment at all, or go away
at very small proportions, whilst others pay their just and full due.

It is therefore Enacted and Declared by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by,
and with the consent and advice of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the ^ame, That all and every person and
persons of the several Ranks, Degrees, and Qualifications in the said Act or
Acts mentioned, shall contribute and pay the several and respective sums of
money therein appointed to be paid (any pretense of e^emption, being the Kings
Majesty's Servants, to the contrary notwithstanding:) And also that every
person and persons, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
shall pay for their Estates, both real and personal, the sum of Forty shillings
for one hundred pounds per annum, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser
Estate, And for every hundred pounds personal Estate, after the rate of five
pounds per annum; Provided it extend not to Estates under five pounds per annum.

And to the intent the same may be equally and indifferently Assessed and
Taxed, Be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
several Commissioners in the said Act named, or any three of them, within their
several and respective Counties, Limits and Precincts, shall have power to
nominate and appoint two or more of the most able and discreet persons in every
Parish, Villa^ or Hamlet, to review the several Rates (...) Ass^ssments that
have been made in their several and respective Parishes, Villages and Hamlets.
And where they shall find that by the negligence, or default of any former
Assessors, any persons or Estates have been under Rated, or omitted to be
Rated, That then they shall Rate and Assess all such persons and Estates, so
under-rated or omitted, to the full value they are to be rated and assessed at,
either for their degrees, persons, or estates, by this or the former Acts to
that purpose made in this present Parliament, or shall by the appointment at
the discretion of the said Commissioners make new Assessments or Rates, and
shall return the same or their said Additional Rates at such places and times
as the said Commissioners; or any three of them shall appoint.

And it is further enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every
sworn Attorney, or Clerk in the Office of the Clerk of the Pipe in the
Exchequer; and every Attorney belonging to the Office of the Lord Treas^rers
Remembrancer, shall pay Twenty nobles apeece.

And be it further enacted and declared, That every Barrester at Law, and every
other person or persons that has or have subscribed to any Deed or Writing
wherein he or they have been written or entitled Esquire, or that has or have
acted by virtue of any Commission or pretended Commission, Act, or pretended
Acts of Parliament, wherein they have before the sitting of this Parliament,
been written or entitled Esquire, shall pay as reputed Esquires within the
said Acts. And to the intent that none that have or shall pay his or their due
proportions. that he or they ought to pay in respect of his or their quality or
degree, may be doubly charged, every person that has or shall pay his full
proportion for his or her degree, and quality, the same exceeding the
proportion of his or her estate, real and personal, shall by certificate under
the hands and seals of (...) or more of the Commissioners within the same
County or Precinets where such sum has o^ shall be paid, be discharged from
further payment for his or her estate, so that it be particularly expressed in
every such Certificates where such estate lies, and the several and respective
values thereof; so that it may appear, that his or her proportion for his or
her degree or quality does exceed that of his or her estate; and also where any
person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, have paid, or shall pay for
his, her, or their estate, in one or more Counties, he or they shall by like
Certificate or Certificates be discharged in other places for so much and such
values specially mentioned to be paid in the said Certificates, and no more.

And be it enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners or any three or more of them within their several Precincts,
shall and may have power to inquire of, hear and determine all abuses,
neglects, and misdoings of all and every the Assessors and Collectors to be
employed by virtue of this or the said precedent Acts; and shall have power to
impose any Fine or Fines upon them or any of them, whom they shall be well
informed (by the oath of two or more credible witnesses, which oath they or any
two of them are hereby empowered to administer) to offend from and after the
Twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred and sixty, in not
performing their duties in their respective employments. Provided, That no such
Fine shall exceed the sum of five pounds for one offense; and that such
Commissioners who shall set or impose such ^ine or ^ines, shall have full power
by Warrant under their hands and seals, to command the several Constables or
Tythingmen, which in the several and respective places where such person or
persons have their habitation or above, upon whom such fine or fines is or are
imposed, to levy the same by Distress upon the Goods of such person or persons
refusing to pay the same, and to return the overplus thereof (if any be)
deducting also reasonable charges for taking such Distress, to the owner or
owners of such Goods; and every such fine shall be employed to the same
purposes as the moneys raised by the said former Acts are appointed: And also
in case no Distress can be found or had for satisfying such fine, and in case
no Distress can be taken by the Collectors or other Officers appointed to
Distrain, for the Taxes or Assessments by virtue of the said former Act or
Acts, that in every such default, upon complaint to the said Commissioners, or
any three of them, within their several and respective limits, the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, shall have full power and authority to
cause every such person from whom no Distress can be had, to be committed to
the next Common Gaol, there to remain until he has fully satisfied and paid
such sum or sums of money, which ought to be charged upon him, by virtue of
this and the said former Acts, without Bail or Main-prize.

And be it further enacted and declared, That the Commissioners of every County
and place respectively shall make up a true account of the sums only of every
Hundred, Lath, Wapentake or Ward, Rated and Assessed by the said former Acts,
together with the additional sums that shall be rated by virtue of this present
Act severally within their several Counties, Limits, and Precincts, without
naming the particular persons or estates, and shall show what has been paid
thereof, and to what person and persons and what has been discharged by such
Certificates as are appointed by this Act, and what is in arrear and upaid, and
shall return the same unto His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, before the Second
day of March next; and in so doing they shall not be compelled to make or
return any other Account, Duplicate, or Certificate.

And it is further enacted and declared. That the true and full yearly value of
all Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, and other Hereditaments, shall be rated
and assessed in manner aforesaid, in the several Parishes, Villages, or
Hamlets, where the same are situate, lying, or arising.

And be it further declared, That every sum charged upon, and paid by any
person, by virtue of the said former Acts or either of them, by reason of
estate, degree, or quality, shall be allowed and deducted out of such further
charge, as shall be imposed upon him or her, by virtue of this present Act.

Lastly, It is enacted and declared, That whosoever is sued at Law for any Act
done, or to be done in the due execution of this or either of the said former
Acts, he may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in evidence:
And if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass against any such Plaintiff
or Plaintiffs in any such Action, the Defendant shall and may recover his
double costs. Provided always, and be it enacted, That this Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to any Peer of this Realm, in point of
Assessment Imprisonment, Distress, or otherwise, provision being made in the
said first recited Act, for the Assessing of the said Peers, by certain Peers,
who are therein named and appointed in that behalf.

And be it further enacted, That the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the
Lord Steward of His Majesty's Household, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Household, the Earl of Northampton, Lord Howard of Charleton, the Lord Roberts,
the Lord Gray of Wark, the Lord Craven, the Lord Mohun, and the Lord Hatton, be
added to the Peers named in the said first recited Act for the Assessing of the
Peers, according to the said recited Act: Which said Lords Commissioners, or
any five of them, in this and the former Act named, shall have power to Assess,
Levy, and Collect; and shall Assess, Levy, and Collect, all such sums of money
as shall be assessed according to the tenor of this and the former Act, upon
such Peers who have not paid proportionably to their estates.

And be it declared and enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That these persons
hereafter named, shall be added Commissioners for their several Counties,
Places, and Precincts respectively, and shall exercise the same power as if
they had been named in the said former Acts, or either of them.

Berks. For the County of Berks, Perigrine Hobby, Richard Harrison Esqs. John
Fettiplace, of FernhamEsq.

Borough of New Windsor. Andrew Plumton Gent. Richard Fishborne Gent.

Bucks. For the County of Bucks, Sir Thomas Hampson Baronet, Sir Phillip Palmer
Baronet, Anthony Ra^cliffe Esquire.

Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrell, John Bennet Esquire.
Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Bennett.

For the Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings, Esquire.

Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George Warberton Baronet, Edward
Warren Esquire. Jeffery Shakerly Esquire. Henry Lee Esquire;

City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, the Major for
the time being.

Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, Robert Roberts, Esquire. Sir William
Thredinham, Jo^eph Tredinham, Thomas Penhallow, The Knights and Burgesses that
serve for the said County, and James Eirsey Gent.

Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Anthony Bouch, Richard ^Urial,
Thomas Croswhat, Robert VVebster.

Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physic, William
Jennins Gent. Edmond Tremaine, William Putt, John Kellond, William Bogan,
George Howard, John Kelley, William Kelley, James Rodd Esqs.

York. For the West Riding in the County of York, VVestbury Norcon Esquire. Robert
VVivell Esquire. Richard Roundhill Gent. William Hamond Esquire. Walter Hawkesworth,
Esquire. Cutbert VVade. John ^reston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esquire, Edward Atkin^^,
William VVitham Gent. Samuel Sonder^^nd,Esquire. Thomas Ward Gent. Sir William
^^gram Knight.

York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York, Sir William
Caley, Arthur Caley Esquire. William Wivell Esquire. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas
VVorsley Esquire. Charles Tankred, Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of
Scarborough for the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt, Esquires, Thomas
Robinson, Thomas Scudamore Esquires.

York. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of the
City of York.

For the Town of Kingston upon Hull, George Crowle.

Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glascock,Mr. Miles Hubbert, Mr.
John Smart, Capt. Hunter, Dean Tindal Esquire. Isaac Wincoll, Thomas Clapton,
Thomas Peek, Peter Johnson, Thomas Manby Esqs.

Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel
Shepard, Phillip Shepard, William Morgan, Richard Daston, John Took^Esqs.
Robert Lord Tracy.

Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert ParretKnight, John Barnaby
of Brookehampton esquire. Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof
Hereford Esquire.

City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esquire. Major, James
Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent.

Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Rawden, James Willimott Junior
Gent.

Arras Dr. of Physic, Richard Combs Esquire.

St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William FoxwistEsq. Recorder, Mr.
John New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cowley Senior, Mr. William Marston,
Henry Conningsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combs Esquire.

Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir William Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas
Peake esquire. Sir Tho. Godfrey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir
William Merideth Baronet, Sir Thomas Pierce Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr.
Thomas Manley.

Sandwich. For Sandwich, John Verrier, Peter Peake Gent.

Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry Banister Esquire. Ieoffry Rushton
Gent. Richard Fleetwood Gent. John Molineux esquire. William Fife esquire. Sir George
Middleton Knight and Baronet, Matthew Richardson esquire. Robert Heywood Esquire. Roger
Stoughton of the City of London, Alderman.

Lincoln. For the parts of Linsey in the County of Lincoln, Edward Turney,
William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, Sir Charles Dallison Knight.

Great Grimsby. For great Grim^by, William Draper, Samuel Proctor.

For the parts of Kestivan, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot.

London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esquire.

Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir John RobinsonBaronet, Lieutenant
of the Tower, Sir Richard Brown, Thomas Bide, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mims,
Sir William Bateman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfield Esquire. Robert Peyton,
John Jones, John Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esqs. William Page
Esquire. Roger GenningsEsq. Richard Meney.

Westminster. For the City of Westminster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck
Esquire. Mr. Graham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknet, Thomas Ki^ke, William
Green, George Farewell, Ralph Darnell.

Northampton. For the County of Northampton Edward Only, John Thornton, John
Willoughby esqs.

Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Windham, Robert Doughty of
Hanworth, Robert Legar,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Ripps, Mr.
Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Black-borne,Gent.

Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert
Steward Esquire; Recorder, Thomas Green, William Wharton, Henry Bell.

Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James
Simonds Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William
DoyleyKnight, Sir Thomas Meadow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John
Carter, Nathaniel Ashby, Thomas Lucas, John Woodroff, James Johnson Esquires,
George Tilyard Gent.

Thetford. For the whole Borough and Corporation of Thetford, the Major for the
time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage Martin, Maurice Shelton, Esquires,
Mr. Robert Keddington Gent. Mr. Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of
Kilveston.

Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir John
Marley.

Nottingham. For the Town of Nottingham, Francis SandisEsq; Thomas Bristow,
William Newton, Gentlemen.

East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bailiffs for the time
being.

Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, John Coker
Gent. James Herbertesq; Sir Thomas Tippin.

University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr. David Thomas,
Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timothy Horton.

The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, William Cornish.

Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Samuel Baldwin, esquires, Mr.
Moore of Middleton, Mr. Bishop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley.

Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; John Colclough,
Timothy Edge, Gentlemen.

Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; William Bacon
Senior, Gent. John CridlandGent. Mawdley Samborne, John Carew, Roger
Newborough, James Haise, esquires.

The City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bristol, The Major
and Sheriffs for the time being, John Knight the elder, William Coulston, John
Bradway, William Cole.

For the City of Bathe, John Vane, John Masters, Aldermen.

Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr.
Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, esqs;

Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowreman esquire; John Oglander of
Newport Gentleman.

Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield,
esquires.

Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, John Yates, Richard Knipe,
esquires, Mr. John Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple Knight, Earl of Ancram, Henry
Capel. Dalinahey esquire. John Farewell,Doctor Windebanck.

For the Town of Rye. Samuel Bembrigg, James Welsh, Thomas Osmonton.

Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Coventry, Sir Arthur Caley
Knight, The Major of Coventry for the time being, Henry Smith Alderman.

Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry PuckeringBaronet, Sir
Clement ThrockmortonKnight, John Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, John Stanton
Esquires.

Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Waltor Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William
Caley esqs. M^tthew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Challoner, Robert
Nicholas of Alcainings, William BroomwichGent. Samuel Air Gent. Simon
SpatchhurstEsq. Christopher Gardener Gent.

Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Air Gent. Simon Spatchhurst esquire.
Christopher Gardener Esquire.

Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert, Lord Viscount Bulkley.

Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, James Phillips, Morgan Herbert, Thomas
Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder,
Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Ymshen, Maurice Vaughan, John Price Gentmen.

Carnarvan. For the County of Carnarvan, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyde of
Na^gwnnadale, Robert Wynn of Conway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, William
Thomas of Carnarvan, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde, Walter Mansell.

Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis Weanly Esquire;

Flint. For the County of Flint, Kenrick Eaton, Esquire;

Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery,

Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverfordwest, Sir Herbert Perrot,
Knight, William Brown, Alderman.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for the raising of Seventy Thousand pounds for the further supply of
his Majesty.
THe Commons Assembled in Parliament do give and grant unto Your most Excellent
Majesty, the sum of Seventy thousand pounds to be raised and levied in manner
following, and do pray Your Majesty, that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted
by Your most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the sum of Threescore and ten
thousand pounds, for one month only, beginning from the First day of July, One
thousand six hundred sixty and one, shall be Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied
and paid in the several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns, and Places within
England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweede, according to the
several Rates, Rules, and Proportions, and in such manner and form, and by the
same Commissioners, as in and by a certain other Act, passed this Parliament,
for raising the like sum of Seventy thonsand pounds for one month only,
beginning from the Twenty ninth of September, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, Entitled An Act for the speedy raising of Seventy thousand pounds for
the present supply of His Majesty, are mentioned or referred unto and intended,
which Commissioners shall meet-upon or before the fifth day of July, One
thousand six hundred sixty and one, and are hereby enabled and required to use
and execute all and every the like Powers and Authorities, as in and by the
said Act are mentioned, or referred to, and intended as fully and amply, as if
the same Rates, Rules, Proportions, Powers and Authorities had been
particularly inserted in this present Act.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
sums of money charged by this Act, upon the several Counties, Cities, Towns,
Buroughs and Places aforesaid, shall be raised, levied, and paid into His
Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer, upon or before the first day of August, One
thousand six hundred sixty one, by the several Receive General, who shall be
appointed by the said Commissioners; Provided always, and it is hereby
declared, That no Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which were
formerly assessed and taxed for and toward former Assessments, and Land-taxes,
and are now in the possession or holding of His Majesty, or of the Queens
Highness, or of any Ecclesiastical person or persons, or his, or their Farmers
and Tenants, shall be exempted from the payment of the several sums of money in
this Act comprised, but that the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, shall be rated, assessed, and taxed for and toward the said
several sums of money in this Act comprised, in such manner and form as they
were of late rated, taxed, and assessed for and toward the said former
land-Rates, any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein-contained, shall
be drawn into example to the prejudice of the ancient Rights belonging to the
Peers of this Realm.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That these persons
hereafter named, shall be added Commissioners for their several Counties,
places and precincts respectvely, and shall exercise the same powers as the
other Commissioners intended by this Act, are Authorized and empowered to do;
That is to say,

Berks. For the County of Berks, Peregrine Hobby, Richard Harrison, Esqs; John
Fettiplace of Ferne^amEsq; and Samuel Woodcox.

Borrough of New Windsor. For the Borrough of New Windsor, Andrew Plumpton,
Richard Firshburne, Gent.

Bucks. For the County of Bucks, William Tirringham Esquire; Sir Thomas Hampson
Baronet, Sir Philip Palmer Baronet, Thomas Ratcliff Esquire;

Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir Thomas Dayrell, John Bennet Esquire;
Sir Anthony Cage, Levinus Benner.

Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Roger Jennings Esquire;

Chester. For the County of Chester, Sir George Warburton Baronet, Edward
Warren, Jeffery Shakerley, Henry Leigh, Esqs;

City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, The Major for
the time being.

Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, Robert Roberts Esquire; Sir William Tredinham,
Joseph Tredinham, Thomas Penhallow, the Knights and Burgesses that serve for
the said County, and James Eirsey Gent. The Major of Lostwithel for the time
being, John Mollesworth Esquire William Williams of Trenythen.

Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Mr. Anthony Bouch, Mr. Richard
Uriell, Mr. Thomas Croswhat,Mr. Robert Webster.

Devon. For the County of Devon, Nicholas DaviesDoctor of Physic, William
Jennens Gent. Edmond Tremayne, William Putt, John Kellond, William Bogan,
George Howard, John Kelly, James Rodd Esquires, Walter Jago, Francis Drew,Esquire;
William Walrond Esquire; John Blagdon Gent. John Hamm Gent. Henry Newte.

York. For the West Riding in the County of York, Welbury Norton, Robert Wivell
Esquires, Richard Roundhil Gent. William Hamond, Walter Hawksworth Esquires,
Cuthbert Wade, John Preston Gent. Arthur Ingram Esquire; Edward Atkinson, William
Witham Gent. Samuel SunderlandEsq; Thomas Ward Gent. Sir William Ingram Knight,
Sir John Goodrick Baronet, Sir Tho. Wentworth, Sir Edward Rodes, Knights,
Godfrey Copley of ^p^otsbrough, John Clayton, Joshua Horton, Thomas Stringer
Esqs. The Alderman of Leedes for the time being.

York Northriding. For the Northriding in the County of York,Sir William Caley,
Arthur Caley Esquire. William Wivell Esquire. Sir Tho. Gower Baronet, Thomas VVorsley,
Charles Tankred Csqs. Sir William Francklyn Baronet, the Bailiffs of
Scarboroughfor the time being, Tristram Fish, Robert Belt,Esqs. Tho. Robinson,
Thomas Scudamore Esqs.

York City. For the City and County of the City of York, all the Aldermen of
the City of York.

Kingston upon Hull. For the Town of Kingston upon Hull, Mr. George Crowle.

Essex. For the County of Essex, Mr. Edward Glascock,Mr. Miles Hubbert, Mr.
John Smart, Capt. Hunter, Dean Tindal Esquire. Isaac Wincall, Thomas Clopton,
Thomas Peek, Peter Johnson, Thomas Manby Esqs.

Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Thomas Freame, Tho. Floyde, Samuel
Sheppard, Phillip Sheppard, William Morgan, Richard Daston, John TookeEsqs.
Robert Lord Tracy, Thomas Morgan Esquire. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Knight,
William Bromage Gent. William VVinter of DimmockGent. Richard Matchen Gent.
John WinnyatGent. Thomas Aylway Gent.

Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Sir Herbert ParretKnight, John Barnaby
of Brookehampton esquire. Thomas Baskervile of Collington Gent. John Boothof
Hereford Esquire.

City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Thomas Davies Esquire. Major, James
Lawrence Gent. Tho. Clerk Gent.

Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Marmaduke Rawden, James Willimott Junior
Gent. Thomas A^asDr. of Physic, Richard Combs Esquire. Sir Robert Io^lyn Knight,
Thomas Coppin, Edward Briscoe, John Halsie Esqs. Mr. Fetherston of Blackeswere,
Edward Brograve, Ralph Gore, Thomas Brograve, Edward Cason, Thomas Bonest,
Henry Becher, Henry Chancey, George Bromley, Alexander Meade, John Crouch,
James Willimott Junior, George Poyner Gent. John Iesson esquire. Sir Edward Alston
Knight.

St. Albans. For the Borrough of St. Albans, William FoxwistEsq. Recorder, Mr.
John New, Mr. Edward Eames, Mr. Thomas Cowley Senior, Mr. William Marston, Sir
Henry Conningsby, Edmond Smith, Alban Cox, Richard Combs Esquire. Thom.
Marsto^Gent.

Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir Willi^m Mann, Sir Edward Masters, Thomas
Peake esquire. Sir Tho. God^rey, The Major of Maydston for the time being, Sir
William Merideth Baronet, Sir Thomas Peirse Baronet, Mr. Richard Manley, Mr.
Thomas Manley.

Sandwich. For the Town of Sandwich, John Verrier, Peter Peke Gent.

Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Henry BanisterEsq. Ieoffry Rushton
Gent. Richard FleetwoodGent. John Molineux esquire. William Fife esquire. Sir George
Middleton Knight and Baronet, Matthew Richardson esquire. Robert Heywood Esquire. Roger
Stowton of the City of London, Thomas Butler, Richard Farrington, William
Wall, William Turner, Henry Brabin, William HodgkensonGent.

Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, and City and County of the same, Edward
Turney, William Lister, Esqs, Sir Robert Dallison Baronet, Sir Charles Dallison
Knight, William Draper, Samuel Proctor, William Thompson, Humphrey Walcot,
Thomas Mills, Michael Dalton, John Watson, William Willoughby, Henry Heron,
Marmaduke Darrel, John Ogle, Anthony Treadway, William Skipwith, Thomas Brown
of Eastkirby, John Almore,Mr. Skinner of Thornton College, Tho. Harrington,
William Whichcot, Charles PelhamIunior, Roger Pelham, Mr. John Lockton, Mr.
John Hobson Junior, Mr. Henry Hall. Mr. Charles Pawdes, Mr. John Colthurst, Mr.
William Bishop, and Mr. Edward Blaw, Aldermen, Mr. William Perkins, Mr. Thomas
Mills, Mr. Peregrine Buck, Mr. William Dowman, Mr. Thomas Dickenson, Mr. John
Thornton, and Richard Wetherel,Aldermen.

London. For the City of London, Nicholas Delves Esquire. Benjamin Albin, Richard
Spencer.

Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, Sir John RobinsonBaronet, Lieutenant
of the Tower, Sir Richard Brown, Thomas Bide, Thomas Harrisonof South-Mins,
Sir William Bateman, Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Pitfield Esquire. Robert Peyton,
John Jones, John Limbrey, Edward Chard, Richard Shelton Esqs. William Page
Esquire. Roger IennynsEsq. Sir Heneage Finch Baronet, His Majesty's Solicitor
General, Cheney of HackneyEsq. Lieut. Col. Powel, Charles Cheney of Chelsey,
Christopher Abdy Esquire. Sir Allen Broadricke, John Barton Esquire.

Westminster. For the City of Westminster, and Liberties thereof, Gabriel Beck
Esquire. Mr. Glaham, Peter Maplesden, George Plunknet, Thomas Kirk, Will. Green,
George Farewell, Ralph Darnell.

Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, William Ionesof Frowen Esquire. James
Proger, Charles Proger.

Northampton. For the County of Northampton, Edward Only, John Thorton, John
Willoughby Esqs.

Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, George Windham, Robert Doug^ty of
Hanworth, Robert Legate,Esquires, Henry Scarborough Gent. Mr. John Kepps, Mr.
Thomas Talbot, Mr. Henry Blackborne,Gent.

Borough of Lyn Regis. For the Borough of Lyn Regis, John BassetMajor, Robert
Steward Esquire; Recorder, Thomas Green, William Wharton, Henry Bell, Robert
Thorowgood, Alderman Holley.

Great Yarmouth. For the Town of Great Yarmouth, Nicholas Cutting, James
Simonds Bailiff there, Sir John Potts Knight and Baronet, Sir William Doyley
Knight, Sir Thomas Me^ow Knight, Thomas Gooch, George England, John Carter,
Nathaniel Ashby, Thomas Lucas, John Woodroff, James Johnson Esquires, George
Tilyard Gent.

Theftford. For the whole Borough and Corporation of Theftford, the Major for
the time being, John Kendal Gent. Mr. Bourage M^rtin, Maurice helton,Esquires,
Robert Keddington Gent. Mr. Nicholas Rookwood, Mr. Robert Wright of Kilveston.

Newcastle upon Tine. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, Sir John
Marley, Sir Nicholas Cole Knight, and Baronet, Sir Francis Bows Knight, Sir
Francis Anderson Knight.

Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, Francis SandisEsq; Thomas Bristow,
William Newton, Gentlemen.

East-Retford. For the Borrough of East-Retford, the Bailiffs for the time
being.

Oxon. For the County of Oxon, William Glyn, John West, Esquires, John Coker
Gent. James Herbert esquire; Sir Thomas Tippin.

University of Oxford. Mr. Robert Withers, Mr. Edward Master, Mr. David Thomas,
Mr. Gregory Ballard, Mr. Timothy Horton.

The City of Oxford. For the City of Oxford, Francis Holloway, William Cornish.

Salop. For the County of Salop, Charles Baldwin, Samuel Baldwin, esquires, Mr.
Moore of Middleton,Mr. Bishop of the Moore, Benjamin Buckley.

Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Thomas Rudiardesq; John Colclough,
Timothy Edge, Gentlemen.

Somerset. For the County of Somerset, William Orangeesq; William Bacon
Senior, Gent. John Oridland Gent. Mawdley Samborne, John C^rew, Roger
Newborough, James Haise, esquires.

For the City of Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bristol, The
Major and Sheriffs for the time being, John Knight the elder, William
Coulston, John Bradway, William Coals.

For the City of Bathe. For the City of Bathe, John Pierce, John
Masters,Aldermen.

Southampton. For the County of Southampton, with the Town and County, Mr.
Essex Powlet, Richard Lucy, Gabriel VVhistler, ess

Isle of Wight. For the Isle of VVight, Thomas Bowremanesq; John Oglander of
Newport Gentleman.

Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, George VViniffe, William Blumfield,
esquires, Mr. John Brook, Mr. Milton of Ipswich, Mr. Edmond Bedingfield, Mr.
Francis Langley, Mr. Thomas Read, Mr. Rabbit of Bramfield, Isaac Motham
esquire, Gardener Web Gent.

St. Edmonds Bury. For St. Edmonds Bury, Francis Smith, Robert Sharp, Samuel
Hustler.

Surrey. For the County of Surrey, Edward Evelin, John Yates, Richard Knipe,
esquires, Mr. John Parker,Sir Purbeck Temple, Sir Thomas Bludworth,Knights,
Thomas Rogers, Charles Good-Harman-Atwood,esquires, John Parker of Rigate.

Rye in the County of Sussex. For the Town of Rye, Samuel Bembrigg, James
Welsh, Thomas Osmonton.

Worcester. For the County of Worcester, Sir John PackingtonBaronet, Sir
Rowland Berkley Knight, Sir John Winford Knight, Samuel Sandys, Henry Townsend,
John Bearcroft, esquires, Sir Ralph Clare, Knight of the Bath.

Worcester City. For the City and County of the City of Worcestor, Edward Soley
Alderman, Samuel Smith, Thomas Twitty, Gentlemen, Henry Townsendesq; Sir
William Mooreton Knight, Humphrey Tyrer, Richard Heming, Stephen Richardson,
Gentlemen, Sir John Packington, Sir Rowland Berkley, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir John
Winford, Samuel Sandys esquire;

Warwick. For the County of Warwick, Listerof Alveston Esquire. Richard Bishop of
Stratford Esquire.

Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Coventry,Sir Arthur Caley
Knight, The Major of Coventry for the tune being, Henry Smith Alderman, Sir
Richard Hopkins Knight, William Iesson, Thomas Norton Esqs. Mr. Thomas Love,
Matthew Smith, Samuel Snell, William Ielliffe, Robert Beak, James Nailer
Aldermen.

Town of Warwick. For the Town of Warwick, Sir Henry PuckeringBaronet, Sir
Clement ThrockmortonKnight, John Rouse, Nathaniel Stoughton, John Stanton Esqs.
Lister of Alveston Esquire. Richard Bishop of Stratford.

Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Walter Buckland, Thomas Mompesson, William
Caley esqs. Matthew Rayman Gent. Tho. Hunt Gent. Robert Chandler, Robert
Nicholas of Alcainings, William BroomewichGent. Samuel Air Gent. Simon
SpatchhurstEsq. Christopher Gardener Gent. Mr. Francis Parry.

Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Samuel Air Gent. Simon Spatchhurst esquire.
Christopher Gardener Gent.

Anglesey. For the Isle of Anglesey, Robert Lord Viscount Bulkley.

Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, James Phillips, Morgan Herbert, Thomas
Ienkins, Erasmus Lloyde, Thomas Evans, Henry Vaughan, Thomas Price the elder,
Esquires; Thomas Lloyde of Yinshen, Morris Vaughan, John Price Gentmen, Tho
Parry, Reighnold Ienkins, John Bowin, Thomas Lewis, Hector Phillips, Nicholas
Lewis, William Jones, Abel Griffin, Esqs, VVactkin Lloyde, John (...) of
Noyadd, Gentlemen; The Major of Cardiganfor the time being, Rees Gwin, David
Morgan,Aldermen.

Carmarthen. For the County of Carmarthen, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde,
Walter Mansell.

Carnarvon. For the County of Carnarvon, Griffith Bodurda, John Lloyde of
Nangwimadale, Robert Wynn of Conway, William VVynn of Pengwoone, William
Thomas of Carnarvon, Jonathan Lloyde, Walter Lloyde, Walter Mansell.

Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, Francis ManlyEsq;

Flint. For the County of Flint, Kenrick Eaton, Esquire;

Glamorgan. For the County of Glamorgan, John Price,of Courtcarne, Morgan
Morgan, Esquire;

Mountgomery. For the County of Mountgomery, William Oakely, Edmond VVareing,
David Morris,Esqs; John Matthews, Henry Pursel, John Kiffin, William Price of
Lanligan, John Lloyd of Conway.

Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverfordwest, Sir Herbert Perrot,
Knight, William Brown, Alderman.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for the Attainder of several Persons guilty of the Horrid Murder of
his late Sacred Majesty King CHARLES the First.
IN all humble manner show unto Your most Excellent Majesty, Your Majesty's
most dutiful and loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That the Horrid and Execrable Murder of Your Majesty's Royal
Father, our late most Gracious Sovereign Charles the First, of ever blessed and
glorious memory, has been committed by a party of wretched men, desperately
wicked, and hardened in their impiety, who having first plotted and contrived
the ruin and destruction of this excellent Monarchy, and with it of the true,
Reformed Protestant Religion which had been so long protected by it and
flourished under it, found it necessary in order to the carrying on of their
pernicious and traitorous designs, to throw down all the Bullwarks and Fences
of Law, and to subvert the very being and constitution of Parliament, that so
they might at last make their way open for any further attempts upon the Sacred
Person of His Majesty himself; And that for the more easy effecting thereof,
they did first seduce some part of the then Army into a compliance, and then
kept the rest in subjection to them, partly for hopes of preferment, and
chiefly for fear of losing their employments and arrears; until by these, and
other more odious arts and devices, they had fully strengthened themselves,
both in Power and Faction; which being done, they did declare against all
manner of Treaties with the Person of the King, even then while a Treaty by
advice of both Houses of Parliament was in being, Remonstrate against the
Houses of Parliament for such proceedings, seize upon His Royal Person while
the Commissioners were returned to the House of Parliament with His Answer, and
when His Concessions had been Voted a ground for ^eace, seize upon the House of
Commons, seclude and imprison some Members, force out others, and there being
left but a small remnant of their own Creatures (not a tenth part of the whole)
did seek to shelter themselves by this weak pretense, under the name and
authority of a Parliament, and in that name labo^red to prosecute what was yet
behind and unfinished of their long intended Treason and Con^piracy; (...)
p^^pose they prepared an Ordinance for erecting la w^d^gious and unheard of
Tribunal, which they called An High Court of Justices, for T^yal of His
Majesty; and having easi^ procur^^ it to pass in their House of Commons, as it
then stood molded, ventured to send it up from thence to the Peers then
sitting, who totally rejected it; whereupon their rage and fury increasing,
they presume to pass it alone as an Act of the Commons, and in the name of the
Commons of England; and having gained the pretense of Law, made by a power of
their own making, pursue it with all possible force and cruelty, until at last,
upon the Thirtieth day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and eight,
His Sacred Majesty was brought unto a Scaffold, and there publicly Murdered
before the Gates of His own Royal Palace; And because by this horrid action the
Protestant Religion has received the greatest wound and reproach, and the
People of England the most insupportable shame and infamy that it was possible
for the enemies of God and the King to bring upon uswhilst the Fanatic Rage of
a few Miscreants (who were as far from being true Protestants, as they were
from being true Subjects) stands imputed by our Adversaries to the whole
Nation: We therefore your Majesty's said Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords
and Commons in Parliament assembled, do hereby renounce, abominate, and protest
against that Impious Fact, the execrable Murder, and most unparallel^ Treason
committed against the Sacred Person and Life of our said late Sovereign, Your
Majesty's most Royal Father, and all proceedings tending thereunto: And do
beseech Your most Excellent Majesty that it may be declared, And be it hereby
declared, That by the undoubted and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither
the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, or
out of Parliament, nor the People collectively or presentatively, nor any other
persons whatsoever ever had, have, has, or ought to have any Coercive power
over the persons of the Kings of this Realm; And for the better vindication of
our selves to posterity, and as a lasting Monument of our otherwise
inexpressible detestation and abhorrency of this vilanous and abominable Fact,
We do further beseech your most Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted, And
be it hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, That every Thirtieth day of January, unless it falls out to be upon
the Lords day, and then the day next following, shall be for ever hereafter set
apart to be kept and observed in all the Churches and Chapels of these Your
Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Twede, and the Iues of Jersey and Guernsey, and all other Your
Majesty's Dominions, as an Anniversary day of Fasting and Humiliation, to
implore the Mercy of God, that neither the guilt of that Sacred and Innocent
^^oud, one those other sins by which God was provoked to deliver up both us and
our King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, may at any time
hereafter be visited upon us or our posterity. And whereas Oliver Cromwell
deceased, Henry Ireton deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, and Thomas Pride
deceased, John L^sle, William Say, Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine Wauton,
Thomas Harrison, Edward Whally, William Heveningham, Isaac Pennington, Henry
Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey,
Robert Tichborne, Owen Row, Robert Lilborne, Adrian Scroop, John Okey, John
H^wson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, John Carew, Carew,
John Jones, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Edmond
Harvy, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter,
Augustine Garland, John Dixwell, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas Wait, John Cook, Andrew Broughton,
Edward Dendy, William Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, are
notoriously known to have been wicked and active instruments in the prosecution
and compassing that Traiterous Murder of His late Majesty, for which the said
sir Hardress Waller, Thomas Harrison, William Heveningham, Isaac Pennington,
Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Row, Robert Lilborne,
Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Edmond
Harvy, Thomas Scot, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George
Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, John Cook,
William Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell, have already
received their Trial at Law, and by Verdict, or their own Confession, have been
convicted, and by Judgment of Law thereupon had, do now stand duly and
legally attainted; of whom, ten persons, that is to say, Thomas Harrison,
Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, John Cook,
Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtell, have most deservedly suffered
the pains of death, and been executed according to Law; and the said John
Lisle, William Say, Valenti^e Wauton, Edward Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond
Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius
Holland, Thomas Challoner, Miles Corbet, William Cawley, Nicholas Love, John
Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, and Edward Dendy, are fled from
Justice; not daring to abide a legal Trial: May it therefore please your
Majesty that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by Authority of this present
Parliament, That the said Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton deceased, John
Bradshaw deceased, and Thomas Pride deceased, shall by virtue of this Act, be
adjudged to be Convicted and Attainted of High Treason, to all intents and
purposes, as if they, and every of them respectively had been Attainted in
their lives: And also that John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward
Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John
Hewson, william Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawley,
Miles Corbet, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton,
Edward Dendy, and every of them, stand and be adjudged, and by Authority of
this present Act Convicted and Attainted of High Treason; And that all and
every the Manors, Messnages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders,
Possessions, Rights, Conditions, Interests, Offices, Fees, Annuities, and all
other the Hereditaments, Leases for years, Chattels real, and other things of
that nature, whatsoever they be, of them the said Oliver Cromwell, Henry
Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, John Lisle, William Say, Valentine W^uton,
Edward Whally, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, sir Michael Livesey, John Okey,
John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawly,
Miles Corbet, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton,
Edward Dendy, Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas
Scot, Gregory Clement, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, John Cook, Daniel Axtell,
sir Hardress Waller, William Heveningham, Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin,
Gilbert Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Row, Robert Lilborne, Henry Smith,
Edmond Harvy, John Downs* Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood,
Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, which they, or any of
them, or any other person or persons, to their or any of their uses, or in
trust for them, or any of them, had the Five and twentieth day of March, in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or at any time since,
shall stand and be forfeited unto Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, and
shall be deemed, vested, and adjudged to be in the actual and real possession
of Your Majesty, without any Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be
taken or found: And also, That all and every the Goods, Debts, and other the
Chattels personal whatsoever, of them the said Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton,
John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, whereof at the time of their respective deaths,
they, or any of them, or any other in trust for them or any of them, stood
possessed in Law or Equity, and all the Goods, Debts, and other the Chattels
personal whatsoever of them the said John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton,
Edward Whalley, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, John Okey,
John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawly,
Miles Corbet, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy,
Thomas Harrison, Adrian Scroope, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory
Clement, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, John Cook, Daniel Axtell, sir Hardress
Waller, William Heveningham, Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Gilbert
Millington, Robert Tichborne, Owen Row, Robert Lilborne, Henry Smith, Edmond
Harvy, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon
Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, whereof upon the Eleventh day
of February, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, they or any of them, or any
other in Trust for them or any of them, stood possessed either in Law or
Equity, shall be deemed and adjudged to be forfeited unto, and are hereby
vested, and put into the actual and real possession of Your Majesty, without
any further Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be taken or found.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Conveyance, Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of
Lease, Grants and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust, or
limitation of any Use or Uses of or out of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, not being the Lands nor Hereditaments of the late King, Queen or
Prince, or of any Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, nor being
Lands or Hereditaments sold or given for the Delinquency, or pretended
Delinquency of any person or persons whatsoever, by virtue or pretext of any
Act, Order, Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or Ordinance since the First day
of January, One thousand six hundred forty and one, nor any Statute, Judgment
or Recognizance, had, made, acknowledged or suffered to any person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, before the Twenty ninth day of September, One
thousand six hundred fifty nine, by any of the Offenders before in this Act*
mentioned, or their Heirs, or by any other person or persons claiming by, from,
or under them or any of them, other then the wife or wives, child or children,
heir or heirs of such person or persons, or any of them, for money bona fide,
to them or any of them paid or lent, nor any Conveyance, Assurance, Grant or
Estate made before the Twenty fifth of April One thousand six hundred and
sixty, by any person or persons to any of the Offenders aforesaid in Trust; And
for the benefit of any other person or persons not being any of the Offenders
aforesaid, or in trust for any Bodies Politic or Corporate, shall be
impeached, defeated, made void or frustrated hereby, or by any of the
Convictions and Attainders aforesaid; but that the same shall be held and
enjoyed by the Purchasers, Grantees, Lessees, Assigns, Cestuy que usu, Cestuy
que trust, and every of them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been made, and as if the said
Offenders had not been by this Act, or by any other course or proceedings of
Law convicted or attainted; so as the said Conveyances, and all and every the
Grants and Assurances which by virtue of this Act, are, and ought to be held
and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the First of January, which shall be in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, be entered and
enrolled of Record in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and not otherwise; Any
thing in this Act herein before contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which at any time
heretofore were the Lands and Possessions of Henry late Marquess of Worcester,
and Edward now Marquess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir
apparent of the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or any of them; whereof or
wherein the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons in trust for
him, or to his use, or any other the persons attainted by this Act, or
otherwise, or any person or persons in trust for them or any of them, had or
claimed, or pretended to have any Estate, Right, Title, Possession or Interest,
at any time before or since the decease of the said Oliver Cromwell, shall be,
and hereby are vested and settled in, and shall be held and enjoyed by the said
Marquess of Worcester, and the said Henry Lord Herbert, in such manner and
form, and for such Estate and Estates, with such Powers and Privileges as they
formerly had in the same respectively; Any thing in this present Act contained,
or any Act, Conveyance or Assurance heretofore made or acknowledged by the said
Edward Marquess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert or either of them, unto
the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons in trust for, or to
the use of the said Oliver Cromwell, or any Act or Conveyance made or done by
the said Oliver Cromwell, or by any in trust for him, to any person whatsoever,
to the contrary notwithstanding. Saving always to all and every person and
persons, Bodies Politic and others, their respective Heirs, Successors,
Executors and Administrators, all such Right, Title and Interest in Law and
Equity, which they or any of them have or ought to have, of, into, or out of
any the premises, not being in trust for any the said Offenders, nor derived
by, from or under the said Offenders, since the Twenty fifth day of March,
which was in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty six; And that
they the said person and persons, Bodies Politic, and other their respective
Heirs, Successors, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, in all and
every such case where his and their Entry was lawful, upon such Offender or
Offenders, or the Heirs or Assigns of such Offender or Offenders, in or upon
the said Twenty fifth day of March, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or
at any time since, may without Petition, Monstrans de droyt, Onster le maine,
or other Suit to His Majesty, enter on the Premises in His Majesty's
Possession, or in the Possession of His Successors and Patentees, their Heirs
or Assigns, in such manner to all intents, as he or they might have done on the
Possession of the said Offenders, their Heirs or Assigns, in or upon the said
Twenty fifth day of March, or at any time since; Any thing in this Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That all and every person and persons which have received any
of the Rents or mean profits, of, in, or out of any the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Chattels real, or Possessions of any the Offender or Offenders
in this Act mentioned, before the Eleventh day of February, One thousand six
hundred fifty and nine, and have paid or accounted for the same before the said
Eleventh day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, unto the
said Offender or Offenders, or their Assigns, or to any claiming from or under
them, shall be clearly and for ever acquitted and discharged of and from the
same, against the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to and for Richard Ingoldsby
to retain and keep, or otherwise to sell and dispose all and singular the Goods
and Chattels formerly belonging to sir Hardress Waller, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, until Two thousand pounds, for which the said Richard Ingoldsby in the
year One thousand six hundred fifty eight, stood jointly bound with the said
six Hardress Waller, unto James Brooks of the City of York, Alderman, and was
then counter-secured by a Judgment upon his Lands, and since by a Deed of
Bargain and Sale of the said Goods and Chattels in Ireland, be fully paid,
together with the Interest thereof; he the said Richard Ingoldsby accounting
for, and paying the full overplus thereof, if any shall be, unto our Sovereign
Lord the King; Any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for Confirmation of Leases and Grants from Colleges and Hospitals.
WHereas since the beginning of the late Troubles, diverse Masters, Provosts,
Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Rectors, Principals, and other Heads, Fellows,
and Scholars of Colleges, Halls, or Houses of Learning, in either of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the Dean, Canons and Prevends of the
Cathedral or Collegiat Church or College of Christ-Church in the University of
Oxford, and Provest, Warden, or other Head-Officer, and Fellows or Scholars of
the ^olledges of Eaton and Winchester, and Masters and Governors, Brethren,
Brothers and Sisters of diverse Hospitals have been amoved ejected or sequestered
by the Lords and Commons assem^led in Parliament, or by certain Visitors by
them appointed, or by some Conventions sitting at Westminster under the name or
style of a Parliament, or by some Authority or pretense of Authority derived
from them or the late pretended and usurped powers, styled Keepers of the
Liberty of E^gland by Authority of Parliament, or Protectors of the
Commonwealth of England Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominion or Dominions
and Territories thereunto belonging. And whereas also after these Amotions,
Ejections or Sequestrations, several other persons have been either by election
of the said Colleges, Halls, Houses of Learning, Church or Hospitals, or by
some of the powers or pretended powers above mentioned placed and substituted
in these Masterships, Headships, Fellowships Deanary, Canories, Prebendaries,
Governorships and other places aforesaid, who have actually exercised the same
places and been de facto Masters, Provosts Presidents, Wardens, Governors,
Rectors, Principals and other Heads, Fellows, Scholars, Brethren, Brothers and
Sisters, Dean Canons or Prebends of such respective Colleges, Halls Houses of
Learning, Hospitals, Cathedral Church or places, and have made diverse Grants
by Copy of Court-Roll, and Leases and Licenses to let or assign Grants and
Presentations to, and Elections of diverse persons, Re-entries for non-payment
of Rent or breach of Conditions, whereupon diverse Questions may in time to come
arise. For prevention whereof, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, with the Advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all Grants by Copy of Court-Roll,
and Leases and Licenses of setting and Assigning Grants and Presentations; And
all Elections of Heads, Masters, Fellows, Scholars, Students and Officers of
the said ^olledges, Halls, Church, and Houses of Learning and Hospitals
aforesaid, into dead or other places then or since Vacant, Receipts and
Acquittances of Rents incurred, Entries for forfeitures or Conditions broken,
had made or given since the Five and Twentieth day of March in the year of our
Lord One Thousand six Hundred Forty two, and before the Five and Twentieth day
of July in the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred and Sixty, by any such
Masters, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Rectors, Principalls and
other Heads de facto of the said Colleges, Halls and Houses of Learning, and
Fellows, and Scholars de facto of the same respectively in either of the said
Universities, or Dean and Canons or Prebends de facto of Christ Church
aforesaid, or Master, Provost or Warden and Fellows de facto of the Colleges
of Eaton or Winchester, or by such Master, Warden or Governors de facto, or
Master, Warden or Governors, Brethren Brothers or Sisters de facto of any
Hospital, by whatsoever particular name or style of Foundation the said
Colleges, Church, Hospitals, Masters, Governors, Fellows, Deans and Canons, or
Prebends are styled, founded, known or incorporated, and all Leases granted by
the Master, Warden, Brethren, Brothers or Sisters of any Hospitals of the
Patronage of any Bishop, Dean, or Dean and Chapter, and all surrenders to them
made to enable such Leases, Grants and presentations, shall stand and be of the
same and no other force and effect, as if the said Masters, Provosts,
Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Rectors, Principals, Heads, Fellows, Scholars,
Dean, Canons, Prebends, Brethren, Brothers or Sisters had been such de jure,
and duly and de jure Entitled in and to the said Colleges, Halls, Houses of
Learning, Church, Hospitals, Offices or places respectively, And as if such
Leases granted by the Master and Brethren of any Hospital of the patronage of
any Bishop, Dean or Chapter had been confirmed by the said Bishop, Dean or
Chapter; And that notwithstanding such defect in the said Lessors or Grantors,
and notwithstanding the restitution of any of the persons so ejected, the
Rents, Covenants and Conditions contained in such Leases and Grants shall go in
succession, as if such Lessors or Grantors had been de jure Masters, Provosts,
Presidents, Wardens, Governors, Reetors, Principals, Heads, Fellows, Scholars,
Dean, Canons, Prebends, Brethren, Brothers and Sisters of such Colleges,
Halls, Houses of Learning, Church, Hospitals and places respectively; Any
former Law, Custom or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it Enacted, That nothing in this Acc contained do or
shall extend to the confirming or making good of any Lease or Leases of any
parcel or parcels of Lands, Tenements, Pastures, Houses, Orchards, Gardens or
Barns, or any of the possessions of or belonging to the Hospital of Saint John
Baptist and the Evangelist in the Town of Northhampton, made between the first
day of September in the Year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred Fifty and
Five, and the Five and Twentieth day of July in the year of our Lord One
Thousand six Hundred Fifty and eight, by the pretended Master George G^odman
and his Co-brethren of the aforesaid Hospital, by color of any pretended Grant
or Patent whatsoever, or notwithstanding the Seal of the said Hospital or
Corporation was to them or any of them set or affixed.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to make good in Law or equity any Lease or Leases made by Simon Moore
Clerk, late Master or pretended Master of the Hospital of Saint Oswald in the
County of Worcester, of any the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of or
belonging to the said Hospital, to Richard Moore son of the said Simon Moore,
or to any of the children or grand children of the said Simon Moore, or to any
other person or persons in trust or for the use or uses of the said Simon
Moore, or his wife, children or grandchildren, or any or either of them.

Provided always, that no person or persons shall be confirmed in any
Mastership, Provostship, Headship, Fellowship, or Chaplains place in any
College or Hall in either of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, or in
the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, that is not ordained Minister by Bishops
or Presbyters (or being ordained, has since renounced his Ordination) where by
the local Statutes of the said respective Colleges or Halls Ordination is
required.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That this Act shall not extend to confirm
any Lease or Leases of the Rectories and Parsonages of Randall and Littlecoates
in the county of Lincoln, which have long since been in the tenure or
occupation of John Lord Culpeper, as by several Leases under the Seal of the
Master and Fellows of the College of the holy and undivided Trinity within the
Town and University of Cambridge of King Henry the Eights Foundation may
appear, and are now Leased over the head of the said John Lord Culpeper the
ancient Tenant, to one John West, though according to usage he claimed to renew
his Lease three years before the expiration thereof at the usual Fines or more.
But that the said John Lord Culpeper, his Executors or Administrators,
reimbursing the said new Tenant or Lessee so much money as has been really
paid to the said College for the Fine for such Lease, they shall be admitted
to renew the said Lease for the said Fine.

Provided always, That whereas Doctor Owen late reputed Dean, and the Chapter
of the Cathedral Church of Christ in Oxon of the Foundation of King Henry the
Eight, by their Indenture dated the seventh day of August, in the year of our
Lord One thousand six hundred fifty seven, did Lease and demise unto John
Arthur Clerk, Thomas Bromefield of London Esquire, and Laurence Marsh of
Darking in the County of Surry Esquire, certain Tyths and Lands parcel of the
Manor and Parsonage of Kirkham in the County of Lancast^r, And by several
other Indentures did Lease and demise unto several other persons many other
parts and portions of the said Parsonage of Kirkham (which had long been in the
tenure or occupation of Thomas Clifton Esquire and his Ancestors, by several
successive Leases under the Abbot and Covent of Vale Royal, and the College of
Christ Church aforesaid respectively) for several terms of years yet unexpired:

Be it Enacted and ordained, That Thomas Clifton now of Litham in the County of
Lancaster Esquire, his Executors and Administrators, (paying the several and
respective Rents reserved unto the said College, and securing unto the said
John Arthur, Thomas Bromefield, and Laurence Marsh, or the Survivors or
Survivor of them, or the Executors or Executor of the Survivor of them, for the
uses in the said Lease expressed and not otherwise, out of the Premises, the
yearly sum of Four hundred pounds, to be paid half yearly by equal portions,
for the term of Eleven years next ensuing, And reimbursing unto the said
several other Lessees respectively or their respective Assigns so much money as
was by them respectively and truly paid for their respective Fines,) shall have
and enjoy the said several demised premises for the residue of the said
several terms of years yet to come, as if the said several Leases made unto
them the said John Arthur, Thomas Bromfeild, and Laurence Marsh, and unto the
said several other persons as aforesaid, had been legally made unto the said
Thomas Clifton by a lawful Deane and Chapter, This Act or any other thing to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to confirm the Election of any Head, Fellow, Scholar or Chaplain of any
College or Hall in either of the Universities, that upon any other ground
besides the want of Episcopal Ordination, is or was not capable of being
elected into such place or places by the Statures of the said College or Hall,
into which he or they were chosen.

Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to prejudice the Title of any person or persons, who by Letters Patents under
the Great Seal since the first day of May, and before the twenty sixth of
August One thousand six hundred and sixty, have obtained from his Majesty any
Grant of any Deanery, Headship of any House, Rectorshiy of any College, Canons
place, Prebendary, Fellowship or Scholarship within either of the Universities,
or the Colleges of Eaton, Westminster, or Winchester; But that all and every
the said Grants and Letters Patents shall be of such, and no other Force and
effect, as the same should have been if this Act had not been made, Any thing
in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to confirm any Lease or Estate made by John Tombs Clerk, of any Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, belonging to the Hospital of Saint Katharines in
Ledbury in the County of Hereford, to any of the children of him the said John
Tombs, or to any other person or persons in Trust for him or them, or any of
them.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That neither
this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall in any wise extend to confirm,
or make good, any Lease or Leases made by William Lenthal, pretended Warden of
the House of Converts, belonging to the Master of the Rolls, since the
thirtieth day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and two, of any Houses
or Tenements thereto belonging, to the prejudice of John Lord Culpeper, his
Successors, Lessees, or Assigns, the said Lord Culpeper paying or reimbursing
unto the said Lessee or Lessees of such Houses or Tenements, such moneys as
they or any of them have paid, with Interest for the same, he or they
discounting for the mean profits thereof.

Provided always, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall extend to confirm William Hook in the Mastership of the Kings Majesty's
Hospital of the Savoy, nor to confirm or make good any Lease of any Lands or
Tenements belonging to the said Hospital, made between the thirtieth day of
January, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred forty eight, and the
first day of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty; The Master of the said
Hospital for the time being, allowing and reimbursing to all such Lessees all
such sum or sums of money, as they or any of them paid to the then Master of
the said Hospital by way of Fine, at the time of such Lease making, and
Interest for the same, And the said Lessees and every of them disc^unting for
the mean profits of the same.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act,
or any thing herein contained, shall not extend to confirm or make good any
Lease or Grant made, or mentioned to be made to any person or persons by John
Owen late Dean, and others, Canons, or pretended Dean and Canons of the
College of Christ Church in the University of Oxford, or by any of them, of
any the Rectories, Tithes, or Gleab Lands of Hampton, Wickenford, Badsey,
Aldington, Uffenha^, South-Littleton, North Littleton, and Middle Littleton, in
the County of Worcester, heretofore the possessions of Henry late Marquess of
Worcester, and Dame Anne his Wife, or either of them, and whereo the said Henry
was dispossessed for his Allegiance and Loyalty to his late Majesty of Blessed
Memory; But that the Executor or Administrator of the said Henry, shall and may
be admitted to renew the Leases of the said Tithes, for such term or terms, as
the said Dean and Chapter of Christ Church are by Law enabled to grant the
same, the said Executors or Administrators satisfying and reimbursing to such
person or persons, all such sum or sums of money, as he or they have paid for
the said Lease or Leases, by way of Fine, with Interest for the same, the said
person or persons discounting to the said Executors or Administrators, for the
mean Profits received thereupon.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to confirm or make good any Lease, Leases, or Estate made by any pretended Dean
and Chapter, Master or Head of any College or Hall in either of the
Universities, or of any pretended Master or Governors of any Hospital, which
said Lease, Leases or Estate had not been good or effectual in Law, had they
been made by a lawful Dean and Chapter, Master, Head or Governor of any
College, Hall or Hospital aforesaid; This Act, or any thing herein contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to confirm or make good any Leaf or Leases of the Rectory or Parsonage of
Arrington in the County of Cambridge, which has long been in the tenure and
occupation of Thomas ^hicheley Esquire; and his Ancestors, by several successive
Leases from the Master and Fellows of Trinity College in Cambridge; Nor shall
confirm or make good any Lease or Leases of the Rectory or Parsonage of Soham
in the said County of Cambridge, which has likewise been, and still is in the
occupation and possession of the said Thomas Chicheley, by Lease from the
Master and Fellows of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, but that the said Thomas
Chicheley (paying and reimbursing the several and respective Tenants or
Lessees, the several and respective sums of money by them severally and
respectively paid to the said College and Hall, for or in the name of any Fine
or Fines, for the making or granting such new Lease or Leases, with Interest,
discounting such Rents and Profits as by them respectively have been taken or
received out of the premises) shall be restored to his said ancient
Possessions. And the said College and Hall respectively shall be enabled to
Lease the said several Rectories and Parsonages, with their respective
Appurtenances, unto the said Thomas Chicheley; This Act, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall extend to restore any person or persons to any Headship, Fellowship, or
Scholarship of any College or Hall, or to any Chaplains or (...) place, in any
College or Hall, in (...) the Universities, or to any Lecture or Readers
place, that is or shall be before the first day of January, One thousand six
hundred and sixty, eiected out of their respective Headship, Fellowship,
Scholarship, Chaplain or Clerks-place, or out of any Lecture in the said
Universities, by his Majesty's Commissioners under the Great Seal, for not
having been legally and according to the several Statutes of the said
respective several places nominated, elected or admitted in or to the same;
Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, Woolfels, Fullers Earth, or
any kind of Scouring Earth.
FOr the better preventing and avoiding of such Losses and Inconveniences as
have happened, and daily do and may happen to the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, and to the Kingdom of Ireland by and through the secret and
subtle exportation and transportation, and by and through the secret and
subtle carrying and conveighing away of Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Sherlings,
Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, out of and
from the Kingdom and Dominion aforesaid, and for the better setting on work
the poor people and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Dominion aforesaid. And to
the Intent that the full and best use and benefit of the principal native
Commodities of the same Kingdoms and Dominion may come, redound, and be unto
and amongst the Subjects and Inhabitants of the same, and not unto or amongst
the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, or of any Foreign Realms
or States, as the same now of late in some great measure has done, and is
further likely to do, if some severer punishment then heretofore be not
speedily inflicted upon such Offenders, as shall be Actors or Assistants in and
to such Exportation and Transportation, and in and to such carrying and
conveying away thereof as aforesaid;

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no
person or persons whatsoever, from and after the fourteenth day of January One
thousand six hundred and threescore, shall directly or indirectly, Export,
Transport, carry or convey, or cause or procure to be Exported, Transported,
carried or conveyed out of, or from the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Barwick upon ^wede, or out of or from the Isles of Jersey or
Guernzey, with Sarke and Alderney, being under the Government of Guernzey
aforesaid, or out of or from any of them, or out of, or from the Kingdom of
Ireland aforesaid, into any parts or places out of the Kingdoms, Isles or
Dominion aforesaid, any Sheep or Wool whatsoever, of the breed or growth of
the Kingdoms of England or Ireland, or Isles or Dominion aforesaid; Or any
Wool fells, Mortlings or Shorlings, or any Yarn made of Wool, or any
Woolflocks, or any Fullers Earth, or any Fulling Clay whatsoever; nor shall
directly or indirectly pack or load, or cause to be packed or loaded upon any
Horse, Cart, or other Carriage, or Load, or lay on board, or cause to be laden
or laid on board in any Ship or other Vessel, in any place or Port within the
Kingdoms of England or Ireland, or Town of Berwick, or Isles, or Dominion
aforesaid, any such Sheep, Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
Wool or Woollflocks, or any Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay, to the intent or
purpose to export, transport, carry or convey the same, or to cause the same to
be exported, transported, carried or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of England
or Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles or Dominion aforesaid, or with intent or
purpose, that any other person or persons should so export, transport, carry or
convey the same into any parts or places out of the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles or Dominion aforesaid, into the Kingdom of
Scotland, or any Foreign parts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Wool,
Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woollflocks, or any
Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay, shall be from and after the fourteenth day of
January, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and threescore,
exported, transported, carried or conveyed out of the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, or Kingdom of Ireland, or out of any
Port or place of the said Kingdoms respectively unto the Isles of Jersey or
Guernzey, or to Sarke or Alderney, Except as in this Act shall be hereafter
limited or appointed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Offender and Offenders, offense and offenses aforesaid, shall be subject and
liable to the respective pains, penalties and forfeitures hereafter following,
That is to say, The said Sheep, Woolls, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn
made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, so exported,
transported, carried, conveyed, packed or laden contrary to the true intent of
this Act, shall be forfeited, and that every offender and offenders therein
shall forfeit Twenty shillings for every such Sheep, and Three shillings for
every pound weight of such Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
wool, woolflocks, Fullers earth, or Fulling Clay. And also the owners of the
said Ships or Vessels knowing such offense, shall forfeit all their Interest in
the said Ships or Vessels, with all their Apparel and furniture to them and
every of them belonging. And that the Master and Mariners thereof, knowing such
offense, and wittingly and willingly aiding and assisting thereunto, shall
forfeit all their Goods and Chattels, and have Imprisonment for the space of
three months without Bail or Main-prise; the one moiety of which said
penalties and forfeitures shall be to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; and the other moiety to him that will sue for the same by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, or
before the Justices of Assize, or in the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace:
In which Suit, no Essoyn, protection or wager of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Merchant or other person or persons
shall after the said fourteenth day of January transport or cause to be
transported, any Sheep, Wool, Wool-fels Mortlings, Shorlings, Woollen-yarn,
Wool-flocks, Fullers-earth or Fulling-clay, contrary to the true intent of this
Act, and be thereof lawfully convicted, That then he shall be disabled to
require any debt or Account of any Factor or others for or concerning any Debt
or Estate properly belonging to such offender. Provided always and it is
nevertheless declared, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not
be construed to take away any greater pains or penalties inflicted or to be
inflicted for any the offenses aforesaid by virtue of any former Act of
Parliament now in force.

And be it also further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every offense
that shall be done or committed contrary to this Act, shall and may be inquired
of and heard, examined, tried and determined in the County where such Sheep,
Wool, Wool-fels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wool-flocks,
Fullers-earth, or Fulling-clay respectively shall be so packed, laden, or laid
aboard as aforesaid contrary to this Act, or else in the County where such
offenders shall happen to be apprehended, or arrested for such offense, in such
manner and form, and to such effect to all intents and purposes as if the same
offense had been wholly and altogether done and committed at and in such County.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no person
or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be impeached for any offense
aforesaid, unless such person or persons shall be prosecuted within the space
of one year next ensuing such offense committed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any person or persons to seize, take and challenge to his or
their own use and behoof, and to the use of the King, his Heirs and Successors,
all and all manner such Sheep, Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made
of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers-earth and Fulling clay, as he or they shall happen
to see, find, know or discover to be laid aboard in any Ship or other Vessel
or Boat, or to be brought, carried or laid on shore at or near the Sea or any
Navigable River or Water, to the intent or purpose to be exported, transported
or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of England, or Ireland, Town of Berwick, Isles
or Dominion aforesaid contrary to the true meaning of this Act, or to be packed
or laden upon any ^^orse, Cart or other Carriage, to the intent or purpose to
be conveyed or carried into the Kingdom of Scotland aforesaid; and that such
person or persons as shall happen so to seize, take or challenge any such
Sheep, Wool, Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks,
Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay as aforesaid, shall have the full moiety thereof,
to all intents and purposes.

Provided always, That such person or persons as shall make any such seizure
or Challenge as aforesaid to his or their own use, shall not be admitted or
allowed to give in Evidence upon his or their Oath or Oaths against any person
or persons, which shall happen to be indicted, accused or questioned by virtue
of this Act, or any thing therein contained.

And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That all and every
Ship, Vessel, Hulke, Barge or Boat, of what kind soever, whereof any Alien
born, or whereof any natural born Subjects not inhabiting within the Realm of
England, shall be owner or part owner, and wherein any Sheep, Wool,
Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wooll-flocks, Fullers
Earth, or Fulling Clay shall happen to be Shipped, put or laid aboard contrary
to the true meaning of this Act, shall be forfeited to the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors.

Provided always, That this Act shall not extend to any Lamd skin ready dressed,
and prepared fit and useful for Furr or Lynings.

Provided also, That this Act shall not in any wise extend to the transporting,
carrying or conveying away of any such Wool-fells or Pelts, with such Wool
upon them, or to any Beds stuffed with Flocks, which shall be carried or
employed in any Ship or other vessel for necessary use only, of and about the
Ordnance or other thing in or concerning such Ship or Vessel, or only for the
necessary use of any the persons in such Ship or Vessel, passing or being, and
which shall not be sold or uttered in any Foreign parts, out of the Kingdoms
of England or Ireland, or Town of Berwick, Istes or Dominion aforesaid; nor to
the exporting, transporting, carrying or conveying of any Weather-sheep, or of
the Wool growing upon any such VVeather-sheep, to be carried alive in any
Ship or other Vessel, for and toward the only necessary food or diet, of or
for the Company or Passengers or other persons therein, and for and toward
none other purpose.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That this Act or any thing
therein contained shall not extend to any such Wool to be exported or
transported out of or from the Port of Southampton, only unto the aforesaid
Isles of Jersey and Guernzey, by, or for the only use or behoof of any the
Inhabitants of the said Isles of Jersey and Guernzey, or either of them, or to
any such Wool to be shipped or laden aboard in any ship or other vessel, by,
or for the only use or behoof of any the Inhabitants of the said Isles of
Jersey or Guernsey, or either of them in the Port aforesaid, to be exported and
transported into the said Isles of Jersey or Guernzey or either of them; so as
such person and persons that shall so ship or lay aboard such Wool into any
ship or other vessel, do before the shipping or laying aboard such Wool,
deliver unto the Customer, Comptroller, Surveyor or Searcher of the Port of
Southampton aforesaid (out of which the same Wool is to be exported) a
writing under the Seal or Seals of the respective Governors of the same Isles
of Jersey and Guernzey, unto which the said Wool is to be transported, or of
his or their Deputy or Deputies respectively, the which writing shall purport
and express that the party named in such writing is authorized and appointed to
export or to cause to be exported out of the Port aforesaid so much Wool,
expressing the number of the Tods, to the same Isle, to be used or manufactured
in one of the same Isles, or in some of the members or parts of the same, and
that such party so authorized and appointed to export or cause to be exported
that Wool, has before the making and sealing of that writing, entered
sufficient Bond to his Majesty's use for the landing of the said Wool in that
Isle. And to the intent that the quantity of Wool to be exported out of the
Port of Southampton aforesaid into the said Isles or either of them in any one
year, accompting the year to begin from the first day of January next ensuing,
and so yearly from the first day of January, may not exceed the Quantity
hereunder specified; that is tosay, unto the Isle of Jer^ey Two thousand Tods
and no more of unkeamed Wool, and unto Guernzey One thousand Tods and no more
of unkeamed Wool, and unto Alderny Two hundred Tods and no more of unkeamed
Wool, and unto Sarke One hundred Tods of unkeamed Wool and no more, every Tod
not exceeding thirty two pounds.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor of the said
Isle of Jersey or his Deputy for whom he will answer, shall not make to any
person or persons any writing or writings such as is above specified, to
authorize or appoint such person or persons as aforesaid, to fetch, e^port, or
transport out of the Port of Southampton aforesaid unto the said Isle of Jersey
in one year, accompting the year from the first day of January, One thousand
six hundred and sixty aforesaid, any greater quantity of Wool then Two
thousand Tods in any one year; and that the Governor of the said Isle of
Guernzey, or his Deputy for whom he will answer, shall not make to any person
or persons any writing or writings, such as is above specified, to authorize
and appoint such person or persons as aforesaid, to fetch, export, or transport
out of the Port above specified unto the said Isles of Guernzey, with Alderny
and Sarke, in any one year, accepting the year from the first day of January
aforesaid, any greater quantity of Wool then One thousand Tods for Guernzey,
Two hundred Todds for Alderney, and One hundred Todds for Sarke in any one
year; and that the Customer of the Port of Southampton aforesaid, shall keep a
true account of all the said quantity of Woolls so by him permitted to be
laden by virtue of this Act, and shall not permit any greater quantity of
VVoolls to be laden then by this Act is prescribed in any one year to either
of the said Islands respectively under any pretense whatsoever, upon the
penalty of the forfeiture of his place, and the sum of One hundred pounds in
money, one moiety whereof to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and
the other moiety to him or them that will sue for the same in any Court of
Record, wherein no Essoyne, protection or wager of Law shall be allowed. And if
any of the Governors aforesaid, or any their or either of their Deputy or
Deputies of the said Isles, or either of them, shall give, grant, or make any
License or Licenses for exporting from Southampton aforesaid, into the said
Isles respectively, of any greater quantity of such Wool, then is before by
the true meaning of this Act limited and appointed in that behalf; That then
the respective Governor or Governors of such of the said Isles, shall forfeit
and pay to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, the sum of Twenty
pounds of lawful money of ^ngland, for every Todd of Wool which shall be so
licenced to be exported, over and above the rate or proportion of Wool in and
by this Act, or the true meaning thereof limited or appointed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Governors aforesaid, or their respective Deputies, or any their Clerks,
Officers or Servants, for the Granting, making, or Sealing of every such
writing of License as is aforesaid, and for the entering a Remembrance of the
same into some book, which they shall have and keep for that purpose, may have
and take the sum of Twelve pence, and no more, upon pain of Forfeiting to be
party grieved the sum of Five shillings for every penny which shall be taken
over and above the said sum of twelve pence, in and by this Act allowed to be
taken, and so after that proportion, the said penalty or Forfeiture for the
taking above Twelve pence as aforesaid, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or
Information in any Court of Record at Westminster or elsewhere, wherein no
Injunction, Protection, Privilege, Essoyne or wager of Law shall be admitted
or allowed.

Anno Regni CAROLI IJ. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DUODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day or April,
An. Dom. 1660.

In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1660.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis.
An Act for Confirmation of Marriages.
WHereas by virtue or color of certain Ordinances, or certain pretended Acts
or Ordinances, diverse marriages since the beginning of the late troubles, have
bee^ had and solemnized in some other manner then has been formerly used and
accustomed: Now for the preventing and avoiding of all doubts and questions
touching the same, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the
advice and assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the ^ame, That all Marriages had or Solemnized in any of his
Majesty's Dominions since the first day of May, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred forty and two, before any Justice of Peace, or reputed
Justice of Peace, of England or Wales, or other his Majesty's Dominions, and by
such Justice or reputed Justice, so pronounced or declared. And all Marriages
within any of His Majesty's Dominions, since the same first day of May, in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty two, had or solemnized
according to the direction or true intent of any Act or Ordinance, or reputed
Act or Ordinance, of one or both Houses of Parliament, or of any Convention
sitting at Westminster; under the name Style or Title of a Parliament, or
assuming that name, Style or Title, shall be, and shall be adjudged, esteemed,
and taken to be, and to have been of the same and no other force and effect, as
if such Marriages had been had and solemnized according to the Rites and
Ceremonies established, or used in the Church or Kingdom of England, any Law,
Custom, or Usage to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, that where in any Suite commenced or to be
commenced in any of the Courts of the Common Law, any issue has been joined,
and not already tried or determined, or shall be joyne^ upon the point of
Bastardy, or lawfulness of marriage, for or concerning the marriages had and
solemnized as aforesaid, the same issues shall be tried by Jury of twelve men
according to the course of Trial of other issues tryable by Jury at the Common
Law, and not otherwise, any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary thereof, in
any wise notwithstanding.

Anno XII. CAROLI. II. Regis.
An Act for Prohibiting the Planting, Setting, or Sowing of Tobacco in England
and Ireland.
YOur Majesty's loyal and obedient Subjects, The Lords and Commo^s in this
present Parliament Assembled considering of how great concern and importance it
is, That the Columes and Plantations of this Kingdom in America, be defended,
protected, maintained, and kept up, and that all due and possible encouragement
be given unto them; and that not only in regard great and considerable
Dominions, and Countries, have been thereby gained, and added to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; But for that the strength and welfare of this Kingdom do
very much depend upon them, in regard of the employment of a very considerable
part of its Shipping and Seamen, and of the vent of very great quantities of
its Native Commodities and Manufactures, as also of its supply with several
considerable Commodities which it was wont formerly to have only from
Forraigners, and at far dearer Rates: And forasmuch as Tobacco is one of the
main products of several of those Plantations, and upon which their welfare,
and subsistence, and the Navigation of this Kingdom, and vent of its
Commodities thither, do much depend; and in regard it is found by experience,
That the Tobaccoes Planted in these parts are not so good, and wholesome for the
Takers thereof; And that by the Planting thereof your Majesty is deprived of a
considerable part of Your Revenue arising by Customs upon Imported Tobacco; Do
most humbly pray that it may be Enacted by your Majesty: And it is hereby
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same: That no person
or persons whatsoever shall, or do from and after the first day of January, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, Set, Plant, improve
to grow, make or cure any Tobacco either in Seed, Plant, or otherwise, in or
upon any Ground, Earth, Field, or Place, within the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or in the Kingdom of Ireland, under the penalty of the Forfeiture of all
such Tobacco, or the value thereof, and of the sum of forty shillings for
every, Rod or Pole of Ground to Planted, Set, or Sown as aforesaid; and so
portionablely for a greater or (...) quantity of Ground, One Moiety thereof to
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors: And the other Moiety to him or them that
shall Sue for the same, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any
Court of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager in Law shall be
allowed.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Majors Bailiffs, Contrables, and every of them, upon Information or Complaint
made unto them, or any of them, by any the Officers of the Customs, or by any
other person, or persons whatsoever, That there is any Tobacco Set, Sown,
Planted, or growing within their Jurisdictions, or Precincts, contrary to this
Act, shall within Ten days after such Information or Complaint, cause to be
burnt, plucked up, consumed, or utterly destroyed, all such Tobacco so Set,
Sown, Planted or Growing.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That in case any person or persons shall
resist, or make forcible opposition against any person or persons in the due
and through Execution of this Act, that every such person or persons for every
such offense, shall forfeit the sum of five pounds to be divided and recovered
in manner aforesaid. And in case any person or persons shall not pay the sums
of money, by them to be paid, by virtue of this Act, That in every such case,
Destress shall be made and Sale thereof, returning the Overplus to the Owners;
And in case no Destress be to be found, That then every such party shall be
committed to the Common Gaol in the County where such Offense shall be
committed, there to remain for the space of two Months, without Bail or
Main-prize.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That this Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall extend to the hindering of the Planting of Tobacco in
any Physic Garden of either University, or in any other private Garden for
Physic or Surgery, only so as the quantity so Planted exceed not one half
of one Pole in any one place or Garden.

Anno XII. CAROLI II. Regis.
An Act for erecting and establishing a Post Office.
WHereas for the maintenance of mutual Correspondencies, and prevention of many
Inconveniences happening by private Posts, several public Post-Offices have
been heretofore erected for carrying, and recarrying of Letters by Posts, to,
and from all parts and places within England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
several parts beyond the Seas; the well-ordering whereof, is a matter of
general concernment, and of great advantage, as well for preservation of Trade
and Commerce, as otherwise: To the end therefore that the same may be managed
so, that speedy and safe dispatches may be had, which is most likely to be
effected, by ere^ting one general Post Office for that purpose;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That there be from henceforth one general Letter-Office erected and established
in some convenient place within the City of Lond^n, from whence all Letters and
Pacquets whatsoever may be with speed and expedition sent unto any part of the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any other of his Majesty's
Dominions, or unto any Kingdom or Country beyond the Seas, at which said
Office all Returns and Answers may be likewise received; And that one Master of
the said General Letter-Office shall be from time to time appointed by the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, to be made or constituted by Letters
Patents under the Great Seal of England, by the name and style of his Majesty's
Postmaster General; which said Master of the said Office, and his Deputy, and
Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently authorized, and his and their Servants,
and Agents; and no other person or persons whatsoever, shall from time to time
have the receiving, taking up, ordering, dispatching, sending Post or with
speed, and delivering of all Letters and Pacquets whatsoever, which shall from
time to time be sent to and from all and every the parts and places of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and other his Majesty's Dominions, and to and from all
and every the Kingdoms and Countries beyond the Seas, where he shall settle or
cause to be settled Posts or running Messengers for that purpose. Except such
Letters as shall be sent by Coaches, common known Carryers of Goods by Carts,
Wagons, or Packhorses, and shall be carried along with their Carts, Wagons,
and Packhorses respectively; And except Letters of Merchants and Masters which
shall be sent by any Masters of any Ships, Barques, or other Vessel of
Merchandise, or by any other person employed by them for the Carriage of such
Letters aforesaid, according to the respective directions; And also except
Letters to be sent by any private Friend or Friends in their ways of journey
or travel, or by any Messenger or Messengers sent on purpose, for or concerning
the private affairs of any person or persons: And also except Messengers who
carry and recarry Commissions or the Return thereof, Affidavits, Writs,
Process, or Proceedings, or the Returns thereof, issuing out of any Court.

And be it furtther Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Postmaster
General for the time being, as shall from time to time be made and constituted
by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the respective Deputies, or
Substitutes of such Postmaster General, and no other person or persons
whatsoever, shall prepare, and provide Horses and Furniture to let to Hire unto
all Through-Posts, and persons riding in Post by Commission, or without, to and
from all and every the parts and places of England, Scotland and Ireland, where
any Post-roads are, or shall be settled and established.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for such Postmaster General to be constituted and appointed as
aforesaid, and his Deputy or Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently authorized,
to demand, have, receive and take for the Portage and conveyance of all such
Letters which he shall so convey, carry, or send Post as aforesaid, and for the
providing and furnishing Horses for through-Posts, or persons riding in post as
aforesaid, according to the several Rates and Sums of lawful English money
hereafter mentioned, not to exceed the same (that is to say) For the Port of
every Letter not exceeding one sheet, to or from any place not exceeding
fourscore English Miles distant from the place where such Letter shall be
received, Two pence; And for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two
sheets, Four pence; And for the like Port of every Packet of Letters
proportionably unto the said Rates; And for the like Port of every Pa^quet of
Writs, Deeds, and other things after the Rate of Eight pence for every ounce
weight; and for the Port of every Letter not exceeding one sheet, above the
distance of fourscore English Miles from the place where the same shall be
received, Three pence; And for the like Port of a Letter, not exceeding Two
sheets, Six pence; and proportionably to the same rates, for the like port of
all pacquets of Letters, and for the like port of every other Packet of Writs,
Deeds, or other things, after the rate of Twelve pence of English money for
every Ounce weight; and for the port of every Letter not exceeding One sheet,
from London unto the Town of Berwick, or from thence to the City of London,
Three pence of English money; And for the like port of every Letter not
exceeding two sheets, Sir pence; and proportionably unto the same Rates, for
every Packet of Letters, and for every other Packet of greater bulk, One
shilling and Six pence for every Ounce weight; And for the port of such Letters
and Pacquets as shall be conveyed or carried from the Town of Berwick unto any
place or places within forty English Miles distance from Berwick, or any other
place where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; and for every Letter not
exceeding two sheets, Four pence; and proportionably to the same rates for
every packet of Letters, and for every other packet or parcel, Eight pence
for every Ounce weight; and for every Letter not exceeding One sheet to be
conveyed or carried a further distance then Forty English Miles, Four pence;
And for the like port of every double Letter, Eight pence: And proportionably
unto the same Rates for the like port of every packet of Letters, and for the
like port of every other packet, One shilling for every ounce weight; and for
the port of every Letter not exceeding one sheet from England unto the City of
Dublin in Ireland, or from the City of Dublin in Ireland unto England, Six
pence of English money; and for the like port of every Letter not exceeding two
sheets one shilling, and proportionably to the same Rates for every Packet of
Letters; and for the port of every other packet of any kind of greater Bulk,
Two shillings for every Ounce weight; and for the port of such Letters or
pacquets as shall be conveyed or carried from the City of Dublin, unto any
other place or places within the Kingdme of Ireland, or from any other place
unto the said City, or to, or from any other place within the said Kingdom,
according to the Rates, and sums of English money hereafter following, viz.
For every Letter not exceeding one sheet, to or from any place within Forty
English Miles distance from Dublin, or any other place where such Letter shall
be received, Two pence; And for every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Four
pence, and proportionably to the same rates for every packet of Letters, and
for every other packet of greater Bulk, Eight pence for every ounce weight;
and for every Letter not exceeding one sheet to be carried or conveyed a
further distance then Forty English miles, Four pence; and for the like port of
every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Eight pence; and proportionably unto the
same Rates for the like port of every pacquets of Letters, and for the like
port of every other pacquets of greater Bulk, One shilling for every ounce
weight; and for all and every the Letters, pacquets, and parcels of goods that
shall be carried or conveyed to, or from any of his Majesty's said Dominious,
to or from any other parts or places beyond the Seas, according to the several
and respective Rates, that now are, and have been taken for Letters, Pacquets,
and parcels so conveyed, being rated either by the Letter, or by the Ounce
weight,

That is to say, d Morlaix, Saint Maloes, Caen, Newhaven, and places of like
distance, port paid to Roan is for Single vi Double xii Treble xviii Ounce
xviii d Hamburgh, Cullen, Frankfort, port paid to Antwerp is Single viii Double
xvi Treble xxiv Ounce xxiv s d Venice, Geneva, Legorne, Rome, Naples, Messina,
and all other parts of Italy, by way of Venice, franct pro Mantua Single o ix
Double i vi Treble ii iii Ounce ii viii s d Marcelia, Smerna, Constantinople,
Aleppo, and all parts of Turkey, port paid to Marcelia Single i o Double ii o
3. q^^. of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix s d Genoua, Legorn, Rome, and other
parts of Italy, by way of Lions, franct pro Lions Single i o Double ii o 3 q^^.
of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix And of Letters sent outward, s d To Bourdeux,
Rochel, Nantes, Orleans, Byon, Towers, and places of like distance, port paid
to Paris Single o ix Double i vi Treble ii iii Ounce ii o s d And for Letters
brought from the same places into England Single i o Double ii o 3. q^^. of an
ounce iii o Ounce iv o Also Letters sent outward, s d To Norembergh, Bremen,
Dantswick, Lubeck, Lipswick, and other places of like distance, Post paid to
Hamburgh Single i o Double ii o 3. q^^. of an ounce iii o Ounce iv o s d And
for Letters brought from the said places to England Single o viii Double. i iv
Treble ii o Ounce ii oAnd for the Port of Letters brought into England from s d
Calais, Diepe, Bulloigne, Abbeville, Amiens, Saint Omers, Montrell Single o iv
Double o viii Treble i o Ounce i o s d Rouen Single o vi Double i o Treble i vi
Ounce i vi s d Paris Single o ix Double i vi Treble i iii Ounce i o s d
Dunkirk, Ostend, Lille, Ipte, Courtrey, Gheandt, Bruxells, Bridges, Antwerp,
and all other parts of Flanders Single o viii Double i iv Treble ii o Ounce ii
o s d Sluis, Flushing, Middleburgh, Amsterda^, Roterdam, Delph, Hagh, and from
all other parts of Holland and Zealand Single o viii Double i iv Treble ii o
Ounce ii o

Provided always, That all Mercha^^^^ Accounts not exceeding one sheet of
paper, and all Bills of Exchange, Invoyces, and Bills of Lading, are, and shall
hereby be understood to be allowed without Rate in the Price of the Letters,
and likewise the Covers of Letters not exceeding one fourth part of a sheet of
Paper sent to Marseilles, Venice or Ligorne, to be sent forward to Turkey, shall
be understood to be allowed to pass without Rate or payment for the same; and
according to the same Rates and proportions for the port of Letters, Packquets
and parcels to or from any of the parts or places beyond the Seas, where Posts
have not been heretofore settled, and may hereafter be settled by the said
Postmaster General for the time being, his Executors or Assigns: And it shall
and may be lawful to and for such Postmaster General, and his Deputy and
Deputies, to ask, demand, take and receive of every person that he or they
shall furnish and provide with Horses, Furniture and Guide to ride, ost in any
of the Post-roardes as aforesaid, Three pence of English money for each Horses
Hire or Postage for every English Mile, and Four pence for the Guide for every
Stage. And whereas upon the arrival of Ships from parts beyond the Seas into
several Ports within his Majesty's Dominions, many Letters directed to several
Merchants and others, have been detained long to the great damage of the
Merchants, in want of that speedy advice and intelligence which they might have
had if the same had been forthwith dispatched by the s^^^d posts, and sometimes
such Letters have been delivered by the Masters or Passengers of s^^h Ships to
ignorant and loose hands, that understand not the way and means of speedy
conveyance and delivery of Letters, whereby great prejudice has accrued to the
affairs of Merchants and others, as well by the miscarryage of many Letters so
brought, as oftentimes by the opening of the same to the discovery of the
correspondencies and secrets of the Merchant.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Letters and
Pacquets that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company, or
any Passengers therein shall or may be brought to any Port-Town within his
Majesty's Dominions, or any of the Members thereof, other then such Letters as
are before excepted, or may be sent by common known Carriers in manner
aforesaid, or by a friend as aforesaid; shall by such Master, Passenger, or
other person be forthwith delivered unto the Deputy or Deputies only of the
said Postmaster General for the time being by him appointed for the said
Port-Town, and by him or them to be sent Post unto the said General Post Office
to be delivered according to the several and respective directions of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the aforesaid Authority, That no person or
persons whatsoever, or Body politic or Corporate other then such Postmaster
General, as shall from time to time be nominated and appointed by his Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, and constituted by Letters Patents under the Great
Seal of England as aforesaid, and his Deputy and Deputies or Affignes, shall
presume to carry, recarry and deliver Letters for Hi^e, other then as before
excepted, or to set up or employ any Foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post, or
Pacquet-Boat whatsoever for the conveyance, carrying, and recarrying of any
Letters or Pacquets by Sea or Land within his Majesty's Dominions, or shall
provide and maintain Horses and Furniture for the horsing of any Thorow-posts,
or persons riding in Post with a Guide and Horn, as usual for hire, upon
pain of forfeiting the sum of Five pounds of English money for every
several offense against the Tenor of this present Act, And also of the
forfeiture of the sum of One Hundred pounds of like English money for every
weeks time that any Offender against this Act shall employ, maintain, and
continue any such Foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post or Pacquet-Boat as
aforesaid: which said several and respective Forfeitures, shall, and may be
sued for, and recovered by Action or Actions of Debt, Plaint, or Information in
any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoigne, Privilege,
protection, or Wager of Law shall be admitted; and the said several and
respective Forfeitures that shall happen from time to time to be recovered,
shall be and remain the one moiety thereof to his Majesty, and his Heirs and
Successors, and the other moiety thereof to such person or persons, who shall
or will inform against the Offender or Offenders against this present Act, and
shall or will sue for the said Forfeitures upon the same.

Provided always, That if any Postmaster of any respective place, does not,
or cannot not furnish any person or persons riding in Post with sufficient
Horses within the space of one half hour after demand, That then such person or
persons are hereby understood to be left at liberty to provide themselves, as
conveniently they can; And the persons who shall furnish such horses, shall not
therefore be liable to any Penalties or Forfeitures contained in this Act.

Provided always, That if through default or neglect of the Postmaster
General aforesaid, any person or persons riding in Post shall fail as
aforesaid of being furnished with a sufficient Horse or Horses, for his or
their use, after demand as aforesaid; That in every such case, the said
Postmaster General shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds sterling, the one
moiety to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or
them who shall sue for the same in any Court of Record, to be recovered by
Bill, plaint, or other Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protection or other
Wager in Law shall be admitted.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That nothing herein contained shall be
understood to prohibit the carrying or recarrying of any Letters or pacquets,
to or from any Town or place, to or from the next respective Post-road, or
Stage appointed for that purpose; But that every person shall have free liberty
to send and employ such persons as they shall think fit, for to carry the said
Letters or Pacquets as aforesaid without any forfeiture or penalty therefore,
Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That if the Packet or Maile shall be carried out of England
into any part beyond the Seas in any Ship or Vessel which is not of English
built, and navigated with English Seamen, That in every such case, the said
Postmaster General shall forfeit the sum of One hnndred pounds Sterling; The
one moiety to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to
him or them, who shall sue for the same, in any Court of Record, to be
recovered by Bill, plaint or other Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection,
or other Wager in Law shall be allowed.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall be capable of having, using, or exercising the Office of
Postmaster General, or any other employment relating to the said Office,
unless he or they shall first take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
before any two Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties wherein such
person or persons are or shall be resident, which said Justices are hereby
authorized to administer the said Oaths accordingly.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Letter or
pacquet-post shall twice every week come by the way of Trurow and Penrin to the
Town of Ma^ketiew alias Marhasion in the County of Cornwall; and once a week to
Kendal by the way of Lancaster, and to the town of Penrith in Cumberland by the
way of Newcastle and Carssile; and to the City of Lincoln, and the Borough of
Grimoby in the County of Lincoln, Any thing in this Act contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such
Postmaster General to be from time to time appointed by his Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors as aforesaid, shall continue constant posts for carriage
of Letters to all places, though they lie out of the post-Roads, as has been
used for the space of three years last past, at the rates herein before
mentioned, under pain of forfeiture for every omission Five pounds, to be
recovered by Action, suite, or plaint, in any his Majesty's Courts of Record,
the one moiety to the use of his Majesty, the other moeity to the use of the
Informer. And for the better management of the said Post Office, and that the
people of these Kingdoms may have their intercourse of Commerce and Trade the
better maintained, and their Letters and Advises conveyed, carried and
recarried with the greatest speed, security, and convenience that may be;

Be it further Enacted, That the said Postmaster General so nominated,
appointed and constituted as aforesaid, and his Deputies, shall from time to
time observe and follow such Orders, Rules, Directions and Instructions for and
concerning the settlement of convenient Posts and Stages upon the several Roads
in England, Scotland and Ireland, and other his Majesty's Dominions, and the
providing and keeping of a sufficient Number of Horses at the said several
Stages, as well for the carrying and conveying of the said Letters and
Pacquets, as for the Horsing of all Thorow-Posts and persons Riding in Post by
Warrant or otherwise as aforesaid, as his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors
shall from time to time in that behalf make, and ordain; And that his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors may grant the said Office of Postmaster General,
together with the powers and Authorities thereunto belonging, and the several
Rates of Portage above mentioned, and all profits, privileges, fees,
perquisites and Emoluments thereunto belonging, or to belong, either for Life
or Term of Years, not exceeding One and twenty Years, to such person or
persons, and under such Covenants, Conditions and Yearly Rents to his said
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors reserved, as His said Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors shall from time to time think fit for the best advantage and benefit
of the Kingdom.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Athority aforesaid, That no person
shall have power to take, use, or seize any Horses for the service mentioned in
this Act, without the consent of the Owners thereof; Any usage or pretense, or
any thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Inland
letters sent by any Packet-post established by this Act as aforesaid, do and
shall pay the rates and prices before mentioned, at such Stage where they are
last delivered only, unless the party that delivers the Letters desires to pay
elsewhere; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided
always, That all Letters, and other things, may be sent or conveyed to or from
the two Universities in manner as heretofore has been used; Any thing herein
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Anno XII. CAROLI. IJ. Regis.
An Act impowering the Master of the Rolls for the time being, to make Leases
for years, in order to new Build the old Houses belonging to the Rolls.
WHereas the Mansion House, Ground, and Tenements, with the Appurtenances
belonging to the Master of the Rolls, as Master of the Rolls, are much out of
Repair, and not capable of Improvement, in regard the former Masters of the
Rolls were not enabled to grant such Leases, and for such Terms as might
encourage Tenants to Build and to Repair: Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled; And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master
of the Rolls for the time being, and his Successors, Masters of the Rolls,
shall have good right, full power, and lawful Authority, during the time he or
they shall continue Master of the Rolls, by writing indented, under Hand and
Seal, to Grant and make Leases for one and forty years, or for any lesser term,
to commence from the making of any such Leases, of all and singular the
Premises, or any part thereof, the Chapel of the Rolls with a convenient
Mansion House, Court, Yard, Garden, Stable, Coach-house, and other Our-houses
and Buildings, fit for the use and habitation of the Master of the Rolls,
only excepted; which Lease and Leases, so to be made, shall be good and
effectual in Law to all intents and purposes, as if such Master of the Rolls
for the time being, as shall so make the same, had been seized of the premises
of a good Estate in Fee simple.

Provided, That in Leases where provision is made for new building of Houses or
Tenements, that the yearly Rent of Twenty shillings at the least shall be
reserved upon every Lease of such a quantity of the said Premises, as shall be
set out and Assigned by the Master of the Rolls for the time being for any one
house or Tenement to be built upon; And that in Leases where there is no
provision for new building, the like usual Rent that has been paid or reserved
for the greater part of seven years now last past, or more, shall be yearly
reserved.

Provided also, That the Master of the Rolls for the time being, or any
succeeding Master of the Rolls, after the Prenusses have been once Letten,
according to the power given as abovesaid, shall not grant or make any new or
concurrent Lease until within seven years of the expiration of the Lease then
in being, nor for any lesser Rent then was reserved upon the former Lease, nor
for any longer term, then for the term of one and twenty years from the making
of such new Lease.

Jo: Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

1. AN Act for the restoring of Henry Lord Arundel of Warder to the possession
of his estate.

2. An Act for restitution of Thomas Earl of Arundel, Surrey and Norfolk, to
the Dignity and Title of Duke of Norfolk.

3. An Act to restore to Wentworth Earl of Roscomon, of the Kingdom of Ireland,
all the Honors, Castles, Lordships, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in
Ireland, whereof James Earl of Roscomon his Great-Grand Father, or James Earl
of Roscomon his Father, etc.

4. An Act for restoring of Sir George Hamilton unto his Lands and Estate in
Ireland.

5. An Act for maintenance of the Vicar for the time being of the Vicaridge of
Royston in the Counties of Hertford and Cambridge, and of his Successors,
Vicars of the said Vicaridge.

6. An Act for enabling Sir William Wray to sell Lands for payment of his
debts, and raising of Portions for his younger Children.

7. An Act for naturalizing of Gerrard Vanheuthusen, Daniel Demetrius, and
others.

8. An Act for enabling of John Newton the younger, and William Oakeley, to
make sale of Lands for payment of debts, and raising of Portions, etc.

9. An Act for the levying of certain moneys due upon the collection for the
Protestants of Piedmont.

10. An Act for the Naturalization of John Boreell Esquire; Eldest Son of Sir
William Borreell Knight and Baronet.

11. An Act for the Naturalization of Abraham Watchtor born beyond the Seas.

12. An Act for restoring of Sir Thomas Crimes Baronet, to his Estate.

13. An Act for enabling George Fawnt of Foston in the County of Leicester Esquire;
to sell and conveigh part of his Lands, for payment of several Debts and
Legacies charged upon his Estate by Sir William Fawnt Knight deceased, and for
the raising of Portions for his younger children, and making his Wife a
Jointure.

14. An Act for Naturalizing Francis Hide, and others.

15. An Act to enable Joseph Micklethwaite an Infant, and his Trustees, to sell
Lands for payment of his Fathers Debts.

16. An Act for raising portions, and making provision for maintenance for the
younger children of Sir Edward Gostwicke.

17. An Act for confirming the Sale of the Manor of Hitcham, sold to Charles
Do, by Sir John Clarke Knight and Baronet, and for settling and disposing other
the Lands of the said Sir John Clarke and Dame Philadelphia his Wife.

18. An Act for the settling of some of the Manors and Lands of the Earl of
Cleaveland in Trustees, to be sold for the satisfying of the Debts of the said
Earl, and of Thomas Lord Wentworth his Son.

19. An Act for the disappropriating of the Rectory appropriate of Preston, and
uniting and consolidating of the said Rectory, and of the Vicaridge of the
Church of Preston; and for assuring of the Advowson, and right of Patronage of
the same unto the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of Emanuel College in
Cambridge, and their Successors.

20. An Act for making the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING' s most Excellent MAJESTY.
1660.

At the KING'S Printing House in Black-Fryars.


