Anno Regni. CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
TRICESIMO SECUNDO.

At the Parliament Summoned to beign at Westminster on the Seventeenth day of
October, 1679. in the One and thirtieth year of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the
Second by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and by several Prorogations continued to the 21st
day of October, 1680. in the 32d year of His said Majesty's Reign.

And thence continued to the 10th of January next ensuing, on which day the
following Acts passed the Royal Assent.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON. Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.

Cum Privilegio.

Anno XXXII Caroli II. Regis.
An Additional Act for Burying in Woollen.
WHereas in one Act of Parliament Passed in the Thirtieth year of His Majesty's
Reign that now is, Entitled, An Act for Burying in Woollen, it was amongst
other things, Enacted and Ordained, That the Affidavits which were to be made
of any persons being Interred in Woollen according to the directions in the
faid Act, should be made or taken before some one Justice of the Peace or
Master of Chancery, Ordinary or Extraordinary, Mayor, Bailiff, or other Chief
Officer of the City, County, Borough, Corporation or Market Town in the County
where the said Party was Buried, who are thereby Authorized and Required to
Administer the said Oath, and to Attest the same under their hands upon such
Affidavit gratis:

And whereas by reason of the distance of the Habitations of the persons before
whom such Affidavit is to be made, and other accidents, diverse persons who have
had occasion to make such Affidavits, have been necessitated to travel many
miles for the making thereof, to their great loss of time, and hindrance of
their other affairs:

Be it therefore Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That from and after the Second day of February, in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and eighty, (where no Justice of the
Peace shall reside, or be to be found in any Parish where any Party shall be
Interred) the said Oaths or Affidavits may be Administered, not only by any
Justice of the Peace, or Master of Chancery, Ordinary or Extraordinary, Mayor,
Bailiff, or other Chief Officer of the City, County, Borough, Corporation, or
Market Town, in the County where any Party was Buried; but also that the
Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, in every Parish or Chapel of Ease, within the
County where any Party shall be Interred, (except ouery the Parson, Vicar, and
Curate of the Parish or Chapel of Ease where the Party is Interred, concerning
whose Interment in Woollen such Affidavit is to be made) be, and are hereby
Authorized and Required to Administer the said Oaths or Affidavits, and to
attest the same under their hands gratis; And that every such Affidavit taken
before them; shall be of like force and effect, as if the same had been taken
and Administered by the Persons Authorized to Administer the same by the Act
aforesaid.

Anno XXXII. Caroli II. Regis.
An Act Prohibiting the Importation of Cattle from Ireland.
WHereas as Act of Parliament was made in the Eighteenth year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, Entitled, An Act against Importing
Cattle from Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, and Fish taken by
Foreigners; which was to continue until the end of Seven years, and from thence
to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, which is now expired:

And forasmuch as by long experience the said Law has been found to be very
beneficial to this Kingdom, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the said Act, and every Clause, Article, and Thing therein contained,
together with the Additions and Alterations herein after mentioned and
expressed, shall from and after the Second day of February, which shall be in
the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred and eighty, be revived,
continue, and remain, and is hereby revived and continued in force, to all
intents, constructions, and purposes for ever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That not only the
Constables, Off^cers, and Inhabitants mentioned in the aforesaid recited Act,
but any and every other person and persons whatsoever, shall, and may take and
Seize, in any place or places whatsoever, the Cattle and Goods Imported
contrary to the said recited Act; and that all and every such person and
persons that shall Seize as aforesaid, shall from time to time have the benefit
and advantage hereafter g^ven by this Act to any Seizor or Seizors whatsoever.

And to prevent all fraudulent Seizures, Sales and Composit ous, to be made by
any person or persons whatsoever, in any Parish or Place whatsoever, where any
great Cattle, Sheep, or Swine shall be Imported or found contrary to this, or
the Act aforesaid, and to make the Prohibitions therein more effectual;

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the respective
Seizor or Se^zors of such Cattle, Sheep, or Swine, shall within six days after
conv^ction and forfeiture thereof, cause the said Cattle, Sheep, and Swine to
be killed, and the Hides and Tallow of such great Cattle, Sheep, and Swine,
shall be and remain to the use of the said Seizor or Seizors, and the remainder
of the said great Cattle, Sheep and Swine, shall be forthwith distributed
amongst the Poor of the said Parish, by the Church wardens and Overseers of the
Poor there, or some of them, upon notice thereof to be given them, or any of
them, by such Seizor or Seizors as aforesaid; Any thing in the said former Law,
or any other Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That in case the said Seizor or Seizors, or the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, shall fail in their respective
Duties, in the Execution of this Act, They and every of them respectivly, shall
forfeit the sum of Forty shillings for every one of the great Cattle, and Ten
shillings for every sheep or Swine, which should have been Rilled and
Distributed as aforesaid, one moiety thereof to the Poor of the said Parish,
and the other moiety to the Informer: The same to be Levied by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the person or persons so offending, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace of the said County
or Place where the said Offense shall be committed, upon confession of the
Party, view of the said Justice, or Oath thereof made before such Justice by
one or more credible Witness or Witnesses, other then the Informer: Which Oath
the said Justice has hereby power to Administer, rendering the Overplus to the
Owners thereof, necessary Charges of Distraining being first deducted. And for
want of such Distress, the said Offender or Offenders to be committed to the
common Goal of the said County or Place, there to remain for the space of Three
months without Bail or Mainprize.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
neither this Act, nor any other Act whatsoever hereafter made, shall either
hinder or be construed to extend to hinder the Importation of Stock Fish or
live Eels into this Kingdom of England, but that it shall and may be lawful to
and for all and every person and persons whatsoever to Import into this Kingdom
of England any Stock Fish or live Eels as aforesaid; Any thing in this Act, or
any other Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And whereas the present Laws do not sufficiently provide against the
Importation of Mutton and Lamb out of Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas
into this Kingdom, but that great quantities thereof are daily Imported and
Sold, to the great loss and prejudice of this Kingdom, Be it therefore Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the said Second day of
February, no Mutton or Lamb shall be Imported into this Kingdom from the
Kingdom of Ireland, or any foreign parts; And all Mutton or Lamb Imported from
Ireland, or beyond the Seas, or that shall be exposed to Sale within this
Kingdom, shall be subject to the like Seizures, and the Importers and Sellers
thereof respectively to the like penalties as are provided or appointed in any
former Law against any Importer or Seller, or Importation of any Beef, Pork or
Bacon, from the Kingdom of Ireland, or any Foreign parts; Any thing in this or
any former Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas the present Laws do not sufficiently provide against the
Importation of Butter and Cheese out of Ireland into this Kingdom, but that
great quantities thereof are daily Imported and Sold, to the great loss and
prejudice of this Kingdom, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That from and after the said Second day of February, no Butter or Cheese shall
be Imported into this Kingdom from the Kingdom of Ireland: And all Butter and
Cheese Imported from Ireland, or that shall be exposed to Sale within this
Kingdom, shall be subject to the like Seizures, and the Importers or Sellers
thereof respectively to the like Penalties as are provided or appointed in any
former Law against any Importer or Seller, or Importation of any Beef, Bacon or
Pork from the Kingdom of Ireland, or any Foreign parts; Any thing in this or
any former Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the more effectual Execution of this and the aforesaid Act, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any great Cattle, Sheep or
Swine shall be once or oftener Seized in pursuance of this or the aforesaid Act,
and afterward either by permission, connivance, negligence or otherwise shall
be removed into and found alive in any Parish or Place within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, other then such
Parish or Place wherein they shall have been respectively Seized, That then the
said Cattle, Sheep and Swine, shall be liable to like Seizure, and the Seizor
and Poor of the Parish or Place have like benefit and advantage, and the
Cattle, Sheep and Swine be forfeited, and the Proof be incumbent upon the
Owner, as if such Cattle had never before been Seized.

And whereas diverse persons on purpose to discourage others from making Seizure
of Irish Cattle, have intermixed some few English or other Cattle in Droves of
Irish Cattle, and so created many vexatious and chargeable Suits against those
that have Seized Irish Cattle in pursuance of the aforesaid Act, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any English or other Cattle driven
or intermixed with Irish Cattle shall be Seized together with them, such Cattle
so intermixed and Seized, shall be deemed Irish Cattle, and shall be subject to
like forfeiture, and be ordered and disposed of in all respects as if they were
Irish Cattle, and Imported contrary to this and the aforesaid Act.

Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed to extend to the
Forfeiture or Seizing any Cattle that are or shall be in England before the
said Second day of February.

ACTS Passed on the Tenth day of January, 1680/1. in the Two and thirtieth year
of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord, CHARLES the Second.
Public Acts.
1. AN Additional Act for Burying in Woollen. p. 3. 2. An Act Prohibiting the
Importation of Cattle from Ireland. p. 6.
Private Act.
AN Act for Rectifying several Errors and Mistakes in the Marriage-settlement
of Sir Charles Hoghton Baronet.

FINIS.

