Anno Regni CAROLI II REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, VICESIMO
SECUNDO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661.
In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

And there continued by several Prorogations to the 14th day of February
1669/70. From whence it is continued by Adjournment made the 11th of April
1670. to the 24th day of October following.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1670.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Anno XXII. Caroli II Regis.
An Act to prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles.
FOr Providing further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and
dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, who
under Pretense of tender Consciences, have or may at their Meetings Contrive
Insurrections (as late Experience has shown) Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That if any Person of the age of Sixteen years or
upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the Tenth day of May
next, shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under Color or
Pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner then according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwiick upon Tweed, at which
Conventicle, Meeting, or Assembly, there shall be five persons or more,
assembled together, over and besides those of the same Household; if it be in a
House where there is a Family Inhabiting, or if it be in a House, Field* or
Place where there is no Family Inhabiting, Then where any Five Persons or more,
are so Assembled as aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for any one or
more Justices of the Peace of the County, Limit, Division, Corporation or
Liberty, wherein the Offense aforesaid shall be committed, or for the Chief
Magistrate of the Place where such Offense aforesaid shall be committed, And he
and they are hereby Required and Enjoined upon Proof to him or them
respectively made of such Offense, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath
of Two Witnesses (which Oath the said Justice and Justices of the Peace, and
Chief Magistrate respectively, are hereby Empowered and Required to Administer)
or by notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record of
every such Offense under his or their Hands and Seals respectively: which
Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be in Law taken
and adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for
such Offense; and thereupon the said Justice, Justices and chief Magistrate
respectively, shall impose on every such Offender so convict as aforesaid, a
Fine of Five shillings for such first offense, which Record and Conviction
shall be certified by the said Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate at the
next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, for the County or place where the Offense
was committed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender so
Convicted, as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offense or
Offenses, contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid convicted;
Then such Offender so convict of such like offense or offenses, shall for every
such Offense incur the Penalty of Ten shillings, which Fine and Fines, for the
first and every other Offense shall be levied by Distress and sale of the
offenders Goods and Chattels; or in case of the poverty of such Offender, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any other person or persons, who shall be then
convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offense at the same Conventicle, at
the discretion of the said Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate respectively,
so as the Sum to be levied on any one person in case of the poverty of other
Offenders amount not in the whole to above the Sum of Ten pounds, upon occasion
of any one meeting as aforesaid. And every Constrable, Head-borough,
Tything-man, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor respectively, are hereby
Authorized and required to levy the same accordingly, having first received a
Warrant under the hands and seals of the said Justice, Justices or chief
Magistrate respectively so to do; the said moneys so to be levied, to be
forthwith delivered to the same Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate, and by
him or them to be distributed; The one third part thereof to the use of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to be paid to the High Sheriff, of the
County for the time being in manner following, that is to say, the Justice or
Justices of Peace shall pay the same into the Court of the respective Quarter
Sessions, which said Court shall deliver the same to the Sheriff, and make a
Memorial on Record of the payment and delivery thereof, which said Memorial
shall be a sufficient and final Discharge to the said Justice and Justices, and
a Charge to the Sheriff, which said Discharge and Charge, shall be certified
into the Exchequer together, and not one without the other: And no Justice
shall or may be questioned or accountable for the same in the Exchequer or
elsewhere, then in Quarter Sessions; And other third part thereof to and for
the use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be committed; And
the other third part thereof to the Informer and Informers, and to such person
and persons as the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively
shall appoint, having regard to their diligence and industry in the discovery,
dispersing, and punishing of the said Conventicles.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such Meeting, Assembly, or
Conventicle, and shall thereof be Convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for
every such first Offense, the Sum of Twenty pounds, to be Levied in manner
aforesaid, upon his Goods and Chattels; and if the said Preacher or Teacher so
Convicted, be a Stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled,
and cannot be found, or in the Judgment of the Justice, Justices or chief
Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted, shall be thought unable to pay
the same, the said Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively, are
hereby Empowered and Required to levy the same by Warrant, as aforesaid, upon
the Goods and Chattels of any such persons who shall be present at the same
Conventicle; Any thing in this or any other Act, Law or Statute to the contrary
not withstanding. And the Money so levied, to be disposed of in manner
aforesaid: and if such Offender so Convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time
again commit the like Offense or Offenses contrary to this Act, and be thereof
Convicted in manner aforesaid, then such Offender so Convicted of such like
Offense or Offenses, shall for every such Offense, incur the Penalty of
Forty pounds, to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, Meeting* or unlawsul
Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn, Yard, or
Backside, and be Convicted thereof in manner aforesaid, shall forfeit the Sum
of Twenty pounds, to be levied in manner aforesaid, upon his or her Goods and
Chattels; or in case of his or her poverty or inability, as aforesaid, upon the
Goods and Chattels of such persons who shall be Convicted in manner aforesaid,
of being present at the same Conventicle; and the Money so levied, to be
disposed of in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
shall by any Clause of this Act, be liable to pay above Ten pounds for any one
Meeting* in regard of the poverty of any other person or persons.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted, That in all Cases of this Act, where
the Penalty or Sum charged upon any Offender, exceeds the Sum of Ten shillings,
and such Offender shall find himself agrieved, it shall and may be lawful for
him within one Week, after the said Penalty or Money charged, shall be paid or
levied, to Appeal in writing from the person or persons Convicting, to the
Judgment of the Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter Sessions; to whom
the Justice or Justices of Peace, Chief Magistrate, or Alderman, that first
convicted such Offender, shall return the Money levied upon the Appellant, and
shall certify under his and their Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the
Conviction past, with the whole Record thereof, and the said Appeal: Whereupon
such offender may Plead and make Defense, and have his Trial by a Jury
thereupon: And in case such Appellant shall not Prosecute with effect, or if
upon such Trial he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass not for him upon
his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions, shall give treble Costs
against such Offender for his unjust Appeal: And no other Court whatsoever
shall intermeddle with any Cause or Causes of Appeal upon this Act, but they
shall be finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That upon the delivery of such
Appeal, as aforesaid, the person or persons Appellant shall enter before the
person or persons convicting into a Recognizance, to prosecute the said Appeal
with effect: Which said Recognizance, the person or persons Convicting, is
hereby Empowered to take, and required to certify the same to the next
Quarter Sessions: And in case no such Recognizance be entered into, the said
Appeal to be null and void.

Provided always, That every such Appeal shall be left with the person or
persons so convicting as aforesaid, at the time of the making thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justice,
Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, or the respective
Constables, Head-boroughs, and Tything-men, by Warrant from the said Justice,
Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may with what aid, force
and assistance they shall think fit, for the better execution of this Act,
after refusal or denial, to enter, break open, and enter into any house or
other place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle, as aforesaid,
is or shall be held, as well within Liberties as without; and take into their
Custody the persons there unlawfully assembled, to the intent they may be
proceeded against according to this Act: And that the Lieutenants, or
Deputy Lieutenants, or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of
His Majesty's Forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot; And also
the Sheriffs and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them
jointly or severally, within any the Counties or places within this Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other
assistance as they shall think meet, or can get in readiness with the soonest,
on Certificate made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one
Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, of his particular Information or
Knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their
respective Counties or places; And that he with such Assistance as he can get
together, is not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may, and are
hereby required and enjoined to repair unto the place where they are so held,
or to be held, and by the best means they can to dissolve, dissipate, or
prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custody such and so
many of the said persons so unlawfully assembled, as they shall think fit, to
the intent they may be proceeded against according to this Act.

Provided always, That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, where he or
his Wife shall be then resident, shall be searched by virtue of this Act, but
by immediate Warrant from His Majesty, under His Sign Manual; or in the
presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant, or two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Constable,
Head-borough, Tything-man, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor, who shall
know, or be credibly informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles held within
his Precincts, Parish or Limits, and shall not give Information thereof to some
Justice of the Peace, or the Chief Magistrate, and endeavor the Conviction of
the Parties, according to his Duty; but such Constable, Headborough,
Tythingman, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor, or any person lawfully called
in aid of the Constable Headborough, or Tythingman, shall wilfully and
wittingly omit the performance of his Duty, in the Execution of this Act, and
be thereof Convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every such
Offense, the sum of five pounds, to be levied upon his goods and Chattels, and
disposed in manner aforesaid: And that if any Justice of the Peace, or chief
Magistrate, shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his Duty in
the Execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of One hundred pounds, the
one Moity to the use of His Majesty, the other Moity to the use of the
Informer, to be recovered by Action, Suit, Bill or Plaint, in any of His
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall lie.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person be at
any time Sued for putting in Execution any of the Powers contained in this Act,
otherwise then upon Appeal allowed by this Act, such person shall and may plead
the General Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence; and if the
Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the Defendant, or if the Plaintiff
discontinue his Action, or if upon Demurrer, Judgment be given for the
Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his full treble Costs.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, and all
Clauses therein contained, shall be construed most largely and beneficially for
the Suppressing of Conventicles, and for the Justification and Encouragement of
all persons to be employed in the Execution thereof; And that no Record,
Warrant, or Mittimus to be made by virtue of this Act, or any proceedings
thereupon, shall be Reversed, Avoided, or any way Impeached by reason of any
Default in form. And in case any person offending against this Act, shall be an
Inhabitant in any other County or Corporation, or fly into any other County or
Corporation, after the Offense committed, the Justice of the Peace, or chief
Magistrate, before whom he shall be Convicted as aforesaid, shall Certify the
same under his Hand and Seal, to any Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate of
such other County or Corporation wherein the said person or persons are
Inhabitants, or are fled into; which said Justice or chief Magistrate
respectively, is hereby Authorized and Required to levy the Penalty or
Penalties in this Act mentioned, upon the Goods and Chattels of such person or
persons, as fully as the said other Justice of Peace might have done, in case
he or they had been Inhabitants in the place where the Offense was committed.

Provided also, That no person shall be punished for any Offense against this
Act, unless such Offender be Prosecuted for the same within Three months after
the Offense committed. And that no person who shall be punished for any Offense
by virtue of this Act, shall be punished for the same Offense by virtue of any
other Act or Law whatsoever.

Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Alderman of London for the time being, within the City of London, and the
Liberties thereof shall have (and they and every of them are hereby Empowered
and Required to Execute) the same power and Authority within London, and the
Liberties thereof, for the Examining, Convicting, and Punishing of all Offenses
within this Act committed within London, and the Liberties thereof, which any
Justice of Peace has by this Act in any County of England, and shall be
subject to the same Penalties and Punishments, for not doing that which by this
Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace in any County of England.

Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the person
Offending, and Convicted as aforesaid, be a Feme-Covert, cohabiting with her
Husband, the Penalties of Five shillings, and Ten shillings, so as aforesaid
incurred, shall be levied by Warant, as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels
of the Husband of such Feme-Covert.

Provided also, That no Peer of this Realm shall be Attached or Imprisoned by
virtue or force of this Act; Any thing, Matter or Clause therein to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to invalidate or avoid His Majesty's Supremacy in Eeclesiastical
Affairs; But that His Majesty, and His Heirs and Successors may from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, Exercise and Enjoy all Powers and Authorities
in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as fully and as amply as himself or any of his
Predetessors have or might have done the same: Any thing in this Act
notwithstanding.


