An Additionall ACT FOR Sequestrations.

Tuesday, February 7. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.

seal of the Commonwealth
An Additionall ACT FOR Sequestrations.
Whereas by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
Sequestrations, Samuel Moyer and others therein particularly named, are
Constituted and appointed Commissioners for Sequestrations, and they or any
four or more of them are thereby Authorized and required to nominate and
appoint such persons as they shall think fit, to seize and secure all the
Estates real and personal of (or which any person or persons stands entrusted
with for) Randall Egerton, Robert Werden, Sir George Booth, and Sir Thomas
Middleton, or any of them, or of or for any other person or persons, who, since
the several and respective times mentioned in the said Act, have committed any
of the several and respective Crimes or Delinquencies therein particularly
specified or described, As in and by the said Act, relation thereunto being
had, more at large amongst other things it does and may appear: Now Be it
further Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That
the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them, shall have, exercise and
put in Execution all such several and respective Powers, Authorities, and
Instructions whatsoever, in, for, or any way concerning the Discovering of, and
proceeding against, all such Persons or new Delinquents, and of all such their
Estates, or in, for, or any other way concerning any other matter or thing
whatsoever, and in any Case or Cases whatsoever touching or any way relating
unto any of the said Persons or new Delinquents, or the Sequestration of their
Estates, or any such Estate so Sequestered, or any of the Rents, Issues, or
Profits thereof, As the late Commissioners for Compounding with Delinquents,
the Nineteenth of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
fifty three, had or might have exercised or put in execution, in, for, or any
way concerning the discovering of, or proceeding against, old Delinquents or
their Estates; or in, for, or any way concerning any other matter or thing
whatsoever, and in any Case or Cases whatsoever touching or any way relating
unto old Delinquents, or the Sequestration of their Estates, or any such their
Estate so sequestered, or any of the Rents, Issues or Profits thereof, and as
fully and amply to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as the
said late Commissioners for Compounding might have done in the same, or the
like matters, things or Cases respectively: Provided, That this Act or any
thing herein contained, shall not authorize or empower the said Commissioners
for Sequestration, to Compound with any of the said Persons or new Delinquents
for all or any part of their Estates.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such persons as the
said Commissioners for Sequestration, or any four or more of them, have
nominated and appointed, or shall Nominate and appoint, shall be Committees for
Sequestration within such place or places, County and Counties, as the said
Commissioners for Sequestration, or any four or more of them, have thought fit
and appointed, or shall think fit and appoint; And they the said Committees or
any two or more of them, (according to such Instructions and Orders as in
pursuance of this Act, or any other Act or Ordinance of Parliament has been or
shall be given unto them by the said Commissioners for Sequestration, or any
four or more of them) shall have, exercise, and put in execution all such
several and respective Powers and Authorities whatsoever in, for, or any way
concerning the discovering of, and proceeding against the said persons or new
Delinquents, and all such their Estates, or in, for, or any way concerning any
other matter, or thing whatsoever, and in any Case or Cases whatsoever,
touching or any way relating unto any of the said persons or new Delinquents,
or the Sequestration of their Estates, or any such their Estates so sequestered,
or any the Rents, Issues or Profits thereof, as the late Commissioners for
Sequestration the Nineteenth of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand
six hundred fifty three, had; or according to Instructions and Orders in
pursuance of any Act or Ordinance of Parliament given unto them by the said
late Commissioners for Compounding, might have exercised or put in Execution,
in, for, or any way concerning the Discovering of, or proceeding against old
Delinquents or their Estates, or in, for, or any way concerning any other
matter or thing whatsoever, and in any case or cases whatsoever touching or any
way relating unto old Delinquents or the Sequestration of their Estates, or any
such their Estate so sequestered, or any the Rents, Issues or Profits thereof,
and as fully and amply to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever,
as the said late Commissioners for Sequestration, might have done in the same
or the like matters, things, or cases respectively. And the said Committees for
Sequestration, or any two or more of them, shall from time to time further Act,
in and about the Premises, according to such Orders, Instructions and
Directions, as in pursuance of this Act shall be given unto them by the said
Commissioners for Sequestration, or any four or more of them, upon any emergent
occasion whatsoever; and not otherwise. And the said Committees for
Sequestration are hereby empowered and required according to such Instructions
and Directions, as they shall from time to time receive from the said
Commissioners for Sequestration, or any four or more of them, to pay all such
Rents, Revenues, Issues, Profits, and other sums of money as shall be raised
upon the sequestered Estates of the said persons or new Delinquents, unto
Richard Wareing Esquire, and Richard Barton Esquire, who are hereby Constituted
and appointed Treasurers-General for this service, and are hereby empowered and
required to receive all such Rents, Issues, Profits, and other Sums of money,
and to give Acquittances for the same; which Acquittances shall be unto such
Committee or Committees for Sequestration, sufficient Discharges for so much so
paid respectively. But before any such Rents, Revenues, Profits, or other Sums
of money shall be so paid unto the said Treasurers, the same shall be duly
entered with Praise-God Barbone Esquire, who is hereby Nominated and appointed
to be Comptroller or Checque upon the said Treasurers touching all such
Receipts, who is hereby appointed the sum of three hundred pounds by the Year,
for his Salary and pains in the said service, To be paid by the said Treasurers
without further order. And the said Treasurers are hereby empowered to take and
retain in their hands to their own use as a reward for their service, two pence
in the pound for all such Rents, Revenues, Issues, and other sums of Money so
received by them as aforesaid. And for the better carrying on of this service,
the said Commissioners for Sequestration, or any four or more of them, are
hereby empowered and required to nominate and appoint such Persons to be
Council, Register, Solicitor, Examiner, Auditor, and all other Officers; and
to give and allow unto them such Sallaries as they the said Commissioners for
Sequestration, or any four or more of them, shall think fit and reasonable on
that behalf, (the said Sallaries being first approved of by the Committee of
Parliament for Inspection of the Treasury). And also from time to time to issue
their Warrants directed unto the said Treasurers for payment of all such
Sallaries, and for payment of all other incident Charges whatsoever, and also
for repayment of all moneys deposited or unduly received. And the said
Treasurers are hereby Empowered and required to pay the same accordingly, and
such Warrants together with the Acquittances of the persons concerned, shall be
unto them a sufficient discharge in that behalf; And the said Treasurers are
hereby further empowered and required from time to time, to pay into the Receipt
of the Exchequer at Westminster, all the rest and residue of all such Rents,
Issues, Profits, and other sums of money, which shall be so received by them
as aforesaid; and to take such acquittances or other discharges for the same,
as has usually been given in the same or the like case or cases; which
Acquittances or other Discharges shall be sufficient to acquit and discharge
them the said Treasurers on that behalf.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for Sequestration and every of them, before he or they do intermeddle in the
execution of any of the Powers given unto them in and by this Act, or by the
said Act first above mentioned, shall take the Oath herein after expressed,
before the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, or any two of them, who are
hereby Authorized and Required to Administer the same, (That is to say) I A. B.
do swear, That I will, according to my best skill and knowledge, truly and
faithfully Perform and Discharge the Trust Reposed in, and Committed unto me,
in Relation unto two Acts of Parliament; the one Entitled, An Act for
Sequestration. The other Entitled, An Aditional Act for Sequestrations. And
that I will not for Love or Hate, Favor, or Affection, Gift, or Reward, or
hope thereof, or for any other Cause or Motive whatsoever, voluntarily break or
infringe my said Trust, in any matter or thing whatsoever, So help me God.

And the said Treasurers, Comptroller, or Checque, and every Person that shall
be Nominated and Appointed by the said Commissioners for Sequestrations, or any
four or more of them, to be any of such Committee for Sequestration; and every
Person that shall be Employed by or under the said Commissioners for
Sequestration, or by or under the said Committees for Sequestration, as
Council, Register, Solicitor, Cheeque, Examiner, Auditor, or otherwise, are
heredy Required before any such Person Act farther in any thing touching the
Premises, to take the same Oath Mutatis Mutandis, before one or more Justices
of the Peace for such County or Place, where such Person is to Act or be
Employed; which Oath such Justices are hereby Empowered and Required to
Administer accordingly.

And Lastly, Be it Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Commissioners, and every of them Respectively, shall
have and Receive for their pains and care in the Management of this business of
Sequestration the Yearly sum of Three Hundred Pounds, to be paid by the said
Treasurers, unto them the said Commissioners, and every of them Respectively,
by even and Quarterly Payments, the Receipt of which under the Hand of the said
Respective Commissioners, shall for such Respective Commissioners Sallarie, be
from time to time a sufficient Discharge to the said Treasurers: And also that
the said Committees, in the Respective Counties and Places, shall have and
Retain to their own Use, for their Sallary, one shilling six pence in the
Pound, of all such moneys as shall be paid by them unto the said Treasurers,
out of the Profits of the said Sequestered Estates, in the Respective Counties
and Places.

Tuesday, February 7. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament. 1659.


