An Act to transmit into the Chancery and Exchequer certain Orders and
Instructions of Parliament, concerning Tonnage and Poundage of Goods and
Merchandises, with the Book of Rates of the same.
BE it enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That
one Ordinance made the sixteenth day of December, 1647, entitled, An Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the establishing of the
Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, together with the book of Rates from the
twenty sixth of March 1648, until the twenty sixth of March, 1651, the book of
Rates in the same Ordinance mentioned and the Orders and Instructions in the
same specified remaining in the custody of Henry Scobell Esquire Clerk of the
Parliament, together with this present act, shall forthwith be transmitted into
the Chancery, and from thence by Mittimus under the Great Seal of England, to
be sent into the Exchequer, for proceeding thereupon to be according to the
contents and tenor and true intent and meaning of the same, and that the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal shall as well award under the same Seal a Writ
of Certiorari directed to the said Clerk of the Parliament for the certifying
of the same into the Chancery, as also thereupon a Writ of Mittimus under the
same Seal, with the tenors of the same Orders, book of Rates and
Instructions, and this present Act into the Exchequer as aforesaid and the
Certificate and Return of the said Henry Scobell so to be made as aforesaid by
virtue of the said Writ of Certiorari, or by any other Writ or Writs to be to
him out of the Chancery directed, shall be as valid and sufficient in the Law
as if the same had been by John Brown Esquire or by any other Clerk of the
House of Peers. And it is likewise further enacted, That the clause in the
Ordinance of the twenty sixth of December aforesaid, whereby the power of
Compositions for forfeited Goods and Merchandise is restrained to the Kings
Attorney or Solicitor General, as of the Quorum shall be enlarged and given to
the Barons of the Exchequer, the Attorney General, and Solicitor General for
the time being or to any two of them, the same former Ordinance notwithstanding.

per Henry Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

