ANNO REGNI CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Decimo
Tertio. At the Parliament holden at Westminster the 8th. of May, Anno Dom.
1661. In the Thirteenth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. An Act for the Establishing Articles and Orders for
the regulating and better government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of War,
and Forces by Sea.

LONDON, Printed for B. Griffin, by order of the Principal Officers and
Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, 1690

ANNO XIII. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for the Establishing Articles and Orders
for the Regulating and better Government of His Majesty's Navies, Ships of War,
and Forces by Sea.
FOr the Regulating and better Government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of
War, and Forces by Sea, wherein under the good Providence and Protection of
God, the Wealth, Safety, and Strength of this Kingdom is so much concerned. Be
it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and Consent of
the Lords and Commons in this peresent Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority thereof, That all and every the Articles and Orders in this Act
mentioned, shall be duly and respectively put in Execution, observed, and
obeyed in manner hereafter mentioned.

THat all Commanders, Captains, and other Officers at Sea, shall cause the
Public Worship of Almighty GOD, according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, established by Law, to be solemnly, orderly, and reverently performed
in their respective Ships: And that Prayers and Preachings by the respective
Chaplains, in holy Orders, of the respective Ships, be performed diligently;
and that the Lords day be observed according to Law.

II. Every person and persons in His Majesty's pay, using unlawful and rash
Oaths, Cursings, Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other scandalous
Actions, in derogation of GODS honor; and corruption of good manners, shall be
punished by Fine, Imprisonment, or otherwise, as the Court Martial shall think
fit.

III. If any Officer, Mariner, Soldier, or other person in the Fleet, shall
give, hold, or entertain Intelligence, to or with any King, Prince, or State;
being enemy to, or any persons in Rebellion against His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, without direction or leave from the Kings Majesty, the Lord
High-Admiral, Vice Admiral, or Commander in chief of any Squadron, every such
person or persons so offending, shall be punished with death.

IV. If any Letter or Message, from any King, Foreign Prince, State, or
Potentate, being an enemy to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or on
their behalf, be conveyed to any inferior Officer, Mariner, or Sou^^^^^, or
other in the Fleet, and the said Officer, Mari^^^ ^ouldier, or other,
aforesaid, do not within twelve (...), having opportunity so to do) acquaint
the Superior C^^mander with it; or if a Superior Officer, or Mariner, being
acquainted therewith by an Inferior Officer, Mariner, or other, or himself in
his own person, receiving a Letter or Message from any such Enemy or Rebel, and
shall not in convenient time reveal the same to the Admiral, Vice Admiral, or
the Commander of the Squadron, every such person shall be punished with death,
or such other punishment as the Court Martial shall think fit.

V. No person or persons of the Fleet shall relieve an Enemy or Rebel, in time
of War, with Money, Victuals, Powder, Shot, Arms, Ammunition, or any other
Supplies whatsoever, directly or indirectly, upon pain of death, or such other
punishment, as the Court Martial shall thing fit to impose.

VI. All the Papers, Charter-parties, Bills of Lading, pasports, and other
Writings whatsoever, that shall be taken, seized, or found aboard any Ship or
Ships, which shall be surprised or seized as Prize, shall be duly preserved,
and not torn, nor made away, but the very Originals sent up entirely, and
without fraud, to the Court of Admiralty, or such other Commissioners as shall
be appointed for that purpose; there to be viewed, made use of, and proceeded
upon according to Law, upon pain of loss of all the shares of the Takers, and
such further punishment to be inflicted upon the Offenders therein, as the
quality of their offense and misdemeanor shall be found to deserve, and the
Court Martial shall impose.

VII. None in his Majesty's pay shall take out of any prize, or Ship, or Goods
seized on for Prize, any Money, Plate, Goods, Lading, or Tackle, before Judgment
thereof first past in the ^dmiralty Court; but the full and entire account of
the whol^ without imbezlement, shall be brought in, and Judgme^^ ^ast entirely
upon the whole, without fraud, upon pain of such punishment as shall be imposed
by a Court Martial, or the Court of Admiralty; excepting, That it shall be
lawful for all Captains, Seamen, Soldiers, and others, serving as aforesaid,
to take, and to have to themselves, as Pillage, without further or other
account to be given for the same, all such Goods and Merchandises (other than
Arms, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture, or Stores of such Ship) as shall be found
by them, or any of them, in any Ship (they shall take in fight or prize) upon
or above the Gun-deck of the said Ship, and not otherwise.

VIII. None shall imbezle, steal, or take away any Cables, Anchors, Sails, or
any of the Ships Furniture, or any of the Powder, or Arms, or Ammunition of the
Ship, upon pain of death, or other punishment, as the quality of the offense
shall be found by a Court Martial to deserve.

IX. If any Foreign Ship or Vessel shall be taken as prize, that shall not
fight or make resistance, that in that case, none of the Captains, Masters, or
Mariners, being Foreigners, shall be stripped of their Clothes, or in any sort
pillaged, beaten, or evil entreated, upon pain, That the person or persons so
offending, shall forfeit double damages; but the said Foreign Ships, and all
the Goods so taken, shall be preserved entire to receive Judgment in the
Admiralty Court, according to right and Justice.

X. Every Captain or Commander, who upon signal, or, order of fight, or view,
or sight of any Ships of the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebel, or likelihood of
Engagement, shall not put all things in his ship in a fit posture for fight,
and shall not in his own person, and according to his place, hearten and
encourage the inferior Officers and common men to fight courageously, and not
to behave themselves faintly, shall be cashiered; And if he or they shall yield
to the Enemy, Pirate or Rebels, or cry for quarter, he or they so doing shall
suffer the pains of death, or such other punishment, as the offense shall
deserve.

XI. Every Captain, Commander, and other Office, Seamen, or Soldier of any
Ship, Frigate, or Vessel of War, shall duly observe the Commands of the Admiral,
or other his Superior or Commander of any Squadron, as well for the Assailing
or setting upon any Fleet, Squadron, or Ships of the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels,
or joining Battle with them, or making defense against them, as all other the
Commands of the Admiral, or others his Superior Commander upon pain to suffer
death or other punishment, as the quality of his neglect or offense shall
deserve.

XII. Every Captain, and all other Officers, Mariners, and Soldiers of every
Ship, Frigate, or Vessel of War, that shall in time of any fight or engagement,
withdraw, or keep back, or not come into the fight and engage, and do his
utmost, to take, fire, kill, and endamage the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels; and
assist, and relieve all and every of His Majesty's Ships; shall for such
offense of cowardice or disaffection be tried and suffer pains of death, or
other punishment, as the circumstance of the offense shall deserve, and the
Court Martial shall judge fit.

XIII. The Captains, Officers, and Seamen of all Ships appointed for Convoy and
Guard of Merchants Ships, or any other, shall diligently attend upon that
Charge without delay, according to their Instructions in that behalf; and
whosoever shall be faulty therein, and shall not faithfully perform the same,
and defend the Ships and Goods in their Convoy without either diverting to
other parts or occasions, or refusing or neglecting to fight in their defense,
if they be set upon or assailed, or running away cowardly, and submitting those
in their Convoy to hazard and peril; or shall demand and exact any Money, or
other Reward from any Merchant and Master, for conveying of any such Ships or
other Vessels belonging to His Majesty's Subjects, shall be condemned to make
reparation of the damage to the Merchants, Owners, and others, as the Court of
the Admiralty shall adjudge; and also be punished criminally, according to the
quality of their offenses, be it by pains of death or other punishment,
according as shall be judged fit by the Court Martial.

XIV. Whatsoever person or persons, in, or belonging to the Fleet, either
through cowardice, negligence, or disaffection, shall forbear to pursue the
chase of any Enemy, or Pirate, or Rebel beaten, or flying, or shall not relieve
or assist a known friend in view, to the utmost of his power shall be punished
with death or otherwise, as a Court Martial shall find fit.

XV. When at any time, Service or Action shall be commanded, no man shall
presume to stop, or put backward, or discourage the said Service and Action, by
pretense of Arrears of Wages, or upon any pretense of Wages whatsoever, upon
pain of death.

XVI. All Sea-Captains, Officers, and Seamen, that shall betray their Trust, or
turn to the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels, and either run away with their Ship, or
any Ordnance, Ammunition, or Provision, to the weakening of the Service, or
yield the same up to the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels, shall be punished with death.

XVII. All Sea-Captains, Officers, or Mariners, that shall desert the Service
or their Employment in the Ships, or shall run away, or entice any others so to
do, shall be punished with death.

XVIII. All persons whatsoever that shall come, or be found in the nature of
Spies, to bring any seducing Letters or Messages from any Enemy or Rebel, or
shall attempt or endeavor to corrupt any Captain, Officer, Mariner, or other
of the Navy or Fleet, to betray his or their Trust, and yield up any Ship, or
Ammunition, or turn to the Enemy or Rebel, shall be punished with death.

XIX. No person in or belonging to the Fleet, shall utter words of Sedition or
Mutiny, nor make, or endeavor to make any Mutinous Assemblies upon any
pretense whatsoever upon pain of death.

XX. No person in or belonging to the Fleet, shall conceal any Traitorous or
Mutinous Practices, designs, or words, or any words spoken by any to the
prejudice of His Majesty or Government, or any words, practices, or designs,
tending to the hindrance of the Service, but shall forthwith reveal them to his
Superior, that a meet proceeding may be had thereupon, upon pain of such
punishment as a Court Martial shall find to be just.

XXI. None shall presume to quarrel with his Superior Officer, upon pain of
severe punishment, nor to strike any such upon pain of death, or otherwise, as
a Court Martial shall find the matter to deserve.

XXII. If any of the Fleet find Cause or complain of the unwholsomness of his
Victuals, or upon other Just ground, he shall quietly make the same known to
his Superior, or Captain, or Commander in chief, as the occasion may deserve,
that such present remedy may be had as the Matter may require, and the said
Superior or Commander is to cause the same to be presently remedied
accordingly; but no person upon any such or other pretense shall privately
attempt or stir up any disturbance, upon pain of such severe punishment as a
Court Martial shall find meet to inflict.

XXIII. None shall quarrel or fight in the Ship, nor use provoking or
reproachful Speeches tending to make any quarrel or disturbance, upon pain of
imprisonment, and such other punislement as the offense shall deserve, and the
Court Martial shall impose.

XXIV. That there be no wasteful expense of any Powder, Shot, Ammunition, or
other Stores in the Fleet, nor any imbezlement thereof, but that the Stores and
provisions be carefully preserved upon such penalties by Fine, Imprisonment or
otherwise, upon the Offenders, Abetters, Buyers, and Receivers, as shall be by
a Court Martial found just in that behalf.

XXV. That care be taken in the conducting and Steering of the Ships, that
through willfulness, negligence, or other defaults, none of his Majesty's Ships
be stranded or run upon any Rocks or Sands, or split, or hazarded, upon pain
that such as shall be found guilty therein, be punished by Fine, Imprisonment,
or otherwise, as the offense by a Court Martial shall be adjudged to deserve.

XXVI. All persons that shall willing burn or set fire on any Ship, or
Magazine, or Store of Powder, or Ship-Boat, Ketch, Hoy, or Vessel, or Tackle,
or Furniture thereto belonging, not appertaining to the Enemy or Rebel, shall
be punished with death.

XXVII. No man, in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall sleep upon his Watch, or
negligently perform the duty inposed on him, or forsake his station, upon pain
of death, or other punishment as the Circumstances of the Case shall require.

XXVIII. All Murders and willful Killing of any Persons in the Ship, shall be
punished with death.

XXIX. All Robbery and Theft committed by any person, in or belonging to the
Fleet, shall be punished with death, or otherwise, as the Court Martial upon
consideration of the circumstances shall find meet.

XXX. No Provost-Martial belonging to the Fleet, shall refuse to receive or
keep any Prisoner committed to his charge, nor suffer him to escape, being once
in his custody, nor dismiss him without order, upon pain of being liable to the
same punishment, which should have been inflicted upon the party dismissed, or
permitted to escape, or such other punishment as the Court Martial shall think
fit.

XXXI. All Captains, Officers, and Seamen shall do their endeavors to detect,
apprehend, and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers
appointed for that purpose therein, upon pain to be proceeded against, and
punished by the Court Martial at discretion.

XXXII. If any person or persons, in or belonging to the Fleet, shall commit
the unnatural and detestable sin of Buggery, or Sodomy, with Man or Beast, he
shall be punished with death without Mercy.

XXXIII. All other Faults, Misdemeanors, and Disorders committed at Sea, not
mentioned in this Act, shall be punished by the Laws and Customs in such cases
used at Sea.

XXXIV. And it is hereby further Enacted, That the Lord High-Admiral for the
time being, shall by virtue of this Act have full power and authority, to grant
Commissions to Inferior Vice-Admirals, or Commanders in chief of any Squadron
of Ships, to call and assemble Court-Martials, consisting of Commanders and
Captains; and no Court Martial, where the pains of death shall be inflicted,
shall consist of less than five Captains at least, the Admirals Lieutenant to
be as to this purposed esteemed as a Captain; and in no cause wherein Sentence
of Death shall pass by virtue of the Articles aforesaid, or any of them (except
in case of Mutiny) there shall be execution of such Sentence of Death without
the leave of the Lord High-Ad miral; if the offense aforesaid be committed in
any Voyage beyond the Narrow Seas, whereupon Sentence of Death shall be given
in pursuance of the aforesaid Articles, or of any of them, then Execution shall
not bed one but by Order of the Commander in chief of that Fleet or Squadron
wherein Sentence of Death was passed.

XXXV. And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the Judge-Advocate of any
Fleet, for the time being, shall have full power and authority to administer an
Oath to any person or witness in order to the Examination or Trial of any of
the offenses aforesaid; and in the absence of a Judge-Advocate, the
Court Martial shall have full power and authority to appoint any person to
administer an Oath to the purposes aforesaid.

PRovided also, and it be further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this
Act or any thing or things therein contained, shall not in any manner of wise
extend to give unto the Lord Admiral of ENGLAND, for the time being, or to any
his Vice-Admirals, Judge or Judges of the Admiralty, his or their Deputy or
Deputies, or to any other the Officers or Ministers of the Admiralty, or to any
others having or claiming any Admiral Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority within
this Realm and WALES, nor any other the Kings Dominions, any other Power,
Right, Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, or authority, than he or they, or any of
them, lawfully have, has, or had, or ought to have, and enjoy before the
making of this Act, other than for such of the offenses specified in the
several Articles contained in this Act, as hereafter shall be done upon the
main Sea, or in Ships or Vessels being and hovering in the main Stream of great
Rivers, only beneath the Bridges of the same Rivers, nigh to the Sea within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and in none other places whatsoever? and
committed only by such persons as shall be in actual Service and pay in His
Majesty's Fleet, or Ships of War.

FINIS.

