AN ACT For Recovery of Public Debts, AND Other DUTIES belonging to the
Commonwealth.

Thursday, March 15. 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



blazon of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.

blazon of the Commonwealth
AN ACT FOR Recovery of Public Debts, and other Duties belonging to the
Commonwealth.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all
Debts, Duties, Profits, Penalties, Issues, Fines, Amerciaments and Forfeitures
whatsoever, which at any time heretofore did become Due, or were or might have
been sued for in the Name of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; or in
the Name of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; or in the Name
of Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, And all
securities taken in the name of either of them during their respective
Protectorships, shall and may be sued for, prosecuted, and recovered in the
Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament. And
that no mistake in the Title of either the said Persons, or other variance,
shall be in any wise material as to any Default or Error to be alleged or
objected thereunto.

Thursday, March 15. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.


