AN ACT OF INDEMNITY AND Free Pardon.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday, July 12. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by John Field and Henry Hills, Printers to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleet Street, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT OF INDEMNITY AND Free Pardon.
IT having pleased Almighty God, after a violent and illegal Interruption, to
restore the Parliament of this Commonwealth to its former Station, and with it
to revive and reestablish the Government of these Nations in the way of a Free
State, without a King, Single Person, or House of Peers. And whereas, during
the said Interruption, and the various Changes and Alterations which followed,
many things have been Attempted, Done, and Acted, inconsistent with the
Interest of this Commonwealth, and contrary to Law, of which notwithstanding,
the Parliament being desirous, by all good ways and means, and with all
convenient speed, to remove all Iealousies, Doubts, Distrusts, and Fears, which
may remain upon the hearts of many of the people of these Nations, in reference
to such their bypast Actings; and that their Minds, Persons, and Estates, may
be Composed, Quieted, Settled, and Secured; and all Disputes, Questions, and
Troubles thereupon arising, and all displeasure and evil will thereby
occasioned, may be Annulled, Extinguished, and buried in perpetual Oblivion, so
that the Government now again restored, may be cheerfully complied with,

Have Enacted and Ordained, and be it Enacted and Ordained by this Present
Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That all and every person and
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, of or within England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or any of them, or the Dominions and Territories to them or any of
them belonging, or appertaining, who have at any time since the nineteenth of
April, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty three, and before
the first of June, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, Advised, Counseled,
Acted or done, or Commanded, or appointed to be acted or done, or have
consented to, permitted or suffered to be acted and done, any matter or thing
whatsoever, tending to or concerning any change or alteration of the Government
of these Nations, from a Commonwealth or Free State, or tending to the abetting
or countenancing such change or alteration, or in pursuance of such change or
alteration, or by virtue or color of any Authority derived mediately or
immediately of or from any convention or assembly called or reputed a
Parliament; or by virtue or color of any Writ, Commission, Letters Patents,
Instruction or Instructions, of or from any person or persons, Tituled, Reputed
or taken to be Lord Protector or Chief Magistrate of this Commonwealth, or
Commander in Chief of the Forces or Armies of this Commonwealth, or by any
other Pretense, Warrant, Command or Commands whatsoever, from them or any of
them, or their or either of their respective Councils, or any Member of such
Council or Councils, or from any other person or persons whatsoever, Deriving
Authority from them or any of them; That all and every such person and persons,
and all such Counselors, Advisors, Actors and abettors, their Heirs,
Executors, and Administrators of them and every of them, and all Bodies.
Corporate and Politic, and their Successors, for ever shall be and are hereby
fully acquitted, pardoned, released, indempnified, discharged, and saved
harmless, of and from all, and all manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons,
Offenses, Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of them
committed, acted, done, suffered or consented unto, of what nature quality or
kind soever the persons or crimes be, or may be deemed, in reference to the
several changes in Government and actings thereupon, as aforesaid, since the
first day of April, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty
three, and before the first day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty nine,
and of all and all manner of Indictments, Impeachments, Informations, Actions,
Suits, Prosecutions, Judgments, Executions, Molestations and Demands
whatsoever, for or by reason of or concerning the same, be it either for or on
the behalf of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of
Parliament, or the Parliament of this Commonwealth, or by, for, or on the
behalf of any person or persons whatsoever, for or concerning the same.

And also, Be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act and Free
Pardon shall be as good and effectual in the Law, to every the persons
aforesaid, in, for, concerning and against all things before mentioned or
intended, as the same Pardon should have been, if all and every the offenses,
Offenders, Crimes, Causes, Matters, Indictments, Impeachments, Informations,
Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Judgments, Executions, Penalties, and all other
things herein contained, or concerned, had been particularly, specially and
plainly named, rehearsed and specified, and also Acquitted, Pardoned and
discharged, by proper and express words and names in their kinds, natures and
qualities, by words and terms thereunto requisite to have been put in and
expressed in this present Act of Free Pardon.

And furthermore, That the said Pardon by the General Words, Clauses, and
Sentences before rehearsed, shall be Reputed, Deemed, Adjudged, Expounded,
Allowed, and taken in all manner of Courts of Justice, and elsewhere, most
beneficial and available to all and singular the persons before Meant,
Mentioned, or Intended, and to every of them, without any Ambiguity, Question
or Delay whatsoever, to be Made, Pleaded, Objected, or Alleged, by the
Attorney General of the Commonwealth, or by any person or persons, for, or on
the behalf of the said Keepers of the Liberty of England, or on the behalf of
the Parliament, or on the behalf of any other person or persons whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That all Fines, Recoveries, Verdicts,
Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentiments,
Informations, Decrees, Sentences, Probates of Wills, Granting of Letters of
Administration, Writs, Returns of Writs, Orders, Acts, and other Proceedings
relating to the administration of Justice, according to Law or Equity, had,
made, given, taken, or done, or Depending in the Courts of Chancery,
Vpper-Bench, Common Pleas, and Court of Exchequer, by any the Commissioners,
Judges, Sheriffs, Coroners, or Ministers thereof respectively, or by any other
the Judges, Commissioners, or Ministers of any Court of Record, Court of
Admiralty, or Delegates, or other Court of Law or Equity, or by, or upon
Commissions of Assize, and Nisi prius of Oyer and Terminer, Jail-delivery,
Commissions of the Peace, or upon any Commission of Sewers, Bankrupts,
Charitable Uses, or other Commissions relating as aforesaid, and all Process
and Proceedings therein, or thereupon had, made, given, done, or suffered in
England, Scotland, or Ireland, or either of them, or the Dominions and
Territories to them, or either of them belonging or appertaining, since the
Nineteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
fifty three, and before the First day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty
nine, shall not be questioned, or avoided for want of Legal Power in the said
Commissioners, Judges, and Ministers respectively, or by reason of the Change
or Alteration of the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Writs, Process or
Proceedings; or that they have not been in the Name of, or before the Keepers
of the Liberties of England, by authority of Parliament, but that such Fines,
Recoveries, Verdicts, Judgments, Statutes, Commissions, Recognizances,
Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentiments, Informations, Decrees, Sentences,
Probates of Wills, Administrations, Writs, Returns, Process, and Proceedings,
Orders, Acts, and Things as aforesaid, shall be of such, and of none other
Force, Effect, and Virtue, then as if such Commissioners, Judges, and Ministers
respectively, had Acted by virtue of a True, Just, Legal Power and Authority.

Provided always, That this Act shall not extend to confirm or make good any
pretended Title of Honor, Dignity or Knighthood, pretended to be conferred,
given or granted by Writ, Patent or otherwise, to any person or persons within
England, Scotland or Ireland, or the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, since the said nineteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred fifty and three, and before the said seventh day of May,
in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty nine; But that all and
every such pretended Titles of Honor, Dignities and Knighthood, are hereby
declared to be null and void.

Provided also and be it Enacted, That those Persons who were esteemed and
taken to be Commissioners of the public Treasury, by color or pretense of
any Grant of that Office made unto them since the nineteenth of April, in the
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty three, and before the seventh
day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty nine, shall
be and are hereby Indempnified and Pardoned for such Acts as have been done by
them in pursuance or pretense of that Authority for the bringing in and issuing
out of the public Revenue of the Nation.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to make good or confirm the
Grant of any Office or Place of Trust given or granted, or pretended to be
given or granted, by Patent, Charter, or otherwise, since the nineteenth day of
April, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty three, and before
the seventh day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty
nine; But that all such be and are hereby declared to be in the disposal of
this Parliament, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding, other
then such Offices and Places as have been disposed by, or derived from any
person or persons who had Power to dispose thereof by Authority of Parliament,
before the twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred fifty three, although such Places or Offices have been disposed since.

Provided always, That this Act shall not extend nor be construed to extend to
any matter or thing exhibited, or depending in Parliament, since the seventh
day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred fifty nine, and
before the twelfth of July, one thousand six hundred fifty nine, for their
judgment or resolution.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Moneys already
paid for necessary Salaries and Allowances had or made to any person or persons
for the Administration of Justice, or for the bringing in, or issuing out of
the public Revenue, or for the preservation of the Commonwealth, by the
Armies, Navies, or Garrisons, or for Augmentation, Increase of Maintenance, or
Allowance to any Ministers, Lecturers, Schoolmasters, Members of Universities,
or Colleges, or to Ambassadors, or other public Ministers employed into
Foreign parts, or for the carrying on of the Public and necessary Affairs of
the three Nations, shall be and are hereby made good and allowed, and the
persons who received the same, discharged and Indempnified.

And be it further Enacted, that all and every Person and Persons, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, comprised within and intended to be Pardoned, or
Indempnified by this present Act, or which are Pardoned, Indempified, or
intended to be Pardoned or Indempnified by any other Act, Ordinance, or Order
of this present Parliament, shall and may in all Suits, Indictments, or other
prosecution, plead the general Issue, and give this Act, or any other of the
said Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this present Parliament in Evidence; and if
upon any Trial or other Proceedings, it shall appear to the Court, Judge,
Judges or Jury, or other persons before whom such Trial or proceedings shall be
had, that the party or parties claiming Indemnity or Pardon, ought to have
Indemnity or Pardon according to the true intent and meaning of this present
Act, and all or any the aforesaid Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this present
Parliament, then such Judge, Judges, Jury, and other Persons, and every of them
respectively, are hereby Authorized and required to allow the same, and him or
them accordingly Indempnifie and discharge, according to ye true intent and
meaning of the aforesaid Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament, to all
intents and purposes whatsoever, and are hereby Authorized and required to put
in execution all and every the said Powers, in as full and ample manner as any
Committee or Commissioners for Indemnity by Authority of Parliament were
enabled to do, and all persons concerned therein, are hereby required and
enjoined to take notice hereof, and to yield obedience accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in case any Suit is
or was depending in any Court of Law or Equity, the Ninth day of July, in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, or before, for or
concerning any matter, cause, or thing, acted or done by any person or persons
whatsoever, since the third day of November, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred and forty, for the service and advantage of the Parliament
or Commonwealth, and any Trial at Law is already had, or any Judgment or
Execution thereupon obtained against any Person or Persons whatsoever for the
same, that the Judges of the said Court, where any such Suit or Cause is or was
depending, are hereby Enabled, Authorized and Required to examine the same upon
Oath, (which the said Court is hereby Authorized to Administer, to any
witnesses that shall be therein produced on either Party, upon Complaint to
them to be made) and to give relief therein to all and every the persons that
are or have been so sued, and ought to be Indempnified and Relieved, and also
to give such Costs to him or them that shall be so Relieved therein, as to the
said Court shall be thought meet.

Provided always, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall be
Adjudged, Construed, or taken to Discharge or Indempnifie any person or persons
who have Farmed the Excise and New Impost, or Customs, or any part thereof, who
have not paid in the Arrears of Money due to the Commonwealth, for the Rent or
Rents of their respective Farms, or shall not pay in the same at such days and
times, as the Committee for Inspection of the Treasuries shall think fit, or
otherwise that the said Farmers shall have no benefit of this present Act,

Provided always, That no person of the age of sixteen years and upwards, and
being of sane Memory, who shall Claim or Demand benefit of Indemnity or Pardon
by virtue of this Act, be admitted thereunto, until it appear to such person or
persons, before whom such Claim or Demand is made, That the said persons so
Claiming or Demanding, has made and subscribed, or shall then subscribe this
Declaration following; That is to say,

I do Declare, That through the gracious assistance of Almighty God, I will be
true, faithful, and constant to this Commonwealth, without a single Person,
Kingship, or House of Peers.

Tuesday 12 of July, 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.


