AN ACT For the Settling the MILITIA For the City of LONDON, and Liberties
thereof.

Monday, March 12. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

AN ACT For the Settling the MILITIA For the City of LONDON, and Liberties
thereof.
THe Parliament taking into Serious Consideration the present State and
Condition of this Commonwealth, and particularly of the City of London, Do
Enact and Ordain, And be it Enacted and Ordained by Authority of the same, That
Thomas Aleyn Lord Mayor of the City of London, the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of
the said City for the time being, Thomas Atkin, Thomas Foot, John Fowke, Thomas
Viner, Major General Alderman Richard Brown, William Thompson, John Robinson,
Anthony Bateman, John Lawrence, Richard King, William Bolton and William Wale
Aldermen, Col. Lawrence Bromfield, Richard Ford, Major Thomas Chamberlyn,
William Bateman Esquire, William Vincent, John Jolly Esquires, Major John
Tailor, William Antrobus Esquire, Thomas Steane, John Win, Theophilus
Biddulph Esquires, Captain Edward Storey, Deputy Abraham Johnson, John
Saunders, Thomas Bludworth Esquire Maximillian Beard Esquire Major Thomas Cox, Major
William Early, Major John Alsopp, Deputy Thomas Lenthall, Cownel Thomas Gower,
Peter Mills, Master Nicholas Penninge, Captain Edward Cleggat, Sir Thomas
Soame, Jsaac Pennington Esquire Samuel V^ssall Esquire, Major General Philip Skippon,
Henry Ashurst, Christopher Pack, John Dethick, Richard Chiverton, John
Frederick, Tempest Milner, William Love, and Edward Backwell, Aldermen of the
said City, Lawrence Blomley, James Noell, Deputy Richard Cliffe, William
Lluelling, John (...), Richard Rives, Leiutenant Colonel Ja^kson, Thomas
Morris, John Bathurst, John Cock, William Allet, Tobell Aylmer, Deputy Thomas
Myms, and James Medlicot, or any nine or more of them, and no other Person or
^^rsons whatsoever, be and are hereby E^^^^^^ted and Appointed Commissioners
for ^he (...) of the City of London, and Liberties (...) shall have power, and
are hereby (...) to Assemble and Call together all (...) person and Persons,
within the (...) Ci^y of London, and Liberties thereof, that (...) and
Convenient for the Wars, and them to Train, Exercise, and put in Readiness: And
them (both Horse and Foot) after their A^ilties and Faculties, well and
sufficiently from t^me to time to cause to be Arrayed and Weapone^ and to take
the Musters of them in Places m^st fit for that purpose; And to Lead, Conduct,
and Employ the Persons aforesaid, Arrayed and Weaponed, for the Suppression of
all Rebellions, Insurrections, and Invasions, that may happen within the said
City and Liberties thereof, and to fight with, kill and stay such Enemies and
Rebels as they shall find in Arms against this Commonwealth, and to disarm al
known Papists, and dangerous and seditious persons, and all such as shall raise
or endeavor to raise any Tumults or Insurrections, and to put the Arms of all
such persons, into the hands of such well-affected persons as they, or any nine
or more of them shall think fit to serve with the same, under such Officers to
be appointed by the said Commissoners as is hereafter mentioned, or otherwise
to secure the same for the use of the Commonwealth.

And Be it further Enacted, That the said Officers may likewise lead, conduct,
and emp^oy the persons aforesaid, Arrayed and Weaponed, as well within the said
City, as within any other parts of this Commonwealth, for the suppression of
all Rebellions, Insurrections, and Invasions that may happen, according as they
shall from time to time receive Directions from the Parliament, or Council of
State by Authority of Parliament.

Provided, That no Citizen of the City of London, or any of the Forces of the
said City and Liberties thereof, shall be drawn forth, or compelled to go out
of the said City or Liberties thereof, for Military service, without his or
their free Consent. And that the said Commissioners, or any nine or more of
them as aforesaid, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to Constitute,
make and Commissionate Colonels, Captains, and other Officers both of Horse and
Foot; and shall have power to remove and displace Colonels, Captains, and other
Officers from time to time, as they, or any nine or more of them as aforesaid,
see cause and think fit. And for furnishing Drums, Colors, Trophies,
Ammunition, and other Emergencies, the said Commissioners, or any nine or more
of them, shall and have hereby power to lay sitting and reasonable Rates upon
the said City and Liberties thereof, not exceeding in one whole year the
proportion of two Months Assessment upon the said City and Liberties, after
the rate of 35000 l. per Mensem, upon England, charged for maintenance of the
Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth. Which Moneys are to be Assessed,
Collected and paid as the said Commissioners, or any nine or more of them,
shall from time to time direct and appoint, under the penalties, and by the
ways and means prescribed in the Act for the present six Months Assessment,
from the 25th of December last.

And Be it further Enacted, That if any Soldier of the Militia-Forces of the
said City shall at any time hereafter refuse or neglect to appear to his
Colors, upon Summons given by sound of Trumpet, beat of Drum, or otherwise by
Order from the said Commissioners of the Militia, or shall depart from his
Colors without leave of his Captain or other Chief Officer; it shall be lawful
for the said Commissioners, or any nine of them, to Impose a penalty upon every
defaulter as they shall see fit, not exceeding xx s. for a Horseman, and x s.
for a Footman for every offense, to be levied by such person and persons as the
said Commissioners, or any nine or more of them, shall appoint, by distress
and sale of the Goods of such persons making default as aforesaid: The said
penalties to be Employed for carrying on of the said Service.

And, Be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any nine, or more
of them, shall, and may summon all and every Treasurer and Treasurers of any
former Committee, or Commissioners for the Militia, within the City and
Liberties aforesaid, or any other person or persons, who, by virtue of any
Authority of Parliament, or otherwise, are possessed of any sum or sums of Money,
or Arms, in relation to the said Militia; and also the late Officers of the
Militia-Forces of the said City, who received Drums and Trophyes for that
service, and to require them, and every of them, forthwith to pay every such
sum and sums of Money, and deliver such Arms, Drums, and Trophyes, remaining in
their hands as aforesaid, to such person and persons as the said Commissioners,
appointed by this Act, or any nine or more of them, shall appoint to be
employed for carrying on of the said Service. And in Case of non-payment and
delivery of such money, Arms, Drums, and Trophyes, to Levy the same money, or
value of the said Arms, Drums, and Trophyes, by Imprisonment of the person, or
by distress and sale of his goods, rendering the overplus to the party
distrayned.

And also it is Enacted, That no person or persons, other then the persons
aforenamed, do or shall from henceforth Act, or exercise any power or
Authority, as Members of the Militia for the City of London, by force, or
color of any former Order, Ordinance, Act, or Authority of Parliament: and
that all, and every person, and persons, who shall act, or do any act or thing
whatsoever, by virtue of this Act, concerning the said Militia, shall be saved
harmless, and Indempnified for and concerning the same, by Authority of
Parliament.

And lastly, It is hereby Declared and Enacted, That this present Act, or any
thing therein, or thereby Declared or Enacted, shall not in any wise diminish
or prejudice the just and ancient Rights of the City of London, touching the
Militia of the said City.

Provided, That no person shall be charged with Horse and Arms, unless such
person have the yearly Revenue of 500 l. per annum, or have an Estate of 6000
l. in Goods, or Money, or other Estate equivalent thereunto; And so
proportionably as the Commissioners in their Discretions shall think
reasonable. And the said Commissioners are not to charge any person with
finding a Foot-Souldier in Arms, that has not a yearly Revenue of 40 l. or a
personal Estate of 500 l. in goods or money, and after the said rate
proportionably for a greater or lesser Estate. It shall be lawful for the said
Commissioners, or any nine, or more of them, to impose the finding of a Horse
and Arms, as aforesaid, by joining two or three or more persons together in the
Charge, as in their Judgments shall seem most conducible to the public Safety.
And the said Commissioners, or any nine or more of them, are hereby authorized
to hear and examine Complaints upon Oath, which they have hereby power to
administer and redress as they shall see cause.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any nine or more of
them, shall Require and Direct all Persons so charged as aforesaid with Horse
and Arms, to allow two Shillings per diem to the Troopers that Serve with
their Horse and Arms, for maintenance of the Man and Horse, and twelve pence a
day to the Foot Soldiers, for so many days as they shall be absent from their
Dwellings or Callings, by occasion of Muster or Exercise.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons so to be Assessed or
Charged by the said Commissioners, shall refuse or neglect, by the time to be
Appointed by the said Commissioners, to provide and funish such sufficient
Horse or Horses, Arms, and other Furniture, or to pay such Sum or Sums of Money
toward the Providing and Furnishing as aforesaid, That then it shall and may
be Lawful to and for the said Commissioners, or any nine or more of them, to
inflict a penalty upon such Person or Persons, not exceeding twenty pounds; and
also by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to Commit such person or persons
so refusing or neglecting to Prison, there to remain without Bail or
Main-prize till he or they shall Conform thereunto, and pay such penalty so
inflicted as aforesaid: Or else by like Warrant to Levy such Sum or Sums of
Money to the value of such Horse, Arms and Furniture, and such penalty
inflicted, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the person or persons so
neglecting or refusing, rendering the overplus to the Party so Distrained; all
necessary Charges in Levying thereof being first deducted.

Provided also, That if any person or persons shall be Assessed to find Horse
and Arms in the County, City or place where his chief Mansion house is for his
whele Estate, That then upon a Certificate or Certificates that such person or
persons is and are so Assessed for his whole Estate in the said County, City or
place, such person or persons shall be discharged of any Assessment for the
same in any other County, City or place where any other part of his Estate
shall lie.

Provided always, That no person shall be permitted to Ride a Horse, or Carry
Arms in this Service, who has been in Arms against the Parliament, or
voluntarily aiding or assisting therein, and has not since manifested his good
affection to the Parliament.

Provided also, That no person shall be Employed in this Service within this
Commonwealth as a Commission-Officer of the Militia Raised or intended to be
Raised, but such or the Sons of such who have Assisted and Adhered to the
Parliament and their Cause, unless such Sons have showed their Disaffection to
the Parliaments Cause. Provided also, That this Act shall continue for one
year, unless the Parliament take other Order.

Monday, March 12. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.


