AN ACT For taking the Accounts and Redressing of Grievances concerning the
Tithes and Church Livings in Wales; And for Advancement of Religion and
Learning there.

Friday, March 16. 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

AN ACT For taking the Accounts, and Redressing of Grievances concerning the
Tithes and Church Livings in Wales; and for Advancement of Religion and
Learning there.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, That the Council of
State be, and are hereby Empowered by Letters, Commissions, or Instructions
from them Directed, under the Seal of the Council, to Authorize and Appoint
such person and persons as they shall think fit within the respective Counties
of Wales and County of Monmouth, thereby Improwering them, or any three or more
of them, to Take and Receive the Accounts of the Commissioners named in an Act
of the two and twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty nine,
Entitled, An Act for the better Propagation and Preaching of the Gospel in
Wales, and to Take the Accounts of all other person and persons that have been
Entrusted and Employed, or have any ways Intermedled with the Letting,
Setting, Receiving, Collecting, Sequestring or Disposing of all or any
Church Livings with Care of Souls, Donatives, Rectories, Vicaridges,
Impropriations, Rents reserved sine Curis, College Pensions and Portions of
Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Livings, Benefices, Procurations, Promoations,
and public Revenues whatsoever, Sequestered or Sequestrable, or in the
Disposal of the Parliament, or which did or do any ways belong or appertain to
the Commonwealth within the said respective Counties of Wales and County of
Monmouth ever since the two and twentieth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty nine: And to Examine and Certify all Deceipts, Frauds,
Undervaluations, Concealments, Mis-imployments and Breaches of Trust of any
person or persons that have had the Letting, Setting, Collecting, Sequestring,
Receiving or Disposing of the said Church Livings, Rectories, Impropriations,
and other the ^^^mises, or have any ways Intermedled therewith.

And for the better discovery of the truth thereof, the said Commissioners, or
any three of them are hereby Empowered to send for Persons, Papers, Witnesses,
Books and Accounts, and to Examine the Accomptants, and all such Witnenes as
shall be produced before them on Oath which the said Commissioners or any three
of them are hereby Empowered to Administer; and to Use all other Lawful Ways and
Means, and Execute all such further Powers as were heretofore given to any
Committee or Commissioners, for taking the Accounts of the Kingdom, by any
former Acts or Ordinances of Parliament, for the better performance and
discharge of the Service aforesaid. And the said Commissioners or any three of
them are hereby further Authorized and Required to Examine and Certify the
true and real Valuations of the said Rectories, Vicarages, Impropriations,
Tithes, Church Livings, and other the Premises within the said respective
Counties, as the same were Farmed, Estimated, Received, or Accounted, for in
the year One Thousand Six Hundred Forty Nine, and so Communibus annis to this
time. And how many Ministers and Schoolmasters have been at any time since
the year aforesaid Ejected and Amoved: And how many of them are fit to be
restored, what Churches, Vicaradges, Rectories, and Places have since become
void, and for how long time they so remamed by the Death, Ejection, or Removal
of the former Incumbents, Ministers, and Schoolmasters; To whom the
presentation and right of patronage to such vacant Places did and does belong.
How the respective Churches and Parishes have been supplied since the said two
and twentieth day of February, One Thousand Six Hundred Forty Nine; and by
whom, and how, the persons are qualified that supplied the same. And the said
Commissioners, or any Three or more of them, are hereby further Empowered and
Required to Examine and Certify, by whom the said Church Livings, Rectories
and Vicaradges, Impropriations, and other the Premises since the time
aforesaid, have been Sequestered, Farmed, Received, Collected, or Disposed of.
And to what real Value the same did and does amount unto, and how accounted;
And how much thereof does remain in the hands of any Person or Persons within
ye said respective Counties, due and unaccompted for to the Commonwealth; And
to Certify the same with all other their proceedings by Virtue of this Act.
And the Commissions and Instructions aforesaid to the Council of State; and one
other part thereof to the Court of Exchequer at Westminster, with a Schedule of
the Debtors and Accomptants, Sum and Sums of Money due and payable from them
and every of them to the Commonwealth, whereby the same may be proceeded upon
according to the Course of Exchequer, against like Accomptants, to force the
Payment thereof without any further Commission, Inquiry, or ^^^^^^sition
thereupon to be had, which they are hereby enabled to do; Any former Act or
Or^^nance concerning the same to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And the Council of State from time to time are hereby enabled to give further
Instructions and Directions for the carrying on of the service aforesaid, and
to give such allowances to the persons by them to be employed therein as they
shall think fit.

And the Council of State are hereby further empowered and required, That in all
Cases where the Presentation does or shall belong to the State either of mere
right or by lapse, That they shall take speedy care for the supply of them.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared; That all Grants or Leases of any Glebes
or Titles belonging to any Parsonage or Vicarage with Cure of Souls within the
Counties aforesaid, made by the Patron and Incumbent since the Two and
twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty nine, to any person
or persons whatsoever, shall be absolutely void to all intents and purposes
against the Successor of such Incumbent, such Successor coming in upon Death,
Cession, Sequestration, or otherwise.

And Be it further Enacted, That where, upon the Certificates of the said
Commissioners, there shall appear any profits of Livings within the Counties
aforesaid, to be remaining in the hands of any person or persons, That the
Council is further empowered to allow and dispose of the same to the present or
succeeding Incumbent, allowing for the serving of the Cure during the vacancy,
what they shall think fit.

Friday, March 16. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forth with Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.


