AN ACT For settling the MILITIA Within the Hamblets of the Tower of LONDON.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Thursday, July 14. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by John Field and Henry Hills, Printers to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleet Street, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.

AN ACT For settling the MILITIA Within the Hamblets of the Tower of LONDON.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That the
Lieutenant of the Tower for the time being, Sir Henry Vane, Solomon Smith,
Lieutenant Colonel John Miller, Maurice Thompson, Thomas Hubert, William
Northy, William Wormell, William Hobson, Richard Loton, William Warren, William
Page, Esqs Captain Chamberline, Edward Anslowe, Mark Mortimer, Francis
Revnolds, Abraham Jesson, Thomas Nash, Benjamin Andrews, Foulk Wormelayton,
Captain Arthur Bayliffe, Robert Wakelin, John Hoxton, Aaron Jones, Major
Kerlebeter, John Brookhaven, William Greensmith, James Dunteer, John Sowdin,
William Meacomb, William Bourn, Thomas Dry, Anthony Touchin, Captain Swanley,
John Limbrey, Colonel Row, Josias Berners, Alderman Mark Hildsley, Doctor
Trigg, Hamond Brend, John Adis, Osmond Coppin, and Lieutenant Colonel Cutlit,
be, and are hereby constituted and appointed Commissioners for the Militia,
within the Hamblets of the Tower of London; And that they, or any Seven or more
of them, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to assemble and call
together all and every such well affected person and persons within the said
Hamblets, as are me^t and fit to bear Arms, and them well and sufficiently from
time to time to cause to be Armed, Arrayed, and Weaponed, and to Form into
Companies, Troops, and Regiments, and to Lead, Conduct, and Employ, or cause to
be Led, Conducted, and Employed, as well within the said Hamblets, as within
and into any other places of this Commonwealth, for Suppressing of all
Insurrections, Rebellions, and Invasions, that may happen to be, and to Fight
with, Kill, and Slay such Enemies and Rebels, as they shall find in Arms
against this Commonwealth. And further to Act and Do according as they shall
from time to time receive Directions from the Parliament or Council of State by
the Parliament appointed, or to be appointed.

And that the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, shall have
power and authority, to present to the Parliament or Council of State, the
names of such person and persons, having respect to the Qualifications declared
by the Parliament, as they shall think fit, to be Colonels, Lieutenant
Colonels, Majors, Captains, and other Commission Officers of the said persons
so to be Armed, Arrayed and Weaponed: Which persons so to be presented and
approved of by the Parliament or Council of State, shall have Commissions
Signed by the Speaker of the Parliament, as the Officers of the Army have: and
being so Commissionated, shall have power to Train, Exercise, and put in
readiness, and also to Lead and Conduct the persons so to be Armed, Arrayed,
and Weaponed, by the directions, and to the intents and purposes aforesaid. And
for the providing Horse and Arms, and the Furniture thereunto belonging, for
the Arming and Weaponing the persons aforesaid: And also for the Defraying and
Paying the necessary Charges thereunto belonging,

Be it further Enacted, that the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of
them, have hereby Power and Authority, to Assess and Charge all and every such
person and persons, inhabiting and residing within the said Hamblets, or who
have any Estate within the same, proportionably, according to their estates
there, as are or shall be fit and meet to be Assest and Charged, for the
purposes aforesaid, for and toward the finding, furnishing and providing,
maintaining and having in readiness one or more Horse, or Horses, Arms, or
other Furniture, according to the several Estates and abilities of the person
so to be Assest and Charged.

Provided, That no one Person not having an Estate of the clear value of three
thousand pounds (of which the said Commissioners are to be Judges) be Charged
or Chargeable with an Horse, Arms, and the Furniture thereunto belonging, and
that no one person not having an estate of the clear value of four hundred
pounds (of which also the said Commissioners are to be Judges) be charged or
chargeable with a whole foot Arms and the furniture thereunto belonging.

Provided nevertheless, And be it Enacted, That all and every person or persons
having an Estate of the clear value of one hundred pounds, and under the said
value of four hundred pounds, be chargeable by the said Commissioners, for and
toward the finding and providing of Drums, Colors, Powder, Match and Bullet,
so that such charge upon any one Person exceed not the Sum of twenty shillings.

And be it further Enacted, that if any person or persons, so to be Assessed or
Charged by the said Commissioners, shall refuse or neglect, by the time to be
appointed by the said Commissioners, to Provide and furnish such sufficient
Horse, Horses, Arms and other furniture, or to pay such Sum or Sums of money,
toward the providing and furnishing as aforesaid, That then it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to
inflict a penalty upon such person and persons, not exceeding twenty pounds,
and also, by Warrant under their hands and Seals, to commit such person and
persons, so refusing or neglecting, to Prison, there to remain, without Bail or
Mainprize, till he or they shall conform thereunto, and pay such penalty so
inflicted as aforesaid, or else by like Warrant to Levy such Sum or Sums of
Money, or the value of such Horse, or Horses, Arms, and Furniture, and such
penalty inflicted, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the person or persons
so neglecting or refusing (rendering the overplus to the party so distrained)
all necessary Charges in Levying thereof being first deducted.

And be it further Enacted, that if any person or persons so to be Armed,
Arrayed and Weaponed, shall detain or imbezle his Horse, Arms or other
Furniture, wherewith he shall be entrusted, That it shall and may be lawful, to
and for the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to imprison such
person and persons, till he or they have made satisfaction for the Horse, Arms
or other Furniture so by him detained or imbezled, and also that if any person,
so to be Armed, Horsed or Weaponed as aforesaid, shall not appear and serve
completely furnished, with the Horse, Arms and other Furniture wherewith he is
entrusted, at the Beat of Drum, Sound of Trumpet or other summons, That then
and so often it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Commissioners, or
any five of them, if the default be in the person or persons so entrusted, to
imprison such person or persons for the space of five days without Bail or
Mainprize, or inflict a penalty, if a Horseman not exceeding twenty shillings,
and if a Footman not exceeding ten shillings, to be paid down without delay or
forbearance: And if any person or persons so assessed or charged as aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to deliver his Horse, Arms and other Furniture, upon
such Summons, or other notice as aforesaid, That then it shall and may be
Lawful to and for the said Commissioners, or any five or more, to inflict a
penalty not exceeding five pounds, to be Levied by distress and sale of the
Goods of such person and persons so refusing as aforesaid, rendering the
overplus to the party distrained, (necessary charges for Levying being first
deducted.) And for the better discovery of the ability of the persons to be
assessed and charged, and of all misdemeanors tending to the hindrance of the
service aforesaid, the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, are
hereby enabled to examine upon Oath such person and persons as they shall judge
necessary and Convenient. And for the better and more speedy execution of the
Premises,

Be it further Enacted, And the said Commissioners are hereby required to
appoint such and so often General meetings of themselves as they shall think
fit, and at such General meetings to appoint one or more Treasurer or
Treasurers, for receiving such money as shall be Levied by virtue hereof, of
all which Receipts and disbursements thereof, the said Treasurers and Receivers
are every six Months to give their Account in writing to the Parliament or
Council of State.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more
of them, shall and may Summon all and every Treasurer and Treasurers of any
former Committee, or Commissioners for the Militia, within the Hamblets
aforesaid, or any other person or persons, who by virtue of any Authority of
Parliament, or otherwise, are possessed of any Sum or Sums of Money, Arms or
Ammunition, in relation to the said Militia, and to require them and every of
them, forthwith to pay every such Sum and sums of Money, and deliver such Arms
and Ammunition remaining in their hands aforesaid, to such person or persons as
the said Commissioners appointed by this Act, or any Seven or more of them,
shall appoint; and in case of non-payment and delivery of such Arms and
Ammunition, to Levy the same Money and value of the said Arms and Ammunition,
by Imprisonment of the person, or by distress and sale, rendering the overplus
to the party distrained: All which Moneys so Levied and Received, and all such
Arms and Ammunition, as aforesaid, to be delivered, are to be employed for
carrying on of the said service: and at such General meetings the said
Commissioners are to divide themselves in such proportions and numbers as they
shall judge convenient, and into such divisions as may most tend to the speedy
and effectual advancement of the service. And for the better securing of the
Peace of this Commonwealth,

Be it further Enacted and Ordained, And the said Commissioners, or any Seven
or more of them, are hereby enabled and Authorized from time to time, by
Warrant under their hands and seals, to employ such well affected person or
persons as they shall think fit, of which a Constable for the time being within
his respective Hamblet to be one, in the daytime, to search for and seize all
Arms and Horses, in ye custody or possession of any Popish Recusant, or other
person that has been in Arms against the Parliament, or that has adhered to
the Enemies thereof, or any other person, whom the said Commissioners shall
judge dangerous to the Peace of this Commonwealth, and with such Arms and
Horses, to Arm such well affected persons as they shall think fit, or otherwise
to secure such Arms and Horses, for the use of the Commonwealth; to which
purpose the persons so to be employed are hereby Authorized and required to
enter into the House or Lodging of any such person as aforesaid, and there to
search for, seize, and take away such Arms and Horses as they shall find, and
thereof from time to time to give account to the said Commissioners.

And be it further Enacted, That all high Constables, Petty Constables, and
other Officers and Ministers within the said Hamblets, be, and are hereby
required to be aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners, in execution of
the Premises; and that all and every Person and Persons, who shall Act or Do
any thing in execution thereof, shall be saved harmless and Indempnified by
Authority of Parliament.

And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful, to, and for the
said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them, to impose the finding and
providing of Horse and Arms as aforesaid, by joining two, three, or more
persons together in the Charge, as to their Judgments shall appear most
conducible to the service of the Commonwealth.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in Force until the First day of March,
One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and no longer.

Thursday 14. July, 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.


