AN ACT FOR THE ADJOURNMENT Of this present PARLIAMENT, FROM The Six and
twentieth of June 1657. unto the Twentieth of January next ensuing

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

blazon of the Commonwealth

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.

AN ACT FOR THE ADJOURNMENT Of this present PARLIAMENT, FROM The Six and
twentieth of June 1657. unto the Twentieth of January next ensuing.
BE it Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parliament,
and the Authority of the same, That this Parliament, and all Bills, Causes and
Matters now depending in Parliament undetermined, shall be, from and after the
Six and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven,
adjourned unto the Twentieth day of January then next ensuing; at which time
all such persons as have been duly Elected and Returned to serve in this
present Parliament, being qualified according to the Qualifications in the
Humble Petition and Advice, and not disabled thereby, are required to give
their Attendance accordingly: And the Speaker of the Parliament is hereby
Authorized and Empowered to Adjourn the same accordingly.

Provided always, That if His Highness, with the Advice of His Council, shall
find it necessary for the Affairs of the Commonwealth, that the Parliament
shall meet sooner, and before the time hereby limited and appointed, That then
His Highness by Proclamation declaring the same, the Sheriffs of the several
and respertive Counties are to give notice thereof unto the several Members
within their County; And all Members of this Parliament are Required and
Enjoined to Attend, and to meet at the time and place appointed by such
Proclamation.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


