AN ACT FOR The more certain and constant Supply of the SOLDIERY with PAY; And
the preventing of any further Oppression or Damage to the PEOPLE by
Free Quarter or Billet.

Die Sabbathi, 12 Maii, 1649.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

Thursday the 24th of November. 1659. At the Committee of Safety at White Hall.
THis Committee being acquainted with the great necessities of the Armies of
this Commonwealth for want of Pay, and being desirous, as much as in them lies
to prevent the Mischiefs and inconveniences which may fall upon the People of
this Commonwealth by Free Quarter, wherein great care was taken by the
Parliament in the year 1649. upon the like extreme Emergencies as are at this
present, as by the Act of Parliament then made does appear; The Committee have
thought fit to Order that the said Act of Parliament be reprinted and
published, and all Officers Civil and Military, and all others whom it may
concern, are to take notice thereof, and to yield Conformity and due Obedience
thereunto, and that the same be put into due execution accordingly.

WILLIAM ROBINSON Clerk of the Committee of Safety.

London Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to the Committee of
Safety. 1659.

AN ACT FOR The more certain and constant Supply of the Soldiery with Pay, and
the preventing of any further Oppression or Damage to the PEOPLE by
Free Quarter or Billet.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament, for the taking off and future avoiding of
all Free Quarter, (which the last Summers War, and great increase of Forces
thereby occasioned, had necessarily brought again upon the people) having
resolved again to disband all such Forces as may be spared; and haing provided
that the rest (which are yet necessary to be continued) shall have constant pay
assigned to them out of the assessments of the several counties by the
Committee for the Army; as also an allowance in Money, in lieu of Billet, so as
duly receiving the same, they may therewith provide and find themselves both
for Quarter, Billet, and other Necessaries, without further charge or trouble
to the people where they lie; And finding that without a present advance of
Money upon the said assessments, the Forces cannot be reduced to that
proportion which the growing Assessment will suffice to pay; and that unless
the continuing Forces be timely supplied with their pay beforehand, they cannot
be enabled or reasonably required to hold that good order, of maintaining and
providing for themselves (as is intended and Resolved) without Quarter or
Billetting upon the People; Do therefore Enact and Ordain, and be it Enacted
and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by authority of the same, That the
first three months Assessment of the said six months, shall be taxed, levied
and paid in the several Counties, to the respective Treasurers or chief
Receivers, before the ninth day of June, 1649. and that the first months
assessment of the latter three months, shall in like manner be taxed, levied
and paid in before the first of July next following; and the second months
Assessment of the said last three months, before the first day of August next
ensuing; and the last month thereof, before the first day of September next
coming; so as the assignments of pay from the said Committee to the several
Forces, out of the assessments of the respective Counties, may be supplied
readily and beforehand, to enable the Soldiery to maintain themselves, without
Free Quarter, Free Billet, or other trouble or charge to the country: And the
several Commissioners for Assessments, Assessors and Collectors in the
respective Counties and places within this Commonwealth, are enjoined and
required, in and according to their several places and trusts, diligently to
see to, and take order for the effectual performance hereof, as they tender
their own and their countries ease and deliverance from the Burden and
Grievances of Free Quarter, and as they will answer the neglect or failer at
their perils. And whereas it often does, and possibly may happen,
notwithstanding the most due and careful taxing or levying of the assessments,
that the moneys assigned upon the assessments, for pay to the several Forces,
may not always be had so soon, as to come to their hands timely and beforehand,
so as the Soldiery not having Money ready in hand, cannot in such case maintain
and provide for themselves, as is intended, but may be necessitated (if they be
not otherwise supplied with ready money) to take Quarter and Billet upon
Credit, till their pay come: And whereas in all such cases, where the Soldiery
wanting present pay, are assigned to have Billet and Quarter found them by the
several Inhabitants, it is too frequently or constantly practiced, that such
Inhabitants either by want of accommodations of their own for the Soldiers
quartering, or by the Soldiers troublesomness or difficulty to be kept quiet,
and satisfied with such Quarter as they can afford, are extremely exacted upon
and enforced to give excessive allowances in Money, either to Inns or
Ale-house-keepers, where they can hire quarter for the Soldier, or else to the
Soldier himself, to hire his quarter where he can; insomuch as many are
enforced to allow in such cases Sixteen pence per diem or more for a Foot
Soldier, and Three shillings per diem or more for a Horse and Man, to avoid the
Quartering of them; and yet when the Soldiers pay comes (if they pay any thing
at all toward satisfaction of Quarters) such Inhabitants usually receive back
no more then according to the Rates heretofore allowed for discharging of
quarters, which come far short of what it usually costs the said Inhabitants:
Now to prevent more surely the Peoples future Trouble, Damage or Oppression in
such kind, It is Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That in case by any
neglect, delay, default or accident it happen, that such Forces have not their
pay timely and beforehand to maintain themselves withal, so as there be a
necessity of assigning the Soldiers upon the several Inhabitants of the Towns
or place where they lie, to have Quarter and Billet, or money in lien thereof,
upon credit, until their pay do come, The Commanders of such Forces shall not
in such case suffer their Soldiers or Officers to exact or take for Quarter or
Billet, any more then the proportion of their days pay, and appointed allowance
for additional pay, and Billet money respectively, for each nights and days
quarter, but that the Inhabitants lending and laying down in moneys, according
to the number of Soldiers and Officers within the Quarters, for each Soldier
and Non-Commissioned Officer, and Officers man, the full proportion of their
daily pay, according to the Establishment for England, and of their additional
pay and Billet money, allowed by the Orders and Resolutions of Parliament for
that purpose herewith published; and for each Commission-Officer under the
degree of a Captain, one half of their daily pay; and for Captains and others
above that degree, one third part of their daily pay, according to the said
Establishment respectively, the Officers and Soldiers shall therewith maintain
and provide themselves both for Victuals, and all provisions for horse and man,
and also Billet, at such Rates as they can agree upon with the Inhabitants
(with respect to the Rules containted in the said Orders and Resolutions) as if
the said Forces had received their pay beforehand from the State, according to
their Assignments; and the said Inhabitants lending and laying down the said
moneys, according to the proportions aforesaid, whilst the said Forces
(continuing amongst them) do want their pay assigned from the State, shall both
be freed from any further charge or trouble for the Quarter or Billet of the
said Forces, according to the said Orders and Resolutions; and shall have the
full sum of the moneys so lent and laid down by them, repaid unto them without
any abatement or defalkation whatsoever. And for the more sure and orderly
performance hereof, It is further Enacted, That in case of such delay, or want
of timely pay to any the said Forces, according to their assignments, the
Inhabitants and Landholders within such Cities, Towns, and Parishes, where such
Forces are by Order from the General, or such as have authority under him for
that purpose, assigned to Quarter, shall according to the number of Officers
and Soldiers actually present within the Quarters, lend and advance the moneys
so wanting, according to the proportions aforesaid, for so long time as the
said Forces (by like Order continuing there) shall want their pay assigned from
the State as aforesaid; which money the Constables or chief Civil Magistrates
of such towns and places respectively, are and shall be hereby authorized in
such case to Rate, Collect and Levy within the said places, in such equal way
and proportions as the Forces otherwise would fall to be Billeted. And if any
person refuse to lend his share, he shall lose the benefit provided by this Act
for those that do lend the same; and the Constable or chief Magistrate, with
two of the Inhabitants that agree to lend as aforesaid, shall have power to
assign so many soldiers as they think fit, to be Billeted upon the Refusers;
and the money so lent and advanced, shall be paid into the hands of the
respective Field-Officers of the Regiment, or chief Officers of the Troops or
Companies quartering there, to be by them issued out to the Officers and
Soldiers under them, for their pay and Billet money which chief Officers shall
thereupon give to the Inhabitants their Receipt or Receipts under their hands,
for all the moneys so lent and advanced to them respectively, expressing for
what Troops or Companies, and for what Regiment the same is received, and
promising and engaging themselves therein, fully to repay the same out of the
next Moneys coming in unto them upon their assignments, from the Committee of
the Army or otherwise, as pay for that time for which the moneys so lent do
supply them; which the said Officers shall accordingly do and perform, under
pain of being liable themselves to proceeding at Law for the same: And in case
of failer, of such repayment of the said Money, by the space of one month next
after the lending thereof, then upon notice of such failer, and producing of
the said Receipts before the Committee of the Army, the said Committee shall
give order to the Treasurers at War, for the fult and speedy repayment of the
said moneys to the said Inhabitants, out of the assessments of the respective
Counties and places where they live; or (if the same be not sufficient) out of
the assessments of the next adjacent counties; or (if that suffice not) then
out of any moneys disposable by them for supply of the Army; and such order,
together with the said Receipts (being delivered in) shall be to the said
Treasurers or the Receivers in the respective Counties, by whom the said Moneys
shall be repaied, a sufficient discharge. And the said Commanders and Officers
to whom any Moneys shall be so lent (in case their assigned pay come not in
timely enough) so as they cannot repay the said moneys, before they be by order
removed to other Quarters, shall within ten days after such remove, send notice
to the Committee for the Army, or Treasurers at War, what moneys have been so
lent unto them, out of what Towns or places, and in what Counties they are so
left unpaid, under the like pain as aforesaid. And upon these considerations,
it is further Enacted, That from and after the ninth day of June, 1649. and
from such time before the said ninth of June, as the said Forces, or any of
them respectively, shall be supplied with their Pay and Billet money as
aforesaid, the several and respective Counties, places and persons within this
Commonwealth duly paying in their assessments, for the Pay and Billet of the
Soldiery, as by this Act, or any other Act of Parliament for that purpose is or
shall be required, they shall be wholly discharged and freed from all
Free Quarter, Billet, or other Charge or burden of or for the Soldiery; and
all Officers and Soldiers whatsoever, having their pay and Billet money allowed
as aforesaid, shall therewith maintain and provide for themselves both for
Victual, and other provisions for Horse and Man, and also for Lodging, and all
things else belonging to Quarter or Billet, at such Rates as they can agree for
with the Inhabitants where they are or shall come to quarter; And no Officer or
Soldier shall under pretense of taking Quarter or Billet, enter into the House
of any person or persons duly paying in their Assessments as aforesaid, without
his or their consent (except Inns, Taverns, Victualling-houses and Alehouses)
nor shall exact or take any Money, Victual, or other provisions for Horse or
Man, without consent of the Owner, and due satisfaction given unto him for the
same, at such Rates as he shall agree unto, other then such moneys and in such
cases as is directed to be lent as aforesaid; and otherwise then for such
necessary Quarter and Billet, and that in such cases only, and according to
such Rules, and Terms as is expressed in the Rules, Resolutions and Orders of
Parliament passed and published with this Act, concerning the disposing and
quartering of the Parliaments Forces under the pains expressed in the said
Orders and Resolutions.

ORDERS and RESOLUTIONS of PARLIAMENT Concerning the disposal of the present
Forces, and Rules Concerning QUARTERING.
Resolved and Ordered,
1. THat by Saturday the ninth of June, 1649. all the Forces now in being in
England, which are within the Establishment for England, shall be drawn into
garrisons, cities and towns, there to be settled in Quarters, until by due Order
from the Lord General, or such as have Authority under him for that purpose,
they be removed.

2. That by the same day all the Forces now in England within the Establishment
for Ireland (except such as shall be then upon march for Transportation) shall
likewise have quarters assigned in Towns or Cities (as near as may be) in order
to their Transportation.

3. That all the Forces raised since the 31 of March, 1648. by any Committees
or Deputy Lieutenants of particular Counties at the charge of their Counties,
which are not comprehended within the Lists of Forces to be paid as of the
Establishment for England or Ireland, lately given in from the Lord General and
Council of War; or shall not before the 28 day of May instant, 1649. be
certified from the General and Council, to be added to the said lists, shall be
disbanded before the said ninth day of June, 1649. by the Committees or Deputy
Lieutenants by whom they were raised, and at the charge of the Counties
respectively unless where the Committees shall see cause to keep up any of
their said Forces, for the particular Services of their Counties, and can find
wherewith to maintain them without Free Quarter, and without any allowance for
their pay out of the Assessment of the 90000 l. per mensem; and where any such
County Forces are appointed to be retained in the present Establishment, the
Lord General is to signify to the respective Committees or Deputy Lieutenants,
what Forces of theirs are so retained, that the rest may be disbanded by them
as aforesaid.

4. That whatever Forces lie quartered in any County, which have not been
raised and kept up hitherto by Commission from the Lord General, or by
authority of the Committees or Deputy Lieutenants of the respective counties,
and are not comprehended, in the said lists of establishment, for the service
of England or Ireland, shall immediately disband and disperse themselves before
the said 28 day of May instant; and after that day shall not presume to exact
or take from any people, any Free Quarter or Free-billet, or any Money, or
ought else in lieu of Quarter or Billet, at their utmost perils, and under pain
of being proceeded against according to Law, for what violence or wrong they
shall do in that kind.

5. That to the end all Free-billet as well as Quarter may be taken off from
the people, the Committee of the Army shall have power, and are required to
make assignment and allowance of money in lieu of Billet to Soldiers and
non-Commissionate Officers, in such places, and to such proportions as shall be
thought fit by the Lord General and Council of War, and certified by the Lord
General to the said Committee, not exceeding the proportions of one penny per
diem a man for Foot settled in Garrison, two pence per diem for foot of the Army,
not settled in Garrison, and three pence per diem for Horse and Dragoons, over
and above their pay allowed for them by the Establishment respectively; and
also till the end of September, 1649. in regard of the present dearth, an
additional pay not exceeding one penny per diem to Foot settled in Garrison, two
pence per diem to Foot not settled in Garrison, and three pence per diem to Horse
and Dragoons; during which all lowance of additional pay, the said Forces shall
maintain themselves with complete Arms, without any charge to the State: And
for performance thereof, the chief Officer in each Troop and Company, shall
have power to stop the said additional pay from such as are defective, until
they do complete their Arms.

6. That from and after the said ninth day of June, the several and respective
counties, places and persons within this Commonwealth, duly paying in their
assessments, for the pay and billet of the Soldiery, as by any Act of
Parliament for that purpose is or shall be required, they shall be wholly
discharged and freed from all Free quarter, Free billet, or other charge or
burden of or for the Soldiery: And all Officers and Soldiers whatsoever,
having their pay and billet Money allowed as aforesaid, shall therewith
maintain and provide themselves, both for victual and other provisions for
Horse and Man, and also for lodging and all things belonging to Quarter or
Billet, at such rate, as they can agree for with the Inhabitants where they
are, or shall come to quarter; and no Officer or Soldier shall under pretense
of taking quarter or billet, enter into the house of any person or persons,
duly paying in their Assessments as aforesaid, without his or their consent,
except Inns, Taverns, Victualling houses or Alehouses, nor shall exact or take
any money, victuals, or other provisions for horse or man, without consent of
the Owner, and due satisfaction given him for the same at such rates as he
shall agree unto, other then such money, and in such case as is directed to be
lent in the Act of Parliament herewith published; and otherwise then for such
necessary quarter and billet, and that in such cases only, and according to
such Rules and Terms as is hereafter expressed; viz.

That whenever any Forces shall by virtue of Order from the General, or from
such as shall have authority under him for that purpose, be upon a march or
removing quarters, they shall at the Towns or Parishes where they shall be
ordered to quarter, be billetted in the usual way by their Quartermasters or
Superior Officers respectively, according to the Assignment or Directions of
the Constables or chief Civil Magistrate in the said Towns or Parishes; or in
case of their refusal or neglect to make assignment or direction therein, then
at the direction of the Quartermaster or Superior Officer, and the respective
inhabitants where any Officers or Soldiers shall be so billetted as aforesaid,
shall receive them to quarter and Billet accordingly, and for one night or two
at the most, shall beside lodging and necessary billet, find them victual,
according to their ordinary Family-diet (wherewith the Soldier shall be
contented) and also hay, or in Summer time grass for their horses, for which
the Soldiery shall pay at the rate of eight pence per diem for a Foot Soldier,
twelve pence per diem for a Dragooner, and fifteen pence per diem for a Trooper
and his horse, and for what Provender they use, as they can agree; and the like
for non-Commissionate Officers, and Commission Officers men, of foot, horse or
dragoons respectively, and Commission Officers shall pay as they can agree, not
exceeding one third part of their daily pay respectively, beside for Provender
as they can agree: and after the first two nights (if they stay longer) both
Officers and Soldiers shall with their pay maintain and find themselves as
aforesaid, and pay for what they have, at such Rates as they can agree with the
Inhabitants, both for victual, and other provision for Horse and Man, but for
the next five nights after the said two nights (if they stay there so long)
both the Soldiers and Officers, if they shall not otherwise agree with the
Inhabitants sooner for their Billet, viz. Lodging, Stable room, and the use of
their ordinary fire and candlelight, shall have the same found for that space
by the respective Inhabitants where they shall be so Billeted as aforesaid,
paying such Inhabitants for the same according to the rates allowed to the
Soldiery respectively, in lieu of Billet as aforesaid; And after the said five
nights (if they be to continue at or or about the same Towns longer) then both
Officers and Soldiers shall thenceforth find and provide themselves Billet
also for their Money, where they can obtain and agree for the same, either in
the said Towns or Parishes, or at any other Village or place adjacent, within
such distance as the chief Officer commanding in the Quarter shall allow of;
and shall not after the said five nights, under pretense of Quartering or
Billet, enter into, or continue in the house of any the said Inhabitants (duly
paying in their Assessments as aforesaid) without his or their consent, except
Inns, Taverns, Victualling-houses or Alehouses, nor shall exact or take any
Moneys, Victuals, or other Provisions for Horse or Man, without the owners
consent and satisfaction for the same, at such rates as he shall agree unto.

Provided, That the Constables or chief Magistrates in the said respective
Towns and Places, shall cause the Inhabitants to afford the Soldiery such
provisions for horse and men as they have to spare, at such Market price as
they usually sold the same for unto others, within a week before the Forces
came first to quarter there, and for that purpose, the respective Civil
Magistrates, or (upon his or their refusal) such chief Officer as aforesaid,
shall in such case have and exercise the same power and authority, for the
rating of provisions for necessary supply of the Soldiery, as by Law any
Magistrate has or may exercise, for the bringing forth or rating of Corn for
supply of the poor, in case of engrossing or forestalling in time of dearth.

Provided also, That in all places to which any Forces come to quarter as
aforesaid, where there is lodging, receipt, and sufficient for the number of
men and horse, at Inns, Taverns, Victualling-houses or Alehouses, the said
Forces, or so many of them as there is such receipt and lodging for, shall
after the two nights of their stay, be disposed of for billet into such Inns
Taverns, Victualling-houses and Alehouses, unless they can agree for their
billet at other places within the quarter, or such distance therefrom as
aforesaid; and in such case shall not after the said first two nights, under
pretense of quartering or billet, enter into, or continue in the house of any
other Inhabitant, duly paying in his Assessments as aforesaid, without his own
consent: And where ever any Soldiers or Officers shall come to quarter in any
Inn, Tavern, Victualling-house or Alehouse, without consent of the Inhabitant,
they shall accept and be content with such sufficient lodging, and such
convenient stable-room, as the Inhabitant has and shall appoint for them, and
shall pay the Inhabitant for the same, at the same rate as is allowed to them
by the State for billet as aforesaid respectively, unless they shall by
agreement with the Inhabitant, have with him their diet or Horsemeat as other
Guests, or at such rates as he shall agree to take; and also provided, that in
case the Forces want their pay assigned from the State, they shall be supplied
with money by way of Loan, from the Inhabitants of the Towns and Places within
their quarters, according to the Act of Parliament herewith published.

And these Rules are to hold as well upon the drawing of the Forces into Cities
or Towns, by or before the said Ninth of June, according to the Resolutions
aforegoing, as upon any remove or change of quarters afterward by due Order as
aforesaid, and shall be duly and constantly observed and kept by and betwixt
all Officers and Soldiers under pay and command of the Parliament in this
Nation; and all Inhabitants of such places within this Commonwealth, where any
the said Forces shall happen to quarter by due Order as aforesaid, while
Assessments for the Army continue to be paid, unless actual War by Invasion,
Insurrection or Rebellion within the Land shall happen so to hinder the due
levying of Assessments, and necessitate such increase of Forces, as that the
Soldiery cannot be constantly paid as is intended: And all Military Officers
for those under their respective Commands, and all Civil Magistrates for those
under their respective Jurisdictions, are required strictly to see to, and to
take order for the due observance of these Rules and Directions aforegoing; and
if any Officer or Soldier shall offend, contrary to the effect of the premises,
upon complaint and proof thereof made before the Colonel, or other
Field-Officer of the Regiment, or before the chief Officer commanding in the
quarters, every such Offender shall be cashiered out of the Army and Service of
the Parliament; and for any damage done to any Countreyman, contrary to the
premises, shall be awarded and compelled to give full satisfaction out of his
pay; and for such damage (if he give not such satisfaction) shall be left to
the Law; and for any violence contrary to the effect of the premises (if it be
capital or criminal) being first cashiered as aforesaid, shall by the said
chief Officer be sent and delivered over to the next Justice of the Peace, to
be dealt with, and proceeded against for the same, according to Law; and if the
said chief Officer shall fail of his duty, in not punishing and proceeding
against such Offenders as is aforesaid, he shall be cashiered, and be liable to
make satisfaction himself; and if any Countreyman shall wilfully and
obstinately offend, to the prejudice of the Soldier, contrary to the effect of
the premises, he shall lose the benefit of that exemption from Free Quarter and
Free-billet, which is hereby provided for.

Hen: Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.


