Commonwealth Coat of Arms, depicting a cross of St George on the left and a
harp on the rightAN ACT FOR THE Exportation of several Commodities OF THE
Breed, Growth, and Manufacture OF THIS COMMONWEALTH.
FOrasmuch as it is found by long experience, that the prosperous Estate of all
Islands is very much (under God) maintained and supported by a quick and
flourishing Trade, and in a just endeavor and care, that the Exportation of the
Native Commodities over-balance the Importation of Foreign Commodities; And
forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God to bless the industry and endeavors
of the People of these Nations, in the great Improvement of Fens, Forests,
Chases, and other Lands, with a great redundancy of Corn, Cattle, Butter,
Cheese, and diverse other considerable Commodities, much desired by, and of
great use to other Nations, and the Plantations abroad; And if Liberty were
granted freely to Export the same, and all Restraints taken away, and the
Customs made easy, it would much encourage Manufactures and advance Trade;
Which His Highness and the Parliament duly considering, are pleased that it be
Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector, and this
present Parliament, and the Authority of the same, That from and after the
First day of January next coming, it shall and may be Lawful to all and every
person or persons, being the Natives of this Commonwealth, or to any other
person or persons whatsoever, only out of such Towns and Ports of this
Commonwealth where are, or shall be resident a Customer or Collector of Tonnage
and Poundage, or one of their Deputies, and not elsewhere, to Load, Carry, and
Transport into the parts beyond the Seas, in Amity with this Commonwealth, and
there to sell the same, Any Law, Usage, or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, these several Commodities of the Breed, Growth, or Manufacture
of this Commonwealth hereafter mentioned, not paying Custom, or any other Duty
for them or any of them, exceeding the Rates herein expressed, limited and
appointed; That is to say, That it shall and may be lawful to transport
Geldings, and that the Custom to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth be
for every Gelding, Twenty shillings the Gelding; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, for every Gelding, Thirty shillings the Gelding: Provided, and it is
hereby Enacted, That such Geldings as shall be transported by the Natives of
this Commonwealth into the Plantations thereof, by shipping belonging
thereunto, pay only Ten shillings the Gelding. Also, that it shall and may be
lawful to transport Oxen, Barrel Beef, Barrel Pork, Bacon, Butter, Cheese and
Candles, any or either of them, when the Prices of these several sorts of
Commodities at the Times, Havens and Places, when and where they shall be
Bought, Shipped or Laden, exceed not the Rates hereafter following; (viz.) The
barrel of Beef, containing thirty six Gallons, at Five pounds the barrel: The
barrel of Pork containing as aforesaid, at Six pounds ten shillings the barrel:
The Flitch of Bacon, at Six pence the pound: The barrel of Butter containing
four Firkins, and each Firkin containing fifty six pounds of neat Butter, at
Four pounds ten shillings the barrel: The hundred weight of Cheese, at One
pound ten shillings the hundred weight: The dozen pound of Candles, at Five
shillings the dozen pound. And that the Custom of the said Commodities be as
follows; (viz.) For the Custom of every Ox, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Six shillings eight pence the Ox; and by Foreiners and Strangers,
Ten shillings the Ox: For the Custom of every barrel of Beef, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Three shillings the barrel; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, Five shillings the barrel: For the Custom of every barrel of Pork,
to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Four shillings the barrel; and
by Strangers and Foreiners, Six shillings the barrel: For the Custom of every
Flitch of Bacon, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Eight pence
the Flitch; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Twelve pence the Flitch: For the
Custom of every barrel of Butter, to be paid by the Natives of (...) Pork, to
be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Four shillings the barrel; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Six shillings the barrel: For the Custom of every
Flitch of Bacon, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Eight pence
the Flitch; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Twelve pence the Flitch: For the
Custom of every barrel of Butter, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Three shillings the barrel; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Six
shillings the barrel: For the Custom of every hundred weight of Cheese,
containing one hundred and twelve pounds, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Twelve pence the hundred weight; and by Strangers and Foreiners,
One shilling and six pence the hundred weight: For the Custom of every dozen
pounds of Candles, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Three pence
the dozen pounds; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Four pence half penny the
dozen pounds: For the Custom of every barrel of Candles, containing ten dozen
pounds, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Two shillings six pence
the barrel; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Three shillings nine pence the
barrel.

And it is further Enacted and Ordai^ed, That it shall and may be lawful for
any person or persons, being Natives of this C^mmonwealth, to carry or
transport of his own, and to buy to sell again in Markets an^ out of Markets,
and to keep, or sell, or carry and transport, and for any other person or
persons, to transport any or all these several sorts of Corn and Grain
following; (viz.) Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Malt and Oats, when the
Prices of these severa^ sorts of Corn or Grain at the Times, Havens, and
Places, when and where they shall be Bought, Shipped or Laden, exceed not the
Rates hereafter following; (viz.) The Qua^ter of Wheat, at Forty shillings the
Quarter: The Quarter of Rye, Pease and Beans, a^ Twenty four shillings the
Quarter: The Quarter of Barley and Malt, at Twenty ^hillings the Quarter: The
Quarter of Oats, at Sixteen shillings the Quarter: An^ that the Custom or
Poundage for the above mentioned sorts of Corn and Grain be as ^olloweth;
(viz.) For the Custom or Poundage of every Quarter of Wheat, to be paid (...)
the Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling the Quarter; and by Strangers
and Foreiners, Three shillings the Quarter: For the Custom or Poundage of every
Quart of Rye, Pease and Beans, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth,
Six pe^ce the Quarter; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling six pence
the Quarter: For the Custom or Poundage of every Quarter of Barley and Malt,
to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the Quarter; and by
Strangers and F^reiners, One shilling and six pence the Quarter: For the Custom
and Poundage of ev^^y Quarter of Oats, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Four pence the Quarter; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One
shilling the Quarter, which said Q^arter of Corn and Grain shall conta^^ (...)
Bushels, and each Bushel to contain eight Ga^ns, according to the Measure of
Winchester: P^^^^ded that the Natives of this Comm^nwealth do transport the
aforesaid Corn and Grain in Shipping truly belonging thereunto.

And it is also Enacted and Ordai^ed, That it shall and may be lawful to
transport and carry out Beer, the Custom to be p^^d by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, to be for every Tun of Beer, Two shillings the Tun; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Six shillings the Tun.

And it is also further Enacted an^ Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
it shall and may be lawful to transport all m^^ner of Calves-skins dressed and
undressed, not exceeding the weight of Thirty six pounds the Dozen, and that no
one Skin exceed the weight of Four pound; and that the Custom of the said
Calves-skins to be paid by the Natives of ^his Commonwealth, be for every Dozen
of Calves-skins, Four shillings the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners,
Eight shillings the Dozen: And that the Surveyor of the Customs, or Chief
Waiter in each Port or Town, do oversee the searching, weighing, telling, and
packing up of the said Calves-skins to be exported. And also that it shall and
may be lawful to transport Sheepskins dressed without their Wool, and that the
Custom to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, be for every Hundred of
the said Sheepskins containing Sixscore, Two shillings six pence the Hundred;
and by Strangers and Foreiners, for every hundred of Sheepskins as aforesaid,
Five shillings the Hundred.

And lastly, it is Enacted and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful to
transport beyond the Seas, into any part in Amity with this Commonwealth, all
sorts of Arms; That is to say, Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces,
Pistols, Sword and Rapier Blades, Hilts for Swords, Rapiers, or Daggers,
Bandaliers, Pike-heads, Halbert-heads and Shapes, Iron, Armor, Saddles,
Bridle-bits, Snaffles, Stirrups, Holsters, and Powder: Provided that no person
or persons do dig within the Houses or Lands of any person or persons of this
Commonwealth for the finding of Salt-peeter, nor do take the Carriages of any
person or persons for the carrying of their Materials or Vessels, without their
leave first obtained and had: Provided moreover, that the Price of Powder at
the Times, Havens and Places, when and where it shall be Bought, Shipped or
Laden, do not exceed Five pounds the Hundred weight. And that the Custom for
the said Arms and other Commodities last mentioned, be as follows; viz. For
the Custom ^f every Score of Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces, and
Pistols, Six shil^^^^ (...) Strangers and Foreiners* Thi^ (...) this
Commonwealth, be for every Dozen of Calves-skins, Four shillings the Dozen; and
by Strangers and Foreiners, Eight shillings the Dozen: And that the Surveyor of
the Customs, or Chief Waiter in each Port or Town, do oversee the searching,
weighing, telling, and packing up of the said Calves-skins to be exported. And
also that it shall and may be lawful to transport Sheepskins dressed without
their Wool, and that the Custom to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth,
be for every Hundred of the said Sheepskins containing Sixscore, Two shillings
six pence the hundred; and by Strangers and Foreiners, for every hundred of
Sheepskins as aforesaid, Five shillings the Hundred.

And lastly, it is Enacted and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful to
transport beyond the Seas, into any part in Amity with this Commonwealth, all
sorts of Arms; That is to say, Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces,
Pistols, Sword and Rapier Blades, Hilts for Swords, Rapiers, or Daggers,
Bandaliers, Pike-heads, Halbert-heads and Shapes, Iron, Armor, Saddles,
Bridle-bits, Snaffles* Stirrups, Holsters, and Powder: Provided that no person
or persons do dig within the Houses or Lands of any person or persons of this
Commonwealth for the finding of Salt-peeter, nor do take the Carriages of any
person or persons for the carrying of their Materials or Vessels, without their
leave first obtained and had: Provided moreover, that the Price of Powder at
the Times, Havens and Places, when and where it shall be Bought, Shipped or
Laden, do not exceed Five pounds the Hundred weight. And that the Custom for
the said Arms and other Commodities last mentioned, be as follows; viz. For
the Custom of every Score of Muskets, Carbines, Birding or Fowling Pieces, and
Pistols, Six shillings eight pence the Score; and by Strangers and Foreiners,
Thirteen shillings four pence the Score: For the Custom of every Dozen of Sword
or Rapier Blades, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the
Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One shilling the Dozen: For the Custom
of every Hundred of Bandeliers, containing Five score to the Hundred, to be
paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the Hundred; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Hundred: For the Custom of every Dozen
of Pike-heads, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Two pence the
Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Three pence the Dozen: For the Custom of
every Dozen of Halbert-heads and Shapes, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, Six pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence
the Dozen: For the Custom of every Suit of Iron Armor, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling; and by Strangers and Foreiners, One
shilling and six pence: For the Custom of every great Saddle, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling the great Saddle; and by Strangers
and Foreiners, One shilling six pence the great Saddle: For the Custom of every
other Saddle, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, Six pence the
Saddle; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Saddle: For the Custom
of every Dozen of Bridle-bits, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth,
Six pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Nine pence the Dozen: For
the Custom of every Dozen of Snaffles, to be paid by the Natives of this
Commonwealth, One penny the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Two pence the
Dozen: For the Custom of every dozen Pair of Stirrups, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Two pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and
Foreiners, Three pence the Dozen: For the Custom of every dozen Pair of
Holsters, to be paid by the Natives of this Commonwealth, One shilling six
pence the Dozen; and by Strangers and Foreiners, Two shillings six pence the
Dozen: For the Custom of every Hundred weight of Powder, to be paid by the
Natives of this Commonwealth, Four shillings the Hundred weight; and by
Strangers and Foreiners, Eight shillings the Hundred weight: Which said several
Sums so to be had and taken, as Custom or Poundage, shall be in full
satisfaction of all manner of Custom or Poundage for the said Geldings, Arms,
Oxen, Corn, or other the before mentioned Commodities or Manufactures
whatsoever; Any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom for the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That His
Highness and Successors, by, and with the Advice and Consent of his and their
Council, may at any time by his and their Writ, and Proclamation to be
published, command that no person or persons shall by virtue of this Act,
transport or carry out all or any of the said Geldings, Arms, or other
Ammunition last mentioned, for such time as shall be therein limited and
appointed: And that it shall not be lawful for any person or persons to carry
out all or any of the aforesaid Geldings, Arms and Ammunition, contrary to the
tenor of the said Proclamation, upon such Pains and Forfeitures, as by the Laws
and Statutes of this Nation in force, before the making of this Act, are and
have been Provided and Ordained in that behalf; This Act, or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1656.


