27 Junii, 1649. An Act touching the first 400000. l. charged on the Receipt of
the Excize.
Whereas the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, by their Ordinance of
the thirteenth of October. 1646. intending to raise the said sum of 200000 l for
the service of the State, did Declare, That every person who should advance
Moneys, Plate, etc. upon the Public Faith, might for every sum of money he
should so lend, be secured a like sum more out of the grand Excize in course,
or by sale of the Bishops Lands, which should first happen, together with
interest, according to 8 l per centem, per annum, to be paid every six months
out of the Receipts of the Grand Excize, till Principal and Interest be fully
discharged. And whereas by the said Ordinance of the 16th of November. 1646. it
is Ordained, That in case the 400000 l so secured, or such part thereof, as
shall not be satisfied by the sale of the said Bishops Lands, that then the
Commissioners for the Grand Excize, should be, and are thereby charged and
chargeable to pay the said sums with interest as aforesaid, or so much thereof
as should be due and unpaid, and should begin to pay the same, when they should
have in ready money one fourth part of the whole Debt that should be owing to
the lenders in course, as they did pay in their moneys, with the interest then
due. And whereas by the sale of the said Lands, the sum of 350000 l or
thereabouts, is already satisfied to the said Lenders, together with interest
according to 8 l per centum, per annum, which therefore ought not to stand
charged on the said excize as a debt to be paid to the said Lenders; but
nevertheless may remain and be charged for the service of the Commonwealth: The
Parliament taking the same into consideration, together with the pressing
necessities for the speedy relief of Ireland, Do Enact and Ordain, and be it
Enacted and Ordained by the authority of this present Parliament, That so much
of the said 400000 l as is already, or shall be satisfied to the said lenders
by the sale of the said Lands, shall nevertheless stand charged upon the said
Receipt of the Excize for the service of the Commonwealth, to be paid by the
said Commissioners in course, as is directed in the said Ordinances, and as
ought to have been paid to the said Lenders, had they not been satisfied by the
sale of the said Lands.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That the said Commissioners do
issue out the said sums hereby declared to stand charged as aforesaid, for the
service of the Commonwealth, according to such Orders and Directions as they
shall from time to time receive from the Council of State; And the Receipt of
the person or persons so authorized to receive the same, shall be a good
discharge to the said Commissioners.

ORdered, That this Act be forthwich Printed and Published.

Hon: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.
An Act for borrowing 150000 l upon the first 400000 l charged on the Excize.
WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, made the 27th of this present
June, It is Enacted and Ordained, That so much of the sum of 400000 l secured
unto the Lenders and Advancers of the 200000 l by Ordinance of Parliament, of
the 13th of October, 1646. as is already, or shall be satisfied to the said
lenders, by the sale of the Bishops Lands, shall nevertheless stand charged
upon the Receipts of the Grand Excize, for the service of the Commonwealth, to
be paid by the Commissioners of Excize in course, as is directed by like
Ordinance of Parliament of the 16th October, 1646. to have been paid to the
said lenders, had they not been satisfied by the sale of the said Lands; of
which said sum there is already satisfied the sum 350000 l or thereabout, by
sale of the lands aforesaid.

And whereas the present and pressing necessities of Ireland, do require a
speedy supply of money, which cannot be delayed until the course of the said
Ordinance of the 13th of October, 1646. (though now near at hand) does fall; It
is Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and authority thereof, That
if any person or persons shall advance and lend any sum or sums of money,
toward the raising of 150000 l for the service of Ireland aforesaid, the said
person or persons shall be secured and reimbursed the same, out of the moneys
so standing charged for the use of the Commonwealth upon the Grand excize, by
the said Act of the 27th. of this present June, and in course of the said
Ordinance of the 13th of October, 1646. together with Interest for the same
after the rate of 8 l per centum per annum, to be paid every six months for so
long time as they shall remain unpaid.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained by authority aforesaid, That the moneys
so advanced and lent upon the credit of the said Act, shall be paid unto such
Treasurer or Treasurers as the Council of State shall under the Seal of the
said Council appoint; and the receipt or receipts of the said Treasurer, shall
be a sufficient authority unto the person or persons lending and advancing the
same, to require and demand the respective sum or sums by them and every of
them advanced and lent, together with interest as aforesaid, of the
Commissioners of Excize and New-impost, who are hereby authorized to pay the
same accordingly, in such course as the said respective sum or sums shall be
lent and advanced, not staying until they have one fourth part of the whole
debt in Cash, but proceeding in payment thereof, as fast as money shall arise
upon the said Act, Any thing in the said Act of the 27th of this present June
to the contrary notwithstanding: And the receipt or receipts of the said person
or persons that shall advance any sum or sums upon the credit aforesaid,
together with the receipt of the Treasurers aforesaid, testifying the sum or
sums by him or them respectively lent, shall be a sufficient discharge unto the
Commissioners of Excize, for payment of the said principal and interest.

And be it further Declared and Ordained by authority aforesaid, That neither
the said sum or sums so advanced and lent, nor any other sum or sums
whatsoever, remaining and standing now charged upon the grand excize, and
untransferred upon the sale of Deans and Chapters Lands, shall be taken off, or
transferred from the said excize, upon any other security whatsoever, nor be
paid otherwise then in their true and proper courses, wherein they were first
charged, upon any exigent or occasion whatsoever.

Die Veneris, 29 Junii, 1649.
ORdered, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.
London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England, 1649.


