An EASY WAY To Get Money, CUM PRIVILEGIO, Without Fear or Cumber.

Proverbs Chap. 1. verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. If they say, Come with us, let us lay
wait for Blood; Let us Lurk privily for the Innocent without cause.

Let us Swallow them up alive, as the Grave; and whole, as those that go down
into the Pit.

We shall find all precious substance; We shall fill our Houses with ^poil

Cast in thy ^ot amongst us; let us have all one Purse.

Printed for the Society of Informers, in the Year 1671.

An Easy Way to Get Money, Cum Privilegio, without Fear or Cumber.
TO all you that can work, and will not; and to all those that through other
ways of Extravigancy have brought your selves into Debt, Necessity, or other
Wants, (for your speedy supply, and future support) there is an opertunity put
into your hands, that is both Safe, Profitable, and Honorable, etc. (It is to
be Informers.)

First, it is an Easy Way; it is no more then this, Seek out where there is in
any House, Barn, Stable, or Backside, five Persons, besides the People of the
Family; though they spoke never a Word; yes if you Swear it is a Conventicle,
then it is a Conventicle; it is no matter if there were never a thought in
their hearts, as to Plotting, or Contriving Insurections, (for which the Law
was made) they being there, its sufficient to have them Fined five Shillings
apeece, the first Time, and Twenty Pounds for the House; and for the second
Time ten Shillings apeece, and if the Justice be not well advised, it may be
for the second Time for the House, you may get twenty Pounds more, although the
Act does not grant it. And of all this it is said the thirds is yours, this you
may easily have; for the Justices are afraid of your power; for you have them
under your ice, so they will not much question you, lest they be counted
Fanatics; and they know that if they do not please your wills, your power is
such, that you may recover fifty Pounds, for your parts, by Action Suite, Bill
or Plea in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster: wherein no Essoyne,
Protection, Wager of Law shall Ly. Can your hearts desire more? Who will nor be
Informers? That must have all Clauses construed most largly, and Beneficially
to their Justification, and Encouragement.

Secondly, it is Profitable, For beside the twenty Pounds, and ten Shillings
apeece for Meeting. Yet if you can but Tempt any by your Questions, or other
Provocations to Speak but a Word, to Answer you, it will serve to make him a
Preacher, and then for the first there is twenty Pounds, and the second forty
Pounds, its no matter what is Spoke, or to what Concern, if you Swear, you did
hear such a One spoke, it is enough to make him a Preacher.

And as to the inabillity, there is no danger, that you should fall short of
your Sallery. For you can by your Power make void (that old and supposed true
Proverb) where it is not to be had the King must lose his Right. But your
Prerogative is such, that if the Offender has it not, you can command your
Servants, to Levy it on any other that is not an Offender in that nature,
provided he be there, otherwise an Apeal will be granted.

And for certainty of your Sallary, you exceed all Lords of Manners, who have
only Manner Courts, with Stewards, Reeves, and Tennants. For you have four
Sessions in the Year, and instead of Stewards, all the Justices of each County,
sit to gather your Rents (gratis) and all the Constables, Churchwardens, and
Overseers, in the County, are your Reeves, to bring in your Rents, on Penalty
of forfeiring five Pounds apiece; and some through your dread have ventured so
far as to break Locks (which is a Power more then the Barrons of the Exchequer
can grant to serve an Execution) so that none must gainsay your will; and if
any Action be disputable, all must be Construed most Largely, and Beneficially,
for your Justification, and Encouragment; that is, to put you in heart in your
enterprises. The Justices must have a regard to your diligence: So no Error
shall be counted an Error in you, though you Swear there were above four,
though you were not there; and this must be a Record and a sufficient
conviction against any whom you please to accuse.

And though that People, that do not know your Power, may prate of Magna
Charta, with his Trial by two Juries of their, equals, and in open Court, where
they may have Council to plead for them; You may tell them, that that is common
Law, but this is a special Law, made only for you; and all things therein must
be construed in Favor to you; and the Justices must have a special regard to
your diligence. And as to Magna Charta that allows of so much disputing in
public, by Lawyers and Councellers, which make a lingering business of a small
matter, with their Writs of Error, and Removes to London, and then down again:
So that a man is along time before he is undone; so that a man is keep in hopes
and fear, which is worse then death it self.

Now this special Law foreseeing the inconvenience of the former tract and
common road, by which men came to a lingering death, has provided a more
speedy way, by making Informers; for now a man (by them) may be Convicted in
private, (without having so many scoulding Lawyers) and have all his Goods
taken from him in two hours Time, and the man not know of it before it be done:
So a man cannot be long in Trouble, but may be upon a new resolve, and his mind
quiet.

And if any shall object against you, and call you Knights of the Post, and
that you swear for a Reward, and that the Law does not admit of any to swear,
that is to have any Profit by swearing. For answer, you may tell them, that the
Knights of the Post do take money to swear, for one man against another, to
carry a Trial: But you do as duty binds you, to swear for the King; and if for
this, the Law allows you a reward, who shall gainsay you? Your Law is as good
as any other Law, which none dare gainsay.

Moreover, you may tell them, That there was a necessity of making this Law
after this manner; For there was a dull spirit in Magistrates and Officers
every where; and therefore those Former Laws became a dead Letter, and died
through want of Execution; But since that we have been Booted and Spurred, we
have Spared them up, with our Hundred and five Pound Spurts, that we have tried
the mettle of all; So that there is none we know of, but what runs agallop; and
some run so fast, by reason of our Spurs, that they put more Spirit in the Law,
then ever was intended by the Parliament.

And moreover, this way of Information is the way of all ways; For it is like
to bring all to your Reformation, without they will chose Desolation; So that
all the former Limited Acts of great Fines, Banishment, and upon Return Death,
all these were of no value; For these though they were great Fines, yet the
Distresses were according to Law, to be Praised, and over plusses to be
returned; But now, though the Fine be but small in words, yet a hundred pounds
worth of Goods may be taken for ten shillings; For there is no overplus to be
Returned back, nor no Goods to be Praised; so there is no value to be put on
any thing that is taken; So there is no withstanding the Informers unlimitted
power; they can command all the Militia, House and Foot, with the Deputies
Lievfienants, Sheriffs, and other Officers, in every County to serve their will
in all things, and at all times; as if the Sabbath were only made for them.

Thirdly, it is safe; For the back Door is shut, for that none can appeal from
your Servants, nor to them neither, if they neglect but seven Days, and they
having had a hand in your business; for you have forced them to give out
Warrants, in the Execution of your power; so there is no fear of letting it
pass against themselves: For your swearing offends none, neither can you be
troubled; it is the Justices that give the Warrant, and Officers that Execute
it; never fear that they will condemn themselves; so all must pass for you; and
you can terrify them with this Clause in the Act, that all must be Construed
most Largely, and Benificially, to your Justification and Encouragement: So do
what you will, you need not fear to be condemned; For then they will condemn
themselves.

And here you will have trebble Cost too; so you will be Gainers on all hands;
And never fear of bringing Suits in other Courts; For your Servants, the
Justices, must finally determine all.

Again, consider, besides the power granted you, the dread and fear that People
are in, that are under your Task-mastership, how irregularly they break the
Laws to please you; So Terrible you are to them, that one Constable shall undo
ten men, rather then call your will in Question: Now the ^aw says that
rationally (considering there is no order of Praising and returning
overplusses) that the levying of the Distresses, should not be in any one
Office, or Officers hand, in any Parish; but does authorize and require, every
Constable Headborough, Tything-man, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor,
Respectively to do it; it does not say, either of them, or any of them, or the
major-part of them; But every of them. And so according to this Act, is the
Justice's Warrant to be made, which is but Rational, like the eight or twelve
men of a Parish to make a Rate, and not for a Covetous Envious Constable to be
Informer, Distrainner, and Levyer, and never give an account for any thing
above five shillings; and of that he hopes to have a third Part too; and it is
a great Question in Law whether there be to be a Pluralliy of Offices,
especially when the Informer is one.

Follow my fancy; whether will thou go? out of the way, well to return again.

To encourage those new installed Officers, which regard must be had unto; I
say, if any should be so mad, as to pretend a disorderly proceeding, in the
taking away of his Goods; Yet it will not fall upon you; it will fall upon your
Vassels and Slaves, who do your druggery, who enter into men's Grounds, and
take away their Cattle, and enter into men's Houses and Shops, and take away
their Goods and Tools, by which they should get Bread for their Children: but
for your parts, who are the Informers, you need not take the trouble, nor fear
the Danger, only to come at the Sessions, to receive your Rents, of your
Stewards; it is no question but that these your Reeves will bring it in; For
they are responsable Men; For they are the full Body of Officers in every
Parish, as Constables, Headboroughs, Tything-men Church wardens, Overseers.
And moreover, they can take all that a man has for ten shillings, and if one
man has it not, they may take it from another that has it, and sell good
Peny-worths; For they shall never be questioned for the Price, nor return any
back; so you are upon better, and more sure Terms, then the best Lords in the
Land, for any Estate they hold; For if those men, aforesaid, do Omit or Neglect
their Duty, there is a Penalty of five Pounds apiece for their so Neglect; and
in some Parishes there are so many of those your Servants, as it may come to
Forty or Fifty Pounds; the least Parish comes to Thirty Pounds; and of all
this, the Third part is yours. So let it go which way it will, Money will be
sure for you; For all must be most Largely Construed to your Benefit,
Justification and Encouragement.

And never fear Old Magna Charta's After-claps, which was made in time of
Popery, with his public Authorizing, Scowlding before the Country, with
Lawyers Contending one against the other, and troubling the Country to come to
Assizes and Sessions,

But this is New Magna Charta, that puts you in Office, whose Oath in a private
Chamber, is a full Conviction; and must be a Record, though it be but before
one Justice: So you being Fstablished, end all the Former Laborinth of Trouble
and Cumber, which was made in time of Popish Darkness.

And if any yet will contend with you about the Constitutions of it, the
Nation, and their Privilleges, to have their Accusers Face to Face, and to be
Judged by their Equals, Twelve honest Men of the Neighborhood, and in Case of
any Corruption there, to Appeal to the King's Court at West-minster, or to the
King himself in Chancery, which is called the Court of Conscience.

As in answer to that, tell them, the Parliament now is of as much Power to
Repeal that, as they were to make it; For they are the Legislative Power; and
is not the Last Will, and Testament of a dead Man, the standing Will, that must
be put in Execution. As for having the Accusers Face to Face, and Appeals, this
was Romish, in Bloody Bonner's Time, and we must not take a president of his
Romish Laws, for Christians: What a Cumber was about Paul, with their Tedious
Laws? As when the Captain of the Castle took him from the Jews, and Commanded
him to be Examined with Scourging, and as they bound him with thongs, Paul said
to the Centurion that stood by; is it lawful for you to scourge a Roman
uncondemned? this their Romish way was, to set Offenders before the Council,
and then again to the Council, and Accusers brought, and then again with two
Hundred Soldiers, and Seventy Horse men, and Speer men, two Hundred to go to
the Governor, and to defend the Accused against his A^versaries; And then again
to Caes^r; and all this Troublesome and Chargable Way was, because they did not
know this quick, and easy Way of Informers.

Fourthly, As to the Honourableness of the Office, Is it not Honorable enough
to command Lievtenants of Counties? Deputy Lievftenants, Sheriffs, Captains of
all the Militia Horse and Foot, to follow the Informers, where they will? Are
not you Generals? This is more then to be a Centarlon, that had only Soldiers
under him. So much for the Militia.

As to the Civil Power, the Justices are your Secretaries, and all other
Parocal Officers, (as aforesaid) are your Slaves and Vassels, only the Judges
are freed from your Servitude, only they have their Laws by themselves, that
you are not to meddle with, and you your Laws that they are not to meddle with,
And is as the Laws of the Meads and Persians, not to be altered, till the
Parliament see your Ambitious Tyrany.

As to the obtaining of this Office you need not to be at any great Charge or
Cost to Purchase it, not to run in Debt to fit your selves with Cuterments, to
set you forth: For be you in what Equipage you will, all Officers Dread you.
And your very Name is enough to make Hundreds flee before you; and the very
first Conventicle, you Enter, you may Commence Doctors; the Study is not long,
that you should lose so much time at the Ends-of-Court, to Study the Old Magna
Charta; that one becomes an Old Man, before he be able to Construe it; For the
Egyptians did figure Justice to be a Blind Old Man, with an equal Balance in
his Hand, and Studients and People have ever since been looking, and wagering,
which way the Balance would Turn; And some presume to say this was Old Magna
Charta: But now, as to you, there is no need to study Contrivances, or which
Way the Scale shall Turn; For all may see plainly the Scale Turns to you; For
all must be Construed most Largely and Beneficially to your Justification and
Encouragement.

And if you will not this believe,
The Act confirms, though some do grieve.
And that there may be no exceptions against any that shall take this Office
upon them, observe these Cautions.

First they must be neither Payers nor Receivers, in any Parish; For then the
Lawyers will Object, that they are Parties; For that either of them will have a
Benefit by it, which they call Illegal

And as for Profession they must be no Jews; For they were not to Covet their
Neighbors Ox, nor Ass, nor any thing that was their Neigbours.

Neither Gentiles; For they had Conscience accusing, and did by Nature the
things Contained in the Law, having the Law writ in their Hearts.

Neither Christians; For they say, they Forsake the Devil, and all his Works,
and all the Lust's of the Flesh; and not to hurt any by Word, nor Deed; Which
is less then Sweating.

And as for the Turk's Profession, I know not what it is; If there may arise
any, so be it; For the Rest Profess the Contrary.

A true Bill is no Lybil; And for any in whose Hands, this may come, If they
fear any Danger in it, they ought not to Conceal it; But to bring it before
some Justice, or the chief Magistrate of the Place, with an account how they
came to it, and then they are Innocent: then if it cannot clear it self, let it
lie in Prison tell it Perish.

And so there is an end.

