THE ANSWER OF THE PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, TO THREE PAPERS
Delivered in to the COUNCIL of STATE By the Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary of
the States General of the UNITED PROVINCES.

As also a NARRATIVE Of the late Engagement between the ENGLISH Fleet under the
Command of General Blake;

And the Holland Fleet under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral Trump.

And likewise several LETTERS, EXAMINATIONS and TESTIMONIES touching the same.

Together with the Three PAPERS aforesaid of the said Lords Ambassadors
Extraordinary; And the LETTER of Lieutenant Admiral Trump therein mentioned,
Translated into English.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

The ANSWER of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to Three Papers
presented to them by the Council of State, from the Ambassadors Extraordinary
of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces; The First whereof is
dated the Third of June, the Second the Sixth of June, and the Third the
Thirteenth of June, 1652. new Style, upon occasion of the late Fight between
the Fleets.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, calling to mind with what
continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections, from the very
beginning of their intestine Troubles they have proceeded toward their
Neighbors of the United Provinces, omitting nothing on their part that might
conduce to a good correspondence with them, and to a growing up into a more
near and strict Union then formerly, Do find themselves much surprised with
the unsuitable Returns that have been made thereunto, and especially at the Acts
of Hostility lately committed in the very Roads of England upon the Fleet of
this Commonwealth, the matter of Fact whereof stated in clear Proofs, is
hereunto annexed; Upon serious and deliberate consideration of all, and of the
several Papers delivered in by Your Excellencies to the Council of State, the
Parliament thinks fit to give this Answer to those Papers:

The Parliament, as they would be willing to make a charitable construction of
the Expressions used in the said Papers, endeavoring to represent the late
Engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the knowledge, and against the
mind of Your Superiors; So when they consider how disagreeable to that
profession the Resolutions and Actions of Your State and their ministers at Sea
have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed
here by Your Excellencies, the extraordinary Preparations of One hundred and
Fifty sail of Men of War, without any visible occasion but what does now appear
(a just ground of Jealousy in Your own judgments, when Your Lordships
pretended to excuse it) and the Instructions themselves given by Your said
Superiors to their Commanders at Sea, Do find too much cause to believe, That
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces have an Intention, by
Force to usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets
that are, under God, their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby expose this
Commonwealth to Invasion at their pleasure, as by this late Action they have
attempted to do: Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to
Endeavor, with Gods assistance, as they shall have opportunity, To seek
Repairation of the Wrongs already suffered, and Security that the like be not
attempted for the future.

Nevertheless, with this mind and desire, That all Differences betwixt the
Nations may (if possibly) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his
Providence shall open a way thereunto, and Circumstances shall be conducing to
render such Endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual then those of this
kind heretofore used have been.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

A Narrative of the late Engagement between the English Fleet under the Command
of General Blake, and the Holland Fleet under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral
Trump near Dover.
UPon Tuesday the Eighteenth of May 1652. in the morning, General Blake being
gone to the Westward as far as Rye Bay eight days before with twelve or
thirteen Ships, leaving Major Bourn in the Downs with eight Ships only, there
appeared upon the backside of the Goodwin a Holland Fleet of Men of War
consisting of two and forty Ships, one whereof had a Flag on the main-top-Mast
head, the rest Jacks and Ancients; and being come unto the South-sands head,
two of them bore up toward the English Ships in the Downs, whereupon Major
Bourn sent out the Greyhound to examine them, and to know the reason of their
so near approach; who answering, That they had a Message to the Commander in
chief in the Downs, were permitted to come in, and having saluted the Flag, the
two Captains named Tyson and Aldred came Aboard the said Major Bourn, and
acquainted him that they were sent by Van Trump to let him know that he had
been Riding about Dunkirk with his Fleet, where by reason of foul Weather they
had lost many of their Cables and Anchors, and the wind being Northerly, were
driven further to the Southward then they intended, which Van Trump thought fit
to signify to prevent any misapprehensions or Jealousies. And having said
this, and received for answer, That the Reality of what they said would best
appear by their speedy drawing off from this Coast, they departed to their
Fleet; and immediately upon their arrival with them, the whole Fleet stood up
to Dover, and came to an Anchor within little more then shot of the Castle the
same day in the afternoon. Upon their coming before Dover Castle, and Riding
there with Flag in the Main-top, without saluting the Castle, the Castle made
three shot at them; notwithstanding which, the Dutch Admiral kept up his Flag,
and rode there at Anchor until the next day noon, and exercised his
Musketeers, by discharging Volleys of small shot many hours together. Upon
Wednesday about twelve a clock the Dutch Fleet weighed Anchor and stood off
toward Calice some four Leagues into the South-east; about the same time the
English Fleet under General Blake coming from the West toward the Downs
discovered them, and supposed by their course they had been going back; Major
Bourn likewise was in sight, coming from the Downs to join with General Blake.
About an hour or two after, the Holland Fleet altered their course, came back
again, made all the Sail they could, and bore directly with General Blake, Van
Trump the headmost with his Flag in the Main-top; and being come within shot,
the General shot a Gun at his Main-top, and then two single shot more:
whereupon Trump shot a single shot through the Generals Flag, and then
immediately gave the first Broadside and took in his Pendants, and hung out
his Red Flag under the Holland Colors, which was the Signal on their part for
their whole Fleet to engage, and so the Fight began, which happened between
four and five a clock in the afternoon, and continued until nine of the clock.
In the Fight the English took two of the Holland Fleet, one whereof having six
foot water in the Hold they left, taking the Captain and Officers aboard, the
other being a Ship of thirty Guns. General Blake lay all night where the Fight
began, or near thereabouts, and the Holland Fleet was espied about four Leagues
distant toward the Coast of France next morning.

The truth of this Relation appears in the Letters of General Blake, Major
Bourn, and others in the Action, by the Examinations of the Dutch Captains, and
other Officers taken in the Fight; the Instructions given to the Dutch Captains
and Commanders, and other Papers, all which are hereunto annexed.

And whereas Van Trump in the account he gives of this Action, makes the
occasion of his coming back upon the English Fleet, the guarding of some
Merchant men richly laden from the Streights, which had been in fight with some
of our Friggots: That action is set down in a Letter written by Captain Young
(hereunto also annexed) whereby the occasion, beginning and ending thereof is
declared: And besides, these very Ships which he pretends to come to protect or
rescue, upon Saturday before had past by General Blake, and were gone to the
Eastward.

General Blakes Letter.
Right Honorable,
I Have dispatched away this Express to your Honors, to give you an account of
what past yesterday between us and the Dutch Fleet being in Rye-Bay; I received
Intelligence from Major Bourn, that Van Trump with Forty Sail was off the
South-sand head, whereupon I made all possible speed to ply up toward them,
and yesterday in the morning we saw them at Anchor in and near Dover-Road;
being come within Three Leagues of them, they weighed and stood away by a wind
to the Eastward: We supposing their intention was to leave us to avoid the
Dispute of the Flag; about two hours after they altered their course, and bore
directly with us, Van Trump the headmost, whereupon we lay by and put our
selves into a fighting posture, judging they had a resolution to engage; being
come within Musket shot, I gave order to fire at his Flag, which was done
thrice, after the third shot he let fly a Broadside at us; Major Bourn, with
those Ships that came from the Downs, being eight, was then making toward us,
we continued fighting till night, then our Ship being unable to sail, by reason
that all our Rigging and Sails were extremely shattered, our Mizen-Mast shot
off, we came with advice off the Captains to an Anchor about three or four
Leagues of the Ness to refit our Ship, at which we labored all the night; this
morning we espied the Dutch Fleet about four Leagues distance from ours toward
the Coast of France, and by advice of a Council of War, it was resolved to ply
to windward to keep the weather gage, and we are now ready to let fall our
Anchor this Tide; what course the Dutch Fleet steers we do not well know, nor
can we tell what harm we have done them, but we suppose one of them to be sunk,
and another of Thirty Guns we have taken, with the Captains of both, his
Mainmast of the first being shot by the Board, and much water in the Hold,
made Captain Lawsons men to forsake her. We have six men of ours slain, and
nine or ten desperately wounded, and twenty five more not without danger,
amongst them our Master and one of his Mates, and other Officers: We have
received about seventy great Shot in our Hull and Masts, in our Salls and
Rigging without number, being engaged with the whole Body of the Fleet for the
space of four hours: And the Mark at which they aimed, we must needs
acknowledge a great Mercy that we had no more harm, and our hope the Righteous
God will continue the same unto us, if there do arise a War between us; they
being first in the Breach, and seeking an Occasion to Quarrel, and watching as
it seems, an Advantage to brave us upon our own Coast, etc.

Your most humble Servant, Robert Blake.
From aboard the James, three Leagues off the Hydes, the 20th of May, 1652.
The Information of Captain William Brandley, taken before his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, and Denis Bond Esquire, at Dover the 22th of May, 1652.
Who says, That Wednesday morning leaving General Blake off from the Nesse
with eleven Ships, (viz.) The James, Victory, Garland, the Speaker, Ruby,
Saphine, Conturion, Star, Portsmouth, Martin, Mormaid and a Merchants Ship in
the States service, and between seven and eight a clock in the morning came to
Dover Road, and fell in among part of Van Trump's Fleet, and hayling several of
their Ships, and asking who wore the Flag, he was answered by three or four of
them, That he was Van Trump, and that they should well wit, as his own men who
were aboard with him that understood Dutch did interpret to him; whereupon this
Informant went home to his own General, being some three Leagues to Westward of
him, to whom he gave the said Account; which so soon as he had done, his
General made all the haste he could to Dover Road with those Ships that were
with him, and being come about three Leagues onward of his way, he this
Informant and the rest of the Fleet discerned Van Trump and his Fleet weighing
their Anchors, and perceived them to make toward the French Coast about four
Leagues from the place where they Anchored, and General Blake steering his
course toward the Downs to the rest of his Fleet, for which this Informant had
seen the Orders of the Council of State to him so to do; and being come up as
high as Holstone, they perceived a Ship came from the Eastwards toward the
Dutch Fleet, not being able to fetch Van Trump, being to the Leeward of him,
shot off a piece; and Van Trump bore up to the said Ship, and within a quarter
of an hour after, Van Trump shot off a Piece, and put abroad his Pendant, and
bore up on General Blake and the Fleet that was with him, and a little to the
East of Sandgate Castle, he came up with all his Fleet, being Two and forty
Sail, to General Blake, and himself being the head-most ship, having his Flag
on his Main Top, came within shot of General Blake; whereupon General Blake
shot at his Flag, and he not taking the same down, he shot a second, and a
third; upon which Van Trump taking in his Pendant, put out his Red Flag under
his Holland Colors, and presently after gave a Broadside to General Blake,
and thereupon General Blake answered him with another, and both the Fleets were
engaged.

William Brandley.

The Examination of Bastean Tunemant late Captain of the Ship called the St.
Lawrence, taken before his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell and Dennis Bond
Esquire, at Dover, 22 May, 1652.
WHo says, He came from Flushing about fourteen days since under the Command
of Admiral Van Trump with two and forty sail of Ships, and that they lay with
their Fleet about four days between Zealand and Dunkirk, and from thence they
came to Dover Road on Tuesday last about ten a clock in the morning, and there
Anchored until Wednesday about twelve a clock and then weighed Anchor, they
made off toward the French Coast about two Dutch Leagues, where a ship of the
States of Holland came up toward them, and made a waft with his Flag to Van
Trump who bore up to that ship, and he saw a boat go from that ship aboard Van
Trump, who thereupon presently made all the sail he could, and came through all
his Fleet, and made with all the haste he could toward General Blake and his
Fleet: and being come near him, he shot a Gun without a Ball, and then two Guns
more with Balls, as he was informed; whereupon Van Trump shot one shot at
General Blake, and then presently fired a Broadside at him, who fired his Guns
lustily again at him, and the Fight began about four a clock in the afternoon,
and continued till night. And he says, That his ship only was taken; and
being demanded what was their Signal to fight, he says, That when their
Admiral hung out his Red Flag under the States Colors, they were to fall on:
And says, That when he saw their Admirals Red Flag hung out, he perceived they
were in earnest, and then he did the best he could.

Bastean Tunemant.

The further Examination of Bastean Tunemant Captain of the St. Lawrence, taken
the same day before the persons aforesaid.
Who being demanded, whether he with four other Dutch Ships were not met by
the Andrew and two other English Ships near Calice about five weeks since, and
whether they did strike Topsails to them; He says they did meet those English
Ships and did strike their Topsails to them; and after their arrival in
Holland, their Admiral Van Trump asked this Examinant why he did strike sail to
them, saying, Were you not as strong as they? and being so, why were you
afraid? And further says, That the Owners of their Ships did likewise use
words to them to the same effect.

The Examination of Cornelius Teby late Lieutenant to the Ship St. Lawrence,
taken the same day before the persons aforesaid.
WHo says, About fourteen days since he came from Flushing and joined with
Admiral Van Trump to the East of Ostend about ten days since, and lay three
days between Dunkirk and the North-furlong and came from thence to Dover Road
on Tuesday between ten and eleven a clock, having two and forty sail of Ships,
and there they anchored until Wednesday about one a clock, and then weighed
Anchor and made toward the Coast of France about four or five Leagues; where
he says, There came a Ship from the Westward and spoke with their Admiral,
who thereupon presently bore up to General Blake, and when he came near,
General Blake made a shot without a Ball at their Admirals Flag, and after that
two more shots, and their Admiral did not take down his Flag, but made one shot
at General Blake, and presently after fired a Broadside, and then General Blake
fired at him; and as soon as their Admiral had fired his Broadside, he hung
out his Red Flag under the States Colors, and upon that their whole Fleet
engaged according to Signal and Orders. The Fight began about four a clock, and
continued about four hours. He says, The said Ship Lawrence was a Merchants
ship hired by the States of Holland for four months, at 1300. Gilders per
month.

Cornelius Teby.

The Examination of Shipco Focus Captain of the St. Mary of Amsterdam now
prisoner, taken the same day, before the persons aforesaid.
WHo says, That about fourteen days since he came from Texel, and joined with
Admiral Van Trumps Fleet before Skevelyn, and laying three or four between
Zealand and Dunkirk, they came on Tuesday last about noon to Dover Road, where
they Anchored until Wednesday Twelve a clock, and then weighed Anchor; they
made off toward the coast of France about Two or Three Dutch Leagues, where a
ship from the Westward made toward their Admiral, who immediately heaved out
all his Sails, and made toward the English Fleet that came from the Westward
with General Blake; how the Fight began he knows not, being a great distance
off; but seeing his Admiral fight he fought likewise, according to his Orders.

Shipco Focus.

The Examination of Peter Johnson Lieutenant to Shipco Focus Captain of the St.
Mary of Amsterdam, taken the same day before the persons aforesaid.
WHo says, About Fourteen days since he came from Texels, and joined with
Admiral Van Trump at Skevelyn about Three days after, and after they lay about
Three days between Dunkirk and the North-furlong; and from thence they came to
Dover Road on Tuesday about Ten a clock in the morning, and anchored there till
Wednesday about Twelve a clock, and then weighed Anchor and made toward the
French coast about Five Leagues, where a Dutch ship of War came up to them, and
spoke with Admiral Van Trump, who thereupon bare up with all the sail he could
to the English General and his Fleet; but who began first to shoot he knows
not: And being asked why he fought, he says, That when the Admiral hung forth
his Red Flag, they were to do the best they could; and seeing their other ships
fight, they fought likewise.

The further Examination of Cornelius Teby, Lieutenant to the abovenamed
Captain Tunemant, taken the same day before the persons aforesaid.
WHo says, That his Captain told him, that Admiral Van Trump blamed him for
striking sail to the English Ships, saying, That he had married a young Wife,
and therefore was afraid, and made haste home.

Cornelius Teby.

WE whose Names are hereunder written, do humbly take leave to certify the
state of the business betwixt Us and the Dutch Fleet, (viz.) Upon the
Nineteenth of this present May we had Intelligence, That they were off the
South-foreland, consisting in the whole of about Forty two sail, we plied up
with our Ships as fast as possible, and being off Foulston, espied the Dutch
Fleet to ride at Anchor near Dover, as soon as the Tide presented we plied
toward them; whereupon they weighed and stood to the Southward, Three Leagues
to the windward of our ships: we thereby imagining they had not any intent to
engage with us, laid our ships about, and within half an hour Van Trump with
all his Fleet bore up upon us; and being near, our General gave Order to fire
at the Dutch Flag to strike; which they refusing, we shot again; they still
refused to strike, but shot a Piece at our Flag, and shot it through, we then
being within Musket shot one of the other: Then the third time we fired a Gun
at his Flag, which was no soon done, but he fired his whole broad side at us,
and so we engaged, and went on fighting from half an hour past Four that
afternoon till Nine of the clock at night, and then we anchored to fit our ship
in a posture for the next morning; the Dutch Fleet being to the southward of us
Three Leagues, next morning directed their course for France; whereupon seeing
of them do so, we plied up to the Downs: This we humbly certify, and the truth
thereof will upon all occasions testify, and have hereunto subscribed our
hands the 24th of this present May, 1652.

Robert Moulton jun. John Gilson. John Redwood. Anth: Jackson. Henry Coradall.


Major Bourn's Relation.
UPon the Eighteenth of May, the Wind being at North-East, the weather
something haisie, about Ten in the morning we saw a great Fleet on the back
side of the Goodwyn sand, which lay with their sayls hayl'd up, and drove to
the fouthward the later Tide of Ebb in land; about twelve they were so nigh,
that we plainly descried them to be all Men of War, consisting of One and forty
in number, one whereof had a Flag at the main Topmast head, the rest Jacks and
Ancients, Hollands Colors, at which time they were near the South sands Head:
There was in the Downs the Andrew, Triumph, Fairfax, Entrance, Centurion,
Adventure, Assurance, Greyhound, and the Seven Brethers, all the rest of the
Fleet being with the General to the Westward, by whose special Command I wore a
Flag at the main Topmast head; the appearance of which I humbly conceive was
one cause amongst others which moved their General to send two Frigots toward
me, which as soon as I perceived plying into the Road, I sent out the Greyhound
to examine them, and know the ground of their Approach; who returned this
Answer to the Captain, That they had a Message from their Admiral to the
Commander in the Downs, at which he made sail toward me, permitted them to
come in, the two Frigots came near and saluted the Flag, and then the Captains
came on Board, whose names were, one Tyson, and the other Aldred, who brought
this Message from their Admiral Van Trump, That by reason of much Northerly
Winds, he with his Fleet was put the southward farther then he intended, and
having Anchored the day before off Dunkirk, many of his ships had lost Anchors
and Cables, and so were forced to leewards; but withal declared, that they had
special Command from their Admiral to signify thus much, That it was the only
cause of their coming to prevent any thoughts or misaprehensions, for that he
had not the least purpose to offer injury to any of the English Nation, but for
fear least any noise or Alarm should be given either at Land or Sea, he
thought good to send this message. And further, the one of them in discourse
said, that their Admiral Trump would have come himself into the Road, but that
he was not willing to breed any difference about his Flag, forasmuch as he had
not order to take it down: To whom I replied, That I presumed there would be no
new thing required of them, and neither more nor less would be expected from
them, but what they knew to be the ancient Right of this Nation; and withal I
desired them to return this Answer from me to their General, That their Message
was civil, that our General was to the Westward, whom I looked for hourly, and
that received; and if what they delivered was so intended, I desired the
Reality there of might be manifested by their speedy drawing off from this
place with their Fleet, for else this their appearance would be otherwise
expounded; and so I dismissed them, who made sail to their Admiral who lay off
the South-Sands head. I expected them to come into the Road every moment, and
therefore was in readiness with the small strength I had under my charge; so
soon as the two Friggots before mentioned came back to their General, they all
made Sail and stood toward Dover, and there they came to an Anchor that Tide.
At the first appearance of them, after I had made them certainly to be the
Holland Fleet, I did according to my duty give such an Account thereof to the
Right Honorable the Council of State, as the time and other business would
admit, and withal I immediately dispatched a Ketch to our General, who met with
the advice thereof that night about Nesse. All the next night we lay in
readiness, our Anchors apeck, and kept two Friggots one at a distance from the
other betwixt us and them, giving them Instructions to make a Signal to me
either night or day, that I might understand their motion whether toward, the
General or elsewhere, to the end I might the better be able to order my self
and the party with me to the best advantage for security of the Generals Fleet
and our selves. In the morning about ten a clock I received advice from the
General being a little to the Westward of Foulstone, and according to Order
received from him, calculated the time and Tide, so that we might most
opportunely make conjunction of our Forces. About twelve a clock I set sail out
of the Downs, the wind being Easterly, immediately after I perceived the
Hollanders to be under sail some of them, and the rest making ready: we steered
along, and when we came as high as the Southforeland, the Hollanders Fleet
was got off the Shore and were (...) Channel over plying to wind-ward toward
Calice, at which time I saw our General and those with him, and within an hour
after or thereabouts, the Holland Fleet bore up and made Sail toward him; we
hastened toward him, and hope I may say, seasonably came in, for by that time
the Guns were fired betwixt the Admirals, we were with the body of their Fleet
and engaged with them from half an hour past four in the afternoon till it was
dark; what execution we did upon them they best know, I shall not determine it,
but surely they were sensible of us, for they did their utmost to decline us
and avoid our coming near, which we endeavored by all means; but their Admiral
leading the Van, they all made sail after him, and so shot themselves to
Leeward of us, and so left the Rear of the Fleet to us, which we endeavored to
sever from the rest, and accordingly did in part break the Body, and some of us
who were the nearest and had the Advantage of the Wind, fell upon the Stern
most, who I suppose found it hot work; the one of them of thirty Guns we took
which fought stoutly, another of the same force so lamed, her main Mast shot
down, and having much water in Hold yielded, and the Captain thereof came in to
our Boat to save himself; the night coming on and no hope left him, I presume
she sunk in the night. We not knowing what might be the issue of this
beginning, endeavored to find out our General, to the end we might receive
Instructions how to order our selves in the morning, expecting certainly to
prosecute the business then, for which end we presently came to an Anchor,
because we would be near them in the morning, but they did not stop, so that in
the morning we could scarce discern them at Topmast head; by which we
concluded that they were bound over to the coast of France, and were not
willing to try it farther at this time, and therefore that evening plied it up
toward Foulstone, and between that and Dover anchored again, and the next day
came into the Downs.

29 May. 1652. Your very assured Friend and Servant in the Work of God, N.
BOURN.

Instructions given to the Dutch captains by Van Trump. Martin Harperts Trump
Knight, and Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and West-Frizeland, etc.
THat the Vice Admiral Scout (or he that keeps the Watch) at night, and all the
Captains belonging under his Color already present, or those that yet are to
come under his Command, upon all occasion that may befall, may know how to
govern himself duly, he is to observe the seventh and eighth Article of his
Lieutenant Admiral's Instruction, whose Content does follow word for word.

The seventh Article.
The Commanders or Captains of the Squadrons already fitted, or yet to be
prepared, are commanded to Maintain and Defend the Ships of these Countries
from all Visitations or Searchings, without comprehending all necessary
Questions in the Sea, or demanding the showing of their Passes and Bills of
Lading; which according to the eighth Article of the Sea-Treaty made the
seventeenth of December, One thousand six hundred and fifty, with the King of
Spain, hereafter inserted in following words, may be required of whomsoever it
may be, defending them against all and every one that would offend them,
delivering them from the hands of any that may have taken them; and in such
Cases to use all their power to overcome such strong Ships, doing all that may
be requisite by their Commissions and ordinary Instructions, according to the
Custom of Seafaring men, to the service of the Country.

And to hinder that the said forbidden Goods of Counterband, whether they be
marked or signed, and are regulated by the Article immediately preceding, not
to be carried to the Enemies of the said King of Spain, and under Pretense
thereof to hinder the Freedom and Safety of Shipping and Commerce.

It is agreed, That the Ships of the Subjects and Inhabitants of the United
Provinces come into any Harbor of the said King, and intending to go thence to
the Countries of his Enemies, shall only be bound to deliver and to show to
the Officers of the Spanish Ports or other States of the said Lord King, from
whence they intend to part to show their Passes, containing and specifying
their Lading of their Ships, attested and marked with the ordinary Seal and
Marks, and acknowledged by the Officers of the Admiralty in the Parts whence
they first are parted, showing the place which they intend to sail unto,
altogether in an ordinary and accustomed Form; After which having their Passes
in the said form, they are no more to be molested, nor searched or detained and
stayed, under what pretext soever it might be.

The eighth Article.
If they come to fight with other strange Ships, because of freeing themselves
or hindering the visiting and searching of the ships of these Countries, and
overcoming the same, they are to bring in or to send such conquered ships, with
sufficient Information of what is past, that it may be right represented in the
Admiralty of the Quarter out of which the Conqueror did part. Datum in the Ship
Brederode, this 25 May, 1652.

Signed, M: Harperts Trump.

APPENDIX.
IT is further here commanded, That all Commanders and Captains under the said
Color or Flags, shall at all hours keep ready their Canons and Fore-Arms, and
coming toward any Foreign Ship of War, making all things ready, and making
haste as much as weather and wind will give them leave, to go to the rest of
our Ships, and there remain in a good posture: That observing well the sign of
War, Defensive and Offensive (by reason of freeing from searching or visiting
of the Ships of these Countries, or otherwise) they may pass according to the
sign, which sign of War shall be a Red Flag, under the Prince, hanging and
streaming on the Admirals Great. Which seeing every one, he shall endeavor to
his utmost to do what possible he can against the parties advantage, taking
them, and to bring the gotten Ships under the Flag, thereupon to resolve and to
dispose as is fit; but as soon as the said Red Flag on the said Admirals great
Rodol is taken in or off, all Actions of Hostility shall cease.

It is also expressly forbidden to make any unnecessary shots of Honor, but
rather to keep and well to manage the Powder and Shot of the Country; but yet
coming to any Foreign Ship of War, whereby it is requisite to give some
salutation by shooting for the Reputation of the Country; In that case they
are to observe and maintain in all honesty the Honor of our Country, according
as the Commanders or Captains of the Foreign Ships of War shall do the like to
the Lieutenant Admiral, or to those that are in his Place and Command; and also
be wary to do no harm by the said shooting for Honor.

Further, whenever some cross the Seas, and any of the Fleet (whether he be
under the Color or a part crossing) discovering any Foreign Ship, following
the third Article of his Letter of Commission, and understanding of any
preparation or gathering of Ships of War, wheresoever it may be, or that
already some Ships or Fleet shall have passed; Then he is to learn, and observe
very strictly the number of the said ships, their Arming, Guns and Men, of the
said preparation; and likewise what course such a Fleet that may be passed may
have taken, and thereof advise, and send in all haste word to the Admiral or
Commander for the service of the Countries, that thereupon order may be taken
accordingly: And the general token or sign shall be to discover the Sea, coming
together or to a Rendezvous to advertise together of such Fleets as may be
passed, whether they may be gone to any Haven of our Countries or not, or
concerning any matter important to the service of these Countries; and
therefore at every half hour marked by his Hourglass, to shoot off a great
Piece of Ordnance, whereupon every one hearing the unusual sign of that shot,
is to answer in like manner, and in all haste go toward the place where the
foresaid shot has been made, that speedily he may meet with the other ships,
and there to do what the Admiral or Commander with the Council of War, for the
good and service of these Countries shall find fit to be done. Datum ut Supra.

Signed, M: Harperts Trump.

Captain Yongs Letter.
Right Honorable,
AS I was coming to the Westward to take the command of the West-guard the
twelfth instant off the Start, I descried a Fleet of ships about a dozen sail,
coming from the Southward, being Admiral, Vice and Rere in the Fleet, so that I
did conceive them to be Sir George Ayscu's Fleet; but I making sail off to
them, found them a Fleet of Hollanders came from Janua and Legorn; Those three
with Flags were Statesmen of War their Convoyers, the other Merchants ships,
some upwards of Thirty Guns and some under; so I bore with the Admiral, and did
send him by my Master, That he should strike his Flag, and did desire a right
understanding might be between us before any Blood was shed in the
controversy; on this the Admiral took in his Flag and put abroad a Pendent, he
said he did belong to Amsterdam, but his name I know not, but the ship has two
wild men or the like in her stern, and some other things between them, she
has some Thirty eight guns: so then the Vice Admiral came up with me with his
Flag abroad, being a ship of Forty two Guns, so I called to persuade him to
strike, he bid me come on board and strike it, so I sent my Boat on board to
persuade him to it to prevent the loss of Blood, if it might be, but he sent me
word by my Master he would not strike; so then being fitted for it, I came up
very near on the Weather-quarter, yet before I fired, I called to the Captain
my self to take in his Flag, but he said he would not; so then I commanded a
Broadside and a Volley of small shot to be fired on him, and I received the
like from him again: Thus we past some four or five Broad-sides each at other,
though I was forced to be at some further distance from him then the first, I
fearing the Admiral would have laid me on Board on the Weather-side, he having
fitted his ship, and come up Main-sail, and all to gain the Wind of me, forced
me to keep the Wind of him; then Captain Reynolds being come up fair within
shot of his weather quarter, having fired some six Guns before at the Rear
Admiral, as he came in amongst us; so he fired part of a broad side at the
Vice Admiral, just at that instant as he was taking in his Flag, the Recovery
being come up even within shot just as his Flag was in, and the Rear-Admiral
struck likewise: So I sent aboard the Admiral, That I did demand the
Vice Admiral, either in his person or his ship to carry into Port, to make good
what damage was done: He told my Master, he did not meddle in the least himself
as yet, as long as it was only about striking the Flag, the which he said was
now taken in; but if I sought any further matter, as the surprizal of him or
the ship, he was bound and would assist him, she being the States ship as well
as he, not then knowing, or could take any notice of any further intentions: So
I desired Captain Reynolds and Captain Chapman to come on board to consult with
me what further to do in it, it being near night; and it was the judgment of us
all, not to proceed any further in it, the Flags being taken in, by reason the
Treaty being between the Nations at present, the case of Breach of the Peace
might not be any way imputed on our part. I have received some damage in my
Hull sail and rigging, the which I shall soon, God willing, get repaired again;
I had one man even as good as killed outright, dyed since, and some Four
wounded, but I hope they will recover: For my own part, I bless the Lord for
it, I am very well; I do believe I gave him his belly full of it, for he sent
me word he had Order from the States, That if he struck he should lose his
head; but at length he did strike, which makes me conceive he had enough of it.

President, Plymouth Sound, May 14. 1652. Your Honors humble Servant at
command, Anth: Young.

A Paper delivered by the Lords Ambassadors to the Council of State, the Third
of June, 1652. new style.
Most Honorable Lords,
WE are here by reason of and unhappy an unexpected Mischance; An horrible
Report has amazed us, That a Fight at Sea should have been betwixt the Fleet
of this Commonwealth and of the United Provinces, and That ours should have
been the reason of this unfortunate business, That we began the Fight, and that
thereupon is fought most cruelly; and that from thence the Rumor of the
breaking of the Treaty, and of open War (which should be very near at hand
between the two Nations) was spread: We astonished by this sad Report, direct
our selves to this Honorable Assembly, and do Declare before God, and out of
all our Hearts, That the Fact, so as it is reported, is committed without the
knowledge, and against the will of the States of the United Provinces our
Lords, and of us their Ambassadors. Moreover we do affirm, That the Hearts of
ours do desire nothing but Unity, Peace, League, and a very near Friendship
with this Commonwealth, and hope that with all their wishes. In the mean while,
we do think it not to be amiss, if we give notice unto your Honors, That we
have received Letters from the Admiral of the Fleet of the United Provinces,
Dated the Thirtieth of the last Month, wherein the occasion and reason of the
said Fight-quite otherwise is declared then the common Report is: For the truth
of which business, we suppose to be convenient to inquire exactly; But this is
worth observation in the mean time, That our Admiral Trump in the same Letter
does declare plainly to have no other Order from the Lords the States, then to
sail about, and to view the shore and coasts of our country, as far as Ostend
and Newport and no farther. By which it does appear as clearly as the Sun is
under Heaven, That by all means the States of the United Provinces have had no
mind to attempt any thing against the Fleet or other ships of this
Commonwealth. If any thing then in this business be done otherwise then it
ought to be, this does not concern the said States, but them which have
executed the said business, and let them make it good. We have been here now
almost six Months about the concluding of a League, by special Order of the
said States, and have delivered some days ago to your Commissioners a Paper, in
which not only the different Points touching the Treaty, but also the means by
which the same could be brought to a good Agreement, and reconciled one with
another, were sufficiently declared; so that we did expect nothing every day,
but a happy end to so good a Work; and truly that excellent matter may in very
few hours be finished. But who should ever believe that so Noble a Work, and
desired with so many vvishes of all honest men, and especially of all the
Churches of the Reformed Christian Religion, should be cut off or hindered by
any such imprudent and turbulent man (whosoever he may be) without knowledge
and against the will of the Lords the States? By Law of Nature and Customs of
all Nations is very well known, That he to whom a Charge is given in particular
things, an Ambassador in Public Business going beyond the limit of their
Commissions, a General of an Army Depopulating without order of his Superiors
any Grounds of the Neighbors; a wild beast doing any mifchief after it has
broken its bond, that not the Masters but those that have done the wrong are
obliged, especially if the disapproving of the same Masters follows
thereupon; which without question (if the business be so as it is related) is
to be expected from the States of the United Provinces. In the mean while we
make no doubt, that to attempt any Hostility before the other party is heard,
cannot be approved neither by God, nor by any men, especially Christians. It is
a Custom by all reasonable Nations to demand restitution of their Goods if any
trouble be done, and in case Satisfaction be given or offered, to lay aside all
Hostility. And it is no wonder that all Nations are so much against War and
inclined to establish a Peace, the War being plainly a cruel monster, a world
of evil, and a mere deluge of innocent blood; therefore the most holy Fathers
of our Religion have expressly declared the War (although just) to be execrable,
especially in relation to the Christians, who are taught by their meekest
Savior to spare other men's blood as well as their own. But amongst all kind of
Wars, is this to be reputed the most detestable and horrible if between these
Nations War be risen. Truly the experience teaches us, that the best and
strongest Wine (if it be corrupted) becomes the sowrest Vinegar; and indeed if
two Nations having been friends of old times, of the same Religion, lovers of
Liberty, joining upon the same Sea, next Neighbors, both Valiant and Warlike be
clashed together, what is to be expected but the Ruin of both, and as the
Proverb says, a Cadmean Victory. And what else is this then to afflict and
depresse your Friends and Companions in Religion to please our Enemies, and to
give occasion openly for to hurt them both. An Author, being none of the least
amongst yours, has very well compared, as we conceive, both the Nations to two
earthen Pots driving in the Sea with this device, If we hurt, we break; He
hitted it very well that honest man, and we may believe you are of the same
opinion. But if the two Nations come to an Agreement, Oh Lord, what store of
Happiness will this bring forth! The true Gods Service will be established, the
Sea be quiet, and Opportunity taken away from all Enemies to trouble them both;
all Companions in Religion be resoiled, and which is to be reputed the chiefest
of all, To the most good and gracious Lord, Praises and Thanksgiving will be
lift up into the Heavens. We conclude then, most Honorable Lords, and instantly
demand and desire, so as we have longed to propose to your Honors this three
days since;

First, That a Copy may be given unto us of the Relation of the things that are
past.

Secondly, That we may send that over by your leave to our Lords the States,
and that the other part being heard, the truth of the Business may be known.

Thirdly, That in the mean while all things may be kept whole and untouched.

Fourthly, That by no means the Business of the concluding of the Treaty be put
off, and that such unfortunate Mischances may be avoided, and an everlasting
Peace may be established between both the Nations.

All which we desire of all our hearts, the great and bountiful God the Author
of Peace will be pleased to grant us.

Signed, Cats. G: Schaep. Vandeperre.

The Translation of the LETTER of the Admiral Trump to the States General,
mentioned in the precedent Paper.
High and Mighty Lords,
MY last Letter was of the twentieth instant, sent by the Messenger that
brought my Instruction aboard, since when I crossed the Sea before the Mase,
Wislingen, Ostend and Newport, until the twenty four of the same Month, when
we were forced to cast our Anchor, and stay there in a hard weather and a rough
sea, until the twenty six in the morning: The weather growing fairer, and being
under Sail, diverse Captains of the Direction came aboard, complaining, That
they lost their Anchors and Cables, some having but two Anchors and two Cables
left; It was resolved, because the wind did grow big, to go under the point of
Dover for to prevent the loss of our Ships. At one of the clock coming before
Downs, we did send the Commander John Thissen from Flissingen, and Captain
Peter Alders toward the Downs to the Commander Bourn, who was there with some
Ships of the Parliament, whom they saluted in my Name, advertising him that we
were bound to cross the Sea about our coast; and that having lost some Anchors
by the last hard weather, we were forced to Anchor under Dover, to help one
another, and so to return to our appointed limits; having also no other order,
but to protect our Merchants Ships and Fishermen, and to maintain the honor of
our Country: That we therefore thought it fit to acquaint the said Commander
with the same, because he should not suspect any thing to the contrary; who
also with much courtesy did salute me, and thank me for this notice. Upon the
twenty nine, at two of the clock, we made sail, the wind North east, good
weather, sailing toward Calice, with intention to cross toward our coast, for
to provide us of Cables and Anchors: Coming about Calice Cliff, we met with
Captain Ioris van Sanen of Amsterdam, coming out the Streights, with Captain
Hugeluyt, having in their Company seven rich Merchants Ships, who are esteemed
above fifty Tuns of Gold, who he left the twenty nine at Anchor, right against
Feverley, where about twelve Ships of the Parliament did lie, and diverse
Frigots came to see them; and for as much as the said Ioris van Sanen upon the
twenty two of May, about Goutstart, was met a Frigot of the Parliament, who
fiercely set upon him for to make him strike, and against whom he defended him
near about two hours, and so was left by the said Frigot, whereupon the said
Commander Hugeluyt, and the said Van Sanen, should endeavor for to find out
our main Fleet, and to give us notice of it; as he did accordingly, fearing
much, That the said Merchants Vessels already might be taken: Whereupon I
presently went thither, to take them under my protection; and if they were
taken, to put them at liberty, if it was possible, according to the seventh and
eighth Articles of my Instruction of the sixteenth instant. Upon the way we met
fifteen Ships and Frigots of the Parliament, among whom one was an Admiral,
whom I intended to view, taking in all my Sails, except both my Murshot Sails,
whom we did avail until the midst of the stangs. Being within a Canon-shot,
he shot a Ball over our Ship, we answered not, he shot another, to which we
answered with one; presently he gives me a broad side, being within a Musket
shot, and shot all his side through our Ship and Sails: Diverse were wounded,
some with the loss of their Arms, some otherwise; thereupon we presently gave
him our broadside, not knowing what they intended, which for as yet I know not,
because they did not speak a word to us, neither we to them, and we fell
thereupon to a general fight. In mean while came the Commander Bourn out the
Downs, with twelve of such like Ships and Frigots mounted, as he told himself
to the said Commander John Thyssen, and Captain Peter Alders, being aboard of
him with sixty to seventy, and the Frigots with thirty eight to fifty pieces of
Ordnance, who in the same while assaulted our Fleet from behind; and we fought
thus from half an hour past four till nine of the clock, the darkness departing
us from another; when both the Admirals a little beyond the reach of their
Ordnance cast their Sails toward the Lee for to gather their Fleets, and to
mend what was shot to pieces, we floated the whole night with a light on every
Ship. The thirtieth in the morning, we saw the English Fleet driven windward
from us, who made Sail and went toward Dover. We wanted two of our Ships, who
were in the rear of our Fleet: The Captains, Tuynmans of Middlebourgh, and
Siphe Fooks of Amsterdam, both Ships of the Direction, whereof we found that of
Captain Siphe Fooks about noon floating without Mast; The Skipper and the
Officers declared unto us that they were taken by three Ships of the Parliament
two hours after Sunset, who took from aboard the Captain and the Lieutenant,
with fourteen or fifteen men more, and putted instead of them many of the
English; but they fearing that the Ship would sink, they took the flight, after
they had plundered all in Hostile manner: They Declared also, That they see that
the said Tuynmans (being with them in the rear of our Fleet) an hour before was
taken: We intend with this Easterly wind to cross to and fro, that we may find
out the said Straight fearders, if it be possible, and with all other Ships
with whom we may meet, to bring them safe in our Country: So ending was
subscribed

M: Harp Trump.
Dated the 30 of May, 1652. from aboard the Ship.
The Lords Ambassadors second Paper, 6 June. 1652.
To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England.
AS on Monday last the Ambassadors of the States of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, have said before the most Illustrious Council upon their honor and
faith, and have averred by the Witness of God, That the unlooked for and
untimely Sea Fight of the two Fleets happened without the knowledge and the
will of the said Lords States, and withal treating with the Council about it
with all uprightness, delivering them a Copy of Trump's Lettershimself, whereby
it might the better appear to the Commonwealth, that the said Lords States had
commanded the said Trump nothing else then to ship about the Coasts and Havens
of their Dominions, to shun all suspicions and Dissentions; even so now again
the same Lords Ambassadors assure the most Illustrious Council, That by the
Ordinary Messenger they receive yesterday, they have received all the
Consultations handled by the said Lords States General from the 22th until the
29th, day of the last Month (new style) on which the said Fight happenned,
whereby it appears yet more clear, and the said Lords Commissioners are more
assured, that their Superiors gave at all no occasion, no cause nor counsel,
but rather they did breathe (as it were) and further with the same mind, care
and zeal, a more strict Friendship and mutual Alliance betwixt these two
Nations, as it does appear more clear then the sun at noon, by their said
Lordships sentence on the occasion of an Answer to be sent to the Protestant
Swissers, made on the 23th of the the said Month, a Copy whereof they now also
present and offer to the said most Illustrious Council.

Therefore the said Lords Ambassadors entreat again this most ample Council,
That yielding due faith to so many Protestations, and to so many Testimonies,
they would now upon their Demands with the Parliament (as is understood)
communicated two days since, they would at the soonest give them such an Answer
as the said Council, according to their Wisdom and Justice may seem good and
necessary, to prevent greater harm, and already imminent Dangers; And that to
these Evils a more ready Remedy may be applied, the same Lords Ambassadors
would not have this Senate ignorant, that the Lord Newport, sent by the Lords
States to deliver to the Lords Ambassadors their Consultations, and signify to
them besides their sincere and plain Mind, since it now seems things did
happen otherwise and against their Hope and Trust, to think upon and prepare
his Return, that so the better he might let them know in what state and
condition matters now are, and what Remedy there may be applied; To which end
the said Lords Ambassadors do entreat this Council to give freedom and leave to
the said Lord Newport, that he may choose some one of the Lords ^tates General
ships, now either in the Thames or in other parts of this Commonwealth, abiding
for his Transportation, or by any other means may return home. Given at
Chelsey, 6 June, 1652. stilo novo.

Signed, J. Cats. G. Schaep. Vandeperre.

An Extract out of the Register of the Resolutions of the High and Mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Provinces.
Thursday the 28. of May, 1652.
AFter that the Letter of the Evangelical Cantons in Switzerland and there
associated in Religion, dated the 14. of April last past, and yesterday
received, was this day again produced; It is upon deliberation resolved and
ordered to send them an Answer, and signify, that their Lordships has
received the before mentioned Letter, and return great thanks for the Affection
which they show unto this State, and for their care for the Conservation of the
Reformed Religion, as also the Continuation of Peace and Concord amongst this
State and the Commonwealth of England; with a Declaration, That their Lordships
will not fail to contribute all things that shall be necessary to promote the
one and the other: And specially a good Correspondence with the said
Commonwealth, hoping the same of the said Commonwealth. That it is true, that
some extraordinary preparation of Ships of War was made, but to no other
intention as to the safety of the Sea, and security of the Navigation and Trade
of these Countries. That to conclude, Their Lordships did wish to the said
Evangelical Cantons and their Religion-friends, all kind of Prosperity, Peace,
Safety and mutual Union, for the Exaltation of Gods most holy Name,
Conservation of the true Christian Reformed Religion, and Prosperity of both
sides, States and Subjects.

The third Paper of the Lords Ambassadors, exhibited 13 June, 1652.
To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England;
Most Illustrious Lords,
EVen as both by word of mouth, and also by Writing, we have signified to this
Council on the third and sixth days of this month, taking God the searcher of
Man's hearts to witness, that the most unhappy Fight of the ships of both
Commonwealths did happen against the knowledge and will of the Lords States
General of the United Netherlands; so also are we daily more and more assured
both by Messages and Letters, witnessing the most sincere hearts of our said
Lords, and that with grief and astonishment they received the fatal News of
that unhappy rash Action; and that upon what we thereupon presently sent them
word of, they did consult and endeavor to find out what Remedy chiefly may be
applied to mitigate that raw and bloody Wound: To which end, they have written
out for to gather a solemn Meeting or Parliament of all the Provinces, whereby
we do not doubt but there will be provided for these Troubles (by Gods favor)
such a cure and present help, whereby not only the outward cause of all
further Evil may be taken away, but also by an Intern comfort the minds may be
redressed and reduced again to a better hope of our Treaty in hand; Which thing
being now most earnestly agitated by our Lords for the common good of both
Nations, to shun that detestable shedding of Christian blood (so much desired,
and would be dearly bought by their common Enemies of both Nations, and of the
Reformed Religion) we again do crave this most Honorable Council, and beseech
you, by the Pledges both of the common Religion and Liberty: mean while to
suffer nothing to be done out of too much heat, that afterward may prove
neither revocable nor repairable by too late idle Vows and Wishes; but rather,
that you would let us receive a kind Answer without further delay upon our
last Request.

Which we do again and again desire so much the more, because we understand,
that the Ships of our Lords and of our Shippers both on the broad Sea, as in
the Ports of this Commonwealth, some by force, some by fighting, are taken by
your men and kept. Given at Chelsey 3/13 June, 1652.

Signed, J. Cats. G. Schaep. Vanderperre.


