THE Quakers Confuted, BEING AN ANSWER Unto Nineteen QUERIES; Propounded by
them, and sent to the Elders of the Church of Duckenfield in Cheshire;

WHEREIN Is held forth much of the Doctrine and practice Concerning
Revelations, and immediate Voices, and against the holy Scriptures, Christ's
Ministry, Churches and Ordinances etc.

TOGETHER With an Answer to a Letter which was Written and sent by one of them
to a Family of Note and Quality in the said County, which pleaded for
perfection in this life, and for Quaking.

By Samuel Eaton, Teacher of the Church of Christ heretofore meeting at
Duckenfield, now in Stockport in Cheshire.

LONDON, Printed by R. White for Thomas Brewster, and are to be sold at the
sign of the three Bibles at the West End of Paul's. 165^.

To the Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Parliament now sitting in
Westminster.
Right Honorable,
IT is the Duty of all that Love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, to contend
for the Faith that was once given to the Saints, every man in his place,
according to the Calling, Office, Power, Interest, Gift, Ability that he has
received from God. And I in my place (though the weakest of many, being yet led
forth thereto by special inviting Providence) have done it both formerly and
at present. And I Assume the boldness to present my poor, plain, weak and
slender labors to your Honors view, and most humbly beg your favorable
construction of my design and scope in them. It is not to asperse any who are
innocent; it is not to bring Saints who are weak and frail under contumely;
Neither is it to exasperate the Supreme Magistrate against any Persons in whom
the visibility of Saintship shall be found; Nor is it to conivnce these Persons
(betwixt whom and my self the contest lies) of their Error; for had there been
any hope of that, I should have found out another way; but it is to preserve
those who are yet sound in the Faith from infection, and it is to awaken others
(who are far more able in the Scriptures then my self) to appear for God, for
Christ, and for the Truth, in such times of the great Apostasy of so very many
from the Faith. And it is to provoke your Honors to a self-reflection, if
thereby you may discern what your own Duty may be, and whether there be not
somewhat which the Supreme Magistrate, according to his Power, Place and
Interest is called to do, in obedience to that command. I know you will
manifest very much tenderness to all Saints, though in different forms, and of
different judgments in circumstantial Truths, and no question Christ will take
it kindly from your hands; but there is a company of Apostate Christians who
are dispersed all over the Land, and who do sow much corrupt seed (which comes
up with great increase in many places) who yet do pass with some for precious
Saints. But my hope is, and my Prayer shall be, that the Lord will make you
wise to judge of Saintship according to Scriptural Rules, and not according to
the large Charity of some who are truly good, though too much friends to them.
You are not ignorant what a Character Christ himself gives of false Teachers,
though appearing a Righteous, Innocent and Harmless People, (as these Quakers
style themselves) he calls them Wolves in Sheeps clothing. And Paul speaking of
such, compares them to Satan in this, That they will transform themselves (as
he does himself into an Angel of Light, so they) into Ministers of
Righteousness. And John in his Epistles makes them all Antichrists, And the
Scope and Drift of all the Apostles in all their Epistles almost, is to confirm
the Faith which the Saints had received, and to preserve from, and recover them
out of Error; and it is to impugn such Doctrine as Seducers brought in among
them, and the Zeal that they showed is worthy of observation. You know also
that as God is a righteous God, and loves Righteousness, and therefore if you
advance Righteousness (as my hope in God is that you will) you shall not lose
your reward; For he is also a jealous God in the things wherein his Glory is
more immediately concerned; And his Honor is not more concerned in any thing
then it is in the Doctrines which men hold and teach, and in the Worships which
men give to him: therefore if you also show your selves jealous of his Glory in
these things, it will be assuredly written down in Gods Book of Remembrance
what Zeal you had for your God, and the Lord will bless you thence forward. Are
Magistrates for a Praise to good works, and for a terror to evil works, while
only they are good and evil, but when they come to be best or worst (as they
always be when Religion is in them) is it so that they then have nothing to
do, neither are they to meddle with them? If this be the sense of the Apostles
words (as all Persons which do exclude the Magistrate from having any thing to
do with the matters of God) will have it to be; it is a strange one, and has
nothing to bear it up, either from that Text, or any that I know of. But you
are sufficiently instructed (I doubt not) concerning your own power, and your
Zeal showed where the honor of God is engaged, will provoke many whereto they
will the rather be carried, considering that no sins do bring more and greater
plagues upon a Not on that professes Righteousness, then sins against the
first Table do; Now Magistrates are the Fathers of the Commonwealth, and
therefore should study to preserve it from those judgments that would destroy
it. Or else why are Laws made against Oaths, and such kind of Blasphemies, if
they be not to intermedle with matters of the first Table; and are there no
sins against the first Table that God hates so much as he hates Oaths? yea,
there are Blasphemies of opinion that are of a more hateful and harrid nature.
But what ought to be done in this case, I leave that to your Honors wisdom to
find out by searching of the Scriptures; knowing that the Lord has made many
of you very dextrous and skilful in the understanding of the Scripture. When
you meet with Crimes of a Civil Nature mentioned in the New Testament, as
Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. You cannot Read their Penalties there which
ought to be inflicted; you find the sins, but not the Punishments against such
Offenders; What course do you take? you are forced to fly to the Old Testament,
and to fetch your Light thence. There are Apostates from the true God, from the
true Christ, from the true Faith in the great Fundamental of it, and from the
true Worship in the very Substantials of it, and who also are Teachers of
Apostasy, who yet were once enlightened, and knew the Truth; What ought to be
done to such, or what course ought to be taken, that Dishonor to God may not
be increased, nor the Land troubled by Gods Controversy against it? I leave it
to be seriously thought of; and I hope the Lord will guide your minds (among
the multiplicity of other weighty and serious thoughts within you) to the
seasonable consideration of it. But if there be Sorcery and Familiarity with
the Devil to be found among a People, who challenge Propriety in God, excluding
all others from Interest in him; I have no cause to doubt but that such gross
polluting Evils will be searched out. The God of Wisdom direct, and guide your
Honors in all things that you take in hand, that by well doing, you may gain
the Testimony of the Saints and World, that you are raised up of God, to exalt
God, Christ, Faith, Truth, Godliness, Righteousness, and Mercy in this Nation.
I most humbly beg pardon from your Honors, for my boldness in suggesting these
thoughts of my heart, and spreading them before you, and remain

Your Honors in all humble Duty Samuel Eaton.

To the Christian READER.
CHristian READER, about three years since I was traveling through Notting ham
toward London, and meeting with many reports respecting a People who are
called Quakers, concerning Sorcery and witchcraft that should be among them;
for confirmation whereof, it was asserted, that many Persons who came among
them only as spectators and Observators of their way, grew distempered, and
fell into trances among them. I was very desirous to satisfy my self
concerning the truth thereof, being very unwilling to entertain reports upon
Hearsay; At last (about half a mile from Nottingham Town) I met with a man of
a godly, sober spirit (as he appeared to me) and Preacher to a people about
amile off from the aforementioned Town: upon occasion of enquiring of the way
which I was to go, I fell into discourse with him about the Quakers, and asked
him, whether he conceived that there was any Sorcery among them; he answered,
yea; and thereupon made Relation of this ensuing Story. There is (said he) a
young man of my Farish, whom I judge to be truly godly; he desired leave from
me to go among them one day to behold their way: but I durst not give way unto
him, but told him that is might be a tempting of God if he should go.
Notwithstanding (unknown to me) he went, and while he was observing of them, he
began to be sick, and was afraid he should fall, and wished himself from among
them, and soon after their meeting was ended; and he grew well again, and
remained unsatisfied with that which he had seen (for he came late) and was
very desirous to have some further knowledge of their way, and therefore went
the second time among them; and after he had been there awhile, he began to be
sick again, and his distemper increased upon him, till at length he fell into a
trance among them, in which they left him, and went their way; and when he came
to himself there was only an old woman there, and he returned home, and was
very sensible of his miscarriage in not hearkening to my advice, and came to me
and confessed his fault, and acquainted me with all that he had done, and what
had befallen him, and blessed himself from that people, and concluded the Devil
was powerful among them. Having received this Relation from the Minister (who
was a mere Stranger to me, but very godly in all his expressions) I became
credulous of many like things, which I had before that time heard of them, and
thought to have nothing to do with that Generation of men; and though I have
been often solicited to confer with them, yet I have perpetually declined it,
because I looked upon them as a People not only deluded, but given over to the
power of Satan. Notwithstanding beyond all mine own thoughts, I have (by the
Providence of the Lord, which orders all things) been called forth to have some
dealings with them, and am now in a sort necessitated to appear in Print
against them. Fo thus it fell out.

There was a certain man, named Richard Waller, who was Servant at a Gentleman's
House near Stopport in Cheshire; this man fell in league with a Woman servant
in the same house with him, who stood related to us, and was a Member of our
Society; she acquainted us with this league, and sought our consent; we
appeared not against it absolutely, because he made some profession of
Religion, but withheld our consent till he should clear himself from some
scandalous fact that was charged upon him; but she was impatient of delay, and
received his own relation of the thing, and to our grief and trouble gave
herself up unto him in Marriage. Not long after both of them left the Family in
which they lived, and went into the lower parts of Lancashire to live there,
near unto those parts where there are many Quakers, who meet frequently
together. This man (it seems) had not been long there but he fell in among
them, and gave himself up unto them; and within a short time after writ a
Letter to the Family (where he and his wife had so lately been Servants) in
which he pleads for such a Perfection which excludes all sin from being
committed by the Saints; and he also pleads for quaking, and produces many
Scriptures to prove both; and he reviles Ministers under the Title of Priests
of this World which teach deceit, and he denies all the Teachers of the World,
and witnesses his Teacher to be within him, and he exhorts them to wait upon
the Lord, and to cease from man, and to mind the Light of God-within them, with
much more of this nature. A Copy of this Letter was given unto me, which I
communicated to the Brethren, and after a debate had of those two things, which
he asserted and endeavored to make out by Scripture; it was concluded that the
Letter with those Scriptures should be answered, and sent to this man's wife who
wrote the Letter, for the establishing of her, because she stood related to us,
and we were sensible of the danger that she was in; and I was entreated to draw
the Answer, which I did, and it was sent by a special Massenger unto her. About
two Months after, the same man that wrote the Letter (which occasioned our
Letter of answer to his wife) came over to our side as a Messenger sent by the
Quakers, with a Reply to our Answer, and with a paper of nineteen Questions;
and upon the fifth of June last, being the first day of the Week, he delivers
the paper of the Questions in their name to me, in the face of the
Congregation, and requires an answer thereto, and pleads for an Absolute
Perfection in the presence of all that were assembled; the paper of Reply he
kept back, as being too scurrilous in his own thoughts, as some collected that
spoke with him; but I had notice of it, and called for it from him the next
day, and then received it.

Upon this account it is that I come to be engaged in an answer to these
Queries; I have also annexed the Copy of his Letter that was given me, and the
Answer which I sent unto it, which was directed to his wife, together with the
Reply that the Quakers made unto it; which indeed is too tedious to be read of
any who have most time; it is such a sottish and senseless piece of stuff, and
has so much scurrilous language in it. But by it, and by the Queries, the
Saints and World may know what a people these are, and what little hope there
is of any good to be wrought upon them; if they would admit of any rational
discourse from Scripture, some encouragement would be given to spend time that
way with them; but they can easily evade all with such Answer as this, Busy
minds give senses to Scripture, and are Persons that have nothing to do with
Scripture, can witness nothing of that they speak of. They pretend to speak and
act all by the Spirit, and if any one will try the Spirit that they speak by,
their Reply is, that such an one can neither witness Scripture nor Spirit, and
therefore has nothing to do with such things. Yet they deceive many, and they
increase in number continually; but the time will come that they shall proceed
no further. In the mean time it ought to be sad to every godly spirit, that
Satan should have such power to work so effectually in and upon many who have
been reputed Saints, who are drawn into them; but God will issue all to his
Glory at the last, and in this I rest, and remain

Thine in the Lord Jesus Samuel Eaton.

THE Quakers QUERIES, For some Friends who call themselves Elders of the Church
of Christ, meeting at Stopport, these etc. A few Queries to you who profess
your selves to be Teachers, Pastors and Elders.
Querie 1. WHether you have the same eternal Spirit which gave forth the
Scriptures, yea or no?

Querie 2. Whether the Apostles did give a right meaking to the Scriptures when
they gave them forth, or left them to you to give a meaning to them, yea or no?

Querie 3. Whether the Plagues be not added to them who add to the Prophesies
written in the Book? and whether his Name be not diminished out of the Book of
Life, that diminishes? and whether you can witness this Name, yea or no?

Querie 4. Whether you have an infallible Judgment to judge of things eternal,
yea or no?

Querie 5. Whether you be above the Apostle, and are able to judge his
Condition? because you say, he was not perfect, who said, he spoke wisdom among
them that were perfect.

Querie 6. Whether you have the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the
World was, which the Apostle speaks of yea or no?

Querie 7. Whether you have heard the voice of the liveing God of Heaven and
Earth? or whether do you not take the Prophets words, Christ's words, and the
Apostles words, and say, he says it, when says the Lord, I never spoke to you?

Querie 8. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin while he is upon the
Earth, yea or no?

Querie 9. Whether you preach no other Doctrine then that which the Apostles
did? that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and with our hands have handled of
the word of life? For this life is made manifest, and we have seen it, and bear
witness and show it unto you.

Querie 10. Whether you have this word which was from the beginning, and this
life manifested to you which was to the Apostles? And if it be, why do you take
a Text from the Letter, and Preach from it, and show the People the Letter?

Querie 11. And show me where the Prophets did take a Text, and preach from it,
but only Christ read a place, and said, it was fulfilled, who said he was
anointed to preach; and which of you can witness you are anointed to preach by
the living God, yea or no?

Querie 12. Tell me why you sing David's Conditions and Experiences in Meeter,
and when you read them, hats you keep on, and when you sing them, hats you put
off.

Querie 13. Whether you have the voice, and whether you do know the voice of
Christ from the voice of a Stranger? My Sheep know my voice, says Christ,
seeing that you are so forward to judge, and sit as Judges of the Saints
Conditions?

Querie 14. Whether that which is in you which Judges, be eternal and
infallible, yea or no?

Querie 15. What is the Ordinance which is ordained of God, that those which
you call Quakers deny, and where or when did God command you to observe them?
As to sprinkle Infants, to pray before and after your Sermons, as you call
them, or to set times, days and hours, which was in the Generation which were
enemies to Christ, who observed such things.

Querie 16. What these Ordinances of God be which you speak of? And where God
commanded them, and to whom, which you say those that you call Quakers do deny?
mention them in particular, and declare them openly in Writing, and give over
accusing.

Querie 17. Whether you do not seduce the People to draw them from the
anointing within them? when as John says, they need no man teach them, but as
the anointing, and the Promise was Eternal Life to him that did abide in the
anointing.

Querie 18. Whether you do not bewitch the people, to draw them from the Spirit
of God within them, to observe these things which God never commanded; to tell
people of a Sacrament, and following your outward Teaching, who stand praying
in the Synagogues, and are called of men-Masters; which Christ did forbid, Mat.
23. And have the chiefest places in the Assemblies; Whether these be not
Antichrists, which act contrary to the Commands of Christ, this yea or no?

Querie 19. Whether a man shall ever grow up that he need no man teach him
under your Ministry, yea or no? seeing the Apostle says, you need no man teach
you, and you which have been long Teachers, how many have you brought up into
this Condition?

The Church of Christ is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, which does witness the
eternal Spirit; and if you be the same Church, and have the same Spirit, Answer
me these Queries without any consequences or senses, otherwise deny your
Eldership and Pastorship, and to be no Church of Christ.

From some Friends in the Truth in Lancashire, whom the World calls Quakers.

An ANSWER to the forementioned Queries, brought by one Richard Waller a
Messenger of the Quakers, and presented by him in the name of them, unto the
Elders of the Church commoncalled the Church of Duckenfield, now meeting at
Stockport in the face and presence of the whole Congregation; and an Answer
required fromthe above said Elders, upon the 5th of June 1653.
Querie 1. WHether you have the Eternal Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures,
yea or no?
Answ. We do believe and assert, that all Concering the indwelling of the
Spirit in the Saints.
that do believe in Jesus Christ (of which number we take our selves to be)
have the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 9, dwelling in them, 1 Cor. 3. 16.
Which Spirit is God, Acts 10. 3. 5. compared with verse. 19, 20. and therefore
Eternal; Dout. 33. 27. and he who gave forth the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2 Timothy 3. 16. But we do not believe that there is any substantial, essential or
personal union, betwixt this Eternal Spirit and such Believers; For such Unions
would either make the Spirit and Believers some third thing, as when soul and
body are united, a third thing which is neither soul nor body, but compounded
of both, arises from it, which is called Man; or else thee will be a
confounding of substance which cannot be; for God cannot mix with the Creature.
And else such Union if it should be Personal, as betwixt the two Natures in
Christ, would make Believers God, and equal with Christ, and consequently equal
with God himself; The Consequence of which would be, thatsuch Persons would
have an Almighty Power, which they might put forth in working as many miracles
as they please, as they may see it make for the Glory of God, and that they
would be omniscient and know all things, and would have the rest of Gods
Atributes as Christ had, who was God andequal with God, and in whom this
Personal Union was; But this is palpsbly false in reference to Saints, and is
full of Blasphemy.

And though we believe that the Spirit of Christ dwells in Saints, yet we assert
the Spirit of Christ to be distinct from the Saint, and the Saints from the
Spirit, And though he dwells in the Saints, yet he acts not in them but as it
pleases him; neither does he impart Wisdom, Power, Grace and Glory but as it
pleases him; 1 Cor. 12. 7. to 12. And though there be the same Spirit in all
Saints that gave sorth the Scriptures, yet all Saints have not the same
Inspiration of the Spirit which the Prophets and Apostles had, so as they
should be able to give forth infallible Truths, and immediately discover the
pure and clear will of God as the Prophets and Apostles did; Timothy had the
Spirit of God, yet he must give attendance to Reading, 1 Timothy 1. 13. and 2 Timothy
1. 14. 15. He must continue in the things he had learned and had been assured
of, knowing of whom he had learned them. And the holy Scriptures which of a
child he had the knowledge of, are those Writings to which the Apostle sends
him as being able to make him wise to Salvation. The Spirit within him did not
dictate all things to him, but he must have recourse to the Scriptures. God
dwelt in the Temple, but God did not make out all his Glory in the Temple.
Sometimes there was no Glory at all that was visible, and yet God was there;
and when there was Glory, there was not all that might have been: And Believers
are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of God dwells in them; but God
does not make out all his glory in them, not all the Glory his Wisdom, Power,
Holiness, or of the rest of his Attributes; For neither is there a capacity in
the Crreature to receive it, neither does the Spirit communicate according to
the capacity, but it is reserved for another time and place; and now every
Saint is in weakness and infirmity, as in Knowledge so in all other Graces. 1
Cor. 13. 9. to 13.

Querie 2. Whether the Apostles did give a right meaning Concerning the sense
of the Scriptures.
to the Scriptures when they gave them forth, or left them to you to give the
meaning of them, yea or no?
Answ. The Apostles and so all the Penmen of Scriptures, in all the Scriptures
they gave forth, had a meaning, and they gave it forth in and with those
Scriptures which they gave forth, yet not always so plainly that the meaning
thereof might be rightly taken up by those that read them, unless compared with
some other Scriptures which they also have given out, which have a plainer
sense in them, and are helpful to expound them; 1 Cor. 2. 13. Christ says unto
the Jews who required a Sign? Ioh. 2. 19. Destroy this Temple and in three
days I will raise it up again: Christ had a sense in which he meant those
words; he understood what himself said; but the Jews understood it not, could
not take up the sense, but applied the words to a Material Building; But the
Evangelist gives the right sense, in which Christ intended them; and we come to
know the right sense, not by the signification of the words themselves; for
more things are signified then one by one word, as the word (Temple) signifies
plainly and properly a material house where God gave his Presence and was
worshipped; but siguratively and mystically the Body of man in which the Soul
dwells. In this metaphorical sense Christ meant it; But this did not appear to
them, nor would it have appeared to us by the signification of the word, if in
another place of Scripture the Evangelist had not given the interpretation;
Ioh. 2. 21, 22. The Apostle Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 3. 16. that some things in
Paul Epistles were hard to be understood, which they which were unlearned and
unstable did wrest to their own destruction. There was a sense which Paul gave
forth in those Seriptures in his Epistles, but it was not easy but hard to be
understood, and so hard that they who were unlearned in the Scriptures, not
well read therein, not well versed, not well acquainted therewith, did wrest
them; and unstable ones by reason of the difficulty that was in the sense of
them, did pervert them to their own and others ruin. Christ in his Parables
that he gave out (which are part of Scripture) had a meaning, But the meaning
was so mystical and hidden, that the Diseiples could not have found it out, if
Christ himself in other words had not given the sense and meaning thereof. And
Moses and the Prophets wrote of Christ so darkly and obscurely, that though
themselves knew what they meant in what they wrote, John 12. 41, yet others did
not; the Disciples did not till Christ first expounded unto them the things
which Moses and the Prophets wrote of him: Luk 24. 26, 27. Therefore it is that
Christ commmands to search the Scriptures, because the meaning lies deep in
many places, and is hidden from the common eye; yet by searching what
Scriptures laid together speak, the sense may be gotten out.

In Answer therefore to the Question, the Apostles when they gave out the
Scriptures, they gave out the sense in some places more darkly, in other places
more clearly; so that the sense and meaning may be taken up (at least in all
the, great Points of Faith) if Scriptures be compared with each other; And they
have not left them to us, nor to any others to give the sense of them, that is,
to put any sense of our own upon such Scriptures which they have given out,
which is not their sense: but that which is Jeft to us, is, to find out the
sense and meaneing which they have put, as in Re2. 13. 18. after some mystical
things had been held out in which there was a meaning, but hard to be
understood, it is is said, Here is Wisdom; let him that understands count the
Number of the Beast; that is, let him set all his Wisdom and understanding that
he has on work to search it out. Nevertheless it is not to be understood, that
the meaning which the Apostles intended in the Scripture which they gave out,
does perpetually follow the sound of the Letter; for the Letter contains
contradiction many times in it, but the Apostles meaning as he interprets
himself, has sweet congruity in it without contradiction.

Querie 3. Whether Plagues be not added to them who add Concerning adding to
and diminishing from the Scripture, In what sense it is to be understood.
to the Prophecies Written in the Book? And whether his name be not diminished
out of the Book of Life who diminishes? And whether you can witness this name,
yea or no?
Answ. It is plain and clear from Rev. 22. 18. that the Evils are great and
terrible, that are threatened against adding and diminishing; But what this
adding and diminishing is that has such woes belonging to it, is the question;
If expounding the Scripture, and interpreting it, and showing the sense and
meaning thereof, be the adding or diminishing that the question intends,
against which such a fearful Sentence is pronounced, then it would reach Ezra
and those others with him mentioned. Nehem. 8. 7, 8. For they read and they
gave the sense, and caused the people to understand the reading. And Christ
also gave the sense of those words in Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. and declared how they
were fulfilled in himself; and he expounded Moses and the Prophets, their
Writings to those two Disciples who were traveling toward Emmaus. And Philip
guided the Eunuch in his reading unto the right sense of the Prophet Isar. in
Chap. 53. 7, 8, 9. He showed the Prophet spoke not of himself but of another,
via. Christ; Acts 8. 31. 34 And what was preaching the Gospal ordained of God
for? And why were Gifts given unto men? but that the People might be brought to
Knowledge, and might come to understand the Scriptures. Therefore the Apostles
were much exercised in opening those sealed Prophesies which were often read
and never understood, which respected Christ, and in proving out of them that
Jesus was the Christ. Therefore the interpreting of Scripture is not adding to
it, so long as it is not any private interpretation that is given, which a man's
heart has found out and his fancy has imagined; but such an interpretation as
agrees to the Spirit of the Scripture in other places. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. and
such as accords with the Analogy of Faith. Romans 12. 6. that is, holds
Proportion with the Doctrine of Faith as it is laid down in other Scriptures;
This is not adding; but adding is, when the sufficiency of the Scriptures to
build men up to salvation, and to make them perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work, is not acknowledged; and thereupon Traditions, Canons, and
Doctrines and Commandments of men are brought in and annexed and imposed upon
the people; As of old, by the Scribes and Pharisees which Christ so often
conflicted with; and by the Roman Synagogue, and by some of that stamp amongst
our selves; And when Persons assume an Authority and Power to themselves to be
the Judges of the Scripture, and expunge what they please out of it, and
introduce into it what likes them, and what sense they give unto it, whether
it agrees or not agres with other Scriptures, yet that must be the sense of of
it, and none must question it: Whereas Scripture it self ought to be its own
interpreter, else there would be no plain standing rule to try truth by, but
the Truth of God must be subjected to the various and opposite fancies of men.
And when Persons pretend the Spirit, and say they have dreamed, and come with
their apprehensions, and say it is made out so to them or it is so given in to
them; and though there be never so much repugnancy in it to other Scriptures,
yet that must be the sense; by which means the Spirit of Truth comes to suffer
many affronts in this Age; This is adding: And (indeed) the rigid adhering to
the letter of Scriptures and to the sound of words therein, without admitting a
wholesome sense, such as accords with other Scriptures, is adding, which is the
way of all Seducers and Deceivers to make their blasphemous doctrine the more
vendible. For the letter of Scripture in some places, without searching out a
sound sense, will countenance Papists, Arrians, Ranters, and whom not! in their
Tenants; This is the introducing of another Scripture then that which is
Scripture indeed; and it is properly such adding to the Scripture, against
which such plagues are denounced. Let these Persons who are called Quakers,
look to this, for it is their grand imposture wherewith they beguilc the
people; they bring the Letter where it serves for their purpose, as the Papists
were wont to bring their hoc est corpus meum, This is my Body, to prove the
bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament. And these press upon the people the
Letter, and cry out upon the Ministers of Christ and say, they are lying
Priests, and they lead the people in darkness, and so by the Letter destroy the
sense of Scripture, and bring in another sense which is not Scripture-sense,
and so themselves are found both adders to and diminishers from the Scripture.

Querie 4. Whether you have an infallible Judgment to judge of things eternal,
yea or no?
Concering Infalibility in judging how fat men may have it, and how far not.
Answ. The first state of every man is darkness; the natural man understands
not the things that are of God, they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. When any man
is brought from darkness to light, even then he knows but in part; Paul
himself was in some darkness; now we see through a glass darkly, said he of
himself and others, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Those to whom John wrote, who had the
annointment to teach them all things, and of whom John said that they knew all
things, (which was but an hyperbolical expression, and did import only much
knowledge to be in them; 1 Ioh. 2. 20, 21, 27.) yet those were not all light
without any darkness, but they were such who might be deceived, and were
subject to error; therefore the Apostle warns them of Seducers, not
withstanding the unction that they have received. They had not an infallible
judgment, but might be mistaken in some of the things of God, though they had
the Spirit; for the Spirit gives himself out to those in whom he is, in light,
in power and grace as he will. Therefore neither we nor any others have
infallible judgments in all things at all times, but we are subject to Error,
and in many things we do not apprehend and speak aright of God, of Christ, of
the Spirit, of the Saints, of our selves, of the mysteries of the Gospel, which
are some of those things which are eternal; As God said to Jobs Friends, Ye
have not spoken of me the things that are right, as my Servant Job has; and
Job himself did darken Counsel by words without knowledge, when he spoke of God.

Notwithstanding that fallible mind and judgment that is in all men in some
things, and at some times; yet because the Rule that is left men to judge by,
is an infallible, sure and certain Rule, which cannot deceive men, and because
it is a plain Rule in many things and easily understood, Prove. 1. 4. and
because the principles of Religion and fundamentals of Salvation are so clearly
revealed in the Scripture, that Babes in Christ may come to the knowledge of
them; therefore both we and all the Saints, may in some things have an
infallible judgment, and may judge of things eternal with a judgment of
Certainty, both respecting God, Christ, Faith, Repentance, Resurrection of the
dead, eternal judgment, and many other things. How else could there be any
preaching, if persons could not know infallibly, that in some things they hold
forth they speak the Truth; And how could any thing be assuredly believed, if
the word of Faith in the true sense of it, could not infallibly be held forth,
and judged of? And how could any Person be at a certainty concerning his own
Salvation? And how could any Christian seal the Truth of Christ with his blood,
if some things could not be judged of with an infallible judgment?

But whether any person having not the Spirit, can have an infallible judgment
to judge of things eternal, by the knowledge they may get from the Scripture,
is the drift and scope of the question, if I be able to make a judgment of it.
They think that none can infallibly judge of things of an eternal nature, but
such who have the Spirit; and that we are persons that have not the Spirit, and
therefore cannot judge of them nor of their way, and that they themselves have
the Spirit, and that judgment belongs to them only, both of persons and of
things; we are but in our first birth, and are carnal, and know not things of
an eternal Nature; they are in the second birth, and are spiritual, and can
judge all things; and all men, for hitherto tends a great part of a large
Letter sent unto us from them, by which I come to prove them in this question.
In answer therefore unto this, I must distinguish of infallible judgment:
There is an infallible Judgment which may be made from the Scripture without
the Spirit, and there is an infallible judgment which cannot be made from the
Scripture without the spirit. The Judgment that may be made from the Scripture
without the Spirit infallibly, respects the Doctrine which the Scripture
contains to be received and believed by men that they may be saved; what they
be, and what manner of life it is, that Persons ought to live that would come
to Life eternal; these things are clearly and plainly laid down, and may easily
be taken up by unprejudiced Persons, who have unballanced spirits, though they
have not the spirit. Upon this account it is that the Apostle John would not
have every Spirit believed, but would have the spirits tried whether they be of
God; but how must they be tried unless by the Scriptures? for every one will
pretend the Spirit, and there are many false Prophets who have the spirit of
delusion, and are gone forth into the world; 1 John 4. 1. For if the Scripture
were not the judge of the Spirit in this case, so far as concerns Doctrines and
Manners which men have Received and learned, whether they be of God or no; or
whether the spirit of the Devil has not inspiried them: therewith, all men
living would be put upon desperate uncertainties, which is the Spirit that
gives our the Truth, and which is the spirit of Error. And they would be
confounded through the multiplicity of spirits, each spirit pretending to
Truth, and crying down the contrary as Error; Therefore the Scripture alone
being of the Spirits inspiring, is a light sufficient to show the Doctrine what
it is, and the commandment and precept what it is, to one that will attend unto
it, without any further inspiration of the Spirit; else in vain were the
Scriptures at the first inspired.

But then again there is an infallible Judgment which cannot be made without
the Spirit, that is, whether those Doctrines and Rules of Life which are
clearly contained in the Scripture be Doctrines which proceeded from God?
whether God spoke with Moses, sent Christ to declare what he has declared,
inspired the Apostles in speaking and writing what they have spoken or written,
or whether all these spoke of themselves. It is the Spirit of God alone that
can give assured satisfaction concerning this. The Jews and their Rulers,
though they saw the Miracles, yet they know not Christ to be the Messiah; for
had they known him, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. These
are among those invisible things which are revealed unto us by the Spirit, as
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 2. 8, 9, 10. It is easy for any man that has his
reason, and has not the Spirit, by reading the Scripture to conclude that
Scripture makes Jesus the Son of Mary to be the Son of God, and the Christ; But
for any man to believe it, and build upon it as a sure truth of God, this is
from the Spirit; flesh and blood has not revealed this, but the Father which
is in Heaven; Christ told Peter so, Mat. 16 16. The conclusion is, That the
Scripture is the foundation of an insallible judgment concerning things
contained in them, and not the Spirit: but both Scripture and Spirit must
concur to give in the certainty of those things that are there contained, that
they may become a sure rock to be built upon; for no one can say assuredly, and
by a spirit of Faith, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.
3.

Quere 5. Whether you be above the Apostle, and able to Concerning perfection,
what may be granted and what not.
judge his condition, because you say he was not perfect who said he spoke
wisdom among them that were perfect?
Answ. This Question relates to a passage in our Answer to a Letter of theirs
which pleaded for perfection; (which we had the sight of) which fell into their
hands, and has occasioned this Question. The words of our Answer are these, He
might have discerned that Paul expressly denies perfection in reference to
himself, Phil. 3. 12. His Question hence is, Are you above the Apostle, and
able to judge his condition, because you say he was not perfect? It is a
senceless, foolish, causeless Question, because he judged nothing of the
Apostles condition, but perverted what the Apostle judged of his own condition;
for it is his own words of himself, which are spoken in the above mentioned
place, not our words of him. Not (says he) as though I had already apprehended
or were already perfect. We relate his words, And do we exalt our selves in it
above him, and judge his condition? As for his speaking of Wisdom among those
who were perfect, that proves not his perfection of which the Question runs,
nor (indeed) does it prove any perfection at all, which excludes all sin, which
is that which they drive at in making mention of it. There is a comparative
perfection which some attain unto, which the Apostle intends in that place:
There are some that are in their way toward it, and have made a good progress,
and are still passing thitherward; these are perfect in comparison of the rude
wild world, and of such who are only babes in Christ: He that can bridle his
tongue, is a perfect man, as James affirms, not absolutely perfect; for the
heart may be unruly, though the tongue be restrained; but comparatively
perfect, because there are not many who can do it; amongst such perfect ones
Paul speaks wisdom, but not amongst absolute Perfectists.

Querie 6. Whether you have the hidden wisdom which God Concerning Christ in
Saints, in what sense they have him, and in what sense not.
ordained before the World was, which the Apostle speaks of, yea or no?
Answ. This hidden Wisdom which God, ordained before the world was, which the
Apostle speaks of in 1 Cor. 2. 7. is CHRIST; for he is called the Wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and he is hidden also; for he was in the World, and the
World knew him not, and he came unto his own, and his own received him not,
Joh. 1. 11. 12. For though they said they knew him, and whence he was, yet
Christ told them, That they neither knew him nor his Father, nor whence he was,
nor whither he went; For though they knew him as he was man, yet the Divinity
which was veiled in his flesh, they saw no^, neither could see; for flesh and
blood revealed it not, but the Father, as Christ told his Disciples; and it is
clear from the abovementioned place, which he alludes to in this Question,
that Christ is the person that is called The hidden wisdom which God erdained;
For the Apostle says, verse. 8. Had they known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory: Now if Christ be this hidden Wisdom, then the
Question runs of Christ, whether we have him, yea or no? Our Answer to it is
this: What we are will appear in time; but if we be Believers, we have him; for
all Believers have him; for he dwells in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. For
faith receives him, Joh. 1. 12. And who ever has one of the three, has all
the three dwelling in him. If Saints have the holy Ghost (as was granted in the
first Question,) Then they have Christ also; nay, they could not have the
Spirit, if they had not Christ; for Christ sends him; yet it must be understood
in a spiritual sense that they have Christ, and not in a literal and carnal.
They have Christ standing in relation to them and they to him, as the members
have the head because they are united to it and it to them, and as branches
have the Vine, and the Vine the branches, because united to one another. And
they have Christ's influence upon them, and Christ in those influences: And they
have the virtue and power of his Spirit put forth in them in such measure as
pleases him, but always in part, and not in perfection, 1 Cor. 13. 12. and
therein they have him. But they have not Christ in flesh, or the flesh of
Christ dwelling in them; for that was taken up into Heaven and will be there
contained, till the restitution of all things. But they intend this Question of
an higher way of having Christ, and they dream that they themselves have him in
a higher way, and that neither we nor any others but themselves have him in
that way. They imagine such an having of Christ as the flesh of Christ had God,
or as the humanity of Christ had the Godhead: The flesh of Christ had God in
such sort, that it was wholly comprehended of God, and taken up into oneness of
Person with him, so as that the infinite power and wisdom and holiness of God,
was put forth many times in flesh; and always when the flesh (that is, when the
humanity) acted any thing, it was in perfection of compliance with God, which
was in it and comprehended it; Such an having of Christ as this, they conceit
in reference to themselves, that as the Godhead had the flesh, so they have the
Godhead, which supplies with all Wisdom, Knowledge, Graces of all kinds,
strength, holiness, and with every thing, so that they need nothing that is
external, neither Scripture, nor Ordinances, or Teachers, but Christ whom they
have within them is sufficent for all things, and unto all purposes, and makes
them perfect as Christ is, as God is; Now such an having of Christ as this is,
we assume not nor dare assume; And we declare against it as a Satanical
delusion, to which God has left these poor Creatures, who have forsaken him.
They would be as God, as Christ; the Devil tempts them to it, as at first he
did our first Parents, tells them that they are so, and so they cast off his
Institutions, Ordinances, Servants, which he sends in his name, and him in them.

Querie 7. Whether you have heard the voice of the liveing Concerning immediate
voices, whether there be any such immediate voices now as of old time to the
Prophets and Apostles. Or, concerning immediate inspiration.
God of Heaven and Earth? or whether you do not take the Prophets words,
Christ's words, and the Apostles words, and say, he says it, when says the
Lord, I never spoke to you?
Answ. This Question consists of two parts; The former part demands of us,
Whether we be persons immediately inspired in what we deliver. For the voice
which they en quire after, is some voice that immediately comes from God, such
as came to the Patriarks, to Moses, to Samuel, to all the Prophets, to Christ
and to all the Apostles, The Jews would confess that God spoke with Moses, and
we Christians will acknowledge that God spoke both with Moses and with Christ;
for all Scripture was given by Inspiration of God, and holy men of old spoke as
they were inspired by the holy Ghost. And this we assert in reference to the
New Testament as well as in reference to the old, because God by signs and
wonders and with diverse Miracles has given Witness thereunto. Now our Answer
is, That such a voice as this, as comes immediately from God, we have not
heard, and such an inspiration as this we have not received, nor do we wait for
it; And if the persons who propound this Question, have heard any such
immediate voice as this (for they pretend much to it, and say Gods speaks unto
them, and the Spirit immediately suggests what they speak or pray in their
meetings, coming unto them at such time as they quake and tremble; and their
quaking is the sign by which others know that the Spirit is come unto them) let
such persons confirm Gods speaking or the Spirits speaking to them by signs and
wonders and by d^versitie of Miracles as Christ and his Apostles did, Heb. 2.
3, 4. else they must of necessity be acounted Impostors and Deceivers of the
People.

The latter part of the Question shows the evilness of their design, and what
it is that they strike at; it is at preaching out of the Scriptures; they would
have no preaching but what immediately proceeds from the suggestion of the
Spirit, which they pretend to have; and herein lies the venom and poison of
the Question, as they are the propounders of it; And they would make all
preachers, save such who preach by the immediate dictate of the Spirit as the
Prophets did and the Apostles did, to be false Prophets and Teachers of lies,
which cell the people that the Lord has said so, and the Lord never spoke to
them; Let this be looked into and examined,

First, It will be granted by themselves, that God spoke by Moses. by the
Prophets, by Christ, and by the Apostles, and that all their words are Gods
Words; and what ever they said in their Prophesies, and preachings, or
Epistles, that they wrote, God said it by them; this is clear from Heb. 1. 1,
2. God spoke in times past unto our Fathers by the Prophets.

Secondly, It must be granted without contradiction, that what ever the Fathers
heard of God at any time during the Old Testament, it was taken out of the
Prophets, it was something that God spoke by the Prophets; For the Priests and
the Levites, which were the Instructers of the Fathers and Teachers of the
people, spoke not any thing which they had received immediately from God by
voice, but what God had spoken by the Prophets, or by Moses, who was also a
Prophet; We shall find that Ezra a Priest and the Levices with him, read in
the Law, and gave the sense, Nehem. 7. 8. Now the Author to the Hebrews
compriseth all the teaching that the Jews of the Old Testament had through all
Generations whilst that Testament was standing, under this head, Gods teaching
them by the Prophets. Now we know there were not Prophets at all times in all
Generations, who brought immediate Messages from God; The last of the Prophets
was Malachy, and there were many Ages after that, yet the people were taught
all along by the Prophets; for the Apostle says, God spoke to our Fathers by
the Prophets: But how could that be when the Prophets were dead? Yea; for
though the Prophets were dead, yet their Prophesies were living and remaining,
and were made use of by the Ministers of the Old Testament, and urged and
pressed upon the people as the Word of the Lord: And Christ is said to have
spoken unto us, when only the words of Christ are brought unto us, Heb. 13.
25. And what ever it be that the Prophets or Christ have spoken from the Lord
while upon the Earth, when such words are urged upon a people, it must be
accounted God present speaking. The Apostles dehortation is, Heb. 12. 25. Not
to refuse him that speaks, he speaks in the present Tense, though Christ was
then in Heaven, and spoke not; but what he has spoken, when it is presented,
must be accounted his present speaking. Christ himself expounded unto the
Disciples The words that Moses and the Prophers had spoken respecting his
sufferings, and presses them upon their Faith, as words spoken by God, blaming
them for their unbelief; And Paul applied the words that God spoke by Esaias the
Prophet, to these unbelieving Jews that withstood his preaching as Gods Message
to them, and said they were The words of the Holy Ghost. Act. 28, 25. 26. And
his whole witness that he gave of Christ, was fetched out of Moses and the
Prophets. Act. 26. 2. And all that are brought to the Faith of Christ, are said
to be built upon the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. Not upon an immediate
voice that comes from God to themselves or to any others who are their
Teachers, but upon the Word of God that was of old spoken by the Prophets; and
this is called a more sure word then any immediate word, unless it come
notably, marvellously, and visibly confirmed unto them. 2 Pet. 1. 19. For there
may be much fallacy in that, and much delusion; but we know that God spoke with
Moses, and with the Prophets; so also with Christ and with the Apostles; and
what was spoken to them, was intended to continue as a rule till Christ's
appearing, Isai. 8. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14.

Thirdly, It is evident from Scripture, that what ever the Prophets or Apostles
have spoken or written, is to be safely kept and retained, and also transferred
and made over to others, and these others are to communicate and make the same
known to others after them, and so it is to pass from man to man, and from age
to age, and never to be lost, but kept as a precious treasury is kept for the
benefit of after Posterity. And consequently that God did not intend immediate
teaching, nor to give out an immediate voice in after ages, which should direct
and guide men in the ways of Salvation, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things that thou have
heard from me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men who
shall be able to teach others also. This is the way in which God intended the
propagating of the knowledge of himself, and of his Son, and of his will. Paul
must have his knowledge immediately, but not Timothy, but he must have it from
Paul, and those faithful men from him, and others from them; so the truth of
God must pass from hand to hand throughout all Generations. And the Faith, viz.
the Doctrine of Faith is said to be once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. and
that very Doctrine which was once delivered, must be always contended for: This
(once) imports as much as already, as verse. 5. shows, or (once delivered) is
once for all, never more to be delivered. It has been delivered, that is,
immediately from Heaven, and that cuts off all expectations of any other
delivery from Heaven, and of all other immediate voices thence; But all Saints
must hold what they have once had, 2 These. 2. 15. Hold the Traditions (said
Paul) which ye have been taught whether by word or by our Epistle. Every Bishop
or Elder (for they are one in Scripture expression) must hold fast the faithful
word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to
exhort and convince gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9, 10. And the reason is rendered,
because there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths
must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, verse. 10. 11. There must not be
waiting for a new word, an immediate word, but that word which has been
already taught, must be held fast; and that is the sound Doctrine which must be
made use of to convince and exhort men by; and this word may be called the Word
of the Lord to the Apostles and Prophets, for our use and benefit, though not
spoken to us immediately, as Paul said, Well spoke the holy Ghost by Isaiah; he
did not say, Well spoke the holy Ghost to me, but to Isaiah. It was Gods Word
to Isaiah, which he made use of against that people to whom he spoke, though
not Gods word to him immediately.

Querie 8. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin Concerning sin, what
freedom persons have from it, and what not.
while he is upon the Earth, yea or no?
Answ. If this Question be meant of a full and perfect Victory over the body of
sin, which is accompanied with the utter destruction of the body of sin, so as
that there shall be no remainders of it abiding in men, so as that persons
shall be all Spirit, and no flesh, and in a perfect state without any
propensity to sin; then the Answer must be negative; no man while upon Earth,
shall overcome the body of sin after such manner: For the Apostle declares the
condition of all the Saints in this World, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary
the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would; and the
same Apostle in Romans 7. 14. to the end, describes in his own person the
vexatious exercise that all Believers have more or less in this World, through
contrary laws within them, viz. through the law of the flesh, and the law of
the mind, which are always warring one against the other. And though they do
delight in the Law of God after the inward man, yet many times through the
strength of sin within them, they know not how to perform that which is good:
And this made the Apostle groan for deliverance, v. 24. Oh wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me, etc. And though he thanks God through Jesus Christ;
yet it was not for any perfect or full deliverance that he obtained after his
groaning from this condition; for he concludes of himself in the very next
words after his thanksgiving, That with the mind he himself served the Law of
God, but with the flesh the law of sin. And the deliverance which he had in
Christ, was from the Curse of such a state, rather then from the state it self;
and from such dominion as would make him a perfect Captive, from which he was
kept; For still his will was to do good, though many times, the good which he
would have done he did it not. And it was deliverance he apprehended by Faith
would be through Jesus Christ to him at last, in which he rejoiced, and for
which he thanked God, rather then for any victorious strength he at that time
possessed. And he saw it in Christ the head already, and assured himself of it
in due time upon that account. But an overcoming of the body of sin, such as
delivers from all sin in this world, is expressly against the Scripture, as has
been already declared in our Letter which we sent in Answer to that pleaded-for
perfection contained in a Letter of theirs brought to our view. But if the
Question respect only a partial overcoming, and such as is imperfect, and is
only in tendency toward perfection of conquest, it will then be condescended
to; For Saints go forth conquering and to conquer, and yet sometimes have the
worst of it, and are as Captives, Romans 7. 23. And yet are never totally
disarmed, but reassume the weapons of their warfare, and take hold on Gods
strengh, and get the better again, and weaken the fleshly part by a power from
on high. And in such a sense as this, it will be granted, that a man may and
does overcom the body of sin. He is about the work and is doing it; by the
power of the Spirit, he is mortifying the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. and
believing that through Christ strengthening him, he shall be perfectly
Conqueror at the last, he may be said to have done it, as in 1 John 5. 4.

Querie 9. Whether you preach no other Doctrine but Concerning preaching,
whether it depend upon seeing of Christ with our bodily eyes, hearing of him
with our bodily ears, handling of him with our bodily hands, as the Apostles
did, yea or no?
what the Apostles did? That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life. For this life is made manifest, and we have seen
it, and bear witness and show it unto you.
Answer. This Question is proposed upon occasion of John's Preface to his first
Epistle, where John first declares the subject which he would bear witness of,
and that was Christ, said to be from the beginning in reference to his Diety,
and said to be one heard, seen, handled, in reference to his humanity; And
afterward he declares his assurance which he had in witnessing and showing
what he should present; he would show them nothing but what he had both heard,
seen, and handled, and therefore could confirm the truth thereof unto them; Now
the Question demands of us, whether we preach no other Doctrine, then such as
John preached? Is the meaning of it, Whether we preach Christ as he did? if so,
we could resolve him, that we aim at no other thing but to exalt Christ. And we
would have all our preaching tend thither. But there is another thing intended
in the Question, Whether we preach with that assurance that he did, nothing but
what we have heard of him, and seen of him, and handled and felt of him, and
what is after this manner manifest unto us and within us. And if this be the
sense (as without doubt it is) then the Answer must be that we do not preach
that Christ whom we have seen with out bodily eyes, heard with our bodily ears,
and handled with out bod^ly hands; for Christ is in Heaven in his humanity, and
not on Earth; and therefore not to be seen, heard, or handled by us or any
other that live on Earth; But that Christ which John and the rest of the
Apostles heard, saw, and handled, we preach, and we do not give our own
assurance, but the Apostles assurance; and we conceive that the Apostles
assurance is as good now as it was then; And we have warrant to preach what we
have understood from their writings, though we have not seen with our eyes;
even as Timothy was commanded to preach and show what he had heard of the
Apostle, who yet himself had not heard, nor seen, nor handled any thing of
Christ; and he must commit them to faithful men, who had seen no more then he,
and they must teach others also; But this Question holds affinity with the
seventh Question, to which I refer the Reader; only I shall add this, that if
the persons that make these proposals do glory over us, because we have not
thus seen Christ, and do give it out that he has appeared to them, and that
they have seen him, and heard him, and heard him, and that he is with and in
them; let them seriously consider, whether it be the true Christ, the same whom
John heard or saw with his bodily eyes, and handled with his bodily hands,
which they have seen, or a bodiless Christ of their own framing. And whether
their seeing of Christ be not like Saul his seeing Samuel, who indeed saw the
Devil in Samuels shape, and talked with him, and had fellowship with him, but
saw not Samuel.

Querie 10. Whether you have this word which was from Concerning the
manifestation of Christ what it is; And concerning preaching from the letter
how far it may and must be, and how far not.
the beginning, and this l^fe manifest unto you which was to the Apostles? And
if it be, why do you take a Text from the Letter, and Preach from it, and show
the People the Letter?
Answ. This word and this life which is Christ, was manifested in flesh, Ioh.
1. 14. The Word was made flesh. 1 Timothy 3. 16. God was manifested in flesh: And
this Word, and this life in flesh was manifested to the Apostles; for there was
a glory of Christ in flesh, in reference to his mighty works which were done in
flesh, which never any else did but he, Ioh. 3. 2. and chap. 15. 24. And this
glory was as of the only begotten Son of God; and this glory they beheld, and
all Saints have beheld it, and do behold it, but not with bodily eyes as the
Apostles did, but with spiritual eyes, with the eyes of Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Whom though ye see not, yet believing ye rejoice, etc. They did not see at that
time, for Christ was ascended: neither do Saints as yet see, because the
Heavens do yet contain him; but they believe; and believing is called a seeing
in Scripture. Ioh 8. 56. Abraham rejoiced to see my days. He did not live to
see it with his bodily eyes, but he saw it by Faith, by which also the Apostles
had the sight of Christ; else they could have seen but the outside of glory,
and have been dazzled therewith, as the rest of the Jews were which saw him,
and were not' able to judge whose glory it was that they saw. In this spiritual
sense Christ is manifest to us, so many of us as believe, and we have seen him
by faith, and he is in us by his Spirit, and is life within us as a living Word
that quickneth us.

Notwithstanding this we take a Text from the letter, because the whole will of
God, and mind of Christ is left us in letters; and blessed is he that reads
and considers thereof, as it is contained and declared in letters, Revel. 1.
3. And Christ himself who was manifest to himself, did take a Text from the
letter to preach things that respected himself, which the letter contained: And
Philip he took that Text in the letter which the Eunuch was guided to read, and
preached Christ from it. And though preaching be from the letter, that though
we make something that is written, or something that is comprehended in
letters, the foundation of our preaching, upon which we bottom and build our
discourse; yet we preach not the letter, but such spiritual truths as are
contained in it, respecting Christ, as Christ preached the glorious truths of
himself: And Philip preached those blessed mysterious truths which concerned
Christ, which have a virtue and power in them from the Spirit which accompanies
them, and which is given to the Elect, whilst such truths written in words and
letters are preached to them, by which such persons are quickened, who were
before dead in trespasses and sins, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. For if the Gospel which is
now left us in words and letters in the Evangelists and Apostles Writings, be
hid from any, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them that believe not, least the light of the
glorious Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. And indeed, this Gospel
as it is now upon record in letters, and is become (as such) a standing rule to
men, is hid from this Generation of men (so far as we can judge) who are the
propounders of this Question; and their design is to hide it from others, and
to draw all persons off from all that is written, to depend upon an unwritten
word; some word immediately dictated to them, within them, proceeding from him,
who is (as they say) the Word from the beginning, and is the life, and is
manifested (as they give out) within them as to the Apostles: And in this sort
of men does the Devil show his spite, spleen, and malice, against the holy
Scriptures.

Querie 11. And show me where the Prophets did take a Concerning preaching from
a Text, and the justification of it; And what anoyntment Ministes have to
Preach.
Text, and preach from it; but only Christ read a place, and said, it was
fulfilled, who said he was anointed to preach; and which of you can witness you
are anointed to preach by the living God, yea or no?
Answ. The Prophets took not any Text to preach from it, because they were to
lay the foundation of preaching unto others, Ephesians. 2. 20. and other were to
build upon it all that they should preach; and therefore it was that the
Priests and Levites did preach out of the Prophets; they read therein and gave
the sense; And the Apostles proved all things from the Prophets which they
preached; And though they did not preach from one particular Text, yet they
preached from many Texts, for they cited many to confirm their preachings. And
the Apostles also, as wise master builder, sinstructed immediately by the
spirit, did in their Doctrine perform the same work, 1 Cor. 3. 10. viz. did
found the Faith of Believers upon their Preachings and Writings. And the
Ministers of the Word which were to succeed them, are only to put their
superstructure to it, bottoming upon that groundwork which they have laid; and
therefore it is that both they and we take a Text, that the weight of our
building may be laid upon it, and that all may see and be convinced that we
preach not our own dreams, but what we have warrant for from the Writings of
the Apostles and Prophets, with and to whom God spoke, and that the truth of
our Doctrine may be read of all men, being engraven upon such Scriptures which
we make choice of; and by this means also, the idle extravagances of men's wits
and fancies, which will never convince the conscience thoroughly, are prevented.

But, why is the taking of a Text quarreled at, when yet it is confessed that
Christ took a Text? And does he not therein justify us? What if the Prophets
did not, yet if Christ did, will not his example bear out our practice? But
these men make light of this pattern, detracting and diminishing (though they
know the danger of it, mentioned, Revel 22. 19.) from the fullness of that
Scripture that declares it, Luke 4. 16. to 23. They say that only Christ read
a place, but the Evangelist says, That as his custom was, he went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read; and that then there was
a Book delivered to him, and when he had opened the Book, he found the place
that he would read, and then closed it again, and gave it to the Minister. They
say, that Christ said it was fulfilled; and as if this were all, they mention
no more; but the Evangelist says, That the people wondered at the gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth. And these things are obvious from this
Text they mention; First, there were public places to meet in, which were
called Synagogues; Secondly, there were days set apart for service to be
performed to God in such places, which are called Sabbath days; Thirdly, there
was a Minister whose work it was to read out of some book of holy Scriptures to
the people to instruct them thence. Fourthly, it is manifest that Christ
approved of all this, and he liked this way so well, that he himself did go and
do likewise, and did accustom himself to the same course of teaching the
people, as that which was edifying to them, so that it was not once only done
that Christ took a Text, but oftend one, his custom was to read some portion
of Scripture, and to preach out of it. And it is evident that Christ did not
only say, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; but many gracious
words proceeded from him, tending (as must needs be supposed by any man that
has but the use of his reason) to clear it up to their capacities, how that
Scripture in every part of it was fulfilled, by opening and unfolding the many
branches of so plentiful and large a Text, and showing how all things therein
related unto, were accomplished in himself, which might be a subject of many
Months discourse as Christ might have followed it.

But these men object, that Christ was anointed to preach; and demand which of
us can witness that we are anointed to preach by the living God.

Christ's anointing was not by the pouring of any oil upon his head after the
manner of the High Priests anointing, Psalm. 133. 2. which was but a shadow of a
more excellent Unction which Christ had. And the Prophet, Psalm. 45. 7. does but
allude thereunto: But his anointing was by the donation of the Spirit, and the
gifts and graces thereof, Ioh. 1. 32, 33. and chapter 3. 34. by which he was
enabled to the execution of such Offices and works to which he was called, in
redeeming a people to God, and especially to preach the Gospel, which in a very
excellent and glorious way he effected, Luke 4. 22. And all the Saints receive
the same spirit, and gifts, and graces, every one according to the measure of
such a part, which they fill up in the body, and are Kings, and Priests, and
Prophets to themselves, as Scripture calls them. But those persons especially
whom God calls out to be to the body in place of eyes to guide them and direct
them, God gives more of his grace and influence to, as appears from Ephesians. 4. 8.
He ascended up on high, and gave gifts to men, viz. such men as he places in
his Church for the work of the Ministry, and for the perfecting of the Saints
till the end of the world; therefore Christ is not anointed alone, but all whom
he calls to the Ministry are anointed also with the same spirit and gifts, and
graces; only he has the pre-eminence, and has an anoynment above his
fellows, for he received not the spirit by measure, as those who are his
Ministers and servants now do, Psalm. 45. 7. Ioh. 3. 34.

Querie 12. Tell me why you sing David's Conditions and Concerning singing of
Scripture. Psalms; the Lawfulness, and necessity thereof.
Experiences in Meeter, and when you read them, Hats you put on, and when you
sing them, Hats you put off.
Answ. David's conditions and experiences are many times our own conditions and
experiences, and then we sing them not as David's merely, but as our own, by a
spirit of Faith making application to our selves of what we sing out of David.
But many times its otherwise, that something of David's inditing, and of his
state, and containing his experience, is the matter of our Psalms, which we
cannot so fitly apply to our own condition and temper, and many stumble at this
and are offended; but its from some darkness in themselves, for Psalms are for
instruction by the very design and scope of of God who dictated them and
enjoins them, as the Titles of very many of them: show: And the Apostle enjoins
the Saints to teach and admonish themselves in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual
Song; and what ever the matter of them be, one end or use of them must be
instruction to our selves from them, as from any other parts of Scripture. And
the reasons of singing them are such as these:

1. God would have us in our meetings to rejoice in him, which is done in
singing.

2. God would have his word to be familiar to us, Col. 3. 16. it must dwell in
us, and this must be showed in singing; and would have us so much to delight in
it, and to find such sweetness in it, that we should make our selves
spiritually merry with it.

3. Because singing is that which raises the Spirit, refreshes the heart,
moves the affections very much, God would have the Spirits of his people to be
raised and refreshed in the deliberate meditation of his Word, what ever the
subject matter be; For therefore it is that the Psalms which David and other
Saints compiled to be sing, consist of subjects of greatest diversity and
variety. Some are Historical, some Prophetical, some are Hortatory, some are
Precatory, others Deprecatory, others Laudative or Psalms of praise, and the
soul should take pleasure in all, and have the heart raised in the meditation
of all; Do we not observe how a profane carnal spirit will compile Songs of
every kind of matter, and will make it self merry therewith? And shall not a
spiritual heart sing every thing that is a Psalm, and is Divine and Spiritual,
with an elevated and raised mind?

Object. But why most David's Psalms be sung Many strick at that who will assent
unto the singing of other Psalms which are compiled by a special gift.

Answ. There are reasons which are weighty, which do carry thereunto.

1. Psalms which were immediately inspired by the Spirit of God are most Divine
and Heavenly, and do contain the most admirable Doctrine.

2. The Scripture is given for every use, to be read, sung, pre^ched out of,
confened of, medicated on, and to be the matter of our prayers also: And those
parts of it which we find to be Psalms, we ought to make use of as Psalms, and
sing them; And though we have liberty to sing other spiritual Songs of our own
or others making, after we have well digested them, as well as to read other
godly Books besides the Scriptures; yet as our reading of other Books will not
excuse our omission of reading the Scripture, so our singing of other spiritual
Songs will not excuse our omission of singing Scriptures Psalms.

3. David's Psalms were brought into the Church of God in Hezekiahs time, and an
express command given to the Levites to sing praise to the Lord with the words
of David, and of Asaph the Seer, which is a president and a pattern for Saints
to follow.

4. There are Commands laid upon the Churches of Christ, and upon particular
Christians to sing Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs unto the Lord, and
nothing suggested unto them concerning the matter of them: And does Christ put
a service upon use people, and nor afford them any straw or matter to perform
the same with? There was no need, else Christ would not have been wanting;
There were Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs complied by David to their hands;
for such Titles we shall meet with in the Book of the Psalms; A Psalm, of David
familiarly a Song often, in Hymn sometimes, as in the Title of 145 Psalm.

5. The Ex(...) of the Apostle to the Church at Coloss, is to let the word of
Christ dwell in them (...), in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing them
selves in psalms, etc. what is this but a clear suggestion, that the word of
Christ, which is some part of Scripture, should be famliar unto them, and
become the matter of their Psalms for their instruction. For is there not first
an injunction, Let the word of Christ dwell in your And is there not after
wards a direction how to perfom it and one way is, by teaching and admonishing
themselves in Psalms

6. It is less warrantable, because there is no president for it; and more
dangerous because of some evil consequences that may attend it to bring in
other Psalms of men's compiling and not Scriptural, into the Church of God, and
to impose them upon the people For the people that must act in singing, must
first know them to be consonant to the Scripture, and must have a right
understanding of them, that they may sing to their edification; and them there
must either be a book of such Psalms so brought in and imposed, which every
Saint must have, or else the whole Church must be gathered together every time
there is singing, to peruse such Psalms which must be allowed to be sung
amongst them but Scripture is silent concerning such ways, and seems to give
other direction.

And though he that had a gift brought his Psalm into the Church, 1 Cor. 14.
26. yet for ought appears he sung it alone, and then the rest might judge, and
say Amen, or not say Amen, as they approved or disapproved of it; And it was
not imposed upon the Church to be sung. But the Apostle Paul lays singing of
Pslams, Hymns, and spiritual songs upon the whole Chruch, and there are no
orders of Musicians now, or office of singing Choriston as in the Old Testment,
but all the people are the Choristers in the days of the New Testament, to
sing Psalms and Songs, etc. And the Apostle James lays at injunction upon
every particular Saint, if he be merry, to sing Psalmi, Jam. 5. 13. But has
every particular Saint a gift to compile a Psalm? If not, what must such a
Saint do? Therefore there must of necessity be use made of Scripture-Psalms.

And as for singing them in Meeter, the Hebrews had their Poetry, according to
which they both compiled and sung their Psalms: And it is but suitable, that
every Nation should have the liberty of their own proper and peculiar Poetry
among themselves to praise God by, and meeter is that which is congruons to our
English Poetry.

Concerning putting on of Hats in reading Psalms, and putting them off in
singing them, I shall not much contest; But this I say, that reverence is that
which is suitable to all Gods Ordinances, and because the putting off the Hat
does show reverence, it would be very comely when Scripture is read; but if it
be otherwise, I judge it not to be want of reverence in such a person, because
reverence may be showed, and not tied to one posture, therefore I leave persons
to their liberty. Yet there is a difference in Ordinances; in some we have an
immediate address to God, and in such we use more reverence, as when we pray or
give thanks, we do not send one to God with our requests, but we go our selves
to him immediately; but in preaching and reading it is otherwise, we have not
immediate communion with God, but God sends by whom he will send his Message to
us; and speaks not immediately, but by another; and so there is no
irreverence, though the like degree of reverence be not given. And hence it
comes, that we may use a different posture and gesture, though the same words
be spoken, if they be spoken in an Ordinance of a diverse nature. As if words of
prayer he read as a part of Scripture, then they are Gods speaking to us by
another, but if we our selves make use of such words, and put them into our own
prayers, then they become our speaking to God, in our immediate addresses unto
him, and so the Hat may be put on in the former, and yet ought to be put off in
the latter; the like may be said of singing and reading David's Psalms: They are
different Ordinances, and may require different postures. There is also
difference betwixt speaking and hearing; he that is the speaker, though it be
but in a civil Assembly, shows more reverence, speaking to many, then they that
hear him do to him, and is usually uncovered, when they that are spoken to are
covered, and in Religious Assemblies it is so also; he that speaks, though it
be in the name of God, is uncovered, when yet the people that are spoken to are
usually covered; But in singing of Psalms, they are all Speakers, and have to
do with God, showing their holy joy in him, and in his word, and therefore are
all uncovered. But the custom of the Churches of God in these things, if there
be not palpable superstition in them, is much to be respected, and not rashly
departed from 1 Cor. 11. 16. and offense to brethren in such things is
vigilantly to be avoided, Romans 14. 20, 21.

Querie 13. Whether you have the voice, and whether you do know the voice of
Christ from the voice of a Stranger? My What is Christ's voice, and how
distinguished from a Strangers voice.
Sheep know my voice, says Christ, seeing that you are so forward to judge,
and sit as Judges of the Saints Conditions?
Answ. The Apostle tells us in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son; for the Word was
made flesh and dwelt among the Jews, and went up and down teaching in their
Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. and this Son
of God in flesh sent forth the Apostles to preach, and put a word into their
mouths, and guided them by his Spirit in writing to the Churches what his
mind and will was unto them, Let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches. Now that which Christ preached, and the Apostles
preached, and wrote unto the Churches, that is Christ's voice, as from Heb. 4 3.
which is fetched out of Psalm 95. appears. David says, to day if ye will hear
his voice: What voice was this? The Apostle tells us, Heb 4. 2. That unto us
was the Gospel preached as well as unto them but the word preached did not profit
them, through unbelief. The word then which they heard in David's time which was
preaching out of the Prophets, was this voice, and so the Gospel which Christ
and the Apostles have preached and left upon Record, is the voice of Christ.
And this voice we have in the Scriptures, and this voice we know, and we are
able through Gods Grace to distinguish this voice from the voice of a stranger,
if any bring not this Doctrine which Christ and the Apostles brought, we know
him to be a Wolf and an Antichrist, and after once or twice admonition, we dare
not say God speed to him. But there is another voice which th^se persons who
question us, intend and pretend to, and that is an immediate voice which speaks
within them, (as they say) and dictates unto them all that they say and do: Now
this voice we have not heard, nor do we know it within our selves
experimentally, and we believe and hope that we shall be kept, that we may
never know it. For we know it is not the voice of Christ, but the voice of a
stranger. We know it from what it speaks and acts in others, yea, in these
persons that pretend to it, and we bless our selves from it, for it is the
voice of the Devil, that comes as Christ to them, and pretends to be he, but
deludes them, and deceives them, as one of themselves, recovered out of their
soars has confessed. Now to the praise and glory of Gods Grace we speak it,
that we have neither heard his voice nor seen his shape.

Concerning our judging, there will be occasion to speak of it in the Answer to
the next Question.

Querie 14. Whether that which is in you which Judges, be eternal and
infallible, yea or no?
Answ. These men are harping in many of their Questions Ifallibility further
discussed.
upon one and the same string; They have a conceit of Christ within them,
speaking within them, acting within them; saying all, and doing all immediately
and infallibly that is said and done by them; so that it is not they that say
or do any thing, but it is Christ and the Spirit within them. And this so fills
them, that it almost fills all their Questions: Now it does appear, that it is
a spirit of delusion, that thus possesses them, because it contradicts both
Christ and the Spirit in the Scriptures, in many things. And after this Christ
and Spirit within, they enquire of us, whether that which judges in us be
eternal and infallible; But we assert no such thing concerning our selves. For
though all the Saints have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, which is
eternal and infallible; yet that this Spirit should do all that Saints do, and
should say all that Saints say, and should judge for them, both of persons and
of things after an infallible manner; and that they should neither say, nor do,
nor judge any thing by any understanding of their own, but the Spirit, all this
we deny. For the Apostle speaks of himself, When I would do good, evil is
present; so it may be said of every man, when I would say or do right, error
is present. Notwithstanding though we judge not either person or thing, by any
Spirit of infallibility, yet there is one that judges, and that is the word
which Christ spoke, and which Scripture speaks; and this word is eternal and
infallible; And so far as we judge according to this word, our judgment
becomes eternal and infallible; and so we may speak of persons present
condition with much certainty, because we know what the Scriptures have said of
them. Christ tells us of Wolves, that shall come in sheeps clothing, and that
by their fruits we shall know them, Mat. 7. 15, 16. And John tells us who is an
Antichrist, viz. he that denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2. 22. And
Peter prophesies of false Teachers, that shall bring in damnable heresies,
denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 1. 1. When therefore we see such, we
may judge of their present state, what and who they be; but in reference to
their future final state, we must leave them to the judgment of God, who
infallibly knows who are his.

Querie 15. What are the Ordinances which are ordained of God, that those which
you call Quakers deny? Or when did God command you to observe them, as to
sprinkle Infants, and to pray before and after your Sermons, (as you call them)
or to set times, days and hours, which was in the generation which were
enemies to Christ, who observed such things. Querie 16. What these Ordinances
of God be which you The justification of several ordinations of Christ in the
Churches of God.
speak of? and where God commanded them, and to whom: which you say them (which
you call Quakers) deny? mention them in particular, and declare them openly in
Writing, and give over accusing.
Answ. These two Questions are distinct in the paper presented to me, but the
former entirely comprehends the latter, and is more ample then it, requiring
us, not only to show reason of accusing them, but also grounds for the
justification of our own practice, therefore I have joined them together; And
in reference to the first; What Ordinances they do deny which God has
commanded, there is no need that we should accuse them, for they are accusers
of themselves in their very Questions which they propound. The Reader may
easily discern from them, what the things are, against which their malignity is
showed. It is against all outward teaching, against singing of Psalms, against
Ministry, against Sacraments, expressly against Infants baptism, against
public prayer, against all set times, days, and hours of performing religious
duties, the 10, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19. Queries do declare all this. Now
whether these be Ordinances of Christ, and how they will be maintained so to
be, will be the Question, and for our own justification must be discussed. I
have already given some touches, respecting outward teaching, and have
endeavored to clear up our practice in singing of Psalms, and shall now
attempt to vindicate other of our ways, and the ways of the Churches of Christ,
from unjust exceptions, and discuss them as I meet with them in the paper.

And first concerning sprinkling of Infants, there is so much Concerning the
sprinkling of Infants.
written for and against this practice, that I account it lost time to make any
large debate about it; only something of that which satisfies us in reference
to our own practice I shall present.

First, for the Act of sprinkling, we use it not, though something may be held
out to justify it; The blood of Christ is called the blood of sprinkling, Heb.
12. 24. and cleansing was by sprinkling blood, Heb. 9. 13. and sprinkling of
blood was used in the Passover, and signified cleansing; therefore seeing
water in Baptism typifies Christ's blood, and the application of it signifies
cleansing from sin, why may not the water be sprinkled on the subject of
Baptism, to signify the cleansing away of sin by the blood of Christ. If any
object further, let such as use it maintain it. Our practice is to use the
water of Baptism in a washing way, which suits well with the mystery in it,
which is washing away of sin, Act. 22. 16. And the Greek word which is put for
baptism, is applied to Tables, brazen vessels, beds, and such like things,
which was not by dipping, but by the application of water in a washing way,
Mar. 7. 4. So that though the word signify dipping, yet it signifies washing
also, which warrants the application of water in Baptism, in a washing way.

Secondly, for the subject of baptism, whether it be to be applied to Infants,
amongst many things I shall only present this, viz. That Baptism is an outward
Seal of an outward and visible Covenant of Grace, which runs always upon the
condition of believing; and is to be applied to visible believers or Saints,
and is also to be extended in reference to the subject as far as the Covenant
is extended; and if the Covenant be extended not only to visible believers,
but to their whole Infant seed, as from Genesis 17. 7. compared with Exodus 12. 48,
49. and also from Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. appears, then the Seal of. it must extend
so far also. I shall confirm all this, first, that it is a Seal, for God having
promised such a blessing as the taking away of sin in the Covenant of Grace,
Jer. 31. 34. would (by the Ordinance of Baptism in the application of the
element of water in a washing way to the body) have the baptized person to know
and believe that he washes away the sin of the Soul by the blood of Christ,
Act. 22. 16. therefore it is said, Act. 2. 38. be baptized for the remission of
sins, not to effect it, but to assure it to you; secondly, that it is an
outward Seal, because all is external and visible; the water is, which is as it
were the Seal; the washing is, which is as it were the Sealing, or the putting
on of the Seal; the body is, which is as it were the thing sealed; all is
outward, and done before men; but whether it be done in the conscience really
and inwardly by the Spirit, that is a secret and known to God. And the Spirit
only is the inward Seal that assures the heart. And many times, the outward
confirmation is separated from the inward assurance, as in Simon Magus; he had
the outward sign of remission of sins, but not remission of sins it self.
Thirdly, that it is an outward Seal of an outward and visible covenant of
Grace, because the profession of faith, with shows of reality, is all that is
required unto the bringing of persons into it, and unto the participation of
the Seal of it. It was enough to the Eunuch he professed his Faith, and Philip
baptized him; he could not see into the heart to know the truth of it, yet he
baptized him; And Ananias, and Saphira, and Simon Magus, their profession
brought them within the Covenaut, and gave them a right to the Seal of it, and
not any truth of Faith it self, for there was none: And indeed that Covenant
wherein the ministry of man in made use of, in the making of it, must needs be
external. Fourthly, that it is extended in reference to the subject of it as
far as the Covenant is excended, because it is the confirmation of it, to the
subjects of it; and the confirmation must need be as large as the Covenant; but
this is not doubted of by any. Fifthly, that the Covenant is not only extended
to visible Believers, but also to their whole Infant seed, because in Genesis 17.
7. we find it so; for it runs in these words, I will be thy God; now this is
comprehensive of all blessings, even the very highest, as Heb. 11. 16. shows,
and it is the same for substance with that in Jer. 33. 33. which is called a
new Covenant; And Circumcision that sealed it, is called The Seal of the
righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. and the Circumcision of the flesh did
signify the circumcision of the heart, Col. 2. 11. And the Gentiles that
professed Abraham's Faith, which had nothing to do with Canaan, entered into it,
and spiritual privileges were sealed to them, Exodus 12. 48, 49. by which it
appears to be a Covenant of Grace: And for the subject, it was with Abraham a
Believer, and with his seed; what seed? his whole Infant seed; for the
application of the seal, viz. Circumcision to the whole Infant seed, shows that
the Covenant extended it so far; And Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11. clears it, That the
Covenant was with the little ones. And though all Infants are not counted the
seed as to spiritual and eternal blessings, as indeed neither are all that
profess Faith with shows of reality (as Demas, etc.) to be accounted the true
spiritual seed, yet they are the seed as to Church privileges, and external
Ordinances of a spiritual nature, and so were all Abraham's Infant natural seed,
and Believers seed in all Ages the true seed, as to the enjoying of such
Ordinances.

Concerning praying before and after Sermon; first, we Concerning praying
before and after Sermon.
find that in the meetings of the first Christian Church at erusalem, there
was Doctrine, breaking of bread, and prayers, in which Ordinances that Church
of Christ was conversant, Act. 2. 42. Secondly, we find that the Apostles,
whose work was to attend upon the Ministry of the Word, upon that account
casting off se^ing of Tables, did join prayer unto it, and did wait upon these
jointly, Act. 6. 4. Thirdly, we read that it was the Custom of the Apostles to
begin every weighty serious business with prayer; when they were to cast a lot,
they went to prayer first; when they were to lay on hands on Deacons, they
first prayed; when they were to send forth Paul, and Barnabas to the work which
God had appointed them unto viz. to preach the Gospel, they prayed first, and
when they ordained Elders in every City, they began it with prayer; so that all
was attempted with prayer; preaching therefore being a weighty work, should be
performed with Prayer. Fourthly, prayer is that which sanctifies all things,
and persons have a Christian holy use of things which in their nature are but
Civil. Every creature of God (says Paul) 1 Timothy 4. 5. is sanctified of God by
the word and prayer; much rather should holy and religious services be used
holily, by adjoining prayer thereunto. Fifthly, The Apostle Paul giving
direction in his Epistle to Timothy, how the worship and service of God should
he carried on in the Churches of Christ, does in 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. enjoin,
that first of all Prayers and Supplications should be made; his scope is not to
direct particular Christians, but Churches of Christians in their public
Assemblies; as appears from verse. 11, 12. where Women are commanded to keep
silence, and are not suffered to teach. Now this respects the public meetings
of the Saints, and in 1 Cor. 11. 4. the same Apostle gives light how public
exercises of Religion were carried on in the Christian Assemblies, there was
prayer and prophesying afoot amongst them; prophesying was not without prayer.
Sixthly, there are also many general rules (amongst others that in Phil. 4. 8.)
which serve to justify this practice: What ever things are just, true, honest,
pure, lovely, of good report, if there be any virtue, any praise, think on
these things. Now I leave it to the judgment of any person who is not given up
to a wicked spirit, whether prayer before and after preaching be not such a
thing. And the Apostle many times requires, that things which make for
edification may be done: 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5, 12, 26. Ephesians. 4. 26. 1 These. 5. 11.
But these men show what spirit they are of, by their arguing against the most
religious and holy Exercises, and spiritual Performances which the Saints use,
and which the Devil and the Flesh have always much opposed.

Concerning set times, days and hours, which was in the Concerning set times,
and days and hours.
generation which was enemies to Christ, who observed such things, I know not
what answer to make, unless I understood what it is that they find fault with:
The Charge runs as if we did keep up those Jewish Sabbaths, and holy Fasts, and
Feasts, and Hours of Prayer which were observed in Christ's time whilst he
lived on Earth amongst those of his own Nation, most of which were enemies unto
him; but they are, or might be convinced of the contrary concerning us, that we
set no such times a part for worship as they did; neither was it the practice
of the enemies of Christ only to set such times, and days and hours apart, but
of the friends of Christ also, and of Christ himself while he was upon the
Earth, and of the Apostles, seeing it was by divine institution that the people
should meet at such times, Acts 3. 1. Nor was it any part of their enmity
against Christ, but rather of their subjection to God, that they met at such
times; therefore these Persons have another intent and scope in their question.
It is our Lords day-meetings, and our Christian Fasts, and Thanksgiving-days
that we keep, that they are offended at; it is the hours of prayer in our
Church-meetings and Families which they find fault with: and in this also they
strike at Godliness; for if they can but destroy all forms, the power will fall
with it; for though the form be but the shell, yet it preserves the kernel; the
power is put forth in a form, and if they can but acquit and discharge the body
from service and religious exercise, the spirit will not bear up in it any long
time after, but all devotion and duty Godward both in body and soul will fall
in short time; Therefore the Devil and his Instruments plead against set times,
days and hours, knowing very well that Gods worship cannot at all be performed
by many Christians together, without times, and days, and hours, no nor yet
kept alive any long time in any.

But for the better justification of set times, days and hours Concerning the
first day.
for Gods service, let it be considered; First, that time is a perpetual
adjunct of action: there is no action can be done, but it must be done in time;
It is therefore a necessary adjunct of divine and spiritual actions: so that if
God will enjoin a worship and a service to be performed to him, he must needs
enjoin the time in which he will have it performed. Secondly, let it be duly
weighed, that both the Apostles themselves were wont to meet upon the first day
of the week to worship God, and that Christ met with them upon that day twice,
and thereby showed his approbation of their meeting upon that day: Joh 20. 19,
20, 26. And also that the Churches that were planted in the world by the
Apostles, observed that day in course as it came, and set it apart for divine
exercises; 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Act. 20. 7. and further it is to be observed, that
the Apostle annexed duty to that day, and bound the collection of the Saints to
that day as it should come in course; which how he could do without usurping
upon them, unless he had received it from the Lord, I cannot understand. And
also that that day above all other days was denominated the Lords day, and it
was spoken of as a noted known day to all the Saints by that name Rev. 1. 10.
which name (Lords day) does point at an institution; as, when the Supper is
denominated the Lords Supper, it is from the institution which it had from the
Lord Christ that it is so named; and Lords day holds the setting of it apart to
the Lords use, and to call something for remembrance, which can be nothing but
the resurrection, as the Lords Supper is for remembrance. Thirdly, let it be
observed that occasional Fasts are justified in the Concerning fasts and
thanksgiving days.
New Testament as well as in the old, from Primitive examples both of Apostles
and Churches, Acts 13. 3. and 14. 23. and upon the like account will occasional
thanksgivings be maintained: and we have in the new Testament, besides the
instances that may be fetched from the Old Testament, something that looks that
way. Acts 4. 23. to 32. Fourthly, concerning hours, it does not appear from the
New Testament what hours were spent in their public service, nor Concerning
hours in the public service.
whether those hours that were spent were spent together, and at one entire
meeting without intermission and parting: or whether they divided their hours
according to the pattern and example which they had in the Offerings and
Sacrisiees of the Old Testament, which were not at once and together, but at
discontinued times; there was a morning and an evening-Sacrifice, which were
offered about the third and ninth hours; and there was a great expediencie in
it, that there might be some bodily refreshing betwlxt the times, and the
necessity of Nature was provided for in it, and Sabbath-exercises were
distinguished thereby from Fasts; and upon this account, it is equitable that
Christian service should be carried for time after such manner: but herein
Christian Prudence has the Principal stroke; for we do not judge our selves
Scripturally obliged to so many hours, or so distributed, that some should be
in the forenoon and some in the afternoon; but for conveniencies-sake we
practice it, yet not precisely keeping to an hour. And for hours in Families,
we Concerning time spent in holy exercises in Families.
have read how holy men of God have carried it in their milies: Abraham
commanded his children and his household after him, and they did keep the way of
the Lord: Jacob he reformed his Family, and purged away the Idols and all the
filth from it, that they might more purely serve the Lord together: Josbua
resolved that he and his house would serve the Lord, now he could not resolve
it in reference to secret worship, which each apart was to perform to God; but
it refers to Family Duties and service, which should be on foot amongst them
together: And David would walk not in his own Person alone, but in his house
with a perfect heart: And there is a Prophecy that respects Families mourning
apart, which is to be accomplished in the days of the Gospel. Zach 12. 12. to
the end, And there is a Promise made, where two or three are gathered together,
(suppose in a Family or any other way) Christ will be in the midst of them; and
where Saints are together in a Family, the Spirit of God within them will be a
Spirit of Prayer within them, and will bring them together; and there cannot be
Family Duties but there must be a time to perform them in and if morning and
evening be taken for them, it is most congruous: First, because occasions, wilt
then best permiso for it will be before the works of these Callibas be begun,
and it will be afree they are finished, Secondly all things are sanctified by
prayer, and so will their is bours be in the morning, and their rest in the
evening; But where or when does a good heart dispute against these things? a
spiritural heart will rather dictate to a Person to apprehend the opportunitigs
unto prayer and all other spiritual duties, both apart and with others, and
will practice what was commanded in reference to preaching, will pray in season
and out of senson, at times which con^^eiency makes cheice of; and at other
times also will put up all manner of prayers, and at all times, as occasion
requites; And where Saipts are together they will encourage one another, and
say, come let us joya together, and pray, and seek the face of God in prayer,
and in other duties also; and in Families especially will this be done.

Querie 17. Whether you do not seduce the People to araw Concerning the Spirits
teaching, in what way to expect it. And whether the outward must be denied,
that the inward may be received.
them from the anointing within them? when as John says, they need no man
teach them, but as the anointing, and the Promise was Eternal Life to him that
did abide in the anointing.
Ans. The scope and intent of this Question, is, to overtura all out ward
teaching by men, and to erect an immediate teaching of the Spirit in the room
of it; It is to carry men off from Gods outward Ordinances, to wait for secret
Inspirations of God; and indeed it is to subject men to Satanical delusions
instead of the Spirits suggestions. For that which is insinuated, is this, viz
that the drawing of any people to attend upon any out ward instruction, becomes
in effect a withdrawing of them from the anointing, or from that inward
teaching of the Spirit, (which indeed) has not one syllable of truth in it:
For John the Baptist did draw the people after him, so did Christ, so did the
Apostles, to hear the Word of God which they preached, which was an outward
word, an outward teaching: did they withdraw such Persons from the inward
teaching, from the anointing within them? or were they not rather drawn to the
anointing within them, by attending and giving heed to the outward preaching?
did not the Spirit of God accompany their outward preaching? did not John come
in the Spirit and Power of Elias in his outward Ministry? and were not many
turned from their disobedience to the wisdom of the Just? and could this be
without the Spirit? was there not an admirable power of the Spirit attending
both Christ's teaching, and the Apostles preaching? did their outward
instruction withdraw the people from the Spirit, or did they not rather convey
the Spirit to them? Is not the Gospel as it is presented to men in an external
way, said to be the administration of the Spirit? 2 Cor. 3. 8. Gal. 2. 5. And
were not many anointed with enriching gifts by that Spirit, which is the
Spirit of the Gospel, which comes along with the Gospel preached? How then are
any seduced by being being brought to the hearing of the Gospel preached? or
are not they rather seduced who are drawn off from the external Means and
Ministry, by which the Spirit is given, and Faith is wrought, to wait for the
receiving of the Spirit without any Word to conveigh it to them? which Spirit
when they have, it is not the Spirit of Truth, but of Delusion: as is confessed
by one of their own, newly redeemed out of such hellish captivity, under which
these poor Creatures are held.

Object. But they produce a Scripture which seems to erect and set up one only
Teacher, which is the Spirit, and to throw down and cast under foot all outward
Teaching which is performed by men. John says to them he wrote, 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
That they needed not that any man teach them, but as the anointing teaches
them of all things, and is Truth.

Answ. First, This is not spoken of all men, but of those 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
Answered. viz. ye need that no man teach you, but as the anointing teaches you
all things.
who are come to Christ, and had the Spirit, that they needed no man to teach
them; But what must they do that have not the Spirit? how must they obtain it,
if not by the Word of the Gospel which conveys it? therefore an outward
teaching is necessary for such. Secondly, The Apostle seems to speak of such an
annointment which they had received, which had already taught them, by which
they should abide in Christ and not be seduced; as those words show, Even us it
has taught you, you shall abide, etc. Now indeed the Spirit of God has taught
us of all things in the Scriptures which were of his inspiring: whereto if we
attend, we shall abide in the Truth, and not be misled by Seducers; and to this
teaching of the Spirit in the Scriptures, we need not that any teaching of man
should be added, but as we are taught in them. Thirdly, The words, You need not
that any man teach you, but as the anointing teaches you, are hyperbolical
expressions; there is an excess in them, as in many places of Scriptute, as
where it is said, If all things should be written, which Jesus said and did,
the whole world would not contain the the Books that would be written: The
meaning is, there would be very many Books written, if all should be written;
And in verse. 20 of this very Chapter, the Apostle tells them that they knew all
things; it is an excessive speech, for no one knows all things but God:
Christ himself as man knew not all things, who yet had the Spirit not according
to measure, but beyond it; the meaning then is, they had much knowledge, and
knew many things, and so they needed not that any man teach them; that is, they
knew so much already of the Doctrine of the Gospel, that if only they
persevered in that which they knew, they might be kept without much teaching;
it is to be understood in a comparative sense; not in an absolute
consideration, as to exclude all teaching, but to exclude much of that teaching
which others do require; and it respects the abundance of knowledge which they
had in comparison of Believers of former times before the Gospel was revealed;
as from the Prophecy, from which these words of John were fetched, appears,
Jer. 31. 34. They shall teach no more man his Neighbor, and every man his
Brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest of them; says the Lord; Knowledge should so abound in
the days of the Gospel, that they should not need teaching so much as in the
times of the Law; For it points at the days of the Gospel after Christ should
be revealed; of which Christ says, That he that is least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, should be greater then John the Baptist, who yet was greater then all the Prophets, so exceedingly should Light shine in Gospel Times; but that
teaching should be absolutely excluded, was not the Apostles meaning; for
though they never did need it less, yet they never had it more then in the days
of the Apostles and of the Primitive Churches: For there were many who were
eminently gifted besides Pastors and Teachers, who did teach; And it is to be
observed, that the Spirit was never given so plentifully in any Age, as in that
Age, wherein so much outward teaching was; so that there is no such measure of
reception of the Spirit, that can thrust out outward teaching while we are
here: yea, and John himself thought there was need of teaching, while he tells
them of an unction that they had received, and that they knew all things, and
needed not that any one should teach them; for verse. 36. he says, These things
have I written unto you in reference to them that seduce you; that is, least
you should be carried away from the Truth by them, he taught them to stand fast
in the Truth they had received. Fourthly, It holds forth that they were not,
neither should be Babes, which knew nothing themselves, were able to judge of
nothing themselves, but do depend wholly and really upon others to teach them,
and were led wholly as others guide them; in this sense they should not need
teaching; for there was a light set up in their souls, and they had the Spirit
of God, which is a light, and enables them to discern with such clearness, that
they believe not because others tell them so, but because they can look into
the Truth themselves. Concerning the last words of that question: viz. that the
Promise was eternal Life to him that did abide in the anointing, because there
is no such Scripture that says so, and because no course we take in our
teaching does tend (as has been showed) to withdraw from the anointing;
therefore I shall not insist upon them.

Querie 18. Whether you do not bewitch the people, and draw them from the
Spirit of God within them, to observe those Sacraments and Ministry,
maintained, and other practices in Churchmeetings.
things which God never commanded; to tell the people of a Sacrament, and
following your outward Teaching, who stand praying in the Synagogues, and are
called of men Masters; which Christ d^d forbid, Mat. 23. And have the chiefest
places in the Assemblies; Whether these be not called Antichrists, which act
contrary to the Commands of Christ, yea or no?
Answ. In this Question, besides the repetition of former things, they strike
at Sacraments, at the teaching and praying of Pastors and Elders, for to them
they speak in all their questions; at the posture of standing in prayer, at the
places of meeting, calling them Synagogues in a derisive way, at the Title of
Master, which is put upon them, and charge them with ambition, in assuming
chiefest places, which (they say) such take; I must clear up the truth in all
these particulars.

First, Concerning Sacraments: there are no Ordinances on foot amongst us which
we call by that name, though there Concorning Sacraments.
might be a defense for it; but there are Ordinances which others call
Sacraments, and we call them Seals of the Covenant, which are to confirm Faith
in the Covenant of God, concerning Remission of sin by the blood of Christ, and
other Grace of the like nature, which is vouchsafed in Christ; and they are
Baptism and the Lords Supper, and they are both of them instituted by Jesus
Christ: Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23. and they both point at Christ's Death and
the shedding of his Blood, Romans 6. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 26. Mat. 26. 28. and they serve
to Seal Remission of sins by Christ's Blood, Act. 22. 16. Mat. 26. 28. and
indeed both of them are to put us in remembrance of Christ; and that which
Christ has instituted, who dares abrogate? And those that destroy the Seals,
therein attempt the destruction of the Covenant; for Seals are the ratification
of Covenants; or at least they do despise Gods grace of condescendency, who for
the cause of our weakness in belief of his Covenants, vouchsafes to grant us
Seals to confirm them. And Gods Covenants have never been without Seals; and
though there has been change of Seals, yet Seals are as old (one or other of
them) and are to last as long as the Covenants, and the Lords Supper expressly
till Christ come: 1 Cor. 11. 26. And let all take heed, least slighting Seals
and gracious Covenants, they be hereafter accounted despisers of Gods Grace,
which will be reckoned amongst the greatest sins.

Secondly, Concerning our outward teaching, I have declared already in part the
necessity of it; It is the ordinary way Concerning outward teaching and
Ministry.
by which a people that are in darkness are brought to light: Mat. 4. 13, 14.
Act. 26. 16, 17, 18. It is the way and means by which the deep and profound,
and many most sweet and necessary Truths of Scripture come to be understood:
Acts 8. 30, 31. It is the means which God has appointed for the bringing of
men to Faith: Romans 10. 14, 17. It is the power of God to Salvation: Romans 1. 16.
It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save those who do believe: 1
Cor. 1. 21. Upon which account it is, that the Apostle concludes, woe unto
himself, if he preach not the Gospel of Christ: 1 Cor. 9. 16. It is the means
of exalting Christ: which made the Apostle so much to rejoice that Christ was
preached, though from an envious Spirit: Phil. 1. 18. And hence it is, that God
in all times and ages in which he has had a Church, has had such which have
preached and taught the people; as James observed in that speech of his in the
Council: Act. 15. 21. Moses (says he) of old time has in every City, them
that preach him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath Day. And must Christ
be worse provided for then Moses? no; Christ himself was a Preacher of himself,
Luke 4. 18. Mat. 4. 23. and he gave Commission to his Disciples to preach, and
sent them into all the World for that purpose; Mat. 18. 19. and in them he
commissioned others in all Ages to the end of the World; for he promised his
presence to the end of the world, and consequently not to them only which were
not to continue so long, but to such also who should succeed them impreaching.
If any one should attempt to make this place invalid, by interpreting the words
which are translated, to the end of the World, to be meant only to the end of
that Age, because of the diversity of the sense that is put upon the Greek word
(...), which is translated (World) and sometimes signifies (Age) to show the
weakness thereof. I shall only give this hint, these words together (...) are
used for the end of the World in a plain proper sense in many places of
Scripture; as Mat. 13. 39, 40. and cap 24. 3. Heb 9. 26. and I know not that
they are together used in any other sense.

Secondly, It seems to be too gross and wicked to restrain Christ's presence to
an Age, much more the things that are given in charge to be preached and
observed verse. 20. as if one only Age were to observe Christ's Commands: for
howsoever the Apostles were the Persons that immediately received the Commands,
and had the Promise, yet there is a further scope in Christ's words, and a clear
intimation of the continuation of the work by others, who should succeed after
they should cease to be. For suitable to this, is that charge which Paul gives
to Timothy. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. I give the^ charge in the sight of God who
quickens all things, and before Jesus Christ, etc. that thou keep this
Commandment without spot irrebukably, until the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Was Timothy to continue til the appearing of Jesus Christ, or is there
not another thing employed, viz. that Timothy should have successors in that
work? to whom Paul gives the charge as well as to him, and lays it upon them to
keep the same Commandment: And because it is one work, Paul speaks to them all
as to one man, and so did Christ in the Commission above mentioned. And Christ
ascended, up on high and gave gifts to men, and he appointed some Apostles,
some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body
of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the
falness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. that is, till all Saints come to a State
of Perfection, so as neither to be subject to error nor to sin, which is not
attainable in this World; Christ was born in weakness and littleness of stature
as other men, and he grew up to a perfect man; the Apostle alludes to this:
Saints are growing up whilst they are here in knowledge and in all spiritual
Gifts and Graces, till nothing be wanting of that proportion which God has
appointed for them, which is not in this life; And Ministry must last while
Saints are in their growing state, while any thing is wanting of the measure
they must come unto.

Object. But ministerial gifts are not now to be found in the world, such which
the Ministers of the Gospel had in the Primitive times; the Apostles were not
to go forth into the world, but were to tarry at Jerusalem, though they had a
Commission to Preach the Gospel in all Nations, till they were first endued
with power from on high, that is, till they were anointed with the holy Ghost,
as was done at the time of Pentecost, as is mentioned Act. 2 1, 2, 3. etc. then
had they the Spirit given them, and were enriched greatly with gifts, by which
they were enabled to discharge that service they were called unto; so Gal. 3.
5. the person that preached the Gospel, had the ministering of the Spirit, but
now no such gifts; therefore no such work ministerial as was then, nor any such
Officers, as Pastors, Teachers, etc. as was then.

Answ. First, When the Apostle Paul lays down the qualification of Bishops or
Elders (for they are one) he mentions many things respecting a good
conversation, and some other things respecting a right dispensation; he must be
^ound in the Faith, and settled and established in the Truth, and mighty in the
Scriptures, that he may convince gainsayers; and inclinable to communicate what
gift he has, by an aptness to teach, and he must be good and upright in his
life in all things; But not one word proceeds from the Apostle of any
extraordinary gifts wherewith he is to be endued, but a total silence in that
point: Now if such an anointment had been necessary with such an absolute
necessary, as that without it there could be no Bishops, no Pastors and Elders
of any kind at all; how comes it that the Apostle omits the mention of so main
a thing which is made the principal, when he nominates many other things?
Therefore that anointment which the Apostles had, and thole gifts wherewith
they were enriched, they served for other ends then to qualify them for the
Ministry; Or if some of them were Apostles qualifications, which were to go
into all the world to preach the Gospel, and did therefore stand in need of
tongues, yet they were not Pastors and Teachers qualifications which are fixed
to certain places and people; Such gifts as were then given, were testimonials
that Christ was received to the Glory of the Father, and did sit at his right
hand, and that all power was given him to Heaven and Earth, according as he
spoke when he was upon the Earth.

Secondly, There might be as forcible an argument fetch: against all
Christianity (if words be taken up in the Letter, in which they run) as against
Ministry, Mark 16, 17. Those signs shall follow them that believe in my name,
they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, and many other
things it is said they should do, and they did so in the Primitive times; very
many of them, and perhaps all had one extraordinary gift or another; as, 1 Cor.
12. 7. The man ifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal; to one in one kind, and to another in another kind. And therefore when
Paul met with Disciples at Ephesus, the first Question that he asked them, was;
whetherthey had received the holy Ghost since they believed? As if suchgifts of
the holy Ghost had been so connexed to Faith, that they could not be separated
the one from the other shall we therefore reason from hence, that because these
signs are not now accompanying those that profels Faith, that there are no
Believers to be found in these latter Ages? We may as rationally, and with as
much (and more) color of Scripture reason after such manner, as these persons
do against Ministry.

Besides, the Apostle speaks of Ministry which some persons have received,
Romans 12. 7. and requires a waiting upon it, and he that teaches must wait upon
his teaching, and he that exhorts must wait upon his exhortation: Here is not
only an outward teaching allowed, (which the persons who shaped these questions
oppose) but an outward teaching by office is enjoined, which some others that
are no Quakers are ready enough to withstand; For if it should be merely by a
gift, which some will grant, though they deny Office: How comes it that the
Injunction is to wait upon it? For though it be not expressly in the Original,
yet it is necessarily employed, that there may be sense made of it; and how
comes an injunction of maintenance, Gal. 6. 6. from him that is taught, to him
that teaches, if teaching be not by Office, be not waited upon, and made the
special work of some persons? And how comes the Apostle to raise a living to
some persons from their preaching, when he says, that they who preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel, and says also, that so the Lord has
ordained it? 1 Cor. 9. 14. and if persons make it not their office, and wait
upon it as upon their office, if only they preach by virtue of a gift that they
have, or think that they have and exercise it at their pleasure, will the
Apostle have such men live upon the Gospel that so preach it? Or why does the
Apostle fetch an argument from them that served at the Altar, whohad their
livelihood thence, to prove a living upon the Gospel Preached, if such who were
to Preach the Gospel, were not Ministerially and by office to do it; For those
who lived upon the things of the Temple, and upon the Altar, were Priests and
Levites, and Ministers of the Old Testament. Were all these Directions and
Instructions which respect Office, Temporary and Transitory? Then may the whole
Gospel in all the Injunctions and Commandments of it be made a Temporary, and a
Transitory Gospel.

Or can any rational person conceive how Preaching is like to be kept up, and
to be on foot any long time, if some persons be not appointed to wait upon it,
and if it be not laid upon some persons as their work? Or what certainty can
the people be at concerning supply that way, if none be engaged to it? And how
weakly is Preaching likely to be carried, when none attend upon it, nor give
themselves over unto it? The Apostles who had incomparable endowments beyond
any who live now, did yet give themselves to prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word. And shall not those who fall greatly below them, be much rather wholly
devoted to that service, when as the work is so weighty if it be carried as it
ought to be, that it requires the whole of man?

But I believe these days wherein there is such arguing against Ministry, and
such pleading for the Preaching of gifted men, were Prophesied of by Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. where 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. which respects the heaping up of Teachers,
opened.
he says, that the time shall come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine;
But after their own lusts, they shall heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and they
shall be turned unto fables. It is observed that the Greek word that is
translated (heaping) does import three things: 1. An ardent study to acquire
many Teachers. 2. A rash and heady gathering together of many Teachers, without
any solid judgment exercised. 3. A confused multitude of such as are gathered
together employed. And it may be further observed, what manner of persons they
be that shall heap together Teachers after this manner, and what grounds they
go upon. First, They are such who will not endure sound Doctrine. Secondly,
they are such who please their own lusts and fancies in the Teachers whom they
heap together to themselves. Thirdly, They are such who have itching ears, who
affect to hear many, and no one nor a few will serve their turn; they hear one
and another without being satisfied, after the manner of those who have an itch
upon them. Fourthly, They turn away their ears from the Truth, and are turned
to Fables; that is, any thing that is new, though it be a very fable and have
no truth in it, is thirsted after by them; old truths will not please so well,
they leave them, and turn after these. It is also worthy to be considered how
Teachers come to be multiplied, that there is such an heap of them; why the
wantonness, looseness, and vanity of the spirit of the People, which will not
endure the strictness of the care and vigilance of Pastors and Teachers, and
have also itching ears, shall multiply them and pile them up one upon another
like an heap; the lusts of the people make many Preachers more then any thing
else. And these persons that are so wanton that they must have many, are yet
such who will not have some, viz such who are solid and preach the Truth; For
this Text says, they turn away their ears from the Truth (where it is solidly
held forth) and are turned after fables.

Nothwistanding that there is a distemper of this kind which is very prevalent
in these days, yet I dare not so affix preaching to office, as thereby to
exclude all exercising of gifts; but the exorbitancy is that which I appear
against; I would have those that do preach, and others also that are solid
sober Christians, judge together who are fit to preach, and who have a gift; 1
Cor. 14, 32. and I would have them first proved, before approved, 1 Timothy, 3. 10.
and then they should exercise it occasionally; for he that has an office, it
belongs to him and is his part to wait upon it; but he that has only a gift
without an office, must look unto it how he is called out to exercise it before
he use it.

Thirdly, Not only outward teaching offends them, but Concerning praying
standing.
praying standing will not down with them; I know not what posture they would
have, but that which we intend by it, is, that he that prays may be seen by
all the people on whose behalf he prays; For he is their mouth, and it does
affect the heart of the people when their eyes behold him who is praying for
them, and it is justified from Solomon's example, who when he prayed on the
behalf of Israel, he stood in the presence of all the Congregation, and spread
forth his hands toward Heaven; And yet we plead not so for standing, but that
we shall grant other postures to be lawful, provided that the person that
prays be visible to the people; but they that love not the duty it self, but
except against it as in Querie 15. may better be allowed to find fault with the
posture.

Fourthly, Nor will they be pleased with the place of Concerning praying in the
Sunagogues.
meeting, who would have no meeting at all for such exercises; they call them
Synagogues in way of derision; but there is no harm in that word if they
understood it; it does but signify a place where the people come together, a
place of Assembling; It did signify the place where the Jews met together to
hear the Word of God upon the Sabbath Day. It was no holy place in the Jews
account, as the Temple was; it was not hallowed and sanctified for sacred uses
only as the Temple was; but was made use of for civil purposes, as to punish
offenses; For they scourged such as they counted malefactors in their
Synagogues, Mat. 23. 34. If our place therefore be only like a Synagogue, its
no brand to us; some place we must have if a service be to be done; and one
place will serve our turn as well as another, provided it be a capacious place
that will hold the company that are to meet in it, and that it be also a free
place, which we may make bold with without detriment to any, and a known
agreed-on place, which all may take notice of, and may repair thither: yet our
place cannot hardly be called a Synagogue in allusion to the Jewish Synagogues;
for it was not erected for any spiritual or divine use, or with any intent of
serving God in it, as the Synagogues among the Jews were, though they made use
of them for other services.

Fifthly, After cavelling at places, they come to strike at Concerning Title of
Master.
Persons, and charge us with Ambition and Affectation of Honor: 1. Because we
are called Masters. 2. Because we have as they say, the chiefest places in the
Assemblies; for the former, viz. the title, we confess it is put upon some of
us, and as we have not affected it, so neither have we cause to reject it. It
does import nothing but civil honor and respect which others show us: It is
put upon all persons who have either birth, breeding, riches of this world,
office and employment of an honorable nature: It was not only put upon Christ,
but upon the Apostles of Christ also, in Joh. 12. 21. and not rejected by them.
Some came to Philip, and said (Sir) we would see Jesus: It is in the Greek,
Master, we would see Jesus: and Acts 16. 30. The Jailer came to Paul and Silas
and said, (Sirs) that is in Greek, Masters, what shall etc. and they repelled
him not in reference to that Title.

But these Persons allege Mat. 13. where it is said; Be not ye called Masters,
for you have one Master which is Christ. But this Text will stand them in no
stead; for this word that is translated (Masters) is, (...) which signifies
such Masters as are Duces viae, Guides of ones way, and Gubernatores vitae,
Governors of a man's life, which is proper to Christ, and not to any man; For
no man doth-it, saving instrumentally from and under Christ. And Rabbi which
was forbidden them also, verse. 8. is such another Title, which carries too much
in the signification of it; it imports one Teacher who for the abundance of his
knowledge is instead of many: And the affectation is that which is principally
forbidden, and the derogating in the coveting of such-Titles from God in that
Glory which is due to him, who is that Dux viae, that Guide of Guides, and that
Rabbi, that one teacher which is more then all; But for the Title Master in a
civil acception, there is neither hurt in giving of it, nor in taking of it,
provided that pride and haughtiness do not occasion it; For the Apostle says,
in giving honor, go one before another, Romans 12. 10. And we know that he
justifies the Title of Master in all such who have others to serve them, and
gives direction unto them how they ought to deport themselves toward those who
are their servants. But these persons may better be born with, if they destroy
Titles, who destroy Relations themselves which founded them. Concerning chief
places in the Assemblies, except the Pulpit be the chief place, which the great
ones covet not, I know nothing of the cause of this charge, but do account it a
meet slander.

Querie 19. Whether a man shall ever grow up that he need no man teach him
under your Ministry, yea or no? seeing the Apostle says, you need no man teach
you; and you which have been long Teachers, how many have you brought up into
this Condition?
Answ. Persons may grow up under the teaching of such a Ministry as is among
us, to need no man to teach them, in the sense in which the Apostle understands
it; they may be brought to the knowledge of all the great truths of the Gospel,
and may come to understand many of the high and deep things of Scripture; they
may also come to be much confirmed and established therein, so that in a
comparative sense they may not need Teachers; not that they are absolutely
perfect in knowledge, but that they know very much, and are able to teach
others also; and of this we have some experience. But in the sense in which
these persons understand it (for they intend such a perfection in knowledge as
excludes all ignorance, and all humane helps for any further seize) we
ingenously confess, that no man is ever like to grow up so high, as to need no
teaching, nor are we our selves come up to such a perfection; and we think our
selves to be but Children in knowledge, in comparison of that which we hope to
attain unto in heaven; nor do we think it any dishonor to us to confess so
much, especially while we medicate upon the Apostles expression, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Now we see through a glass darkly, speaking of the time of this life, but then
we shall see face to face, speaking of the time after this life. Nor do we find
that Christ himself, or the Apostles, ever bred up persons to such a condition
as these men speak of, to need none to teach them in their sense. Paul bred up
Timothy, and to a great height he bred him under his Ministry, whom he calls
Son, because he had been with him as a Son, yet he exhorts him to meditate upon
such things, and to give himself wholly unto them, that his profiting might
appear unto all, 1 Timothy 4. 15. And Peter exhorcs those that he wrote to, of
whom he Iaith, that he did ouly put them in remembrance of things, and that
they knew them already, and were established in the present truth, that they
would grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.
18.

The Conclusion that they put to all these Questions, is this;

The Church of Christ (say they) is a pillan and ground of Truth, which does
witness the eternal Spirit; and if you be the same Church, and have the same
Spirit, answer me these Queries without any consequencies or senses; otherwise
diny your Eldership, and Pastorship, and to be no Church of Christ.

Answ. The Church of Christ is the ground and pillar of Truth, and does witnese
the truth of all that is contained in the holy Scriptures, and more especially
that the mystery of godliness is gteat, viz. That God was manifest in the
flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the World, received up into Glory. And this we assert without
any Consequencies or senses; many of which, (if not all) you that urge us thus,
most desperately deny. As for your questions, we have answered them agreeablyto
Scripture, and have made such inferences and necessary consequences, and have
put such senses as cannot be contradicted by any knowing Christian, nor indeed
by any but those whose design is to destroy all Scripture, and utterly to
subvert the Faith of the Gospel, and to lead men captive after their own
delusions: and instead of denying a Pastorship, and Eldership, and our selves
to be the Church of Christ, we shall pray God to open the eyes of so many of
these poor creatures, who are thus sold over to delusions, that so many of them
as belong to Gods Election, may be recovered out of the snare of the devil, who
are led captive for the present after his will.

A Copy of a Letter which Richard Waller a Quaker, sent to a Gentleman's
Family, near Stockport in Cheshire: in which both he and his wife had been
formerly servants: Wherein he pleads for an absolute perfection, and for
Quaking.
Dear Friends,
MY dear love in the Lord presents it self unto you all in the power of the
truth; desiring the Lord to establish you all in the truth it self, that you
may grow and become faithful unto the Lord to bring forth much fruit, that the
Lord in all things may be glorified by you. Dear friends, I did long stand in
opposition against a company of people by the World called Quakers; So it
pleased the Lord in his time to let me see my condition; So that I did plainly
see that I had got the Saints words to talk of before I came to witness the
Saints condition: Now the Scripture says, Jesus Christ was made manifest to
destroy the works of the Devil. Whosoever can witness Christ manifest in him,
can witness sin destroyed: But he that says Christ is manifest in him, and
commits sin, is a liar. For whosoever is born of God, sins not, 1 Job. 2.
4. For his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God;
Now the Priests of the World tell us we cannot be perfect here: So they leave a
hole for Satan here contrary to Scriptures; and when will they have him cast
out? As for me, I deny all the Teachers of the World: For I can really witness
that I have found my Teacher within me, which is a mystery to all the World.
Now, I and the rest that can witness that Christ is made manifest in us, we are
hated of the World; for we disown the Worlds ways, Worlds worships, and Worlds
Customs, and they disown us. Now the Scriptures says, He that is a friend to
the World, is an enemy to God: The World calls us witches and mad men; they did
so by Christ; they said he was a Devil: and they said Paul was mad, and Stephen
spoke Blasphemy: It is just so now as it was then; they Jear and say, Never any
of the Saints Quaked and Trembled. Read these Scriptures at your leisure, and
you may find them liars, Heb. 12. 25, 26. Ezra. 9. 3, 4. Heb. 12. 21. Moses
quaked and trembled. David trembled Psalm. 119. 120. Psalm. 18. 7. Heb. 3. 16.
When I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered. Jerem. 23. 9. Isa. 66. 2.
Ezekiel. 32. 10. Dan. 10. 7. and 11. Daniel Trembled, Acts 9. 6. Joel 2. 10. Job
26. 11. Amos 8. 8. Jer. 30. 6, 7. Acts 13. 40. 41. See here is a Cloud of
Witnesses against them: And whereas they deny that perfection is to be
attained, here they are found liars. See Phil. 3. 15, Let us, as many as are
perfect, be thus minded. Col. 1. 28. Col. 4. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Heb. 6. 1. Heb.
10. 14. He. 12. 23. Heb. 13. 21. Jam. 1. 4. Col. 4. 12. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Joh. 17.
21. I in thee, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. I plainly
see the Priests taught deceit, and we believed them: But the Lord has
discovered their deceit to his, and he will teach all his himself. Oh therefore
wait upon the Lord, and cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, and
mind the light of God in you which discovers deceit; and the peace of God be
with you all, and keep you all in the sense of him staid in your minds, that
you may be kept in his fear which keeps the mind clear, and pure, and open
to receive his teachings, and to forsake the evil, and choose the good, and so
bring you into obedience; and it will suffer you to join with nothing but what
is of it own nature, pure and clear, and it will keep you from the evil of the
World. The Lord cause you all to grow up as trees of Righteousness, and
stablish your hearts in the living truth, that his name in all thing may be
glorified.

Dear friend Christian, I have sent you a little book, read it without
partiality, and you may see deceit discovered; My wife desires you to present
her service to her Master and Mistress, and all the children, and her love unto
you and all the servants; We are both well, and our child grows fast. As for
me, as I begun with my dear love unto you all, so I end: For I dare not
complement, because it is a Custom of the World. Farewell,

A Copy of an answer to the forementioned Letter, written in the name of the
Church of Duckenfield, now meeting in Stopport, and sent unto the wife of
Richard Waller, for the settling and establishing of her in the faith of Christ,
being a member of the forementioned Church, wherein all such Scriptures which
were brought to prove an absolute Perfection and Quaking are Interpreted, and
the true sense given to them; and freed from such corrupt fense for which they
are alleged.
Sister Waller,
YOu are very precious to us, though your miscarriage against God and us has
been very great. We are apt to hope that the Lord either has or will convince
you of the sin you committed in your unadvised Marriage; Which you so
selfwilledly carried on against us: And when your heart is kindly humbled; we
know you will give praise to God, and justify us: And then we shall conceive
as much can see of joy from your repentance, as we have done grief from your
sin: We cannot yet think otherwise, but that you do belong to the Lord: And if
so, he will not suffer you to have rest in any evil way you have gone in, till
he have made you truly sensible, and sorrowful after a Godly manner: which if
ever you once manifest to us, we shall with as much tenderness own you, as in
any time heretofore: For you are very dear to us, and our bowels do very much
yearn after you: Especially since we heard of a Letter which your husband wrote
to Duckenfield, which some of us have seen; by which we discern what deadly
poison he has sucked in, to the undoing of his poor Soul, if God be not very
merciful to him, and bring him to Repentance. And you also, through your
nearness of Relation to him, are exposed to multiplicity of Temptations, to
forsake the faith of our Lord Jesus, and to turn aside to such Satanical
delusions which he is carried away with. We do conceive hope, that as yet the
Lord has kept you, by observing one passage of his Letter, which holds out
your desire, that your service may be presented to your Master and Mistress:
therein, owning the relation they stood in to you, and you to them, which he
declares against, making it the worlds way, and not Gods. Our desire and prayer
to God for you shall be, that he will yet keep you even to the end. And who can
tell but that the Lord may bring out a great deal of good to your soul, by this
evil of your Husbands fearful apostasy, which his Letter holds out? God may
open your eyes, thereby to see your sinful haste which you made in that
Marriage: He may humble you for rushing upon it against Counsel; he may make
you to know that he was angry against you, by leaving him to such fearful error
of way. He has laid a sore affliction upon you, by giving up one so near and
dear to you, to such fearful Temptations. You have offended God through him,
and now you must be chastned in him. Be awakned, be awakned, and consider the
Lords righteous hand in this matter; The person whom you have chosen, God seems
to have forsaken; at least for a time he is become the Devils Captive. O fear
you, and repent you, least he also forsake you. But we hope better of you; and
our prayer is, that you may be settled and established in the truth. We foresee
that you will be strongly solicited: He that thought himself bound to tempt
persons by his Letters at so great a distance, what alluring ways will not he
take to cause you to forsake your integrity, and to turn aside to such fleshly
deceits of Satan: take heed you be not bewitched with pretenses, and quotations
of Scripture presented in the Letter; there lies the greatest danger. The Devil
tempted Christ, by telling him that it was written; and his Instruments will
use the same fleights: They will put false Glosses upon Scripture, while they
deny all senses to be put upon Scripture, to deceive themselves and others
thereby. The Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 3. 16. that some that are unlearned,
and unstable, do wrest Scripture to their own destruction; and he does warn
them, lest they being led away by the error of the wicked, do fall from their
own stedfastness, by such means. And we also do beseech you to beware of this
Snare, viz of Scripture abused by misconstructions. It is a misconstruction,
when the construction is made to follow the sound of the words, though it be
never so much repugnant to other Scripture: You know that all Scripture is
given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3, 16. And that holy men spoke as they were
Inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Now God is a God of Truth, and the
Spirit is a Spirit of Truth, and cannot speak contrary things, nor contradict
himself: therefore, if there be any seeming contradiction in Scripture taken in
the Letter of it, we must seek after a right sense, by which the seeming
contradiction may be removed. Your husband produces many Scriptures to prove
an absolute perfection without sin; And the first Scripture he mentions, is
Phil. 3. 15. Let us (says Paul) (speaking of himself and the Philippians) as
many as be perfect, be thus minded; He Collects from hence, that the Saints
here have such a perfection that excludes all sin: Alas poor Creature! We
thought he had been better acquainted with his own heart: But he might have
looked a little higher in the Chapter, upon ver. 12. and have discerned that
Paul expressly denies Perfection in reference to himself Not as though I were
already perfect, says he; Was Paul perfect, and yet was he not perfect? In the
Letter there is a contradiction: But Paul speaking by the Spirit of God, cannot
contradict himself: therefore, we must look after the sense of the word
[Perfect] It is many time taken for sincere, 2 Kings 15. 14. Asa took not away
the high places; that was his failing; Yet his heart was perfect; In what sense
perfect? Was it perfect without sin? Not so, For it was his sin that the high
places were not taken away; But perfect, that is Upright; He did not serve God
in pretense, but in truth, They say we must not give the sense of Scripture,
but must take it in the Letter; but that is contrary to the examples of
Scripture. Those in Nehemiah 8. 8. read in the Book of the Law, and gave the
sense; and it is necessary sometimes to avoid contradiction, which is in the
Letter, to give the sense; The sense of that place, in Phil 3. 15. Let us so
many as be perfect, be thus minded, is this, Let us so many as be Sincere,
Upright, and halt not betwixt Moses and Christ, betwixt the Law and the Gospel,
be thus minded: that is minded like to Paul, as he had given them example; For
that was the Scope in that whole Chapter; he had left the Law and all
confidence in Mofaical Ordinances, and followed Christ; But yet was not perfect
therein, as to be without defect in that, but was upright and sincere therein;
and he presses them, as many as were perfect, that is, upright, to be as he
was, to do likewise, and yet not to think that they can be so complete as not
to need to follow more and more after Christ; but to be still striving, as he
was; This is clearly the sense, by which your husband may understand his error.
As for all other places, to give a particular Exposition of each Quotation,
will take up more time then we can well spare at present; but as need shall
require, upon intimation given us, we shall be willing to hold forth the sense
of any Scripture you shall doubt of hereafter, as the Lord shall help us, and
we hope with Truth. comparing Scripture with Scripture, that one may not oppose
another. Only in general it is good to take notice that is Scripture there is
mention made of a Comparative perfection; Those who stuck in Moses his Rites,
and could not get past them, were not so perfect as those who were clearly
bottomed upon the Gospel. And to this Perfection Paul endeavored to bring the
Colossians, and Philippians, and all that did believe, Col 1. 28. And those who
were Babes in knowledge, were not so perfect as those who had their senses
exercised to discern betwixt good and evil, of which Heb. 6. 1. And there is a
perfection that respect Justification, and not Sanctification, Heb. 10. 14. By
one Offering he has for ever perfected them that are Sanctified; that is, he
has perfectly justified all the Saints, by dying once; when as all the legal
Offerings (though repeated day by day) could not do it; But there was still a
Conscience accusing for sin. And there is a perfection that respects rather the
number of Graces, then the measure of them, and respects rather duration and
continuance to the end, then any height or strength in the act of performance;
as Jam. 1. 4. Let patience have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and
entire, wanting nothing; This perfect work of patience, is the work of patience
perpetuated, and lasting to the end; He that endures to the end shall be
saved, Mat. 10. 22. Mat. 24. 13. And [being entire and wanting nothing]
respects the filling up, and completing the rest of the Graces that they had,
with this Grace of patience exercised to the end; as in 2 Cor. 8. 7: Therefore
as ye abound in every thing, in Faith, and Utterrance, and knowledge, and in
all diligence, and in your love to us; see that ye abound in this Grace also.
When all Graces be in Saints, and do abide in exercise to the end, then there
is a kind of Perfection in Saints. And the Scripture does frequently stir up
the Saints to endeavor after perfection; When yet it says not that is is to be
attained unto in this life. 2 Cor. 13. 9. We wish (said the Apostle) your
Perfection; and Heb 6. 1. Let us go on to perfection; And the Apostle himself
was not Perfect, but going on toward it, Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I were
already Perfect; But I forget that which is behind, etc. and so follow on
toward it. The Apostle Paul tells us, that while he was here, he did see
through a Glass darkly; and that now, that is in this life, he did know but in
part; and if but in part, where then was perfection? And the Apostle John tells
all Saints, 1 John 1. 8. that if they say they have no sin they deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them; And the Apostle James faith, that in
many things we-offend all; he and all others did offend And he faith, he is a
perfect man, that offends not in word; that is, he would be comparatively
perfect that could only bridle his tongue; but who can do it at all times? we
perceive your Husband cannot; for then he would never have uttered such
reproachsul words against godly men, calling them Priests, and saying they are
found Liars; his Conscience will tell him that some of them are such as fear
the Lord: but he faith, if Perfection be not here, we leave an hole for Satan;
and when will it be, if it be not here in this Life? Alas, alas, is he left so
soon to so great darkness as not to believe another Life and World after this?
that he asks when it will be, if not here? It seems Satan has had an open door
to enter into his heart, and fill it with such fogs and mists of Darkness; he
might have read and weighed the Apostles words, in 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10, 11. Now we
know in part, but when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away; and he might have considered that distinction of time
contained in these words, Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; this [now] is here, and this [then] is after this life; But he
strengthens himself in that place, in 1 Ioh. 3. 9. He that is born of God,
sins not, but his Seed remains, and he cannot sin; This he urges, but he
considers not that the same John says that which is contrary to this, viz.
Whosoever says he has no sin, deceives himself, and the truth is not in him;
A sound sense therefore must be brought out of John's words, else John will be
found a Liar against himself, and against God, as your Husband endeavors to
make him, denying sin to be there, in whom Christ is made manifest, from this
text; but the meaning is of sin in course, perfisted and continued in, without
true repentance and turning from it; he that is born of God cannot so sin; for
the seed of Truth and of Grace within him, will not let him so sin; for after
such manner the wicked of the world sin, but the Saints cannot so sin; there
will be smitings of heart in them, and they will ask and enquire what they have
done, and will repent and turn to God, as Job did, David did, Peter and all the
Saints have done.

Now concerning quaking and trembling, there is a multiplying of many Texts of
Scripture without knowledge; for none of them can be applied to justify the
practice of those whom they call Quakers. The first Text that they allege, if
it be taken in the Letter, as they take all Scripture, does destroy them and
their practice; viz. Heb. 12. 26 whose voice then shook the Earth, but now he
has promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but the
Heaven also. Now the Apostle gives the sense of these words [yet once more]
verse. 27. It signifies (faith he) the removing of those things that are
shaken, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain: Now those Persons
whom they call Quakers, they are shaken in their meetings, first one, and then
another; then the Text taken in the Letter, shows that they shall be removed
and taken away, seeing they are shaken; but others who are not shaken, shall
remain; so they fall by the Text which themselves allege. But the true sense
of this Text is Metaphorical, and signifies the removing of things corrupt in
Church and State, so far as it remains yet to be fulfilled; and it did signify
the removal of Moses Law of Rites, that the Gospel might be establ^shed instead
thereof. There was an outward shaking of the Mount, and of Moses, but it was
typical of this Metaphorical and spiritual shaking, and showed how Moses
Paedagogie, or Childish Discipline was to be removed away; but what is this to
their purpose? There is also a spiritual trembling, arising from the reverence
of God and his Word, which is inward in the foul, which all Saints have more or
less; Isa 66, 2. Ezra 9. 4. which are Texts of his citing, but they make
nothing for the upholding of their outward shaking: nor are they persons that
tremble at the Word of the Lord, but are despisers of it, There is also a
quaking and trembling of Flesh, but it did ar^se from the sense of Gods
Judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. Jer. 23 9, Ier. 30 5 6. and from a sense of Gods
Wrath; Psalm. 187. but they who have the name of Quakers, being all of them
perfect and without sin (as they pretend) cannot be afraid of Gods judgments
and of his wrath, nor do they quake upon that account; what they shall do
hereafter if they repent not, we leave to that one ludge of the world to
determine in his time. There is also a quaking from Visions and Apparitions, as
when an Angel appeared to Daniel, Dan. 10. 7. 11. and the outside of the
Vision, those that were with him saw, and quaked, and fled through fear; they
saw not the inside, as those that were with Saul did which saw a light, though
they saw no man, and they were terrified. And Paul was astonished, and trembled
Acts 9. 6. upon the appearance of Christ to him. Now whether these persons
pretend to apparitions or not, we know not; and whether there be any Apparition
unless the Devil does appear, we know not; only this we know, Those persons
who saw many Visions, and to whom God immediately, or by an Angel spoke
familiarly, which caused quaking and trembling, they were such, for whom, and
by whom, God wrought many wonderful things; therefore said the Pharisees to the
people, We know that God spoke with Moses; It was known to all, by signs and
wonders that Moses did, that God had Communion with him and spoke to him; so
also it was with Daniel, Peter, Paul, and all others; so that all might be
assured that God spoke with then, and the appearance was visible also: Now when
these persons can confirm their Visions by miraculous things wrought for them
and by them, it will be better received, that God has appeared and spoken to
them. But that which most satisfies us, that neither they nor their quaking are
of God, is first, because though some particular persons, upon some particular
and sudden appearances have trembled and quaked, yet there is nothing in all
the Scripture that makes out the meetings of many people together in a constant
way and course, waiting and expecting to see or hear something which casts them
into trances, and brings upon them quaking and trembling, and in a kind of
order also; as first one, and then another. Indeed the Apostles did abide
waiting at Jerusalem once; but never after, for the receiving of the Spirit
according to the Promise of the Father, by Christ's own special Injunction; but
then the Spirit came in visible manner; there was a rushing wind, and sound
from Heaven, and an appearance of cloven tongues, like as it were fire sat upon
every one of them, and they spoke with tongues; But what injunction have these
men to meet, and sit together waiting for any appearance of spirit, or Angel,
or ought else? And what promise have they made to them, or what outward
appearance is there of any coming of the Spirit to them? Or what mighty works
are done by them; Or what communion with God, or with his Spirit can they have,
which oppose God in their many blasphemous assertions which come from them? and
who destroy many of the great Doctrines of the Gospel? and who change and
subvert Gods Ordinances, viz. Relations betwixt Magistrates and Subjects,
Masters and Servants, etc. which God does build up in his word?

Sister, You may discern what little strength there is in those many Scriptures
in your Husbands Letter, heaped togegether, by that which we have presented in
answer; A cloud of misapplied Scriptures we hope will deceive none but the
simple. We are willing to believe that God has, and will give you a better
understanding, then to be deceived with vain words. Watch you, stand fast in
the faith, quit your self well like a solid Christian, be strong: If you doubt
of any thing, send to us, we shall endevor to give you satisfaction, and shall
beg of God to guide you, even he himself by his Spirit, into all Truth: Appear
not in any other meetings, as you tender the welfare of your Soul, tempt not
God to, leave you. If your Husband bring them to your house, get from among
them. If by any means you can, have no discourse with them, least you be
ensnared. You are warned in your Husband, he conversed with them, and how soon
is he become one of them, as his Letter shows, We pity his condition greatly.
What would we do to recover him, and bring him out of such snares? But we fear
least some sin is unrepented of, and that God is offended, and has left him;
Look you to your self, and past ways, and know the evil you have done, and
meet the Lord by faith and timely Repentance; It may be God will be gracious to
you, and you shall be kept in the fire, and in the water, in the midst of the
greatest and nearest dangers; so that they shall not touch you, nor hurt you.
Which shall be the prayer of those who are true friends to your soul, and do
watch over you, as those who must give an account to God for you.

Farewell. From the Elders, and some brethren of the Church of Christ, meeting
at Stoppors, In the name, and on the behalf of the rest. Sam. Eaton.

The Quakers Reply to our forementioned answer, sent by Richard Waller, with an
injunction that it should be read in the presence of the CONGREGATION.
I Have received a Letter, wherein I find many busy minds, giving senses upon
the Scriptures, and false Accusations.

Can you give a better sense upon the Scriptures then they are? thereby you
show another Spirit then that which did give forth the scriptures. For all
Scriptures being given forth by the Inspiration of the spirit, it is of no
private Interpretation, nor came not by the will of man. O flesh be silent
before the Lord, who art giving senses, and speak with thy own will: wherein
thou have uttered forth thy solly, who art unlearned: therefore thou art
wresting the Scriptures, which thou would turn upon the backs of others, and
the same turns upon thy own back and pate, who art giving senses: who live in
the corrupt nature, and pleadest for it, a servant to the Devil, maintaining
his Kingdom: Whereof thou Accusest him being led Captive, and thou art led
Captive, doing the work of the Devil, and art a witness against him, or them
who are in the second Birth, and the children of the living God: Jacob was a
perfect man, God saw no iniquity in him; Job was a perfect man; And God saw no
transgression in Israel; and Christ said, be ye perfect, as your heavenly
father is perfect: and the Apostle said, see that you stand perfect in the will
of God, And he that is born of God sins not, neither can be sin, because the
seed of God remains in him; he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he
is righteous; let no man deceive you with vain words, and in that number you
show your selves to be deceiving with vain words; and we speak wifdom among
them that are perfect, says the Apostle; Yet not the wisdom of this world,
that comes to naught: but in the wisdom of the world thou art, witnessing
against that which the Apostle justified, and have raised thy self out of that
which he was in, giving Senses and Meanings upon his words, as they painted
Serpents did, showing a contrary Spirit then the Apostles had; Showing thy self
in the first Birth, and not in the second, which is perfect; Literally
learned, but not Spititually, that which will own it, own without any
Witchcraft, Sorcery, or twining humane inventions, or its sense upon the
Scripture, which all is for Destruction and Fire; For to that in thy Conscience
do I speak, which shall eternally witness for me, and before you witness, the
same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, you must witness these things in
your selves. The contradiction is in your selves, and a seeming contradiction,
and not in the Scripture: Therefore it is you that look after the sense of the
word, which cannot own it as it is, and so make the contradictions; had you the
Spirit which Paul had, and which gave forth the Scriptures, you would not wrest
it to your own destruction; but the confusion is in your own minds, and that is
wresting the Scriptures in you, and giving senses to it, which is for
destruction; And whereas you speak of Paul's condition; I desire you to let
Paul's condition, and the Saints alone: For you know nothing of them, but are
giving senses upon their words, and wresting them, being unestablished with his
Spirit, and his life, and the Saints; For that mind in you has nothing at all
to do with it: The Letter says that the Saints were complete in him, and is
not upright perfect? Wherein it shows that you are not complete in Christ, but
without in the world, giving meaning to his words; whereas you speak of giving
a particular exposition of every Quotation, it is the busy mind which would be
exalted; So if I should answer to every sense which you have given upon the
Scripture from your conceivings, I should make fools wise in their conceits,
which God has promised, he will scatter the proud in their imaginations, and
there you are, and there is your portion.

Friends, Your weakness you have uttered, while any one thinks they are perfect
they cannot tell; but are in the same mind that you are in, giving senses upon
the Scripture, which was given forth by an eternal spirit, and you are giving
senses upon ir, with your external minds, and your own imagined wisdom, which
is from below, you utter it forth; for it denies perfection, and while your
minds stand in imitation, there is an Image in your minds, which sets something
up in it, that neither knows Christ, nor the way, nor the Scripture; Neither
can it refolve doubtful minds; But that sense giving upon the Scriptures does
heal up the beast which has a wound, and applies the Scriptures to a wrong
nature, to your own sense, that thereby many are led blind by you, and led into
doubts, and instead of stablishing, you unstablish, and that is it which keeps
so many in sin, and from waiting upon Jesus Christ, which comes to take away
sin.

Friends, here you sit as Judges of the Saints conditions, speaking you do not
know what of the Gospel, of Moses Law, of Justification, and Sanctification,
which of these things you know nothing of, but are busy minds, uttering forth
your folly; for none of these things can you witness, which you speak of, not
the Law of Moses, nor Justification, nor Sanctification, nor the Gospel, not in
the inward man, but in the Notion; he that is sanctified is justified, and
witnessed, and where it is not, it is babled and disputed upon, as you do,
giving your own imaginations and senses upon it, which leads into temptations
from God, both your selves and others; By one offering he has for ever
perfected them that are Sanctified.

Friends, give over your babbling, and see which of you can witness this Christ,
this Sanctification, and this Perfection, and give over your disputes, and
rabling, and rambling with an unclean mind; For the Grace of God teaches to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. Which I do see you know nothing of but
in the Notion, and the History of it, who are Ministers of the Letter.

Friends, see if you be brought to see a Conscience that does accuse for sin;
For that you must witness before you witness the Gospel, and look within your
selves, and gad not abroad; For that is the woman that abides not in her own
house.

Friends, let me ask you one question, are you come to the end, that you are
Teachers of others? I believe it will appear with a literal knowledge; or have
you an infallible judgment to judge of perfection, who were perfect, and who
were not perfect? For you make it appear as though you were able to judge, but
it is with your own sense, and dark thoughts, and not with the spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, who was the Minister of Christ which had it; said that
they might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; You speak forth your
imaginations; Is the perfection that is in the Saints, but a kind of perfection
as you speak of? These are your Saints which live in the Imaginations, and your
Perfection, and your Sanctification, which is your own sense, who wrest the
Scripture to your own destruction; by one offering he has for ever perfected
them that were sanctified: out of your own mouths you are judged. Friends, the
Apostle Paul did not tell you these words, but you are thieves that steal his
words; For he spoke to the Saints which had an understanding, when he bad them
forget those things which were behind, which you need not give a sense to his
words, and wrest them to another meaning; that is your condition which James
speaks of, for you live in the nature by whom Offenses come; that is but a
form, and the Robber to apply his words, except you had a Principle within you
that told you so: And John says, if they say they have no sin, they deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them; But says he, if you confess your
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive, and to cleanse from all sin; and if
you walk in the light as he is in the light, the blood of Jesus, Christ
cleanses from all sin; But here you are not in this light, onor cannot witness
this blood, no not the confession of your sin, but in the generation of the
Pharisees, gathered Churches, separated from others, contending against Christ;
Who said, a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, and witnessed a good
Conscience before Pontius Pilate: and where Christ is made manifest, he has
destroyed the works of the Devil; and he that is born of God sins not, and
he that sins is of the Devil; Hereby are the children of God known from the
children of the Devil; And in that Generation you are pleading for the sin, and
not for the faith, which purifies the heart; But that mind and servant must
serve its own master, whom you contend for; So every kingdom stands for it
self, yet you have one of the beasts colors of profession, which makes you to
appear beautiful, as ever the Harlot did, under a pretense of the true worship
of God, which is a stranger from the Spirit of God, as you utter it forth,
which the Saints were guided by.

Friends, you give Exposition of the Apostles words, which he gave no such
exposition, but spoke plainly; he was a perfect man that could bridle his own
tongue; and I know none in your Church and Generation can do it; Herein thou
show thy self and thy Religion to be vain: For he that has not power over
his own tongue, his Religion is vain, and thy self no Minister of Christ; For
he was a Minister of Christ that said so, but you are evil beasts, and slow
bellies, which the Scripture speaks of; Are they not hirelings, as the Priests
were? are they not called of men masters? and have they not the chiefest place
in the assemblies? are they not liars, which pretend to be in the same state
the true Prophets were in? you are in the same nature which justifies them, who
are for condemnation, and God will condemn that high wisdom of yours; the
Apostle said, as he is, so are we, in this present world: which of you can
witness that there is no hole for Satan? But friends, look within, and you
shall see he keeps the house, you plead so much for him; Friends, in that life
you live in, you cannot see it, For none can see God and live: therefore are
you blinded, Fogged, and Misted with the corruptions of the dark mind:
therefore take the alas, alas, to your selves, and pity your own selves: he
that believes is born of God, and he that is born of God sins not, and he
that is born of God overcomes the world, and this belief you shut your selves
out of, and do make it appear that you do not believe, to that in your
Consciences I speak.

Friends, as touching John's words, let flesh be silent for giving senses upon
them, for that fills the world full of imaginations and fancies: For you are
the Liars, which would draw something out of his words, and give another
meaning to them, and show a contrary spirit, and the wresting of the
Scriptures; but all such as you are discovered, where the life of them is made
manifest, who wrest the Scriptures, and give your own sense and meaning upon
them, and so bewitch them by your craft, and draw them from waiting upon God to
have them fulfilled: so that mind judges all to be deceit, which is not
according to your own lense, and so calls light darkness, and evil good:
Friends, you strengthen your selves with that Scripture, as he that says he
has no sin, deceives himself, and the truth is not in him.

And here you stand up for the Devils kingdom, For you have not confessed your
sins yet; If you confess you^ sin, he is faithand just to forgive, and to
cleanse from all sin; but these thing you know nothing of, but show forth your
corrupt mind, and your selves of them which the Scripture speaks of.

Friends, here you have uttered forth your folly without knowledge and
understanding, and make it appear that you never heard the voice of God, for
his voice shakes the Earth; First you must witness the Earth shaken, before you
witness the Heavens; and make it appear, that an your knowledge is notionary and
earthly, and yet standing, and of this World; and the world by their wisdom
know not God, and there you are: to that in your conscience I speak; here you
thrust your selves out of the Church of God, and show forth your ignorance, not
having the form of the Letter; For Paul when he came among the Corinthians, he
was with them in fear, and weakness, and much teembling, that their Faith might
stand in the power of God, and not in the wisdom of Words; but here are you
not: and the Corinthims received Titus trembling: and he that was a Minister of
Christ, exhorted the Saints to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, for it was God that wrought both the Will and the Deed; and the
Assembly which assembled to Ezra, had all trembling hearts, and Jobs flesh
trembled, and David's flesh trembled, and his bones quaked, and Moses when he
heard the voice of God, he trembled; and Habbakuk when he heard the voice of
God, he trembled. Hear the word of the Lord all you that tremble at his Word;
when your Brethren hate you and cast you out and say (...) the Lord he
glorified, he shall appear to your joy when they shall be ashamed; and in that
Generation you show your selves to be, not knowing the Power of God not the
Scriptures, but err; so shutting your selves out, from the life of them that
gave forth the Scriptures, making your selves openly to appear blind; Friends,
besilent, as giving senses of shaking and of removing of things without you;
for, it is the e^^th within you, and the Corruptions within you which plead for
the Devils kingdom so much, which must be removed, and that bufie minds which
are giving senses upon the Saints Conditions, for eternally you know nothing.
Friends, as touching Moses Condition, when any one witnessestlie, same
Condition, you cannot own it, but are cavelling about words; neither can you
witness that you are made free from the Law, for the Law has power over a man
as long as he lives; The Saints that did witness they were made free: from the
Law by the body of Christ, witnessed this quaking and trembling, which you with
your serpentine wisdom would give senses upon them, and despise: but he shall
not enter into the Kingdom: Did not Habbakuks lips tremble; and his belly
quake? And did not the Prophets knees knock together and quake? David and Ioh,
their flesh trembled, and so must all proud flesh he laid low, and the
loftiness of man be brought down and your imaginations, and God alone be
exalted; the power that makes you to quake and tremble is now made manifest,
which you know not; for if you did, you would not give so many senses upon the
Scripture; and the same Power is now made manifest as ever was, praised be the
Lord for ever; As they that saw the outside of the Vision, as you speak, so you
see the outside of the Letter, and would fly from them who have the power of
the Letter, as Daniel had; so you see the outside, but not the inside, as
Daniel did, if you did, you would not utter forth your solly, ignorance and
weakness: the same Christ they do witness to be made manifest, that makes proud
flesh to tremble, and the same operation and death to be brought conformable to
Christ they witness: but this power working in them as thou say thou know
not, and whereof you speak, that you know them whom God spoke to by Angels and
Visions, whom he wrought wonders by, but only by a history-knowledge by Paper
and Ink, and there you show your selves to be liars; for them whom you do
accuse, which you call Quakers, the wondrous Works of the Lord are made
manifest among them; though that Christ wrought Miracles among the people, yet
they said, he did it by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; and thou show thy
self to be in the same Adulterous Generation that the Scribes and Pharisees
were, which would have a sign or a wonder, but there in none shall be showed to
thee but the sign of Jonas; for an adulterous Generation seeks for a sign, and
there thou art. Friends, you say there is nothing in all the Scriptures, makes
out of the people meeting together as concerning trembling; did not the
Corinthians tremble when Titus came to preach among them? and did not the
Assemblies that came to Ezra tremble? there is nothing in your minds of God,
born up in your understandings to judge withal; so in your'own conceits you
are satisfied; and does not the Lord say, I will shake all Nations; and let all
the Inhabitants of the Earth tremble; so ye show forth the ignorance of the
form, for the power of it you cannot own, nor believe where it is operating and
working; Friends, you have uttered forth many lies and slanders, and scandalous
speeches; lay your hands upon your mouths, blush and be a shamed, who art in
Cains nature, murdering the righteous ones in your hearts, and spewing forth
your venom against a harmless people; was it not the practice of the Saints to
wait alone upon God for counsel, for wisdom, for grace, and for the Spirit? and
being guided by the light of God they waited upon God; and the Apostle exhorts
them, that they should take heed to the light within them, until the day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in their hearts; and no Prophecy of the Scripture came
by the Will of man, so it was of no private Interpretation, but Holy men spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; this moving you speak not from, neither
know; therefore as dogs, fnarle and bite them who are guided by the same
Spirit, and wait for the same Spirit, by which we have unity with them in the
same Spirit; and you show your selves to be in the number of them who use their
tongues, and say, he says, when says the Lord, I never spoke to them; but you
speak a vain divinatition of your own brain, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, gathering your selves together against the Lord and against his
anointed; but I am satisfied, that I see your folly and weakness uttered
forth, which does blind many; but God is raising up a light which will discover
you; the Doctrine of God they own, but your Doctrine which is of man, they
deny; And if these be your Ordinances which you speak of, as sprinkling
Infants, and telling people of a Sacrament, these we deny, for God never
commanded them; and if you draw people to these things which God never
commanded, you bewitch them; for the Galathians were bewitched, which were
drawn to act these things, God had not commanded when the substance was come;
and so you do bewitch them to follow your Traditions from the sight of God
within them. And as touching Magistrates, you are false accusers which the
Scripture speaks of, which have the form and not the power; For all who are
brought into the Truth, do labor with singleness of heart unto God, and not
with eyeservice; and their souls are subject to the power of God, and Justice
they own, and honor in their soul, which cuts down filthiness and corruptions
which are alive in you, which makes you to give forth so many false accusations
upon a harmless people, who wait for the restoring of the Kingdom, and the
overturning the World and the Kingdoms of it, and the Image of the Devil
defaced in man, and the Image of God renewed in Righteousness, and man brought
into his being from whence he was fallen; and so you are yet under the dominion
of Satan, judging truth error and blasphemy as ever they did, which had the
form and not the power, in whose steps you walk; seeing you have uttered forth
your folly so and filthiness, and call your selves the Church of Christ; his
Church is not a sinful Church, for that you stand up for; but his Church which
he has purchased with his blood, is without spot or wrinkle, or any such, and
yours is but an imitation; therefore slander not the Church of Christ, as they
which say they are Jews, and are not, but are Synagogues of Satan; and there
you are.

I charge you by the Lord, that you read this among all your Churches as you
call it, and as you will answer it before the Lord, for to that in your
Conscience do I speak.

From some Friends in the Truth, whom the World calls Quakers in Lancashire.

Annotations upon this Reply, and an Extraction of the unsavory passages
contained in it.
THe greatest part of this Reply contains nothing but reproachful and
villifying expressions, and is extremly censorious of us, as of persons who
have nothing but darkness in us, and is self-magnifying, as conceiving
themselves only in the light, and having themselves, and they only the
spirit. And some small part of it makes mention of the very self same
Scriptures which Richard Wallers Letter does contain, and of some few more of
like nature; But there is scarce the show of an answer to any thing in ours,
though it be very large and tedious; Some of the un-favory and un-Christian
expressions, I have gathered out and presented to public view, that all
persons that have to do with them, may know what scurrilous language they may
expect instead of an Answer.

I find many busy minds giving senses upon Scripture.
O flesh be silent before the Lord, who art giving senses.
Who speaks with thine own will.
Thou have uttered forth thy folly.
Who are unlearned, therefore thou art wresting the Scriptures.
The same turns upon their own back and pate.
Thou live in corrupt nature, and pleadest for it.
A servant to the Devil, maintaining his Kingdom.
Thou art led Captive doing the work of the Devil.
Thou art a witness against him and them who are in the second birth.
Thou art deceiving with vain words.
In the wisdom of the world thou art.
Showing a contrary spirit to the Apostle.
Showing thy self in the first birth, and not in the second.
Literally learned, but not spiritually.
Had you the Spirit, you would not wrest Scripture to your own destruction.
The confusion is in your own minds.
Let Paul's condition alone, for you know nothing of it.
You are not complete in Christ, but without in the world.
It is the busy mind that would be exalted.
If I should answer to every sense you give, I should make fools wise.
God will scatter the proud, and there you are, and there is your portion.
Your exernal mind, and imagined wisdom, which is from below.
There is an Image in your mind, which neither knows Christ, nor the way, nor
the Scripture.
That sense giving, heals up the beast that has a wound.
Here you sit as Judges of the Saints conditions, speaking you do not know what
of the Gospel, of Moses, of the Law, of Justification, of Sanctification.
Of these ye know nothing, but have busy minds uttering forth your folly.
None of these can you witness to, not the Law, not Moses, not Justification,
not Sanctification, not the Gospel in the inward man, but in the Notion.
It is babled and disputed upon as you do.
Friends, give over your babbling.
Give over your disputing, and rabling, and rambling with an unclean mind.
Look to your selves, and gad not abroad, for that is the woman thae abides not
in her own house.
Paul did not tell you these words, but you are thieves and steal his words.
You live in that nature by whom offenses come.
But here you are not in this light, nor can witness this blood, nor the
confession of your sin.
You are in the Generation of the Pharisees contending against Christ.
Children of the Devil, and in that Generation are ye pleading for sin, and not
for faith.
You have one of the beasts colors of profession.
You appear beautiful as every harlet does.
None in your Church and Generation can bridle his tongue;
Herein thou shewst thy self and thy Religion to be vain.
You are evil beasts, and slow bellies.
You are Blinded, Fogged, Misted with the corruptions of a dark mind.
You are liars which would draw something out of John's words.
Here you stand up for the Devils Kingdom.
You have uttered forth your folly without knowledge.
The world by wisdom knows not God, and there are you.
You are in the same nature, who justify them who are for condemnation.
The earth within is that which pleads for the Devils Kingdom.
Thou show thy self to be of the same Adulterous Generation of the Scribes
and Pharisees.
You have uttered forth many lies, and slanders, and scandalous speeches.
You are in Cains nature, murdering the righteous one.
You are spewing forth your venom against an harmless people.
As dogs, ye snarl and bite them that are guided by the Spirit of God.
You speak a vain divination.
You are yet under the dominion of Satan.
You have uttered forth your folly and filthiness.
They that say they are Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan,
there are you.
This is some of that mire and dirt, which as the Sea they cast up against us,
merely for the cause of that Letter which we sent to one of their wives, who
stood related to us; But this is not all, for the whole Reply consists of such
kind of Language, save that here and there, there is some small intermixture of
some Scriptures produced for the Justification of Perfection anh Quaking, which
I see no cause to return any further answer to, because the answer that is
already given in the Letter that we sent, which is now presented to public
view, may be equally applied to such Scriptures which are here added, as to
those other Scriptures which I met with before, and will remain in like force.

These are the persons, who alone pretend to the Spirit, and to the second
birth, and do not only lay us, but all the Saints in all the World, under the
condemnation of such who have not the spirit, and are in the first birth, and
not in the second. But what spirit it is, that Dwells, and Acts, and Rules in
them, does appear from their expressions, for their speech bewraies them.

These things have I presented for this end and purpose, to obstruct their way,
and stop their further proceedings, that by their impostures they may pevail no
longer; If God shall be pleased to give his blessing to my endeavors, herein it
will be a good reward of my labors; however I have discharged my duty, and
shall have peace in that.

There was a paper given unto me, containing the confession of John Gilpin a
Quaker; Which is now printed for public view, that all may take notice what
spirit it is that possesses these persons, and may fear and tremble at Gods
just Judgments, who delivers up them to Satan, who cast off him.

FINIS.
There is lately Printed and sold by Thomas Brewster, at the three Bible in
Paul's Churchyard, near the West and, these Books, viz.
A discovery of Mystical Antichrist, Displaying Christ's Banners, but attempting
to lay waste Scriptures, Churches, Christ, Faith, Hope. etc. Containing an
examination of the Doctrines and ways of the Quakers in York-shirie; Written
by, John Pomroy, Pa. Glissen, Joseph Kellet.

Milk for. Babes in Christ, or Meditations, Observations, and Experiences:
Diverse Cases of Conscience Resolved, etc. by M. Fynch, Preacher of the Gospel
in Lincolnshire,

Sions glory Discovered in the Churches and Ordinances, before the fullness of
the Jews come in by I. Proud.

Three Treatises, 1. A Discovery of the unsupportable burden of sin. 2. The
Resolution of a soul to return to God, that is sensible of his withdrawings. 3.
The Entertainment that such meet within their returnings, by P. Hobson.

The Resurrection of the Witnesses, and Englands fall from Rome, by M. Carry.

Refractoria Disputatio: Or the Thwarting Conference, In a Discouse between
different Interests: Disputing about the Dissolution of the late Parliament,
and other Changes of State.

A stop to the mad multitude, being an Answer to a scurrilous book, published
against the peace of this Commonwealth: Entitled, The Grand Politic Informer.

A Description of Jerusalem as it flourished in Christ's time; With a large Map,
Explaining, 268. places therein, and in the Suburbs thereof; showing the
several places of the Acts and sufferings of Jesus Christ, and his holy
Apostles; As also of the Kings and Prophets, etc. Also seven general Rules for
expounding Scriptures that speak of Christ's coming, and Kingdom, and calling
the Jews. by H. Jessey.

Vindicae Justificationis Gratuitae, Justification without conditions, or the
free Justification of a sinner, and the absoluteness of the New Covenant
Explained, Confirmed, and Vindicated, from the Exceptions, Objections, etc.
Cast upon it by the asserters of conditional Justification, viz. Mr. Baxter,
Mr. Woodbridge, Mr. Cranford, By W. Air, Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of
a Church at New-Sarum.


