The OATH of ALLEGIANCE AND THE NATIONAL COVENANT PROVED To be NON-OBLIGING:
OR, THREE SEVERAL PAPERS ON THAT SUBJECT; VIZ.

1. Two POSITIONS, with several REASONS of them, and CONSEQVENCES flowing from
thence. 2. An ANSWER to the said POSITIONS.
A REPLY to the said ANSWER, wherein the Truth of the Positions is Vindicated,
and the Oath of Allegiance, and the National Covenant are made Non-Obliging.

By SAMUEL EATON, Teacher of the Church of Christ at DARKENFIELD in CHESSHIRE.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, 1650.

To the READER.
Good READER,
IT is not many days sin^ I was informed, that some Positions of mine,
respecting the Oath of Allegiance, were made public to the world, and that an
Answer thereto was annexed, and together with the Positions was printed, which
at first I could hardly receive for truth: but for further satisfaction, the
book was sent me, and in the Title Leaf, I read, An Answer to some Positions of
Mr. Samuel Eaton (dispersed by him.) I am necessitated for the Vindication of
my self, to publish the bad dealings that I have met with in this business from
Brethren, I will not call them falsebrethren, though their proceedings do hold
forth too much falseness and baseness.

I had occasion in the latter end of the last year, to be often times at a
Gentleman's house of honorable note in Lancashire; he declared himself
unsatisfied how the Oath of Allegiance could be Non-Obliging, which was so
absolutely taken by many of the Subjects, and by himself: I gave him such
Answers as were suitable to my present apprehensions: his request was, That I
would put down in writings what I had presented in words, or any other
conceptions of the like nature, about that subject, and send them to him: I
condescended, and in a free friendly way presented him with my sudden thoughts,
and enclosed them in a letter to him, having had his promise not to communicate
the same to any, save to one friend of his, whose private conceptions of them
he would entreat, and would show them to me. But thus it fell out, there waas a
piece of dishonestly (I might put a worse term upon it) acted by some, that
would be better thought of. The letter sent to this Gentleman was opened, a
Copy was taken of the Positions contained therein, and many Copies written out
of that Copy and dispersed abroad, all ^ver two Counties, before ever the
Gentleman (to whom I writ, and sent the said Positions) received his Letter. I
wondered much at it, knowing that I had not given any Copy to any Creature, and
had not so much as showed it to any at that time, save to three persons. The
Gentleman discerning that the Letter had been opened, and hearing that Copies
were got abroad, thought himself bound to search it out, some pains was taken
to discover it, at last it came to light. I could both name the place where,
and the person by whom it was done, but for some special reasons I forbear. The
Gentleman when he had perused the Writing sent it to his friend, and his friend
instead of Answering it himself, (as I expected) procures an elaborate Answer
unto it; which after the space of six weeks or two months was sent unto me, and
therein my two Positions were spoken to, but nothing else that was contained in
my Paper was meddled with. And the Author of this Answer, at that time, thought
to have proceeded no further in his Answer, but about six weeks after the
receipt of the other, the second part of his Answer was given to me, both which
are now printed to the view of the world by means of some Brethren about
Manchester, to whom a Copy of the Answer was sent, without the knowledge, and
unto the offense of the Author thereof, as I am credibly informed. I had sent
my Reply to that part of the Answer which first came to my hands, to be perused
in a private way, before I knew that any thing was extent in print, but am now
forced to expose it to Public view. By all this it may appear that I intended
not to engage in this Controversy, but could not decline the giving of an
Answer to a Question propounded. If any satisfaction shall arise to any by any
thing which I represent, I shall be thankful to God. However I shall not
repine, because it was Gods Will, that my private conceptions must thus come to
light. Notwithstanding, wrong doers must give an account. I remain,

Thy friend in the Truth, SAM. EATON.

POSITION I.
EVERY Oath to make it warran^able, and lawful, ought to be taken in Judgment
and Righteousness. Ier. 4. 2.

The Oath then of Allegience, that it may be in Righteousness and Judment must
be,

1 Conditional, not Absolute; mutual, not single: taken by both Parties, not by
one only: by the Ruler or Governor, not alone by the Ruled; by the Prince, as
well as by the Subject.

Reason.

It is against the ground and reason of the Primitive Institution of
Government, which is the good of the Subject, That there should be any Oath to
hind the Subject absolutely to Allegiance and Duty, whether the Prince or
Governor rule for the Subjects good or not; therefore such an Oath cannot be
taken by the Subject in judgment, or in righteousness; therefore such an Oath
is not lawful.

So again it is against Equity, and Reason, and against the good of the
Subject, that he should be further or longer bound to the Prince, or Ruler, to
submit to him, then the Prince or Ruler is bound to the Subject, to rule well,
and administer justice rightly, if therefore the Obligation be not mutual, but
single, it is not lawful.

Consequence.

Then (if the Oath of Allegiance taken to the late King, were in judgment and
righteousness, and so lawful) the King was, or ought to have been, as strongly
bound to all his Subjects by Oath, as any of them to him; then if he break his
oath, all the Subjects are absolved, if they will. Then at what time the King
levied War against his Subjects, they were discharged by that breach of oath in
him, of their Allegiance, else the whole Parliament, and Parliamentary party
were both perjured persons (as many of them as have taken that Oath) and are
Rebels, that have taken up Arms against the King.

2 Not to Heirs.

Reason.

Because who knows (as Solomon says Eccles. 2. 19.) whether the Heir will be
a Wise man, or a Fool: a just and righteous man, or a wicked man, and tyrant.
Now if no man know this, then it is not an Oath in judgment, if any man swear
Allegiance to an Heir, nor is it a righteous Oath, for the Subject may hind
himself to his own hurt, yea ruin and destruction.

Consequence.

Then the oath of Allegiance was in that branch of it that respected Heirs, an
unlawful oath; for who knows what any of the late Kings Posterity might have
proved? Whether they would have upheld Religion, or have changed it? Whether
they would have upheld the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject, or subverted
it? We know what their Education was, Who then could take an oath in
righteousness and judgment in reference to them? It is good to know first, and
to swear afterward.

3 Not to any one kind of Government, Monarchical, or any other, to uphold it,
and continue it, in a constant way, without changing of it.

Reason.

Because, though Civil Government in general be an Ordinance of God, tending to
man's good, therefore to reject it would be sinful; yet this or that kind of
Government is not an Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
And if an Ordinance of man, then man may change it, for his own greatest good,
and benefit, and must change it, when he has proved any kind of Government
inconvenient, and hurtful. Then to swear not to change it, is sinful, and in
righteousness and judgment may not be done, for all kinds of Government is not
equally good, uor are they equally suitable to all people; and experience
makes persons wise to discern what is better, and what is worse for themselves:
Therefore an Oath to uphold any one kind of Government, longer then it
continues to be most safe and profitable, is unlawful.

Consequence.

Then the oath of allegiance serving to uphold Kingly. Government against all
other, was an unlawful oath; for who knows not what a plague this kind of
Government has been to this Nation? and who knows not that the most of our
Kings have been Tyran^s? and who knows not what a Blessing the change of
Government has brought to the United Provinces*

Objection.

But suppose there was some unlawfulness in the taking of such Oaths, yet is
there not a necessity of keeping them being taken?

Answer.

If that Oath taken against the life of one man, by Herod, because unrighteous,
and cruel, was not only sinfully taken, but more sinfully kept; then such oaths
of allegiance which are absolute, and not conditional, which are single, and
not mutual, which are to Heirs, whether wisemen or fools, whether just men or
Tyrants, which are to uphold Monarchy, (the woeful fruits whereof having been
long tasted, and felt by this Nation) seeing they are dangerous, and may pro^e
(as often they have done) destructive to the lives of many men, they are not
only unlawful to be taken, but unlawful to be kept.

POSITION II.
SUppose the Oath of Allegiance be a lawful Oath, yet the Subject is now
absolved from it, by them that have Power to absolve from it.

Reason.

The Representatives of the People, which in reason are the Supreme Power of
the Nation, imposed this Oath upon the Subject, by an Act for it, made in
Parliament, by which they obliged the Subject to Allegiance to the King, then
in being, and to his Heirs. And this Act done by their Representatives was
their own voluntary Act, to which they were not obliged by any law of God, or
Nature; for there is no rule requiring them to accept of such a Person to be
their Prince, and his Heirs after him, and to swear Allegiance to him and them;
but this was the Subjects own free Act, in their Representatives: Therefore if
the Repres^ntatives take away this Act and repeal it, they thereby set the
Subjects at Liberty from such Allegiance, and from that Oath by which they are
bound to it. Abraham that imposed the Oath upon his Servant, might acquit him
of it, because not bound by any rule from God, but obliged by Abraham only.

Consequence.

This present Parliament, having taken away that Oath of Allegiance, which was
Enacted to be imposed; there remains no more Conscience of it, to such who have
taken it.

But then it will come unto this,

Whether the Parliament be the Supreme Power?

Whether the Representatives of the People, be the Parliament?

Whether the present Representatives that now Sit in Parliament, be the
Representatives of the People?

To the First I say, 1 It is evident, That the Norman Kings coming in by
Conquest had never any true Right to the Crown of England, but what the
Parliament gave them: Then the Power of the Parliament was greater then theirs;
because that Power, that is the Cause of Power, is greater then that Power,
that is the Effect of Power: 2 The Power of Parliament, is the Power of the
People; now in Reason the Power of the People is the Supreme Power, because
thence (as from the Root) all Power first sprang, and proceeded.

To the Second I say, I^ the Parliaments Power be the Peoples Power, and the
Supreme Power, then the Representatives of the People, are the Parliament, and
none else: for the Representatives of the People are the People in them, and
there is the Root of Power, therefore they are a Parliament.

To the Third I say, The present Representatives that now Sit in Parliament,
are, 1 All of them Chosen by the People, therefore of Right they Sit in
Parliament. 2 The present Representatives are all that are left to Sit in
Parliament; for the most of the rest have Deserted their Trust, without any
Force upon them; for though some were Secluded and Secured, yet the rest were
not at all interrupted, but have voluntarily Departed from the House. 3 The
Representatives that Remained, and Continued to Sit in Parliament, were
always, when fewest, and still are above the Number allowed of by Law; and
therefore they are a Parliament.

There is one Objection, which may be urged against the Parliaments Absolving
men from their Allegiance to the Kings Heirs, and against their Abolishing
Kingly Government. It may be said, That

Kings have the same Right to their Kingdoms, Crowns, and Revenues, as others
have to their Manors, and Demesnes?

Such Right which Kings have had, they never justly came by it, but

AN ANSWER TO A PAPER Pretending to prove the OATH of ALLEGIANCE Void, and
non-Obliging: Containing TWO POSITIONS, The Substance whereof is Repeated in
the Process of this ANSWER.
THE drift of the First Position, and the prosecution thereof, (with which I
begin) is to show the said Oath to have been unlawful and unwarrantable in the
taking of it, and so void in the fact, or making.

1 I shall premise for the clearing partly of what follows, That an D. Sand. de
Iuram. obl. pr. 2.. 14
Oath may be unlawful, 1 Either in regard of the matter, or thing sworn, as if
a m^n swear to do any impossible, or sinful act. 2 Or in the Manner, or
Circumstances of swearing; as if a man swear unadvisedly, or with a false
intention or other-wayes unduly for manner. The former way of unlawfulness
makes an Oath void in the taking, but not the Latter: So that though a man
swear an Oath (in some sort) not in Truth, that is, not intending to be tied
to, or to keep it; or not in Judgment, that is, not consideratly enough; yet if
the Oath be in Righteousness, that is, of a just, and lawful matter, or thing,
it is of Force; otherwise no Oath could bind in foro externo, or be of any use
for Confirmation, for who can discern with what mind another man Swears? Again,
This evidently appears by the validity of that unadvised Oath of the Princes to
the Gibe^nites, Joshu. 9. 15. 18, 19. 2 Samuel 21. 2. And of that Oath of
Z^d^kiah, and his people to Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Cron. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17. 13 21.
2^. which they entered into treacherously, Hos. 104. Annotat of ^^^mes and
Diodat. on Hos. 10 4.


2 I observe what a gross Imputation the first Position lays upon the King,
and Parliament that framed and Ordained the Oath of Allegiance, and all other
Parliaments since that have Continued, and the Successive Houses of Commons
that have Sworn it, with those multitudes of Magistrates, Ministers, and of
other Professions in the Kingdom that have taken, and still hold themselves
bound by it (having had all the while so much Divine and Gospel* light shining
forth to and in them) as if they had published, pressed, taken, and justified
(as against the Papists by writing) an Oath the matter of it unjust and sinful.
This man had need bring clear Reasons for what he here thus charge upon so
many Worthyes, for place, piety, and judgment; and declare them A Lie against
the Title, or the Title a Lie against this.
more publicly then by a Private Paper, that he may call to Repentance the
whole Nation, that is (as he supposes) involved in this impiety of an unlawful
Oath. But let us first by the Trial of his Reasons, see whether he has not
more need to repent of this his Charge.

His general exception against the lawfulness of the Oath is, That it is not
according to the rule Jer. 4. 2. in Judgment and in Righteousness. Were it
defective [in judgment] that is (in deliberatness of taking) that would not be
(as I have said) a ground to invalidate its obligation ipso^acto: seeing it
were but a failing in the manner, not a corruptness in the matter: a fault in
the Person swearing, not in the Oath sworn: and in the person a defect
internal, or of the mind, not externally visible in the act: and to be presumed
to be found only in some persons swearing, not in all. That part therefore of
the Allegation, were it true, might have been left out, and as often as it is
brought in to prove the Oath unlawful so as not to bind, it adds no strength
to the Conclusion. But to descend to his particulars, 1 To manifest the Oath's
disagreement with the said rule of Jeremiah. His first particular Exception is,
That it ought to have been Conditional, not Absolute; Mutual, not Single. His
Argument in effect runs thus, That it may be in Judgment and Righteousness, it
must be Conditional not Absolute; Mutual, or taken both by Ruler, and Rulled;
not Single, or taken only by one Party. But this Oath is not so Ergo, etc.
That the Reader may understand us both, and I may more clearly pass on in my
Answer, I must interpose a distinction or two upon the Terms.

1 Says he, The Oath must be Conditional, not Absolute. 1 I conceive the words
[Conditional, and Absolute] may be taken, 1 Either in reference to the thing
sworn, which is Obedience, or Allegiance to the KING; thus the Oath must be
Conditional, not Absolute; that is, the obedience which we bind our selves to,
must be with limitation, and c^ndition, restraining it (as all obedience to men
in any relation is to be, to just, honest, lawful things, or so as to Consist
with our obedience to God; not absolute or illimited in that sense. 2 Or in
reference to the tie, or obligation of the oath, as the qualification thereof;
and so I say it may be Absolute, and must not of necessity be Conditional, that
is, The subordinate and limited obedience which is due to the Prince or
Magistrate, I may swear unto absolutely, or withour any special Condition
annexed to my Engagement. Special Condition I say, for I must once again
distinguish, to wit, of Conditions. 1 Some are general, and such as no
promisary oath that is lawful can be without, those are (I think) all of them
reduced to these two heads, namely that the thing sworn be Honest and Possible.
These Conditions are presupposed, and not wont to be expressed, and
notwithstanding the including of them an oath may be said to be Absolute. 2
Others are Special, and Proper Conditions, which are ingredients in some oaths,
the which are (by reason of them) termed Conditional. They are usually either
somewhat that is Contingent, as when a Merchant Covenants and Swears to give an
hundred pounds to another man, or to a public Use, if his Ship (that is gone
to Sea) return home safe with her Merchandise; or, that which is Arbitrary, or
in the choice of man's Will, his (commonly) to whom the oath is Engaged; as if a
Master Covenant and Swear to maintain his Servant with Meat, Drink, and such
Wages, if he be a true and diligent Servant to him. It is not the Former, but
this Latter Conditionality which he requires in the oath of Allegiance, to wit,
That the Subject be only bound to his Duty of Allegiance if, and so long as the
Prince observes his duty of Government inviolate: and this in truth is not in
that oath, nor is it necessary to make the oath lawful. The Major therefore of
this Oath-impugners Syllogism I deny in that first part of it, viz. It must be
Conditional, not Absolute: To make good my Denial, 1 I will Answer what he
says to prove it. 2 Bring in my Reasons against it: and leave the Reader to
judge betwixt us.

1 All that he says for proof of that Assertion is this, It is against the
ground, and reason of the Primitive Institution of Government, which is the
good of the Subject, that there should be any Oath to bind him Absolutely,
whether the Prince Rule for the Subjects good, or not. This were something if
it were proved, but the Reader is left either to take it upon his word, or to
remain unsatisfied both of it, and the conclusion which depends upon it, if he
like to do neither, let him try whether I can satisfy him to the contrary.

1 The Parliament that Enacted this Oath, and all subsequent Parliaments who
were entrusted with, and most able (in all probability) to judge what would be
for the Subjects good, and who (without all controversy) were more sufficient
and competent Judges thereof then this man, have adjudged it not against, but
for the Subjects good.

2 It has consisted with the public good (yea contributed to it, or else the
Papists would not have so opposed it) from the time it was first set forth,
until now, in impartial men's judgments, and no complaint has been at all heard
against it from the Kingdom, nor scarcely, if at all, from particular men, till
within these few days, what the suppressing of it on the other hand will tend
to, a little time may fully enough manifest.

3 A thing may be said to be against the peoples good in two very far different
senses: 1 Either in it self of its own nature, or simply considered: of this
sort are injustice, impunity of offenses, sedition, conspiracy, hostile
invasion, and the like; such things are in their own nature opposed to the
public good. 2 Or accidentally and contigently, thus any thing almost that
falls under a political consideration, and comes under the dehberation of the
Lawgivers, though lawful in it self, and for the present probably, yea, or
necessarily good for a Commonwealth, may prove in the event somewhat
incommodious and hurtful. There is a goodness of the end, which is one and the
same in all States and Governments, viz. The happiness of the Community, and
this is intended, not deliberated on, or chosen by the Lawgivers: Ac
deliberamus quidem non de finibus sed de iis quae referuntur ad fines. Aristot.
Eth. l. 3. c. 3.
And there is a goodness of the means tending to that end, and this is variable
in relation to times and people; that may be good in the nature of a means for
one people, or time, that is not so for another. Est enim genus hominum natura
vary comparatum atque affectum, aliud servile, aliud colendis regthus
accommodatum; aliud Democraticum and Populare; at que horum generum suum cuique
est ac distinctum commodum. Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 12. number. 112. Itaque
manifestum est ejusdem disciplinae esse considerare, non solum quae sit, and
qualis optima Respublica, cujus status si nulla vis obstiterit, maxim
desideretur, and optetur; sed etiam, quae cuique congrua and consentanea est,
permulti enim optimam consequi nequeunt, quare neque Legislator, neque is qui
vere civilis habeatur, ignorare debet quae res^ub tam absolute perfecta sit,
tum pro statu rerum presaentium maxim laudanda, tum denique quae pro
condition aliqua non sit improbanda. Idem l. 4. c. 1. number. 2. Itaque
cognoscendae erant rerum publicarum species, ac differentiae, and quot modis
u^ter se commisceantur, cumque haec eadem prudentia optimarum legum scientia
and unicuique Reipub. convenientium conjungenda est, ad respublicas enim leges
sun^ accommodandae non autem ad leges res ipsae publicae. Idem eodem Nu. 6. 27
It is the means and its goodness which falls under the consulation of the
Legislators, and because of the uncertainty thereof, they are occasioned often
to change their advisements and laws: But by reason that in things which
approach near the foundation, or do constitute it, changes are very perilous
in a State, and in those things it is better to bear an inconvemency, then to
run the hazard of an in^ovation; therefore it has been the honest and
necessary wisdom of most States, to settle them by a firmer Sanction then they
use in other things, and to ordain a kind of immutability in them, and
consequently to ratify them by Oaths, foreseeing that no inconvenience in the
Constitution of a Government, in it self lawful and eligible, can match the
mischief of an-alteration; and therefore that the uncertain danger of that is
rather to be chosen, then the inevitable miseries of this: Such things as may
by reason of their changeable nature prove in the issue some what
disadvantagious, may yet, if for the present good, and probably hopeful so to
continue, be sworn to absolutely, as in voluntary Promises, Leagues, and
Contracts, both public and private, among all Nations has been the practice,
and by good Scripture-presidents it is justified, Genesis 47. 31. Exodus 13. 19.
Josh. 9. 15 14 9. Judge. 21. 5. 18. 15. 12. 13. 1 Samuel 14. 24. 19. 6. 20. 12. 17
1 King. 1. 13. 29. 2 Samuel 29. 23.
and the reason is, Because if any future prejudice do redound, it can be (the
Obligation of the Oath remaining) at the worst, but an outward incommodity, the
which is compensated by the avoiding of a greater evil, which the leaving of
the matter free and unsecured would more certainly breed and bring. To apply
all this to the case in hand: If any impeachment of the Subjects good can be
supposed to result out of his sweating to his Prince absolutely, whether he Rule
well or no, it is but accidental, and such as it is, it is over-ballanced with
a greater mischief which would accrue by leaving the Subjects un-ingaged: for
the shuning of which, the lesser evil, to wit, the being bound to a King,
though he should prove a bad Governor, is to be chosen; for that, in comparison
of a greater evil, has the consideration of good, and is so eligible: It is a
less evil for a people to be bound to a Prince that possibly may prove bad,
then to be so loose, as to be at liberty to cast him off when they shall judge
him to Rule ill, that is, when they please; the former does not so nearly and
probably tend to the subjects hurt as does the latter: For, first, The Prince
may prove just and virtuous. Secondly, If he degenerates, the Subject is bound
to obey him actively, but in lawful things. Thirdly, In his lawless Acts there
may be a remedy (as the punishment or resistance of his bad instruments by the
Parliament, without whom, though he may Will unjust things, yet he cannot
Execute them) and yet his Government be continued. Fourthly, And suppose the
case that there be no remedy, as when he has got a party stronger then can be
resisted, or subjected to punishment, then to cast off his power and depose him
(suppose it lawful to do) will be no relief, his strength will command
subjection. Fifthly, The miscarriages of a Prince ordinarily (unless it come
to public contestation, wherein the Subjects sworn and unsworn, if their cause
be just, and the Parliameot authorize their standing up, are in the same
capacity of resistance) extend but to the detriment of some particular persons,
rarely does any Nero-like, seek the destruction of the whole. But on the other
hand, set the people free to shake off the reins of their present Government,
when they shall think it unequal, and, 1 You destroy the nature of Government,
as will afterward be showed. 2 You expose the people to an immediate loss of
the very use and enjoyment of any Government, the power of mobility and change
being sure to invite al ill-disposed persons immediately to put that power in
ure, and hurry all (if they may prevail) into consusion. In short, a bad
Government is better then none; it is more tolerable for a people that one, or
few, then that every man do that which is right in his own eyes. To be bound to
Allegiance, may lay the people open to the former; to be loose, will
precipitate them into the latter: The former inconvenience cannot be so
universally extensive, speedily destructive, and remediless, or unresistible,
as the latter.

2 The latter thing I premised, is to give my Reasons for the contradictory to
his Major Proposition in that first part, It must be Conditional, not Absolute:
Against which I say, The oath of allegiance may be absolute, or unconditional,
in the sense before given; and for this Assertion, I render these Reasons:

1 Were there no Oath, the limited obedience which is due to Princes and
Magistrates, is due to them absolutely; that is, Whether they Ru^e well or no;
and that which is absolutely due, may be obsolutly sworn; The former Proposition
I ground thus;

1 The Precept of Obedience to Civil Governors, is without any condition or
reserve of a disingagement of the Subject in case of the Governors miscarriage;
read the Fifth Commandment, and those other Injunctions, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc.
Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, etc.

2 God commands his people to be subject to Heathen Princes, and the most
absolute and oppressive Tyrants that likely ever have been, Jer. 27. 12. Mat.
22. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 13. I speak not here of Tyrants, in regard of Title, or
Right; that is, Usurpers: but of Tyrants whose Title is just, but their
Government unjust, and oppressive.

3 Servants are to be subject to their Masters, not only that are good and
gentle, but those that are froward, and do them wrong, and from whom they
suffer for well-doing, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20. and by Analogy. Subjects are tied
in the same terms to their Governors.

4 David would not stretch out his hand against Saul upon this ground, for that
he was his Master the King of Israel, and the Lords Anointed, though he was
then in actual, violent, and unjust pursuit of his life, 1 Samuel 24. 5. etc. 26.
9. etc.

5 Otherwise you leave no place for passive obedience to pray for, and patience
toward Magistrates in case of their wrong doing, and your innocence, which yet
is generally acknowledged to be a duty Ames. Medula Theol. l. 1. c. 17. p. 57.
Vrsin. Cat. p. 3. q. 104


6 Else you dissolve all Magistracy, it will be impossible in man's corrupt
estate to retain or continue any, in as much as no man, or men, can in the vast
multitude, and difficulty of Magistratical affairs avoid offending every day, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 5.

7 The Doctrine of orthodox Protestant Divines generally is, That obedience is
due (in lawful things) to the most degenerate, oppressing, and tyrannical
Princes Calvin. Inst. l 4 c. 20.. 24, 25, etc. Pet. Mart. loc. C cl. 4. C. 2..
12. 18, 19. Als. Theol. C. 17. Reg. 8. Perk C. of Cons. l. 3 c. 6.. 1^ Buc.
Insti. Theol. loc. 49. q. 21. Synop. pu^. Theol. dis. 50. These. 18. 27. Sharp.
sim. Epoch. 5. Q. 44. 45.


2 We find oaths of Allegiance in Scripture, sworn to Princes without any
Conditions inserted, Judge. 11. 9, 10. 2 King. 11. 4. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17.
13. and Nehem. 10. 29. Their oath was to observe all the Commandments of the
Lord, whereof the fifth Commandment, with application to their present and
future Magistrates, was one.

3 It is a thing within our power to settle our Allegiance absolutely, as well
as it is within a man's power to dispose of himself to service so, whether his
Master prove good, or evil, or as it is in a man or woman's power to bestow
themselves in Marriage, whether the mate be observant of duty, or no?

4 A Conditional oath is not consistent with a necessary duty; obedience to
Magistrates is no less arbitrary, but commanded, and that though they be bad;
but now the duty being necessary, if you would have it sworn with a proviso of
the Rulers performing his duty, you nullisie the end of an Oath, which is to
confirm, put out of doubt, and give security of what is due. A thing sworn may
become due, either by the rule of Equity, or by a voluntary Covenant: That
which is due the latter way, if the Covenant be conditional; the Oath that is
to ratify it, may be also so far conditional, but what is due in the former
kind, to wit, by absolute and unalterable rule, or precept of Justice, cannot
be sworn to conditionally; for that would be no ratification to it, nay it
would be a debilitating, and rendering more insecure of that which was simply
due without an oath, a condition being put into your oath, being a very
probable medium to persuade the swearer that he is no otherwise bound to the
things sworn, then upon that Condition; which being broken by that party sworn
to, he will easily conceive himself altogether free: Thus the absolute Rule
will receive impeachment, and not strength in its obligation by the conditional
oath: such an oath therefore is in its end inconsistent with it.

2 I come to the latter part of his Major which exacteth, That the Oath be
mutual, or taken both by Ruler, and Ruled; not single, or taken only by the
ruled. Some explanation of his terms, more then is here he might have used; for
lack whereof I shall as I go observe some difference of sense appliable to his
words, and so express how I deny this branch of his Position, and why.

1 His words sound, as if he would have the same oath to be taken mutually both
by Prince and Subject, which (if he remember that the oath spoken of, is the
oath of a Subjects Allegiance, obedience, or subjection to be yielded to his
Sovereign, and that the King is the person sworn to) he will no^, cannot I
suppose, own to be his sense.

2 But the apter sense, and that which I suppose was in his intention, is, That
the Ruler and Subject should each swear to his respective duty; the Prince,
That he will Command and Govern lawfully: the Subject, That he will perform all
lawful homage, and obedience: And to this I say, Although it be true, it in
fact, in our case, that the King has sworn his duty on his part, as well as
the Subject does in this oath swear his, yet the Proposition is false in this,
and it cannot be said, That thus it universally ought of necessity to be
betwixt every Prince and his Subjects, much less can it hold that, unless it
be thus mutual, the Subjects oath is not in righteousness according to Jer. 4.
2. but that for want of this mutuality it is null. For,

1 We read of many undoubtedly righteous Oaths in Scripture, undertaken in
Covenant betwix^s man and man, wherein one party only swears, and not both
mutually, Gen 24. 2. 47. 31. Exodus 13. 19. Josh. 2. 12. 9. 15. 14. 9 Judge. 15.
12. 1 Samuel 19. 6. 1 King. 1. 13. 29. 51. 2 Samuel 19. 23. Neh. 5. 12. Jer. 38. 16.

2 We find in Scripture, Oaths of Allegiance taken by Subjects to their Rulers,
without the reciprocal swearing of the Rulers to them 2 King. 11. 4. Judge. 11.
10. Chapter 36. 13 Ez. 17. 3.
; such was that engagement, Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18.

3 Oaths are never to be taken but necessarily, that is, When not only the
matter is of great weight, but it cannot otherwise be sufficiently confirmed or
assured then by Oath Doctor Sanders. de Juram. ob. prael. 7.. 12. Thol. synt.
jur. l. 50. c. 3.
, but in solemn humane Covenants it comes to pass that sometimes the
performance lies only on one party, the other is to receive advantage, but not
to do any thing: Sometimes the danger of breach lies only, or more on one part
then on another: Sometimes th^re is other satisfactory assurance given besides
swearing: and sometimes there is other remedy, if there should be a breach,
then the forfeiture of an Oath: In such, and other cases, an Oath on the one
party may no^ need, and consequently is not to be exacted.

4 But suppose the case, that it be as necessary for security that the King
swear to the people, as that they take an oath to him, yet if through overmuch
credulity, or otherwise it be that the people do swear, and not the Prince,
this cannot be the least color for the nullifying of the peoples Oath: For
whether the King Swear or no, that which makes the Oath obliging, is, That in a
just and possible matter promised, God is invocated as a witness of the
promise.

3 There is another sense of mutual swearing more strict then the former, and
that is, when not only two parties swear to each other their respective parts,
but they both swear with a mutual respect; that is, The obligation of the one
party, has a respct to, and a dependence on the performance of the other
party: as when one man swears to another to give him so much Money for his
Land; that other swears to convey to him his Land for so much Money; in this
kind, the breach of the one is a releasment to the other. And here that Adage
holds good,

Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem; And also that Rule of the Law, Frustra
qu^ fidem postulat sibi servari ab eo, cui fidem a se praestitam servare
recusat.

But this sense of mutual swearing cannot come in to be meant in our case: For,
1 Such an oath is plainly conditional; The one party swears not to give the
other absolutely, and clearly so much Money, but to give him so much for his
Land; the having of the Land then is an express condition of his oath: but the
oath of the Subjects Allegiance is granted to be absolute, and is as such
disputed against by him here; and I have abo^e proved an oath of Allegiance
cannot be Conditional. 2 The Kings cath is also absolute, and binds without
dependence on the Subjects loyalty; no man will say (I think) that the King is
discharged from ruling justly, and may become an absolute Tyrant, if his
Subjects exceed the bounds, or fail of the bonds of their oath, or duty: nay,
if the Subject transgress his duty, the King is bound by his oath to cause
Justice according to the Law and Tenor of his Oath, to be done; and cannot
otherwise escape violation of his Oath. 3 Such mutual oaths are entered into by
both parties at the same time, and have their mutual respects expressed, but
neither does the King and Subjects swear to each other at the same time;
neither is there any such mutual respect mentioned, or so much as employed in
either of their Oaths. 4 Such mutually respective oaths have only place in
matters arbitrary, or that are in men's choice to do, or not to do until they
bind themselves by Covenant, but such are not the relative duties of Kings and
Subjects, there being a divine Law obliging each to the Duties of their Offices
before they swear.

We see no sense imaginable of Mutual not Single will fit this man's turn, but it
will make his Proposition false, either if predicated of the oath of Allegiance
at al; So does the First, and Third acception before mentioned; or if predicated
with that modus of a necesse est, so does the Second. But let us hear his
Reason for this clause of his Major whatever be the sense of it.

It is (says he) against Equity and Reason, and the good of the Subject, that
he should be further, or longer bound to the Prince to submit to him, then the
Prince is bound to the Subject to Rule well, and administer justice rightly.
Grant all this, and it will no way follow; Therefore the Oath of Allegiance to
make it righteous must be mutual, in any sense: for the Prince may be bound,
and that as long to his part, as the Subject is to his, (and so he is, and it
is impossible to be otherwise for Prince and Subject; his tie to Rule in
Justice, and his to Obey in just things are relatives, and do infer necessarily
each other) to wit, by the tie of Scripture, Conscience, and positive Laws, and
yet not be sworn at al.

His Major being thus (I hope) fully Refuted, I need not to take notice of his
Consequences, as he calls them, but in a word I shall touch on them.

The First is nothing but a Hypothetical Repetition of some part of the Major
Proposition, which I have been so long in disproving: If the Oath of Allegiance
were in judgment and righteousness, the King was as strongly bound to the
Subjects, as any of them to him: This therefore I pass by, as the same that
was said before, and no Consequence from it.

The Second is, Then if he break his Oath, all the Subjects are absolved if they
will. This Consequence I deny: I have I think, fully made it clear before, That
the Oath of Allegiance taken by the Subject is absolute, not depending upon any
thing to be performed by the King, whether sworn, or not sworn; and that it
could not have been otherwise. And though the King and People have each sworn
their duties mutually, yet not with See Doct. Sanders. de Juram. ob. prael. 4..
8.
a mutual respect, by virtue whereof a breach on one side might be a discharge
on the other, and that neither the tenor of their Oaths hold forth any such
thing, neither is the matter of them capable thereof, being necessary, not
arbitrary.

The Third is, Then at what time the King Levied War against his Subjects, they
were discharged by that breach of Oath in him of their Allegiance. This is a
Consequence of the former Consequence, and stands or falls with it: That
therefore being Answered and Disproved, this vanishes.

The Fourth thing is no Consequence, but a Reason of the two last Consequences,
and in method of arguing is therefore an antecedent to prove them, it is thus,
Else the whole Parliament and their party were perjured persons, so many of
them as have taken this Oath, and are Rebels in taking up Arms against the
King.

First, If their taking up of Arms against the King (as he terms it) were
Rebellion, their absolution from their Oaths (were it so indeed) by the Kings
breach of his, could not unmake, or make it no Rebellion; for the debt of
Obedience is existent in the Subject before any Oath taking, and it is not
founded on swearing, but only confirmed by it, and therefore survives after the
pretended dissolution of it; and consequently makes that taking up of Arms
which would have been (if the Oath had not been (as he supposes) nullified)
Rebellion nevertheless.

Secondly, We must therefore say, as the Parliamentarian party has believed,
declared, and in many Treatises in Print, maintained al along the late Wars,
That the Arms of the Parliament were not against any brance of the Subjects
Allegiance, or the Oath for it (which they professed still to persist in, yea,
and in the act of their Arms bearing, Covenanted to yield and maintain) but
concordant with the same. In as much as they enterprized not against the Kings
Person, his State, or Government, they went not against his Majesty, his Heirs,
or Successors, they joined not against his Crown and Dignity, the Rights
whereof, and the Bounds of the Subjects Obedience, are prefixed by the Laws of
the Realm, the ultimate interpretation whereof, is in the Parliament which
declared their Arms to be for, and agreeable to the Laws. The King, as King,
acts only by his Courts and Laws, what he does besides, or against these, is
the man's, not the Kings acting. What is done by Order of the Courts of Justice,
and by virtue of the Laws, is done (though against his personal presence or
command, yet) for the King, his Crown, and Dignity.

2 His next Exception against the Oath of Allegiance is, That it is an unlawful
Oath, in that it is sworn to the Kings Heirs: His Reason for this Exception
proceeds thus,

Who knows (as Eccles. 2. 19.) whether he will be a wise man, or a fool; a
just, or a ^ricked man, and Tyrant? Now if no man know this, then to swear to
an Heir, is not an Oath in judgment, nor is it righteous: for the Subject may
bind himself to his own hurt, yea ruin.

Consequence. Then the Oath of Allegiance was in that branch, that respected
Heirs, an unlawful Oath, etc.

I admit of the Antecedent, but utterly deny the Consequence. 1 For the whole
Consequence, I Answer;

1 This inference is directly contrary to that which Solomon in the place
cited, Eccles. 2. 19. makes from the words. Solomon's is, Yet shall he have Rule
over all my labors wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self
wise under the Sun. This man's inference is (in effect) because no man knows
whether he will be a wise man, or a fool; therefore he shall not have Rule, etc.
that is, We must not Engage beforehand that he shall Rule, while it is uncertain
what he will prove: though Solomon says, Notwithstanding that is uncertain, yet
he shall have Rule.

2 The same Reason (if it held) would lie against any Oath, or Engagement to
any Rulers in being whatsoever they are; for say they be come to maturity, and
for the past and present time have given proof; yet who knows what they that
are now wise, and just (morally) may hereafter come to be? The Scripture
supposes, That not only a just Father may have a wicked Son, but a righteous
man (in profession and external carriage) may turn from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Neroes Quinqu^nnium of Reigning well is generally
known, the good beginnings of ^eash, and Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 23, 24, and 26. and
therefore degeneracies are sufficient instances of the lubricity of men in
authority. Yea it is well known how fearfully Solomon himself with Asa, 1 King.
11. 2 Chronicles 16. and others, fell in diverse particulars of a gross nature; if we
must first know, and swear afterward, we must never swear to any promissorily.

3 This Consequence (were it of force) would equally condemn in general al
promissory Oaths, and other Covenants, and Engagements, betwixt man, and man;
for it cannot be foreseen in any, what the persons contracted with will prove;
or whether the Covenant will be beneficial, ot hurtful; and in particular, the
Laws and Sanctions of those Nations in all ages, which have settled successive
Regality, or any other Government, ^or longer then the present possessors of
the power endure, which yet is a way, not only more generally approved, and
practiced, then any other of vicissitudinary Election, but warranted by the
word of God. Israel offered a successive power to Gideon, Judge. 8. 22. and God
himself instituted, and bound the People to a lineal Government in David and
his seed, 2 Samuel 12. 15. 2 Chronicles. 13. 5. The Patriarchal power (which was
political) was successive, and could not have been cast off at pleasure: so was
the Government of the Jewish Nation, f^r about an hundred years in the lineage
of the Macca^ees.

4 We have Scripture examples (of an uncontroverted integrity) of Oaths, and
Engagements to Princes and their Heirs; and to Princes in their young, unripe,
and untryed years: Take for instance that of Abraham's swearing to Abimelech
King of Gerar, his Son, and Sons Son, 1 Chr. 23. 29. 22. 29. 1. 22 5. and that
of David's making Solomon King in his own life time, and engaging the people to
him when he was yet young and tender; and that of JEHOJADAHS, and the Peoples
making Ioash King, and swearing to him when he was but seven years old, 2 King.
11. 4. 22.

2 For the two parts of the CONSEQUENCE in several.

1 The Oath is not in judgment, because no man knows what the Heir will prove.

I say, 1 It may be in Judgment so far as a future contigency can be
deliberated on: and this may be concluded on advisedly (as morally certain)
that it is better to have the Crown settled in a line, whereby sometimes a
vicious person may be advanced, then to have it under Election at every
personal change. This has been the experimented maxim of the wisest States
Minore discrimine sumi princip. m qua^ quaeri. Tacit. H. lib. 2.
. 2 If it were not in Judgment, this defect makes not an oath Unlawful, as to
the nullifying of it. A rash oath, if of a lawful thing binds (Judge. 21. 7. 15.
1 Samuel 14. 24. 37. Josh. 9. 14. 15. as before was proved.

2 Nor is it a righteous Oath, for the Subject may bind himself to his own
hurt, yea ruin.

1 Though the Subject may not bind himself to what is necessarily, or at the
time of his swearing may appear probably to tend to his hurt, or ruin, yet he
may swear (intending the public good) to that which is of a mutual nature, and
may in the event turn to his own hurt, and ruin; and might he not so swear,
yet having so sworn, he is bound to stand to his Oath, Psalm. 15. 4. Josh. 9.
15. Ezekiel. 17. 13. 1 Samuel 14. 26. 28. 37. Judge. 21. 5. 15. 18. which is
contradictory to what this man here says.

2 If the Heir should misprove, his power is bounded by the Law, and commixed
with the Parliaments: If he vary, the power of Parliament, the Laws and
Liberties of the Subject are the same. The late King confessed and declared a
remedy against Tyranny to reside in the Parliament; there may be a prevention
then of the Subjects ruin (whatever the Heir prove) if the KINGDOM be
faithful to it self.

3 His Third Exception against the Oath as unlawful, and void, is, That it is
to uphold one kind of Government for continuance, and in a constant way without
changing. His Argument to make good this Exception, proceeds thus,

If of the several kinds of Government, all are not equally good, nor suitable
to all People: And man may change the Government he is under for his own
greatest good and benefit, and must change it when he has proved any kind of
Government inconvenient and hurtful, and must not uphold any one kind of
Government longer then it continues to be most safe and profitable; then to
swear to uphold any one Government continually and constantly, and not to
change it, is sinful; and in Righteousness and Judgment may not be done. But of
the several kinds of Government, all are not equally good, nor suitable to all
people, and man may change the Government he is under for his own greatest good
and benefit, and must change it, when he has proved any kind of Government
inconvenient and hurtful; and must not uphold any one kind of Government longer
then it continues to be most safe and profitable. Ergo,

For Answer hereunto,

First, I observe there is a fault to be found with the whole Argument, as
somewhat transgressing the rules of arguing.

1 In the Consequence there is something of the error called Ignoratio Elenchi;
for we swear not in the Oath of Allegiance, indefinitly or indeterminatly as
his words import, to uphold one Government continually, and not to change.

First, We swear only to His Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors: so that when
ever they are al extinct, (which may be sooner or later, as divine Providence
disposes) the Oath of it self cease and determines.

Secondly, Notwithstanding the Allegiance sworn to the said persons, their
Crown and Dignity, there is power of change in the Government left to the
mutual consent of both parties; to wit, Those sworn to, and them swearing, as
it is in all humane Contracts and Oaths Als. Theol. Cas. C. 15. Reg. 2.
of this nature.

2 In the Minor there is somewhat of the fallacy called petitio principii,
namely, That any kind of Government, granted to be lawful, can prove
inconvenient and hurtful to the Subjects. The Governors indeed may prove bad
and noxious, and so the Government comes to be abused; but a perniciousnesse
cannot therefore be charged upon the Government it self, nor can that be a
necessary ground for the change of Government: if so, you will bring in a ground
for endless Mutations; a change in the persons, or a regulating of them, is
the apt remedy for that hurt: but the Government, the abstract or essence of
the thing, never can prove hurtful, because it is an Ordinance of God for man's
good, Romans 13. 12. 4. and that in specie, as afterward will be showed, and as a
Go^ernment it has a political goodness seated in its being, by the
unchangable Law of Nature.

Secondly, But admit the Argument were not peccant in form, yet the Assumption
in the main of it, which is, That man may change the Government he is under for
his own greatest good, and must change it when he has proved any Government
inconvenient and hurtful, and must not uphold any one Government longer then
it continues most safe and profitable; I must flatly deny. What Position more
Anarchical could be delivered? For the disproof, I offer thus,

1 He says, Man may change the Government, etc. but the holy Ghost says,
Prove. 24. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change: He allows a change to be for greater good; but the
holy Ghost tells us in the next words, Verse. 22. For their Calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them ^oth?

2 If men may change for the better, and must change upon a supposed hurt, then
all Oaths, Engagements, or Promises of Obedience, Allegiance, or Fidelity to
Magistrates, are unlawful to be undertaken; for all such Bonds, are in relation
to a present, and particular Government, the Engagers are under: And they are
not for the time present, or for an instant, but for a future Continuance. And
there is in all such Engagements, a making over of the Right which the Engagers
have in the matter Covenanted, to the persons Engaged to; according to that
known Rule, Omne promissum cadit in debitum: either then such a change to be
made by the persons under Authority may not, must not be; or such Engagements
may not, must not be by them undertaken: The former imports a power and duty
inherent in the Subjects to reserve in themselves a liberty to alter, and to
practice it when they judge it convenient: The latter speaks a binding out from
any such deed, and an abandoning of any such Right; but the Scripture is clear
enough for such Engagements, Eccles. 8. 2. 2 King. 11. 4. Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18
Judge. 8. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.

Thirdly, This Position not only disalows all such Engagements, but dissolves
the natural, or moral bond it self of duty, and subjection to Magistrates, for
to be free to change when a man judges it best, is to be free when he will, and
that is not to be tied at al; by this means any man is disingaged from
subjection, both in foro interno, and externo, when he will say, He thinks the
present Government not safe or profitable, or another to be better; and having
so resolved, he is absolved: He may now disobey the Commands, stand our against
the Judgments, take up Arms against the Person and Authority, and be exempt
from the Sword of the Magistrate: yea, although he have sworn, or subscribed
Allegiance: because such an Oath, or Promise (says this Doctor) was sinful,
not in righteousness: But I would fain have him declare, What thing
Magistracy, and what Subjection is.

Fourthly, This Doctrine will acquit, and justify all the Conspiracies, and
Treasons, that ever were enterprized against the power of the Magistrate since
the World was. Was not the Conspiracy of Absolem, 2 Samuel 1^ 1 Kin. 11 2^. 12.
1. etc. Act. 5. 36.
and that of Sheba against David? Was not the Rebellion of Jeroboam against
Solomon, and Rehoboam? Were not the Seditions of Thendas and Judas the
Gaulonite against Caesar? Were not all the Treasons against MAGISTRACY that ever
have been, attempted for the p^rties (yea for the Public) greater good, as
the Conspirators judged?

If it be said, That not particular men or a less party are to judge the
expediency, and take in hand the change, but the whole people. Besides that,
the people under Authority collectively taken have no such power (as I intend
presently to show) it may be said.

1 Seldom or never does a whole Nation under a lawful Government of themselves
affect or move to a change, it is the flatterers, and deceivers of the people
ordinarily that desire and mislead the people to (...) Arist. poli. lib. 5. c.
5.
it.

2 How the Judgment and Will of the whole Body of a People should be known and
declared unto Execution before particular men act to a change of their own
private judgment, to me is a thing unimaginable.

Fifthly, This necessity of retaining a power in Subjects to change, and of
using it for a greater good, or removal of a temporal hurt, in opposition to an
Oath sworn against that change, is directly against the Scriptures, tying men,
that swear to their own hurt, not to change, Psalm. 15. 4. Josh. 9. 18, 19. and
condemning those that for such ends have receded from their Oaths, Ezekiel. 17.
13, etc. Josh. 9. 15. compared with 2 Samuel 21. 2.

Sixthly, That Position so much now adays insisted on of the Peoples Power to
depose, abolish, and alter the power of their Governors at pleasure, which is
actually settled, and both in it self lawful, and lawfully set over them, I hold
is a gross error.

Some of my Reasons in short are,

First, Such a course (supposing the Governors Dissent to it al along) is no
other then that resistance of the Ordinance of God, condemned, Romans 13. 2.

Secondly, It is directly opposite to that Subjection commanded every Soul that
is in the relation of a Subject, Romans 13. 1. and that 2 Pet. 2. 13.

Thirdly, If the People may do it, then it must needs be that they have a Civil
power and authority over their Magistrates; which is contrary to those
Scriptures which make the King Supreme, and call the power which the people are
subject to, The higher Powers; higher in relation to them, who are below, and
put in subjection to them, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans 13. 1. And indeed, if the People
have a power over their Magistrates to judge, or displace them, How are the
Magistrates their Superiors, and Rulers? The same persons cannot be under, and
over others in the same kind of order or power. If the Magistrates be under the
People, whom are they over? If the People be above the Magistrates, whom are
they under?

Fourthly, The holy Ghost commands the People to render Tribute, Custom, Fear,
Honor* (not at random to a Magistracy leaving them at liberty to what they
please, but) to whom they are due; they are a debt then, which respects a
determinate object, the present Magistrate. No Debtor can pay a Debt by
transfering it from one to another, or giving what he owes to another besides
the proprietor.

Fifthly, Magistrares are of God, his Ordinance and Ministers, and they are
Judges for him as his Vicegerents, Romans 13. 1, 2. 4. 2 Chr. 19. 6. and
therefore cannot stand at the mere will of the People. God must have a hand in
their removal, as he has in their admission; or else it is injurious: he
removes, and admits now, but not by immediate revelation (as sometimes in
Israel) but by the rule of his Word, executed by man, He has given a Rule for
the setting up of Magistrates, but where has he given any for their deposing?

Sixthly. If it were in the Peoples power to change at pleasure their
Magistracy, then how could it be such a heinous sin as it is challenged to be
for the people to reject Samuels Government, and desire and mo^e for a King, 1 Samuel ^. 6, 7, 8. 12. 17?

But let us next ^ear what he alleges for this his Assertion of Mutability.

He says, Though Civil Government in general be an Ordin^nce of God tending to
man's good, therefore to reject it would be sinful, yet this or that kind of
Government is not an Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
and if an Ordinance of man, then man may change it, etc.

1 Civil Government in the general cannot be said to be Gods Ordinance, and
therefore unrejectable; but this, or that kind of Government, that is a
legitimate and true species of it, must necessarily be yielded to be also Gods
Ordinance, and unrejectable; for it is a sure rule, whatsoever is directly and
per se said of the genus, or general nature, must be also said of the species,
or particular kind: And again, the whole nature of the genus, or general, is
contained in every Species, or kind Quicquid predicatur de praedicato
praedicetur de subjecto, Reg. 1. (...). Tota natura generis continetur in una
quaque specie.


2 The Apostle cannot be taken to speak of power in general only, and
abstractly, but must be understo^d distributively of al lawful powers in their
special kinds: When he says, There is no power but of God; the powers that be,
are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 1, 2. He that shall say of this or that kind of
lawful Government, as of Monarchy, it is not of God, it is not the Ordinance of
God; speaks direct contradictories to the holy Ghost here. No Subjects
obedience, to this or that Government he is under, could be urged upon him by
virtue of this reason, There is no power but of God, etc, if this, or that kind
of Government were not of God, and were not his Ordinances.

3 And for his discretive, but an Ordinance of man, it is no inference of the
former, therefore not the Ordinance of God. For this, or that Government, is
both an ordinance of God in Paul's style, and an ordinance of man in Peter's; and
you cannot say these two Apostles speak of Government in two different ways;
the former in general, the latter in particular: for as I have proved, Paul
must be taken of particular kinds. So it is clear, Peter speaks first in
general, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, etc. and then in
particular, Whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, etc. this,
or that Government, Paul calls an Ordinance of God.

1 In that it is instituted in its special nature by God, and warranted for any
people, but not commanded or imposed (as Government in the general is) upon
every Nation. For it is with Governments in relation to Nations, as with
Callings, in relation to Persons: every man must have a Calling, but it is
distribu^ively this, or that, or the other; al are not necessarily to have this
one, 1 Cor. 7. 7. 17.

2 In that it is invested in the particular persons by God, when they are
called to the Government according to his Rule, though he does not point them
out immediately by his own finger, but immediately by men. In like manner as they
are the Ministers of Christ in the Church that are Called according to his
appointment, though men in the same office ordain them And in this regard, the
Magistrates (not the Government abstractly) are called Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.
2. compared with 3, and 4. Peter terms it man's ordinance, either because both
the special form of Government, and the persons holding it are chosen, and so
immediately Constituted by men. Or rather because it is conversant about humane
affairs, and man's benefit. Not as if it were invented by, and had its original
from men, for so it is of God. As Expositors interpret and compare that place
of Peter with the other of Paul Beza. Marlor. Divin^s Annotat. D^odat.
And that Peter excludes not, but takes in the divine authoriration to that
Government he treats of, is evident; in that he wills submission to it, for
the Lords sake. How for his sake, if it be not his Ordinance?

Having thus answered the Premises of his Sylogism, and what he brings to back
the Assumption withal. His Consequence or Conclusion following goes to the
ground, and the lawfulness of the oath of Allegiance remains unshaken. But he,
as his manner is, amplifies his Consequence with matters altogether
inconsequential, and independent on the Premises.

1 He says, Who knows not what a plague this kind of Government (viz.
Kingly) has been to this Nation? And that the most of our Kings have been
Tyrants? I am one that knows not these things, but judge the contrary, and will
be tried by the Experience, and Voice of this Nation. And in the mean while, I
request him to try these his words by the Scriptures following, 2 Pet. 2. 10,
11, 12. Jude 8, 9, 10. And to take heed of the Verdict, and Ju^gement therein
given upon Governmentblasphemers.

2 Who knows not what a Blessing the Change of Government has brought to the
United Provinces? I am sure this man knows not, neither can say, If those
Provinces excel in Blessings, that they are brought by a Change of their lawful
Government, considering what Solomon observed of old, Eccles. 8. 14. 9. 1, 2.
concerning the disproportion of Wordly success to men's ways; and the
inevidence of the goodness, or badnesse of persons, and actions if estimated
by events. Which every man's experience can second.

Whether those Provinees have changed or recovered their Government; or whether
they yet stand but as our Parliament did with the late King in the first War,
defending, and demanding the Security of their just Privileges with the Sword
in their hand, I leave him further to consider: and I assure him this, There
have been observations great store of Gods Judgments upon those that have
rebelled against, cast off, or murdered their lawful Governors gathered by
worthy men Theater of Gods judgments by D. Beard and Doct. Tailor, lib. 2.
chap. 2, 3, 4, 5.
. But I never before met with any, that made observations of divine blessings
upon any of those acts.

Thus far his EXCEPTIONS by way of proof of his first Position goes.

He in the close makes one Objection against himself, and gi^es his Answer to
it thus;

Objection. Suppose there was some unlawfulness in the taking such Oaths, yet
is there not a necessity of keeping them being taken?

Answer. If Herod's Oath against the life of one man, being unrighteous and
cruel, was sinfullie taken, and more sinfullie kept, then these of Allegiance
which are absolute, not Conditional, etc. and which are to uphold Monarchy,
the woeful fruits whereof seeing they are dangerous, and may prove, as often
they have done, destructive to the lives of many men; they are not only
unlawful to be taken, but to be kept.

Not granting any unlawfulness in the taking of this Oath, having (I hope)
made good its innocence against all that has been said; yet suppose I had made
this Objection, I would not take this Answer. My Reason is,

He cannot parallel Herod's Oath and ours in the matter wherein Herod's was
unlawful both in the taking and keeping. What was that? to shed innocent blood,
to massacre a guiltless and holy Person. What was ours? To yield obedience in
lawful things, to a lawful power. Is it any more? and are not the matters of
these two Oaths as far unlike as light and darkness? That which he heaps np
to aggra^a^e our O^^^ to the height of the unrighteousness of Herod's, is
nothing but the three exceptions which all this while I have been Answering, and
therefore shall content myself with what has been said to them; only in the
close, he tells us,

Monarchy is dangerous, and may, as often it has, prove destructive to the
lives of many men, and therefore its unlawful to swear, or keep the upholding
of it.

This is nothing but what may be as truly said of any kind of Government, how
lawful soever: none that has been as much practiced as it, can be affirmed to
have been less destructive* or to be less dangerous then it. But the
possiblity of being, or experience of having been abused, is no valid Reason
why a Government may not be upheld; (if it be, down must al Governments fall)
and if yet it may be upheld, to swear to uphold it, may be an Oath lawful for
the matter; and if it cannot in that respect be made a Crime, it deserves not
to be paraleld with Herod's* Oath. What parallel in point of unrighteousnes
Herod's keeping his oath, and others violating theirs; his execution, and
theirs, may have; it is not to my pu^pose in hand to show.

I have done with his First Position, and pr^ceed to his Second, which is this,

Suppose the Oath of Allegiance to be Lawful, yet the Subject is now absolved
from it by them that have power to absolve from it.

This Position of a power in any to absolve from a lawful Oath is new (as far
as I have read, or heard) among Protestants, and has until now been accounted
by Papists, the Popes and Prelates Prerogative; by us, their Antichristian
presumption.

But let us see where, and upon what ground he builds such a power:

Reason. Because Representatives of the People, which in reason are the Supreme
power, imposed this Oath by an Act of Parliament, this was the Subjects free
Act in their Representatives, no Law of God or Nature obliging them to accept
of such a Person, and his Heirs, and to swear Allegiance to them. If therefore
the Representatives take away, and repeal this Act (as this Parliament has
done) they thereby set the Subjects at liberty from such Allegiance, and from
their Oath binding to it, there remains no more Conscience of it to such as
have taken it: Abraham that imposed the Oath upon his Servant, might acquit him
of it, etc.

First, For the Antecedent, I shall only note;

1 He sets up a Supreme power over us by Reason, not by Law, or the Peoples
Constitution: and this Reason is not the Nations, but, 1 Either his own private
judgment, and if that may create a Supre^m power to him, then every other
private man's Reason is to set up one to him* even where there is one already,
over the people he is of. 2 Or it is the Common Reason that is in all men
naturally: and if so, how comes it to pass, That there is so much variety of
Kinds of Supreme Government, and that Representatives have it not in all times
and Nations; yea that scarce they ever had it?

2 That in citing the power that Enacted this Oath, he omits the King, and
House or Lords, who in the then Parliament concu^ed in this Enacting, and
Imposition.

3 That although the King then was rightsully and actually Enthroned in the
Regal power and Dignity, and both the Law, and the Oath of Supremacy obliged
the people to him and his Heirs; yet he dares to say, No Law of God, or Nature,
obliged them to accept of such a Person and his Heirs. Is not the Fifth
Commandment the Law of God, and Nature? and those Precepts, Romans 13. 1. Tit.
3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Repe^^ions, and divine Ratifications thereof? And does not
that Law command every people and person Allegiance to their particular lawful
Governors* and was not the King in Being, his Heirs in Capacity, and designaton
such*

Secondly, But for the Consequent there is no Truth in it, nor color of
Reason; or inference from the Anteceden^ for it. Besides, That the act cannot
(for ought appears to me) be Repealed, but by the same power that made it: and
the Allegiance sworn was not founded upon the Act or Oath, but due, and paid
before them both. The Oath in its own words terms it self a Recognition and
Acknowledgement; and the first words of it are,

I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare
in my Conscience before God and the World, That King James is lawful King of
this Realm, etc.

Suppose the Representatives to be the Supreme power, that the Imposing of this
Oath was their Sole Act, and the Subjects in them, and that they did it
voluntarily or unobliged to it: does it thence follow. The Representatives
repealing that Act, the Subjects that upon their Enacting swore it, are now
absolved from their Allegiance, and from the Oath*

1 They that have power to impose an Oath were never said (many Divintty
extant) to have power eo ipso to absolve from it, when the imposers are also
the party sworn to, there it is granted (both by Protestant Doct. Sanders. de
juram. oblig. prael. 7.. 8. Theolos Syntag. juris, l. 50. c. 12.
and Papists) they have power to release from the Oath, not because they are
the imposers, but because they are the party sworn to, for omnis qui promittit
sacit jus alteri, cui est facta promissio, the right of the thing sworn is
theirs to whom the Oath is made, and therefore they may release from it; and
this is ^^e true ground of that power he supposes in Abraham to acquit his
Servant, not his being the imposer of his Oath: but where the imposers are a
Third party from the persons swearing, and sworn to, there they have no claim
of power of Relaxation. And thus the case is here, The Representatives (as he
faith) impose the Oath, which is sworn to the King, and bind in Allegiance to
him. If they that impose an Oath, may Release from it, then may any Court or
Magistrate Release a Juror or Examinate from the Oath they have gi^en him; then
it a man impose an Oath upon himself (as in some cases he may) he may absolve
himself when he will from it, though he therein obliged himself to God, or
another man. And this is truly the case here, as he himself states it; The
Subjects by their own act in their Representatives impose this Oath, and by
their own personal act swear i^, and after by their own ^ctin their
Representatives absolve themselves i^.

2 The Repeal of the act, is no Repeal or dissolution of the Oath; the
Parliament that framed, and by their act imposed the Oath, did not thereby make
it an Oath, but it was the Subjects swearing which made it an Oath, and an
Obligation or Religion to him* as the Ministers rehearsing and dictating the
words of Marriage to the Couple Marrying each other, makes not the Marriage,
but the parties themselves declaring in those words. And as the Clerk in a
Court reciting the words of a Jurors Oath to him makes not the Oath, but the
Jurors assent to it. The Parliament can conjoyn, or punish the refusal, or
manifest breach of an Oath. But a promissory Oath being the act and Covenant of
him that swears, and a part of divine Worship, the bond of Conscience upon the
swearer, and the validity of Gods Ordinance, and the Obligation that is therein
entered into unto God, as the invocated witness, and judge, cannot be within
the Parliaments authority to nullify in all Subjects Oaths which may be made
with, or without their imposition. There are cases indeed, wherein a superior,
as a Husband, Master, Father, Magistrate, may make void the Oath of their
respective inferior by ANALOGY, or equity of that Rule, Numb. 30. but those
are, 1 In matters that are belonging to the Right, or Power of the Superior to
dispose of; as the Representatives may acquit from an Oath in point of their
own Right Animadvertendum tamen est penes ^os non esse facultatem rescindendi
quod libet jus jurandum subditorum sed illud duntaxat cujus materia est eorum*
potestati subjecta. Alsted. Theol. Cas. Cap. 15. Reg. 2.
But the Allegiance in this Oath sworn is none of theirs, but the Kings, and
therefore sworn to him by the Subjects, and in particular by them. 2 By that
Law Numb. 30. the Superior may interpose to nullify his Inferiors Oath made
without his knowledge and consent, and that must be done in the day that he
hears of it; but there is no further power given by that Law in the matter of
Oaths. Now in this our Case, the Representatives have been so far from being
ignorant of the making of this Oath, and disalowing it as soon as it was know
to them, that they were the Composers and Commanders of it; yea, and have taken
it themselves. Let any the least Warrant, yea or President be brought for
Releasing an Oath in this Case, and I shall sit down.

Lastly, For a Close of my Answer unto this Position, I shall observe what the
Tenor of this Oath has in it:

I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor any
Person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof.
And do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

This is not the Swearers Declaration only, but the Parliaments in Compiling,
and Imposing this Oath, and al Representatives have personally thus declared in
taking it. Shall we believe them concerning their power in this matter, or this
man?

That which follows is no proof of the Position, nor any thing to the validity
of the Oath.

FINIS.
A REPLY TO AN ANSWER Pretending to Refute some POSITIONS Which tended to make
the OATH of ALLEGIANCE Void, and not Obliging.
THE Answerer begins with the Drift of the First Position, which he says is,
To show the Oath to be unlawful in the taking of it.

Reply. The Drift of the First Position is to show the unlawfulness of the Oath
upon a Supposition, that the Oath was Absolute and not Conditional, that it was
Single and not Mutual, etc. and not otherwise.

He falls upon Premising something in these words: An Oath may be unlawful, 1
Either in regard of the matter or thing sworn, as when it is some sinful act:
Or, 2 In regard of the manner, as when the thing is unadvisedly sworn: The
former way of unlawfulness makes the Oath Void in the taking of it, but not the
latter: which appears by the validity of that unadvised Oath of the Princes to
the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. 15. 18, 19. 2 Samuel 21. 2.

He erreth at the first dash; That Oath of the Princes was a sinful Oath Deuteronomy.
7. 2. Exodus 23. 32. yet it was not void, but was kept by them.

He falls upon Observing, and speaks of A gross imputation that is laid

If there be any Charge at all upon any, it is upon those that make the no
imputation at all upon one or other, which the Author of the Position rather
conceives then the contrary.

He mentions the general Exception against the lawfulness of the It is but a
fault (says he) in the manner, not in the matter; in the Person, not in the
Oath.

If it be so, Whence is it that the Law provides, That no Vows, Oaths, ipso
facto void; but he connects Judgment and Righteousness together, as adding
strength to each other, and making such an oath so unlawful, as not to be
obligatory.

He descends to particulars, and objects against that Conditionality I conceive
the words (Conditional and Absolute) may be taken, 1 Either in reference to the
thing sworn, which is Obedience or Allegiance to the King; and so the Condition
is, it must be Honest; Or, 2 In reference to the Tie or Obligation of the Oath:
And of this latter, he makes another distinction concerning Conditions, in
these words: Some Conditions are general, and such as no promisory Oath that is
lawful can be without: And he makes (Honest) this general Condition. 2ly.
Others are special and proper Conditions.

He makes, Honest and Just, to fall under the opposite members of his

He comes to oppugn the Reason, that is brought in the Position, that the Oath
must not be Absolute, but Conditional, viz. That it is against the Ground and
Reason of the Primitive Institution of Government, which is the good of the
Subject, that there should be any Oath to bind him absolutely whether the Prince
Rule for the Subjects good or not. And his first Exception is,

That this Reason wants proof.

There was such cleernesse in the Reason, that it needed not proof. For

His Second Exception is, The Reflection that this Argument in the

There is something inserted in this, that is not granted, viz That the While
the Prince should rule according to the Laws of the Kingdom. For, 1 They never
declared so much, That they intended the oath to be absolute. 2 The Oaths that
Kings in this Nation have always taken, show the contrary, and their Oaths to
him must be interpreted by his Oath to them: Now his Oath to them is, To Rule
according to the Laws of the Kingdom, therefore their Oath to him must have the
same restriction, and so cannot be absolute. 3 The Parliament is sharer (at
least) by this man's own confession, page 5. with the Prince in Government. For,
he says, It is a mixed Government that is amongst us in this Nation; and in a
mixed Government, the Prince has his share; and the People, in their
Representatives, have their share; therefore the Parliament would never make
the Oath absolute, least thereby they should give away to the Prince that part
in Government which is theirs. 4 It was to recover this share in Government,
and the Peoples Liberties thereby out of the hand of the Prince, that this WAR
was undertaken against him. Which if they had never Conditioned with the Prince
for, in their Oath to him, (neither expressly, nor implicitly) had not been
justifiable upon this man's Assertion, That an absolute Oath is lawful.

His third Exception is setcht from Experience, His words are,

1 It had been necessary that he should have showed what good it has
contributed to it, and how it has been consistent with it, considered as
absolu^e, as now he and many more do understand it, and hold themselves still
obliged by it.

2 The Papists ^ad reason to oppose it, because it was given out to be intended
principally (if not solely) against them. And their Allegiance in reference to
their Religion (which subjected them to a foreign power) tell justly under
suspicion, to engage them therefore more firmly to the Prinee, this oath was
contrived and Enacted.

3 Many precions conscientious men were long since (much more then Papists)
offended at it, foreseeing that there would be a great snare in it, as it was
urged without an explication, Yea, It was pressed more upon them* then upon the
Papists; and the Papists (most of them) knew how to get off from it, and to
avoid it, but not they. When the Persecution was so ho^ against Inconformists
that many thousands were forced to fly the Land; then was there a command, That
all Ports and Havens should be narrowly looked unto, that none might be
suffered to pass out of the Nation, till they had first taken this Oath; and
my self hardly escaped at that time.

4 It might ^ave proved fatal to this Nation, had this Parliament understood it
as this man does in an absolute sense, and not according to the Laws of the
Land* For then had the Design of the late King and his Father (to make
themselves absolute Mona^chs, and to bring the peointo an absolute subjection
to their arbitrary Government) been accomplished, and there had been no place
so much as for a Defensive War, but absolute slaves the Kingdom must have been,
as they were several years before this Parliament sat.

He comes to distinguish of things that are against the peoples good; and,
says he,

That some things are against the peoples good in their own nature, and

He might and must distinguish of things accidental; some things are should
come: So it is in Commonwealths, there are many things that are against the
good of the people, which though accidental in reference to the persons and
time, yet certain and in^allible, in reference to the Causes, and the course of
Gods Providence; and when there is not provision against such evils, but rather
a door set open for them, by either persons or things done, it is against the
good of the people, because all knowing men may easily foresee such things,
though they cannot so punctually discern the times and seasons of them.

I shall give some instances: Wars, are things accidental, yet certain, at one
time or another; and that Government that provides not against it, but rather
invites it by security and negligence, is against the good of the people, and
ought to be either redres^ed, or removed: Murders, Rapes, Fellonies in a
Commonwealth are accidental, yet they will certainly be, and those Statesmen,
and L^gisla^ors that provide not against them, are against the good of the
people.

There may be Instances of other kinds: Wolves amongst the Flock are
accidental, yet they will be, and those Shepherds that provide not against
them, by feeding the Church of God with wholesome sound Doctrine, are against
the good of the Flock. Storms and Tempests at Sea are accidental, yet they will
certainly come; and those Ship-masters and Mariners that go to Sea without
good Tacking, they are against the good of their Principals, and those that
fraught them, and against their own lives also. And so it is with Tyrants in
Government, they are accidental in a Commonwealth, yet it is certain such
there will be, since so great corruption sell upon mankind, and those
Oath-imposers, and Oaths that are imposed, that provide not against such, but
rather invite and set open a door to Governors to be such, are against the good
of the Commonwealth, and people; and such is that Oath of Allegiance, if it be
absolu^e and not conditional, as this man would have it.

2 He distinguishes again of the goodness of the End, and of the means
tending to that End; and he makes the happiness of the Community to be the
goodness of the End; and this to be intended and not deliberated on, or chosen
by the Law-gi^ers. The means he makes variable, in relation to times and
people, and says. That that may be good in the nature of a means, for one
people or time, that is not good for another.

Reply. I allow of the Distinction in the former branch of it fully, and say
with him, That the happiness of the Community is the goodness of the End. And
I ad this, That the just freedom o^ the Subject is the happiness of the
Community, which an absolute Oath of ALLEGIANCE fights against.

I also concur with him in the second branch of the Distinction of the
goodness of the means, that it is that which falls under Deliberation and
Counsel: but that all means is variable and changable after Counsel has found
it out, I deny: For the goodness of the means may be considered Generally, or
Specifically. Consider it in its general nature, and it admits not of any such
variation according to times and places: but consider it in its special nature,
and then it may admit of variation. For Example, Government in general, is a
good of the means, respecting the happiness of the Community, and yet is
necessary for all Communities, that they may be happy: but this, or that
special kind of Governmentis not necssary for all Communities, in all places
and at all times, but there may be some change and variation. So to Govern
according to Laws, and to obey according to Laws, is necessary, and admitts of
no variation, because it conduces absolutely to the good of the Community: but
to govern and obey according to the same Laws, is not necessary, but variable,
according to places and times.

Unto this head of the goodness of means conducing to such an End, viz. The
happiness of the Community, he makes a firm Sanction by an absolute Oath (that
there may be a kind of immutability in States and Governments thereby) to
appertain. And says, It is the wisdom of most States so to setle them, to
prevent the danger of Innovation and changes. And ^e makes this to be a better
means of the Communities happiness, then the other of Conditional parts and
Covenants with the Prince. For he speaks of the evil of swearing to a Prince
absolutely, to be but inconvenience, disadvantagiousnesse, prejudice, outward
incommodity, impeachment of the Subjects good: but the evils of a Conditional,
or unabsolute Engagement, he speaks of them, as Mischief and Misery: and when
the other is in his account but uncertain danger, he makes this inevitable hurt.

Reply. If all this be true, then the Constitution of our State, was not so
prudently considered by our Forefathers, when they Established a mixed
Government, as might have been; and so much expense of Blood to recover the
Subjects Liberty and Propriety, was a great sin. For it had been better for the
Subject (if he have said truth) to have yielded themselves up to the Will of
their Prince, to have submitted quietly to an arbritrary power, and to have
borne an Iron yoke for ever, then to have contended with him: and our Brethren
of Scotland did ill to give us such an Example as first to appear in Arms
against him: But rational men must first put out their eyes* before they can
believe such a Paradox. For can there be a greater Mischief and Misery, then
thraldom and slavery? then loss of Religion, Liberty, Propriety, Life it self?
For all these will lie at stake, and be hazarded, by an absolute Oath firmly
kept and observed. War with all the effects of it that can follow such
conditional Engagements, is but a short Misery, and not so ignominious as the
other, for persons live and die like men in it; but in the other, they live and
die like beasts, and all their life is but a long-lived death. But many in
these days, are like the Israelites, who when in bondage and under Pharoahs
yoke, cried to God, and sighed and groaned, and then it was a condition
intolerable; but when they were delivered and saw War, and found some evils
they expected not, then they judged it better to be in Egyptagain: and then the
state of cruel Servitude was but an inconvenience in comparison of the other
Mischief. But let the mischief of a Conditional Engagement be what it will, it
must be chosen, and the absolute must be avoided, because Liberty, and
Propriety, etc. are the happiness of a Community, and the end of Government,
and the birthright of all the Subjects which have not forfeited it, and ought
not to be given away to the will of the Governor, and a Conditional Engagement
is the means to preserve it.

He says, Such things as may by reason of their changeable nature prove in the
issue somewhat disadvantagious, may yet, if for the present good, and probably
hopeful so to continue, be sworn to absolutely, as in voluntary Promises,
Leagues, and Contracts, both public and private, among all Nations has been
the practice, and by good Scripture-president it is justified, Genesis 47. 31.
Exodus 13. 19. Josh. 9. 15 14 9 Judge. 21. 5. 18. 15. 12. 13. 1 Samuel 14. 24. 19.
6. 20. 12. 17 1 King. 1. 13. 29. 2 Samuel 19* 23.
.

Reply. 1 Allegiance (which is the thing that he would have absolutely sworn
unto) may not only prove through the changable nature disadvantagious, but also
has, and does often, and will certainly at one time or other prove pernicious,
not to persons only, but to Commonwealths.

2 An absolute Contract of Allegiance, sets up the Prince too high, and puts
down the Subject too low: The one is made by such a Contract more then a man,
the other is rendered less then a man, and more like unto a Beast. And it is
neither for the present good, nor hopeful to continue so* to put such a
distance betwixt them. For absolute Sovereignty is Gods Prerogative, whose Will
is perfectly holy, and just, and good, and not to be attributed to the
Creature, so full of imperfection and corruption; and it lays a temptation
before him to miscarry in his Office.

3 Some voluntary Promises and Contracts are dissimilia, things unlike, holding
no proportion to the thing in Controversy, viz. To the Oath of Allegiance, the
absolutnesse whereof is by him Asserted, and the Instances or Examples in
Scripture carry not any kind of Analogy. Let them be pe^used, and rational men
will wonder, that ever they were produced. 1 Some of them, are not Oaths made
to men at all, but to God, as that in Judge. 21. 5. 18. and some others. 2
Others of them are Oaths, the performanee whereof lies only on one Party; the
other is to receive advantage, but to do nothing, as that in Genesis 47, 31. Exodus
13. 19. Josh. 9. 15. and 14. 9* 3 Others of them were Oaths of things, that
were in their nature pernicious and sinful to be sworn to, as that in 1 Samuel
14. 24. Jonathan speaks of it, That his Father had troubled Israel and hindered
the Lords Work by that Oath of not touching any food till evening. And when
Saul would have had Jonathan put to death in reference to his violation of that
Oath, the people rescued him, and did well in it. And there is none that comes
so near the case, as Ionathans and David's Oath, which was not absolute, but
conditional, so as that if the one had broken it, the other would have been
absolved upon it. But this Oath of Allegiance is an Oath betwixt persons, that
owe respective duties to each other, and the Obligation of the one, has a
respect unto, and a dependence on the performance of the other; and so is an
Oath of another kind, then those mentioned in his Scriptures, and cannot be
absolute, as he from these patterns would prove.

But he gives his Reasons, why absolute Allegiance does not so nearly and
probably tend to the Subjects hurt, as the Conditional does. 1, He says, The
Prince may prove just and virtuous.

Reply. 1 The Conditional Engagement is the best way to make him prove such,
when he Rules upon his good Behavior, he is more likely to Rule well. 2 Most
Princes prove not such but unjust and vicious. 3 To be left to his own
arbitrary Will in Governing, is like to prove a temptation and snare to him. A
lawless Liberty to do what he lists many times corrupts the Prince.

2, He says, If he degenerates, the Subjects are bound to obey him actively,
but in lawful things.

Reply. What then? If the Oath be absolute, they are bound to obey him
passively in all other things, wherein they cannot obey him actively, even to
the loss of Life, Limb, Liberty, and Estate, which will certainly bring
calamity enough upon them. Nor were the Children of Israel bound to obey
Pharaoh actively, save only in lawful things; and yet they were miserable
enough for all that. And the Condition of the Subject may be no better then the
Condition of Gally-slaves, if this be all the comfort that the Subject has,
that he is bound to obey actively but in lawful things,

3, Hesaith, In his lawless Acts there may be a remedy (as the punishment or
resistance of his bad instruments by the Parliament, without whom, though he
may Will unjust things, yet he cannot Execute them) and yet his Government be
continued.

Reply. 1 What Justice is in this, To resist, and punish his bad Instruments,
and not him who is the principal efficient? For if they be in fault, he that
sets them on work much rather. And usually it has been said, The Messenger
bears no blame, but if there be a fault, his it is that sent him, and certainly
the Servant is in less fault. 2 This resisting of his bad Instruments, is a
resisting of him, as Christ speaks to his Apostles whom he sent forth, He that
receives you, receives me; and he that despises you, desp^seth me: So it may
be said of Resisting, in reference to the Instruments of the Prince, He that
punishes, or resists them, punishes and resists him in them; and this is
absolutely against the Oath of absolute Allegiance. 3 This resisting and
punishing of the Princes Instruments, is as unsafe and dangerous, as the not
continuing of his Government when it is degenerated to Tyranny; for it will
inevitably bring on a War betwixt the Prince and People: For the Prinee, if he
be able, will maintain his Instruments in what he sets them about, and
vindicate their Cause, while they do nothing but what they have his authority
for; and this is the evil that this man declines so much, that to prevent it,
he pleads for an absolute Engagement, whatever the mischief be to the Subject;
and yet in this place he brings this in as a Remedy to prevent the danger of
the other. 4 This Remedy begins at the wrong end, goes not the next way, but
far about to work redress, and reaches not the end, nor effects any cure; for
a corrupt Prince will never want bad Instruments, his greatness will have a
corrupting influence upon those about him; and like Prince, like Officers and
Servants under him. But let the Prince be fettered by wholesome Laws, tending to
his own just Honor, and the Subjects just Freedom, and the Mischief will not
only be redressed, but might be pre^ented, and with less ^azard also. 5 The
Parliament are Subjects, in this man's account, as well as other men; and
therefore by his Assertion, must be absolutely engaged to the Prince; and
wherein they cannot obey actively, they are bound to obey passively, and
therefore may not actively appear against his authority in his Instruments, for
where is then Allegiance, which an absolute Oath will always bind too?

4, He says, And suppose the case that there be no remedy, as when he has got
a party stronger then can be resisted, or subjected to punishment, then to cast
off his power and depose him (suppose it lawful to do) will be no relief, his
strength will command subjection.

Reply. 1 The way to prevent the getting of this strong Party, is to keep the
Subject from the snare of absolute Oaths, and to let them know their Liberty,
and that their Allegiance is but Conditional. 2 Concerning deposing (if an
absolute Oath be once taken, and be lawful both to be taken, and kept when
taken) it cannot be lawful; no nor yet the putting of his Person into hazard by
War, pretended to be undertaken against his Ministers and Servants under him. 3
When the Subject has a just Cause to contend for; viz. For Covenanted Rights,
they may cast themselves upon God; for God has made it to appear, not by
Might, nor by Arms, but by his Spirit, great things have been accomplished.

5, He says, The miscarriages of a Prince ordinarily extend but to the
detriment of some particular persons, rarely does any Nero-like, seek the
destruction of the whole.

Reply. 1 Let the Declarations which have been set forth by the Parliament
(when both Houses sat, and were most full) be viewed, and it will appear, That
the Mischiefs and Miseries that came by the corrupt Mind and Will of the
Prince, were general, and reached the whole Nation: What can be said of
Ship Money, and multiplicity of Monopolies? Did they not, one way or other,
reach all? Were some particupersons only annoyed by them? 2 If at first few be
like Nero, to seek the destruction of the whole; yet being crossed, and thereby
incensed and vexed, if it come to a public Contestation, almost every one will
choose to destroy all, rather then to miss of their Will, and fall short of
their Design.

6, He says, In that case Subjects sworn, and unsworn, (if their Cause be
good, and the Parliament authorize their standing up) are in the same capacity
of Resistance.

Reply. 1 Not so, if their Oath be absolute and obligatory, (as this man will
have it) for an absolute obligatory Oath to obey actively or passively, and yet
a capacity of Resistance (if the Parliament warrant it) are contradictory one
to the other. 2 Nor can the Parliament authorize it, if themselves have
absolutely, and irrevokably, and lawfully also sworn Allegiance, and in such
sort also imposed it upon the Subject.

7, He says, Set the people free to shake off the reins of their present
Government, when they shall think it unequal, and, 1 You destroy the nature of
Government; and, 2 You expose the people to an immediate loss of the very use
and enjoyment of any Government.

Reply. 1 The People act all in, and by their Representatives, who are so wise
and faithful to the Commonwealth, that they will not slightly shake off the
present Government; but when it is to preserve the Commonwealth, after they
have had long patience, and plentiful experience that there is little hope of
good whilst it stands, much less will they suffer the Commonwealth to be
without a Government, and to lie in Confusion; the proof of both which we have
had amongst our selves. 2 How the change of Government should be against the
nature of Government, I cannot apprehend; and he shows no Reason for it

What is spoken by him, in way of Comparison, betwixt a bad Government, and no
Government; betwixt one, or a few, doing that which is right in their own eyes;
and every man's doing so, the one he makes an accidental effect of absolute
Allegiance; the other he makes an inevitable effect of conditional Allegiance,
because they be naked unconfirmed Assertions, and experience amongst our selves
has so evidently confuted them, I shall therefore pass over them.

Afterward in the Second place he lays down a contradictory Assertion in
these words, The Oath of Allegiance may be Absolute, or unconditional: And he
renders Reasons for it:

1 He says, Were there no Oath, the limited obedience which is due to Princes
and Magistrates, is due to them absolutely, whether they Rule well, or no; and
that which is absolutely due, may be absolutely sworn.

Reply. This is only true while they acknowledge them to be their Princes and
Magistrates, and do continue them in those Offices and Places: and it is as
true of every Constable, what misdemeanour soever he be guilty of, yet he must
have that observance of his Place from all, while in his Place: But the
Question is, When Princes and Magistrates Rule amiss, not to the welfare, but
ruin of the people over whom they are Magistrates, Whether the People be not
(in that case) absolved from al Tie and Obligation to them, as Magistrates, if
they will: that is, Whether the Representatives of the People, which have the
Peoples power, for the Executive part of it, may not if they will, (yea, and in
many Cases are bound in faithfulness to the People, and for their good, to)
declare such Princes and Magistrates, in reference to such miscariages, to be
no longer Governors, and so therein to free the People from their Allegiance to
them. And it is asserted in the Position, That they may if they will. A Pastor
of a Church miscarries in the execution of his Office, and becomes a Wolf to
devour, rather then a Pastor to feed the Church of Christ, Is not his Flock
notwithstanding bound to obey him in the Lord, and according to Rule, whilst
he remains a Pastor to them? But the Question is, Whether it be not the Duty of
such where the Power is, To Depose him from his Office, and therein to absolve
the People from such Duty as such an Office calls for? And so it is in this Case
of a Prince or Pastor to a Commonwealth.

But he Confirms this REASON, by Seven other Reasons.

Reas. 1. The Precept of Obedience to Civil Governors, is without any condition
or reserve from a disingagement of the Subject in case of the Governors
miscarriage, read the 5th Commandment, and those other Injunctions, Romans 13.
1, 2, etc. Tit 3. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 13. etc.

Reply. It is to be understood whilst they are Governors, and whilst they are
Fathers: and the same may be spoken of Pastors of Churches, for they are
Fathers; and there is no reserve for a disingagement from duty toward such,
whilst the office of such lasts. But the Question is, Whether there be no
Reserve for a disingagement from the Office it self, and the Relation in
reference to that Office, as it respects such a person who has miscarried in
it? If that be asserted, the Fifth Commandment will not prove it, not those
places quoted. For there are Two sorts of Fathers included in that
Commandment; there is a Natural Father, whose relations is indissolvable, what
ever the miscarrying be: and there is an Instituted Father, which originally
the People both in Church and Commonwealth were wont to create, for the Common
good of them all. And such a Father as the People make, or their Elders, or
Patriots for them, the People may lay aside; or their Representatives on their
behalf, upon misdemeanors in Government, the relation in this Fatherhood is not
indissolvable; and those Scriptures quoted, contradict not this; For it is
known well, That in those times there were great Changing of the Chief
Magistrate, which took off the People, and freed them from their duty, when
their relation ceased.

Reas. 2. God commands his people to be subject to Heathen Princes, and the
most absolute and oppressive Tyrants that likely ever have been, Jer. 27. 12.
Mat. 22. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 13. I speak not here o^ Tyrants, in regard of Title, or
Right; that is, Usurpers: but of Tyrants whose ^itles a^e just, but their
Government unjust, and oppressive.

Reply. 1 But did God ever Command the Heads of the people, who had the power
of all the people, to continue such in their Places, if they had power to remove
them? It is one thing what God Commands particular parsons to do, that have no
Power no manner of way, and what the duty of the Chief of all the people (who
represent them) is to do. 2 Were not those very persons many of them ^yran^s in
Title, as well as in Government, concerning whom God Commands his People, That
they should be subject to them? Did not the Emperors advance themselves by the
power of their Armies that they commanded, to whom the Senate was forced to
yield, and yet subjection is required whilst they were in Place? What can be
said of Nebuchadnezzar himself? Was his Title good, getting all by the Sword as
he did? and yet Subjection is commanded to him, as his own quotation proves. So
that it is manifest, That all the Scriptures which he produces, are as strong
to prove that which he disapproves of, as they are to prove that, which he
would prove by them.

Reas. 3. Servants are to be subject to their Masters, not only to them that
are good and gentle, but those that are froward, and that do them wrong, 1 Pet.
2. 18, 19, 20. and by Analogy Subjects are tied in the same ^erms to their
Governors.

Reply. Servants in those days were such who were bought with their Moneis,
and were their Slaves, as now many Christians are to the Turks; therefore in
subjection they must be, both to the Good and Froward, and could not help
themselves; and the Apostle exhorts them to be contented, and patient in their
condition for the Lords sake: But yet elsewhere he exhorts them, That if they
could be free, they would choose it rather. Now I hope this man's scope is not,
To put Commonwealthes into this Condition of Servility and Slavery to Princes.
Nor will he grant such an abso^ute Dominion to Princes, as to Masters over such
Servants. Such Servants were for their Masters, when their Masters had bought
them: But Commonwealths are not for Princes, but Princes for Commonwealths;
therefore there is no parity betwixt the one and the other. The subjection of
Commonwealths, must not be a bondage, as the subjection of such Servants was,
unless it be that some people have forfeited their freedom by some Rebellion,
or wicked bloody hostile acts, as the Irish have done. The yoke may be hea^ie
on such justly, and yet they have no cause to kick against it.

Reas. 4. David would not stretch out his hand against Saul upon this ground,
for that he was his Master the King of Israel, and the Lords Anointed, though
he was then in actual, violent, and unjust pursuit of his life, 1 Samuel 24. 5,
etc. 26. ^. etc.

Reply. David at that time was but a private man, and Saul was King
unquestioned by the Heads of Israel, and Saul's persecution was but of one
private man's life, it appears not that he was a Tyrant unto the Comwealth.
However it i^ e^ident that he was given of God immediately, without the
interposition of the people, and therefore it might be, that he must be taken
away by God, though he had been a Tyrant. But what is this to Princes in these
times, that have no such immediate Calls to Kingdoms?

Reas. 5. Otherwise you leave no place for passive obedience to, prayer for,
and patience toward Magistrates in case of their wrong doing, and your own
innocence, which yet is generally acknowledged to be a duty.

Reply. There will be particular wrongs enough, to exercise the patience of
particular persons, before it come to be miscarriage against the Commonwealth:
and there will be miscarries enough through weakness and invigilancy against
the Commonwealth which will exercise the patience of all the people, and yet
at last, if the mischief grow very high and threaten ruin; subjection is not
so absolute, but that the Heads of the people may free themselves, and the
people, from such a yoke.

Reas. 6. Else you dissolve all Magistracy, it will be impossible in man's corrupt
estate to retain or continue any, in as much as no man, or men, can in the vast
multitude, and difficulty of Magistratical affairs avoid offending every day, 2 Samuel 23. 3, 5.

Reply. If the people themselves were such Idiots and Children as to expect a
Government that should be perfect, yet I hope it will hardly be asserted of
their chosen men, whom they make their Representatives, that they are such; and
therefore I wonder that ever such a Reason should be produced. The High COURT
where Wisdom should be seated (if any where) will not run stark mad, to
displace the Supreme Governor for infirmity and weakness, which (as a man) he
is incident unto every day, and so therein overthrow al Government: No, no,
there has been experience enough of their long suffering. But when a Prince to
maintain his Lust, will raise a War, to endanger the destruction of al his
Subjects; then let the REPRESENTATIVES of a people know their Privilege and
Duty, which is to serve the People, however it goes with the Prince.

Reas. ^. The Doctrine of orthodox Protestant Divines generally is, That
obedience is due (in lawful things) to the most degenerate, oppressing, and
tyrannical Princes.

Reply. These orthodox Divines speak of subjection of particular persons to
such Princes while they are in place and power; but they speak not of States
which are set up to be (at least) sharers in Government with the Prince. Nor do
they press obedience upon them, without any allowance to help themselves, by
calling him to an account in the peoples name.

2 He says, We find oaths of Allegiance in Scripture, sworn to Princes without
any Conditions inserted, Judge. 11. 9, 10. 2 King. 11. 4. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezekiel.
17. 13. and Nehem. 10. 29. Their Oath was to observe all the Commandments of
the Lord, whereof the fifth Commandment, with application to their present and
future Magistrates, was one.

Reply. 1 If there be no Condition inserted, it will not follow, That therefore
there was no Condition; but the justice and equity of the thing is to be
considered, whether i^ does not require a Condition; and the Rules of general
Equity are to be followed, which is consonant to, yea, commanded in the
Scripture, viz. To do, as one would be done unto. 2 The places quo^ed, prove
not the thing; That in Judges, of the peoples Oath to Iepthah may well be
understood with this restriction, According to the Laws of the Lord, and of the
Land: for Iepthah was a Believer, and a Judge whom God raised up; and it is
probable, that he would not desire Headship over them upon other terms. They
were also an unfree people when they Covenanted with Iepthah to advance him to
Government: and if their Oath were absolute, they did not put themselves into a
worse Condition thereby, but might think it better to be servants to him, then
slaves to the Ammonites: and if it were an absolute Rule which he had, he must
Merit it before he had it, and was to become their Savior, before their
Ruler: so that this Instance is not applicable to the thing in Controversy.
That place in 2 King. 11. 14. must be interpreted by Verse. 17. where it is
said, That Ie^o^ada made a Covenant betwixt the King and the People, which
implies, that he mutually engaged them, and so it was not an absolute Oath.
That in 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. speaks of Zedekiahs breach of oath, but nothing of any
absolute Oath. That in Ezekiel. may receive the same Answer with the former,
because it belongs to the same thing. That in Nehemiah, which respects the
Observation of the Fifth Commandment, h^th had its Answer before.

3 He says, It is a thing within our power to settle our Allegiance absolutely,
as well as it is within a man's power to dispose of himself to service, whether
his Master prove good, or evil; or as it is in a man or woman's power to bestow
themselves in Marriage, whether the Mate be observant of duty, or no?

Reply. The Question is not whether it be in our power to settle our Allegiance
absolutely, but whether it be in our lawful power to do it or no; and the doubt
is not the less in reference to these Instances which he produces of a
Servant his giving of himself up to his Master irrevokably, whether good or
bad; and of a Man or Woman giving themselves up in Ma^riage, whether the Mate
be observant of duty or no, but the grea^er? For it persons be bound to be
wise, and just, and merciful to themselves, then they cannot do such a thing
without sin: and it would be counted a desparate wicked part in a man, to bind
himself to another to be servant for ever, whether he be kind or cruel; whether
he give him any thing or nothing; yea, though he take from him that which he
has. And the unrighteousness of the thing is the same, in the case of an
absolute Oath to a Magistrate.

4 He says, A conditional oath is not consistent with a necessary duty;
obedience to Magistrates is not left arbitrary, but commanded, and that though
they be bad; but now the duty being necessary, if you would have it sworn with
a proviso of the Rulers performing his duty, you nullify the end of an Oath,
which is to confirm, put out of doubt, and give security of what is due. A
thing sworn may become due, either by the rule of Equity, or by a voluntary
Covenant: That which is due the latter way, if the Covenant be conditional* the
Oath that is to ratify it, may be also so far conditional, but what is due in
the former kind, to wit, by absolute and unalterable rule, or precept of
Justice, cannot be sworn to conditionally; for that would be no ratification to
it, nay it would be a debilitating, and rendering more insecure of that which
was simply due without an oath, a condition put into your oath, being a very
probable medium to persuade the swearer that he is no otherwise bound to the
things sworn, then upon that Condition* which being broken by the party sworn
to, he will easily conceive himself altogether free: Thus the absolute Rule
will receive impeachment, and not strength in its obligation by the conditional
oath: such an oath therefore is in its end inconsistent with it.

Reply. 1 This Reason is much like to the First, and has its Answer there:
But, 2 It may be demanded, Whether obedience to Magistrates, be more necessary,
or due by more absolute unalterable Rule and Precept of Justice, then obedience
from Servants (which came free, and upon Covenant to their Masters) is? If not,
then, Whether obedience to Masters may not (and ought not to) admit of a
Conditional promise or oath to the performance of it, without any inconsistency
with the necessity of such a duty: and if, in the necessary obedience of
Servants, such a Conditional promise or oath may be admitted, Why not in the
necessary obedience of Subjects to Magistrates? And, 3 It may be asked how, and
when obedience to Magistrates came to be necessary* He will not say, That before
Magistrates were, obedience was necessary to them; but Magistrates, and
obedience to them, came in together. But how came Magistracy* (I speak of
individual persons put into the Office of Magistracy) Not by an immediate call
from God, as David did and some few others which Scripture mentions: nor were
they (originally) born to that superiority over the people, but were first
exalted to that power by the Choice of the People: then there was a voluntary
Covenant at first betwixt them: then (if the people looked at their own good)
the Covenant was Conditional, and so their Oath (which was to confirm it) was
Conditional, and so their obedience (which is the thing sworn to) was
Conditional, and so it was necessary not otherwise but upon a Condition. And so
it is commanded in Scripture, not otherwise but upon the Condition it was first
grounded on, and in that way it is necessary and unalterable, the Condition
being observed upon which it was built and bottomed; and more then this cannot
be inserted by divine Precept. And whereas he makes this distinction, A thing
sworn may become due either by rule of Equity, or by a voluntary Covenant: It
appears by what has been presented, That both members of the distinction
without jarring meet in this. 1, There is a voluntary Covenant which is
Conditional; and 2, There is a Rule of Equity necessitating upon that Covenant
and Condition; so that obeying comes to be due both ways. 4 A Conditional Oath
does not weaken, but strengthen such obedience which is necessary and
unalterable upon such a Condition. For the Magistrate comes to be assured by
such an Oath, that he shall be obeyed, upon his good behavior, and just, and
upright carriage in his Office, and that the people will not be fickle to him,
if he be faithful in Government to them. After his large dispute against the
Conditionality of the Oath, he proceeds to arguing against the Mutuality of it;
and First he mentions so me of the words in the Proposition, and blames them
for defectivenesse in point of cleernesse, in reference to the Sense in which
the Position is to be understood, and takes occasion thereupon to speak of
different senses, and gives one sense which he supposes will not be owned by
me; and then an apter sense, which he supposes was in my Intention: For thus
he speaks;

1, His words sound, as if he would have the same oath to be taken mutually
both by Prince and Subjects, which he will not, cannot (I suppose) own to be
his sense.

2, But the apter sense, and that which (I suppose) was in his intention, is,
That the Ruler and Subject, should each swear to his respective duty; the
Prince, That he will Command and Govern lawfully: the Subject, That he will
perform all lawful Homage, and Obedience.

Reply. And what needed so much ado? Was the Proposition somewhat defective in
words? And was it not immediately made full in the Reason which followed the
Position? So that he needed not to have said, For want of Explanation he must
observe some different senses applyable to my words; nor needed he to have
said, ( I suppose) for he might have been at a certainty, what my sense was;
For my words in the Reason are these, It is against the good of the Subject
that he should be further, or longer bound to the Prince, or Ruler, to submit
to him, then the Prince or Ruler is bound to the Subject to Rule well, and to
Administer Justice rightly. Let the Reader judge, whether he needed to have
come with his different senses: or, whether the different senses that he brings
were applyable to my words, when these words were before him.

After he pretends to have found out the sense of the Proposition, he concludes
it false. But how does he make it out?

1 He says, We read of many undoubtedly righteous Oaths in Scripture,
undertaken in Covenants between men and men, wherein one party only swears,
and not both mutually, Genesis 24. 2. 47. 31. Exodus 13. 19. Josh. 2. 12. 9. 15.
14. 9 Judge. 15. 12. 1 Samuel 19. 6. 1 King. 1. 13. 29. 51. 2 Samuel 19. 23. Neh. 5.
12. Jer. 38. 16.

Reply. The Scriptures that he quotes to prove undoubtedly righteous single
Oaths, taken by one party, and not by both parties, are Oaths most of them of
another kind then that which the Position speaks of, viz. Oaths, the
performance whereof lies only on one party, the other is to receive advantage,
but not to do any thing: but the Oaths that the Posi^ion speaks of to be
Mutual, are of things and duties which both parties are equally with respect to
their several places bound to by the Command of God: For the Command to Obey,
lies no more stricktly upon the Subject, then the Command to Rule, lies upon
the Prince; and these Scriptures have been most of them Answered before: Only
in Josh. 2. 12. and Jer. 38. 16. the performance whereof lies on both sides,
and whether the Oath were reciprocal, is not so clear; but conditional it was,
as from Josh. 2. 17, etc. Jer. 38. 24. appears; and conditional in the very
sense I have urged: So as that they were discharged if the Condition were not
kept; and they assented to the Condition whether they swore, or not; and they
are full against him as any text in Scripture.

2 He says, We find in Scripture, Oaths of Allegiance taken by Subjects to the
Rulers, without the reciprocal swearing of the Rulers to them 2 King. 11. 4.
Judge. 11. 10. Chapter 36. 13
; such was that engagement, Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18.

Reply. 1 To the Scriptures in the Margent, I have Answered before, yet this
may be added, That if there be some examples of Oaths of Allegiance without
reciprocal swearing through over much credulity of the Subject, or because in a
necessitous condition, yet the equity and justice of the thing, viz. That the
Oath ought to be reciprocal, is nothing less by such examples. 2 That in Josh.
1. 16, 17, 18. which he seems to lay most weight upon, is rather against him
then for him, for it was conditional as the last words in Verse. 18. show, Only
(say they) be strong and of good courage: It is as if they should have said,
Upon this Condition we will harken unto thee as unto Moses before, if thou be
such as Moses was, if thou be strong and of a good courage to do the work of
the Lord in thy Place and Office; they require as much from him in his Place,
as they promised to him in their places: for there is not any thing spoken of
an Oath, on either side.

3 He says, Oaths are never to be taken, but necessarily.

1 When the matter is of great weight.

Reply. Is there not as much necessity for the Prince to swear, as the People?
Is not Ruling well as weighty, if not much more weighty then Obeying? Has not
faithfulness in Ruling, begotten Loyalty? Has not a wise, just PRINCE, made
an obedient, upright People?

2 When it cannot otherwise be sufficiently confirmed.

Reply. This Reason of an Oath is much more strong in reference to the Prince,
then to the People: For when once the Prince has the Power of the Kingdom in
his hand, What can be better security of his faithfulness, then his Oath? As
for the people, if they swear not, yet if they be disloyal, their lives, and al
they have, are in the Princes hands. But it is nor so with the Prince, til
there has been a Contestation first, and his power is broken.

3 It comes to pass sometimes, That the Performance is only on one Party.

Reply. But that is not the case betwixt Prince and People, for the performance
must be on both sides, else the Commonwealth is miserable.

4 Sometimes there is other Satisfactorie Assurances given besides an Oath.

Reply. But what is that the Prince can give to satisfy the People besides
swearing, and yet the People cannot give the same, but they must needs swear?

5 Sometimes the danger of the breach lies only, or more on one Party then
another.

Reply. So much more need has the Prince to swear then the People, because the
danger of the breach lies most on his part. For, for one Instance that can be
given of the Peoples disloyalty to a just Prince, there may be twenty given of
the Princes unjust oppressive carriage to an obedient People.

6 Sometimes there is other remedies, if there should be a breach, then the
forfeiture of an Oath.

Reply. I hope the Remedy whatever it be besides an Oath, may be applicable to
the People, if they break, as to the Prince, if he break.

4 He says, But suppose the case, that it be as necessary for security, that
the King swear to the people, as the people to the King; yet if (through
overmuch credulity, or otherwise) it be that the people do swear, and not the
Prince, this cannot be the least color of the nullifying of the peoples Oath:
For that which makes the Oath obliging, is, That in a just and possible matter
promised, God is invocated as a witness of the promise.

Reply. Grant it be as necessary, that the King swear as the People, and that
through the credulity of the people the King swear not, or that through fear of
incensing him, they dare not demand an Oath from him, and yet through his power
and wrath they are forced to swear to him, (and this is the case many times)
and suppose that the King after this Oath of the People to him turn Tyrant, and
prey upon them, Is this Oath of the people obligatory, or is it not? I have
Asserted that it is not, and for this Reason, Because whether the King swear,
or swear not, he ought to do the thing that he should swear, or else not expect
that which he makes the People swear to, because the justice of the thing in
the peoples Oath, depends upon a Condition, that the King perform his duty. For
its impious and wicked for a people to promise, much more for a people to
swear, that though it should come to pass, that the King should turn all his
power and force against them to destroy them, yet he shall be their King, and
they will obey him still, while any of them are le^t alive. And this man
himself, says nothing in his Reason which he renders Contradictory to this,
but what rather serves to confirm it. For he says, That which makes the Oath
obliging is, that in a just and possible matter promised, God is invocated, as
a witness of the Promise: He says, The matter must be just that is promised
and sworn to, or the Oath is not obliging: now the justness of such a promise
and oath, is the Condition upon which it is made, viz. That the Prince Rule for
their welfare, and not for their Ruin, otherwise the Subject is most inhumanly
unjust against himself, and God is invocated to such wickedness, which is high
presumption in those persons that do it: and the thing is not ratified thereby,
but repentance ought rather to be showed. But (indeed) it is to be supposed,
that the people swear not at any time, but that at least this Condition is
tacit, in the Oath; and that the King is engaged unto his part with the people
in the same oath. And if any man argue otherwise and say it is not so; I say
then, Such an Oath is unlawful, and holds not longer, then in the true scope
and extent of it, it ought to hold.

After that apter sense of ( Mutual) which he says is my sense, he comes to
give another sense of ( Mutual swearing) which he says is stricter then the
former, and that is says he, When not only two persons swear to each other
their respective parts, but both swear with a mutual respect; that is, The
Obligation of the one party, has a respect to, and a dependence upon the
performance on the other party: as when one man swears to give another so much
for his Land, the other swears to convey to him his Land for so much Money, in
this kind the breach of the one, is the releasment of the other.

Reply. This is not another sense, but the same with the former; for this is in all mutual Oaths that are made by two persons to each other reciprocally, they
are Oaths made with mutual respect; that is, The obligation of the one party,
has respect to, and dependence upon the performance of the other party, as in
Genesis 21. 31, 32. betwixt Abimel^ch and Abraham. Genesis 31. 52, 53. betwixt Jacob
and Laban. Josh. 2. 12. 17. to 21 betwixt Rahab and the Spies. 1 Samuel 30. 15.
betwixt David and the Amalekite. 1 Samuel 20. 16. 17. betwixt David and Jonathan.
1 King. 2. 42, 43. betwixt Solomon and Shimei. 2 King 11. 17. betwixt Ioash and
the People. And where will it be found otherwise, but still in mutual Oaths of
two persons to each other, they are with mutual respect, and the obligation of
the one, has respect to, and a dependence upon the performance of the other,
so as the breach of the one, is the releasment of the other, as in the Oath
betwixt the Spies and Rahab is most clearly manifest. For there it is expressed
in so many words, and it is perpetually implied in all other such like Oaths
which we read of in the Scripture, where it is not expressed. Of this nature
are Oaths betwixt Prince and People if they be mutual, (as (by the grant of
this man) in Englands case they be) then they be with respect: for the Prince
does not swear to give himself up for the Peoples good, to be shepherd of
them, and Captain over them for naught, but for such homage, obedience, fear,
duty, tribute, custom, revenue, to be performed and given by the People uuto
him: So the People do not swear to give unto the Prince so much fear,
observance, subjection, revenue, absolutely and clearly, but for such a work of
faithful Ruling and Governing them. And it is yet more clear in the Relation
betwixt Pastor and People, the Covenant betwixt them is with respect, and the
obligation of the one party, has respect to, and dependence upon the
performance of the other. The People do not promise or engage to give so much
of their Estates for the maintenance of him absolutely and clearly, but with
respect to his laboring in the Word and Doctrine among them; neither does the
Pastor engage absolutely and clearly so to labor amongst them, and give out his
strength in such sort for their good, but with respect to such double honor, as
the Scripture obliges them to give him. And yet it cannot be denied but that
(notwithstanding this mutual respect that such an Engagement has to each
other, and dependence which the one has upon the performance of the other)
both of them are tied and engaged to God, and that the duties which they do
perform are duties to God, because God has commanded them such duties, but
not without, but upon such mutual respect to each other, and it is no duty to
God without this respect, for a people to give this double honor to him, that
will not Rule well, and labor in the Word and Doctrine among them, but they
ought rather in discharge of their duty to God, to remove, or cause to be
removed such a person from his office, and so to withdraw their double honor
from him: and so it is in these relative duties betwixt Prince and people. And
so let this man (if he can) or any other, show by divine Rule a more absolute
engagement betwixt Prince and people, then betwixt Pastor and people.

But he says, This sense of swearing cannot come in to be meant in the point
of Controversy: But why so?

1 Says he, Such an Oath is plainly Conditional, as when one gives so much
Money for so much Land, he gives it not cleerlie and absolutely, but for so
much Land.

Reply. So it is in this case plainly Conditional, perhaps not always expressly
Conditional: If a people should say nothing to him that is to be their Pastor
of any duty that he is to perform to them, but only promise such maintenance
to him, the Condition of Preaching to them is plainly enough implied though not
expressed. It cannot rationally be conceived, that they would give so much to
him, as being their Pastor, for doing nothing: so of the People it may be said,
in reference to their Allegiance to their Prince, that there is no absolute
necessity that the Condition should be expressed, especially in the case of the
Subjects of this Kingdom, because the King was sworn to Rule according to the
Laws, and that was the Condition of al after Oaths taken by the people to him.

2 He says, The Oath of Allegiance is granted to be absolute by the Author of
the POSITIONS, and disputed against by him, as such.

Reply. It is a mistake to say so: The Dispute was to prove, That either the
Oath was Conditional, or ought to be; was Mutual, or ought to be; if lawful:
And therefore if broken on the Kings party, then the people are absolved. And
though he himself was satisfied that it was Conditional, and Mutual, and with
Respect; yet because others did deny it, therefore he expressed himself in a
disjunctive [either was mutual or ought to have been.]

3 But says he, The Kings Oath is absolute, and binds without dependence on
the Subjects Loyalty; no man will say, That the King is discharged from Ruling
justly, and may turn Tyrant, if the People fail in their Oath toward him.

Reply. It is denied, That the Kings or Peoples Oaths bind without dependence
any more then Pastors and Peoples Engagements do: and though no man will say,
That the King is discharged from Ruling justly, and may turn Tyrant; yet
rational men will say, That he may cease his Ruling, and lay down his Office of
Government, if the People generally withold their Subjection, and his Revenue
from him. Nor can any one rationally think, That the Governor should still carry
the weight of such a Trust over such a People, who do withdraw their fear, and
reverence, and obedience from him, and will pay him no tribute, and withhold his
Re^enue, and abuse his person: but that he may in such a case, be absolved from
all engagement in reference to such a Function over such a People, and so the
case is with the Subject. There is difference betwixt non adjuration, and male
adjuration, the latter is in no case warrantable, but the former is justifiable
upon the breach of the people in disloyalty to him.

4 But (says he) such mutual Oaths are entered into by both Parties at the
same time, but neither does the King nor Subjects swear to each other at the
same time.

Reply. This is not necessary in mutual Oaths betwixt two parties which are
with respect; such mutual Oaths may be betwixt two Princes of diverse Nations,
and so depending the one upon the performance of the other; that if there be a
breach on either side, the other is free upon it from such obligation, and yet
these Princes not meet together, nor swear at one time.

5 Such mutual respective Oaths, have only place in matters arbitrarie, which
are in men's choice to do, or not to do before they swear, but not so in these
relative duties betwixt Kings and Subjects.

Reply. It is arbitrary (though not in reference to Government it self, yet) in
reference to the disignation of the person or persons that are to be put in
place of Government, before there be a Pact or Covenant betwixt such person or
persons, and such a people whom they are to Govern. And though there be a
necessity after such Pact and Covenant, yet such necessity is bottomed on such
a Pact or Covenant, and so it is not an absolute necessity, but a necessity
upon such a Condition. The duties of Masters and Servants, are necessary in the
general, but particularly considered in reference to this or that person giving
up themselves to be Servants unto such and such Masters, it is merely arbitrary
before the Pact, and there is place for such respective Oaths betwixt them,
and that the one breaking, the other is free upon it.

But he goes on to consider of the Reason of the Position, viz.

That it is against Equity and Reason, that the one should be further or
longer bound to the other, then the other is bound to him: And he says, That
if that be granted, yet there is no necessity that the Oath be mutual, for the
Prince may be bound, and is bound, and it cannot he otherwise, but that he
should be bound to his duty as long as the Subject is to his, by Scripture,
Conscience, and positive Laws, and yet not sworn at al.

Reply. If al be granted that he says, let the Reader judge whether if the
Subject be bound to the Prince by Scripture, Conscience, and positive Laws,
and by an Oath to the Prince over and above all the other, and the Prince be
bound to the Subject by Scripture, Conscience, and positive Laws, but not by an
Oath; Whether the Subject be not further bound to the Prince, then the Prince
to him. But in this particle ( further) he meddles not, which yet was in the
Reason of the Position: but says, The Prince is bound (and that as long) but
he says not ( and that as far) and yet he would seem to grant the whole
Reason, and notwithstanding deny the mutual Oath, but it is without Reason.

The Proposition remaining still in strength (as I suppose) and the Reason of it
also, notwithstanding all that has been endeavored by him against it; the
Consequence remains firm also. And as he disables them not, so need not I to
confirm them.

Only in the end of the Consequences there was (for further illustration rather
then confirmation) the Parliaments Fact, in taking up Arms produced as suitable
to those inferences, and serving to clear the Oath of Allegiance to be
Conditional, and not Absolute; to be Mutual, and not Single; in the very
account of the Parliament it self, who best understood it. For had not they in
that Oath of Allegiance sworn with this limitation in their own understandings,
( viz. According to the Laws of the Kingdom) as the Condition whether expressed
or not, and had they not known that the King was sworn to them, to Govern
according to the Laws, and that these two Oaths had mutual respect to each
other, this Oath of Allegiance in an absolute sense Considered, had they not
renounced it as unjust and wicked, would have made them guilty of disloyalty
and Rebellion in taking up of Arms, which I am sure my Antagonist (whoever he
might be) would not charge them with.

Now unto this he Answers two things:

1 He says, If their taking up of Arms against the King were Rebellion, their
absolution from their Oaths by the Kings breach of his, could not unmake, or
make it no Rebellion; for the debt of Obedience is existent in the Subject
before any Oath taking, and it is not founded on swearing, but only confirmed
by it, and therefore survives after the Oath should be dissolved.

Reply. But in this argumentation, he builds upon that which I have often
destroyed, and takes that for granted, which I have often denied, viz. (That
there is an absolute debt of Obedience to this or that Magistrate) which is not
so, save only upon mutual Covenant, which comes afterward to be confirmed by
Oath, and from which by the breach of Covenant and Oath upon the Magistrates
side, the Subject is acquitted, viz. From his Oath and Covenant together; so
that the one does not survive the other, as in all mutual Oaths it is; there is
an absolution from the oath, and from the thing (of which the oath is)
together; as in Josh. 2. 20. appears: they would be quit of the oath, and not
only so, but of the thing also, if she kept not within, or should discover.

2 He says, We must therefore say, as the Parliamentarian party has believed,
declared, and in many Treatises in Print, maintained al along the late Wars,
That the Arms of the Parliament were not against any brance of the Subjects
Allegiance, or the Oath for it (which they professed still to persist in, yea,
and in the act of their Arms bearing, Covenanted to yield and maintain) but
concordant with the same. In as much as they enterprized not against the Kings
Person, his State, or Government, they went not against his Majesty, his Heirs,
or Successors, they joined not against his Crown and Dignity, the Rights
whereof, and the Bounds of the Subjects Obedience, are perfixed by the Laws of
the Realm, the ultimate interpretation whereof, is in the Parliament which
declared their Arms to be for, and agreeable to the Laws. The King, as King,
acts only by his Courts and Laws, what he does besides, or against these, is
the man's, not the Kings acting. What is done by Order of the Courts of Justice,
and by virtue of the Laws, is done (though against his personal presence or
command, yet) for the King, his Crown, and Dignity.

Reply. In this sense that he puts upon the taking up of Arms, there is enough
to ratify and confirm that which al along I have been contending for; and
there is nothing that contradicts me, but what contradicts it self. I shall
take up some passages in the Relation which he makes:

1 He says The King, as King, acts only by his Courts and Laws, and what he
does besides, or against, these is the man's, not the Kings acting: It is as
much as if he should say, The King falls under a double consideration, as a man,
and so when he departs from Laws, and from Justice, he is only to be looked upon
as such, and as a King, and so only when he keeps to his Laws, and to his
Courts of Justice. Now we know that the oath of Allegiance was made to the
King, as King; and so the Subject has nothing to do with him in point of
obedience or Allegiance, save only as King; that is, When he Rules according to
Law. Again, The oath of Allegiance being to a legal King, when the person of
the King is a Tyrant, and breaks al Laws and overthrowes al Courts of Justice,
where is then this legal King? and if there be none, the subject is then
discharged from their oath of Allegiance.

This distinction betwixt the man and the King, is but a notional conceit; for
take away the man, and where is then the King? and sure I am, that God will make
no such distinction when he shall come to judge Princes; but al their
miscarriages in Government, and irregularities in the managing of their Offices
shall be charged upon them as Princes set over the People: then it will not be
said, What he does besides, or against the Laws and Courts of Justice, is the
man's, not the Kings acting; it will appear then, That Kings, as Kings, have
offended, and been unjust and tyrannous.

2 He says, That the Parliament has declared their Arms to be for, and
agreeable to the Laws; that is, for the King ruling by Laws: and against the
King; that is, the person that carries that name, which is indeed but the man,
when he violates al Laws in Ruling; for they were only sworn to the King,
acting by his Courts and Laws; and what is this, but the same that I have
asserted in the Positions, viz. That if the Subject were absolutely engaged by
oath to the person of the King, whether he Rule well or il, and that this oath
were lawful, the PARLIAMENT must needs be disloyal in taking up Arms against
the person of the King.

3 He says, That which is against the Kings personal Presence, or Command, is
not against the King: that is, is not against the King in Law, or against such
a one as the King ought to be according to Law. So that he grants, That
Allegiance is not to a personal King, or his Commands, unless he be a legal
King, and a King according to Law; for things may be done against his personal
Presence and Commands, wherein he concurs with the Positions, but contradicts
himself: For, where is any place for passive obedience, if that be true, which
yet is one of his Reasons of unconditional, or absolute Allegience.

4 Now whereas he says, The Parliamentarie Party enterprized nothing against
his Person, etc. There seems to be a contradiction in it; For he says, They
declared their Arms to be for the Laws, and so against all that opposed them,
which his Person, personal Presence, and Commands often did. And (indeed) did
they not make his Person fly from place to place? And was not his Person often
in danger, as the persons of those that fought under him were? And was not his
Person secured in Holmesby-House? And had their Allegiance been to his Person
as distinct from the Laws, they had violated it.

And whereas there is mention made of the Covenant which they entered into to
preserve his Person, and that in the very times of their Arms bearing: It is
manifest, That they bind themselves first to maintain Religion, and the
Liberties of the Kingdom; and then in Religion and Liberties to preserve his
Person and Honor, and no further, but as might stand with them; which shows
that they were bound to them firstly by Law, and not to any Allegiance to his
Person against them, but so far as they might preserve them: and therefore in
the very time of this Covenant, they are found in ways of chastizing him,
though with a scope of preserving him, if possibly Religion and the Subjects
Liberty may subsist with it. And first, they correct him in his Instruments,
and then in Person in securing him, which was not very honorable unto him, but
the preservation of Religion, and Liberty of the Subject forced them to it. At
last their Counsels were to make no more Addresses to him, but to lay him
aside, and to settle Religion and Liberty without him, and this was more
dishonarable to him; but their Covenant which bound them first to Religion,
etc. compelled them to it: and there was yet further liberty in the Covenant
left for them to cut him off, and his also, if the necessity of the
preservation of Religion and Liberty of the Subject should require it. And
indeed it is not rational to think, That they could have a lawful power,
without contradicting the oath of allegiance or the Covenant, of inflicting
lesser Censures and Penalties upon him, and yet want power to inflict higher
and greater punishments if the nature of the Crime deserved them, and the
necessity of conserving Religion and Liberty required them.

But he comes to consider of the Second Exception against the Oath of
Allegiance which the Position mentions, viz. as there is in it, A swearing to
the Kings Heirs, he mentions my words in the Reason that I lay down of my
Exception against it, viz. Who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool,
etc. And he mentions my Consequence, viz. The Oath of Allegiance was in that
branch of it an unlawful Oath. And he makes this Answer;

First, I allow of the Antecedent, but utterlie deny the Consequence of it.

Reply. But it must be understood that I mean it (as it is now made use of, and
insisted upon, and urged by many who have taken it) of an absolute Oath to them
whatsoever they prove to be. For the strength of the Reason which I bring
against it, lies in these words, They may bind themselves therebie to their own
hurt and ruin; which if it be not absolute they cannot do: therefore I dispute
against it, as absolute as I did against the other branch of it.

But let his Reason of the whole CONSEQUENCE be weighed.

1 Says he, This Inference is directly contrary to that which Solomon in the
place cited, Eccles. 2. 19. makes from the words: Solomon's is, Yet shall he
have Rule over all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have
showed my self wise under the Sun; This man's is, (in effect) because no man
knows, whether he will be a wise man or a fool, therefore he shall not have
Rule.

Reply. 1 Let the text be weighed and truly examined, and it will appear that
Solomon speaks not of the kingdom which he was to leave to his Son, whether a
wise man or a fool, but he speaks of his labor, wherein he had labored in
getting Riches, in gathering Wealth, in building Houses, in planting Vineyards,
in improving of his earthly Estate in the World. He shows there is a vanity in
it, His Son shall have Rule over al. In Verse. 18. he says, He hated all his
labor because of this; which cannot be meant of his labor in the Kingdom in
Government: and it is suitable to that in Job 14. 21. Psalm. 49. 10.

2 If Solomon should mean it of the Rule of the Kingdom, yet he speaks not of
it as a thing that he did approve of, but of it as that which he counted vanity.

2 He says, The same Reason if it hold, would be against any Oath or
Engagement to any Rulers in being whatsoever they are, for say they become to
maturitie, and for the past and present time have given proof, yet who knows
what they that are now wise and just (morallie) may hereafter come to be? The
Scripture supposes, That not only a just Father may have a wicked Son, but a
righteous man (in Profession and External carriage) may turn from his carriage,
etc.

Reply. 1 This Reason of his wherewith he disputes against the Exception that I
make, viz. Of Oaths to Heirs; is very strong against himself in reference to
absolute Oaths which he would maintain, and shows how dangerous absolute
oaths to Princes or other Governors are, and how destructive they may become,
if not only a just Father may have a wicked Son, but a righteous man (Prince or
other) may turn away from his Righteousness.

2 Notwithstanding there is this difference betwixt the one and the other, that
whilst a man swears Allegiance to a Prince, at present wise, and just, and
pious in profession, but mutual and changable he swears in judgment to him, he
exercises his understanding and best abilities in judging, beyond which a man
cannot go, nor does God require him to go: but in the other, he exercises not
his judgment at al, but swears handover-head to a thing he does not know what,
and to a person he knows not whom. And I would ask this man, Whether (if it
were so) in all the under-Offices in the Kingdom, That persons should come by
Succession to their Places? If all Judges should, and al Magistrates and other
persons in office should, whether there were not like to be a miserable
Commonwealth? And whether he durst reason after this manner, and make a
parity, betwixt choosing men just at present and wise men, and men of truth to
such places, and making such places Hereditary; because if there be an
Election, the persons that are good and able for such places may degenerate,
and if it be Hereditarie, they may be good, and can be but naught as the other
may prove to be. I would ask him also, Whether there be the like casuality in
reference to the one as to the other? Though there be a possibilty in reference
to both. And if this Reasoning be shameful in referenee to under Officers,
then, Why is it not so in reference to the supreme Officer? Besides, there is
an express Command for the one in Exodus 18. 21. 23. campared with Numb. 11.
16, 17. but where is there any Command for the other?

3 He says, This Consequence were it of force, would equally condemn all
promisorie Oaths, and other Covenants and Engagements between man and man; for
it cannot be foreseen in any, what the persons contracted with will prove.

Reply. This Reason of his (thus far of it) is of the same nature with the
former, and receives its Answer in the former; But he goes on, and says,

It is also against the Laws and Sanctions of those Nations in all ages, which
have settled successive Regalitie, or other Governments for longer then the
present possessors of the power endure.

Reply. Nations have so done, and they have been plagued in doing so also.

But (says he) its warranted by the Word of God. Israel offered a successive
power to Gideon, Judge. 8. 22. God himself instituted and bound his people to a
lineal GOVERNMENT, in David and in his Seed, 2 Samuel 12. 15. 2 Chronicles. 13, 5. The
Patriarchs power which was political, was successive; so was the Government of
the Jews for a hundred years, in the lineage of the Macabees.

Reply. 1 The instance in Gideon proves nothing; though Israel offered it,
being deeply affected with the greatness of the deliverance of which he was
instrumental, (and it was only a sudden expression of their love, and not so
deliberatly done) yet Gideon accepted it not.

2 As for Gods instituting it lineally in David: 1 God raised up Saul to the
Kingdom, but settled it not lineally in him; let the one be set against the
other. 2 It appears not that God settled it in the next of blood in David's
lineage, or that the next of blood had it; for Solomon was not his eldest Son
living, but Adonijah was before him, yet God gave it to Solomon not to
Adonijah; therefore this setting it in David's seed, is not pattern for
succession among us. 3 It was done in reference to Christ, who was to come from
David's loins, and was to have his Throne, Luke 1. 32.

3 The Patriarchal Government, whatever it was (for we are left much in the
dark about it; and this man makes use of it, but holds not out any light
concerning it) the Law of Nature instituted it, for the Father is greater then
the Child, and his Governor, from that act of his in begetting of him; as God
is Governor of the World, by that act of his in Creating it: but mixed
Families, as in Commonwealths, the People make their own Father, that is,
their own Governor. And they ought to do it with the best understanding they
have.

4 The example of the Maccabees proves nothing. For they were Saviors whom God
raised up successively, and therefore they might well Rule successively; but for
the thing it self, God seems to di^alow it, for Israel had a Government settled
by God amongst them, before Saul's time, but not Kingly, nor in Succession, but
of another kind. And this Government they liked not, but would have a
Government according to the Nations, viz. Kingly Government in Succession; but
God was displeased with it, and said they had rejected him in it.

4 He says, We have Scriptural examples of an uncontroverted integrity, of
Oaths to Princes and their Heirs, and to Princes in their young* unripe, and
untryed years. Take (says he) that instance of Abraham's swearing to Abimelech,
his Son, and his Sons Son, Genesis 21. 23, 24. And that of David's making Solomon
King in his own life time* when he was young and tender, 2 Chronicles. 23. 1. and 29.
1. And that of Jehojada's and the Peoples making of Joash King, and swearing to
him when he mas but seven years old, 2 King. 11. 4. 21.

Reply. 1, Abraham swore to Abimelech, and to his Son, and to his Sons Son, not
to deal falsely with them, but according as Abimelech had dealt kindly with him.
This was not only a safe oath without danger in Abraham, but a just Oath, and
of a thing necessary in it self to be done; and of an unchangable nature so far
as concerns falsnesse, and it was a mutual oath, and also therein conditional
so far as concerns kindness, and therefore no way applicable to the oath of
Allegiance in reference to Heirs which (as was said in the Reason) may bring
Ruin, and is like to prove sooner or later, pernicious. 2 That instance of
David in making Solomon King in his life time while young and tender, has
little strength in it. Solomon was the person appointed thereunto of God, and
therefore he was sure to be competently furnished with abilities for it from
God, what ever his age might be; and he grown up to such years, that excellent
Wisdom, and an excellent Spirit fit for Government appeared in him. 3 That of
Ioash has more in it in reference to unripe years, but reaches not the case,
because he was all that was left of those Heirs that were to succeed in David's
lineage in the Kingdom, which God had established by Covenant upon David and his
seed.

2, He denies the two parts of the Consequence, 1 That part, viz. The Oath is
not in judgment, because no man knows what the Heir will prove. But what are
the words wherein he denies it?

1 It may be (says he) in judgment so far as a future contigencie can be
deliberated upon, and this may be concluded on advisedlie (as morallie certain)
that it is better to have the Crown settled in a Line wherebie sometimes a
vicious person may be advanced, then to have it under Election at every
personal change: This has been the experimented Maxim of the wisest States.

Reply. The true sense of this Answer is, That there is no place for
deliberation in swearing to Heirs, of whom we can know nothing how they will
prove, save only how to prevent a greater mischief which is supposed will come
by new Elections upon every change, which wise States do decline: but what evil
there is at al in a well Governed State by new Elections at every change I am
not able to reach, but experience will instruct, That the greatest, and longest
lasting Wars have been, where Competitors in point of Title, have contended for
the Crown. And how frequently one has supplanted another to obtain the
Kingdom, Stories do plentifully show.

2 If it were not in judgment (says he) this defect makes not an Oath unlawful
as to the nullifying of it, a rash Oath (if of a lawful thing) binds, as before
was proved, Judge. 21. 2. 7. 1 Samuel 14. 24. 37. Josh. 9. 14, 15.

Reply. 1 Nor did I ever assert, That an Error in Judgment when the Oath is
righteous in the nature of it, might be broken, though there are cases which
are very dubious. 2 The Scriptures which he cites are none of them in a
righteous thing, nor did they al of them bind, nor ought they to have done,
therefore he mentions them improperly. For, First, That Oath which the Tribes
did make, of not giving their Daughters to the Benjamites, after they had
cruelly cut off all the Women appertaining to that Tribe, was an unrighteous and
cruel Oath, and should not have bound them. Secondly, That Saul should lay a
Cu^se upon the People, that tasted any thing til evening, was also not only a
rash, but an unmerciful, and unjust Oath; and Jonathan said as much of it when
he heard of it, so far was he from being troubled that he had broken it, and he
thought not himself guilty of death, Shall I die (says he) for this? And the
People rescued him, and the Oath stood not in that branch of it. And that of
Josh. 9. respecting the Gibeonites was a sinful Oath in the matter of it, as it
proved though they knew it not, as well as a rash Oath; and there was Error
personae in it also, which is enough to break any Oath, and therefore there was
special reason why it held, and it reaches not to us. And it is against this
man's own Position, That an unrighteous oath in the matter of it should hold;
now this oath to Heirs is of this nature, not only rash, and not in judgment,
but unrighteous, and therefore ought not to hold.

2 He denies that part of the Consequence, which concerns righteousness in an
oath, which I lay down in the Position thus, Nor is it a righteous Oath for the
Subject may bind himself to his own hurt, yea ruin. His words are these;

Though the Subject may not bind himself to what is necessarily, or at the
time of his swearing may appear probably to tend to his hurt or ruin; yet he
may swear (intending the public good) to that which is of a mutual nature, and
may in the event turn to his own hurt and ruin. And might he not so swear, yet
having so sworn he is bound to stand to his Oath, Psalm. 15. 4. Josh. 9. 15.
Ezekiel. 17. 13. 1 Samuel 14. 26. 28. 37. Judge. 21. 5. 15. 18. which is
contradictorie to what this man here says.

Reply. He states the Question amiss, and puts the case so, as that it is not
the case, for to swear to Heirs from generation to generation, though it be
uncertain which Heirs, and at whattime such Heirs will prove corrupt and unjust
in adjuration, yet it is more then probable (even as certain as that there will
be change of weather, when yet for the present it is fair and pleasant) that
such Heirs will stand up in ensuing generations.

2 Though there may possibly be cases in which oaths that were taken with a
good intent, but proving accidentally pernicious to the takers, must be kept:
yet if this be asserted by the Answerer, That mere voluntary arbitrary oaths
made without any Condition, and at the best (if not forced) in favor of such a
Family, and intended for mutual good, but proving ruinous to the makers, and
serving only to strengthen cruelty and unrighteousness in the persons to whom
made, that such oaths ought to be kept, has neither the color of Reason nor
Scripture for it; and this is the case directly in such absolute oaths to
Heirs: Nay, in the case which himself makes, it will not hold that such an oath
should be kept: For suppose a man should swear to another to go to such a City
for him at such a time, to effect such a business; but he afterward comes to
understand, That at his return there are persons that will be in ambuscado to
take away his life; ^^ this man bound to keep his oath, if the other will hold
him to it?

3 As for the Scriptures, they are not pertinent, and some of them have been
often Answered: That in Psalm. 15. 4. is meant of an oath that is made to another,
by which that other may be profited, and the person himself that sweirs, comes
at unawares to be thereby damified; such an oath oug^^ to be kept, though it be
to a man's loss: but the oath (...) we are discussing, is of another nature, an
oath by which not one (...) but a Nation, not disadvantaged somewhat, but even
sold (as it is (...) times) to ruin, or (what is worse, even) vassalage, by
which not the person to whom the oath is made is profited, but his base lusts
satisfied, to his own ruin at the last. That in Josh. 9. 15. is not exemplary,
as I have often said before; For I would ask, Whether if a Counterfeit Prince
(as stories make mention of many) had under pretense of being such a one ( viz.
The right Heir to the Crown) gained an oath of Allegiance, would that oath have
stood against the right Heir? I am sure this man will not assert it. The other
Scriptures have been answered already, therefore I pass them over.

If the Heir (says he) should misprove, his power is bounded by the Law, and
commixed with Parliaments if he vary, the power of Parliament, the Laws and
Liberty of the Subject, are the same. The late King confessed and declared a
remedy against Tirannie to reside in the Parliament, there may be prevention
then of the Kingdoms ruin, whatever the Heir prove, if the Kingdom be faithful
to it self.

Reply. But what are Parliaments, if the Prince will not call them, or may
speedily dissolve them? Or what are Laws, if the Prince will not keep them? Or
what are the Liberties of the Subject, if the Prince will overthrow them? As the
late King gave out, He would never have any more Parliaments. And if the Scots
had not frighted and forced him, probably he would have made his saying good.
What are al these, if the People be absolutely bound to Alleg^ance, whether the
Prince Rule well or il, and must obey in lawful things, and be passive in all the
rest? And suppose they may oppose, Will it not engender a War? and how that War
may issue, who can foretell? It may be a Kingdoms Ruin: here is then but a poor
Remedy, such an oath then as endangers all this cannot be lawful, nor is it fit
to be kept.

But he comes to examine my Third Exception against the Oath of Allegiance,
Which is against swearing to any one kind of Government absolutely wiihout
admitting of a change, for a greater good and benefit, and to prevent
inconvenience and hurtfulness, which has been observed to come through such a
Government.

And, 1 He blames the form of arguing in these words;

I observe (says he) there is a fault to be found with the whole Argument as
somewhat transgressing the Rules of Arguing: 1 In the Consequent, there is
something of the Error called Ignoratio Elenthi, for we swear not in the Oath
of Allegiance indefinitlie or indeterminatlie to uphold one Government
continually and not to change.

1, We swear only to his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, so that when
ever they are extinct (which may be sooner or later as divine Providence
disposes) the Oath of it self cease and determines.

Repl^ ^n swearing to Heirs, we swear to all that are of the blood, for the ^^
Heirs in Law, and while any of them are alive, the oath never cease^^; and the
blood has lasted near 600 years already, and may last probably enough til
Doomes Day. 2 Swearing to Successors (though not of blood, though all the blood
should be extinct) is a swearing that there shall be Successors, and that we will
obey them; And is not this to swear indefinitly to uphold one kind of
Government, where is then that fault, viz. Ignoratio Elenchi?

2. Notwithstanding the Allegiance sworn to the said persons, there is power of
change in the Government left to the mutual Consent of both parties, to wit,
those sworn to, and them swearing, as it is in all humane Contracts and Oaths
of this nature.

Reply. 1 But this man has sure forgotten, that which he has often asserted,
viz. That the Precept of Obedience to Civil Governors was without any
Condition, or reserve of a disingagement, or that it was due by absolute and
unalterable Rule, and without dependence upon another, and not with mutual
respect. Which (if he have spoken the truth) will be an impediment to this power
of change by mutual consent. However it be, its very palpable that he has
contradicted himself in his Assertions.

2 If the Oath be to Heirs and Successors, and binding, how can he say, They
may be discharged through mutual consent from that part of it which concerns
Heirs, without Contradiction again to himself, in reference to what he asserts
afterward in page 8. His words are these, Is not the Fifth Commandment the Law
of God? And those Precepts, Romans 13. 4. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Repetitions
and divine Ratifications thereof? And dotl^ not that Law Command every People
and Person Allegiance to their lawful Governors? And was not the King in Being,
and his Heirs in Capacity and Designation such?

Thus he Disputes against absolution from the Oath of Allegiance, not only in
reference to the King in Being, but also in reference to his Heirs in Capacity
and Designation, as a breach of the Law of God: and yet it seems by mutual
Consent, the King in Being, and the People may dispense with this Law of God,
and may cut off the Heirs from Regnancy, and change the Government, and not be
guilty of breaking this Law of God.

3 This grant that he makes of a power of change through consent, is as good as
nothing, for how unreasonable will it be to conceive, That a Person in
Possession of a Kingdom, will consent to loose it, and alter the Government?

The Second fault he finds in the form of Arguing, is in the Minor: There is
(says he) somewhat of the fallacy called Petitio principii, namely, That
any kind of Government granted to be lawful can prove inconvenient and hurtful
to the Subjects. The Governors (indeed) may prove bad, and so (indeed) a change
in the persons, or a regulating of them, is the apt remedy for that hurt: but
the Government is the Ordinance of God, and has a political goodness seated in
its being.

Reply. But he forgets himself again, and makes that to be Petitio Principii,
which he had before granted; and does afterward grant in that comparison which
he makes betwixt several kinds of Governments, and several Callings. He had
said, page 2. in that distinction of the goodness of means tending to the
happiness of a Community, That it was variable in relation to times and
people, and that that may be good in the nature of a means for one people or
time, that is not so for another. And he cites out of Aristotle Pol. Lib. 3.
these words, Est enim genus hominum natura varia comparatum atque affectum,
aliud servile, aliud colendis Regibus accommodatum, aliud timo craticum and
populare, atque horum generum suum cuique, est ac distinctum commodum. And more
there is exserted by him out of Aristotle to this purpose. And then afterward,
in comparing diversity of Governments to diversity of Callings, he does by
Consequence speak the same thing again, viz. That though al Governments be
according to God, warranted in the Scriptures, and in that sense Gods
Ordinance, as al lawful Callings are, (for there is no difference, but what may
be said of the one in this respect, may be said of the other) yet al
Governments are not alike good and profitable, alike congruous and agreeable,
alike safe and suitable to al people; nay, there may be a comparative evilnesse
and hurtfulnesse in some Governments to some Commonwealths; some
Commonwealths know how to put a bridle upon Kings better then others can: and
so it is in Callings, which is his own Comparison, some Callings though good in
themselves and Gods Ordinance in the sense before expressed, yet hurtful to
some persons, and pernicious also; and therefore to bind up to one Calling is
unlawful, especially when by experience it has been found hurtful, through the
unsutablenesse thereof; and so it is of Governments: and so he cavils against
that as not granted, which yet is granted by himself more then once.

Having done with the form of Arguing, he comes to consider of the Argument it
self, which is, That man may change Government for his greatest good, and must
change it, upon experience of the hurtfulnesse of it. And he flatly denies it,
and says,

No Position is more Anarchical then this is.

Reply. 1 But it was necessary, that first he should have done me right, and
taken up my words in a right sense, and then have showed the Anarchie in them;
but he puts a false sense upon my words, and then disputes against them. It is
said in the Argument, That man may change Government; he takes it up for every
particular man, and then cries out of Anarchie, but without al reason, for this
word [ man] is frequently in common phrase of Speech, and in Scripture
acception, the same with [ men] Let not (man) prevail, is the same with Let not
(men) prevail. Vain is the help of (man) is al one with Vain is the help of
(^en) and so here, man is put for men. And ( man) is sometimes in Scripture put
for Rulers, and the great ones amongst men; Who art thou, that thou should
be afraid of a (man) that is, a man in power and authority, who is wont to be a
terror unto other men; and so here, ( man) is put for the principal Men amongst
the People, and my inference which I make from 1 Pet. 2. 13. shows the sense in
which I understood it as he might easily have conceived (if he had pleased) It
is this, If an Ordinance of man, then man may change it; that is, If it be not
expressly commanded of God, but left to the liberty of man at the first, to
establish what form of Government he likes best, then man, that is, such men
which at first Erected it, may change it. Now these are chief men chosen out of
all the People (because all the people cannot meet together conveniently, nor
without confusion act) and which have the peoples power, if these set up Kingly
Government, they may upon experience of the hurtfulnesse of it, change it, and
establish another, which they apprehend more safe and profitable: And where is
the Anarchie in this Position or Assertion? And what is become of al his
Disproofs which he offers? Are they not Shafts shot against the wall, and break
themselves?

2 He himself confesses man may change it; For does he not say, That the
persons swearing, and the persons sworn to, may by mutual consent change it?
And are not these [ man]? And is not he become Anarchical now in his own
Position?

But let the strength of his Disproofs be weighed.

His First Disproof is from Prove. 24. 21. His words are these:

1, He says man may change the Government, etc. but the holy Ghost, Prove. 24.
21. says, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change. He allows a change to be for greater good: but the
holy Ghost tells us in the next words, verse. 22. For their Calamity shall rise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

Reply. The sense that he puts upon this Scripture is abusive to the place, and
a wronging of the holy Ghost therein: For the first words, Fear the Lord and
the King, serve to give light to all the rest, and the sense of the after words,
must carry respect unto those former words, Meddle not with those that are
given to change: It is as if he should say, Meddle not with those that will
change the Decrees and Precepts of God and the King, and so neither fear God
nor the King. The wife man admonishes that we would abstain from the
fellowship of those which detract from the Commands of God and the King,
speaking evil of them, and bringing others to the contempt of them; So
Iansenius upon the place. And Wilcock, Such as vary, viz. from the Command of
God and the King, agreeing together, are the persons that are given to change.
And Tremelius upon the place, understands it of persons violating the Commands
of God and of the King, and departing from the reverence of God and of the
King, in the disobedience of their Life and Conversation; the Calamity of such
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the Ruin of them both? that is, of such
who do so contemn God and the King, and others who are associated with them.
And what is this against changing the Government, when it is (by the Governors
breaking of Gods Laws and the Laws of the Land) become hurtful and ruinous.

2, He says, If men may change for the better, and must change, then are all
Oaths, Engagements, Promises of Obedience to Magistrates unlawful to be
undertaken; for all such Bonds are in relation to a present and particular
Government the Engagers are under, and they are not for the time present, or
for an instant*, but for a future Continuance. And there is in all such
Engagements a making over the right, which the Engagers have in the matter
Covenanted, to the persons engaged to: either then such a change may not, must
not be; or such Engagements may not, must not be by them undertaken. But the
Scripture is clear enough for such Engagements, Eccles. 8. 2. 2 King. 11. 4.
Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. Judge. 8. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13.

Reply. 1 All such Oaths should be Conditional, and then they cannot be
unlawful, as has often been showed: and as for the persons, where the chief
Power resides, viz. The Representatives of the people, they should never
absolutely bind their own hands in Engaging to any Governors or Magistrates
whatever; for they sell away the peoples Liberties, and betray their trust in so
doing. But they are to be the Eyes of the People, to spy out the ways of the
Peoples safety, and ^elicity. No more then the present Parliament ought to make
any absolute Engagement to any Council of State, but with Limitation of the
good of the Subject of which they must be Judges: and yet it will not follow
tha^ such an Engagement would be only for an instant, but it may be for long
Continuance, if the good of the Subject will permit it. And as for the People,
their swearing ought to be with Subordination to their Trustees which Represent
them. There is therefore no strength in the Consequence, viz. If there be a
liberty to Change, there must be no Engagement. There may be liberty of Change
in Servants that live with such Masters, yet there may be an Engagement to
them. There may be liberty of Change in people in reference to Pastors amongst
them, and yet there may be Engaging also. And as for the Scriptures that are
brought to prove the lawfulness of Engaging they might have been spared; for
the lawfulness of it is not denied, Provided, That such Engaging be
Conditional: and therefore they need no Answer.

3, This his Position not only disaloweth all such Engagement, but dissolves
the Natural and Moral Bond it self of Duty and Subjection to Magistrates; For
to be free to Change when a man judges it best, is to be free when he will; and
that is, Not to be tied at all, etc. and then a man may disobey Commands, and
take up Arms, and be exempt from the Sword of the Magistrate, because such an
Oath to continue any Government longer then he thinks it safe, says this
Doctor, is sinful.

Reply. It is not my Position, but his own Fiction, that dissolves al
Government: For I have not asserted [but he has imagined so much] That any man
may be free to Change when he judges it best, but I place the power of
erecting, and plucking up, and changing for the Commonwealths Good, where it
ought to be of right, in the Representatives of the People. As for that Title,
which in scorn he puts upon me, I pass it over, knowing, That it is more his
shame to do it, then mine to suffer it.

But says he, I would fain have him declare what thing Magistracy and
Subjection is.

Reply. The Apostle has declared, Romans 13. 1, etc. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. to
which I adhere: Magistracy is a Principallity or higher Power ordained of God,
and (yet in reference to the special form of Government and the persons holding
it) chosen, and immediately constituted by men, for their good; And Subjection,
is the Peoples acknowledging and obeying for their own good this Principallity,
to ordained of God, 2 Samuel 15 20. 1 Kim. 11. 26. 1. 12. etc. Act. 5. 36.
and so constituted by men.

4, He says, This Doctrine will acquit, and justify all the Conspiracies and
Treasons that ever were enterprised against the power of the Magistrate since
the World was, for all will be pretended to be for the great good of the
Commonwealth.

Reply. This is a great slander that is cast upon this Doctrine so far as it is
mine, for seeing that it only reserves a liberty in Commonwealths, to change
upon weighty Causes which their Representatives are Judges of, and Agents in;
it justifies no particular persons, no^ particular parties Risings, but it may
be truly said, That this Doctrine cuts the comb of al Tyranny, and will force,
and constrain Go^ernors to a good behavior.

But after he had so greatly aspersed and vilified this Doctrine (as he calls
it) which (indeed) was formed in his own heart; he approaches somewhat nearer
to the truth of my Assertion by way of Objection, but reaches not fully the
sense in which I intended it; His words are these, But it may be said, Not
particular men, or a lesser party, are to judge of the expedi^ncie, or take in
hand the change, but the whole People. And he argues against it thus,

1 He says, Seldo^e or never does a whole Nation under a lawful Government of
themselves, affect, or move to a Change, it is the flatterers and d^ceivers of
the people that lead the people to it.

Reply. If they do not affect, and move to a Change, yet if their
Representatives do it, who are not (I hope, in this man's account) the
flatterers and deceivers of the People, but the Trus^^es or the people for
their good, the people do it in them, unless they do in their Petitions
generally appear against it.

2 How the judgment and will of the whole Body of the people (says he)
should be known and declared unto execution, before particular men Act to a
Change of their own private judgment, is to me a thing unimaginable.

Reply. When the whole Body of a people have entrusted certain Selected ones
with their Power, their Trustees meeting together, and holding Corespondence
with the several Counties, and Places that Chose them; and sent them out in
their Name, mav act for a Change for the peoples good. And is this
unimaginable? Besides, If this were not, yet the Commonwealth consists of
rational, sociable Creatures, which meet at Church and Market (as the saying
is) that is, have occasions of the Communication of Councels; and so it comes
to pass, That the apprehensions of some men comes to be the Spirit of the most
of the People, nor is there any indirectnesse or unlawfulness in this.

5, He says, This necessity of retaining a power in Subjects to Change, and
of using it for a greater good, or removing of a temporal hurt, in opposition
to an Oath sworn against that Change, is directly against these Scriptures,
tying men that swear to their own ^urt not to Change, Psalm. 15. 4. Josh. 9. 18,
19. and condemning those that for such ends have receded from their Oaths,
Ezekiel. 17. 13. etc. Josh. 9. 15. compared with 2 Samuel 21. 2.

Reply. 1 These Scriptures have been often made use of, and often Answered; That
in Psalm. 15. 4. speaks of particular men's swearing for the ad^an^age and good
of another, and their own disadvantage; but speaks not of things that have
been, and may be pernicious; not to single persons alone, but to
Commonwealths; and not profitable to any, unless to saitsfie the lusts of
some parricular persons. And I would ask, Whether if a Commonwealth should
swear Succession of Judges in all the Courts within it self, should such an Oath
stand or not? Or, whether would not such an Oath, rather fall under his own
Exception, That the thing sworn to must be just and honest, else it is not
obliging* And I would know a Reason wherefore it should not much rather be
asserted of the supreme Judge*

2 If there has been such a perpetuating Oath to any Family, yet it is
Conditional while that Family carries it justly, and according to the Laws of
the Kingdom: and so it is, That as a Family advances it self sometimes by
virtue over the people, meriting their favor as Gideon did, and gaining their
Promise (yea oath) that they shall Rule, and their Son, and their Sons Son: So a
Family may by vice, dishonor it self; and lose that favor, and be adjudged
worthy to be slighted, and Cashiered; yea, Censured and Punished, as Saul's
house came to reproach and ignominy: And an Oath, or many Oaths, would not
have supported it, or confirmed it.

3 That Oath of Josh. 9. 18, 19. to the Gibeonites was ratified after they knew
that they were their neighbors, and after they knew that they had transgressed
the Commandment of the Lord (though unwillingly) by making peace with them;
and therefore if they had not had some special warrant from the Lord for it, it
would have been in them double iniquity to have confirmed it. But its more then
probable, That (being it was in Joshua's days, to whom God did much reveal
himself, and seeing they had mist it by rashness before in not enquiring at
Gods mouth) they went to God about it, and had his direction in it; therefore
the offense of Saul became so heinous, as 2 Samuel 21. 2. shows.

4 That in Ezekiel. 17. 13. etc. is not for his turn, but rather against him; For,
1 Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah King, who was not King til he made him; and so
he was of Nebuchadnezzar's setting up. 2 Nebuohadnezzar took of him an Oath to
be faithful, and he brake this Oath. 3 Therefore Nebuchadnezzar justly came
against him, and deposed him, and put out his eyes, and carried him to Babylon;
and so (indeed) originally it was the Commonwealth in their Representatives,
make the King (for their best Title was from Parliament) and they take him
sworn to Rule according to the Laws, and he breaks his oath, and they declare
the Commonwealth disingaged from him, and they not not only remove him, but
suffer not any of his Seed to Reign. Thus it appears he strengthens that by
Scripture which he would invalidate: Other Answers have been given besides
this, when this Text has been urged, to which I refer the Reader.

6, That Position so much insisted upon now a-dayes, of the Peoples tower to
depose, abolish, and alter the power of their Governors at pleasure, which is
actuallie settled, and both in it self lawful, and lawfully set over them, I
hold is a gross error.

Reply. I know no such Position insisted on in Terminis, as he lays down; nay,
I know, That al wise godly men do abhor such a Position, of deposing,
abolishing their lawful Governors at pleasure: But that Parliaments may do it
in the Peoples Name, upon just, and weighty Causes; is asserted, and will be
maintained.

But says he, Some of my Reasons in short are:

Reply. His Reasons might be over-passed with out any answer, because they be
Reasons of a Position of his own Invention, and will not be owned by them, at
whom he strikes at in it; yet they shall be considered of.

1, He says, Such a course (supposing the Governors dissent) is no other then
that resistance of the Ordinance of God, condemned Romans 13. 2.

Reply. 1 This Reason suits not with the Position, which he undertakes to
Confute, in the limitations that he gives it; For he says, That the Governors
must be lawfully set over, but the Governors, Romans 13. 2. were set over the
People by the Souldery, by the power of the Sword. And yet he says, To remove
such (when their continuance is for the peoples hurt, without their own
consent) is a resisting of an Ordinance of God, which (I believe) when he
considers more seriously of, will not appear truth in his own eyes.

2 The Text of Romans 13. has nothing at al to do with (neither meddleth it
with) a States Changing his Governors, and altering for the better; but he
requires obedience to received Governors in lawful things, while they remain
Governors, and are in their Offices. I suppose he will not deny, but that the
Senate of Rome, while the power was theirs (though they obeyed Dictators, and
Emperors, whilst they continued* them) might yet upon just cause remove them,
without falling under the guilt of resisting the Ordinance of God, condemned in
Romans 13. 2.

2, It is directly opposue to that Subjection commanded every soul, that is in
relation of a Subject, Rom 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13.

Reply. This may receive the like Answer with the former; and in the instance
of Pastors in reference to their flocks may be morefully cleared. Is it
required in Heb. 13. 17. That the People obey them that have the Rule over them
in the Lord, and to submit unto them: but this does not take away their power
of removing them from their Offices, upon their unworthy and un-Pastor-like
carriages; Suppose (to prevent controversies) it be in a place where there is
no Classis.

3, It the People may do it, then it must needs be that they have a Civil Power
over their Magistrates which is contrary to those Scrip^ures which make the
King Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 13. and call the Powers that the People are to be
Subject to, Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1. higher in relation to them, etc. And if
the Magistrates be over the People, how are they under them, to be removed or
changed by them, etc? If the Magistrate be under the People whom are they over?
If the People be above the Magistrate, whom are they under, etc?

Reply. The People may be considered, either in Themselves, or in their
Substitutes and Representatives; in Themselves, and so they may be taken as
they are a Community or Commonwealth collectively; Or distributively, as
individual persons and members of the Community or Commonwealth. If they be
considered as a Community, the Root of al Civil power is in them, and they are
Supreme, and greater then all the individual members of them, so far as
concerns right, but not so far as concerns the exercise of power, for that is
in their Substitutes, and Trustees, who have the power of the Community for the
exercise of it. The Representatives also may be considered in a twofold
Respect; as a Parliament and Court Collectively, and so they set up Judges, and
Officers, and Magistrates, both the Superior and the Inferior, and are
greater then they: Or they are considered singly, and personally, and as out of
Courts, and as pri^ate men; and so they are lesser, and inferior; to the very
Officers which they themselves in Court do make: So any Parliament Man is
subject to inferior Courts and the Judges thereof, as other men are. And a
King, or any other Chief-Magistrate, or Magistrates, by what Title soever you
will call them, may be considered in reference to the People, as they are a
Commonwealth, Collectively; and so he is not Superior, or greater then they,
in the right of Power, though in the exercise, he is. But consider him, in
reference to any of the members singly, whether in Office, or Office, he is
greater both in power, and in the exercise of it, then any other, either
person, or party: So of the Representatives, they are al Subjects singly and a
part considered; and he is supreme over them al; but Collectively considered,
they having the power of the Commonwealth, and he set up by the Commonwealth,
(or by them in the Commonwealths name) they are greater then he; and he
himself in that sense is but a Subject, though the principal in reference to
that great authority, wherewith he is entrusted. Thus a Prince is Major
singulis, and Minor universis; greater then any part, but less then the whole.
And (indeed) there is sound Reason for it: Kings are for Commonwealths, and
not Commonwealths for them; and therefore Commonwealths are greater. They are
Ministers (says the Apostle) as to God; so in a sense, to Commonwealths for
their good: Commonwealths create them, and empower them, therefore they are
less then them. The Representatives also, may be considered, as Sitting, and
then no Magistrate is supreme to them; or as not Sitting, and then the
Magistrate, King, or other chief Governor, may be called supreme in the
exercise of Power, though not in the right of it.

4, The holy Ghost commands the People, To render Tribute, Custom, Fear,
Honor, not at random to the Magistrate, leaving them at liberty to what they
please, but to whom they are due; which respects a determinate object, the
present Magistrate.

Reply. The whole of this may be granted, for it serves only to prove
subjection to the present Magistrate, but it hinders not a Change; but that if
Reason, and the good of the Community require, one may be removed, and another
set up in his stead; and he who is empowered, is to have the tribute.

5, Magistrates are of God, his Ordinance, and Ministers, and Judges for him,
and his Vicegerents, Romans 13. 24. 2 Chr. 19. 6. and therefore cannot stand at
the mere will of the People; God must have a hand in their removal, as he has
in their admission, or else it is injurious: he r^moves and admits now, not by
immediate revelation, as sometime in Israel, but by the rule of his Word,
executed by man: He has given a rule for the setting up of Magistrates, but
where has he given any for their deposing?

Reply. As Magistrates are Gods Ordinance, so they are Man's Ordinance; because
man determines both of the kind of Government, and does also design the men,
but always, according to Gods Word: And as they are Judges for him, and his
Vicegerents, so they are Judges for the Commonwealth and their Substitutes.
They Judge for God, viz. His Glory: and for the People, viz. Their Good, Romans
13. 4. And it being confessed, That their admission and removal is not
immediately from God, but by men, according to Gods Word; it will follow, That in
that way, by which Regularly they enter into Power and Office, by that way,
they may be put forth, and removed from Office: For, Eorum est deponere, quorum
est ponere. And let me see that Rule that God has given for setting up, and I
doubt not, but I shall make the same Rule serve for putting down. Indeed, That
Scripture wherein it is said, That Kings, etc. are the Ordinances of Man, does
empower man, both to set-up, and to pull down.

6, If it were in the Peoples power to change their Magistrates at pleasure,
then how could it be such a heinous sin, as it is challenged to be, for the
People to reject Samuels Government, and desire, and move for a King, 1 Samuel 8.
6, 7. and 12. 17?

Reply. Samuels Government, was Gods Government; for there were Elders of the
People, and Princes of the Tribes, by whom the People were ordinarily Governed;
and there were Judges raised up by God immediately, at certain times when they
were molested by the Nations round about them, of which Samuel was one: Now
that which God had Constituted, That, they might not Change, especially not for
a worse, as they did, when they chose Kingly Government after the manner of the
Nations.

After al his own Reasons against change of Government, he comes to weigh my
Reason for the lawfulness of Change; which was this, That though Civil
Government in general be the Ordinance of God for man's good, therefore to
reject it would be sin: yet, this, or that kind of Government is not the
Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of man, and therefore man may change it. And
against these words ( is not the Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of man) he
bends himself by several Arguments to overthrow it; and yet in the issue he
establishes it. And because my words in point of cleernesse were not so full,
he takes advantage; but yet opening that text of Peter, which I aleadge for the
proof of my Assertion, he gives my sense wherein I made use of it; but I shall
set down his Exception in his own words:

Civil Government in the general cannot be said to be Gods Ordinance, and
therefore unrejectable; but this, or that kind of Government that is a
legitimate, and true species of it, must necessarily be yielded to be Gods
Ordinance and unrejectable.

Reply. When I express my self in these words, This, or that kind of
Government is not the Ordinance of God, but the Ordinance of man: my meaning
was, This, or that kind of Government, is not in such sort, or sense, the
Ordinance of God, as Government in general is; that is, Is not by special
Institution imposed upon al, or any people, as Government in general is; is not
by Commandment laid upon any people to necessitate the receiving of it, as
Government in general is: So that it cannot be said of any special Government,
That if a Nation, or People, receive it not, admit it not, it sins in not doing
it; as it may be said of Government in general, That if any People receives it
not, that People sins in not receiving it. And because I speak of sinning, in
the not-admitting of the one, and not of sinning in the not-admitting of the
other; it is plain, That I meant it in the sense that I have now expressed it.
And in this sense he concurs with me; his words are, Government in its special
nature, is Warranted for any People, but not Commanded, or Imposed (as
Government in general is) upon every Nation: and he says afterward, That
Peter terms Government Man's Ordinance, because both the special form of
Government, and the persons holding it, are chosen, and so immediately
Constituted by man. And this is that which I assert: So that when I said, That
Government in specie, was not an Ordinance of God; my meaning was, It was not
an Ordinance by any special Commandment, as government in general was; it was
not immediately Constituted by God, but by men. God does not so Institute the
kinds of Officers in Commonwealths, as he does the kinds of Officers in
Churches. And in this lay the strength of my Reason; Therefore if the special
kinds of Government be not Commanded by God, but chosen, and immediately
Constituted by men, then they may be changed by men; Provided, That their
grounds be sufficient to bear such a Change. And to this he replyeth nothing,
nor disables it at al; so that the Reason stands in strength, and the
Consequence is firm and unshaken; viz. That such an Oath, that tends absolutely
to uphold any one form of Government, is unlawful.

But he urges this Argument against my words in the sense that he took them;
as if I had asserted, That they were not the Ordinance of God at al: and says
thus, Whatever is predicated of the genus, or general nature; is predicated of
the species, or special nature.

Reply. I appeal to the Reader, Whether he does not herein Contradict himself
afterward, when he says, That of the general nature of Government, it may be
said, That it is the Commandment of God; but of the special kind of Government
(he says) that it cannot be said, That it is the Commandment of God, but
warranted only by God.

There is also a Second Contradiction in his words, whilst he prosecutes
against my Expression so earnestly; (if my understanding fail me not) he says
in one place, That Government is Instituted in its special nature by God; and
afterward he says, It is not Commanded by God, and that both the special
form of Government, and the persons holding it, are immediately Constituted by
men.

There is also a Third Contradiction (which in this bad Cause which he
manageth) he runs into; He had said in page 5. The King, as King, Acts only
by his Courts and Laws, and what he does, besides these, is the Man's not the
Kings; and that things may be done against his personal Commands. Yet in this
place he says, The Magistrates, not the Government abstractlie are called Gods
Ordinance: the meaning is, The King, not King-ship (where Kingly Government is
on foot) the person of the King, the Man, not the Power (as it ought to be
exercised according to Law) is the Ordinance of God, and must be obeyed.

After the Consequence, by way of Illustration, I expressed my self in some
words, concerning the heavy plague that has been upon this Nation in Kingly
Government, and of the many blessings that have followed the Change of it,
among the United Provinces, which he takes great offense at, wherein I shall be
justified by the Chronicles, that record the Reigns of the Kings of this
Nation, and the plentiful experience which many thousands living have had of
the truth thereof in some of them. Notwithstanding lest I should move his
patience further, I shall forbear any further Reply. It is enough what the
Parliament when the House was full, and Voted, NO more Addresses to be made,
has published to the World concerning the late King.

In the last place, in the Close of the first Argument, he comes to consider of
the Objection which I (knowing many other would be ready to make it) both
framed, and answered: The Objection was, Though the Oath might be unlawful to
be taken, yet being taken, it ought to be kept: The Answer was, That if Herod's
Oath was unlawful to be taken, and much more unlawful to be kept, being only an
Oath against the life of one man; then this Oath of Allegian^e (if absolute)
was not only unlawful to be taken, but also to be kept, because very
dangerous to the lives, state, and liberties of a Commonwealth of men.

His Answer hereto, in substance is this;

He cannot parallel Herod's Oath and ours in the matter, wherein Herod's was
unlawful both in the taking and keeping. What was the matter of that? To shed
innocent blood: To massacre a guiltless and holy Person. Now what is the
matter of ours? To yield Obediance in lawful things, to a lawful power: Is it
any more? And are not the matter of these two Oaths, as far unlike as light
and darkness?

Reply. There Is only this difference, That Oath was to kill directly; This
consequently: That speedily and out of hand; This surely and undoubtedly,
though uncertain in reference to the time when. For if the Oath be of absolute
obedience, to the Father, and Son, and Sons Son, and al after-Heirs, then not
only active, but passive obedience must be yielded; and if the person be the
power, as he asserts from Romans 13. 2. compared with verse. 3, 4. (his words are
these, The Magistrate, not the Government abstractlie (are called Gods
Ordinance) then the person may not be resisted in any thing, let him do what he
will; let him become a Nero, yet he may not be resisted, no not in his
Ministers; For his name and his authority is in them, and it is impossible to
resist them, but there will be a resisting of him in them. And if this be so,
then the Floud-gates are set open to al Iniquity, and corrupt men which are
chief in power, and are secure from al opposition and resistance, that know
that they may have life and state and al at their demand without contradiction,
are invited to al unrighteousness and oppression. Even as a graceless person,
that is in want, and knows that the Judge will neither hang him, nor punish
him, is invited to rob and steal: what an unrighteous Oath then is this, in the
very matter of it, that tempts the Prince in such sort to al lewdness and
wickedness, and that will certainly, either sooner or later, be destructive?
And how unmeet is it to be kept? It is as it a Judge should swear to al poor
persons that are in want, That whatever they do, he will not question them:
those who are good, would be good still, notwithstanding this Oath; but yet it
would invite naughty minded persons to al dishonesty and unrighteousness, and
it would expose the lives and estates of men that have any thing, to extreme
danger, though it would be uncertain who the persons are that would suffer, or
at what time they might suffer violence, but they are not secure any moment,
such is the Oath of absolute Allegiance, and such an Oath as this kept, is more
murtherous then the Oath of Herod.

In the Second place he comes to Consider of the Second Position, viz. That the
Representatives of the People, (which in reason are the Supreme power) imposed
this Oath, by an Act of Parliament, this was the Subjects free Act in their
Representatives, no Law of God or Nature obliging them to accept of such a
person and his Heirs, and to swear Allegiance to them; if therefore the
Representatives take away and Repeal this Act, as this Parliament has done,
they thereby set the Subject at liberty from such Allegiance, and from their
Oath binding to it, there remains no more Conscience of it to such which have
taken it. Abraham that imposed the Oath upon his Servant, might acquit him of
it.

He begins with the Antecedent of this Position, and Notes Three things;

1 He says, He sets up a Supreme power over us by Reason, not by Law or the
Peoples Constitution.

Reply. Though it be by Reason, yet it is by Law and by the peoples
Constitution also, for the People appoint their Representatives, and the
persons whom they appoint, are the Parliament; and this is according to Law:
And this Parliament has the power of making Laws, and repealing them, and the
King by Oath is sworn to confirm what they conclude on, and present unto him;
as at the beginning of the War was held out in those Declarations which they
put forth for the Kingdoms satisfaction. The Parliament then is above the King
according to Law, and the peoples Constitution: For, he is bound up to their
Conclusions which they make for the good of the Kingdom, and they are not bound
up to his, yet it is according to Reason also.

But he asks, What Reason? Private, or Common Reason?

Reply. 1 Common Reason shows that in the mixture of Families in one
Commonwealth, where there is no natural headship (as in one Family there has
been) there, without consent, there can be no headship, or power, or
Government; And those that must Consent, are the Root of that power or
Government that comes to be amongst them.

2 Common Reason shows also, That all the people that give this Consent unto a
power or powers to be over them, cannot act this power which is founded in
their Consent.

3 Common Reason shows, That those whom they Substitute for the acting of their
power in matters of Supreme concernment, are the Supreme power.

4 Common Reason shows, That if these Substitutes or Trustees for the people do
choose one Statesman to Rule over al, or a Council of State to do it, yet they
that choose and set up such persons, are greater in power then they that are
chosen.

5 Common Reason shows, That if such Princes who have gotten Possession of the
Kingdom by the Sword, have yet Complied with the Parliament to obtain a sure
Title, then the power of putting in and establishing such Chief Commanders,
appertains to the Parliament.

But how comes it then (says he) that there is such variety of kinds of
Supreme Government?

Reply. This has come to pass sometimes because the peoples Right has been
invaded by force and power, and so the people has not acted freely; and
sometimes by the interest of some persons in the people, they have been wrought
up to give consent to this or that kind of Supreme Government, or it may come
from the variety of apprehensions in several Commonwealths, affecting and
choosing rather this then that kind of Government. Notwithstanding, in those
Commonwealths where the people choose their Representatives to act their power
for them, Common Reason says that such Representatives are the Supreme power.

2 He says, In citing the power that Enacted this Oath, he omitts the King and
House of Lords, who in the then Parliament Concurred in this Enacting, and
Imposition.

Reply. Neither King, nor House of Lords had power to make a Law, that was the
Prerogative of the peoples Representatives, and the King must confirm what they
did. Herein was the Representative Supremacy above the other.

3 He says, That although the King was then rightfully and actually Enthroned
in the Regal Power and Dignity, and both the Law, and the Oath of Supremacy
obliged the People to his Heirs, yet he dares to say, That no Law of God or
Nature obliged them to except of such a Person and his Heirs. Is not the Fifth
Commandment the Law of God and Nature? And those Precepts, Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3.
1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Repetitions and divine Ratifications thereof?

Reply. 1 I speak of things Originally as they were at first, himself spoke a
little before, That Government in the special form of it, and the persons
holding it, was Chosen and immediately Constituted by men; Where then is either
Law of God or Nature, determinatively binding to it? Therefore what Right any
such Family has, it was Originally by the Peoples receiving such a Family, and
therefore it was free and voluntary. 2 The 5 Commandment, Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3.
1. 1 Pet. 2. 13. exalts not any Family to the Throne, nor does require the
people to accept of such and such a Family to be over them; but being accepted,
and while continued, requires subjection, but no further. 3 The Kings Ancestors
came by Conquest, and if rightfully Enthroned in Regal Power, then the Title by
Conquest it seems is good by his Assertion, which yet in the present change, I
believe he will not acknowledge, nor dare I grant it without the consent of the
Representatives in Parliament. Ther^ore it is that Kings themselves, when they
have got the Crown by the Sword, have desire to hold it by Consent of
Parliament, and their Acts for it. 4 What Right came Originally by Parliament,
and the Acts thereof, and not by any express Law of God or Nature, cannot be
an everlasting Right, but may be withdrawn, together with all the Confirmations
of it, if the Causes be just, by the same power that set it up.

But for the Consequence, he says,

It has no Truth in it, or color of Reason, nor Inference from the
Antecedent. But what Reason shows he for blasting the Consequence, and
reproaching it in such sort?

1 He says, The Act cannot (for ought appears to me) be Repealed but by the
same power that made it.

Reply. If he mean by the same power, the Representatives in Parliament, then
the same power that made the Act, has Repealed it; but if he mean, by the same
power, the King and House of Lords, together with the Representatives in
Parliament, I have showed, That the King and House of Lords have no Legislative
power at al, and that it is the Representative sole privilege to make Laws,
and the King must Confirm, therefore they could do it without him.

2 He says, The Allegiance sworn was not founded upon that Act, or Oath, but
due before.

Reply. I have not Asserted, That the Allegiance is founded upon that Act or
Oath, but I hold the contrary, viz That the Oath is founded upon Allegiance
that was due before. But this I Assert, That Allegiance was never absolutely but
conditionally due: 1 While the Prince keeps his Oath in the Coronation, taken
to administer Justice. 2 While the Parliament have not declared him to have
broken his Oath, and so that relation cease betwixt him and the people, and
consequently the Allegiance to be at an end, and consequently the Oath of it to
be extinct. This is clearly my Tenant, That while Allegiance is due to any
Governor whatever, the Oath that has been taken of it is binding, and that al
persons and powers in the World, are never able to absolve or acquit the
persons that have taken it, from it: But yet withal this I hold, That 1
Allegiance may expire, 2 That it then expires when the Condition of it is not
kept. 3 That the Parliament is the Supreme power, and so the Judge o^ this when
the Condition is broken. 4 When they declare that the Condition is broken
(unless there be a palpable unrighteousness in their Declaration) and when
they by their Acts do discharge the people of their Allegiance, and do Repeal
the Act for the Oath of Allegiance, then the people are free, first, of their
Allegiance, and then of the Oath which they took of it. And this is that which
I further hold, That the People or Commonwealth are firstly and principally
subject to the Parliament their Representatives, for they have put their whole
power into their hand, so far as concerns the exercise of it, and have put
themselves into subjection under them, and therefore their Allegiance is
firstly due to them, and through them to any Governor or Governors, Prince or
other Magistrate or Magistrates, whom they shall either set up and entrust with
the exercise of Supreme power when they Sit not, or whom they shall confirm
finding in that power, when they came to Sit. Why else have persons who have
come to the Throne by Conquest, immediately called Parliaments to ratify and
confirm their Title, which they foresaw might be justly questioned without
such ratification. And in this sense it is, That the Parliament it self has
taken the Oath of Allegiance to Princes, not Collectively as an House sitting
in power and authority of Parliament; for in that sense themselves were
Supreme, but as single persons and members of the Commonwealth, they
themselves are subject to the power that as a Parliament themselves erect and
confirm. And I also conceive, That hereupon there is no Allegiance to any
Magistrate against the Parliament, but that the Parliament may make it void,
while they remain the Peoples Representatives, and continue in that place and
power. As now in this Change of things, the Council of State, is the Supreme
power of the Nation, at al times when there shall be no Parliament sitting; but
in the time of Parliament, the Parliament it self is Supreme, and not they. And
though the persons of al Parliament men, and all the Nation with them, should
swear Allegiance to that Council, yet it is in, and not against the authority
of Parliament, that they so swear; and if the Council of State should miscarry
in point of Government, and the Parliament should declare them to be no Council
of State, both themselves who in their persons were sworn, and all the people
who have taken that Oath with them, are acquitted from it. For the Allegiance
it self and the Oath to confirm it, are first due to the higher power, who
has power over both the Council of State (and for maleadjuration may call them
to account) and the people also, and so may discharge the one of Government,
and the other of duty to them. And so I look upon the Parliament, as the
principal party in the Oath of Allegiance to any Prince, and the Oath to the
Prince is through them, and in them, and not against them; and so the
Parliament (the Causes being just and weighty) have power to acquit from it*
And in that sense it was that I produced the instance of Abraham* So if a
Magistrate should (...) a Constable, to obey (...) is lawful Commands,
according to his place; a superior power to the Magistrate, who has power over
them both, by removing the Magistrate from his Trust, absolves the Constable
from the Allegiance, and from his Oath also. And this is so clear, that none
can rationally deny it. Yea, he himself grants it, in his first Argument
against my Consequence, only he denies that this is the Case in Controversy,
(but it is but a bare denial) for he says,

Where the imposers are also the party sworn to, there it is granted that
there may be absolving from the Oath, or a dispencing with it.

And this is the Case because an Oath to an inferior power is made in and not
against the superior power, in and through whom, Duty and Allegiance is due to
the inferior power, I hope then there is both Truth, and color of Reason, and
good inference in the Consequence. He grants further, and says,

There are Cases wherein a superior, as a Husband, Master, Father, Magistrate,
may make void the Oath of their respective inferior, by an Analogy or equity
of that Rule: but these are (says he) in matters belonging to the right and
power of the Superior to dispose of, as the Representatives may acquit from an
Oath in point of their own right.

Reply. This is the very Case, it is the right of the Representatives to be
Supreme; therefore any Oath of the Subject, to any Magistrate, (suppose a
Prince) is not against them, bnt in them, and they are the principal party; it
is to the other in them, they may therefore absolve from it, by taking Rule
from the one, and Duty from the other, because both are subordinate unto them,
and they are principally concerned in the Oath that passes betwixt them.

Thus I have endeavored to maintain the Truth of the Positions: Let the Reader
judge betwixtus.

There is one thing more which I think good to annex to what I have held forth
in this Reply, viz. My Answer to a Querie, or Conclusion rather, which is drawn
from my Positions, and is lately come to my hands, viz.
Querie.

WHAT may Conscientiously be resolved upon, in relation to the late Enacted
Engagement, from the Principles and Premises laid down by me in the prosecution
of my first Position? And whether I have not damned it, as to my self, and to
all those who are of my mind, and persuaded (fo far as my Position may prevail)
all others not to take it?

For thus he Argues from my Positions;

If an Oath, or Promise, or Engagement, failing in any of those Rules which in
the Position are laid down, be unlawful, then the Enacted Engagement must needs
be unlawful, because first it is absolute, without any Proviso of their Ruling
well, that are, or may be in power. 2 It is single, or without the Rulers
Engaging to the Subject to Rule well and justly. 3 It is to those of whom we may
be as much unsatisfied, how they will prove hereafter, as we can be of an Heir.
4 It is to one kind of Government, called, The Commonwealth, as it is now
Established, and that described with contradistinction from, and Exclusion of
King and Lords. It is also to continue in a constant way, for the words run, [
I will be true and faithful.]

Answer.
If I should look upon the Engagement, under such apprehensions as he has
looked upon the Oath of Allegiance, and pleaded for it, I should not think it
tolerable to be taken by any Conscientious man. But I have other Conceptions of
it.

1 I deny, That the Engagement is Absolute, or that any such Engagement can be
absolute, but that at least there will be a tacit Condition therein, for the
Equity and Justice of the thing will require it perpetually; and that (however
it would be more satisfactory if the Condition were expressed, yet it is
palpable enough that the Condition is employed, though not one word should be
spoken. I have given Instance in Pastor and People: If the people should not
indent with their Pastor to Preach the Gospel, but should accept of him to be
their Pastor, and promise so much Maintenance unto him, yet it is employed that
it is upon the Condition of his Preaching to them; for no rational man will
conceive that they promised such Maintenance in reference to such an Office,
without performing the work of the Office: So it is betwixt Magistrate and
Subject.

2 I deny, That the Engagement is single; for long since there came forth a
Declaration from the Parliament, wherein they Engaged to Govern the Nation
according to known Laws of the Land. And this Narrative was purposely set forth
to satisfy the Nation, in reference to Jealousies that the people lay under.
And it makes the Engagement mutual betwixt the Magistrate and the People. And
if it be mutual, then it cannot be absolute, as he asserted. For I have showed,
That in a mutual Engagement the Obligation of the one, has respect unto, and
dependence upon the performance of the other, so that if the one violate the
Engagement in his part, the other is discharged upon it.

3 I deny, That it is to those of whom we may be as much unsatisfied how they
will prove hereafter, as we can be of an Heir; for the Engagement is to the
Representatives of the Nation, of whom we were satisfied when we Chose them,
and we exercised our judgment when we Chose them; and if otherwise, it was the
Commonwealths fault. And we know what they have been, they have sought the
Nations welfare; and time will declare what they will be, and let them not be
prejudged. However, they are but temporary Rulers, and not so much as for term
of life, much less are their Heirs to be chief Rulers after them.

4 I deny, That the Engagement is to one kind of Government absolutely, whether
hurtful or profitable, for the Representatives of the people have power to
change it, when they see cause, for the good of the Nation, and they neither
have, nor intend to tie their own hands absolutely, but that if they should
prove it to be pernicious, they might change it.

So that it is apparent, by what I have presented, That he has totally
mistaken the business of the Engagement.

FINIS.

