THE ANSWER OF THE Parliament of England, TO A PAPER, Entitled, A Declaration
by the Kings Majesty, To His Subjects of the Kingdoms of Scotland, England and
Ireland. Printed at Edinburgh, 1650.

Whereunto is annexed, COPIES of Four LETTERS To the King of SCOTLAND, Which
were found in the Lord Loudouns Cabinet.

Die Veneris, 20 Septem. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Answer and Letters be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

IT is well known unto the World, what manner of Contest the Parliament of
England has had, these years last passed, in their own Defense, to preserve
themselves from the almost Established Tyranny, which, through a long tract of
Time, had been obtruding it self, as well over the Consciences, as the Laws and
Civil Liberties of the People in England, Ireland and Scotland; Designing and
Practicing the Extremity of all Evils upon these Nations, rather then to suffer
it self to be stopped in its course, or disappointed of its end: Else what
signified the first Troubles raised in Scotland by the late King, and (that
failing) then the cherishing, upholding and continuing, to the last, the Horrid
and Bloody Rebellion in Ireland, by the same hand; and after all, the bringing
of an Unnatural War into the Bowels of this Nation, managed and improved to the
utmost by him, and the Popish, Prelatical and Profane Party adhering to him
therein? Which Evils have been writ out in such deep Characters of Blood, been
attended with such Consumption of Treasure, and almost Devastation of several
Countries in the three Nations, that they will not suddenly be worn out of the
Peoples Sense, much less of their Memory. Yet, even during these first
Troubles, the Designers were not ashamed to appear barefaced, in their open
and avowed Principles, of Opposition and Hatred against the Cause of God, the
Work of Reformation, Privileges of Parliament, and Peoples Liberties; having
for that purpose incorporated themselves in Interest with all the known and
implacable Enemies of the same, as, The Popish Party abroad, and Prelatical and
Malignant Party at home: But now, when by the unspeakable Blessing of God unto
this Nation, Tyranny has received its Mortal Wound, not only by being Beaten
out of the Field, in all that have fought for it, but by the Remarkable Justice
that has been done upon the Prime Instrument (in the late Kings Execution) and
in consequence thereof, the Government of this Nation Restored to a
Commonwealth and Fee-State; and the Supreme Authority Established in this and
Successive Parliaments, or Representatives of the People, without King or House
of Lords, as the best Means and strongest Bulwark, under the Divine Protection,
to preserve the Peoples Liberties against the like Attempts and Invasions for
time to come, and so deprived of all Hopes of its ever taking Root again in
this Commonwealth; and being like also, if this Commonwealth continue, to lose
ground in Scotland and other Nations, where the People are made mere Slaves and
Vassals to the Will of their Prince, and his Lordly Instruments in Church and
State.

It has seemed good to Charles Stuart, the Declared King of Scotland, and to
the prevailing Party in State and Kirk there, to dress up this old and
Malignant Cause, in a more plausible and Religious Garb, then that with which
it was put forth before; and to take it out of, or rather for a time suspend
its Exercise in the hands of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant Party, who
begin also to see they can keep it up no longer, but it will certainly breathe
out its last Gasp, if it be not shifted, and by some Change of Instruments,
recover a Reputation amongst good men; And therefore a room and place is made
by common Consent amongst them, to receive and hide the Interest of Tyranny,
and of Opposition to all Christian, as well as Civil Liberty, within the verges
of the Solemn League and Covenant: The Signing of which Covenant, and the
emitting of a Declaration, by the eldest Son of the late King (expressing in
words a superficial Repentance, for what there is no probability for him at the
present to put in practice) and promising (in effect) for the future, to
Tyrannize and Enslave men chiefly by the Advice of the Kirk, and as shall tend
to uphold their Power and Clergy-Interest, in the first place, before his own
(An Homage which the Pope indeed has claimed from Earthly Princes, as that
which is due to him, as he pretends himself Gods Vicar on Earth.) This is now
accounted full Satisfaction, as to what is to be done on his part; and
whereupon they would make the World believe the state of the Cause is altered,
even to that degree, as that their New King is now no longer upon his Old
Principles, but is come over to those upon which they have fought against his
Father for these Twelve years past. The Deceit and Evil of all which, will
appear, when we shall come to take in pieces the said Declaration, and thereby
Unmask (as we have promised) the gross Hypocrisy of the Contrivers thereof,
and the Wicked Design that is couched and contained therein, under pretense of
The Name and Cause of God, The Work of Reformation, The Power and Freedoms of
Parliaments in England, according to their Ancient Form (except only a
perpetual subjecting and subordinating of their Laws, Councels and Advices to
the Clergy, who have a promise, That their Councels shall be heard before any
other whatsoever) and other plausible Inducements to possess himself of the
Crown of England; And having obtained that Power, with the Destruction of all
the Faithful and truly godly Party, that have declared themselves for this
present Government, He may then be more absolute in Tyranny, then ever Prince
in England was, and derive the same in Succession to his Posterity, upon the
score of Conquest, acquired to him by the help of the Scots; whose good will to
England (for the Cause of God, as they would have us believe) has been and
still is such, as to hold it fit to impose upon us the Yoke of their
Usurpations both in Church and State, and have not scrupled to attempt the
attaining of the same, either by Subtilty of by Force: By both which Means they
never thought themselves in so fair a way unto their End, as now they have cast
themselves into, by their late Agreement with their New King; and this
Declaration they have made him put forth, which we shall Answer in the distinct
Paragraphs of it in order as they lie.

. 1.
HIs Majesty taking in consideration, that merciful Dispensation of Divine
Providence, by which he has been recovered out of the snare of Evil Council;
and having attained so full persuasion and confidence of the Loyalty of his
People in Scotland, with whom he has too long stood at a distance; and of the
Righteousness of their Cause, as to join in one Covenant with them, and to cast
himself and his Interests wholly upon God; and in all matters Civil, to follow
the Advice of his Parliament, and such as shall be entrusted by them, and in
all matters Ecclesiastic, the Advice of the General Assembly and their
Commissioners; and being sensible of his duty to God, and desirous to approve
himself to the consciences of all his good Subjects, and to stop the mouths of
his and their Enemies and Traducers, does in reference to his former
Deportments, and as to his Resolutions for the future, Declare as follows.
ANSWER.
THe Dispensations of Divine Providence are indeed merciful, by which Princes
or Governors are at any time really recovered out of the snare of evil Counsel;
yet when this is done by the violence of an absolute Necessity, it is seldom
real or lasting, and then the Mercy in it is but little to the People, who will
taste the bitter fruit of such dissimulations when it is too late. It seems
that the King of Scotland can now profess to the world, he has been in the
snare of evil Counsel, whilst he entertained any doubts or diffidence of the
loyalty of his People of Scotland, and stood at a distance from them and their
Cause, and was unconvinced of the righteousness of it, and did not join in one
Covenant with them, nor cast himself and his Interests wholly upon God; and in
all matters Civil follow the advice of his Parliament; and in all matters
Ecclesiastic, the General Assembly, or the Commissioners thereof: We do not
deny but his former Counsels, as well as himself, have suffered a great change,
through the merciful Dispensation of Divine Providence to this Commonwealth,
prospering so wonderfully our Armies in Ireland, as to exclude him and his
Interest in a great measure from thence, and preserving this Nation in Peace
within it self, to prevent any footing to be given to him here, whereby he was
reduced to the course he has now taken, to say what the Parliament and Kirk of
Scotland shall put into his mouth, and tell him is fit for him and his Affairs
to declare, or else to lose all: And if Scotland do esteem it so great a mercy,
to have him reduced to this pure necessity of casting himself into their Arms;
We know to whom, under God, they owe the Obligation; a Blessing which we
confess we do not envy them, and which (were we secured never to be partaker of
with them, or by their means) we should not hinder them from the free and full
enjoyment of; Having by fad experience found what it is to have a King, though
never so well beset in appearance with good men about him, or to trust to his
Repentances and Promises, Oaths or Declarations, how fair soever in show, and
how strong soever laid down in words. As to the Evil of the Counsel, out of
which its said, He is recovered by this change: We say, That if the future
Resolutions mentioned in this Declaration, be the evidences whereby we are to
judge of the goodness of the new Counsel, we cannot but take notice, That they
do only vary the means, but not the end, which still is evil, to wit, The
enslaving the three Nations; and do change the Instruments, but not the Cause
(as is before, and shall further be made evident) and therefore we must be
excused, if we judge that their young King is yet in as great a snare of evil
Counsel as ever, and thereupon endeavor what in us lies, to keep this Nation
from falling under the bad effects thereof.

. 2.
THough his Majesty as a dutiful Son be obliged to honor the memory of his
Royal Father, and have in estimation the person of his Mother; yet does he
desire to be deeply humbled and afflicted in Spirit before God, because of his
Fathers harkening to, and following evil Counsels, and his opposition to the
work of Reformation, and to the Solemn League and Covenant, by which so much of
the blood of the Lords People has been shed in these Kingdoms; and for the
Idolatry of his Mother, the Toleration whereof in the Kings House, as it was
matter of great stumbling to all the Protestant Churches, so could it not but
be an high provocation against him who is a jealous God, visiting the sins of
the Fathers upon the Children: And albeit, his Majesty might extenuate his
former Carriages and Actions, in following of the advice, and walking in the
way of those who are opposite to the Covenant and to the work of God, and might
excuse his delaying to give satisfaction to the just and necessary Desires of
the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, from his education, and age, and evil
Counsel, and Company, and from the strange and insolent proceedings of
Sectaries against his Royal Father; and in reference to Religion and the
ancient Government of the Kingdom of England, to which he has the undoubted
Right of Succession; yet knowing that he has to do with God, he does
ingeniously acknowledge all his own sins, and all the sins of his Father House,
craving pardon, and hoping for mercy and reconciliation through the blood of
Jesus Christ. And as he does value the constant Addresses that were made by his
People to the Throne of Grace on his behalf, when he stood in opposition to the
Work of God, as a singular Testimony of long-suffering, patience and mercy upon
the Lords part, and loyalty upon theirs; so does he hope, and shall take it as
one of the greatest tokens of their love and affection to him and to his
Government, That they will continue in Prayer and Supplication to God for him;
That the Lord, who spared and preserved him to this day, notwithstanding of all
his own guiltiness, may be at peace with him, and give him to fear the Lord his
God, and to serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind all the
days of his life. ANSWER.
THe first Testimony of the good of the New Counsels, into whose hands the
Scots King has cast himself, is, The Repentance toward God which they advise
him to make, in reference to his own Sins, and Sins of his Fathers House; A
matter in it self truly praiseworthy; and the consequence whereof, in the
words wherein it is expressed, does in no small measure reach to the
Acknowledgement of the just Hand of God upon his Father and Mother, in the
Banishing of the one, and taking away the life of the other by the hand of
Justice; putting it into the hearts of those here, that remained faithful to
their Trust in Parliament, to cause his Blood to be poured forth, by whose
personal Actings, Authority and Commissions, so much of the Blood of the Lords
People has been shed in the Three Nations (as this Declaration it self
acknowledges) and for which therefore we have reason to bless God, and admire
his Providence, That out of the mouth of the Son, there has, in the sight of
the whole World, been brought forth such a Justification of the Sentence passed
and Executed upon the Father.

But as to the manner of Declaring this his Repentance, that is to say, with
the Qualifications therein allowed of; whereby, under the pretense of a dutiful
Son, He may still retain in Memory his Fathers Actions of Tyranny for his
Pattern; and, through the high Estimation of his Mother, have his Ears still
open to her Councels, as often as she can convey them to him: And as sensible
as he must be of his own and his Fathers Enmity and Opposition against the
Lords People in the Three Nations, yet he must still be encouraged to persist
in the same against those that are truly the Lords People, under the pretense
of Sectaries. These are such Inconsistencies and Haltings in so serious a Work,
that as it is justly to be feared, that God will not be well pleased therewith;
so neither will it have its expected effect amongst men, who with ease may see
through the deceit and lameness of it, and will with greater abhorrency be
aware of them and their Designs, that strive to cover themselves with Webs,
that will not prove Garments, but whose Nakedness does still appear.

. 3.
ANd his Majesty having, upon full persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all
the Heads and Articles thereof, now Sworn and Subscribed the National Covenant
of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Solemn League and Covenant of the Three
Kingdoms of Scotland, England and Ireland, Does Declare, That he has not Sworn
and Subscribed these Covenants, and entered into the Oath of God with his
People, upon any sinister Intention and crooked Design, for attaining his own
Ends; but, so far as Humane Weakness will permit, in the truth and sincerity of
his heart: And that he is firmly Resolved, in the Lords strength, to adhere
thereto, and to prosecute to the utmost of his power, all the Ends thereof, in
his Station and Calling, really, constantly and sincerely all the days of his
life. In order to which, he does in the first place Profess and Declare, That
he will have no Enemies, but the Enemies of the Covenant; and that he will have
no Friends, but the Friends of the Covenant: And therefore, as he does now
detest and abhor all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, together with Prelacy,
and all Errors, Heresy, Schism and Profaneness, and resolves not to tolerate,
much less allow any of these in any part of his Majesty's Dominions, but to
oppose himself thereto, and to endeavor the Externation thereof to the utmost
of his power; so does he as a Christian Exhort, and as a King Require, That all
such of his Subjects, who have stood in Opposition to the Solemn League and
Covenant, and Work of Reformation, upon a pretense of Kingly Interest, or any
other pretext whatsoever, to lay down their Enmity against the Cause and People
of God, and to cease to prefer the Interest of Man to the Interest of God;
which has been one of those things which has occasioned many Troubles and
Calamities in these Kingdoms, and being insisted into, will be so far from
Establishing of the Kings Throne, that it will prove an Idol of Jealousy, to
provoke unto wrath him who is King of kings, and Lord of lords. The King shall
always esteem them best Servants, and most Loyal Subjects, who serve him, and
seek his Greatness in a right line of subordination unto God; Giving unto God
the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Cesars: And
Resolves, not to love or countenance any who have so little Conscience and
Piety, as to follow his Interests with a prejudice to the Gospel and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, which he looks not upon as a duty, but as flattery,
and driving of Self-Designs, under a pretense of maintaining Royal Authority
and Greatness. Secondly, His Majesty being convinced in Conscience of the
exceeding great Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of that Treaty and Peace made with
the Bloody Irish Rebels, who treacherously shed the Blood of so many of his
faithful and Loyal Subjects in Ireland, and of allowing unto them the Liberty
of the Popish Religion; for the which he does from his heart desire to be
deeply humbled before the Lord: And likewise considering how many Breaches have
been upon their part, Does Declare the same to be void, and that his Majesty is
absolved therefrom; being truly sorry that he should have sought unto so
unlawful Help for Restoring of him to his Throne, and resolving, for the time
to come, rather to choose Affliction then Sin. Thirdly, As his Majesty did in
the late Treaty with his people in this Kingdom, agree to recall and annul all
Commissions against any of his Subjects who did adhere to the Covenant and
Monarchical Government in any of his Kingdoms: So does he now Declare, That by
Commissionating of some persons by Sea against the people of England, he did
not intend Damage or Injury to his oppressed and harmless Subjects in that
Kingdom, who follow their Trade of Merchandise in their lawful Callings, but
only the opposing and suppressing of those who had Usurped the Government; and
not only bar him from his just Right, but also Exercise an Arbitrary Power
over his people, in those things which concern their Persons, Consciences and
Estates: And as since his coming into Scotland he has given no Commissions
against any of his Subjects in England or Ireland, so he does hereby Assure and
Declare, That he will give none to their prejudice or damage; and whatever
shall be the Wrongs of these Usurpers, That he will be so far from avenging
these upon any who are free thereof, by interrupting or stopping the liberty of
Trade and Merchandise, or otherwise, That he will seek their good, and to the
utmost employ his Royal Power, That they may be protected and defended against
the unjust Violence of all men whatsoever. And albeit his Majesty desires to
construct well of the Intentions of those (in reference to his Majesty) who
have been active in Council or Arms against the Covenant; yet, being convinced
that it does conduce for the Honor of God, the good of his Cause, and his own
Honor and Happiness, and for the Peace and Safety of these Kingdoms, That such
be not employed in places of Power and Trust, He does Declare, That he will not
employ, nor give Commissions to any such, until they have not only taken, or
renewed the Covenant, but also have given sufficient Evidences of their
Integrity, Carriage and Affection to the Work of Reformation, and shall be
declared capable of Trust by the Parliament of either Kingdom respective: And
His Majesty, upon the same grounds, does hereby recall all Commissions given to
any such persons; conceiving all such persons will so much tender a good
Understanding betwixt him and his Subjects, and the settling and preserving a
firm Peace in these Kingdoms, That they will not grudge nor repine at his
Majesty's Resolutions and Proceedings herein, much less upon discontent act any
thing in a divided way, unto the raising of New Troubles, especially since upon
their pious and good deportment, there is a Regress left unto them in manner
above expressed. ANSWER.
IT is somewhat early days for him, who (by reason of his education and age,
and the Council and Company hitherto about him) could not be much furthered
into the sight of the Justice and Equity of what is contained in the Covenants
mentioned, presently, that is to say, in the space of almost four and twenty
hours, to grow up into the full persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all the
Heads and Articles of those Covenants, and to be able to declare, That he has
not sworn nor subscribed them upon any sinister intention and crooked Design,
for attaining his own ends; and with so fixed a Resolution to persist therein
really, constantly and sincerely all the days of his life; when as the
Commissioners of the General Assembly, in their Declaration dated the
thirteenth of August, do say, That there may be just Grounds of stumbling from
his refusing to emit this Declaration; and do tell him in so many words, that
They will not own him nor his Interest, otherwise then with a subordination to
God, and in so far as he owns and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims
his and his Fathers opposition to the Work of God, and to the Govenant, and all
the Enemies thereof: And notwithstanding all, he still persists in his Refufal,
withdrawing to Dunfermlyn, whether the Marquess of Argyle and Earl of Lothian
are sent after to press him to Subscribe; and in the mean time, overtures are
made underhand to our Army, as if things might yet be made up in a fair way,
and their King and they were not likely to agree: And on the fifteenth of
August, a Remonstrance and Supplication of the Officers of the Scots Army, by
way seconding the foresaid Declaration of the Committee of Estates, and
Commissioners of the General Assembly, was presented to, and approved of by the
Committee of Estates: And on the sixteenth of the said August, the Declaration
so earnestly pressed upon him, or rather forcibly extorted from him, is
subscribed and emited by him: And now in a moment, what a blessed and hopeful
change is wrought upon this young King? how hearty is he become to the Cause of
God, and the work of Reformation? and how readily does he swallow down these
bitter Pills which are prepared for and urged upon him, as necessary to effect
that desperate cure under which his Affairs lie? But who sees not the gross
Hypocrisy of this whole Transaction, and the sandy and rotten foundation of
all the Resolutions flowing hereupon? as first, He that on the fifteenth of
August hugged all his Malignant and Popish Party in his bosom, and lodged them
in the secret Reserves of his favor and love as his best Friends, can now on
the sixteenth (the day following) from a fullness of persuasion of the Justice
and Equity of all the Heads and Articles of the Covenant, renounce and discard
them in the sight of God and the world, and vow never to have any more to do
with them, as old Sinners, unless they by his example turn to be as good
Converts as himself, and be able to personate and act the same part; and so by
virtue of the very Covenant it self, eat out and undermine those who
conscientiously and honestly intend the ends of it: The sad experience whereof,
was as well seen in the managing the whole business of Duke Hamiltons Invasion,
as in many of the then Members in both Houses, who never showed more zeal for
the Covenant, then when they found that thereby they could suppress and beat
down the truly godly and honest Party, as Sectaries, and Enemies to Monarchical
Government, and buoy up the sinking and lost Reputations of the most engaged
Royalists and rotten hearted Apostates, under peetence that they were turned
Friends to the work of Reformation, and for upholding the Church Interest: And
if in this sense the Scots King will have no Enemies, but the Enemies of the
Covenant, nor no Friends, but the Friends of the Covenant, he makes but little
change; for he has the same Friends and Enemies that he had before, with this
only difference, That by his and his Parties becoming in appearance friends to
the Covenant for a while, they have the opportunity at the last to make use of
this Engine; better to undermine and oppose the true ends of the Covenant, then
by a flat opposition to it, and to obtain a Crown, what Dissimulation is not
thought lawful by Politicians? though a larger measure then what is held forth
in this Declaration, cannot easily be instanced in; And which therefore we
doubt not but God, who is the Searcher of the Hearts, and Tryer of the Reyns,
will proceed further to discover in the face of the Sun, and more severely
judge in this new King of Scots and his House, then if he had dealt plainly
with God and Man, and held himself forth in his own colors: The little time
which he has been upon the Stage, having sufficiently laid him open what he
is, A true Inheritor of his Fathers Principles and Counsels, wherein he may be
traced all along; and even in this last Action, wherein he has trod in the
steps of his Father, as well as other his Predecessors, who when ever they
found themselves in Scotland beset with the power of the Kirk and State, did
subscribe and emit whatever was pressed upon them, though they resolved to
break all that ever was so done by them upon the first occasion.

And as a second Deduction from his full persuasion of the Justice and Equity
of all the Heads and Articles of the Covenants, He Declares his conviction in
conscience of the exceeding great Sinfulness and Unlawfulness of that Treaty
and Peace made with the Bloody Irish Rebels, and of allowing to them the
liberty of the Popish Religion; and that he is resolved, for time to come,
rather to choose Affliction then Sin. It seems very much to be doubted, if the
Irish Bishop of Clogher, armed with a Commission from Ormond, Charles Stuart's
pretended Lieutenant of Ireland, had with his Army of Irish Popish Rebels,
founded upon a pure Popish Account, succeeded and prevailed against our Army in
Ulster under Sir Charles Coot, Whether then that which is now confessed, and
resolved against as Sinful and Unlawful, would have been so acknowledged, or
thought wisdom, perhaps, so to have been, by the Kirk of Scotland it self;
considering that the said Bishop offered very fair Quarter to all of the Scots
Nation, that were for Monarchical Government; and the Scots Clergy in those
parts had about the same time stirred up the people in our Quarters to Mutiny
and Rebellion (insomuch that Sir Charles Coot was necessitated to secure their
persons) as if they had done it on purpose to prepare the way to usher in the
Infal upon our Quarters, to destroy our Forces, by that Irish Army, who pitched
their Opposition chiefly against such as they called Sectaries, being indeed
such as declared for the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. But when
Sin does not prosper, it is no wonder if it be bewailed; and if it lose its
power, it is no marvel if it lose also its credit, even with the best Friends
to it. It is fit Popery, and the Bloody Rebellion of Ireland, should be
renounced, and the Scots King Absolved from any further hand in it (considering
the many Breaches, or rather Failings on their parts) now that through the
Blessing of God upon the Sectarian Army in that Nation, as they call them, the
Rebels have been disinabled to keep themselves in Power, and maintain his
Interest there; which we have good reason to believe is yet a greater
Affliction to him, in his sober thoughts, then he finds it to be Sin: For, as
we are credibly informed, Ormond and Inchiquin were very lately departing out
of Ireland, and giving up all there; but by very fresh Directions and Commands
from the Scots King out of Scotland, they are Required to stay, and promote his
Interest there: In pursuance of which, the said Ormond is as busy as ever,
giving out Commissions amongst the Irish, whether as Friends to the Covenant or
no, we shall leave the World to judge.

The third and last Effect of the Scots Kings full persuasion of the Justice
and Equity of all the Heads and Articles of the Covenant, is, His Recalling all
Commissions formerly given for infesting the Seas with Pyracies and
Depraedations; and Resolutions for the future, to employ none in such Power and
Trust, until they have renewed the Covenant, and be declared capable of such
Trust by the Parliament, as more at large is afore-recited in the clause it
self. It is to be observed (as little Justice and Necessity as the Scots
pretend there was of sending our Army into Scotland) That here is now
acknowledged by their King, for himself and them also, That the Scots have
treated and concluded with their King, on the behalf of the People of England
and Ireland, as well as Scotland, and have taken upon them (we presume, by
virtue of the Covenant) to Interest themselves, in the highest Degree, in the
Laws and Liberties of England, and have laid the Groundwork of a New War, to
be carried on principally by themselves in this Nation, Declaring for such as
adhere to the Covenant and Monarchical Government, and against such as (without
Opposition to the Covenant) are for this Commonwealth, as it is now
Established, without King or House of Lords; And yet have the confidence to
Appeal to God, how innocent they are of giving us any cause to send an Army
into Scotland, in our Defense, and to keep off this deep designed War from our
own Doors, as long, at least, as God shall enable us thereunto. Will not God
judge such underhand Dealing as this? We are assured he will; as he has begun
already of late most wonderfully and seasonably to do: And he that thus brings
it to light out of their own mouths, gives us hope, That in his due time he
will return it with Shame and Loss upon their own heads, who have adventured on
such bold Undertakings, to which they were never called, but are most perfectly
unconcerned, any further then they are drawn and enticed thereunto by
inordinate lusting after the Conquest of this Nation, and Establishing
themselves in the Wealth and Power thereof.

But to make all fair and smooth to those that are apt to be deluded and
misled, and to engage them in a New War against their Native Country, their
New Converted King declares, That by Commissionating persons at Sea to commit
Pyracy and Depraedations, for the interruption of Trade, He intends no Damage
nor Injury to his harmless and oppressed Subjects, but only to his Enemies;
which now are none, but those that are Enemies to the Covenant and Monarchical
Government: And that he resolves to employ none in such Trust, until they have
renewed the Covenant, and been declared capable of that Trust by Parliament;
and therefore does in words recall all Commissions given to any such persons:
But when all this is done, how are the former Evils committed at Sea, to the
interruption and destruction of Trade, remedied by this, or the parties
injured, repaired? When War was acted by Duke Hamilton, upon the Lives and
Estates of this Nation, and none therein were employed, but such as took the
Covenant, and were declared fit for that Trust by the Parliament of Scotland,
who commanded that Invasion, Were the Evils of War less upon the English, or
the Crime less in those that acted them? Do such Resolutions as these vary the
state of the War, and of the Cause, or do they only change the Method and
Circumstances of moving and proceeding to the same end? We hope it is too late
now, to mis-lead any of the well-affected with Blindes of this nature, by which
they have once been cozened before, and whereby they may assure themselves they
shall be deceived a second time, if the Cavaliers, and purely Royal Party, do
but lay hold of the expedient offered to them, which is, by a (feigned) pious
and good Deportment, to make themselves capable of a Regress into their former
Employments, upon the cheap Terms of swallowing down the Covenant, and the
obtaining the Approbation of as full and free a Parliament, as that which
Authorized the Invasion of this Nation by Duke Hamilton. And full, who knows
not what such a Declaration as this signifies, to those that have Commissions
to Rob and Spoil, and perhaps better understand Charles Stuarts Intentions that
granted them, then those that put him upon holding forth this Dissimulation, as
if they were recalled.

. 4.
ANd as his Majesty has given satisfaction to the just and necessary Desires
of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, so does he hereby assure and declare, That
he is no less willing and desirous to give satisfaction to the just and
necessary Desires of his good Subjects in England and Ireland; and in token
thereof, if the Houses of Parliament of England, sitting in Freedom, shall
think fit to present unto him the Propositions of Peace, agreed upon by both
Kingdoms, he will not only accord to the same, and such alterations
thereanent, as the Houses of Parliament, in regard of the Constitution of
Affairs, and the good of his Majesty and his Kingdoms, shall judge necessary,
but do what is further necessary for prosecuting the ends of the Solemn League
and Covenant, especially in those things which concern the Reformation of the
Church of England, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; That not
only the Directory of Worship, the Confession of Faith, and Catechism, but
also the Propositions and Directory for Church Government, accorded upon by the
Synod of Divines at Westminster, may be settled; and that the Church of England
may enjoy the full Liberty and Freedom of all Assemblies, and Power of
Kirk-Censures, and of all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, according to the Rule
of his own Word: And that whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, may be
diligently done for the House of the God of Heaven; and, whatever heretofore
has been the suggestions of some to him, to render his Majesty jealous of his
Parliament, and of the Servants of God: Yet is he has declared, that in
Scotland he will hearken to their Counsel, and follow their Advice in those
things that concern that Kingdom and Kirk; So does he also declare his firm
Resolution to manage the Government of the Kingdom of England by the Advice of
his Parliament, consisting of an House of Lords and of an House of Commons
there; and in those things that concern Religion, to prefer the Counsels of the
Ministers of the Gospel to all other Counsels whatsoever. And that all the
world may see how much he tenders the safety of his People, and how precious
their blood is in his sight, and how desirous he is to recover his Crown and
Government in England by peaceable means; as he does esteem the service of
those who first engaged in the Covenant, and have since that time faithfully
followed the ends thereof, to be Duty to God, and Loyalty to him; so is he
willing, in regard of others who have been involved in these late Commotions in
England, against Religion and Government, to pass an Act of Oblivion, excepting
only some few in that Nation who have been chief obstructers of the work of
Reformation, and chief Authors of the change of the Government, and of the
Murder of his Royal Father. Provided, That these who are to have the benefit
of this Act, lay down Arms, and return unto the obedience of their lawful
Sovereign. ANSWER.
THe Treaty that was touched upon in the former Paragraph, made between the
kingdom of Scotland and their King, in reference to England and Ireland, is
here at large, and in the particulars of it, set down; it will be needless to
repeat them: In the whole Frame of which, we dare boldly affirm, There are
those Grounds laid of inslaving this Nation to the Scots, and especially to the
power of their Clergy, That no Parliament that has ever yet sat in England,
and have had the least drop of true English blood in them, but would disdain
and abhor to be thus imposed upon by the Scottish Nation: And are these the
hopes that are given to this Nation, of having two Houses of Parliament sitting
in Freedom, when what they must desire, and what they must have, must be
prepared and agreed for them by a Foreign Nation? Will the Parliament be more
the Parliament of England, when two Houses shall be brought upon the Stage
again with a King at the Head of them, by the power of a Scottish Army enforcing
this upon the Nation, then when the Parliament is in actual possession of such
Power and Freedom, as through the blessing of God upon their endeavors, they
are able by Law to exclude both King and House of Lords (the known opposers of
the Peoples Freedom) out of their National Counsels, and by the force God has
enabled them with, to preserve the common Peace and Safety of the whole, under
the Government of a Commonwealth and Free State? It is too late now to think
that the People have no better discernment of their own true Interest, then to
be ^atched with any satisfaction that can be offered and given by a King, if he
himself with his power must come in at the end of it: Nor will the great
promises of what he will do in the Cause of God and Work of Reformation (under
that pretense to let in upon us the return again of Tyranny) much work upon the
pious and judicious among us, who want not the full and free enjoyments of
their consciences in this kind, in a voluntary way under this Government,
without being beholding to the Concessions of a King: nay, we may truly say,
That since the change of Government in this Nation, there have been more Laws
made, and means used for the propagating the Gospel and the power of godliness,
and encouraging the true Professors thereof; and more done for the extirpation
of Profaneness and open Wickedness, then has been during the whole time of
the Reigns of Kings over this Nation.

And as to the King of Scotland's declaring his firm Resolution to manage the
Government of England by the Advice of his Parliament, consisting of a House of
Lords and of a House of Commons; and in those things that concern Religion, to
prefer the Counsel of the Ministers of the Gospel, before all Counsels
whatsoever; We trust it shall never be in his, nor in the Kingdom of Scotlands
power, to impose either himself or his Creatures, the House of Lords, upon the
Supreme Authority and National Counsel of the Freeborn People of England; who,
if they once become corrupted in that which is the Fountain of their Liberties,
their own Representatives in Parliament assembled (which with thus much cost
and hazard are set up in some measure already in their Primitive and Original
Purity, and are going on every day more and more to the completing thereof)
must expect nothing but the flowings forth of Tyranny and Mischief upon them,
in and by their very Laws; and that which should be the chief and only remedy
against all their evils, would by this means become the greatest cause and
author of them: Nor would this at all be mended or helped by the Clause which
is put in, That in those things which concern Religion, he will prefer the
Counsels of the Ministers of the Gospel before all Counsels whatsoever, and so
by undeniable consequence before the Parliament it self; for we have learned by
experience, That there is hardly any Debate had in Parliament, but the
subject matter of it, in some sense or other, may be brought under the
concernment of Religion, and by that means, all the Laws must be or not be, as
the Clergy will approve or not approve of them; A practice so inconsistent with
the Fundamental Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and the Peoples good,
that it has always been exploded and resisted by all Assertors of English
Freedom; and whenever any visible Attempts have been made to promote such a
Design (as too often have been since the sitting of this Parliament) the
Parliaments have highly Resented it, and frequently adjudged it High Treason,
looking at it, as that which Introduces a Foreign Jurisdiction, and makes way
for the setting up again a Popish Supremacy, changed in Name only.

Touching the Act of Oblivion offered; It is no doubt, the effect of a great
desire the King of Scots has to receive that which he pretends unto, in the
Government of England, An Acknowledgement of his Power to dispense such Favors:
But in the mean time we must observe, who it is that makes this Offer, A
Traitor to the Parliament and People of England, and who by his past Actings
against them, has rendered himself obnoxious to their severest Censures, from
which we hold him no way Absolved by Assumption or Declaration of a Scottish
Kingship.

He who by Law and his Guilt stands incapable of the meanest Privilege amongst
us, Does he think himself qualified to Exercise the Greatest? Shall the
Malefactor be presumed to have Power to give Pardon to his Judge? Or do the
Scots or their King imagine, under pretense of an Act of Oblivion, to seduce
England to receive their Laws from Scotland? The Obstructers of real
Reformation we are as much against, as he or they can pretend to be, as by our
Acts and Actions appears; Amongst which, we reckon it not the least, That that
Grand Enemy to Reformation, the Father of the now Declarer, after his long and
Bloody progress made in Destruction and Devastation of the Innocent people in
the Three Nations (the Guilt whereof upon him, being a Truth so apparent, as
both Himself and Son, and our now Enemies of Scotland, have been forced to
acknowledge) has been by Our Authority Tried, Adjudged and Executed, for his
notorious Treasons, Tyrannies and Murders; whereof, whatever the
Interpretation be given by the Son of that Murderer, or other his Partisans,
Old or New Malignants, late Apostates, or detestable Neutrals, who style the
Act of Justice, Murder (with like Truth and Reason, as those who call Good,
Evil, and Evil, Good; Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light) We, for our parts,
bless God for that opportunity put into our hands, of offering that Sacrifice
to Divine Justice, toward vindication and cleansing of our Land from that
Blood, wherewith, by that Murderer and his party, it was so miserably defiled.
And as we have been obliged in a faithful and conscientious discharge of that
Power and Trust committed to us by God, and the People of this Nation, to
Avenge that Innocent Blood upon the Head of that Tyrant, and some others, the
chief Authots and Actors under him in shedding thereof: So for the seduced
Multitude, and those who in simplicity have been misguided by them, to act to
their own and Countries ruin, We have, in the view of all, expressed our
tenderness and forbearance toward them. And being invested with the Authority
of the Nation (whose Representative we are) in that behalf, as to such misled
persons, The Parliament of England thinks fit further to declare, That as they
have already long since had it in their thoughts, and for that purpose have
under consideration, An Act of general Pardon (in the progress whereof they
have been interrupted, by the renewed Endeavors of Charles Stuart, and his
Adherents, to disturb the Peace of this Commonwealth, and hinder its
Settlement) they will with all convenient speed apply themselves to the passing
of such an Act; And in the mean time do expect from all persons living under
the Protection of this Commonwealth, That they make not themselves any way
Ayders or Abettors of the said Charles Stuart, in his Pretenses to the
Government of this Nation, under what fair and specious shows soever, upon the
penalties in the Laws in that behalf provided.

. 5.
THe Committee of Estates of the Kingdom, and General Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, having declared so fully in what concerns the Sectaries, and the
present Designs, Resolutions and Actings of their Army against the Kingdom of
Scotland: And the same Committee and Assembly having sufficiently laid open
public Dangers and Duties, both upon the right hand and upon the left, It is
not needful for his Majesty to add any thing thereunto; except, That in those
things he does commend and approve them, and that he Resolves to live and dye
with them, and his Loyal Subjects, in prosecution of the Ends of the Covenant.
ANSWER.
THe Parliament of England, and also their Army, having so fully declared the
Justice, Necessity and Ends of undertaking the present Expedition into
Scotland; and having also put it in a way how those Declarations from the
Committee of Estates, and Commission of the Kirk, in Answer thereunto, shall
have their invalidity detected (as some of them already in part have been) It
will be needless to say any thing further on this subject in this place.

. 6.
ANd whereas that prevailing party in England, after all their strange
Usurpations, and insolent Actings in that Land, Do not only keep his Majesty
from the Government of that Kingdom by force of Arms, but also have now Invaded
the Kingdom of Scotland, who have deserved better things at their hands, and
against whom they have no just quarrel; His Majesty does therefore desire and
expect, That all his good Subjects in England, who are and resolve to be
faithful to God and to their King, according to the Covenant, will lay hold
upon such an opportunity, and use their utmost endeavors to promove the
Covenant, and all the ends thereof; and to recover and re-establish the Ancient
Government of the Kingdom of England (under which, for many Generations, it did
flourish in peace and plenty at home, and in Reputation abroad) and Privileges
of the Parliament, and Native and Just Liberty of the People: His Majesty
desires to assure himself, That there does remain in these so much confidence
of their Duty to Religion, their King and Country, and so many sparkles of the
ancient English Valor, which shined so eminently in their Noble Ancestors, as
will put them on to bestir themselves for the breaking the Yoke of those men's
Oppressions from off their Necks: Shall men of Conscience and Honor set
Religion, Liberties and Government at so low a Rate, as not rather to undergo
any hazard, before they be thus deprived of them? Will not all generous men
count any Death more tolerable, then to live in servitude all their days? And
will not Posterity blame those who dare attempt nothing for themselves, and for
their Children, in so good a Cause, in such an Exigent? Whereas if they gather
themselves, and take courage, putting on a Resolution answerable to so Noble
and just an Enterprise, they shall honor God, and gain themselves the
Reputation of Pious men, worthy Patriots, and Loyal Subjects, and be called The
Repairers of the Breach, by the present and succeeding Generations; and they
may certainly promise to themselves a Blessing from God upon so just and
honorable undertaking for the Lord, and for his Cause, for their own Liberties,
their Native King and Country, and the unvaluable good and happiness of the
Posterity. Whatever has formerly been his Majesty's guiltiness before God, and
the bad success that these have had who owned his Affairs, whilst he stood in
Opposition to the Work of God; yet the state of the question being now altered,
and his Majesty having obtained Mercy to be on Gods side, and to prefer Gods
Interest before his own, He hopes, That the Lord will be gracious, and
countenance his own Cause in the hands of weak and sinful Instruments, against
all Enemies whatsoever. This is all that can be said by his Majesty at present,
to those in England and Ireland, at such a distance; and as they shall acquit
themselves at this time in the active discharge of their necessary Duties, so
shall they be accepted before God, indeared to his Majesty, and their Names had
in remembrance throughout the World. Given at Our Court at Dunfirmlin the
sixteenth day of August, 1650. and in the second year of our Reign. ANSWER.
THat which was first in Design and lurking at the bottom, is now last brought
forth into open view to be put into practice: Until the Scots King had thus
washed himself clean with his verbal Repentances, had pretended a full
persuasion of the Justice and Equity of all the Articles and Heads of the
Covenant, and a casting of himself wholly upon the Advice of Parliaments, and
Assemblies of Divines, in all Civil and Ecclesiastical matters in both Nations;
He would have spoiled his own Affairs, and weakened the hands of all that should
have joined with him, to have engaged in a new War against England, who have
smarted and suffered too much already by the old; but now, after the Landscip
of such Wonders as these is drawn forth into a piece of paper, and the state of
the Cause and of the War would seem to be changed, What does all this tend to,
and what is the use that is to be made of it? Surely no other then that, which
if all these things had been left undone, was his and the Scots proper Interest
before, upon their old Account; that is to say, To stir up all Parties and
Interests capable of his or their seducements, to take the first opportunity to
embroyl this Nation afresh in blood, that they might come in as Conquerors, and
so make it, as much as in them lies, the saddest spectacle of ruin and misery
that can be imagined; for what can be like an overrunning of the Nation by a
Scottish Army, with their King in the Head of them, be their pretenses what they
will? And therefore, since it is so apparent what is the end and Design of this
Declaration, It will become all true Englishmen to be more awakened then ever,
to watch against, and resist to the last man, so pernicious and deep laid a
Design, whereby at one blow to cut off and disappoint all that has been fought
for so many years together, and subject themselves to the power of a Foreign
Nation, against whom God has been pleased to give so wonderful a Testimony by
the late signal Victory near Dunbar, the third of September, One thousand six
hundred and fifty, upon Solemn Appeals made by both parties to Almighty God:
And as it shall be our parts to omit no good means that God has put into our
hands, to prevent any Insurrections or Disturbances of the public Peace and
Safety, by what hand soever carried on; so we do hold it our duty further to
Declare, That whosoever shall be found (in pursuance of this Declaration of
Charles Stuart the Scots King) promoting the Interest of him the said Charles
Stuart, or any way engaging in the prosecution of the wicked Designs therein
contained, They shall be proceeded against with much more severity then
Delinquents in the former Wars, as to the judgment of Parliament shall be
thought meet.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

SInce the dispatch of this Answer, there came to hand the Copies of four
Letters, written from the Earl of Loudoun, Chancellor of Scotland, to the King
of Scots, which were taken in the said Chancellors Cabinet among the spoils of
the Scots, at the late memorable defeat of their Army in the Fields of Dunbar:
By which seasonable Providence, a further discovery is made, of what was
sufficiently evident before to all discerning men; both of the Scots continuing
Design to invade England, had we not thus prevented them; and of the
dissembling formality of their Kings Repentance, so much cried up by them, upon
his omiting (as they call it) this Declaration, and obtruded upon their
credulous multitudes, and swallowed by their Party here for Interest sake: when
hereby it is evident 'twas drawn by them in terminis, and extorted from him with
Minatory importunities, and well demonstrates the little sense of Conscience or
Honor in that Kings, and the desperateness of his hopes that pursues his end by
such means. And it may further be observed, what sincerity can be expected from
that Nation in any Public Transactions, when their great Minister of State
dare make so bold with his Kings Answer, as to alter it to what he thought
would be^ter serve a turn; and offer that to their Parliament as their Kings,
without ever consulting him in it, and that in a business of so great a
concernment: The discovery of these juglings may be useful for those who have
been imposed upon by the boldness of these Instruments, who without respect or
reverence to truth, are wont to be bold with any thing that may conduce to
their end.

Die Veneris, 20 Septembr. 1650.
THe Copy of a Letter from the Lord Loudoun to the King of Scotland, dated 9
Julii, 1650, and the Copies of three other Letters, all found in the Lord
Loudouns Cabinet, were all this day Read.

ORdered by the Parliament, That the said four Letters be all printed at the
latter end of the Declara^ion, with the Circumstances when and where the same
were found; And it is referred to Mr. Scot to take care to see them printed
accordingly.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
ALbeit there be no man rejoices more for your Majesty's safe Arrival in this
Kingdom, or more desirous to wait upon your Majesty then my self; yet the duty
of my place in attending the Parliament so long as it was sitting (where I did
endeavor to be more serviceable to your Majesty then I could be elsewhere) and
the distemper of my health, not permiting me to travel, I hope will plead
pardon at your Majesty's hand, that I have not come to wait upon you; but so
soon as I shall be any ways able to travel, I shall attend your Majesty; and
shall not presume to trouble your Majesty with any particulars till then,
resolving to make it my chief care and study how to improve the happy agreement
(laid upon so pious and well grounded a Foundation of a Covenant with God and
your People) to the best advantage, as may conduce most to his Honor, and the
Recovery of your Majesty's just and undoubted Right of all your Kingdoms; than
which, nothing shall be more faithfully and really endeavored by

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subject and humble Servant, LOUDOUN.
Edinburgh, 9 Julii, 1650. Endorsed, A Copy of my Letter to the Kings Majesty,

9 Julii, 1650.


Most gracious Sovereign,
THe Marquess of Argyle and the Earl Balclewgh, have communicated to me your
Majesty's Answer to that Paper, which was presented by him and others to your
Majesty, in Name of your Parliament and their Committee, concerning the Removal
of some of your Servants and others from your Court and Royal Person: And
considering that some parts of your Answer is such as would not be
Satisfactory, I have presumed to alter it, and write it so, as I am confident
will give good Satisfaction: For seeing your Majesty has by your Answer to the
same Desires, given full contentment to the General Assembly, I doubt not but
your Majesty is willing to give the same conent to your Parliament and
Committee of Estates: Therefore I trust your Majesty will pardon my boldness,
for I know no better service can be done to your Majesty, than that any thing
which proceeds from you, may be acceptable to your People, and that your
Majesty may be more and more endeared in their affections; which is the duty,
and shall be ever the desire of

Endorsed, A Copy of my Letter to the King,

July 22. 1650.


Most gracious Sovereign,
THe condition of your Majesty's Army here, and what our Resolutions are at
present, will be so exactly shown to your Majesty by Sir James Lumsden, as I
shall refer the particulars to his Relations, rather than trouble your Majesty
with a long Letter; yet briefly I hold it fit to show your Majesty, That
Cromwell has gotten more than a months provision for his Army by Sea, and that
he expects shortly new Recruits: And victuals being so scarce, as it will be
very difficult to entertain our Army in a Body till the Harvest, that Corns be
cut and reaped, Its resolved, for this and other Reasons, That this Army shall
march out to the fields nearer the Enemy, and (if they force us to fight) in
Gods strength to give them Battle; or (if they shall not pursue us) some
Enterprise will be undertaken, to make a diversion to give the Enemy work in
England, rather than consume us with a lingering War, and make the seat of it in
Scotland. In order to which, your Majesty's hastening hither your Declaration is
so necessary, as the delay of it will retard and obstruct any Expedition into
England; and time is so precious, as the loss of opportunity can hardly ever be
recovered: So praying God to bless your Majesty, and so direct your Councels,
and the actions of your Armies, as may serve most for his honor, and may
restore your Majesty to your just Right. And, Sir, It is the desire and
judgment of many, That Sir J. L. should be Lieut: General of the Foot, but was
not thought expedient to do it presently, to shun contest and emulation; yet
his affection to the Cause, and to your Majesty's Service, is such, as he is
willing to give his best assistance in ordering the Army, and to act his part
in a day of Battle: And truly Sir, he is a person of so much valor and
experience in War, that your Majesty would give him all encouragement, and lay
your Commands upon him, to return presently to the Army, and not leave it.

Endorsed, A Scroll of my Letter to the King,

Aug. 10. 1650.


SIR,
THere has been so much said by these who are here, and those were sent from
the Committee of Estates, and from the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
to move your Majesty to emit that Declaration for satisfaction of the Church
and State, and of such in all your Kingdoms as desire Religion and your
Majestics Throne to be established, according to the Covenant, as I can add
little to persuade your Majesty; yet if your Majesty shall ponder in the
Balance of righteous judgment, the consequences will follow upon your
granting or refusal, your Majesty will not deny it. If your Majesty grant and
emit this Declaration, you satisfy the Church, the State, the Army, and all
your good Subjects; They all concur to act for you, and the Army is ready (if
they be not engaged in present Battle) to march into England, and leave
Scotland, and all which is dear to them to the utmost hazard, and sacrifice
their Lives for carrying on the Work of Reformation, and restoring your Majesty
to your Right and Crown of England: And then, if there be any in England who
dare appear for Religion, for their own Liberties, or for your Majesty's
Interest, they will find a fit opportunity for it. Your Majesty is now obliged
by the Oath of Covenant with God and your People, to promote the Ends of the
Covenant in your Royal Station and Place, to the utmost of your Power. And your
Majesty by the Treaty with this Kingdom, and in good Reason, is bund to follow
the Counsel and Advice of your Parliament and Church, and of these who are by
them authorized; and since this which is earnestly desired by both, as
necessary for the good of Religion and the Covenant, and engaging of the Church
and Kingdom to hazard their Lives and Estates for carrying on your Majesty's
Interest, with the Interest of Religion, your Majesty should not deny, but
cordially and speedily condescend to it.

If your Majesty, after so earnest entreaty and such offers, from the Church,
the State and the Army, shall refuse to satisfy the desire, and clear your
Resolutions, your Majesty will grieve their Spirits, cool their Affections, and
weaken their Hands: And since your Majesty refuses to do what is necessary for
the good of Religion and Gods Interest, they will look to the safety and good
of Religion, and to their own Safety, and emit a Declaration, how willing they
are to hazard their lives for your Majesty's Interest, if ye had been for
Religion; but that being denied, they will separate the preservation of
Religion from your Interest, and so to the Safety of this Kingdom; and if there
be a difference and separation upon those grounds, there will never, in humane
appearance, be such a conjunction, and your Enemies (who will grant any thing
which may destroy your Majesty) will win their ends.

Endorsed, A Copy of my Letter to his Majesty, upon sending the Declaration to
him to be Signed.



FINIS.

