A Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to this
Kingdom, and to the whole world.

Wherein (amongst diverse of his Majesty's late illegal proceedings) is
discovered, how several Commissions under the Kings Authority have bin granted
to many professed Papists (herein Nominated) for places of Command in this War,
with power to raise men and Arms, which in sundry places they have performed.

Also how Sir John Hinderson, and Colonel Cockram, were sent to Hamburg and
Denmark, to raise Forces there, and in other foraigne parts, to bring into
this KINGDOM.

With the names of some who have bin proclaimed Rebels in Ireland, now in great
favor with his MAJESTY.

For which and other reasons they are resolved to enter into a solemn oath and
covenant with God to the uttermost of their power, with the hazard of their
lives and fortunes to defend the Truth, against the Kings popish Army, and all
that shall join with them in the prosecution of this wicked design.

Die Sabathi, October. 22. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and published, and read in all Churches
and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, by the
Parsons, Vicars, or Curats of the same.

John Brown Cler. Parliam.

October. 23. London Printed for John Wright. 1643.

A Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
WE the Lords and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, do in the
presence of Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our Consciences, and
discharge of that great trust which lies upon us, make this protestation and
Declaration to this Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole world, that no
private passion or respect, no evil intention to his Majesty's person, no
design to the prejudice of his just honor and authority, engaged us to raise
Forces and take up arms against the authors of this War, wherewith the
Kingdom is now inflamed.

And we have always desired from our hearts and souls, manifested in our
actions and proceedings, and in several humble Petitions and Remonstrances to
his Majesty, professed our loyalty and obedience to his Crown, readiness and
resolution to defend his person, and support his estate with our lives and
fortunes to the uttermost of our power.

That we have been willing to pass by, not only those Injuries, Ignominies,
Slanders, and false Accusations, wherewith we have been privately oppressed
and grieved, but likewise many public encroachments, and high usurpations, to
the prejudice of Religion and Liberty, diverse bloody, Traiterous and cruel
practices and designs, for the utter ruin and destruction of the Church and
State, so as we might for the time to come have been secured from that wicked
and Malignant party, those pernicious and Traiterous counsels, who have been
the authors and fomentors of the former mischiefs and present calamities which
have, and still do distemper this Church and State.

That for the same purpose, and for the avoiding of blood we directed the Earl
of Essex Lord General by himself, or others in some safe and honorable way
to cause to be delivered an humble Petition, wherein we do desire nothing from
his Majesty but that he would return in peace to his Parliament, and by their
faithful counsel and advice compose the distempers and confusions abounding
in his Kingdoms, as he is bound to do, we therein professing in the sight of
Almighty God, which is the strongest obligation and assurance that any
christian, and the most solemn public faith which any such State as a
Parliament can givetx, hat we would receive him with all honor, yield him all
true obedience and subjection, and faithfully endeavor to defend his person
and estate from all danger, and to the uttermost of our power to establish to
him and to his people, all the blessings of a glorious and happy Reign, as it
is more largely expressed in that Petition.

For the delivery of which Petition, his Excellency has twice sent unto the
King, humbly desiring a safe conduct for those who should be employed therein,
but his Majesty refused to give any such safe conduct, or to receive this
humble and dutiful Petition, by any address from the Earl of Essex, saying
that if Justice had been done, the Gentleman which brought the second Message
could not expect his liberty.

By all which and many other evidences and Inducements, we are fully convinced
in our judgments and belief, that the Kings counsels and resolutions are so
engaged to the Popish party, for the suppression and extirpation of the true
Religion, that all hopes of peace and protection are excluded, and that it is
fully intended to give satisfaction to the Papists by alteration of Religion,
and to the Cavaliers and other Soldiers, by exposing the wealth of the good
subjects, especially of this City of London, to be sacked, plundered, and
spoiled by them.

That for the better effecting hereof, great numbers of Papists have in show
conformed themselves to the Protestant Religion, by coming to the Church,
receiving the Sacrament, and taking the oaths of Alegiance and Supremacy,
which some of their own Priests have encouraged them to do, by maintaining
that they might do all those things and yet continue good Catholics: Under
which cover his Majesty did at first begin to strengthen himself, those of
that Religion being weak, and unable to endure the envy and discontent which
the arming of the Papists would procure in the Kingdom, and therefore
endeavored to keep off all Jealousies and suspicions by many fearful oaths
and imprecations, concerning his purpose of maintaining the Protestant Religion
and the Laws of the Kingdom; causing some professed Papists to be discharged
out of his Army, and none to be received that would not endure the Test of
coming to Church, receiving the Sacrament, and taking the oaths of Allegiance.

That his Majesty being now grown stronger, and able as he conceives to make
good his own ends by Arms, his confidence in the Papists, does more clearly
appear: Persons imprisoned for Priests and Jesuits have bin released out of
the Goal of Lancaster, porfest Papists have bin in vited to rise and take up
Arms, Commissions under his Majesty's Authority have bin granted to many of
them for places of command in this war, with power to raise men and great
numbers have bin raised by them, and they daily increase, as namely to Sir
Nicolas Thornton Sir Tho. Howard Bar. Sir Edward Widdington, Sir William
Riddell, Master Smith, of Ash, Master George Wray, Master Edward Gray, of
Morpeth Castle, Master Lancelot Errington, of Dento, Master Lancelot Holtby,
all of Northumberland, Bishopric of Durham and New Castle, to Master Clifton,
Master William Walton, Sir William Gerrard, Baronet, Sir Cicill Trafford,
Master Anderson, of Lostock in the County of Lancaster, and diverse Forces are
raised and paid by the Earl of Worcester, and his Son the Lord Herbert, and as
we are informed by an express messenger, sent from those parts, the said Lord
Herbert, a notorious Papist, is made General of all South Wales, and we are
further informed out of Yorkshire, by diverse persons of great worth and
quality, that those that raise Forces in these parts for his Majesty, do arm
and employ Papists, and use their advice in their consultations, all which is
contrary to the solemn Oaths, Protestations and execrations, whereby his
Majesty bound himself to maintain the Protestant Religion, and the laws of
the Land, by which he endeavored to get a confidence in the people of his good
intentions, which how well it is answered, we leave to the world to judge,

That S. John Hinderson and Col. Cockram, men of ill repor both for Religion
and honesty, sent to Hamburg and Denmark, as we are credibly informed to raise
Forces there, and to bring them to New-Castl. and to ioyn with the Earl of New
Castl. and the Army of Papists, which they intend to raise there, and that
diverse endeavors have bin used in other foraigne parts to bring in strange
Forces into the Kingdom; that the King has received about him diverse Papists
of Ireland, some of which are indicted of high Treason for their rebellion
there, notoriously known to have bin in actual Rebellion, as namely the L.
Yaffe, S. John Dungane, proclaimed a Rebel, Colo, Fitz Williams, Doctor Meara
indicted for the Rebellion in Ireland, and fled for the same, and yet appointed
Physician to Prince Rupert; and that his Majesty has sent for the Petition of
the Irish Rebels, which the Justices had stopped, with evident expression of
favor to them, whereby that Kingdom is like to become an unfit habitation of
any Protestants, and a seminary of war and treason against this Kingdom.

That diverse English Traitors, actors in the former designs against the
Kingdom and Parliament, are the chief Counselors and actors in this
unnatural war against his Subjects, as the Lord Digby, Oneale, Wilmot,
Pollard, Ashburnham and others.

That we have bin likewise credibly informed, that diverse Jesuits, and
Priests in foraigne parts, make great collections of money, for relief of the
papists in Ireland, and the furthering of his Majesty's designs here against
the Parliament, and that by them, and some others, fled out of this Kingdom
for Treason: great means are made to take up the differences betwixt some
Princes of the Roman Religion, that so they might unite their strength, for the
extirpation of the protestant Religion, wherein principally this Kingdom, and
the Kingdom of Scotland are concerned, as making the greatest body of the
Reformed Religion in Christendom, and best able to defend themselves, and
succor other Churches.

For all which reasons we are resolved to enter into a solemn oath and
Covenant with God, to give up our selves, our Lives and Fortunes into his
hands, and that we will to the uttermost of our power, and Judgment, maintain
his truth, and conform our selves to his will, That we will defend this cause
with the hazard of our lives, against the Kings Army, and against all that
shall join with them in prosecution of this wicked design, according to the
form to be agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, to be subscribed by our
hands, and that we will for the same ends associate ourselves, and unite with
all the well affected in the City of London, and other parts of his Majesty's
Dominions.

That we expect our Brethren of Scotland, according to the act of pacification,
whereby the two Kingdoms are mutually bound to suppress all debates and
differences, to the disturbance of the public peace, that they will help and
assist us in defense of the Cause, which if the Popish party prevail, must
needs either involve them in that alteration of Religion which will be made
here, or engage them in a War against this Kingdom, to defend their own
Religion and Liberty: And we doubt not but the God of Truth, and the great
protectior of his people, will assist and enable us in this our just defense,
to restrain the malice and Fury of those that seek our Ruin, and to secure
the persons, estates, and liberties of all that join with us: And to procure
and establish the safety of Religion, and fruition of our Laws and Liberties,
in this and all other his Majesty's Dominions, which we do here again
profess before the ever-living God, to be the chief end of all our Counsels
and Resolutions, without any intention or desire to hurt or injure his
Majesty, either in his Person or just Power.

FINIS.

