18. October, 1648.
A DECLARATION and ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
For the Sequestering the Estates both Real and Personal of Delinquents, to be
employed for and toward the raising and maintaining of a Troop of Horse, for
the Service of the Parliament within the County of Surrey.
FOrasmuch as diverse ill-affected persons have endeavored to raise a new War in
this Kingdom, tending to the ruin of this present Parliament, and the
destruction of all the well-affected persons that have adhered thereunto,
contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and to the Declarations and Orders of
Parliament made therein, whereby all such persons as have or shall raise Force
against the Power and Authority of Parliament, and against the Forces raised by
Authority of Parliament, for the defense of Parliament and Kingdom, are and
have been from time to time declared Traitors: Be it therefore Ordained and
Declared by the said Lords and Commons, That the Estates as well real as
personal, of all such person or persons as have been in Arms in the late
Rebellion raised by the Earl of Holland, and others in the County of Surrey, or
any other their adherents, and also all and every other person or persons that
have sent in unto their aid and assistance, either Money, Men, Horse, Arms or
Ammunition, or have indeavored either by providing themselves, or persuading
others to send in any aid or assistance to the said Forces; And by reason of
the said Earls departure out of the said County, came short of such their
intended aid and assistance; As also the Estates of all such persons lying and
being within the said County of Surrey, as did aid and assist the like late
Rebellion in the County of Kent, Essex, or Sussex, or that have taken any
Horse, or plundered any person of his Goods, for or toward the maintenance of
any Forces against the Parliament, and shall prove to be comprised within the
Terms and Directions of such Ordinances of Parliament, as have been formerly
made and published concerning Sequestration of Delinquents Estates, shall be
forthwith Seized and Sequestered into the hands of the Sequestrators and
Committees of the said County formerly named for the Sequestration of
Delinquents Estates, who are to pursue all Powers and directions in the
execution thereof, as in and by the said former Ordinances of Sequestration is
declared: And it is hereby Ordained and Declared, That all the profits arising
out of all or any the said Delinquents Estates, lying and being in the said
County, shall be employed toward the raising and maintaining of a Troop of
Horse for the Service of the Parliament within the said County, for the
preservation of the Peace and Safety of the same; And the said Committee, or
any seven of them, have hereby power and authority given them to set Fines, and
makes Compositions with all and every the said Delinquents, (as were not at
that time actually Sequestered for former Delinquencies) according to the Rules
prescribed and set down for Goldsmiths Hall for such Estates only as lie within
the said County, certifying the Committee sitting for compositions at
Goldsmiths-Hall, the names of the persons, and the sums so set, and to employ
the moneys so raised for the uses aforesaid: And it is further Ordered, That
Sir Will. Brereton Bar. John Lloyd Esquire Charles Lord Car, John Thyn, Arthur
Squib, George Duncomb of Shalsord, William Ellyot Esquire; Sir Robert Needham
Knight, Thomas Scot, Richard Salway, and William Owfield Esquires, be added
unto the Committee of Sequestrations in the said County of Surrey; And the
Committee formerly made for the raising of moneys for the Army under the
command of the now Lord Eairfax, with the Committee for Sequestrations, or any
three or more of them, have hereby authority to raise upon the County such
further sum or sums of money by way of Assessment, for and toward the raising
and maintaining of the said Troop of Horse for the said County, so as the sum
exceed not Four hundred pounds per mensem, which said moneys are to belevied
according to the rules and directions appointed by the Ordinance, for the
Raising and Levying the moneys for the Army under the command of Thomas Lord
Fairfax, with the several and respective powers therein given and granted; and
that such moneys already laid toward the Raising and paying of the said Troop,
are hereby allowed of and to be Levied accordingly: Provided, That hereafter
neither the foresaid past nor future Assessments are to be extended or
continued further then the aforementioned provision by the profits of
Sequestrations and Compositions, shall fall short of those ends for which they
are given by this Ordinance; And if it shall be thought fit by the said
Committee to raise a Foot Company for the safety of the County, They are
authorized hereby to pay the said Company out of the Sequestration and
assessment aforesaid.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance and
Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
1648.


