AN ADDITIONALL ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in the PARLIAMENT
OF ENGLAND, For the morefull Indemnity of the Officers and Soldiers who have
acted by Authority, and for the service of the PARLIAMENT. Together with
several VOTES of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, concerning the
same.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance and Votes be
forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Sabbathi, 5 Junii, 1647. An additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in the Parliament of England, for the more full indemnity of the
Officers and Soldiers who have acted by Authority and for the service of the
Parliament.
FOrasmuch as in the times of this late War and public distractions there
have been many Injuries done to private persons and other offenses Committed by
diverse persons bearing Arms in the service of the Parliament, The Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled taking into their Consideration, That it is
expedient that the injuries and offenses aforesaid be pardoned and put in
Oblivion rather than by pretense of prosecution against some few persons, a
great number of such who have faithfully served the Parliament be brought into
a continual vexation for such Actions as the exigencie of War has
necessitated them unto, Do therefore Ordain, and be it Ordained by the said
Lords and Commons, That all persons who have committed any offenses,
trespasses, injuries, or other misdemeanors whatsoever, during such time as
they have been employed in Arms, by or for the service of the Parliament, be,
is, and are hereby discharged and pardoned of the same, and off and from all
prosecution or damages therefore, either at the Suit of the King or the party
grieved, and may in case he or they be questioned therefore, plead the general
Issues, and give this Ordinance in evidence, which shall be allowed to all
intents and purposes as if the same were pleaded in War. And in case any
shall prosecute any Action or Suit contrary to the Tenor of this Ordinance,
against any person hereby discharged, after notice given that such person is
hereby discharged, the defendant or Defendants so prosecuted shall recover his
and their cost against such Prosecutor.

Provided also that this Ordinance nor any thing herein contained, shall extend
to discharge any such person or persons as aforesaid from making their true and
just Accounts to any Committee or Committees of Parliament appointed or to be
appointed for that purpose, of what they have taken, received, or had, for the
Service or benefit of the Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 5 Junii, 1647. Votes of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, for the disbanding and payment of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Common
Soldier both of Horse and Foot of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army shall have their
full pay upon their disbanding or engaging for Ireland, deducting for free
Quarter, according to the course and Rules of the Army.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Officers of
this Army not in Commission, shall likewise have their full pay upon their
disbanding, or engaging for Ireland, deducting for free quarter, according to
the course and Rules of the Army.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That there shall be
an addition of a Months Pay to the commissioned Officers of Sir Thomas Fairfax
his Army, both Horse and Foot, that shall either disband or engage in the
Service of Ireland.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Declaration
bearing Date the thirt^eth of March, 1647. shall be expunged out of the
Journall of both Houses; the said Declaration was accordingly expunged.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 19 Junii. 1647.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament having well accepted the obedience and
readiness of those Officers and Soldiers who have complied with their Orders,
have Ordered and Ordained, and by Authority aforesaid do Order and Ordain,
That all and every the said Officers and Soldiers aforesaid, shall ^e freed,
exonerated, acquitted, and discharged, and are in and hereby declared and
adjudged from henceforth to be free, exonerate, acquit, and discharged of and
from all and whatsoever prosecution, judgment of life or member, pains,
penalties, and punishments whatsoever incurred or that shall, may, or can,
might, could, should, or ought to be inflicted, prosecuted, had, or pursued
against them or any of them, for or by reason of the said pretended offense or
offenses of their departure from their said Colors, or from under the Command
of the said Sir Thomas Fairfax, or from or under the command of any Military
Officer or Officers under him whatsoever.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 24 December. 1647. An Ordinance giving power to the Committee of
Indemnity, to put in Execution the Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedoms.
BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
That power be given to the Committee for Indemnity, to put in execution the
several Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedoms that have served the
Parliament in this late War, and to receive all complaints made upon them,
and to give Redress to the party grieved, and to allow Costs, Charges, and
Damages, as they shall see cause, according to the power given them, in cases
of Indemnity.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

