A friendly DEBATE On a WEIGHTY SUBJECT: OR, A Conference by Writing Betwixt Mr
SAMVEL EATON AND Mr JOHN KNOWLES Concerning the DIVINITY OF JESUS CHRIST: For
the beating out, and further clearing up of TRUTH.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for GYLES CALVERT, at the black spread-Eagle at the
West End of Paul's, MDCL.

(...) presented Truths, nor thine own Eyes to be too much weakened by over much
use of the clouded spectacles of Ancient terms and opinions: but in regard
there must be some Oneness, and Analogy between the Recipient, and the thing
received, to make up an intellectual, and perfect conjunction; (as the
Metaphysics say:) be exhorted in the fervent Love of the Love-working Spirit,
to understand what you receive, and to receive what you convincingly
understand; let not ancient Authority darken Truths glory, though newly
discovered; nor new Errors shake Truth settled, though anciently confirmed, but
as the Apostle says in the Spirit of the Father, Try all things. The Treatise
designs the confirmation of the Negative part of this Logical Question,
Whether Jesus Christ the Son of the Most High God, be that God? the nature
thereof is of high concernment, and calls for the greatest, the gravest
consideration. It Is the exhortation of the Spirit, Heb. 3.1. (...).
Heb. 3.1. Holy Brethren consider, the word is weighty. Beloved Christians, the
Son requires the understanding of a sublimated spirit, sunk down into the very
Center of the Soul, expunged from the Relics of the dregs of vain delusions.
Professors of all sorts examine principles already taken in; try it with your
own hands, especially this here presented, it is matter of moment, and that for
these Arguments.

1. In regard of the Excellency of this Knowledge, Phil. 3.8. (...).
so Paul calls it, Phil. 3.8. it is the knowledge of him that lay in the womb of
Eternity; that received, that revealed, the bosom-secrets of glory, 1 Ioh.
1.18. It Is the knowledge of our friend, that is crowned King in the Assembly of
Heaven, and contains the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Psalm. 2.6. Col. 2.3.

2. In regard of the Mystery of this Knowledge. Every Truth is a secret, and
that in regard of its proximity (that I may not say Identity) to the highest:
Then that, sure, more eminently which the Spirit of God intentionally signs
so. The Sons name is a secret, as that Angels, Judge. 13.18. Phelij, a secret, a
wonderful name; a wonderful name indeed would it be, were his name in the
number thereof made known. And Col. 4.3. Ephesians. 3.3. Col. 2.2. Col. 4.3. Ephesians.
3.3. Col. 2.2. (...).
(...). The disquisition and search of things remote, separate, and
transcendent, is a work for Spirits generated in the Divine Love, and tinctured
with the Divine Nature, which enobles them above all acts seemingly glorious in
the worlds view; especially

3. In regard of the Utility thereof: The Knowledge of the Son is very
profitable: by the right understanding whereof many prophecies concerning the
Church lie either chained up in darkness, and undiscovered, or appear so
mighty, that they are by most too too rashly censured and condemned. It Is no
less then eternal life in all the parts thereof, John 17.3. 1 John 5.20. Nay,
John 17.3. 1 John 5.20. John 14.9.
it is to know the Being of all knowledge; and the center of every Being, John
14.9.

Friends, sit down no longer in deadness, in darkness: but consider these
things in your selves once and again, and then judge according to the spirit of
Oneness and divine Revelation that works in you. See more by your own Eyes;
that the Babel of Traducall Doctrines authorized only by man, may fail and
fall. To believe this or that to be, without a spiritual light and intelligent
persuasion, is but an implicit faith, and comes under the Roman condemnation.
He knows best that has truth written upon his own soul.

But when on the one hand I weigh the wantonness of these days, in lifting up
the heel against many Truths pressing near; and the facility on the other hand
to entertain without knowledge and understanding, it prompts me to premeditate
the various effects this ensuing Treatise will produce: Some Luxuriant and
heady spirits will (peradventure) draw the curtains before they know it is
night, and sit down in their retired, their forced darkness. Others, whose ears
stands always open, and Athenian-like, are wandering, are waiting for some new
thing, will too easily welcome it as an Angel of Light, and lodge it with them
without so much as quaering What are you? But are afterward as soon drawn out
of it as dallied to it. Yet is it my hopes that some Valiant one in spiritual
Israel, whose sword is on his thigh, Cant. 3.7, 8. will enter the List with
her, to the discovery of her strength or weakness, and endeavor the settlement
of this point in Question.

Happily this may be the time that the Truth of these Mysteries of the Father
and of Christ shall be manifested: who sees not the multitude of divisions,
haesitations, acceptations concerning God, Christ, and the Spirit. The smoke of
the pit ascends very high; me thinks it proclaims the glory of the Lord to be
rising for the breaking of the cloud, to the ushering in of the day.

But why are such things brought forth to trouble the people?
It Is not (I can assure thee) blazoned with singularity or effected publicity;
but that that Doctrine formerly received might have better foundations then the
Philosophers Jus Rationis, or occulta qualitas to palliate their ignorance,
that things might come to a particular scrutiny, and that the seemingly fair
face of many mental buildings may be searched, and their body examined to the
very Basis.

Let no man be offended at the style thereof, plainness of language may be no
hinderance to her entertainment: she may happily make better provision in that
kind, when humane Eloquence is made the Watchword in the Lords Army; and yet
if any shall wonder why it adventures abroad in such a clothing; give me leave
to Apologize a little for her Garments, and tell you that she rose in haste,
and intended only a visitation to a private friend, upon a more then earnest
invitation; but by the way meeting with some adventitious Salutants, she was
unwillingly arrested, and now pressed to hazard her self upon the doubtful
multitude.

Lastly, (for I am writing an Epistle) if any Man from its pretense to Light,
and claim to Reason (especially the Gentleman for whom it was intended, and to
whom it is committed) shall daigne to descend the Sands with it, Let him in
Love, and in the Spirit know, That reviling is no reason, and that he adds
nothing to Truth that belcheth forth bitterness from a distempered spirit; Let
him teach himself in the Doctrine of Luther, Non convitiis sed argumentis
errantis conscientia est erigenda. And if yet any man shall indiscreetly and
scornfully handle his weapons, the return of the Author I (suppose) will be
silence.

Master Eaton's Scriptures and Instances.
THe Doctrine against Christ being God, is not only contradictory to the
Scripture which does most clearly hold him out to be so, as when he is called
God, in Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; The mighty God,
Isa. 9.6. The great God and our Savior, in Tit. 2.13. The true God, Joh. 5.20.
and when the incommunicable name Jehovah is attributed to him in Jer. 23.6
which signifies one that has being of himself, and gives being to his
promises; and so becomes proper to the most high God alone: and when he is
called The everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. and in that saying of Christ to the
Jews, Before Abraham was, I am, Joh. 8.58. and in that Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the End, says the Lord, which was, is, and which is
to come; the Almighty: and when he is said to be in the beginning, and to be
with God, and to be God, Joh. 1.1. and when it is said that by him all things
were made and without him nothing is made that was made: and when Christ says
that he is always, and so with all the faithful to the end of the world, Matthew.
28.20. and when he asserts that he knew all the works of the Churches, which at
that distance, (as mere man) he could not do, Rev. 2.2. and when he is said to
be the firstborn of every creature, where his eternal generation is held out,
Col. 1.15. and that by him all things were created verse. 16. Now because
Creation is a making of all things out of nothing, and required an infinite
power, God could make use of no instrument, inasmuch as God cannot give an
infinite power to any creature, because no creature is capable of such a divine
attribute; for it would make him God, to be almighty, or to be infinite in
power: And when he is resembled in reference to his eternity to Melchizedek;
Without beginning of days, or end of life, Heb. 7.3. and that in Prove. 8.22.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way (says Christ:) Before his
works of old, I was set up from everlasting, verse, 30. Then was I by him, as
one brought up with him, etc. And that in Zech. 13.7. Awake, O sword, against
my Shepherd, against the man that is my fellow. And that in Joh. 3.13. No man
has ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son
of man that is in heaven. And that in Joh. 17.5. Glorify me, O Father, with
that glory I had with thee before the world was. There be many other pregnant
Scriptures, which would be too long to mention, for the proving of Christ to be
God in that sense which we usually speak of God: and therefore that opinion
that denies it, contradicts these Scriptures.

But further, it may be truly said that this Doctrine that makes Christ a mere
creature, brings in as it were another Gospel; destroys the true Gospel in many
of the parts of it, and brings in another Scripture in many points.

1. As first, if Christ be but a mere creature, and not God, then the giving of
Divine worship, and honor, and service to a mere creature is lawful and
warrantable, and yet everywhere forbidden in reference to any creature; but is
practiced to Christ, in Rev. 5.12, 13, 14. and would be Idolatry, if Christ
were not God.

2. If Christ be a mere creature, then it is lawful and warrantable to believe
in a mere creature, which is against the tenor of the whole Scripture; but is
commanded in reference unto Christ, Joh. 14.1. and salvation is annexed to it,
Joh. 3.36.

3. If Christ be but a mere creature, then faith in a mere creature can save
man, which is absurd and gross, and contrary to the Scriptures: for Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness, Romans 4.3. and so
was saving.

4. If Christ be but a mere creature, then a mere creature is the Savior of
men, saving them with a mighty and eternal salvation, as the Scripture speaks:
but this is against the whole current of the Gospel, which speaks of God our
Savior, Tit. 2.10, 13, and in many other places.

5. If Christ be but a mere creature, then a mere creature is Mediator betwixt
God and Man; which cannot be, because a mere creature is no way meet to be a
days-man for God; and because a Mediator must either partake of both God and
Man, or of neither; else he will rather be a party then a Mediator, if he
partake of Man's nature, and not of Gods; if he be Man, and not God. Therefore
this Mediator betwixt God and Man is called Emmanuel, that is, God with us, or
God in our nature; God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. or God made flesh,
as in Joh. 1.14.

6. If Christ be but a mere creature, then the righteousness of Christ which is
imputed to believers, is not the righteousness of God, but the righteousness of
a mere creature: But this is against the tenor of the Scripture, Phil. 3.9.

7. If Christ be but a mere creature, then to pardon sin belongs not to him,
because Scripture testifies that none can forgive sin but God, because all sin
is against God, therefore none can forgive it but God. But it is evident Christ
took the authority of forgiving sin: Son, (says Christ) thy sins are forgiven
thee: and Luke 7.48.

8. If Christ be but a mere creature, then the value of that offering which
Christ offered, when he offered himself to God, is taken away, and the
satisfaction which Christ gave to Divine justice is destroyed: for if the
person that died were a mere man, and the blood that was shed, the blood of a
mere man, and not of God, as it is called. Acts 20.28. then how could it
satisfy for the sins of many transgressors? for there is no proportion betwixt
one mere man dying for sins, and many men sinning, and deserving death each of
them for the sins they have committed. And how an infinite Justice offended,
should be satisfied with a sacrifice finite in value, is unconceiveable, and
against the tenor of the Scripture.

9. If Christ be a mere creature, then the intercession of Christ is utterly
overthrown: for Christ, (if mere man) being in heaven, cannot know the state of
his Church in all places upon earth, therefore cannot intercede for it.

10. If Christ be a mere creature, then how can he protect, and defend, and
save, and direct, and rule, and govern his Church in all the world, in every
condition, and against all enemies, he being at such a distance and remoteness
from the Church; and yet it is said of him, that he is able to save to the
utmost those that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. and that he is with them to
the end of the world; and Christ stood by Paul, and strengthened him in
suffering, Acts 23.11. and Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my
patience, I will keep thee in the hour of temptation: so that it is Christ now
in heaven that keeps the Saints on earth; which, being a mere creature, he
cannot do.

11. If Christ be a mere creature, then a mere creature is the judge of the
world; which is against the Scripture: for the Judge of all the world is God;
before whom Abraham stood, Genesis 18.25. when he pleaded for Sodom. Rev. 2.5, 6,
the day of judgment is called the day of the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his works.

12. Lastly (which should have been before) if Christ be a mere creature, then
prayer to him, being now in heaven, is altogether vain and frivolous, insomuch
as persons may cry loud, long enough before Christ hear them at that distance.
But the Saints have been wont not only to pray to God in Christ's Name, but to
pray to Christ directly and immediately, as in Acts 7.59. Rev. 22.20. Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. Come, Lord Jesus, etc.

Master KNOWLS his Answer to the Arguments and Scriptures alleged by M.
Samuel Eaton concerning the Divinity of CHRIST.
SIR,
IT is a good thing (as the Author to the Hebrews speaks) that the heart be
established in grace: and to me it is an indubitable truth, that unsettlement
is sometimes the next way to a right and firm establishment: For Error, whilst
misapprehended, is entertained in gracious hearts as a welcome guest; and
Truth, whilst received hand over head by tradition only, is as a Building
whose foundation is but sandy, which holds up no longer then the waves and
winds hold in. Whether most Professors have not swallowed without chewing much
of that Doctrine they now profess, is not my work to determine. It is enough
for me with shame to confess, that I have been of the number of those (if any
such be) who see with other men's eyes, and pin their faith (as we usually
speak) on the Churches sleeve. But having now through the goodness of God
turned over leaf, and learned a new course, I am resolved to examine all things
by the Touchstone of Truth, that I may unlearn what I have learnt amiss, and
hold fast that only which in my understanding is good. Upon this account being
somewhat willing to make a scrutiny into the Common Doctrine of the holy
Trinity, (of which in most ages there have been some scruples amongst men of
parts and learning) and exhorting others to the same practice for the
abovenamed ends; but especially reasoning thereof as one dubious therein, I was
suspected (to say no more) by you and others, to be in Faith unsound and
Heterodox. Wherefore that the Common Doctrine might be supported, you published
a Paper, and did cast the same into my hands; which lying open to many
Objections, I promised (being urged) to present you therewith, upon this
condition That nothing spoken might be taken for my judgment: To which you
agreed, and therefore I shall act freely, as if I were in judgment directly
opposite to you; and shall desire that neither you nor others do conclude,
before I profess what my judgment is. I was about to present you with an exact
Epitome of the common Doctrine of the holy Trinity, with Interrogations about
it, Arguments against it, and seeming Contradictions in it; but have forborne,
till I find by a modest Answer to this, that your spirit is able to bear.

Now ad rem, to the business in hand; which is concerning the Deity of Jesus
Christ. The Question is not clearly stated in your Paper; wherefore give me
leave to do it.

The Question is not Whether Jesus Christ be a God in Name and Office Nor
whether the Father dwell in him: but Whether he be That most high God, whose
Being and Actings are originally of himself. That he is, you assert but I deny,
and that for the beating out and further clearing up of Truth. The way you have
taken (by Scripture and Reason) to make good your Assertion, I cannot dislike;
the truth is, I like no other way. Whether the Scriptures brought speak on your
side, and whether your Reasons have weight in them, is now the thing in debate.

I shall begin with your Scriptures, and with that first which first appears,
which is Psalm. 5.6. Thy throne (O God) is for ever and ever: and the Scepter of
thy Kingdom is a right Scepter.

Answ. First, that no Argument can be found in the text to confirm the thing
you assert: for though it were granted, that this Psalm is a Prophecy only of
Jesus Christ, (which I shall not allow, it being spoken, according to a literal
sense, of Solomon the King; to which Willet, Pareus, Hugo Grotius Iunius,
Cotton, and almost all Interpreters do consent) yet this Title God will not
bolster up your opinion of Christ. For the name Aelohim, which here is
attributed unto Christ, is common with the most High to Creatures, both Angels
and Men. It is given to Angels, Psalm. 8.5. Thou have made him (that is, Christ)
a little lower then Aelohim Gods, (so in the Hebrew) which is translated by the
Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 2.7. the Angels. To men, Psalm. 82.1. God judges
among the Gods, that is, the Rulers of Israel. So verse. 6. I have said, Ye are
gods. Likewise in Exodus 22.8, 9. where the word is translated Judges.

Secondly, that some Arguments may be drawn from this Psalm to deny the thing
you assert. Take these.

1. He that is blessed of God, is not the most high God: For without all
contradiction, the less is blessed of the better, Heb. 7.7. But this God (Jesus
Christ). is blessed of God, verse. 2. Grace is poured into thy lips, therefore
god has blessed thee for ever.

2. That God which has a God, is not the most high God. But this God (Jesus
Christ) has a God: Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness;
therefore, O God, thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows, verse. 7. Therefore, etc.

3. That God whose authority is derivative, is not the most high God. But the
authority of this God (Jesus Christ) is derivative, verse. 7. where he is said
to be anointed by God, that is to receive Kingly or Godlike power form him.
Therefore this God Jesus Christ, is not the most high God.

Now I hasten to your second Scripture, Isa. 9.6. And his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The ever lasting Father, The Prince of
Peace.

Answ. These two Titles, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, you dig out of
the text, and lay them as the foundation of your faith, that Jesus Christ is
the most high God.

To this Scripture take this Reply:

1. That according to some men's reading, those Titles do not at all belong in
this place to Jesus Christ: and after some men's expounding, they appertain not
to Christ only. Some Jews thus read the words: And this is the name by which
The Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, etc. shall call him, to wit, The
Prince of Peace. This lection Calvin mentions; and knowing that the words may
admit of this construction, the verb being of a neutral as well as a passive
signification speaks in objecting no more then this; Quorsum tot epitheta in
Deum Patrem hoc loce congesta forent? Calv. Instit. l. 1. Cap. 13. p. 35.
That is; To what end should so many epithets be heaped together in this place
on God the Father? when the purpose of the Prophet was to adorn Christ with
famous titles which might build up our faith in him. Wherefore it is no doubt,
but that by the same reason he is now called The strong God, as a little before
Immanuel.

Others there be that give those Titles typically to King Hezekiah. Amongst
whom, Et vocabitur nomen ejus] In Hebraeo est, vocabit. Supple quisque. Notum
autem Hebraeis dici sic vel sic vocari aliquem, cui tales tituli aut (...)
convenient. Hugo Grot. in loc.
that learned man Hugo Grotius is one, whose Annotations on the place be
pleased to take.

And his name shall be called] Every one (that is supplied) shall call him. Now
it is known to the Hebrews, that any one is thus named, or called thus, to whom
such titles or epithets do agree.

Wonderful] For those very excellent virtues which shall be in him.

Counselor, mighty God] Yea rather, one that asks counsel of the mighty God.
One that in all businesses seeks counsel from God, to wit, by the Prophets.

The Father of an age] One who should leave after him many posterities, and for
a long time.

2. But were it granted that the Text speaks only of Jesus Christ, yet would
not the thing in question be thence concluded, Because that the Titles amount
not to so much as most high God, which are the terms of the Question. Ael
Gibbor, Mighty God, is not so much as Ael Shaddai, Almighty God, by which the
most High is called, Genesis 17.1. And both these terms are communicable to the
Creature. Ael is used Psalm. 82.1. Aelohim stands in the assembly of Ael;
which is translated the mighty, but is the same with this in Isaiah, Englished
God. That it is here attributed unto Magistrates, appears from the Septuagint,
reading these words thus: (...). God stands in the assembly of gods, the
Magistrates in Israel. And the other epither mighty, is given to the Captains
of Nebuchadnezzar's Army, Ezekiel. 32.12. if we consult with the
Septuagintversion, where the words are thus read; (...), a strong God; to which
is exegetically added (...), Lord, to expound it: or, with Symmachus and
Theodoret, with whom the words are thus rendered, (...), that is, strong,
mighty, putting a Comma between the words, as Montanus does in his Interlinial
Bible: we shall not find so much strength in the words, as some suppose, to bear
up the Doctrine now in dispute.

Now for this Title Everlasting Father;

1. Our Translation differs from most (if not all) both Greek and Latin
Versions. The Septuagint thus renders, [(...)] A Father of Eternity (life or
world) to come. Sym. thus: (...), A Father of the world. Theod. thus, (...),
which is from the Hebrew word for word, and may be thus Englished: A Father
unto posterity. Hierome, pater futuri saeculi in the Margin, but in the Line
pater aeternitatis, a Father of Eternity; to which Tremellius and Piscator
agree. Now the reason says Paraem why he is called a Father of Eternity, is,
because he is the Author of Eternal life.

2. Our Translation gain-says a main part of the Common opinion. It is the
Doctrine of our Divines, that the Persons in the Trinity may be distinguished,
but not divided, nor confounded. The Person of the Father (say they) is not the
Person of the Son; nor is the Son the Father, etc. Now there is but one
Everlasting Father. But if Christ be the Everlasting Father, either there are
two Everlasting Fathers, or the Person of the Father and the Son are confounded.

3. But in the last place, were it granted that those titles belong to Christ
only, and that they are equivalent with that of Most High God: yet will it not
of necessity follow, that Jesus Christ is the Most High God:

1. Because titles may be translated from one to another, to whom they properly
do not belong. Daniel calls Nebuchadnezzar King of Kings, Dan. 2.37. In the Old
Testament it is a usual thing, for Angels and Men, who did represent God to
bear his Name.

2. Because enough may be found in the Text to distinguish this glorious one,
who bears those glorious names, from the Most High God: 1. In that those titles
of glory are given to the Child, that should be born, (which was the Man
Christ Jesus) without making mention of any other nature, v. 6. 2. In that the
Person to whom those titles appertain is called a Son, and is said to be given.
Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, etc. which notes out another
person, and one greater: for he that gives, is greater then he that is given;
for none but Superiors can give or dispose of others.

3. Because there is another spoken of in the Text, who is exalted above him,
to whom those titles belong, by a name more noble, Jehovah of Sabbath or
Hosts, which by the Apostle from Esaias 6.3. is translated Lord Almighty, Rev.
4.8. and given to him that sits on the Throne, who is distinguished from the
Lamb, chap. 5.13. And in that all those things spoken of the Son are
appropriated to another as the Author thereof. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts
shall perform or do this, v. 7.

Now I shall close up the Answer with an Exposition, that a learned and godly
man gives of the place. His words are these:

Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called WONDERFUL (by reason of his
exaltation, which is so strange and wonderful, that even the greatest part of
Christians cannot believe it, and therefore imagine another nature in Christ,
besides his Humane Nature, as thinking a man incapable of so transcendent an
exaltation) COUNSELOR (In being made acquainted with all the Councels of God)
MIGHTY GOD (by reason of the Divine Empire over all things both in Heaven and
Earth, conferred on him by the Father, agreeably whereunto Paul calls him God
over all blessed for evermore, Romans 9.5. A Father of the age (In being the
Author of the age to come, as both the Septuagint, and old Latin Interpreter
expound it: or else a Father of Eternity, in being Author of Eternal Life to
all that obey him. For to render the words as the English Translators do, who
here call Christ the Everlasting Father, is to confound the Person of the Son
with that of the Father, and so to introduce Sabellianism.

Your Third Scripture is, Tit. 3.13.
Tit. 3.13. which I shall pass over till I come to your second paper, where it
is brought forth in a more formal way, and with an appearance of greater
strength.

THat which follows is, 1 John 5.20.
1 John 5.20. This is the true God, and eternal life.

Answ. Christ is the most high God, in that he is, (as you suppose) here called
the true God. The words I confess at the first blush seems to stand on your
side: but if well considered they speak not a word for your cause; for they
relate not to the Son, but to the Father only.

First, if we consider these words, this is the true God, and eternal life, as
an entire body of themselves, not having dependence on the words immediately
preceding, as probably they have not, being by a full point separated from
them: then they are the Epitome, Abridgement, or sum of the whole Epistle.

And so the Apostles mind seems to be this: This Father which I have in this my
Epistle treated of, is the true God; and this Jesus Christ of whom I have
spoken, and in whom ye have believed is eternal life; that is the way to it.

Secondly, but were it granted, that these words, This is the true God, do
depend on the foregoing words: yet will it not of necessity follow, that the
Son, not the Father is the Antecedent to the Relative, this; and so that the
sentence must be thus understood, This Son is the true God. In the precedent
words there is mention made of the Father: [ And we know (says the Apostle)
that the Son of God is come,] i. e. We Believers assuredly know, that the Son
of God is already come in the flesh, notwithstanding many at this time gainsay
and deny it, [And has given us an understanding that we may know him that is
true] and this Jesus Christ, being in the bosom of the Father, and having
received from him the promise of the spirit, has anointed the eyes of our
minds, that we might savingly know him that is true, that is, the true God; as
some Greek Copies have it. [And we are in him that is true, etc.] If with
Erasmus and Tindal we read the words thus: and we are in him that is true
through his Son Jesus Christ; the meaning is this, We have not only an
apprehension of, but also union and communion with him who is the true God, by
the means of his Son Jesus Christ. But if we follow Piscator, the words hold
out that oneness and fellowship, which the Saints have with the Father, and his
Son Jesus: For thus he would have them read, And we are in him that is true,
(to with the Father) and in his Son Jesus Christ. But last of all, if we
consent with Hierome, who by making (...) a redundant has them thus, and we
are in this true Son Jesus Christ; they speak only of that oneness we have with
Christ. Now the words that follow, relate to the Father; This is the true God.
The Apostle intends the Father: But because his assertion is contrary to many
men's interpretation, take for the backing of it these few Reasons.

1. Because the Text will Grammatically bear it: for the words may be thus
rendered, That is the true God; and so the Antecedent to the Relative, is not
the Person immediately foregoing, which is Jesus Christ, but another spoken of
at a farther distance, to wit the Father.

2. Because Jesus Christ no where in the Scripture is called the true God; and
therefore is it the more questionable, whether he be so called here the place
being somewhat doubtful and ambiguous.

3. Because the Father is called the true God distinct from the Son, 1 Thessalonians.
1.9, 10. For they themselves show of us, what manner of entering in we had unto
you, and how ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God, and
to wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus which
delivered us from the wrath to come. It is evident from this Text, that the
Father distinct from the Son, is called the living and true God; and therefore
is it probable, that in the Text under Examination, the Father only is
intended in this expression, this is the true God.

4. Because the Father is called the only true God, John 17.3. And this is
life eternal that they might know thee the only true God, and whom thou have
sent Jesus Christ. Here the Father is called the only true God, and so the Son
is excluded from being the true God, and therefore of necessity in 1 John 5.20.
The Father only is intended.

THe Text which comes next to be scanned, Ier. 23 6.
is, Ier. 23.6. And this is his name, whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. Hence is gathered that Jesus Christ is the most High God,
because the incommunicable name Jehovah is attributed to him.

Answ. First, that it is a probable conjecture that our English Translators saw
not this Mystery wrapped up in the name Jehovah. In that they do not here follow
their usual custom in giving the Hebrew name: for they read not Jehovah, but
the Lord our righteousness. Yea, that the Apostles themselves were ignorant of
the use, where unto the name Jehovah is put by you and others. For though we
have in the New Testament Hebrew names, yet Jehovah appears not there; but in
stead thereof (...), Lord, which is a common name.

Against this you once objected, That the name Jehovah cannot be expressed in the
Greek language. But to me this seems not true; for there is no letter in
Jehovah which the Greeks want, but may be found in other names, which in the
New Testament are rendered in imitation of the Hebrew; as Jacob, Abraham, David.
And it cannot but seem strange, that that name, which cannot (as you say) be
expressed in the Greek language (by which the Old and New Testament was
published to the greatest part of the world) should be a foundation for that,
which you call a truth fundamental.

Secondly, that it is not an undeniable consequent that Jesus Christ is the
Most High God, because called Jehovah; for although the name may most properly
belong to the most High God: yet it is communicated in the Scripture unto
creatures. To Angels frequently, Genesis 19.24. Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrha brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of Heaven; That is, the Angel
which did sustain the name of Jehovah, he rained, etc. If credit may be given
to some, the title Jehovah is in this of Jeremiah appropriated to the people of
Israel and Judah. They read the words thus, and this is the name which they
shall call it, [to wit the people,] Jehovah our righteousness; that is, God
has done well for us. In Ier. 33.16. the people of Jerusalem and Judah in the
letter, but according to a Mystical sense, the Church of Christ is called
Jehovah our righteousness. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem
shall dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, Jehovah
our righteousness. Also the City Jerusalem is called Jehovah, Ezekiel. 48.35. And
the name of the City from that day shall be Jehovah is there. Yea, the Altar,
which Moses erected when the Amalekites were discomfited is called Jehovah
Nissi, The Lord my Hunter, Exodus 17.15. I know you will not say, that the
Church is the most High God, much less the Altar or City Jerusalem; yet you may
see that the Incommunicable name Jehovah is, communicated to them. How your
inference concerning Christ may be justified, is yet not evident: but remains
dubious, not only for the commonness of the name, but also because this
Jehovah is said to be raised by another, v. 5.

THE Scripture which occupies the next place has been already insisted on:
wherefore that which follows being John 8.58. John 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am, is now to be spoken to.

Answ. The words rightly understood will no ways countenance your inference
from them. In the words we have a Grammatical Figure which they call Enallage,
whereby, one time is put for another, as here the present tense for the
praeter, Am for Was, Before Abraham was, I was: and so they note out and
signify one or both of the things that follow.

1. That Jesus Christ was instituted and revealed before Abraham had a being.
If we take the word I, to signify the Whole of Christ, there is a necessity
that the words be thus understood: for Christ according to the flesh was not in
being before Abraham was. That he was revealed before Abraham was, is clear and
evident: for the seed of the woman at the beginning was made known to Adam.
That he was ordained before Abraham had a being is from Scripture not a little
manifest, as 1 Pet. 1.20. And by the same reason he may here be said to be
before Abraham was, as he is elsewhere called the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8.

2. That he had a real being and existence before Abraham was; this cannot be
asserted of whole Christ, and therefore according to this Exposition the Figure
Synecdoche (whereby the whole is put for a part) must be understood in the
Text. It is granted by all that contend for, and by some that deny the Divinity
of Jesus Christ, that he had a being and existence before Abraham was: but what
this being was is the only doubt. Some affirm that Jesus Christ, before he was
born of the Virgin Mary, had no other existence, but in the Godhead, and was
only to be considered as the Son eternally begotten of the Father. Others
assert that this conceit is neither Scriptural nor Rational, but unsound and
absurd: and that he had a created being before Abraham was; yea, that he was
the first creature, and so Lord of all.

That this Controversy may be decided, I shall lay down three Positions.

1. That whole Christ does consist of flesh and spirit.

Every man is constituted of two parts, flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Iam.
2.26. and so is Christ, as in Romans 1.3, 4. where the Apostle speaking of whole
Christ, mentions nothing but flesh and spirit. According to the flesh, that is,
the body of Christ, he was of the seed of David: But after the spirit of
holiness, he was the Son of God.

He that can find another part besides those two, or any nature besides what
belongs to his flesh and spirit, may have liberty to bring forth, (for ought I
know) what he may find out.

Abraham did exist only according to the spirit. He had no being but a
spiritual one: But this is no controversall thing, being on all hands concluded
for truth. The only disagreement is, whether this spirit of holiness after
which Christ is the Son of God does signify the Divine Nature, and Godhead, or
else the soul which was created or formed, and did exist distinct from the
flesh or body of Christ.

Wherefore the third Position is:



To support this take these Reasons:

1. Because to affirm that the Spirit of Christ did exist distinct from his
body, and may be spoken of as a person, is not in the least absurd. For the
spirit or soul of a man may exist distinct from the body, and is spoken of as a
person. What are those spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. but the
souls of good men glorified in Heaven, whose bodies were in the graves. In Luke
23.43. says Christ to the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise;
Thou, that is, thy soul or spirit, shall be with me, that is, with my spirit in
Paradise.

2. Because the titles which most properly belong to Christ before he took
flesh, do hold him forth to be a Creature; first, he is called the Son of God,
Luke 1.35. Now this title informs us of his Inferiority to God, his Existency
of God, and his Superiority over all things.

1. It holds forth his Inferiority to God, God is his Father; but a son is
inferior to a father, and by the Law is bound to honor and obey him.

Wherefore Christ confesses that his Father was greater then he, John 14.28.
My Father is greater then I. And professes that he did honor his Father, John
8.49. Jesus answered, I have not a Devil: but I honor my Father, and ye do
dishonor me.

That this might be put past all doubt, he is called the Son of the Highest,
Luke 1.32. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David. And therefore
not the Highest, for there can be but one Highest; and he is the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

2. This title Son of God proclaims his Existency on God.

A Son is of a Father, and therefore the being of a Father is before the being
of a Son; God as he is a Creator, is the Father of all, Ephesians. 4.6. And all men
as creatures, are Gods offspring. Acts 17.28. Angels and Men who are
principal creatures, are called the Sons of God, Job 38.7. Luke 3 38. They
that hold the Deity of Christ, do affirm, that the Son was of the Father by an
Eternal Generation. But what this Generation is, they cannot declare, and
therefore call it ineffable; Yet M. Perkins will tell us, that the Son was
generated of the Father, in that the Divine Essence was communicated to him.
But who can tell what this Him, was, to whom this Essence was communicated? And
who can affirm, that this Essence was communicated to this Him, and yet assert,
and evidence that he was never without it? And that he was God, and yet
distinct from the Essence; for it is said that the Essence was communicated to
Him? Where Scripture does assert, and how reason will make out an Eternal
Generation, and whether the phrase Eternal Generation does not contain in it a
mere contradiction, let him that can, show.

Now let it be asserted, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God as he is a
creature, and then let us see, whether a definition may not be made of his
Generation.

His Generation is that act of Creation, whereby the God of all beings did
immediately and in the first place, bring forth and produce him.

Generation and Creation, to beget and create, are sometimes in Scripture terms
equivalent: As is evident from the work of God in changing the creature which
is sometimes called a new Creation, sometimes Regeneration; and the person
changed is in one place said to be created in another to be begotten.

In the last place this title Son of God, sets forth his superiority over all
things. We shall find that Son of God, and Christ are terms convertible, if we
compare Matthew. 16.16. with Mark 8.29. when Christ asked his Disciples this
quaery, Whom think ye that I am? Then Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God. So Matthew: But Mark in relating the same
answer, gives it thus, Thou art the Christ. From which is evident, that Christ
and the Son of God are terms equivalent; for one Evangelist uses both, that
one might expound the other, but another leaves out one of the terms, because
either was sufficient, both being Synonama's. So likewise in Acts 9.20.
compared with verse. 22. of the same chap. And it is as manifest in the
scripture, that Christ, King of Israel; and chosen of God are convertible
terms, noting out one and the same thing, to wit, Authority, Dominion, and
Power. It will appear to you as clear as the sunn, if you compare these Texts
together, Matthew. 27.42. Filij dicuntur qui aliqua exparte alicui sunt similes.
Mark 15.32. Luke 23.35. Magistrates and Princes, by reason of that Dominion
they have over others, are called the the sons of the most High, Ps. 82.6. I
have said ye are Gods: and all of you are sons of the most High.

So David is called in Psalm. 2.7. which mystically and more properly belong to
Christ, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, which sets forth the
Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, according to the confession of all. Now Christ
is named The son of God in way of Eminency, as being King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. That this superiority which Christ has over all things might be the
more perspicuous, he bears this name also; The only begotten Son of God, Jo.
3.16. which title points at his Heirship. Jesus Christ by whom God made the
world, was appointed to be heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. now he that is an
Heir, is (as the Apostle speaks) Lord of all, Gal. 4.1. In this sense Isaac is
said to be Abraham's only begotten son, Heb. 11.17. not that Abraham had no
other son, (for he had one by Hagar, and diverse by Keturah) but because Isaac
was his heir. To the rest he gave gifts, but to Isaac all that he had.

The second Title is the word of God, Rev. 19.13. And his name is called, The
Word of God.

This name is imposed on him for two Causes.

First, because he is the Image of Gods invisibility, God is invisible, and
dwells in unaccessible light: and therefore in this life he cannot be known as
he is; notwithstanding, because the knowledge of God is eternal life; he has
revealed himself so far as necessary, and in a way suitable to our capacity.
This discovery of God is made in his son Jesus, who is therefore called (Col.
1.15.) the Image of the invisible God; and also the brightness of the Fathers
glory, character of his substance, Heb. 1.3. And this Image Jesus Christ has
his Shadows, whereby he reveals himself, and so consequently the Father. His
shadows are the works of God, Christ being Gods principal and immediate
Instrument in all his works: And also the words of God are a shadow of Christ,
for by them are the works of God made known or made more clear unto us, and
therefore Christ is fitly called The word of God, in that a word or speech is
the discoverer of man's invisibility. The excellency or deformity of the mind,
the tongue makes evident.

Secondly, because he was produced by God immediately. This title declares not
only that he was made, but also that he was Gods immediate work. Facere verba,
to make words is no unusual phrase; men's words are their creatures. And for
the producing or making of words no instrument distinct from the Agent
intervenes; but the Agent is the instrument: Therefore a word is a lively
shadow of Jesus Christ, who was the first creature that ever God made, and the
instrument by which he made all things.

The third title is this, The firstborn of every Creature, Coll. 1.15. It is
evident from the Text, that this title is appropriated to Jesus Christ, by whom
all things are made: and it cannot be applyable to him any otherwise, but as a
creature; and it holds him forth to be the first of Creatures. A man's
firstborn is the first that he begets, and is brought forth to him. The same
word is used to express the firstborn among the Egyptians children, Heb. 11.28.

The fourth title is, The beginning of the creation of God, Rev. 3.14. The
beginning of the creation of God, that is, the first of Gods creatures; the
words will bear this exposition: for (...), beginning, signifies the first part
of any thing, or the first of things in the same kind: so in Luke 1.2. Mat.
24.8. Joh. 2.11. But some will say, that he is called the beginning, because he
is the Prince of the creation. But where the word is used in the singular
number to signify a Prince, I do not at present mind. True it is, that
Christ is the chief, because he is the first of all the Creatures. Others will
affirm, that he is thus called, because he is the Author of the creation. But
this exposition is excluded, in that the creation whereof he is the beginning,
is called the Creation of God, who is the author of all created things.

Now for the third reason which does confirm the third position, That the
Spirit of Christ, according to which he is the Son of God, is a Creature.

whole Christ is a creature.

If whole Christ be, then doubtless every part of Christ is a creature.

That whole Christ is a creature, these following Arguments will demonstrate.

That which is distinct from GOD is a creature.

But whole CHRIST is distinct from GOD, therefore whole CHRIST is a CREAIVRE.

The Major is evident to sense and Reason: for God is but one, and it is absurd
to imagine him distinct from himself. But some peradventure will make use of
the usual distinction betwixt person and essence, and so affirm, that one may
be distinguished from God personally, and yet be one in essence with him.

To this distinction hear what a learned and godly man speaks: His words are
these: As for this wretched distinctions (to omit the mention of the Fathers)
is not only unheard of in Scripture, but is also disclaimed by Reason. For, 1.
it is impossible for any man, if he would but endeavor to conceive the thing,
and not delude both himself and others with empty terms and words without
understanding, to distinguish the person from the essence of God, and not to
frame two beings or things in his mind, and consequently two Gods. Secondly,
if the Person be distinct from the Essence of God, then it is either something
or nothing; If nothing, how can it be distinguished, seeing nothing has no
accidents? If something, then either some finite or infinite thing; if finite,
then there will be something finite in God, and consequently (since by the
confession of the Adversaries themselves, every thing in God is God) God will
be finite, which the Adversaries themselves will confess to be absurd. If
infinite, then there will be two infinites in God, to wit, the Person and the
Essence of God, and consequently two Gods; which is more absurd then the
former. Thirdly, to talk of God taken only essentially is ridiculous; not
only because there is no example thereof in Scripture; but because God is the
name of a Person, and signifies him that rules over others; and when it is
put for the most High God, it denotes him who with sovereign and absolute
authority rules over all, but none but a Person can rule over others, all
actions being proper to persons: wherefore to take God otherwise then
personally, is to take him otherwise then he is, and indeed to mistake him.

Thus much for the Major.

The Minor, which is, That whole Christ is distinct from God, is now to be
proved. The Scripture being full and frequent in the demonstration of this, I
shall speak but a few words to it.

First, Christ himself does confess it, John 8.42. Jesus said unto them (to wit
the Jews) if God were your Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth,
and came from God; neither came I of my self, but he sent me. In this Text we
may note these few things:

1. That God is a Person, and that Father is his name, If God were your Father
ye would love me, etc.

2. That Christ does plainly distinguish himself from God: If God were your
Father, ye would love me; for I proceeded forth, and came from God, etc. Yea,
he affirms that of himself, which denies him to be God; to wit, change of
place, I proceeded (says he) and came forth from God. And subjection to God; I
came not of my self, but he (that is, God) sent me.

Christ also distinguishes himself from God, Lu. 18.18, 19. And a certain
ruler, asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal
life? Jesus answered, and said, Why call thou me good? none is good save
one, that is, GOD. Here Christ affirms, that there is but one God, (to wit,
by way of eminency) and excludes himself from being this one God. Why call
thou me Good, there is but one good, even God. Were Jesus Christ the most High
GOD, and were this a fundamental, (as you assert;) it is imaginable, that
Jesus Christ, who came, not to condemn, but to save the world, should never say
it, and should in this place so much cloud it.

Secondly, now let us hear some testimonies that the Apostles (who were to
speak nothing but what their Lord and Master Jesus Christ did command them)
have given to the thing in hand, Let Paul (as Peter was wont to do) speak for
the rest: In 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. He tells us, That there are diversity of gifts,
but the same Spirit; and there are differences of administrations, but the same
Lord; and there are diver sity of operations, but it is the same God which
works all in all. Here the Apostle does distinguish the Spirit, and the Lord,
from GOD; and shows, that those gifts which were distributed to men by the
Spirit, that they might be fitted for several ministrations in the Kingdom of
the Lord Christ, did all of them proceed from God.

The same Apostle in the same Epistle, Chap. 8.5, 6. does as one designing the
thing, distinguish the Lord Jesus from God. For though there be says he) that
are called Gods, whether in heaven, or in earth, (as there be Gods many and
Lords many) but unte us there is one GOD, even the Father, of whom are all
things, and we unto him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
we by him. Here we have the Apostles and Primitive Christians Creed: They
believe that there is but one GOD, (in way of eminency) to wit, the Father of
whom (as the first cause) are all things, and unto whom (as the ultimate end)
Saints are, and so all things; and that there is but one Lord, (in way of
eminency, amongst all made Lords) even Jesus, by whom (as the great instrument
of God) are all things, and we by him. See Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. where a plain
distinction is made betwixt the Spirit, the Lord, and GOD, But enough of this.

Obj. But Christ does say that he is one with the Father, John 10.30.

Sol. It Is true, Christ does say that he and the Father are one: But one what?
one Person? that none will assert. But are they one God, one Essence: Yea,
that is the thing, which many will subscribe to, as Christ's meaning here. But
did Christ intend to signify that? Doubtless no, which appears, not only from
the absurdity of the thing, but also evidently from Christ's vindication of
himself from the accusation of the Pharisees, who misconstruing of this did
mis-inferre, from this saying of his, I and my Father are one. In this
vindication we may observe:

First, that Christ denies the Premise of their conclusion. They concluded that
he spoke blasphemy, (and therefore went about to stone him) because (as they
understood) he made himself God, to wit, the most High God) and so made more
Gods then one, Verse 33. This Christ denies, affirming that his saying did
amount to no more then this, The son of God, verse 36. that is, Gods
representative.

Secondly, Christ asserts the lawfulness of his saying, by an argument drawn a
minori ad majus, from the less to the greater. If they to whom the Word of GOD
came, (to wit, the Judges of the great Synedrion, who received a commandment
from God to judge the people of Israel) were without blasphemy called Gods:
then he whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world (to have
dominion over all mankind) may without blasphemy be called God, or the Son of
God. But they to whom the word of God came were called Gods: This Christ proves
from Psalm 82.6. Jesus answered and said, Is it not written in your Law, I said
ye are Gods, verse 34. Therefore he that the Father has sanctified and sent
into the world, may without blasphemy be called God, or the Son of GOD. That
this might be applied to Christ, Christ himself appeals to his works, sending
the Pharisees thither, to satisfy themselves, that he was sent of the Father.
If I do not (says he) the works of My Father, believe me not: But if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know and believe that
the Father is in me, and I in him, verse 37, 38.

Thirdly, he declares his inferiority to God; in that he says, that the Father
sanctified and sent him into the world, that is, prepared and gave him a
Commandment for the exercise of a very great authority, ver. 36.

Hence may be easily seen by a judicious ey, that Christ intended not by this
saying of his, I and my Father are one, to hold himself equal to the Father,
or one in Essence with him. But how are we then to understand the words? This
sentence, I and my Father are one, admits of this meaning. I and my Father are
one in work; the same work that I do, my Father he does also. The like phrase
by the consent of all is taken in the like sense, 1 Cor. 3.8. Now he that
planteth, and he that waters are one: How one, unless in work? The context
will constrain us (if we consider it well) to baptize Christ's expression into
the same acceptance. For the words in dispute close up a glorious discovery of
that gracious protection, which Christ affords to the sheep of his Pasture,
which also he affirms to be the work of his Father: and so in work they are one.

Now who can hinder the drawing up of this conclusion, That whole Christ is a
Creature?

The second Argument contributing something to this Position, That whole Christ
is a Creature, now follows:

He that lives by another is a Creature: But whole Christ lives by another:
Therefore whole Christ is a Creature.

That God lives of himself is a general and undeniable Maxim: Wherefore I
should but waste time, if I should spend time in the confirmation of this, that
he is a creature who lives not by himself but by another.

But for the Minor, That whole Christ lives of another, there is need of proof.
That scripture, which without stammering does speak it forth, is, John 6.57. As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats me,
even he shall live by me. Here Christ speaks no parable, but plainly shows us,
that life is originally in the Father; and that he himself is sent by, and so
subject to the Father; and that he lives (not by the Godhead as united in one
person with the Man hood, but) by the Father: even as believers live by him, in
that they do not immediately derive their life from the Father, but mediately
through the Son. Therefore whole Christ is a Creature.

The third Argument, which takes part with the foregoing, appears clothed with
these expressions.

He that has what he has from another, is a Creature.

But whole Christ has what he has from another.

Therefore whole Christ is a creature.

The Major is as clear as the Sun shining at noon day, the truth whereof men
need not put on spectacles to see: wherefore I shall pass by it as needless to
be spoken to, and hasten to the Minor, which doubtless some will deny, That
what Christ has, what he has received from another the Scripture does
abundantly speak, and bear witness to. Christ confesses that all things are
delivered to him of the Father, Luke 10.22. The Father (says John the Baptist)
loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand, John 3.35. That this
may be more evident, I shall instance in a few particulars, and therein confine
my self to the Authority and sufficiency of Jesus Christ, which are the main,
and things including in them all the rest.

1. I shall begin with Christ's Authority, which though it be exceeding great
and glorious; Christ being a God, a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and
having a name or authority above every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come, yet it is derived from, and subjected
to the power and authority of another. He is a Lord, but Peter tells us that he
is a made Lord, Acts 2.36. Therefore let the house of Israel (says he) Know
assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both
Lord and Christ. He was appointed and anointed by the Father both for the
having and exercising of Sovereign Authority and power, Heb. 1.2. with the
ninth of the same chap. both which places (as all confess) speak of Christ in
the highest consideration. Paul, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. does plainly informus,
that the Father of Glory (whom he calls, v. 17. the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ) having raised up Christ from the dead, did set him at his own right
hand in the Heavenly places far above all Principality and Power, and Might and
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that
which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be
the Head over all things to the Church.

That his Name, Power, or Authority, was by gift, does with the greatest
evidence shine forth from Matthew. 28.18. and Phil. 2.9.

2. Now let us come to the next thing, the Sufficiency of Jesus Christ, which
though it be All-sufficient in reference to his Work and Offices, yet is not
Originally his, but from another, as the Fountain thereof. I shall illustrate
this in some few particulars.

First, Christ's sufficiency to instruct in Doctrine was from another; All the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in Jesus Christ, Col. 2.3. And his
lips have abundantly, yea, sufficiently dropped the honey and the honey comb, I
mean the doctrine of the Gospel.

This Doctrine was not Originally his, he enjoyed it being conveyed from
another to him, and did by the assistance of another, teach and publish the
same. Christ himself affirms, that the Doctrine he taught was not his own, but
his that sent him; that it was of God, and that he spoke not of himself, Joh.
7.16, 17.

He received what he has delivered unto us. Grace was poured into his lips,
Psalm. 45.2. He testifies what he has seen, and heard, as in John 3.32. What he
has seen and heard, that he testifies, and no man receives his testimony,
said John the Baptist; This was spoken of Christ who came from Heaven, as is
evident from the precedent verse; To this Christ bears witness in that saying
of his to his Disciples, John 15.15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for
the servant knows not what his Lord does; But I have called you friends: for
all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. That
which Christ by the Angel signified to John, God gave him Rev. 1.1. He also in
the work was assisted by another. The Spirit of the Lord was upon him, because
he had anointed him to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. Luke 4.18.

Secondly, His sufficiency to effect Miracles was from another.

The testimony that Christ gives of himself, we may without scruple receive.
The Son (says he) can do nothing of himself, John 5.19. he was Gods instrument
in the Miracles wrought by him, Acts 2.22. Ye men of Israel (says Peter) hear
these words, Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God, among you, by Miracles,
Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your
selves also know, etc. So that God the Father was the Principal Agent in all
these Miracles, which Christ wrought or effected, which is farther confirmed by
Christ's saying, John 14.10.

Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in
me, He does the Work. In that the power by which Christ did work was the power
of God, as is manifest from Matthew. 12.28. But if I, (says Christ) in Gods
Spirit (so in the Original) cast out Devils, Then is the kingdom of God come
unto you. By Gods Spirit, we are not here to understand the Holy Ghost, but the
Power of God, which was present with Christ for his assistance: as will
manifestly appear by comparing with this Text, Luke 11.20. where the same
speech is thus represented; But if I in (or by) Gods finger cast out Devils,
doubtless the Kingdom of God is come unto you. The finger of Gods power
manifested in operation, as in Exodus 8.19. the like phrase in the like sense is
used. And therefore Christ is said to do Miracles, (not because he was God but)
because God was with him, Acts 10.38. He did his Miracles in his Fathers name,
John 10.25. When the Jews desired Christ to tell them plainly, whether he were
the Christ: the text tells us, that Jesus answered thus; I told you, and ye
believed not; The works that I do in my Fathers Name, they bear witness of me:
Whereby Christ owned the Fathers Authority over him, and acknowledged that his
power to work was from him: As the Apostles did in reference to Christ by doing
miracles in his name, Ast. 3.6. The works Christ did, the Father gave him to
finish, that they might bear witness (not that he was God, but) that the
Father sent him, Jo. 5.36. But I have greater witness (says Christ) then that
of John; for the works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works
that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And the Rise of all
was (not his merits, but) the Fathers Love, John 5.20.

Thirdly, His sufficiency to bestow the spirit was from another.

The spirit is principally from the Father, wherefore Christ prayed to the
Father for it, John 14.16. And the Father sent the Spirit in Christ's name, John
14.26. And Christ having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
shed it forth upon his Disciples, Acts 2.33.

Fourthly and Lastly, (to name no more) Christ's sufficiency to quicken the
dead, is from another, John 5.21. comp. with the 26 v. The Son quickneth the
dead, but it is given to him to have life in himself.

Now why may not this Conclusion, [therefore whole Christ is a creature,]
appear with boldness, being ushered in with so strong a guard as the precedent
Argument is?

The fourth Argument which drives on the same design, now puts forth its hands
to the work.

He that acts in obedience to another, is a creature.

But whole Christ acts in obedience to another.

Christ is the Head of the Church, but God is the Head of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3.

The Father is the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Christ is called
Gods Servant, Esaias 42.1. And is said to be sent of the Father, John 10.36. Now
the Master is greater then the Servant, and he that sends, then he that is
sent, John 13.16. He came in his Fathers name, John 5.43. He came into the
world to do the will of God, Heb. 10.7. Lo I come to do thy will, O God. He
himself was not this God, but the Father was this God, whose will Christ came
to do: For he came not to do his will, but the Fathers, John 6.38, 39. I came
down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me,
and this is the Fathers will, which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, etc. The Authority and Directory of Jesus
Christ was the Fathers Commandment, John 12.49, 50. I have not (says Christ)
spoken of my self; but the Father which has sent me, he gave me a Commandment
what I should say, and what I should speak, and I know that his Command meant is
life everlasting: Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said untome,
so I speak:

Therefore whole Christ is a creature.

The Argument, which at this time is appointed to bring up the rear, witnesses
what has been said by the former, to wit,

That whole Christ is a creature.

He that acts with dependence on another, is a creature.

But whole Christ acts with dependence on another.

Therefore whole Christ is a creature.

No man is so Independent in respect of sense and reason as to deny the Major:
Wherefore let us see, whether Scripture, (which in no part thereof is an enemy
unto Reason) will vote for the Minor.

Petitions and Professions, of which the Scripture is not silent.

1. Let us take a view of Christ's Petitions; Christ prays to another, and
thereby shows his dependence on another. In the work of our Redemption we shall
find Christ busy in the work of Prayer. See that Prophecy of Christ which you
have in the 22 Psalm, and you will presently see the truth of the thing
asserted. Reflect your eyes on the 11 verse, and there shall you hear Christ
praying thus: Be not far from me, for trouble is near, for there is none to
help, and so on to the 19 ver. where again he does breath forth the requests of
his heart. Be not far from me, o Lord, o my strength, have thee to help me,
etc. Add to this Prophecy the Author to the Hebrews testimony, concerning its
fulfilling, Heb. 5.7. Who (that is, Christ) in the days of his flesh, when he
had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto
him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. So
in his working of Miracles, we find him in the same work of Prayer, Mark 7.34.
and that to the Father as is clear from John 11.41, 42.

2. Now for Christ's Professions, Christ professes that God is the object of
his dependence, Psalm. 16.1. Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I put my trust.
And he professes that the ground of his confidence was another assistance,
Psalm. 16.8, 9. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices,
my flesh also shall rest in hope, etc. Also in Esaias 50.7. The Lord God will
help me, therefore shall I not be confounded, therefore have I set my face as a
flint; and I know that I shall not be ashamed, etc.

The Minor being made clear, the Conclusion will not hide its face. Therefore
whole Christ is a Creature. Thus I have done with the third Position, and so
have brought my Answer relating to John the 8. and 58. unto a period:

WHerefore I shall now scan the Scripture which meets us next, which is Rev.
1.8:

Answ. From this Text you would infer: Rev. 1.8. Answ.
that Jesus Christ is the most High God: and that doubtless for this cause.
Because Christ here speaking of himself, does appropriate to himself terms
equivalent to that of most high God: But Sir, how can you demonstrate that
these are the words of Christ; and that they are here appropriated, and do
relate to him? You peradventure will say, that the thing is evident, in that he
is called the Lord, who here speaks, and to whom those Titles are applied. If
this be your demonstration it is full of darkness, and helps nothing to resolve
the scruple: For God or the Father distinct from Christ is called the Lord,
Acts 3.19, 20. chap. 4.26. And frequently in this Book of the Revelation. To
this Title you will (it may be) add the testimony of learned Interpreters, who
take the words as spoken by Christ and of himself. Confirmatio salutis
praecedentis a dei ipsius verbis: quae sua^ operationem in res creatas
singulas, aeternitatem immutabile in s^se, and in omnibus suam omnipotentiam
asserit and illam trinitatem quae ante lict a est, divinibus concluditur
essentiae suaeunitate. Bez. Non negamus quosdam etiam Orthodoxos Interpretes,
Lyranum item and Riberam Jesuitam, haec Deo absolute, seu Trinitati tribueri
hoc loco. Par.
It is true, that some so conceive of the words, but not all; Beza conceives
that these words are spoken of God absolutely taken. Pareus confesses that
certain Orthodox Interpreters do attribute the word to God as they consihim
absolutely: And therefore if our faith be built upon the sayings of men, we
shall not here know what to believe. Wherefore we must betake our selves to
Reason, whereby the spirit may convince us, of whom the Text in controversy is
to be understood. That it is to be understood of the Father these Reasons may
help forwards to satisfaction.

1. Because this Text declares the principal Author of those things, which
John the Divine was to communicate to the seven Asian Churches. For these words
begin a new matter, and are no part of the salutation. They speak of God even
the Father, who is of highest Authority, and from whom originally this
Revelation was. Christ he is spoken of verse the 11. and is to be considered as
the Principal Instrument in conveying this Revelation to the Churches: for God
gave it to him, to show unto his servants those things, which were shortly to
come to pass, verse 1.

2. Because those Titles are no where in the Scripture attributed to Jesus
Christ. He is indeed called Alpha and Omega, the first and last, verse 11. but
not Alpha and Omega, as signifying the beginning and the end.

3. Because the terms in the Text are elsewhere apparently and professedly
given to God the Father, distinct from the Son. He is called Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end, Rev. 21.5, 6. And he that sat upon the throne said,
behold, I make all things New, And he said unto me Write: for these words are
true and faithful: And he said unto me, it is done, I am Alpha and Omega the
beginning and the end, etc. The Angel uses the same phrase Rev. 22.13. And
doubtless in the same manner. In the fourth verse of this first Chapter: the
Father (as all men acknowledge) is said to be, He that is, he which was, and he
which is to come.

THe Scripture which follows, and is now to be considered of, is John 1.1. In
the beginning was the Word, John 1.1.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

Expositors on this Text usually bring forth Platoes invented terms, whereby
they do not a little cloud the simplicity of the Word of Truth. The words may
be thus read. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with the God, and
the Word was a God. And they may have this sense, In the beginning (in the
first part of time) was the Word, ( Jesus Christ according to the spirit of
holiness did exist) And the Word was with the God (This Jesus Christ was a
delight to the most high God, and did converse with him) and the Word was a
God. (This Jesus Christ had power committed to him, whereby he might represent
the Most High God.)

Now for your inference from the Text, that Jesus Christ is the most high God.

1. I answer that nothing is found in the Text, that does assert Jesus Christ
to be the most high God? He is called GOD, it is true; but what of that? Will
necessity bring in this Conclusion, (...), etc. Just. Mart. p. 490.
that he is the most high God? Nothing less: For the name (as it has been
showed before) is common with God and Creatures. To what has been said, I
shall only add a saying of Justin Martyrs, Whatsoever Angels (says he) have
appeared in the place of God, or acted with men, they have obtained the name of
God, as he which spoke with Jacob and Moses: Yea, and men also are called Gods;
but this appellation is granted to both, for some Office committed to them, etc.

2. That something may be found in this Text to deny Jesus Christ to be the
most high God: he is here distinguished from God: for the Text says, the Word
was with God: and so he was distinct from God. That the Phrase notes out a
distinction all men grant; I shall leave Reason to draw up the Conclusion;
therefore Jesus Christ is not the most high God. God cannot be distinguished
from himself, therefore he that is distinguished from God must be considered
under another notion. But some do infer from this distinction that which they
call personality, (which has already been spoken to) taking God in the first
place to signify the Person of the Father, who is wont (say they) to be called
God in way of eminency; a strange saying in the mouths of those, who hold
Co-equality amongst the Persons in the Trinity.

And also Christ is here differenced from the most high God: in that he is
called a God, but he with whom he was The God in way of eminency: the omission
of the Article is not a little considerable. That which you add from the third
verse of this Chapter, will find elsewhere a fitter place to receive an Answer
in.

NOw I come to Matthew. 28.20. Matthew. 28.20.
Lo I am with you always to the end of the world.

I am with you always unto the end of the World; is no more then this, I will
do you good, whilst ye remain employed in my work. My Author in this
Exposition is old Jacob, no bad Interpreter, Genesis 31.3. the Lord commanded
Jacob to return into the Land of his Fathers, and to his kindred, and for his
encouragement adds to the promise thus, I will be with thee: which Jacob in
chap. 32.9. thus expounds, I will deal well with thee, or I will do thee good.
Jesus Christ is present with his Messengers, or deals well with them, when he
does instruct, comfort, strengthen, or protect them: and all these works he
does in his absence by his spirit, whom the Father has sent in his Name, Joh.
14.26. Let me only (for brevity sake) instance in the work of instruction.
Christ instructed his Apostles, but not immediately; for the spirit which came
in Christ's Name, and received of his, was the Instrument, by which Jesus Christ
did the work, John 16.13, 14, 15. When he the spirit of truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he
shall hear that shall he speak, and he will show you things things to come. He
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you,
all things that the Father has are mine: therefore said I, Hic locus de modo
praeseutiae spiritus quo se suaque nobis communicate: caeterum corpore abest.
Beza in loc.
he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. Christ is now in Heaven,
sitting at the right hand of God, and is present with the Saints in Earth by
the spirit, and glorious influences of grace and mercy, John 14.16, 17, 18.
This kind of presence by the spirit Beza and others understand to be intended
in Matthew. 28.20.

REv. 2.2. is now to be minded, Rev. 2.2.
whether it does join with the foregoing Texts, in speaking any thing by way
of Justification to your Assertion or not.

Answ. Christ could not (say you) at so great a distance know all the works of
the Churches as mere man.

What could he not? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? What could the Prophet
Elisha know at a very great distance, what the King of Syria said in his
bedchamber? And yet cannot Christ know at a distance? He has the spirit (to
wit wisdom, power, etc.) given him without measure, John 3.34.

And therefore can know beyond what we can conceive: And yet is not the most
high God, for his knowledge is of another, John 5.30. I can of mine own self do
nothing; as I hear, I judge; and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine
own will, but the will of the Father which has sent me. Though he always knew
all things necessary for the perfect discharge of his Offices; yet there was a
time when he was excluded from the knowledge of the hour and day of judgment,
Mark 13.32. The words from the Greek are these: But of that day and hour no one
knows, neither the Angels which are in Heaven. Nor the Son, unless the
Father. Hence it is plain, that the Father only knew the day and hour of
Judgment, and that the Son himself was at that time excluded from the
knowledge of it; therefore this knowledge was not originally of himself nor
always perfect.

COl. 1.15. Col. 1.15.
I find next in your Paper, but have already spoken to it; yet was willing
here to mention it; least you should think I had forgot it. Sir, this Text you
say, holds forth the Eternal Generation of Jesus Christ. I pray consider it
again, and by your next let me hear what part thereof it is in which Christ's
Eternal Generation may be seen.

THe next Scripture is Col. 1.16. Col. 1.16. with John 1.3.
To which I shall add John 1.3. being reserved for this place.

Answ. Sir, here you harp upon two other strings, and think they sound that
alowd in your ears which you have entertained in your thoughts, to wit, that
Jesus Christ is the most high God. But pray Sir, consider whether your
Conclusion be the Echo of those Texts, or else of your own thoughts only. But
you seem to gather this Argument from the words to manifest the verity of your
thoughts.

He by whom all things were made is the most high God. But all things were made
by Jesus Christ.

Therefore Jesus Christ is the most High God.

I shall answer to your Major by distinguishing betwixt the Agent Principal
and Instrumental. That there may be in one and the same work, one Principal and
another Isntrumental Agent none will deny. But whether there were in the work
of Creation one Principal, and another Isntrumental, is a thing to be proved.
That the Father was Principal therein, and so the most high God, comes not
under debate. But whether the Son was only Instrumental in that great work of
Creation, is the Controversy, and must be the subject of our present inquiry.
I affirm, that Jesus Christ was only an Isntrumental Agent in the Creation of
the worlds.

The Reasons by which, I shall at this time guard mine assertion from suspicion
of error, are these that follow.

The first is drawn from the silence of all creatures. The book of the
Creatures, as well as the book of the Scriptures, Ex Creatioue agnoscitur Deus,
sed non Deus pater, fill. and spir. si quoni im vis illa efficiens quia mundus
fuit creatus, pertinet ad Essentiam Dei, non ad subsistentiam ejus personalem,
Amesius.
speak forth with open mouth, this sacred truth that there is one first cause,
and Principal Agent of all things. Of a Trinity of Persons in Unity of
Essence, as Principal Agents in the work of Creation; the whole Creation is
wholly silent: Wherefore our Divines acknowledge, that God is known from the
Creation, but not God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, because that efficient
power, by which the world was created, belongs to the Essence of God, not to
his personal subsistence.

Yet by their leave, God is a Person, all actions being proper unto persons;
and therefore by their grant, the works of Creation hold forth but one Agent,
who must needs be the Principal (if not the only) Agent therein; for it is not
imaginable, that if there were then one Principal Agent, they should not all
be equally discovered by the work, being equally concerned in it: Therefore if
Christ were an Agent, he was but an instrumental one.

The Second Reason proceeds from the verdict of pure Reason. If Reason may
obtain credit, she will tell us, that there could be in the work of Creation
but one Principal Agent, because there is by nature and in way of eminency but
one God: For if there were two Principal Agents, there must be two Gods in way
of eminency, (the terms being convertible) which to affirm would be absurd, and
easily disproved. And therefore if Jesus Christ were any, he was but an
Isntrumental Agent in that work of Creation.

The Third Reason issues from the nature of Christ's being. That whole Christ is
a creature, has been already proved: yet let me add a word from Col. 1.15.
which does immediately precede the Text now in question. Christ is there called
the image of the invisible God; and so is distinguished from God, because the
image and the thing whereof it is an image are not the same; in that nothing
can be the image of its self

Now he is called the image of the invisible God, in that God through him did
principally manifest and declare his Divine Glory, and in that the chiefest
Dominion of the creature was by the Father committed to him; in this sense man
is called the image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7.

He is also called the firstborn of every creature; whereby he is ranked among
the creatures, yet so as that he is the Head of them.

Now if whole Christ be a creature, then will it unavoidably follow, that he
was but an Instrument in the work of Creation: for God and creatures are
contradistinct, and he could not be, unless he were God, a Principal Agent.

The fourth Reason does spring from the manner of Christ's working.

1. Though he had an hand in the Creation of the world, yet was it not
originally of him, 1 Cor. 8.6. where the Apostle does plainly show us, that all
things are of God, even the Father, and that all things are by, not of Jesus
Christ, and so the Son is distinguished from the Father in the work of
Creation; the Father being the first cause, and original of all things, and
Christ the instrument of the Father, by whom he did manifest his Divine Glory
in producing creatures.

2. Instrumentum and Minist. Ter.
In that in the work of Creation the Scripture tells us, that God acted by him,
Ephesians. 3.9. where it is said, That God created all things by Jesus Christ: (...)
Just. (...). Theoph. (...). Origin.
So in Heb. 1.2. which openly hold forth Jesus Christ as Gods instrument in
creating the world.

He is frequently called by the Fathers the Instrument and Servant of God.

But you endeavor to strengthen your Proposition by a Reason (such as it is)
drawn from impossibility; God could (say you) make use of no instrument in the
work of Creation. But Sir, this assertion derogates from Gods All Sufficiency.
Is any thing impossible with God? Is any thing too hard for the Lord?

2. It contradicts your own testimony. I remember that in a Conference (where I
exercised both silence and patience, to the Glory of God,) since I received
your paper, you did affirm in the hearing of not a few, that God might at first
have made an Angel, or some other creature, and by it have made all things.

How to reconcile one with the other is a thing unfeasible; and therefore you
must confess, that you are not always infallible: yea, that sometimes you
differ from your self; and so it is no wonder, if you disagree with others. But
what shall I take from your present judgment? Must your last words stand? If
so, then you have weakened your cause; and I may save a labor in returning an
answer to that, which follows in your paper: If the former, then you must
recant what you last said, and I must not here make an end of my Reply to your
Major. The truth is, I honor Reason so much, that I should rather prostrate my
self to its shadow and appearance, then to the best man's testimony and
assertion: wherefore I shall honor Reason so much as not to pass by without
examination that which appears in your paper, with Reasons dress on it. Your
Reason thus runs,

Now because Creation is a making of all things out of nothing, and required an
infinite power, God can make use of no Instrument: inasmuch as God cannot
derive and give an infinite power to any creature, because no creature is
capable of such a Divine Attribute, for it would make him God, to be Almighty,
or to be infinite in power.

Answ. I shall not answer to all in this Reason which seems not to be sound
doctrine, but only so far as the matter in hand requires.

1. Though it be true that Gods infinite power was manifested in the work of
Creation: yet was not the Infinity of his Power manifested fully in that, or
any other work; for he has more power then ever yet he had need to use, or
then could in any work be fully declared.

2. Your assertion plainly denies the man Christ Jesus to be God; Almighty, or
Infinite in power; for you say that God could not give or derive an infinite
power to any creature, and that a creature cannot be God, Almighty, etc. The
man Christ Jesus was a creature, how then can that Person be God?

3. The ground of your Argument is straw and stubble; For infinite power may be
manifested by them, to whom it is not communicated, and so their proper power;
As is evident in those that wrought miracles and raised the dead, in which
infinite power was manifested, and yet the instruments thereof were not in
power infinite. The like might be said of Gospel-Preachers, whom God makes his
Instruments in men's conversion, as great a work as the worlds Creation. The
same might be said of Christ in his work of our Redemption.

But enough of this.

I shall now examine your Minor, which was, That all things were made by Jesus
Christ.

This is true, Christ being excepted, of whose Creatural being I have already
spoken.

Obj. But you will say, that in John 1.3. it is said, That all things were made
by him, and without him was nothing Made, that was Made.

Sol. The words are to be restrained to all those things which by the use of an
instrument were made and created. In the first verse of this Chapter, the
creation of Jesus Christ is included, and in this third verse he is spoken of
as the instrument of God in creating all things, and therefore is here to be
excepted. As when John the Baptist speaking of Christ, ( John 3.32.) said, What
he has seen and heard that he testifies, and no man receives his testimony;
it is evident that John was to be excepted. Persons are sometimes segregated
from others of the same kind, in way of eminency, being chief amongst them.
Thus in Psalm. 18.1. where it is said, that David sang that song, when the Lord
delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul.
What, was Saul none of Davide enemies? he was the chiefest, and therefore
segregated from the rest.

Thus having taken off the Charet wheels of your Argument, the Conclusion
cannot advance up by its assistance.

I Come now to Heb. 7.3. Heb. 7.3. Answ.


I perceive you are willing to gather from this Text the Eternity of Jesus
Christ; (but on this tree grows no such fruit,) You say that Christ is here
resembled, in reference to his Eternity, to Melchisedek, without beginning of
days, or end of life. Pray Sir, was Melchisedek Eternal? If so, then he was
God. But he was neither the Father, nor the Son, nor the Holy Ghost, whatever
some have conceived, I hope you will not allow a quaternity of Persons in Unity
of Essence. And therefore will allow that the words be taken in a figurative
sense. Quod non narratur ponitur quasi non sit.
Melchisedek was without beginning of days or end of life, in that there is no
mention made either of his birth or death, in the History of Moses: or
especially in reference to his Priesthood, the time of its beginning and ending
being not certainly known. So our High Priest Jesus Christ is without beginning
of days, or end of life.

YOur next Scripture is Prove. 8.22. Prove. 8.22.


Answ. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of
old: I was set up from Everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was.

The meaning is this, (...), etc. Sept.
The Lord who is Possessour of Heaven and Earth, obtained or created me when he
began to work, before all his ancient works. And I was set up, or anointed to
have the dominion of all things, and that from Everlasting, that is, from the
Beginning, before the Earth was.

The Septuagint have the words thus: The Lord created me the beginning of his
ways for his works. Dominus acquisivit me principium viaesuae, ante opera ex
tunc, A saeculo principatum babui a capite, ab initiis terrae. Mont.
He founded me in the Beginning before the Earth was made. Montanus thus: The
Lord obtained me the beginning of his way, before his works from thence; I had
dominion from Everlasting from the Beginning, from the beginning of the Earth.

The thirtieth verse speaks of Christ as having a being before Gods works of
old; yet so as that it was created one.

THE Scripture which follows next in your Paper, Zach. 13.7.
is, Zach. 13.7.

Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, against the man that is my fellow, says
the Lord of Hosts.

Answ. I suppose that you would infer hence the coequality of Jesus Christ with
the Lord of Hosts, whose words those are. But doubtless when you drew up this
Conclusion, you hearkened to the sound, not the sense of our English word
Fellow, which does not always note equality, as from Psalm 45.7. and Heb. 1.9.
you may be informed, where the Saints are called the Fellows of Christ; from
which none acquainted with Reason or Scripture will conclude their coequality
with him. Had you consulted with the Hebrew word used in the Text, you would
have been a stranger to so strange an inference. For the words translated, My
Fellow, might be rendered, My Citizen, my Neighbor, my Second, Hebraea vox
proximum aut amicum sonat qui stat e regione alterius. Et praesto est a emnia
amici officia comparatus quamobrem idem in sinu patris esse, and ad dexteram
illius sedere dicitur intercedens pro nobis. Trem. in Locum.
my Lieutenant, my Vicar, my Friend; So the Septuagint [(...)] the man, my
Citizen, or Neighbor. Tremelius, thus: [Virum proximum meum] The man my
Second, my Lieutenant, my Neighbor, my Vicar, or the like.

Tremellius and Iunius in their Marginal Notes speak thus. The Hebrew word (say
they) signifies one that is very near, or a friend, who stands over against
another, and is ready at hand for all friendly offices; wherefore the same, to
wit, Jesus Christ) is said to be in the bosom of the Father, and to sit at his
right hand, interceding for us. And so the words acquaint us with these two
things especially,

1. That Christ is the Principal object of Gods dearest affection. The man my
fellow, quem maxim amo, says Groti us, whom I most of all love.

2. That Christ is Gods Principal Servant in his highest tranfactions. One that
is Gods Representative, as the word in the Text holds forth, and the Scripture
everywhere speaks. I might now collect from the words something to oppose the
Doctrine you assert, they being spoken of a man, and in reference to the Lord
of Hosts, who cannot possibly have an equal, unless it were possible to have
two Gods;

BUT I shall pass by that, and hasten to the Scripture next appearing, which
is, John 3.13. John 3.13.
And no man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, the
Son of Man which is in Heaven.

Answ: Sir, what your intent was in alleging this Text, I no whit doubt, but
the reason of your inference thence is yet to me unknown. Thus the words may be
understood; [No man has ascended up into Heaven] that is, no man has known
those Divine things, the knowledge whereof is reserved for another life; or
those Divine things which are known in this life, as they are in themselves,
nakedly appearing without their earthly habits, and as expressed in a remote
and Angelical Language. [But he that came down from Heaven, the Son of Man
being in Heaven] that is, The Son being excepted, who was in Heaven, and
descended thence, for some work which he had to do on Earth; or thus, he being
excepted who came down from Heaven, to wit, the Son of Man, who is in Heaven,
that is, in the bosom of the Father, knowing his Secrets, and Divine things as
they are in themselves; notwithstanding he speaks only of those things, and in
that way which men are now capable of.

I shall countenance this Exposition with a few Reasons.

1. Because this sense and meaning wherewithal I have clothed those words, is
no way opposite to the analogy of faith. There is nothing (as I suppose) to be
picked out of my words, which the Doctrine of the Gospel will pick a quarrel
with. But this Exposition lessens the number of those Texts, that plead for
Christ as most high God. But let not Scripture be forced; let every Text speak
what it knows. To misapply is to pervert Scriptures.

2. Because the sense, which I would that this text should own and allow, is
elsewhere challenged by the like phrases to themselves as their due. Ascendere
in coelum, to ascend into heaven, is to penetrate the secrets of heaven, as
Grotius speaks on this place. In the like manner does Musculus and Bucer
understand the words.

In the same sense is the like phrase to be taken, Prove. 30.4. and so Piscator
expounds it. And thus, to be in heaven, is to enjoy the discoveries of Gods
hidden secrets. Thus Paul was in the third heavens, when he heard unspeakable
words, which is not possible for a man to utter, 2 Cor. 12. In this sense
Christ was in heaven, says Grotius; Christus introspexit patris intima, says
he, Christ looked into the most secret things of the Father.

3. Because this sense which I have joined to this text, makes the text appear
as fitly joined with its context. In those two verses, which immediately
precede this; Christ does reprove Nicodemus for his unbelief; which he
aggravates from the certainty of the thing spoken: Verily, verily, we speak
what we know, etc. and then from his perspicuity in speaking; if I have told
you earthly things (that is, either things that may, and are necessary to be
known in the earth; or else the words have respect only to the manner of
Christ's holding them forth) and ye believe not: how can ye believe, if I should
tell you of heavenly things: In this thirteenth verse you have an exclusion of
all men, (Christ excepted) from the knowledge of heavenly things which are
reserved for another world, or which are known here, as they are in themselves.

THe last Scripture which I find in your Paper, John 17.15.
is Ioh. 17.5. And now, o Father, glorify me with thine own self, with the
glory I had with thee before the world was.



O thou Father, who do abound in kindness, and art the fountain of goodness,
the time being come of finishing my course in earth, and returning to thy self;
glorify me in heaven, (who have emptied my self, taking to me a natural and
mortal body, and walking among men in form of a servant; and now being ready
to humble my self to the death, even the death of the Cross in obedience to
thee) with that glory which I had in heaven before the world was: being then
with thee as Heir of all things, clothed with Majesty and Glory, answerable to
that high station, wherein thy pleasure was to set me; and to that great
dominion, wherewithal thou wast pleased to invest me.

SIR, What you can fetch from this scripture, to confirm your doctrine of
Christ's Deity, does lie (as yet) under the shadow of darkness, and in the
land of obscurity. That much might be gathered hence, by a good deduction, to
make opposition against your assertion, is not a little perspicuous and
apparent. A few things I shall present you with, as a taste of that which might
be gathered hence, to disown that point and conclusion, which with so much heat
and passion you endeavor to uphold and maintain amongst us.

It appears from this Scripture, That whole Christ is a Creature.

First, in that he directs his prayer to the Father. If our Lord Jesus were God
equal with the Father, there had been no need, nor can cause be showed, why he
should supplicate to the Father, a Person in the Trinity, and not act relyance
on the Godhead, which dwelt in him bodily. These words spoke Jesus and lift up
his eyes to heaven, v. 1.

Secondly, in that the Glory was not divine, which he had with the Father
before the world was. Because this Glory, which he had in heaven with the
Father before the world was, at this time of his praying was separated from
him. This must be asserted, or I know not how Christ's prayer can be justified.

We do not pray but praise for things we have, if we know, that we have them;
but it cannot be imagined that Christ was ignorant of what he had. Now, if
Christ were a person in the Trinity, coequall with the Father, and so enjoying
by the same right the highest Glory, he could not, especially with the Father
(or in heaven) be without it in any sense whatsoever, as by the clouding,
darkning, or obscuring of it: Therefore the glory which he had with the Father
was not the highest glory, but a glory proceeding from the Highest: and so by
good consequence, He who at that time was the subject of it, was really and
indeed a Creature.

Thirdly, it appears that the Glory which he had with the Father was not
Divine, or the highest Glory, because it was to be communicated. Glorify me, o
Father, with that glory, etc. Now the Highest Glory being infinite, could not
be given or communicated to the humane nature, which was finite, and so
incapable of it; (This is but your own assertion, in what you speak relating to
the creation) but it is absurd to conceive, that the Divine glory, which is
essential in God, could be communicated to the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ.
And therefore this Glory was not the highest, and the subject of it was a
Creature.

Thus I shall take my leave of the Scriptures, which you alledg (to confirm,
that Jesus Christ is the most High God) leaving them for that they are intended
for; being without controversy not useless, but exceeding useful.

SIR, Unto your texts of Scripture you adjoyn one Reason (if it please you so
to call it) which I shall set down in your own words, thus.

It may be said truly, that this Doctrine, which makes Christ a mere creature,
brings in, as it were another Gospel, destroys the true Gospel in many of the
parts of it, and brings in another Scripture in many main points.

Come now let us reason together concerning this your Reason, which is
formidable in appearance to your Antagonists; but whether it carries the Sword
of truth in its hand, and strength of conviction let us now seriously consider.
That we may with the more certainty, and facility determine, I shall be your
leave draw your Reason into the form of an Argument, Thus:

That Doctrine which brings in, as it were, another Gospel, destroys the true
Gospel in many of the parts of it, etc. is erroneous and to be rejected.

But that Doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature does so. Therefore.

SIR, I shall subscribe with both hands (if need be) to the Major, that it is
true: And if the Minor be of the same blood, I shall conclude with you in the
conclusion, and let him be Anathema that holds the contrary. But how will it
appear, that that Doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature, does bring in,
as it were, another Gospel, destroys the true Gospel in many of the parts of
it, etc? That it might be evident, you bring in twelve Instances, which, were
they good and true (though fewer) might serve for a sufficient Jury to bring in
a final verdict concerning the thing in debate: but of what moment your
Instances are, let us now examine.

If Christ be but a mere creature and not God, then the giving of Divine
worship, and honor, and service to a mere creature is lawful and warrantable;
which yet everywhere is forbidden in reference to any creature, but is
practiced unto Christ in Rev. 5.12, 13, 14. and would be Idolatry if Christ
were not God.



That it is contrary to the Scripture to give Divine worship, honor and
service to a mere Creature.

But Divine worship, honor and service is by the warrant of the Scripture
given to Christ Jesus, Rev. 5.12, 13, 14.

Therefoae Christ Jesus is not a mere creature.

To the Major I shall thus reply:

1. I conceive that your expressions (having in them some ambiguity) need
explanation. If by Divine worship, honor and service, you mean that worship,
honor and service, which is in any sense Divine, I utterly deny your
Proposition as erroneous and unsound: For there is no worship, honor and
service, which of right belongs to the creature, but is in a sense Divine, God
being the principal Author, and ultimate Center thereof, Romans 13. Ephesians. 5.7.

But if you mean in the strictest sense, that worship, honor, and service
which is peculiar unto the most High God, then shall I say with you, that it is
Idolatry, and contrary to the Scripture to give it to any creature whatsoever.
That worship, honor and service which is peculiar unto God, differs from that
which may be yielded to the Creature, partly in the matter, but wholly in the
manner of it. We must pray to God for all things we want, and may pray to men
for what they can give; we must obey God, and we must obey men, who are set
over us by God; but we may not worship, honor, or serve men in the like manner
as we do the most High God, who is the Principal and Ultimate Object of all
worship, honor and service; his right thereto being only of himself, and he
himself being the sole end thereof. According to this sense is that command
which our Savior mentions ( Mat. 4. ^0.) to be understood: Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

2. I wonder at this adjection MERE, which you have added to creature; as if a
creature in essence could be more then a mere creature; or as if some creature
might have as its right and due, that honor, worship and service which the
Scripture does appropriate to the most High God.

Sure I am, that creatures as creatures are excluded from sharing with GOD in
that worship and service which is peculiar to him.

Now for your Minor, That Divine worship, honor, and service is by
Scripture-warrant given to Christ Jesus.

Gods Viceroy, and acting amongst men in his Fathers name, which the Scripture
you bring helps to confirm. But where the Scripture allows worship, honor and
service to be given to him, as the Principal and Vltimate Object thereof, is
not yet made to appear; and therefore the Conclusion may not have liberty to
pass as an unquestiouable truth.

If Christ be a mere creature, then it is lawful and warrantable to believe in
a mere Creature, which is against the tenure of the whole Scripture. But it is
commanded in reference unto Christ, Joh. 14.1. and salvation is annexed to it,
Jo. 3.36.

If Christ be a mere creature, then faith in a mere creature can save man,
which is absurd and gross, and contrary to the Scriptures: for Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness, Romans 4.3. and so
was saving.



1. That that Faith which is needful and necessary to salvation has a double
object, God, and the man Christ Jesus, Joh. 14.1. the Scripture which you quote
bears witness to this as a truth.

We are to believe on him that sent Jesus Christ, Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, (says Christ) he that hears my Word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death to life; And also on Jesus Christ that was sent, John 6.29.
As the Serpent was lifted up in the wilderness; so must the Son of man be
lifted up: that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.14, 15. That faith which has but a single object is
not a saving faith. It is impossible that men should by a Gospel Light believe
in God, and not in Christ, or in Christ and not in God: Jesus cried and said,
He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me, John
12.44. For by the Gospel God appears merciful in the face of Christ, and Christ
appears isntrumental in the hand of God, Romans 4.24. Romans 10.9. Though in some
places but one is expressed: yet there the other is clearly implied.

2. That that Faith which is needful and necessary to salvation acts in a
diverse manner on God, and the Lord Christ Jesus.

It acts toward God as the Principal and Vltimate, and toward Jesus Christ,
as the Secondary and mediate Object of Faith. Peter shows that the Saints to
whom he wrote did believe in God through Jesus Christ; and so that God was the
Ultimate, and Christ the Mediate object of their faith, 1 Pet. 1.21. It Is from
Gods Commandment that faith in Christ is needful, 1 John 3.23. And it is from
Gods appointment that faith in Christ is saving, Joh. 6.4. This is the will of
him that sent me (says Christ) that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life.

If Christ be but a mere creature, then a mere creature is the Savior of men,
saving them with a mighty and eternal salvation as the Scripture speaks, but
this is against the whole current of the Gospel which speaks of God our
Savior, Tit. 2.10, 13. and in many other places.

Answ. Against this your instance I shall level this Assertion, which will be
sufficient to discover its weakness, and confute it; That to affirm Jesus
Christ to be the Savior of men without God, or equal with God, is contrary to
the current of the whole Scripture; which does distinguish God from Christ in
the work of Salvation, calling him a Savior, as distinct from Christ, as in
the 1 Timothy 1.1. where God is said to be our Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ
to be our hope; and in the Text you allege, and frequently elsewhere.

And in that the Scripture does prefer God in the work of Salvation before our
Lord Jesus Christ, making God to be the principal Agent therein, when it
declares that the work of Christ in saving men was from the purpose of God, who
appointed him for it, and from the Precept of God, who enjoined him to it, and
from the Presence of God, who assisted him in it, all which from the Scriptures
might be abundantly set forth unto us: and also revealing the Lord Christ Jesus
to be in the work of Salvation an instrumental Savior. For this see only Tit.
3. v. 4, 5, 6. which puts it past all question. But after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washof
Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

If Christ be but a mere Creature, then a mere Creature is Mediator betwixt God
and Men, which cannot be, because a mere creature is no way meet to be a
Daysman for God and because a Mediator must either partake of both God and
Man, or of neither, else he will rather be a Party then a Mediator, if he
partakes of man's nature, and not of Gods if he be man and not God, Therefore
this Mediator betwixt God and man is called Emmanuel, that is God with us, or
God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. or God made flesh, John. 1.14.

Answ. This your fifth Instance doubtless is intended for the same purpose as
the former. But if it bring not with it more evidence of truth then they
afforded, the Doctrine which denies Christ to be the most high God, may yet be
accounted free from those high and capital Crimes, of bringing in as it were
another Gospel, and the like, wherewithal it is accused.

That we may the better understand what it speaks, I shall reduce it into the
form of an Argument: and that we may more clearly discern what truth it speaks,
I shall spend some time to examine it. If we consider the words of this
Instance with the scope of it, we shall perceive, as a natural offspring, this
argument to issue from it;

That Doctrine, Which makes the mediator betwixt God and man to be a mere
creature, brings in as it were another Gospel, destroys the true Gospel in many
of the parts of it, etc. in that it is against Reason, that the mediator should
be a creature; Because a mere creature is no way meet to be a Daysman for God;
and because a mediator must either partake of both God and man, or of neither,
else he Will be rather a party then a mediator, etc. and in that it opposes
these Scriptures, Mat. 1.23. 1 Timothy 3.16. Io. 1.14. But, that Doctrine which
denies Jesus Christ to be the most high God, makes the mediator betwixt God
and man to be a mere creature. Therefore.

Answ. Although (Sir) your major deserves not esteem, notwithstanding that
attendance of Reason and Scripture you have allotted to it; your Reasons being
strangers to Reason, and your Scriptures not bearing the Livery of your
Doctrine: yet you merit a Reply, for that appearance of Reason and Scripture,
which you have drawn after your majors heels.

The first Reason you bring to justify your Accusation of that Doctrine, which
makes the mediator betwixt God and man to be a mere creature, as destructive
to the Gospel in (at least) some main part of it is this,

Because a mere creature is no way meet to be a daysman for God Sir, this
Reason wants a Reason to support it; for it is not in it self so evident to
Reason, as that none may suspect it; neither is your word a sufficient Reason
for any to believe it.

What should hinder but that a mere Creature (to use your own terms) may be a
Daysman or mediator betwixt God and man? Is there any work which belongs to
his Office, which is impossible for a Creature to perform, notwithstanding
Divine Assistance with him? I dare assert the contrary, and am able to prove in
whatsoever work you can in sance, belonging to Christ's Mediatorship, that of
himself he was not able to perform it, unless by the assistance of another,
which he enjoyed, and so is a complete mediator.

Your second Reason which joins hand with the former, and speaks to as little
purpose, is this, Because a mediator must either partake of both God and man,
or of neither; else he Will rather be a party then a mediator.

Sir, that there is a necessity, that Christ the mediator must be God and man,
or else he will be rather a party then a mediator, you say, but why, is yet to
be learned. Was not Moses a mediator betwixt God (or the Angels) and men? But
was Moses God and man, or Angel and man? Moses was a mere man, as all will
confess; but that he was a mediator betwixt God and men, or Angels and men the
Scripture declares. Gal. 3.19. When you brought in this Reason, you did you
knew not what, for it gives witness against you. By the assistance thereof I
shall expect an Argument, by which the supposed Deity of the Mediator will be
denied; and shall leave you to show where its weakness lies.

If Christ the mediator Were God, he was a Party; but Christ the mediator was
not a Party; Therefore Christ the mediator was not God.

The major is clear. Let me only in the work of Reconciliation give an
instance. In Reconciliation by a mediator we are to suppose three, one
offended, another offending, and a third mediating for peace betwixt them: God
was offended, men were offenders, and Christ was the mediator. Now if Christ
had been a sinful man, he had been of the party offending and if he had been
God he was the party offended. But Christ, was not a party say you, and
therefore I need not prove the minor; but from the Proposition which I have
confirmed, and the Assumption, which you have acknowledged, draw up the
Conclusion, that Christ the mediator is not God.

Now I shall consider the Scriptures you bring, and hear what testimony they
afford to the thing you assert, that Christ the mediator is the most high God.
Your first Scripture is Matthew. 1.23. where Christ's name is called Emmanuel, the
signification whereof is God with us. Whence you would collect that there are
two natures in Christ the mediator.

This is I confess a common inference, but that it is natural from it I cannot
yet understand. Emmanuel was not the name of Christ, but a signification of his
name Jesus, which is evident if you compare the 21, 22, and 23. verses of this
chap. together; now the name Jesus signifies not the nature, but the office of
Christ, as the Angel expounds it, verse 21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for
he shall save his people from their sins. And so Emmanuel notes out that
certain aid that God would afford by Jesus Christ to the Church.

THe next Scripture is 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery
of godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, etc. Ancient interpreters (says
a learned man) as the Latin, the Syriack, the Arabic, Ambrose and Augustine,
1 Timothy 3.16.
make this Reading to be suspected, for they read not as we do, for thus they
read the words, And Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness
which (mystery) was manifested in the flesh, etc.

And Hincmarus adds that this word God was put in the Text by the Nestorians.
But if we allow our Reading, this Text will make nothing for your purpose; for
it is not denied, but that Christ was a God, and the Text says but this, a God
was manifest in flesh, that is appeared visibly amongst men, when he took unto
him a body.

YOur third and last Scripture is, John 1.14. where it is said That the Word Was
made flesh; the meaning is this, That Creature which was immediately made by
God, took unto it a body; I find no place where the flesh of Christ signifies
any thing more then his body, according to which he died, 1 John 14.
and is nowhere taken for the Humane Nature.

Let me now oppose your Proposition by two or three Reasons, which I shall
leave you to pause upon. Christ the Mediator is a mere Creature;

1. Because whole Christ is a creature: For this see before. Now if whole
Christ be a creature, then either a mere creature is the Mediator, or Christ
is not a Mediator.

2. Because a Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3.20. now if Christ be God, then he
is a Mediator of one: for he cannot be a Mediator to himself, and there is
but one God.

3. Because Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and Men, 1 Timothy 2.5. Now if he
were God, he could not be a Mediator betwixt God and Men, for he could not be
a Mediator to himself. And Paul in that of Timothy calls the Mediator betwixt
God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Thus having taken away the Major, though the
Minor were granted: yet would not your Conclusion stand, having but one leg
to rest upon.

I am now come to your sixth Instance: which is this,

If Christ be but a mere creature, then the Righteousness of Christ, which is
imputed to Believers, is not the Righteousness of God, but the righteousness of
a mere creature; but this is against the tenure of the Scriptures, in Phil. 3.9.

Answ. Sir, I suppose from some terms in this your Instance, and from the Text
you allege, that by Righteousness you mean that righteousness Whereby
Believers stand in the sight of God free and clear from all sin, in reference
to the curse of the Law. This is the Righteousness of God, by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, (that is, that in Jesus Christ which is to be the object of our
faith) unto all and upon all that believe, Romans 3.22. God is the Principal
Author of this Righteousness, and Christ is an Instrumental Agent therein. Now
that in Christ which is imputed to us for righteousness, is his obedience;
which was both active and passive. The opinion nowadays is, that the active
obedience of Christ, whereby he did perfectly fulfill the Law, and his passive
obedience, whereby he did perfectly suffer the curse of the Law, are imputed to
us for righteousness. Now he could not obey the Law as he was God, nor could
the suffer the curse of the Law, but as he was Man; and so that righteousness
of Christ, which was imputed unto us, was a creatures righteousness.

Now I shall hasten to your seventh Instance, which here follows.

If Christ Were a mere creature, then to pardon sin belongs not to him, because
the Scripture testifies, that none can forgive sins but God, because all sin is
against God; therefore none can for give it but God: but it is evident, that
Christ took the Authority of forgiving sin: Son (says Christ) thy sins are
forgiven thee, Luke 7.48.

Answ. Because many think that some weight lies in these words, I shall be a
little the more large in my Answer to it; I shall without marring it, make this
Argument of it.

None can forgive sin but God.

But Christ did forgive sin, Luke 7.48.

Therefore Christ is God.

I shall reply to your Major, that none can forgive sin but God.

1. By objecting against the witness you bring for it; for your proof alludes
to that which we have in Mark 2.7. Who can for give sins but God only? This
though it be in the Scripture, yet is it no part of the Standard; for the dark
Scribes who were enemies to Christ, did speak it.

2. By objecting against the Doctrine you teach in it. That none can for give
sin in any sense, but God only, may pass for an error: for it is the duty of
all men, to for give others those sins they commit against them, Matthew. 6.14.
And it is the privilege of some men to forgive all sins, in reference to the
curse of the Law, John 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them; and Whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. That none can
forgive sins as God does, shall have my leave to pass for a truth. God in
forgiving of sin is Principal, doing it by his own Authority, not receiving
power from another.

Now for your Minor, That Christ did for give sin. It Is true, that Christ did
forgive sin; and that he the Son of Man had on Earth power to do it, as he
himself speaks, Mar. 2.10. But what will this help to bring in the Conclusion,
that Christ is God? Doubtless no, because mere creatures (as above) have in
some sense power to forgive sin. If it can be proved, that Christ is Principal
in forgiving, something may done. But that cannot be, because the Scripture
cannot oppose it self. The Scripture tells us, that we are justified by the Man
Christ Jesus, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren,
that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. And by him
all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. And it also shows us that Christ is not the
Principal forgiver of sins; in that he prayed to another (on the Jews behalf)
for the forgiveness of sin, Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them,
for they know not What they do. And in that he received from another his power
of forgiving sins, Acts 5.30, 31. The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom
ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior, for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of
sins.

Thus I have blockt up the way, that your Conclusion cannot pass, but opened a
way for my self, to pass from your seventh Instance to that which follows.

If Christ be a mere creature, then the value of that offering, which Christ
offered, when he offered himself to God, is taken away, and the satisfaction
which Christ gave to Divine Justice is destroyed: for if the person that died
were a mere man, and the blood that was shed were the blood of a mere man, and
not of God, as it is called, Acts 20.28. then how could it satisfy for the
sins of many transgressors; for there is no proportion betwixt one mere man
dying for sin, and many men sinning and deserving death, each of them for the
sins they have committed. And how an Infinite Justice offended should be
satisfied with the sacrifice finite in value, is unconceivable and against the
tenure of the Scripture.

Answ. Considering the words of this Instance with its scope, we may draw up
this Argument.

That Doctrine which takes away the value of Christ's offering, and destroys the
satisfaction which he gave to Divine Justice brings in as it were another
Gospel, etc.

But that Doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature does so. Therefore.

I shall grant the Major; but how prove you the Minor? You would confirm your
Doctrine by asking two Queries:

1. If Christ was (say you) a mere creature, then who could he satisfy for the
sins of many transgressors, etc?

Sir, if it please you to consider Romans 5.12. and so forward, you may answer
your own Query, or see as good Reason of this, which I shall now propound.

If Adam were a mere creature, how could his sin make many transgressors? If
through the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God and the
gift by grace, by one man, Jesus Christ has abounded unto many, Romans 5.15.
Christ (as well as Adam) was a common person, and therefore the Lord having
laid upon him the iniquities of us all, and he bearing the curse of the Law,
his Members are delivered from both the sin and the curse.

Your Second Query is this, How is it conceivable that an Infinite Justice
offended should be satisfied by a Sacrifice finite in value?

What matters it (Sir,) if it be unconceivable? must it therefore be
uncredible? Doubtless in all Controversall doctrines, you will not hold this
for an Orthodoxall tenent. In the Doctrine of the Trinity credit must be given
to things unconceivable; but the like liberty (it seems) will not be allowed in
Christ's Mediatorship. Eut Sir, the foundation you build upon is not a little
questionable: you take that for granted, and so infer from it, which you are to
confirm. Sure I am, that not a few errors may lie under your
Non-Scripturall-Language. Ye tell us of an Infinite Sacrifice, but what you
mean by it, and where Scripture tells us, I am yet for to learn. The Scripture
tells us, that Christ was made sin, or a sin offering for us, by taking our
sins and bearing the curse: But how this Sacrifice was infinite, remains to me
unconceivable. If the suffering of Christ had been Infinite, there had been no
end of it: If the curse had been Infinite, man could not have born it, being
incapable of any thing Infinite in the Infinity of it. It is enough for me, to
believe that my Lord Jesus suffered for me, whatever I deserved to suffer; and
that was the curse of the Law, be that what it will.

There is a Scripture which I find in your Instance, and that is Acts 20.28.
and I knew no fitteer place then the close of my Answer for it.

Sir, I shall offer these few things to your consideration:

1. That there may be some mistake in the Text. God may be put for Lord or
Christ, which if granted, the words are thus to be read: Take heed therefore to
your selves, and to all the slock, over which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with his own
blood. The Churches of the Saints are called the Churches of Christ, Romans
16.16. This conceit of a mistake may receive countenance from the possibility,
probability and facility thereof. It is possible that the Scribe through
carelessness, or something worse, might here put God for Christ. There are two
places, one in the Old Testament, another in the New, which Willet conceives
to have been mistaken by the Scribes negligence, or something worse.

The first is Psalm. 22.16. where Caari, signifying as a Lion, is put for Caru,
they pierced. The other is Romans 12.11. we have (...) time for Lord, Also it is
probable, that here is a mistake, for as Grotius observes, many Copies have
Lord, and the Syriack Christ, not God. Lastly, it was easy to mistake taking
one for the other, from that compendious writing which was anciently much in
use: where for (...) they wrote only (...), and for (...).

2. But in the next place, if it be proved that there is no mistake in the
Text, yet there may be a defect in the words. For the last clause some Greek
copies thus have it; which he has purchased with the blood of his own, and so
the word Son is to be understood with the blood of his own Son.

3. Last of all, if both these may be removed, yet the words may have another
meaning then what you and many others allot to them. Christ's blood may be said
to be Gods own blood, in way of eminency, it being more excellent by far then
the blood of the Legal Sacrifices. In the old Testament tall trees are called
Cedars of God; the like Phrases are frequently there to be found. And the New
Testament is not wholly a stranger to the like Phrases. In this sense Christ is
called the Lamb of God, Joh. 1.36. because he was far more excellent then
either the Paschall Lamb, or any other Lamb, which was to be slain in way of
Sacrifice, under the Leviticall Priesthood. The Divine Author to the Hebrews
speaking both of the blood of legal sacrifices, and of Christ Jesus, preferres
the blood of Christ far before all other blood that was shed for the expiation
of sin Heb. 9.13.14.

Now I hasten to your ninth substance, which is this.

If Christ be a mere creature, then the intercession of Christ is overthrown,
for Christ if mere man being in heaven, cannot know the state of the Church in
all places upon earth, therefore cannot intercede for it.



Thus it may be formed without the least injury to your meaning, if your mind
agree with the import of your words.

That Doctrine which utterly overthrows the Intercession of Christ, brings in
as it were another Gospel, etc.

But the Doctrine which makes Christ to be a mere creature, utterly overthrows
the intercesson of Christ. Therefore.

Sir, to your major I yield the fullest concession, being so much a friend to
Christ's Incercession.

Your minor brings in an high accusation, but pray Sir, how is it attended with
probation? you only say, that if Christ were a mere creature, being in
heaven, he could not know the state of the Churches in all places upon earth,
and therefore if he were but a mere creature he could not intercede.

What must we again take your word for a proffer? I wish a better, for there is
no goodness in that. We have already been too long troubled with the word, I
say in stead of proof. What have you learned to measure the knowledge of him,
who has received the spirit without measure? cannot he as man know in heaven
what things are done in earth?

Who told you so?

None but the man Christ Jesus can intercede, it being absurd to conceive, that
God can interede, unless it might be conceived that God has a Superior. Now
if the man Christ Jesus does intercede for his Church he knows her state, and
why he may not know the state of the Church by a communication of power from
the Father, notwithstanding he be not God and man in one Person, is a riddle
for the unfolding whereof I would willingly plow with your heifer. Thus I take
leave of your ninth Instance, that I may visit the tenth, which because it is
of the same value, and in that part which I would deny it, already answerd'd in
my reply to Matthew. 28.20. whither I refer you. I shall pass it by, and be take
my self to examine the eleventh which now follows.

^^^^nce 11.
If Christ be a mere creature then a mere creature is the Judge of the World,
which is against the Scritpure, for the Judge of the World is God, before whom
Abraham stood in Genesis 18.25. When he pleaded for Sodom, Romans 2.5, 6. tho day of
judgment is called the day of Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, who
will render to every man according to his words.



That Doctrine which makes a mere creature the judge of the world, is against
the Scripture, Genesis 18.15. Romans 2.5, 6. But Christ is the judge of the world.
Therefore that doctrine which makes Christ a mere creature, is against the
Scripture.

To your Major take these Answers: 1. That in a sense it is false; for Christ
shall judge the world. But you will say he is not a mere creature. But what say
you to the Apostles? were not they mere creatures: but what will you say, if I
shall show from the word, that they shall be judges at the last day: see Mat.
19.28. and you shall hear Christ telling Peter, that they of the Apostles, Who
had followed him in the regeneration, should sit upon 12 Thrones, judging the
12 tribes of Israel. And are not all the Saints mere creatures? Doubtless at
that instant, when you framed this Instance, you had not in your mind what Paul
speaks in 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Do ye not know, says he, that the Saints shall judge
world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the
smallest matters; Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? 2. That in a sense it
is true, no creature can be as God is, the judge of the world; for God is
Principal in the judgment, being both the Alpha and Omega of it, deriving his
power from none, being the original of al power.

Thus you may see, that your Proposition is, and is not true. I pray for the
future make distinctions, where need requires.

Now for your Minor, that Christ is the judge of the world.

Sure you take this for a granted truth, that no proof is brought to confirm
it. I shall grant it. What then?

Will your design of drawing up the Conclusion prosper? nothing less: For it
has been brought to light, that mere creatures shall be Judges of the world.
Wherefore if you cannot from evident scriptures demonstrate this, That Jesus
Christ is Principal in judging the world; deriving from none his power of
judgment, you will do nothing to purpose.

But Sir, that I may preserve you from such an endless labor, I shalll ay down
these Propositions, which also will spoil your present Market.

Propos. 1. That the most High God, who is the worlds Principal judge, will not
immediately, but by a Delegat judge the world. In Acts 17.31. the Apostle tells
us, That God has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. In John 5.22.
Christ thus speaks, The Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment
to the Son: Christ must reign till all enemies are put under his feet; and when
all things shall be subdued to him, then shall the Son also himself be subject
to the Father, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

That Jesus Christ is a subordinate Judge in reference unto God the supreme
Judge; but superintendent in reference to the Saints his assessors in judgment.

That Christ is not the supreme Judge, is evident from these Scriptures. In Acts
10. Peter shows, that the Apostles were commanded of God to preach unto the
people, and to testify That Jesus Christ is ordained of God to be Judge of
quick and dead. Christ when he comes shall be sent, Acts 3.20. and shall come
in the glory of the Father, as Viceroy and Lord Deputy, Mat. 16.27. The Father
has given him authority to execute Judgment, Io. 5.27. And all that honor
which shall be given to him, shall be for the Fathers glory, Phil. 2.11.

J am now to deal with your last Jnstance, which is like to deal as unkindly
with you as the former.

If Christ be a mere creature, then Prayer to him being now in Heaven, is
altogether vain and frivolous, inasmuch as persons may cry loud long enough,
before Christ hear them at that distance, but the Saints have been wont not
only to pray to God in Christ's Name, but to pray to Christ directly and
immediately, in Acts 7.59. Rev. 22.20. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Come Lord
Jesus.

Answ. By the rule of the Gospel we are to pray to God, or the Father in the
Name of Christ Jesus. You have nothing to countenance Prayer to Christ, but the
two Texts you mention. Jf Stephen did pray directly to Jesus Christ, his act
might be warranted by the visible appearance of Chrise; As Lot prayed to the
Angel, being visible, That in the Revelation is no Prayer, but an intimation of
the Churches desire after Christ's coming. The like manner of speaking we have
Rev. 6.16. which is no Prayer. I cannot but look upon that as vain and
frivolous; which you set as the Walls and Bulwarks of your Argument.

If Christ were but a mere creature, being in heaven, we might cry loud and
long enough before he could hear us.

I would only ask you this question, whether Christ could not hear as far as
Stephen could see. Stephen could see from Earth to Heaven, though he was but a
man. What will hinder the Man Christ from hearing as far?

Thus I have with much brevity (though a considerable Volume might have been
written) concluded my answer to your Instances, which are twelve in number
after your own reckoning, though they might have been fewer by many, being
branches one of another. I have studied to forget your person, and endeavored
only to discover the weakness of your arguing. Whether I have done any thing
to purpose, I leave you to be Judge, when with sobriety and impartiality you
are capable to examine. And so in the midst of my many other occasions, I have
brought my whole Answer to a full period; and have time to say no more but
this, that my desires are, that the God of light and strength would be pleased
to enlighten your eyes, that you may rightly discern all things; and so order
your spirit, that by modestliness you may breath forth truth in replying to him
who is,

Sir, yours whilst you are for the truth.

FINIS.

