AN ADITIONALL ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, FOR
The better taking and expediting the Accounts of the whole Kingdom.

ORdered by the Commons assembled, in Parliament that this Ordinance be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



LONDON. Printed by T.W. for ED. HUSBAND, Printer for the Honorable House of
Commons 1645.

AN ADDITIONALL Ordinance for the better taking and expediting the Accounts of
the whole Kingdom.
FOr the better taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, and the more speedy
levying of such sums of Money as are, or shall be due unto the Commonwealth
upon such Accounts as are, or shall be determined.

It is Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
That the Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, and the
several sub-Committees of Accounts within their respective limits, shall have
full Power and Authority, and are hereby Authorized to issue forth Warrants to
the High Constables, Constables, Petty-constables, and Headboroughs of every
Hundred, Lath, Rape, Wapentake, Ward, and to the Churchwardens of every
Parish, or any of them, or to any other Person or persons under the degree of a
Peer of this Realm, nor to any Member of the House of Commons within the
Limits aforesaid, whom they shall think meet, thereby requiring the Persons
to whom the said Warrants shall be directed, to make strict and diligent
inquiry in every Parish of this Kingdom within their several Precincts, what
sum or sums of Money, Plate, Horse, Arms, Ammunition, Household stuff,
Goods of all sorts, Rents and profits of Lands, Wood, Provisions of all kind,
and Free quarter have been received, taken, collected, raised, seized, or
sequestered within the said Hundred, Lath, Rape, Wapentake, Ward and Parish, by
way of voluntary Contribution, Tax, or otherwise, and by whom the same has
been received, taken, collected, raised, seized, sequestered, and to whom paid
or delivered. And the said persons unto whom the said Warrants shall be
directed, shall give notice thereof in writing, and leave, or cause the same to
be left, at every house within every respective Parish, to inform them of all
such sum or sums of Money, Plate, Horse, Arms, Ammunition, Housholdstuffe,
Goods, Rents, and profits of Lands, Wood, Provisions of all sorts, and free
Quarter, that have been received, taken, collected, raised, seized, or
sequestered by any person or persons, and by whom paid, given, or contributed to
any person or persons whatsoever, for the use of the Commonwealth by way of
Assessement or otherwise, within fifty days after personal notice left or
given, under pain that every person or persons, who shall wilfully or
negligently fail to give in such Information within the time aforesaid,
without rendering a just and reasonable Cause of his or their fayler herein,
shall from thenceforth be disabled to demand the Benefit of the public Faith
for all such Moneys, Plate, Horse, Arms, Ammunition, Provisions,
Contributions, free Quarter, as he or they shall omit to inform of; And after
such information taken by the persons to whom the said Warrants shall be
directed, the same shall be returned in writing to the said Committee, for
taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or unto the sub-Committee of
Accounts respectively for the better inabling them to charge the said
Accomptants.

And whereas several sequestrations have been unwarrantably, fraudulently and
deceitfully discharged or let or sold at under values by the several
Committees or Officers for sequestrations in the several Counties, Cities and
other places of this Kingdom.

Be it Ordained that the Committee for the taking of the accounts of the whole
Kingdom and the several sub-Committees for the said accounts respectively,
shall have power and are hereby authorized to enquire thereof by Oath, and if
they shall find the same to be unwarrantably, fraudulently, and deceitfully
discharged, undersold or underlet, they shall further enquire by what ways and
means, and by whom the said discharge, undersale, or underletting, was
procured, and such person or persons as shall be found faulty in the premises,
shall make such satisfaction to the Commonwealth proportionable to their
offense, as the Committee of accounts for the Kingdom, or any five of them,
shall adjudge and determine, so as the said persons be not Peers of this Realm,
or Members of the House of Commons.

And be it further Ordained that the said Committee for taking of the accounts
of the whole Kingdom, and the sub-Committees for the said accounts
respectively, shall have authority and they are hereby authorized to inquire of
all persons whatsoever, that have or shall any way conceal and detain the
Estates, Goods, and Chattells of any person or persons sequestered or
sequestrable, and shall charge them for the same as accomptants to all intents
and purposes, so as the said persons be not Peers, of this Realm or Members of
the House of Commons.

And whereas several accomptants to whom there is no allowance given by act,
Ordinance, or order of one or both Houses of Parliament, demand upon their
acco^pts several allowances: Be it Ordained that the said Committee for taking
the accounts of the whole Kingdom shall have power and authority, and they or
any five of them are hereby authorized to make such reasonable allowances unto
the said accomptants for their charges and pains as they shall think meet,
the said allowances not exceeding a penny in the pound, for every pound
received by such accomptant.

And be it further Ordered and Ordained, that every person or persons found in
Arreare upon any Account to be determined by the said Committee, or any five or
more of them, shall immediately upon determination of the said Account and
signification, or notice thereof given to the several person and persons
aforesaid, or left in writing at his or their House, or usual place of abode
by the said Committee, or any five or more of them, pay in, or cause to be paid
unto the Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being, or unto such
particular Treasurers, as by any former Act or Ordinance are appointed to
receive the same, and in case no Treasurers are already appointed, then unto
such Treasurer as shall by virtue of this Ordinance be made in every County in
this Kingdom, all such sum and sums of money as shall be found and
certified to be Arreare, and by him or them due and owing upon their said
Accounts, or otherwise give such sufficient security for the payment thereof,
in manner and form aforesaid, within the space of forty days next after the
said Certificate, as by the said Committee for taking the accounts of the whole
Kingdom, or any five or more of them shall be approved of. And for default
thereof, the said person or persons neglecting or refusing to pay, or secure
the said sums and arreeres, as aforesaid (not being a Peer or Assistant, or
Officer of the house of Peers, or Member or Officer of the house of Commons)
shall be committed by the said Committee, or any five or more of them, unto
such prison as they shall think fit, there to remain without Bail or
mainprize, until he or they shall pay in the several sums of money, or give
such security for payment thereof, as aforesaid. And if any such person or
persons be Peers, or Assistants, or Officers of either House of Parliament,
then their names to be certified to such House as they shall belong unto
respectively, that such further course may be taken therein as shall seem
meet.

And be it further Ordained, That if it shall appear to the said Committee, or
said Sub-Committees, by the acknowledgement of the Accomptant, or otherwise,
that there remains any Sum of Money or Goods in the hands or possession of any
Accomptant (not being a Peer, or Assistant or Officer of the House of Peers, or
Member or Officer of the House of Commons) or any other person or persons to
his use; that the said Committee, or any five or more of them, or any of the
said Sub-committee, or any five or more of them, shall, before the said Account
determined, have hereby power to order the payment of the same Moneys, and to
make sale of all such goods to the use and benefit of the Commonwealth, within
such time as shall be by them limited, or, in default thereof, to proceed
against the said Accomptants as in the precedent Clause is directed, against
such persons whose Accounts are determined.

And be it further Ordained, That if it shall appear by proof to the said
Committee of Accounts, or any Sub-Committee of Accounts, that any person or
persons who is accomptable by virtue of the Ordinances for taking of the
Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or any of them, shall go about or endeavor to
depart the Kingdom, or convey away, hide, or obscure his or their Estates, to
prevent the payment of what shall be found justly due from him or them unto the
Commonwealth; that then the said Committee of Accounts, or Sub-Committee in
every County, or any five or more of them respectively, shall and may, by
Warrant under their hands to be made to such person or persons as they shall
think fit, cause the person, and estate of such person or persons (not being a
Peer, or Assistant or Officer of the House of Peers, or Member or Officer of
the House of Commons) to be seized and secured, until such time as he or they
shall put in good and sufficient Security to be taken by the said Committee, or
Sub-committee, or any five or more of them respectively, that he or they shall
and will truly pay and satisfy all such sum or sums of Money as shall be
found due from him or them unto the Commonwealth, upon the determining of his
or their Accounts.

And be it further Ordained, That if any person or persons (not being a Peer,
or Assistant or Officer of the House of Peers, or Member or Officer of the
House of Commons) shall be found indebted and arrear upon the foot of his or
their Account, and shall be imprisoned, or otherwise absent himself from the
place of his usual abode or dwelling, by the space of one month after notice
of his or their Arrear given according to this Ordinance; that then the
Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or Sub-committees
respectively, shall and may send for any person or persons in whose hands,
power, or knowledge the Estate real or personal of such person so found in
arrear shall be, and examine the said person or persons upon Oath (which, by
virtue of the said Ordinances, the said Committee or Sub-committee respectively
shall have power to administer) for the discovery of the Estate real or
personal of such person or persons so indebted: and having discovered the
same, the said Committee of Accounts, or any five or more of them, shall have
power to nominate some fit persons who shall hereby have power, and are
authorized to seize and make sale of the Estate real and personal, Rights and
Credits of such person so found in arrear, in as ample manner as is usual in
the case of Bankrupts, the said sale to be by Deed enrolled in the Court of
Chancery, and to be good and effectual in Law, to all Intents and Purposes,
against the said party so found in arrear, and all claiming by, from, and under
him, without good and valuable consideration; and to cause such Moneys so
raised to be paid to the respective Treasurers in this Ordinance named.

And be it further Ordained, That the Sub-committee of every County of this
Kingdom, or the major part of them, shall from time to time have power and
authority to name one fit and able person in every County, to be Treasurer of
that County; and the said person so named being approved of and allowed by the
Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, shall receive the
several sums of Money that shall be found arrear from any person or persons
within the said County, and shall disburse the same as the same is or shall be
Ordered by the Houses of Parliment: And the said Treasurer shall exhibit upon
his Oath unto the said Sub-committee a Bill of such necessary charges as he
shall be at in the receiving, paying, carrying of the Money received by him
according to direction of such Order or Orders; which charges so by him
disbursed, he shall and may lawfully retain, upon his allowance of the said
Bill.

And be it further Ordered and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons shall find him or themselves agrieved with the determination
of any such Account as aforesaid, then every such person and persons so
agrieved, after he or they have deposited, or sufficiently secured, in such
sort as the Court of Chancery shall think fit, such sum and sums of Money as
are found in arrear, and by him or them due and owing upon his or their said
Account, unto the Chamberlain; of the City of London for the time being, shall
and may, within thirty days after such Account shall be determined, and notice
thereof to him or them given or left, and such payment or securing of the said
Money as aforesaid, exhibit his or their Appeal into the Court of Chancery,
for redress therein; and that upon the said Appeal, the said Court of Chancery
may, by such ways and means as to the Lord Keeper or Commissioners of the Great
Seal for the time being shall seem meet (the circumstances of the case
considered) within six months after the delivery of the said Appeal, in a
Summary way, without formality of proceedings, proceed to the examination,
hearing and determining thereof, and, upon hearing thereof, shall and may add
or diminish, alter or enlarge the said determining of the said Account, as to
them shall be thought to stand with equity and good conscience; and shall and
may tax and award such person and persons as they shall find to complain or
appeal without any just or reasonable cause, to pay such costs and sums of
Money as they in their discretions shall think fit, to the use of the
Commonwealth, unto the Chamberlain of the City of London aforesaid; and for
neglect or refusal thereof, to commit the said person or persons to prison,
until they shall pay the same: And that the said sums of Money so paid unto
the Chamberlain of the City of London upon the said, Appeal, shall not be
disposed of until the said Appeal be determined, and so much shall be adjudged
against the Appellant, to be paid unto such particular Treasurers as are
appointed to receive the same as aforesaid, or to be disposed as by Order of
the said Houses of Parliament shall be appointed and directed: And the party
that shall prosecute the Suit for the Commonwealth, shall have full costs
allowed unto him, in case he that shall appeal shall not prevail upon his
Appeal.

And further it is hereby Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons,
That all persons employed or to be employed in taking of the said Accounts by
virtue of the aforesaid Ordinances, their and every of their Officers and
necessary Attendants, and their and every of their horses, shall be free from
pressing, and shall not be seized or taken by virtue of any Order or Ordinance,
for the service of the State, so long as they or ahy of them are employed in or
about the taking of the said Accounts.

And be it further Ordained, That the Officers and other persons employed by
the several sub-committees in each County and City, shall have such
reasonable and fitting Allowances as shall be thought fit by the said
sub-committees, or the major number of them, and shall be approved of by the
Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or any five of them.

And be it further ordained, That if any person or persons (not being a Peer of
this Realm, Assistant or Officer of the House of Peers, or Member or Officer of
the House of Commons) that shall be summoned to appear before the Committee for
taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or the said Sub-committees
respectively, shall wilfully neglect or refuse to appear before the said
Committee or sub-committee, and shall afterward, for such his neglect or
refusal, be sent for, and attached by their Messenger or Messengers, That in
such case it shall and may be lawful for the said Messenger so attaching the
said person or persons, to take of every such person the sum of two pence for
every mile he shall go or ride for the said person or persons so offending, and
Twelve pence for the Attachment of the said person offending.

And be it further Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful for the Register,
Accomptant, or Clerk to the said Committee for the taking of the Accounts of
the whole Kingdom, and their Sub-committees respectively, to take from every
person that shall be found in arrear Three pence for every Sheet that shall be
written of every Examination or Account, and Twelve pence for every Order which
the said person so found in arrear shall desire to have written or copied out
for his benefit.

And be it further Ordained, That the said Committee for the taking of the
Accounts of the whole Kingdom, and the said Sub-committees respectively, or any
two of them, shall have power and authority to administer to every Register,
Accomptant, Messenger, or other Officer or person employed, an Oath for their
and every of their faithful demeanor, the Tenor whereof follows.

I A. B. do swear, That, according to my best Skill and Judgment, I shall
faithfully, diligently, and truly demean my self in the Office of (...) or
other Employment wherein I shall be employed by the Committee for the taking of
the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, or by any Sub-Committee for taking the said
Accounts.

And it is further Ordained, That the Sub-committee of Accounts of each
respective County and City, or any five or more of them, shall have full power
and authority to send into any other County or City, and to cause all persons
accomptable for any Moneys or Goods received or taken in the County of which
they are Sub-committees (not being a Peer, Assistant or Officer of the House of
Peers, or Member or Officer of the House of Commons) to appear before them, for
the examination of their former Accounts, according to this and the several
Ordinances, unless the Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom
shall give order to the contrary.

And be it further Ordained, That if any person or persons, named or to be
named, of any Sub-committee of Accounts, according to the said several
Ordinances of Accounts, or which shall be named Treasurers according to this
Ordinance, shall refuse to take upon them the said respective Employments, or
to take the Nationall-Covenant, upon certificate of the several names to the
House of Commons, by the Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole
Kingdom, they shall receive such punishment as the high Court of Parliament
shall think fit.

FINIS.

