Junij 3. 1643.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of Money and other
Necessaries for the ARMY.
IT is Ordered, That the Collectors upon the weekly Assessement, by virtue of
the Ordinance of Parliament, of the fourth of March last, do use their best
endeavors to collect the Arreares of such moneys as are assessed by virtue of
the said Ordinance, and carry in and pay the same to the Treasurers in
Guild Hall, before the twelfth of this instant June, and that in the mean time
the said Collectors do give a note (of the names of such persons in their
several and respective Wards and Precincts as have been refractory and refuse
to pay the said weekly assessement) unto the persons newly appointed to take
distress, who are to distraine for the sums assessed and unpaid, and pay the
same to the Collectors in the said several and respective Wards in case they
distraine money, and the goods they distraine to carry to Guild Hall to Samuel
Gosse, or his Deputy appointed to receive the same. And for such sums of money
as the said persons shall distraine, the said Collectors shall not only allow
and pay to the persons taking distress, the two pence in the pound allowed by
the said Ordinance, but also two pence in the pound more of their own moneys
for their pains therein, if they themselves shall not be willing to perform
the duty as is required of them by the said Ordinance, And that the said
Collectors do appear before this Committee on the said twelfth of June, and
bring with them a note of the total sums assessed in their several
precincts, and committed to their care of Collection; And an Account of what
sums they have paid to the Treasurers at Guild Hall of the said weekly
assessement by them respectively collected, and the dates of the Acquittances
given by the said Treasurers for the same, and what sums of money shall then
remain in their hands not paid in to Guild Hall; And a Roll of the names of
such persons, as then shall not have fully paid their assessements, and the
several sums of money by them unpaid; That so the said Collectors, or those
persons newly appointed to distraine, may levy the same by distress according
to the said Ordinance, whereof they are not to fail. It is also ordered that
this be Printed and published.

Martin Dallison Clerk to the said Committee.


