Die Veneris, 6o Decembris. 1644.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That John
Towse, Thomas Foot, John Kendrick, Thomas Cullum and Simon Edmonds, Esquires,
and Aldermen of the City of London; John Lamot and Edward Claxton of the City
of London, Esquires, the present Commissioners of the Excise and New-Impost, in
and through the whole Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick, shall and may do and execute all and every the Clauses, Articles, and
other thing or things, Ordained, Mentioned and Contained in the Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament, bearing date the ninth of January, 1643. touching
the Excise of Flesh-Victuals and Salt: As also the Ordinance dated the third of
August, 1644, entitled, An Ordinance Declaratory, for the better Regulating
and Levying of the Excise of Flesh, within the Cities of London and
Westminster, Suburbs and Lines of Communication. Which said two Ordinances are
hereby Ordained to stand in force, and be managed by the said Commissioners,
for one year next ensuing the ninth of January, 1644. to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever; who shall receive the like Allowance of six pence in every
pound, for the Receipt. And be it further Ordained, That as well all and every
the said Commissioners, Deputies and other their Officers, as all and every
other person and persons which shall do any thing in execution or performance
of this present Ordinance, shall be therein from time to time protected, and
saved harmless, by the Power and Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Jo; Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes and John Raworth. 1644.


