A DECLARATION And Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT; For the
speedy raising of a Body of HORSE, For the Preservation, Safety, and Peace of
the Kingdom, to resist the Insolences and Outrages committed by the Soldiers
of The Kings Army.

Which Horse are to be raised out of the several Counties within specified;
and to be under the Command of the Right Honorable, EDWARD Earl of Manchester,
Who is appointed by this Ordinance for this service to be Commander in chief,
both for Horse and Foot.

Die Martis, 25 Julii, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed; And that the Knights and Burgesses of the
several and respective Counties, in which Horse are to be raised by direction
of this Ordinance, do take care that Copies hereof be forthwith sent down into
their several and respective Counties.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edward H^bands. July 27.

A Declaration and Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
For raising of a Body of Horse, etc.
THe Lords and Commons taking into their sad and serious consideration, the
great and manifold miseries under which the good and well-affected People of
this Land now suffer, by means of that Popish Army which is pretended to be
raised by the Kings authority; which consisting for the most part in Horse, do
range and wander up and down the countries, and not only Plunder, Imbezill,
and take away the Goods and Estates of the well-affected, but abuse their
Persons, and very often times destroy and kill them: And in a deep sense and
apprehension of their sad and wretched estate and condition, being not only
wholly deserted, and forsaken by those, from whom by the Laws of God and Man
they ought to receive Protection, and preservation from Violence and Injury;
but also their Persons and Estates exposed to Ruin and Destruction, without
any color or warrant of Legal authority: And the said Lords and Commons
having resolved to apply the uttermost of their endeavors, in discharge of
that great Trust reposed in them for the preservation, peace, and safety of the
People of this Kingdom, and securing their Persons and Estates from the Rapine
and Fury of the Soldiers; and finding it most necessary that a Body of Horse
should be forthwith raised, To resist and repel the Insolences and Outrages
committed by the Soldiers of the Kings Army; Not doubting but all good people
will readily and willingly contribute their best Assistance, unto a work so
necessary, for the good of the Kingdom, and their own preservation; Have
thought fit, and do hereby Declare and Ordain, That such number of good, able,
and sufficient Horses for service (of which, the Troops of Trained Horse of
each county are to be accounted as part) shall be forthwith raised in such
counties, cities and places, and brought unto such places of Rendevouz, and at
such times as are hereafter in this Ordinance mentioned and expressed; That is
to say, within the cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof; and
the county of Middlesex, there shall be forthwith raised Fifteen hundred Horse;
within the county of Hertford, Three hundred Horse; within the county of Essex,
Five hundred Horse; within the county of Surrey, Three hundred Horse; within
the county of Sussex, Four hundred Horse; within the county of Kent, Six
hundred Horse, of which number the city of Canterbury and Cinque Ports are to
bear an equal proportion; within the county of Buckingham, Two hundred Horse;
within the county of Bedford, Two hundred Horse; within the county of Berks,
Two hundred Horse; within the county of Southampton, Five hundred Horse; within
the county of Cambridge and Isle of Ely, Two hundred Horse; within the county
of Huntingdon, One hundred Horse; within the county of Suffolk, Five hundred
Horse; within the county of Norfolk, Six hundred Horse, of which the city of
Norwich is to bear an equal proportion; and within the county of Northampton,
Four hundred Horse. And it is further Ordained, That such of the Trained Horse
of London, Westminster, and the county of Middlesex, and such others as are
already raised within the said cities of London and Westminster, and county of
Middlesex, do meet in Tothill-fields in Westminster, on the Five and twentieth
of this instant July, and the rest appointed by this Ordinance to be raised
within the said cities and county, to make up the number of Fifteen hundred on
the Fourth of August next; and the Trained Horse of the counties of Essex, and
Kent, and such other Horse as are already raised within the said counties, are
to meet in Tothill-fields in Westminster on Friday next, the Eight and
twentieth of this instant July; and the rest appointed by this Ordinance to be
raised to make up the proportions allotted upon the several counties, are to
meet at the said Rendevouz on the the Fourth of August next; and the
Trained-Horse of the counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, and
Huntingdon, and such other Horse as are already raised within the said
counties, are to meet at Cambridge on the First of August next; and the rest
appointed by this Ordinance to be raised, to make up the proportions allotted
upon these several counties, are to meet at the said Rendevouz on the Eight of
August next; and the Trained-Horse of the counties of Surrey, Sussex,
Southampton and Berks, and such other Horse as are already raised within the
said counties, are to meet at Windsor on the Eight and twentieth of this
instant July; and the rest appointed by this Ordinance to be raised, to make up
the proportions allotted upon these several counties, are to meet at the said
Rendevouz on the Fourth of August next; and the Trained-Horse of Hertfordshire,
Bedfordshire, Northamptonshire, and Buckinghamshire, and such other Horse as
are already raised within the said counties, are to meet at Bedford on the
First of August next; and the rest appointed by this Ordinance to be raised, to
make up the proportions allotted upon these several counties, are to meet at
the said Rendevouz on the Eight of August next.

And be it further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the several and
respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament, of the several and
respective cities, counties, and places aforesaid, and every Two of them, are
hereby authorized and required to cause this Ordinance to be put in due, full,
and speedy execution, and to use all possible diligence and circumspection in
the taking and lifting of such Horses, that the same may be done with such
indifferency and equality, that as little offense may be given to the
well-affected party as may be: And to the end that this work may be carried on
with Expedition, and that the Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament,
unto whose care and fidelity the same is specially entrusted and recommended,
as absolutely necessary, not only for safety and preservation unto those
counties, but even to the whole kingdom, to be forthwith dispatched, may be
armed with power sufficient for the effecting of the same. Be it likewise
Declared: and Ordained, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
several and respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament, or any
two of them as aforesaid, to take and seize the Horse or Horses of any person
within any of the several and respective cities, counties, or places as
aforesaid, and them to List and Inroll, and cause to be brought to the
respective Rendevouze, appointed as aforesaid.

And if any person shall show himself opposite or refractory unto this service,
so as the same by means thereof shall be delayed, molested or interrupted, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Deputy Lieutenants and Committees
of Parliament respectively, or any two of them, to impose a reasonable Fine on
such person for such his contempt to this Ordinance, and disturbance to this so
necessary a service; and the same Fine to leavie, by imprisonment of his Body,
and sequestration of his Estate, until the same shall be fully satisfied.

And full power and authority is hereby likewise given unto the said several
and respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament as aforesaid, to
use all good and lawful ways and means for the effecting of this service, as
in their wisdom, judgment and discretion shall be thought most conducing to
the advancing thereof. And the said Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of
Parliament as aforesaid, are to take care that able and sufficient Riders of
the several horses aforesaid, be provided of good and fitting Men, and of such
persons as are well-affected to this service; who are also to have provided and
sent for every Soldier and Horse, one Months pay beforehand, by one fitting
and sufficient person, who is to continue with the said Horse as Paymaster;
which Money is to be raised and leavyed out of the several and respective
counties, cities and places, in such manner as by the said several and
respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament, or any two of them,
shall be thought most indifferent and convenient: And if any person shall
refuse, or neglect to pay any sum of Money, whereat he shall be rated or
assessed, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament, or any two of them, to appoint
a Distress of the Goods of such person to be taken, and to be sold for
satisfaction of the same.

And it is further Ordained, That Edward Earl of Manchester shall command in
chief, all the Horse and Foot that shall be raised in the counties aforesaid by
virtue of this Ordinance. And it is likewise Ordained, That the respective
Deputy Lieutenants, Committees, and persons employed by them of the counties,
and cities of London, Westminster, Middlesex, Essex, and Kent, do deliver the
Horses of their several counties and cities, raised and to be raised as
aforesaid, unto the Earl of Manchester, or in his absence to Colonel de
Mazeris, appointed hereby to command the said Horse under the said Earl of
Manchester, and to Train and Exercise them, and to employ them for the defense
of the said counties, as cause shall require, until such time as further Order
shall be taken by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament. And it is
further Ordained, That the said Earl of Manchester, or the said Colonel de
Mazeris shall give in writing under his hand a perfect List of the numbers of
Horse and Arms he receives of the several counties: For the which Horse and
Arms, the several counties and persons who furnish the same, shall have the
Publique-Faith for repayment and satisfaction. And it is further Ordained, That
the respective Deputy Lieutenants, Committees, and persons employed by them of
the counties of Bedford, Buckingham, Northampton, and Hertford, do deliver the
Horses of their several counties, raised and to be raised as aforesaid, unto
the said Earl of Manchester, or in his absence to Sir John Norrige, appointed
hereby to command the said Horse under the said Earl of Manchester; and to
Train and Exercise them, and to employ them for the defense of the said
counties, as cause shall require, until such time as further Order shall be
taken by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament. And it is further
Ordained, That the said Earl of Manchester, or the said Sir John Norrige, shall
give in writing under his hand, a perfect List of the number of Horse and Arms
he receives of the several counties; for the which Horse and Arms, the
several counties and persons who furnish the same, shall have the
Publique-Faith for repayment and satisfaction. And it is also Ordained, That
the respective Deputy Lieutenants, Committees, and persons employed by them of
the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, do deliver the Horses of their several
counties unto the said Earl of Manchester, or in his absence to Sir Miles
Hubbard, appointed hereby to command the said Horses under the said Earl, and
to Train and Exercise them, and to employ them for the defense of the said
counties as cause shall require, until such time as further Order shall be taken
by the Lords and Commons in Parl. And it is further Ordained, that the said
Earl, or the said Sir Miles Hubbard shall give in writing under his hand, a
perfect List of the number of Horse and Arms he receives of the several
counties; for the which Horse and Arms the several counties and persons who
furnish the same, shall have the Publique-Faith for repayment and satisfaction.
And it is also Ordained, That the respective Deputy Lieutenants, Committees,
and persons employed by them of the counties of Huntingdon, Cambridge, and Isle
of Ely, do deliver the Horses of their several counties, unto the said Earl of
Manchester, or in his absence to Colonel Oliver Cromwell, appointed hereby to
command the said Horse under the said Earl of Manchester, and to Train and
Exercise them, and to employ them for the defense of the (...) as cause shall
require, until such time as further Order (...) taken by the Lords and Commons
now assembled in Par^^^ment. And it is further Ordained, That the said Earl, or
(...) said Colonel Cromwell shall give in writing under his (...) perfect List
of the number of Horse and Arms he receive^ (...) the several counties; for
the which Horse and Arms, the several counties and persons who furnish the
same, shall have the Publique-Faith for repayment and satisfaction. And be it
lastly Ordained, That the respective Deputy Lieutenants, Committees, and
persons employed by them of the counties of Surrey, Sussex, Southampton and
Berks, do deliver the Horses of their several counties, unto the said Earl of
Manchester, or in his absence to Colonel Richard Norton, appointed likewise
hereby to command the said Horse under the said Earl of Manchester, and to
Train and Exercise them, and to employ them for the defense of the said
counties as cause shall require, until such time as further Order shall be
taken by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament. And it is further
Ordained, That the said Earl of Manchester, or the said Colonel Norton, shall
give in writing under his hand, a perfect List of the number of Horse and Arms
he receives of the several counties and persons who furnish the same, shall
have the Publique-Faith for repayment and satisfaction.

Provided always, that this Ordinance shall not extend to the Horses, Mares,
or Geldings of any Peer, or Member of the House of Peers, nor to the Horses,
Mares, or Geldings of any Assistant or Attendant in the said House of Peers.

FINIS.

