Die Mercurii, 23 November 1642.
THE Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, being cer^ainely informed
that the Papists and other malignants, and ill-affected persons in the County
of York, Northumberland, Westmerland, Cumberland, Lancashire, Cheshire, County
Palatine of Duresme, and Town and County of Newcastle, have entered into
association, and have caused, and daily do cause great Forces both of Horse
and Foot to oppose and distress the well-affected Subjects, and to aid and
succor the Popish and malignant party in those Northern parts, and in
particular those now in the city of York: The said Lords and Commons do
declare, That they hold it a thing most fit, necessary and healthful for the
present State of this Kingdom, and do accordingly order, That all Lord
lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, and
all other well affected persons, inhabitants in the several Counties of York,
Lincoln, Notingham, Derby, Stafford, Chester, Lancaster, Northumberland,
Cumberland, Westmerland, County Palatine of Duresme, and Town and County of
Newcastle, do and shall associate themselves, and mutually aid, succor, and
assist, one another, by raising forces of horse, and foot, and leading them
into places which shall be most convenient and nocessary, and by all good ways
and means whatsoever, to suppress and subdue the popish and malignant party in
the said several counties, and to preserve the peace of the Kingdom,
according to the orders and declarations of Parliament, and that the said
inhabitants of the said several counties, and every of them for so doing, shall
be saved and kept harmless by the power and authority of Parliament.

And the said Lords and Commons taking into their serious consideration, the
necessity of appointing a commander in chief, over the Officers, which are or
shall be raised in the Counties a^oresaid, or any of them, for the ^ervice
aforesaid, in regard that by the particular Commissions already granted to
persons in the said several Counties, there is not power given, to lead Forces
out of their own Counties: It is ordered, that the Lord General the Earl of
Essex his Excellency, shall be desired to grant such commissions to the Lord
Fairefax (in his Excellencies absence from the said counties) for levying,
leading and conducting, all such Forces as are or shall be raised in the said
several Counties for the service of the King and Parliament, as his said
Excellency to himself has, and likewise power to give the same Orders and
instructions, for regulating the Souldiary, which is or shall be under his
commands, as his said Excellency has given to his Army, and to use martial
law, to compel obedience thereunto as occasion shall require, And also power
and authority to make and appoint Colonels, Captains, and other Officers for
levying, conducting, and leading the Forces, as he shall think fit.

FINIS.

