6. Julii; 1644.
A DECLARATION OF The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, Declaring John
Webster, Theophilus Bainham, Edward Manning, Richard Ford and James Yard,
Merchants, to be Incendiaries between the United Provinces, and the Kingdom and
Parliament of ENGLAND.
WHereas John Webster, Theophilus Bainham, Edward Manning, Richard Ford, and
James Yard, Merchants, contrary to their Allegiance and Duty, have done and
committed several Actions tending to the Destruction of this Kingdom, and to
maintain the bloody and most unnatural War now raised against the Parliament
and Kingdom:

It is Declared by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, That the
said John Webster, Theophilus Bainham, Edward Manning, Richard Ford, and James
Yard, have by the said Actions manifested themselves to be Incendiaries and
Enemies to the Parliament and Kingdom of England; And be it Ordained by the
said Lords and Commons, That if any person or Subject of this Kingdom, shall
after publication hereof, employ the said John Webster, Theophilus Bainham,
Edward Manning, Richard Ford and James Yard, or any of them in their service as
Factors, or otherwise in Trading or Merchandise, or consigne or convey any
Money, Merchandise, or Goods, to them or any of them, or to others to their or
any of their use or uses, That all such Goods shall be taken and seized on as
forfeit, and such persons, for sending such Money, Goods and Merchandise, to be
taken as Ayders and Maintainers of persons that are Traitors and Rebels.

And that the Deputy Governor, and Assistants of the Fellowship of the
Merchant Adventurers residing at Rotterdam in Holland, do forthwith exclude the
persons abovenamed their Court, and from all meetings of the said Fellowship,
and not permit them to enjoy any privilege or immunity granted or belonging to
the said Fellowship and Company.

And that the said Deputy Governor and Assistants, do forthwith cause the said
Theophilus Bainham, James Yard and Richard Ford, to be apprehended and taken,
and to be sent over into this Kingdom, to be proceeded with, as Incendiaries
between the States of the United Provinces, and Parliament of England, and as
persons that have attempted to break the Amity, and long maintained Union and
Friendship between the said two Nations.

Die Sabbathi, 6. Iulii, 1644.
ORdered by the House of Commons, That this Declaration be printed and
published; And sent to the Lord Major, to be published by the common Crier in
Exchange time, and to be published upon the Exchange.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands. Julii 13. 1644.


