A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

Showing the present Design now on foot (by virtue of a pretended Commission
from His Majesty) for a Cessation of Arms, or Treaty of Peace with the Rebels
in Ireland, now they are brought to such a low condition, that they are
enforced to devour and eat one another in some parts of that Kingdom

And by what popish Instruments and Ministers in their councels at the Court,
the said design is and has been carried on; Persons of great trust, eminent
for their affection to religion, and hatred of the Rebels being displaced, and
men popishly addicted put in their Offices.

All serving for the better introduction of Popery, and extirpation of the true
Protestant religion, in that and other of His Majesty's Dominions.

Die Sabbathi 30. September. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, October. 2. 1643.

A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
AS it is evident to all the world that this late horrid rebellion of the
Papists in Ireland did, without any color or pretext of provocation
professedly and boldly aim at the destruction of the Protestant Religion, the
rejecting of the Laws of England, and the extirpation of the British
Inhabitants out of that Kingdom: So it is no less manifest, that this
Parliament of England (to whom His Majesty has left the mannaging of the War
against those Rebels) has taken the troubles of Ireland to heart with that
resentment and compassion as may evidence their zeal to Religion, their love
to their distressed Contrymen, and brethren there, in these times, when the
like Jesuitical practices have cast England into woeful distractions and an
unnatural war, not withstanding which the reducing of Ireland has still
been a chief part of the care of this Parliament; And God has been pleased
to bless our endeavors with such success as that those furious bloodthirsty
Papists have been stopped in the carriere of their cruelty, some part of the
Protestant Blood which at first was spilt like Water upon the ground, has
been revenged, their massacres, burnings, and famishings, have by a Divine
retaliation been repayd into their bosom; And the Protestant party has been
erected to that condition of strength and hope, that their enemies are
constrained, (distrusting their Forces) to have recourse to their craft and
policies; And therefore by their subtle Agents at Court, and their active
instruments elsewhere have been endeavoring now of a long time to make our
Arms in Ireland disaffected to the Parliament, what by occasion of their wants
not so readily supplied as their need required, what by amusing them with these
unhappy differences fallen in here between King and people, laboring by that
means to divide those Forces into factions, to the end the maine work they
have in hand might be neglected, which is the prosecuting of the War against
the Rebels, so far brought low in some parts of Ireland, that if they can be
deprived of the benefit of this Harvest, they are not likely to see the next
Summer. And therefore the Rebels finding that notwithstanding the distractions
here occasioning the slownesse and scarceness of supplies, yet they themselves
are in a far worse condition, being in want of most things necessary, not
only for the maintaining of a war, but even of life, the judgment of God
being remarkable upon them in this, that as their bloody and treacherous
Religion made them inhumanely cruel in shedding the Protestants blood, so now
the famine amongst many of them has made them unnaturally and Caniball-like
eat and feed one upon another: Therefore that they may have time to expect
from their friends abroad new supplies both of victual and Ammunition, and may
without molestation reap the fruit of this Harvest, they have labored a
Treaty for a Cessation, which Project of theirs does no less aim at the
overthrow of the remainder of the Protestants in that Kingdom, then their
treacherous taking of Arms at first did intend the destruction of them all;
for their Cessation and Hostility, their War and peace are alike to be esteemed
of, and with those that neither in peace nor war keep any faith, it is best to
be in perpetual defiance: Therefore the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, according to their continued care of that Kingdom of Ireland, do
in a special manner take into their consideration the condition thereof, upon
this occasion of an intended Cessation, and so much the rather because it is
feared that the Protestant forces through want of provisions for their Armies
may at last, it not relieved, be persuaded to admit of this course, in hope
thereby to procure some means for their subsisting; as also because there is
too much ground to suspect, that if this Cessation should be agreed unto, they
might have opportunity to join with the Popish party here for their greater
strengthening: And though it were to have no influence upon this Kingdom, yet
the evil Consequences of it are so many and pernicious to Ireland, that this
Parliament should betray the trust reposed in them, if they did not declare
against this Cessation, and use all means in time to make it prove abortive.
And therefore they desire that it may be observed and taken notice of:

First, from whence the counsel and design of this Cessation arises, even
from the Rebels and Papists themselves for their own preservation; for soon
after they had missed of their intent, to make themselves absolute Masters of
that Kingdom of Ireland by their treacherous surprises; and seeing that this
Kingdom did with most Christian and generous resolutions, undertake the
charges of the War for the relief and recovery of Ireland; Propositions were
brought over from the Rebels by the Lords Dillon and Tase, at which time they
were intercepted and restrained by Order of the House of Commons. After that,
they had the boldness, even while their hands were still imbrued in the
Protestants blood, to petition His Majesty that their demands might be heard,
and for this purpose they obtained a Commission to be sent over into Ireland to
diverse persons of quality (whereof some were Papists) to hear, receive, and
transmit to His Majesty their Demands, which was done accordingly: and one
Master Burke, a notorious pragmatick Irish Papist, was the chief Solicitor in
this business. After this, the just revenging God giving daily success to
handfuls of the Protestant Forces against their great numbers; so that by a
wonderful blessing from Heaven they were in most parts put to the worst; Then
did they begin to set on foot an Overture for a cessation of Arms; concerning
which, what going and coming has been between the Court and the Rebels is
very well known; and what Meetings and Treaties have been held about it in
Ireland by warrant of his Majesty's ample Commission sent to that effect; and
what reception and countenance most pragmatick Papists negotiating the
business have found at Court, and that those of the State in Dublin, who had
so much Religion and Honesty as to dissuade the Cessation, were first
discountenanced, and at last put out of their places and restrained to prison,
as Sir Will. Parsons one of the Lords Justices there, Sir John Temple Master of
the Rolls, Sir Adam Loftus Vice-Treasurer of Ireland, and Treasurer at Wars,
and Sir Robert Merideth one also of the Council Table.

Secondly, the Lords and Commons desire it may be observed, That during all
these Passages and Negotiations, the Houses of Parliament were never acquainted
by the State of Ireland with the Treaty of a Cessation, much less was their
Advice or Council demanded, notwithstanding that the care and managing of the
War was devolved on them, both by Act of Parliament, and by His Majesty's
Commission under the great Seal, To advise, order, and dispose of all things
concerning the government and defense of that Kingdom. But the wants of the
Army were often represented and complained of, whereby with much craft a ground
was preparing for the pretext, wherewith now they would cover the Counsels of
this Cessation, as if nothing had drawn it on, but the extreme wants of their
Armies; whereas it is evident, That the reports of such a Treaty have been (in
a great part) the cause of their wants, for thereby the Adventurers were
dis-heartened, Contributions were stopped, and by the admittance to Court of
the Negotiators of this Cessation, their wicked counsels have had that
influence, as to procure the intercepting of much provisions which were sent
for Ireland, so that Ships going for Ireland with Victuals, and others coming
from thence with Commodities to exchange for Victuals hade been taken, not
only by Dunkirkers having his Majesty's Warrant, but also by English Ships
commanded by Sir John Pennigton under his Majesty. Mr. Davis his ships, and
others.
And moreover, the Parliament Messengers sent into several Counties with the
Ordinance of January last for Loanes and Contributions, have been taken and
imprisoned, their Money taken from them, and not one penny either Loan or
Contribution has been suffered to be sent in for Ireland from those Counties
which were under the power of the Kings Army, while in the mean time the
Houses of Parliament by their Ordinances, Declarations, and Solicitations to
the City of London, and the Counties free from the terror of the Kings Forces,
were still procuring not contemptible aid and relief for the distresses of
Ireland.

3. As the Lords and Commons have reason to Declare against this Plot and
design of a Cessation of Arms, as being treated and carried on without their
advice so also because of the great prejudice which will thereby redound to the
Protestant Religion, and the encouragement and advancement which it will give
to the practice of Popery, when these (...) Papists shall by this agreement,
continue and set up with more freedom their Idolatrous Worship, their Popish
Superstitions, and Romish abominations in all the places of their command to
the dishonouring of God, the grieving of all true Protestant hearts, the
disposing of the laws, of the Crown of England, and to the provoking of the
wrath of a jealous God; as if both Kingdoms had not smarted enough already,
for this sin of too much^ ^^^niving at, and tolerating of Antichristian
Idolatry, under pretext of civil contracts and politic agreements.

4. In the fourth place they desire it may be observed that this Cessation will
prove dishonorable to the ^ublike Faith of this Kingdom, it will elude and
make null the Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, made for the forfeiting of the
Rebels Lands; at the passing of which Acts, it was, represented, that such a
course would drive the Rebels to despair, and it proves so, but otherwise
then was meant, for despairing of their force and courage, they go about to
overcome us with their craft.

5. Lastly, what shall become of the many poor exiled Protestants, turned out
of their Estates by this Rebellion, who must now continue begging their bread
while the Rebels shall enjoy their Lands and houses? and who shall secure the
rest of the Protestants, that either by their own courage, industry, and great
charges, have kept their possessions, or by the success of our Armies have
been restored? Can there be any assurance gotten from a perfidious Enemy, of a
Cessation from Treachery and breach of agreement, when they shall see a fit
time and opportunity? These and many other Considerations being well weighed,
it will appear evidently that this design of a Cessation is a deep Plot laid
by the Rebels, and really invented for their own safety, and falsely pretended
to be for the benefit of our Armies.

And whereas the Lords and Commons, have no certain Information that the
Treaty is concluded, but are informed by several Letters that all the
Protestants, as well Inhabitants as Soldiers in that Kingdom, are resolved to
withstand that proceeding, and to adventure on the greatest extremities rather
then have any sort of Peace with that generation, who have so cruelly in time
of Peace murdered many thousands of our Country men, and labored to extirpate
the Protestant Religion from amongst them; So they do believe, that these
rumors of a Cessation were first contrived by the Enemies of our Religion and
peace, and by their practices: The Treaty was carried on with much subtility
and solicitation, thereby to stop the sending of supplies from thence to our
Armies, and for the cooling of the affections of those who have already showed
their Zeal to the Weal^ of Ireland: And therefore the only means to defeat
this their policy, and prevent the evils intended by it, is to settle a course
whereby the Armies of Ireland may be at least fenced against hunger and cold:
For which purpose it is desired, that all those who are well-affected to the
Protestant Religion, either in that or this Kingdom, and all those who by their
adventures already made, have embarked their particular interests with the
public of that Kingdom, and do desire a good return of their engagements,
would join their endeavors, for obviating of that necessity, which may be
made a strong argument to enforce a destructive Cessation of Arms, and that
they would not through too much suspicion and jealousy of it forbear the
providing of supplies, and so occasion that inconvenience which they ought by
all means to prevent, for by so doing, they will lose all their former pains
and charges; and the withholding of provisions now will gain credit to that
calumny laid against this Kingdom, of neglecting the Armies of Ireland, and
by the continuing of supplies, these Forces will be encouraged to continue the
War, and so crown both their work and ours. And lastly, the Rebels seeing
assistance against them still flowing from hence, must needs be out of hope of
prosecuting or concluding this their design. The cry of much Protestant blood,
the great indigency of many ruined Families, the danger of our Religion almost
exiled out of that Kingdom, calls for this last Act of Piety, Charity,
Justice, and Policy from us, which being resolved on, Letters are to be
dispatched to the several parts of that Kingdom, to encourage the Commanders
and Soldiers upon the aforesaid reasons and assurances, that they may not
hearken to such an unjust and deceitful counsel, and as (...) their
prosecuting of the War, through Gods blessing they have successefully
resisted the Rebels cruelly, so they may upon this occasion beware they be not
overreached by their craft.

All which the Lords and Commons do earnestly desire, may be seriously taken
to heart by all the Kingdom, and that from those other encouragements
mentioned at large in the Ordinance of the 14 of July last and such as now are
offered, a (...) may be taken whereby such a constant weekly ^^^tribution may
be settled as will supply to the Armies in Ireland, the mere necessities of
nature, which may be more punctually and seasonably transmitted unto the
several parts of that Kingdom, according to their respective wants, that so
the benefit and honor of so pious a work happily begun, and successefully
hitherto carried on, may not be lost when so little remains to be done; and
that the fading of a Kingdom, the re-establishing of so many Protestant
Churches, the re-possessing of so many thousand Christians into their Estates,
may not be deserted and let fall to the ground, for a little more pains and
cost.

FINIS.

