A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT Assembled at WESTMINSTER.

January 23. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this DECLARATION be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.



EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.

A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
THe People of England having been necessitated to take up Arms in the just
defense of their Laws and Liberties against the late King: And it having
pleased GOD, after a long War, and many Battles fought in the Field, so to
bless their Armies, and to bring the War to such an issue, that if they were
not wanting to themselves, they might reap the fruit of all the Blood and
Treasure exhausted in that Quarrel, and not only be restored to their Freedom
for the present, but secured against all the like attempts for the future. The
Parliament hereupon, as the Trustees of the People, for the accomplishing of
those ends, did declare and enact, That the People of England, and of all the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, should be thenceforth governed
as a Commonwealth and Free State, by the Representatives of the People in
Parliament, and that without any King, or House of Lords; Judging: this not
only to be the undoubted Right of the People, but that the Office of a King in
these Nations, or to have the Power thereof in any Single Person, as also the
House of Lords, was burdensome and dangerous to the Safety and Liberty of the
People: And by this means the Foundations of a Public Interest being laid
in the place of that which was only private and personal, this People might
grow up (through the goodness of God) into perfect Freedom, being Governed in
the Supreme Power by their own Representatives; and in the Executive Power, by
their known Laws and Judicatory; the best Measure and Standard of Liberty:
their Navigation and Trade encouraged and promoted, which in all Monarchies is
stinted and restrained. The true Protestant Religion both at home and abroad
owned and countenanced, which under the former Constitution was clogged with
vain and superstitious Ceremonies, and corrupt opinions touching Faith and
Worship, imposed upon all, without any regard had to tender Consciences, and
the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Professors thereof, with Godliness it
self, discountenanced and persecuted.

To this state of things did the Parliament judge it their Duty to bring this
Nation, and the Free People thereof; and no man can reasonably doubt, but that
long before this time, the Parliament (through the same good and gracious
presence that had accompanied their undertakings) would have accomplished their
Intentions in these things, and settled the Commonwealth upon the Basis and
Foundation aforesaid, if they had not been so often Interrupted, and thereby
prevented hitherto from doing that, which always was and is the utmost desire
and intention of their hearts.

And yet the Parliament cannot but take notice of the Artifices that are used
to mis-represent their Intentions, and to blemish their Proceedings before the
People, unjustly charging them with a Design to perpetuate themselves now
Sitting, to subject the People to Arbitrary Power, and to govern them by Force.
And as to matters of Religion on one hand, That they are enemies to the
Ministry, their Maintenance by Tithes, to the Universities and Learning, and
encouragers of Fanatic Principles; On the other hand, That the Parliament is
too severe, and of Imposing Principles in matters of Religion; not being
ignorant, that those who by these means do industriously labor to dis-affect
the People to the Parliament, are such, who by specious pretenses would first
put out their eyes, that they might not see the way to their own true Liberty,
and then bring them back again into their old Servitude.

The Parliament therefore, to omit nothing in their power that may undeceive
honest and well meaning men, have thought it necessary in this conjuncture of
Time and Affairs, to Declare and Manifest (as they do hereby) what their
Intentions are, as to the Government of these Nations, with some other
particulars relating thereunto; wherein they are Resolved (through the
Goodness and Assistance of God) to remain constant and immovable.

1. That the Parliament will provide forthwith to perfect those beginings which
are already made for settling the Government of these Nations and the People
thereof in the way of a Commonwealth and Free State, without a King, Single
Person, or House of Lords, in such manner, that they may be Governed from time
to time by Representatives in Parliament chosen by themselves, in whom alone
the Supreme Authority of these Nations does and ought to reside, and by such as
they shall appoint and constitute as Officers and Ministers under them for the
good of the People; And that the Parliament will make it their Care to form the
Army and Forces of these Nations in such manner, that whilst it shall be found
necessary for them, or any of them, to be kept up for the Safety of the
Commonwealth, they may be wholly subject and obedient to the Civil Authority.

2. There being nothing more essential to the Freedom of a State, than that the
People should be governed by the Laws, and that Justice be administered by such
only as are accomptable for Maladministration; It is hereby further declared,
That all proceedings touching the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of all the Free
People of this Commonwealth, shall be according to the Laws of the Land. And
that the Parliament will not meddle with the ordinary Administration, or the
Executive part of the Law: It being the principal care of this, as it has been
of all former Parliaments, to provide for the Freedom of the People against
Arbitrariness in Government.

3. And that they will make effectual provision for the Countenancing of a
Learned and Pious Gospel Ministry through all the three Nations, and for the
encouraging and protecting them in the work of their Ministry against
Disturbances. And as to their Maintenance, that by Tithes shall be continued,
it being already established by Law, and is in it self the most certain,
convenient and comfortable way of Maintenance, that in the Judgment of the
Parliament can be settled. And therefore they do expect and require, That the
Judges, Justices of the Peace, and others whom it concerns, do take care, that
the Laws touching the same be put in effectual execution. And for a further
increase of Maintenance than has been anciently settled upon Preaching
Ministers, The Parliament does declare, That the Augmentations by the
Impropriations of the late King, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and Delinquents
not compounded for, as likewise by Tenths and First Fruits, shall be continued
and settled upon the preaching Ministry, not to be aliened or altered from that
use; and distributed in such manner as they may be applied to such places as
stand in most need, that every place in the Land may have a preaching Minister,
who may be able to teach the People the good Knowledge of the LORD, and may
have a comfortable Livelihood and Encouragement among them: As also that
provision shall be made for due Liberty of Conscience in matters of Religion,
according to the Word of GOD.

4. The Parliament do Declare, That they will uphold the public Universities,
and Schools of this Land, and not only continue to them the Privileges and
Advantages they now enjoy, but shall be ready to give them such further
Countenance as may Encourage them in their Studies, and promote Godliness,
Learning, and good Manners amongst them.

5. The Parliament being very sensible of the great decay of the Trade of these
Nations, will apply themselves to such Councils and Means, as shall be found
most proper both for the speedy restoring and increasing thereof; Judging, That
there is no one thing in the Affairs of State more important to the VVelfare,
Strength, and Glory of a Commonwealth, especially of this being an Island, then
the Encouragement of Trade and Navigation.

6. As to the present Burdens which are upon the Nation, The Parliament is
very sensible thereof, and of those Extravagant Councils and Actions which have
engaged the Nation in so great a Debt and Charge, the guilt whereof will not
rest upon them, though the danger and burden thereof does. And it is one of the
greatest Cares they have upon them, how to give the People that Ease which
their Condition calls for, and also provide for their Safety, and answer the
pressing Necessities of the State; Which the Parliament hopes in some measure
to do in a very short time, in case the unreasonable Dissatisfactions and
turbulent Actings of Unquiet Men do not Continue the Charge longer than
otherwise will be necessary.

Monday, Jan. 23. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and
Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


