A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT For a day of THANKSGIVING.
THe signal Mercies wherewith God has blessed this Commonwealth for some years
past, are so evident and convincing, that such only who are offended at the
hand from whence they come, can refuse to make acknowledgement. And had not the
Concerns been more then humane, which were Imbarkt with the late Adventures in
these Nations, their miscarriage might have been according to the expectance of
the Adversary: But though not for our sakes, yet for his great Name sake, who
sits in Heaven and laughs to scorn all the Plots and Devices of the ungodly,
hitherto we have been delivered. The snare is broken, and we are escaped. It Is
not unknown with what an outstretched Arm it has pleased God, as well to
prevent, as repel those dangers which seemed of late to threaten this Nations
Peace, by the Apostasy of some from their former Engagements in conjunction
with old Enemies, together with a neutral Generation, in so much as few
Counties of England but have been in some measure infested, though not with
open acts of Hostility, yet with secret Complottings and Attempts, to debauch
the people to an Insurrection, but more especially the North-Western parts,
where Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, Colonel Egerton, Colonel Werden,
and several others their Accomplites, upon pretense of adding to this Nations
Freedom, would have by force of Arms, brought it into Bondage, by re-admitting
a Kingly Interest and Family, against which God has so long by a Successive
and uninterrupted Series of Providence very fully witnessed; That when in many
other places of this Nation, even at once the Enemy has attempted to break in
upon our peace like a flood, it is wonderful to behold, how the Spirit of the
Lord has lifted up a Standard against him. All which the Parliament
considering, has reckoned it a duty incumbent on them to set apart Thursday
next, being the sixth day of October, one thousand six hundred fifty nine, for
a Day of solemn Praises and Thanksgivings, to be returned unto the Lord; And to
the end, that all who are truly free to such a Duty, within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and late lines of Communication, may have an
opportunity to offer a Sacrifice of Praise on this behalf, the Parliament does
hereby Declare they are invited thereunto; and as for all other parts of this
Commonwealth, upon the third day of November next: That as the true performance
of this Duty is by such a people as are made free in the Sons freedom (for
Praise waits for God in Sion) so an occasion is hereby given to render it to
the Lord, even in the Great Congregation.

And although this Combination was so general, its appearance sudden, and
there was not wanting a readiness of willing people to offer themselves in such
a day of trial; yet that it has pleased God, with the loss of so little Blood,
to still the raging enemy and avenger, yea, after his defeat and
disappointment, that both Persons and Things are brought to light in this
matter beyond expectation, are none of the least motives to quicken and excite
even all that fear God, and work righteousness in these Nations, unto such a
Duty at this Season, not doubting but as it has pleased God to cause the wrath
of man to praise him, so that the remainder of wrath will he restrain.

Saturday, October. 1. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Declation be forthwith Printed and
Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.


