THE Hainousness of Injustice Done under the Pretense of EQUITY: IN A SERMON
Preached in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, Before the Honorable BARON
TURTON, At the ASSIZES holden for that County on Monday the Eighth of August,
School.

By LAURENCE ECHARD, A. M. Prebendary of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the Right
Reverend James Lord Bishop of that Diocese.

LONDON, Printed for M. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street. School.

THE PREFACE.
WHEN I preached this Sermon, I had no Thoughts of publishing it; nor was it
the Advice or Importunity of Friends that occasioned it now. I was sensible
that it was composed with too much Haste and Carelessness, to deserve a Public
View, when so many correct Sermons were already extant. But immediately after,
finding my Reputation in some Hazard by Means of the Misunderstandings of some,
and the Misrepresentations of others, I thought I could do no greater Justice
to my self than to publish it, and so rectify Peoples Mistakes; especially
such as arose from second and third Hand Stories. It seems several Tradesmen
as well as Lawyers were not well pleased with some Passages; and therefore
censured me as a Person too Reflecting and Unmannerly to my Superiors: And that
these Censures might seem just, my Words and Sense were much misrepresented,
and several Passages related and discoursed of that were never in my Sermon. In
sum, this is the Reason for my publishing this Sermon, which I have done just
as it was preached, without any material Alteration. And since it made such a
sensible Impression upon some, as to take notice of it to my Disadvantage, I
hope the Publication of it may occasion some others to take notice of it to
their own Advantage.

PROVE. xi. 1. A false Balance is an Abomination to the Lord: but a just Weight
is his Delight.
AS the Proverbs and Sayings of the wise Author of this Book are generally
remarkable for being distinct and independent of each other; so they are no
less remarkable for being often figurative, and of a very strong and extensive
Meaning. So the Words of this Text; though they can literally signify nothing
but the Odiousness of a false Weight or Balance in particular, yet they have
truly and naturally a more enlarged and diffusive Sense, and do imply the
Odiousness not only of false Weights and Balances, but likewise of all Things
of the like Nature and Consequence; of all unfair and unfaithful Actions, of
all unequal and injurious Proceedings, and of all false and irregular
Distributions of Justice. In sum, this Text, according to the general Meaning
of its Words, does enjoin that great Virtue and Duty of Justice; a Quality
which is inseparable from, and essential to the Great Judge of Heaven and
Earth, and is as indispensibly necessary for the Subsistence and Well-being of
Mankind in this World, as for their eternal Felicity in the next.

But though these Words do strictly prohibit all false and unequal Distributions
of Justice both in Private as well as Public Persons, yet they are not so
properly to be extended to all Kinds of Injustice whatsoever. They relate
indeed to the most and worst Kinds of Injustice, but not so positively and
directly to all. For, as it has been observed by many, there are Two several
Kinds of Injustice; the One open and barefaced, without any Coverings for its
native Crookedness and Deformities; and the Other secret and disguised, so
cunningly clothed and adorned, that it appears like Justice its self: The One
depends chiefly upon Force and Power, and the Other upon Treachery and
Infidelity: The Former carries no Pretense with it besides that of gratifying
and profiting the Actor, and the Latter has always the plausible Appearance of
doing Justice to the same Person it really injures. Now the Words of my Text
are designed to manifest the Odiousness and Hainousness of this latter Kind;
and do elegantly represent it under the Notion of a false Balance. For a false
Balance is always made use of under the plausible Pretense of doing of Justice,
though it has a contrary Effect; and whenever it wants that Pretense, the
Unfairness is detected, it loses its original Design, and consequently ceases
to be injurious.

To make a fuller and clearer Distinction between these two Kinds of Injustice,
we may observe, That to the former Kind belong all Rapines and open Violence,
all Robberies and Murders, and all unjust Plunderings and Devastations; to
which we may add all those particular Acts of Injustice which our Laws call
Thefts. These last indeed are generally transacted with the utmost Privacy and
Secrecy, yet the Injustice is undisguis'd and barefaced, and they are not done
with the Pretense of doing of Justice to those Persons they injure; nor have
they the same treacherous and pernicious Circumstances as belong to the latter
Kind of Injustice, of which I am principally to treat.

This latter Kind, setting aside Murders and Violence offered to Men's Bodies,
is no less hurtful and injurious than the Other, and at the same time more
deceitful and ungenerous; consisting of such particular Acts of Injustice as
have always a fair, and very often a laudable Appearance. So that this is not
bare and simple Injustice alone, but Injustice mixed with, or wrapped up in
some Act of Dissimulation, Infidelity, and Villainy. Of this Kind are all false
Weights and Measures, all Cheats and Over-reachings in Bargains, all Breaches
of Trust and Infidelity, with an infinite Number of others of the like Nature;
only we must not omit all unequal and false Distributions of Justice,
especially by such to whom the Administration belongs, and where a general and
public Good is concerned.

Having thus distinguished between these two Kinds of Injustice, and shown that
there is a manifest Difference, it will not be improper to my present Design to
compare them together, and to examine which is the most heinous of the two, and
the most detestable in the Eyes of God. And I question not but I may easily
make it appear, that the Latter, which is the Subject of my Discourse, is of a
far more criminal Nature than the Former, and is therefore emphatically said to
be an Abomination to the Lord.

This Kind is more abominable than the other, First in its Nature, and Secondly
in its Consequences.

First, It is more abominable in its Nature: And it will appear from the former
Distinction, That this is a Complication of Crimes and Mischiefs, whilst the
other is only Simple Injustice. This is a Mixture of many Impieties together,
and those of the meanest and basest Kind; the Other is only one single Act of
Wickedness, without any Concomitants of Treachery and Infidelity. Open Violence
and Robberies have sometimes the Appearance of Courage and Bravery, and have
some Resemblance of the Acts of Heroes; but the Other are always vile and
ungenerous, and will ever be accounted the Acts of Villains. But to set the
Comparison in a truer Light, and to give neither of them any specious Names,
the Former resembles the Actions of a savage Beast, that cannot exceed the
Bounds of its own Strength; but the Latter the Subtleties of the Devil, of
whose Artifices we know no Limits.

Smaller Thefts are indeed of a meaner and more ungenerous Nature than open
Robberies, yet still they are generally as unmixed, and are bare Acts of
Injustice without any Pretense of Fairness and Fidelity. He who privately
steals my Goods, or picks my Pocket, does a great Act of Injustice, but he does
me no other Injury than the Value of the Goods or Money amounts to, and adds no
other Sin to this: But he who cheats me in his Shop by false Weights, false
Stories, and false Representations, does the same Injustice and Injury to me as
the other; but then, as an Addition to his Crime, he picks my Pocket more
exquisitely and securely, imposes upon my Understanding and common Faculties,
and joins Lying and other Sins to his Injustice. So that it is apparent, That
this Kind of Injustice is far more criminal in its very Nature than the other;
not only because it is viler and more base, but also because it has the
Addition of many other Crimes and aggravating Circumstances from which the
other is free. But,

Secondly, This Kind is more abominable than the other in its Consequences; one
of which is, That we have far less Security against these Kind of unjust
Actors, than we have against the other; so that the Mischiefs of it are more
certain and inevitable, which is always a Circumstance that makes a Crime more
odious in the Presence of God. Force can repel Force, but it cannot repel
Treachery. We have Arms to stop the Fury of Robbers, Locks to prevent the
Pilferings of Thieves, and strict Laws to secure us against the Inconveniences
of both; which, God be thanked, has been so effectual, that our Nation in
general has not suffered any great and extraordinary Mischiefs from either: But
no Arms, no Locks, nor no Laws can secure us from the various Mischiefs and
Subtleties of a thorow-pac'd Villain. Nay, Laws will give us no Relief in many
common and notorious Acts of Injustice. If a poor Wretch steals a small
Quantity of Goods, perhaps to cover his Nakedness, or to satisfy his Hunger,
he shall certainly be punished for it: But another Person shall be permitted to
steal what he pleases in his own Shop, in his Bargains, and after the like
manner, without any Punishment or Censure from the Laws.

Now what is the Reason of the Difference, but only this? One is accounted
Theft according to Law, and the Other not. But this makes not the Crime the
less, but the greater before God; who judges not as Man judges, but reserves
such Cases as these for his peculiar Judgment and Punishment. I speak not this
to extenuate the Actions of Thieves, or to expose any Deficiencies in our Laws,
which I grant cannot be made to reach all unjust Actions; but to show, That
this Kind of Injustice is more heinous before God, not only in its Nature, but
likewise in its Consequences; since the Mischiefs and Inconveniences of the
one are more unavoidable than those of the other. Upon which Account it is,
that God, as I just now hinted, does in a great measure reserve Cases of this
Nature for his own peculiar Tribunal in the last and dreadful Day; and
therefore he has more frequently, and with greater Threatenings manifested his
Displeasure against this Kind of Injustice than the Other; and particularly in
the Words of my Text, where we are told, That it is an Abomination to Him; a
Word that implies an extraordinary Degree of Hatred and Detestation.

But now to approach a little nearer to this present Public Occasion. -- If
all Acts of Injustice be odious in God's Sight, even in the meanest and most
private Person, and especially such as are wrought by secret Springs, and under
the Pretense of doing of Justice; then certainly those must be exceedingly
heinous before God that are done by Public Persons, and in a Public Capacity,
whose Employment it is to establish all Things with the utmost Impartiality,
and to see that no Injustice be done in a Nation. I hope I offend not, if I
say, that I now mean the Judges of the Kingdom; Persons from whom we receive
inestimable Benefits and Advantages, and such as keep up the vital Heat and
Vigor of the State, purging it from all malignant and corrupted Humors. In
these are reposed a vast and mighty Trust; and being placed in such exalted
Stations, they never want Opportunities of doing of much Good or much Injury.
But considering the innumerable Frailties of Humane Passions and Inclinations,
they often meet with great Temptations to mislead them: And tho the Greatness
of their Dignities, and the Plentifulness of their Revenues, may well be
supposed to set them above all common Attacks, yet it must be their Virtues
alone that can secure them against such as are Extraor dinary. Therefore the
good King Jehoshaphat, when he set Judges over the Cities of Judah, gave this
most remarkable Charge to them; Take heed what you do; for ye judge not for
Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the
Fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no Iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts, 2 Chronicles. c.
19. v. 6, 7. There cannot be a greater Motive and stronger Argument than the
Words of these two Verses: And were I to enter upon them, and insist upon all
their Particulars, I should seem to deviate too much from my first Subject and
Design, which was to say something of the Cares and Duties not only of Judges,
but likewise of all such Officers and Persons who depend upon them, and are
concerned in this present Public Occasion.

And here I might not improperly insist upon those great Conveniences and
mighty Advantages which the Nation receives from these public Meetings and
Administrations of Justice; and what Good the Judges and their Ministers are
capable of doing. And more especially I might insist upon those several Acts of
Injustice which are sometimes done by Judges themselves, but more frequently by
Lawyers and Officers of the Court. These do most properly belong to my present
Subject and Occasion: But to search and to dive into all these Particulars, as
it is a Task exceeding tedious, and almost endless, so it is likewise an Office
very ungrateful to some, and will be thought unmannerly by others. However, I
crave leave to say something concerning two Particulars, both of which are
exceeding Grievances; yet they are by many vindicated, and looked upon as
Matters not in themselves unjust. They are,

First, Delaying and deferring of Justice when it is really due: And,

Secondly, Knowingly to undertake and manage an unjust Cause.

The first Particular belongs principally to the Judges, and the second to the
Lawyers and Officers; and the One is frequently the Cause of the Other.

1. Delaying and deferring of Justice when it is really due. This, with
Submission, I take to be a notorious Piece of Injustice. For, whenever it is
in the Power of the Judge and the Court to do a Man Justice that sues for his
real Rights, and they wilfully defer and delay it, it is undoubtedly unjust,
and an Abomination to the Lord. The detaining and keeping a Person from his
Right, is a manifest Injury to him, and sometimes occasions the Loss of it at
last; but very often it makes it so inconvenient and burdensome to him, that it
would have been as well, or perhaps better for him to have lost it at first.
Whether this growing Mischief has arose from the Number and Variety of our Laws
and Cases, the native Liberty of our State and Constitution, the Methods and
Practices of the Courts of Judicature, or from the unreasonable Compliance of
the Judges themselves, or from all these together, I shall not pretend to
determine. For my own Part, I shall only take the Freedom to say, That the
Tediousness of many of our Lawsuits, and the frequent Difficulties of
obtaining Justice, are become a Burden almost insupportable to this Nation; and
a Burden from which many barbarous, and I may add, enslaved Nations are in a
great measure free. These Regular Proceedings are accounted the honorable
Badges and Tokens of our Liberties; but as they are often managed, they are
grown so heavy and grievous to us, that Fetters and Chains are almost as
eligible.

I must confess, that these are Mischiefs and Misfortunes that do chiefly
attend the most civilized and polite, as well as the most free and easy
Governments. For in the Beginning and Infancy of Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
the Laws are generally few and strict, the Suits easy and soon determined, so
that Justice is continually done without any Trouble or Burden. Then Justice is
a Lady free and generous, modest, yet easy of Access, and ready to assist all
that sue to Her. But when Dominions and Policy, Laws and Ordinances, Arts and
Sciences, and Riches and Vices increase, then Justice is disguised, and
attended with such numerous Trains, and must be waited upon with such Variety
of Formalities and pretended Regularities, that but few can be able to approach
her Presence. The Poor cannot purchase their Way through her Attendants, but
must be satisfied without her Assistance.

Now it is generally acknowledged, That nothing so much enervates the Strength
of a State, and relaxes the Sinews of a Government, as slow and dilatory
Proceedings in Matters of Justice. They fill the Body Politic with ill and
unwholesom Humors for want of Exercise and Evacuation, and do in a great
measure make the Blood and Spirits to stagnate. They make Way for all Kinds of
Corruptions, and all Kinds of vile Practices; and have been the Cause of the
Decay and Mortality of the greatest Empires and Commonwealths in the World.

The Danger of these was soon discovered by the great Emperor Vespasian, who
when he came to reform and revive a corrupted and sinking Empire, he found it
absolutely necessary to regulate the Tediousness of Law Suits, and to retrench
the innumerable Processes and Appeals in the Courts of Judicature; without
which the State it self must have suffered. His Example was happily followed by
his excellent Son Titus, and also by the renowned Trajan, who besides these
Regulations, utterly exterminated all the Delators, Promoters, and Pettifoggers
in Rome, and put them to all Kinds of ignominious Punishments, as the Pests of
the City, and the Disturbers of the Public Peace. The Care and Wisdom of these
Princes recovered the State, and kept it alive for some Ages longer than could
have reasonably been expected. To descend to a more modern Instance, I might
mention the present Turkish Empire, which is acknowledged by all to be
overgrown with such notorious Corruptions and Briberies, and to abound with
such Flaws in Policy, as are sufficient to sink that or any other State: Yet we
are assured by the most skilful Politicians, That this Empire is kept up by
almost one Thing alone; which is, The extraordinary quick Dispatch in all
Matters of Justice. This does in a great measure set all Things right, and
makes Amends for all the other Errors and false Steps in the Government.

I do not pretend to propose any of these Examples for our own Imitation, but
only mention them to show the fatal Mischiefs of dilatory Proceedings in
Justice, and the Advantages of the contrary Practices. And for that I might
produce great Numbers of Instances; but I am satisfied that I need not appeal
either to History or Example, to prove so manifest a Truth. It is sufficient
for me to show, That these are real Acts of Injustice, and are never to be
allowed when it is in the Power of Judges and Magistrates to prevent them. And
I may add, That though Judges always act by a limited Power, which the Laws
themselves do sometimes streighten to an inconvenient Degree; yet still they
have a Power of Relieving, if not Remedying these Mischiefs in most Cases. I
hope I reflect upon none here present, when I say, It is a Shame to good Men,
and a Wonder to wise Men, That such frivolous Pleas, and such ridiculous
Niceties should be urged and allowed in Courts of Judicature, as we often find;
and all this to ward off a present Blow, and to hinder a Man as much as
possible of his real Rights and Estate. This may truly be called a false
Balance and an Abomination: For this is doing a Person an Injury, and then
showing him Law for it; which is abusing him besides, and likewise scandalizing
and profaning our Laws, which were never made to do or countenance any Piece of
Injustice. Now one great Cause of these tedious and unreasonable Processes in
Law, is,

2. The Other Particular which I proposed to treat of: Which is, Knowingly to
undertake and manage an unjust Cause.

Now this is a Matter that does not so properly belong to Judges of Courts, as
to Pleaders and Advocates; and it is so frequently practiced in all Courts,
that by many it is not only thought to be no Sin, but a Thing very convenient
and necessary. But I am satisfied that nothing is more easily proved than the
Injustice and Sinfulness of such Practices. For he who knowingly promotes and
willingly joins with a Person in an unjust Cause, is no less guilty than the
Person himself, and very often more; for the Client is not so proper a Judge of
the Justness of a Cause as the Counselor is. How often does a just Cause and a
just Man suffer by these Means? When a Pleader shall employ the utmost of his
Eloquence, Wit, and Learning, to promote a manifest Piece of Injustice, and to
ruin another Man's just Rights? A Thing which, God knows, has too frequently
succeeded in this Nation. This is the more dangerous and fatal, because Quirks
and Artifices are never wanting to disguise the Justice of the Matter, and to
gild over the Blackness of the Crime, which are sometimes subtle enough to
confound the greatest Lawyers and Judges themselves.

But it is commonly alleged and objected in the Case, That Pleaders and
Advocates need not concern themselves with the Justice of a Cause; but it is
their sole Employment to assist their Clients, and do them what Service they
can: So that if the Cause be bad, it is their Client's Fault, and not theirs,
who only act according as their Business and Professions lead them.

In answer to which Objection, I must take leave to assert, That no Man's lawful
Business and Employment can necessarily lead him to commit an unjust Action:
And to say, He is obliged to it by his Profession, is a notorious Reflection
upon his Profession; which is to suppose that his Profession obliges him to do
that which God himself has always prohibited. But to put this Matter beyond all
Dispute, I would demand of Him who knowingly pleads and promotes an unjust
Cause, Whether he enters upon it with an Expectation of carrying it, or not? If
he expects and endeavors to carry the Cause, he then does Injustice to the
contrary Party whom he opposes, by hindering or endeavoring to hinder him of
his real Right: If he does not expect to carry it, he betrays and injures his
own Client, which is no less unjust than the other. So that take it either Way,
though it may sometimes be palliated and extenuated, it can never be vindicated.
And it is a Surprise to good Men sometimes to see Persons of no common Parts
and Learning standing up openly and before the World, to smooth over an odious
Cause, and vindicate an Action in its self manifestly unjust. This indeed is
sinning with Security, and without Shame; and acting wickedly without either
Fear or Remorse. Certainly such Pleadings must prove mightily to their
Disreputation, and be a great Hinderance to their Business and Professions. But
I hope, and am fully persuaded, that this Audience is free from such Persons as
I am condemning; therefore I would not be thought to reflect upon any here
present.

Having briefly gone through these two Particulars I proposed, I shall omit
many other unjust Practices that are too frequent in Courts of Judicature, and
shall only observe in general, That all such Acts of Injustice as are done in
public Courts, and by public Persons, are of the blackest Dye, and the most
odious before God; being always of a higher Concern, and of a more pernicious
Consequence than the unjust Actions of private Men. Judges and Magistrates have
the Stamp of Heaven upon them, and in their Distributions of Justice do in some
measure represent the great Judge of all the Earth. Now if They, who are set up
purposely to do Justice to others, shall commit any Errors, and make any false
Steps, as they are most injurious to the Public, so they are most dangerous
and fatal to themselves; and the greater and more exalted the Persons are, the
more heinous are their Crimes.

Tho the Actions of Judges and Magistrates are seldom publicly censured, and
more rarely punished in this World, yet the Supreme Judge of all Men will
remember them, and do them Justice too, by making them eternal Examples of his
Wrath and Vengeance. When that terrible Judge shall at the last great Day do
Justice to all Mankind; when all the Mysteries of Iniquity shall be unfolded,
and all Men's secret Thoughts and monstrous Imaginations be exposed in their
native Deformity to the World; then shall the Actions of all unjust Judges,
Magistrates, and Officers be laid open in the most public and exemplary
Manner, and be punished, not as the Actions of Single Men, but as the Crimes of
whole Societies. To whom much is given, much will be required; and a Man had a
thousand times better be an Idiot, a Natural, and the most vile and despicable
of all Humane Kind, than by his great Parts and Learning to raise himself to
the highest Stations, and act contrary to his Trust. Parts and Learning are
most dangerous Engines when misapplied; and a Man had far better be without
them, than to abuse them. To speak in the plainest Terms, A Man had much better
be a Fool than a Knave; though the former is generally more despicable in the Eye
of the World. For Folly is only a Misfortune, and the unhappy Effects of mere
Nature; but Knavery is a Monster begotten by the Devil, which will certainly
carry a Man to the black Place where it had its Birth.

To conclude all, The Matters that I have insisted on are of the highest
Importance, both to the Honor of God, and to the public Peace of the Nation;
and as I have taken the Freedom to speak some Truths without Fear or
Complaisance, so I hope I have spoken them without either Rudeness or Indecency.

Now to God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

