A DECLARATION OF THE Several Proceedings of both Houses OF PARLIAMENT, With
those in the County of KENT Now in Arms against the Authority of Parliament,
Manifesting their Desires and Endeavors for the avoiding of the Effusion of
Blood.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration and
proceedings concerning the business of Kent be Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
June 5. 1648.

A DECLARATION OF The several Proceedings of both Houses of Parliament, with
those in the County of Kent, now in Arms against the Authority of Parliament;
Manifesting their Desires and Endeavors for the avoiding the effusion of Blood.
THe House of Commons had notice on Monday the 22 of May last, of the Tumults
and Insurrections in the County of Kent, both by some of their own Members, as
also by a Letter from the Major and others then at Rochester, wherein they
intimate, That the chief ground of the Rising there, was a Rumor given forth,
That a Regiment of Horse and Foot was sent for by the Committee, to suppress a
Petition intended to be presented to the House; and desire, That those Forces
might be stopped from coming into that county; and, That the extraordinary
charges of that City may be taken into consideration; upon which they promise
Obedience and conformity, as well to the late Ordinance touching the manner of
Addresses to the Houses by Petitioners, as otherwise. Upon consideration of the
said Letter, the House appointed a day for the bringing in the Report
concerning the said Charges, and sent down Three of their own Members,
Gentlemen of that County, to use their Endeavors for the pacifying of those
Tumults; with a Letter from the Speaker to the Major and other Gentlemen then
at Rochester, where the Tumults first began: which Letter is as follows:

A Letter to the Mayor and other Gentlemen of Rochester.
Gentlemen,
UPon the reading of your Letter in the House, they have commanded me to return
this Answer, That it never was their intention to send any Force into that
County to suppress Petitioning, but only to disperse such as should
Tumultuously assemble, under pretense of bringing up Petitions to the House, to
disturb the Peace of the County and Kingdom, and to offer violence to the
freedom of Parliament: But since both by your Letter, and the Relation of
Captain Lee and Captain Westrow, they are satisfied of your readiness to yield
obedience to the late Declaration of Parliament, directing the manner of
presenting Petitions, they have put a stop upon the marching of those Forces
into that County, so as they shall not advance thither, unless we be
necessitated to give further Order, by any more Tumultuous Assemblies of that
City or County. This being all I have in Command, I rest.

22 Maii, 1648.

These three Gentlemen coming into that County, did their best to quiet the
County, but could effect nothing but a Cessation, from Wednesday the 24 of May
till Saturday following, 5 of the clock; during which time, the Insurrection
did increase to far greater numbers.

While those Gentlemen were in the country, the Earl of Thanet desiring the
Peace of that his native County, on the Wednesday aforesaid did apply himself
to the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Lieutenant of that County, to desire him to
accompany him to the Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-house, which he
did accordingly; and the Earl of Thanet made several Propositions to that
Committee, which he said he was very hopeful would, being granted, remove the
Distempers there; and he declared, That what he heard from some of the
Gentlemen then in arms gave him this hope. The Committee after much conference
with the said Earl, resolved upon some Instructions to be given to him, which
on Thursday morning they reported to both Houses, who then passed them, which
are as follows:

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE John Earl of Thanet, upon Propositions by
him offered, concerning appeasing the Tumults in KENT.
I. YOur Lordship is desired to declare to those that are lately risen in Kent,
That the Houses have lately published a Declaration concerning Petitions to be
brought to the Houses, which is herewith delivered unto your Lordship: That
when they have delivered up the Towns, Magazines and Arms that they have
seized, and shall be retired peaceably to their Houses, they may bring and
present a Petition to the Houses, according to the said Declaration.

II. Your Lordship shall also declare unto them, That upon their immediate
disbanding and departing home quietly to their houses, they shall have
Indemnity for what is past.

III. Your Lordship is also desired to return to the Houses, between this and
Saturday morning, an Answer, whether they do give obedience to the Parliament
in laying down their Arms, delivering up the Magazines, and repairing quietly
to their own houses.

The said Earl going into Kent with the Instructions, promised his return on
Saturday morning, which he did accordingly; and then brought a Letter from the
Gentlemen in the County, that were then engaged: wherein they promised an
Answer by my Lord of Thanet at five of the clock in the afternoon; but none
came that day, though the Committee sat late, expecting it. But on the Lords
day in the afternoon, Sir Thomas Peyton Baronet, one of the engaged Gentlemen,
brought a Letter to the Committee at Derby-house, the Earl of Thanet not coming
with it, for what Reasons it is not known: The Letter is as follows;

To the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-house.
My Lords,
WE have seen the Instructions from your Lordships to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Thanet; Upon consideration of which, we have thought fit to return this
Answer to your Lordships,

That we have cause to believe, there are many persons now about your
Lordships, who endeavor to infuse into you, very sinister opinions of our
proceedings, in relation to the safety of this County at this time; who, when
we shall be admitted to a fair and equal hearing, will appear to be the
greatest Disturbers thereof themselves. And that our intentions are free from
all other ends then Natural Defense, We humbly beseech your Lordships to
understand, That we are in a firm Resolution to observe the Declaration of the
Houses; and for the manner of presenting our Petitions and Complaints will
follow the Directions in the said Declaration. But saving to our selves always
the liberty of preserving the most ancient and inviolate Freedoms of this
County, We must desire your Lordships to put a fair interpretation upon our
purposes of continuing within the safeguard of our Arms, till we have
assurances from your Lordships, that the clamors of those above against us,
have had no success in their enraged Design of engaging this County in Blood
and Ruin, when they find never so small a diminution of their Arbitrary
power, so long exercised over us, endeavored to be taken from them; not
doubting but upon the presentation and fair reception of our Petition and just
Complaints, the Houses will give such seasonable relief therein, as will
abundantly discover the inclination of this County to Peace and Amity.

My Lords, This is the Account we can give you of this County by the hands of
the noble Lord the Earl of Thanet, whom also we have desired to inform your
Lordships further, That our present posture tends not to offer violence to the
Parliament, nor suffers acts willingly unbeseeming our fair intentions; but do
and shall take strict care to repress, wheresoever we find it, the incensed
Spirit we see in the people: which how it has been raised, we shall in due time
be able to make appear, and so we rest

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servants, Thomas Peyton. John Darel.
Thomas Palmer. Ja: Hales. Thomas Hardres. George Newman. Thomas Godfrey.
Matthew Hammon. James Newman. Tho: Cau^top. Edward Whitton. Will: Hugessen.
Richard Lee jun. Tho: Engeham. James Darel. R: Wilkinson. Ed: Roberts. Phil:
Wareld Mayor of Rochester.



It must not be omitted, That before this, something more was done by the House
of Commons, to show their desire of preventing bloodshed; On Saturday about
five in the ^fternoon, one Mr. Sherman Minister of Lee near Detford came to the
House, informing them, That he had been with some of the Commanders
thereabouts, and demanded of them what they desired, or would give them
satisfaction: They answered him, That they would be quiet, so they might have
an Indemnity for what they had done. The House hoping that by this they might
be pacified without force, gave to Mr. Sherman the Instructions ensuing, of
which no account has been given.

INSTRUCTIONS For Mr. Abraham Sherman Minister at Lee.
YOu are desired to declare to those that are lately risen about Greenwich and
Detford, That the Houses have lately published a Declaration concerning
Petitions to be brought to the Houses; That when they have delivered up the
Towns, Magazines and Arms that they have seized, and shall be retired peaceably
to their houses, they may bring and present a Petition to the Houses, according
to the said Declaration.

You shall also declare unto them, That upon their disbanding and departing
home quietly to their houses before two of the clock to morrow morning, they
shall have Indemnity for what is past.

27 May, 1648.
REported from the Committee at Derby-house, read, and upon the Question
assented, and Ordered to be presently Signed, and sent a way with Mr. Sherman.

On Monday the 29 of May last, The Letter was reported to the Houses that Sir
Thomas Peyton brought, which being read and considered of, The Houses seeing
all their former Endeavors for an Accommodation fruitless, and the resolution
of the engaged party in that County to continue in Arms, without and against
their Authority: And being informed, that by the said party some Maritine Forts
were surprised, others beleaguered, and diverse Ships in the service of the
Parliament withdrawn from their Obedience: The said Houses, in discharge of
their duty, and care of the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, passed this
ensuing Vote:

Die Lunae, 29 Maii, 1648.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do Declare, That they do leave
the whole managing of the Business of Kent to the General.

After which Vote, the General marching into the County, The House received
information, that those in Arms there sent a Trumpeter to the General, desiring
him to grant a Pass to their Commissioners, to Treat according to Order of
Parliament: which Trumpeter said, That Squire Hales was their General, Sir
Thomas Peyton Lieutenant General, and Sir John Many Major General. His
Excellency returned Answer by a Trumpeter of his own, That whilst they
continued in Arms without and against the Authority of Parliament, and doing
acts of Hostility, to the disturbance of the peace of that County, he could not
admit of a Treaty, nor lose time in prosecution of them; But if they shall
forthwith lay down Arms, and disperse themselves, he doubted not of the Mercy
of the Parliament to those who are abused and deluded; and of their Justice
against such only as shall appear to have bin the chief and most eminent
Actors and Fomentors of this Rebellion.

By this that has bin done, all men may see That the Endeavors of both Houses,
in transacting of this business, did manifestly tend to peace; and that if they
had bin in any measure really complied with, There might have been an happy
settlement and composure in that County before any Engagement.

A Narrative of these Proceedings has been lately made by Members of both
Houses by their command, To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the
City of London: who, after their return of Thanks to both Houses for their
condescension, in Declaring to them their aforesaid Proceedings, Did Declare
themselves fully satisfied therewith; and did desire, That the Houses would be
pleased to publish the same in Print, for the Satisfaction of other their
fellow-Citizens, and Subjects of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

