Diverse Questions upon His Majesty's last Answer, concerning the Militia,
Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament.
Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament.

THat this Answer of His Majesty is a denial to the desires of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the Militia.

Resolved, etc.

That those that advised His Majesty to give this Answer, are Enemies to the
State, and mischievous Projectors against the defense of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc.

That this denial is of that dangerous Consequence, that if His Majesty shall
persist in it; It will hazard the peace and safety of all His Kingdoms,
unless some speedy remedy be applied by the Wisdom and Authority of both
Houses of Parliament.

Resolved, etc.

That such Parts of this Kingdom as have put themselves into a Posture of
defense against the common danger, has done nothing but what is justifiable,
and is approved by the House.

Resolved, etc.

That if His Majesty shall remove into any remote Parts from His Parliament, it
will be a great hazard to the Kingdom; and a great prejudice to the Proceedings
of the Parliament.

Resolved, etc.

That these Houses holds it necessary, That His Majesty may be desired, That
the Prince may come unto Saint James, or to some other convenient place near
about London, and there to continue.

Resolved, etc.

That the Lords be desired to join with this house in an humble request unto
His Majesty; That he will be pleased to reside near his Parliament; That both
houses may have a convenience of Access unto him upon all occasions.

Resolved, etc.

That the Lords be moved to join with this house in some fit course of
examination, to find who were the Persons that gave his Majesty this advice,
That they may be removed from his Majesty, and brought to condign punishment.

Resolved, etc.

That no Charter can be granted by the King, to create a power in any
Corporation, over the Militia of that place, without consent of Parliament.

Resolved, etc.

That the Lords shall be moved to join with this house in these Votes.

Resolved, etc.

That the Lords shall be desired to appoint a select Committee, that may join
with a Committee of a proportionable number of this house; to consider, and
prepare what is fit to be done upon these Votes, or upon any thing else that
may arise upon this Answer of his Majesty concerning the Militia, and
concerning the Prince.

March 1.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


