A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, That the
Sheriffs of LONDON shall be saved and kept harmless by the authority of both
Houses, for not publishing some late Messages and Proclamations lately sent
them in his Majesty's Name.
WHereas diverse Proclamations, Writs, and Messages, some under the great Seal,
and some under the Privy Signet, have been directed and delivered unto
Alderman Langham and Alderman Andrews, then and yet Sheriffs of the City of
London and County of Middlesex, Commanding them in his Majesty's name to
execute the same, which Proclamations, Writs and Messages, being contrary to
the privilege of Parliament, and some of them containing matters tending to
the Scandal of the proceedings thereof, and to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth, were by Order of both or either House of Parliament, forbidden
to be executed, And the said Sheriffs in obedience thereunto, according to
their duty did forbear to execute the same, The Lords and Commons do Declare,
that they well approve of the ready conformity of the said Sheriffs to their
commands; And do further Declare and Ordain, that the said Sheriffs shall by
the authority of both Houses be saved and kept harmless from all damages and
inconveniences that shall or can happen unto them for obeying the said Orders,
or for any Act or thing they have done or shall do, in pursuance of the said
Order or Orders.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

March 11. Printed at London for John Wright in the Old-bailey. 1642.


