A DECLARATION OF THE Parliament, of the Commonwealth OF ENGLAND, Relating to
the Affairs and Proceedings between this Commonwealth and the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and the present Differences
occcasioned on the States part.

And the Answer of the Parliament to Three Papers from the Ambassadors
Extraordinary of the States General, upon occasion of the late Fight between
the Fleets.

With a Narrative of the late Engagement betvveen the English and Holland Fleet.

As also

A Collection of the Proceedings in the Treaty between the Lord Pauw,
Ambassador Extraordinary from the States General of the United Provinces, and
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

Friday the Ninth of July, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That no person whatsoever, without particular
License from the Parliament, do presume to Print the Declaration (Entitled, A
Declaration of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Relating to the
Affairs and Proceedings between this Commonwealth and the States General,
etc.) Nor any the Papers therewith printed, other then the Printer to the
Parliament.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1652.

A Declaration of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Relating to
the Affairs and Proceedings between this Commonwealth and the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and the present Differences
occasioned on the States part.
IF the Sufferings of the People of the United Provinces under the heavy yoke
of their Oppressions, before their Deliverance from the same by the Mercy of
God be remembered, and the Principles and Spirit which then acted in them, and
the ready and constant Help which they have had in all times from this Nation,
and that with no small Expense of English Blood and Treasure, the Returns which
they have made toward this Commonwealth will hardly be believed.

It is not intended to be very particular in mentioning the state of the
Affairs of this Commonwealth as it stood when oppressed by a Tyrant, they were
necessitated to fly to Arms for Defense of their Lives and Estates, because in
Parliament they did but assert and desire the Settling of their Just and Native
Liberties, wherein by so many Wonders, in so many signal Battles, by such a
Series of Providence in England, Ireland and Scotland, the Lord was pleased to
bless a poor handful, who approved themselves faithful to that Cause.

Neither is that Endeavor to divide them in the memorable year of Forty eight,
to be omitted; nor the great Preparations made against this Nation in the year
One thousand six hundred and fifty, which necessitated their Proceedings in
Scotland, being refused Satisfaction for fore-past Wrongs; and denied Assurance
of Peace from them, who had received the Declared Enemy of this Commonwealth
from the United Provinces, where that mischievous Contrivement was hatched
against England, and from whence their Enemies had much open and secret
Assistance by the Interest of the Prince of Orange and others, even at a time
when that Prince and his Adherents were contriving, as was most probable, to
erect a Tyranny upon those Countries; and to reduce them to their former
Bondage, of which he missed but narrowly, especially in his Attempt upon
Amsterdam; which things are better known there then here, and are not the
purpose of this Declaration.

Neither is it pleasant to remember that cruel and bloody Business of Amboyna
toward the English, for which no Satisfaction at all has been given, though
often demanded in that Case, and in others not unlike it.

But such was the Affection of this Nation toward the People of the United
Provinces, and to the Establishment of Liberty, and the Advantages of Traffic
and Strength to both; but above all, to the Advancement of the True Protestant
Religion which both profess, and which in humane probability would receive the
greatest Growth by their Friendship; and observing in some of the Governors and
People of those Countries an Affection to this Cause, and particularly
expressed by them in their free Contribution for the poor Protestants in
Ireland; that so soon as the Affairs here came by the Blessing of God to any
consistency, the Parliament did send a Resident to the States General, who
expressly refused to receive him, as themselves very well know.

The Affairs here being yet further prospered by the Almighty, and the
Affection and Judgment the same still in respect of their Neighbors, the
Parliament sent again, and joined with their Resident there another worthy
Person Dr. Dorislaus, who were instructed and enabled to see if by any good
means a right Understanding might be had; but one of these Public Ministers,
Dr. Doristaus, being come upon this public Employment to the Hague, the place
of Residence of the States General; was there most barbarously and openly
Murdered; of whose Assassination the world will judge as of an Action most
abhorred, against all Rules of National Intercourse, and even Humanity it self;
and how little was done there to Attache the Murderers whilst the business
was fresh, or has been done since, though often called upon from hence, they
well know, and must be here remembered.

On the other side, the States having formerly sent their Ambassadors, the
Lords, Borele, Renzwo and Joakimi into England, in the time of the late
Troubles, pretending all good Offices, which proved to be a Correspondence with
the Enemy, and a Means of Assisting them against those to whom they were sent;
This, with Reproaches by them cast upon the Parliament, was the work of those
Ambassadors; for which, how liable soever by the practice of Nations they left
themselves, yet not the least Incivility was offered to them, but their
Demeanor made known to their Superiors, and Repairation desired, but none
vouchsafed.

After these Passages, when it had pleased God to put a full End to the
troublesome Affairs in England, not one Garrison upon the firm Land being in the
Enemies hands, nor any Force on foot, but all reduced to Peace and Settlement,
the Affairs of Ireland in a good condition, most of the Towns and Cities there
in the Parliaments power, and their Affairs in Scotland not unprosperous, when
there was much less cause to apply to the States, for any need the Parliament
had of their Assistance, or if they should have looked upon themselves and
their Neighbors, as other States use to do; yet still retaining the former
Principles of Affection and Judgment of the great Concernment an Union between
the two Commonwealths would be to the upholding of the Protestant Interest, so
much designed upon by the Enemies thereof, and unto common good and Liberty.

The Parliament did send a Solemn Embassy to the States General, the
Ambassadors Enabled and Instructed to endeavor to Compose former Differences,
and to effect a firm and strict Union, as far as might be consistent with
Reason and Justice, and the Honor of this Nation, and be for Mutual good; Nay,
they can say, That those Ambassadors from hence were Empowered to make such
Tenders unto, and Agreement with the States, as would have demonstrated the
Affection of this Commonwealth to the Good of the people of the United
Provinces, the same as to themselves.

How unheartily and dilatorily they were dealt with in relation to their
Errand, whereby the Embassy was rendered of no effect; how unsafe (to say no
more) they were in their Persons during their abode in the Netherlands, what
Indignities were offered to them and their Followers, and unpunished; and at
whose Door the fault hereof does lie, is too apparent. But these Endeavors for
Friendship, by this delay and Aversness on the States part, becoming fruitless,
the Honor of this Commonwealth in the Persons of their Ambassadors wounded, and
their desires of Amity thus slighted, the Ambassadors were recalled home.

By this appears what has been done to procure a firm League and Amity with
the United Provinces, and what honest and sincere Endeavors have been on the
Parliaments part to effect it, who in the mean time proceeding on to conflict
with those Difficulties which Providence called them unto in Scotland and
Ireland, and the same gracious hand of God which had gone along with them,
having brought their Affairs in Ireland to so good a pass, as that little
remained there to be done; and prospering the War in Scotland so, as that
Country being in a manner quitted to them; and the Scottish Army under the
Command of Charles Stuart, Son of the late King, marching into England, was
totally defeated at Worcester, and almost all of them killed or taken, except
himself and some few others hardly escaping.

Then and not before, the States General thought fit to send an Embassy to this
Commonwealth, which was received with such willingness and Affection, as might
testify for them, they stood fixed to their former Principles.

As the Treaty went on, having some reason to avoid Dilatoriness and to desire
Certainty, when Positive Demands were pressed to the States Ambassadors, they
were evaded in things not of the hardest Resolution, with Allegations of want
of Power, though their Commission showed no such Restraint: yet to obtain
further Power* Returns must be made to their Superiors; and before Answers
could be had, the Provincial States must be Assembled, which gave small grounds
of any real intendment of a firm Peace and Amity.

During the time of Treaty also, whilst at the first their Ambassadors Debates
seemed to seek no better Props then of Ingenuity and Reason, the Ambassadors of
the States acquainted the Parliament, that one hundred and fifty Ships of War
were intended to be set out by their Superiors, besides those of their Navy
then abroad; and all these pretended for more security of the Sea; and
conservation of the Trade and Navigation of the United Provinces, but not to
offend England.

Whether this were done to Amuse the Parliament or to Denounce against them, is
to the States best known, and the Grounds of those extraordinary and great
Preparations, when they had no Enemy at all in these Seas.

To these things the Parliament made no other Answer, but quietly intended a
Provision for their own just Defense, in case any should Invade them.
Nevertheless, not altering their Resolutions more or less as to the things to
be insisted upon or granted, having made Justice and Honor, and a mutual Good,
in preservation and saving of each Rights to other, the rule to steer their
Actions by, who were most willing to come to a happy Close of this Treaty, and
were not, to their knowledges, wanting in any thing which might testify their
reality to finish the same.

In the mean time the States go on with their Preparations at Sea, appoint
their several Rendezvous of their Fleet tending to a Conjunction of all into
one, under the Command of him whom they call Lieutenant Admiral Trump; what his
Intentions or Instructions were, his own Deportment and some precedent Actions
will demonstrate.

Particularly, when amongst others, one of their Ships being met by a man of
War under the Command of Captain Young, was in a friendly manner summoned to give
the usual Respect to the Ships of War of this Nation, which another of his
Company had done before, and which has been accustomed not only as a civility
and respect, but a principal Testimony of the unquestionable Right of this
Nation to the Dominion and Superiority of the adjacent Seas, acknowledged
generally by all the Neighbor-States and Princes, and particularly by
themselves and their Predecessors, besides many most authentic Records and
other undeniable Proofs, together with a constant Practice in Confirmation
thereof: Yet he refused, affirming that if he did it, he should lose his Head.

Not long after this ensued that Action of Trump, the particulars whereof are
set down in the Narrative herewith Printed; by which that Hostile and injurious
Act appears to have been done against Neighbors in Amity, who have so often and
earnestly desired and testified their willingness to firm and continue the
same: and this also veiled with, and in the midst of a Treaty of Peace offered
by themselves.

Accompanied also with such Arrogance and Injustice, not only to the denying
of so unquestionable a Right, but Usurping upon the same; and in prosecution of
that Injury without any provocation, seeking out the Ships of this Commonwealth
in their own Seas, upon their own Coast, in their own Road, there falling upon
them, beginning a War, and thus endeavoring the Destruction of their Men and
Ships, even to the beating them out of the Sea, and utter Subversion of the
Naval Power and Trade of this Commonwealth, had not God by his goodness turned
the shame thereof upon the heads of those who were the wrong Doers.

After this long Patience of the Commonwealth of England, and after these high
Injuries and Provocations thus forced upon them, the Success at Sea not
answering Expectation, it pleased the States General to send another Ambassador
Extraordinary to the Parliament; who, as the former Ambassadors a little before
his coming had done, labored to excuse their Superiors from having any
Intention, or giving any Instruction to Warrant this Dealing; which,
notwithstanding the Preparations, the returning from another Course and seeking
out the Parliaments Ships in their own Roads, and there falling upon them
without the least Provocation, as before is mentioned, was yet by the
Ambassador called an Accident, and a thing done by mere Chance, the Action in
the name of his Superiors utterly disclaimed, yet the Employment and the Agent
continued by them and reinforced.

And when the clear truth of this unworthy Fact, bearing in it self part of the
Proof thereof, by the Fleet under the Command of Trump, coming purposely into
the Road of England unto their Fleet; and the rest thereof being attested, not
only by many eye-wit nesses, Englishmen, but also by diverse Officers, and
others of the Netherlands taken in the Fight, who concur fully in the
Testimony; yet a long and intricate way of Examination thereof is propounded, a
Cessation of acts of Offense and Hostility in the mean time desired, and a new
Proceeding upon the old long Treaty entered into by the former Ambassadors; that
time being thus gained, an addition of strength might therewith be provided.

The Powers of this Ambassador being desired to be seen, none but his
Credential Letters, and some Passes for his Transportation were produced; but
no power to Treat and Conclude with the Parliament, for which material Point he
resorted to the Powers of the former Ambassadors, who had Commission to Treat
and conclude upon the former Negotiation, and owned this also; and although
they came upon the general business of the Treaty of Alliance between the two
Commonwealths, and the Lord Pauw came upon a particular Action done after that
Treaty begun and proceeded in; yet such was the continued desire of the
Parliament, if possible, to compose the said late Differences in a Friendly
way, that they proceeded to treat with the Lord Pauw, waving the present
Dispute upon his want of Powers.

And when nothing in Particular was tendered by the Ambassador, but the Generals
before recited; and a Proposal, That the Parliament would make their Demands to
him; they were contented, not insisting upon the disadvantage thereof, to make
their Demands unto the Ambassador for Satisfaction for Wrongs past, and
Security for the future, which are herewith likewise Printed; whereby it was
put into the Hands of the Ambassador, to come to an Agreement upon the Demands
of Satisfactions to be by both Parties moderated and asserted, as was
propounded to him in another Paper; and upon such Agreement for Satisfaction
(the Demand for Security being left to after consideration) to have a Cessation
of all acts of Hostility and Offense as he desired, and the Parliament was thus
willing to assent unto.

But instead of drawing toward any such Agreement, or endeavoring to come to
Particulars therein as was offered; the Ambassador was not pleased at all to
second or pursue his former earnest desire of a Cessation, though it were thus
in his own Power to accomplish, but wholly declined the same; and for himself
and the other Ambassadors, desired speedy Audience to take their leaves, and to
depart into their own Country, being expressly commanded (as they affirmed) so
to do; and in that they were not denied any Respect or Accommodation, nor used,
during their abode here, as the Public Ministers of this Commonwealth had
been in the United Provinces; and by this Departure, they were pleased to put a
period both to the one and the other Treaty.

At their last Audience in Parliament, much was recited of the same matter
contained in their former Papers; and as to that which they then urged
concerning acts of Hostility not looked for, neither at any time before
declared; and that their Ships (brought into the Ports of England, and there
detained of late against their thought, and before any Declaration of Hostility
issued out, and whereof the Commanders are unware and guiltless, having not
given the least, nor to no body occasion of Disputes) might be released; the
Parliament therein need but refer to the Narrative by them published, and
delivered to the Ambassadors of the Lords the States General, before the
arrival of the Lord Pauw, and seen by him at his first coming.

And although that first Breach and high injury done by Trump was on the
Parliaments part altogether undeserved and unlooked for, yet after the same
committed, a Prosecution against the Wrong-doers could not in probability but
be looked for from the Parties injured, to whom no Satisfaction has yet been
offered; unless the Parliament should quietly and tamely have laid themselves
down at the feet of those who have thus endeavored the Ruin of them, and have
betrayed into those hands the Rights and Safety of the People of this Nation,
which few would have esteemed agreeable to the great Trust in them reposed.

By these Proceedings faithfully represented to the view of the World, it will
be more then evident with what Affection and Constancy the Parliament have
labored for the Friendship of the United Provinces: how carefully they avoided
all Differences and Occasions of a War between the Nations, though all such
Overtures of Amity and nearest Alliance have been rejected.

At last, when this Commonwealth was assaulted and invaded, their Ships torn,
their Men slain, without the least color of any Offense given; upon which
Attempts and the Consequences thereof had the same succeeded, not only the
Rights, Honor and Traffic, but even the very Being of this Commonwealth had
been highly endangered; The Parliament held it their Duty, thus compelled and
necessitated into a most unwelcome War begun upon them, to defend themselves;
and whilst a just Satisfaction and Security cannot otherwise be had, To
endeavor the gaining thereof by such ways and means wherewith the Lord shall
enable them.

And herein, as the Parliament does rest abundantly comforted in the Integrity
of their own Proceeding, and faithful Discharge of their Duty, so they assure
themselves that all indifferent persons will entertain this clear Testimony of
the Justness of their Cause; for the issue whereof they depend not upon any
Policy or strength of Man, but only upon the Goodness and Assistance of that
Righteous God who has hitherto in so wonderful a manner appeared for them, and
who never failed those that seek him, and with uprightness and sincerity of
Heart attend upon him.

Hen: Scobell Cleric. Parliamenti.

The Answer of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to Three Papers
presented to them by the Council of State, from the Ambassadors Extraordinary
of the Lords the States General of the United Provinces, upon occasion of the
late Fight between the Fleets.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, calling to mind with what
continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections, from the very
beginning of their intestine Troubles they have proceeded toward their
Neighbors of the United Provinces, omitting nothing on their part that might
conduce to a good Correspondence with them, and to a growing up into a more
near and strict Union then formerly, Do find themselves much surprised with
the unsuitable Returns that have been made thereunto, and especially at the Acts
of Hostility lately committed in the very Roads of England upon the Fleet of
this Commonwealth, the matter of Fact whereof stated in clear Proofs, is
hereunto annexed; Upon serious and deliberate consideration of all, and of the
several Papers delivered in by Your Excellencies to the Council of State, the
Parliament thinks sit to give this Answer to those Papers:

The Parliament, as they would be willing to make a charitable Construction of
the Expressions used in the said Papers, endeavoring to represent the late
Engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the knowledge, and against the
mind of Your Superiors; So when they consider how disagreeable to that
profession the Resolutions and Actions of Your State and their Ministers at Sea
have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed
here by Your Excellencies, the extraordinary Preparations of One hundred and
Fifty sail of Men of War, without any visible occasion, but what does now
appear (a just ground of Jealousy in Your own judgments, when Your Lordships
pretended to excuse it) and the Instructions themselves given by Your said
Superiors to their Commanders at Sea, Do find too much cause to believe, That
the Lords the States General of the United Provinces have an Intention, by
Force to usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets
that are, under God, their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby expose this
Commonwealth to Invasion at their pleasure, as by this late Action they have
attempted to do: Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to
Endeavor, with Gods assistance, as they shall have opportunity, To seek
Repairation of the Wrongs already suffered, and Security that the like be not
attempted for the future.

Nevertheless, with this mind and desire, That all Differences betwixt the
Nations may (if possibly) be peaceably and friendly composed, as God by his
Providence shall open a way thereunto, and Circumstances shall be conducing to
render such Endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual then those of this
kind heretofore used have been.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

A Narrative of the late Engagement between the English Fleet under the Command
of General Blake, and the Holland Fleet under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral
Trump near Dover.
UPon Tuesday the Eighteenth of May 1652. in the morning, General Blake being
gone to the Westward as far as Rye Bay eight days before with twelve or
thirteen Ships, leaving Major Bourn in the Downs with eight Ships only, there
appeared upon the backside of the Goodwin a Holland Fleet of Men of War
consisting of two and forty Ships, one whereof had a Flag on the main-top-Mast
head, the rest Jacks and Ancients; and being come unto the South-sands head,
two of them bore up toward the English Ships in the Downs, whereupon Major
Bourn sent out the Greyhound to examine them, and to know the reason of their
so near approach; who answering, That they had a Message to the Commander in
chief in the Downs, were permitted to come in; and having saluted the Flag, the
two Captains named Tyson and Aldred came Aboard the said Major Bourn, and
acquainted him that they were sent by Van Trump to let him know that he had
been Riding about Dunkirk with his Fleet, where by reason of foul Weather they
had lost many of their Cables and Anchors, and the wind being Northerly, were
driven further to the Southward then they intended, which Van Trump thought fit
to signify to prevent any misapprehensions or Jealousies. And having said
this, and received for answer, That the Reality of what they said would best
appear by their speedy drawing off from this Coast, they departed to their
Fleet; and immediately upon their arrival with them, the whole Fleet stood up
to Dover, and came to an Anchor within little more then shot of the Castle the
same day in the afternoon. Upon their coming before Dover Castle, and Riding
there with Flag in the Main-top, without saluting the Castle, the Castle made
three shot at them; notwithstanding which, the Dutch Admiral kept up his Flag,
and rode there at Anchor until the next day noon, and exercised his
Musketeers, by discharging Volleys of small shot many hours together. Upon
Wednesday about twelve a clock the Dutch Fleet weighted Anchor and stood off
toward Calice some four Leagues into the South-east; about the same time the
English Fleet under General Blake coming from the West toward the Downs
discovered them, and supposed by their course they had been going back; Major
Bourn likewise was in fight, coming from the Downs to join with General Blake:
About an hour or two after, the Holland Fleet altered their course, came back
again, made all the Sail they could, and bore directly with General Blake, Van
Trump the headmost with his Flag in the Main-top; and being come within shot,
the General shot a Gun at his Main-top, and then two single shot more:
whereupon Trump shot a single shot through the Generals Flag and then
immediately gave the first Broadside and took in his Pendants, and hung out
his Red Flag under the Holland Colors, which was the signal on their part for
the whole Fleet to engage, and so the Fight began, which happened between four
and five a clock in the afternoon, and contiued until nine of the clock. In the
Fight the English took two of the Holland Fleet, one whereof having six foot
water in the Hold they left, taking the Captain and Officers aboard, the other
being a Ship of thirty Guns. General Blake lay all night where the Fight began,
or near thereabouts, and the Holland Fleet was espied about four Leagues
distant toward the Coast of France next morning.

The truth of this Relation appears in the Letters of General Blake, Major
Bourn, and others in the Action, by the Examinations of the Dutch Captains, and
other Officers taken in the Fight; the Instructions given to the Dutch Captains
and Commanders, and other Papers, all which are hereunto annexed.

And whereas Van Trump in the account he gives of this Action, makes the
occasion of his coming back upon the English Fleet, the guarding of some
Merchant men richly laden from the Streights, which had been in fight with some
of our Friggots: That action is set down in a Letter written by Captain Young
(hereunto also annexed) whereby the occasion, beginning and ending thereof is
declared. And besides, those very Ships which he pretends to come to protect or
rescue, upon Saturday before had past by General Blake, and were gone to the
Eastward.

A Collection of the Proceedings in the Treaty between the Lord Pauw,
Ambassador Extraordinary from the States General of the United Provinces, and
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
The Lord Pauw's Speech at his Audience before the Parliament, the Eleventh of
June, 1652.
Right Honorable,
THe Public Testimonies and manifest Tokens of a sincere Benevolence, pure
Love and true Friendship, which the Universal State and Subjects of the United
Provinces have always showed to the English People, and principally to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, now prosperously and happily
Governing, are so notorious and known to the whole Christian World, that no
body can doubt of it; much less of a true Faith and long used Observation of
Friendship, of the States General of the United Provinces.

But, forasmuch as by reason of the Variety and Inconstancy of Worldly things,
sometime happen those things which do dark the Exterior Face with Clouds, and
are like to show a Distraction of minds: But when these things are prevented
by time, and all Contrarieties taken away, they will serve more to conserve and
confirm, then to dissolve the Bonds of mutual Friendship: Therefore it has
pleased the States General of the United Provinces, my Superiors;
notwithstanding they doubt not of the singular Wisdom and Diligence of their
Extraordinary Ambassadors here, staying about great and weighty Business, to
send me in an extraordinary Embassage to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, To present clearly and sincerely their Wishes for the Public Safety
and happy Government thereof; with proffer of all their good Offices, as I,
being so lately come from their Honorable Assembly, can testify out of my
certain knowledge, That nothing is more in their Hearts and Wishes, Then that
not only a firm and constant Friendship be Religiously kept between both
States; but that it may daily grow, and by all means be consolidated, and
nothing may happen which may break or any way disturb the Bars of mutual
Safety, Profit and Friendship, between so Neighbor Nations: And that therefore
they have received with great Astonishment and sorrow of Heart the News, of
what, contrary to all expectation, has lately happened between the Admirals of
both Commonwealths. But forasmcch as this unlooked for and unexpected case
might not only raise new Troubles, but also give occasion of Suspicion, as if
the present Treaty for a mutual Alliance, and a straighter Corroboration of the
old Friendship, was not earnestly prosecuted, and therefore we should labor in
vain to come to a happy end: My Superiors have not thought amiss, but rather
convenient, even necessary, that at this time and upon this unhappy case fallen
out, I should above the ordinary use and custom, and therefore superabundantly,
(seeing that by reason of my Office I have been in all their Counsels)
represent openly and sincerely to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, all the Particulars which have happened, as well before as after that
Fact, as they are come to their knowledge, to remove all things out of the way
which might breed any grudge or breach of Friendship between both States, or
cause the least disturbance or delay to the Treaty.

Therefore, by virtue of the Credential Letters of the said General States, and
in their name I do Protest and Declare to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, That they have never entertained in their thoughts, never acted, much
less commanded any thing which might offend the Dignity of this Commonwealth,
lessen the common Friendship and good Correspondence which has endured for so
many years, or under any pretense whatsoever sow any seed of Misunderstanding;
But rather that the said States have intended with all their hearts, and
endeavored by all their power, That the said Friendship and Alliance might be
perfected in the best way, and speedily, and might be solemnly established for
ever for the Safety and Advantage of both Commonwealths. It is very true that a
great Fleet has been prepared in the Low Countries, but that the States
General have by the continual Complaints of their Subjects been forced to
consent to it, is also a thing most certain and known; as also, that they have
Ordered, That notice thereof should be given to the said Parliament; which was
done and signified to no other intent, then that the Subjects of the United
Provinces which had suffered great Damages at Sea, and lost several ships,
should be secured and protected by just and ordinary means; and that no Wrong
or Offense should be offered to any, much less to undertake any Dispute against
the Fleet and Ships of the same Parliament upon the Controversies and
Differences of the Sea. All which being done and performed in that manner, and
nevertheless being accidentally hapened of both sides a great Debate and
Controversy between both Fleets, the States General have thought fit to
acquaint the Parliament of England, with the Relation sent to them in writing
by their Admiral, and approved and witnessed by their Captains and other
faithful persons, That the Admiral Trump, more by necessity then other reasons,
is come nigh the Fleet of this Commonwealth, and has first sent his civil
Salutation to the Commander Bourn; and having afterward met accidentally with
the Admiral Blake, put out his Boat to send some Deputies unto him, and to
Declare the Reasons of his coming, and besides that, commanded to take down his
Flag; but when he saw, that he against all expectation was unhappily saluted by
him with a Broadside, and thereupon he discharged his Guns, not to offend but
to defend himself; and that from thence by mere accident, rather then
purposely, was arised a Fight amongst those Fleets, which by the Lords Blessing
shortly after was ended: Which, forasmuch as it was begun by an unexpected
Salutation, and not continued with earnestness by ours, nor done or committed
by Alienated minds, or any Reasons known before, but by Chance; Therefore the
States General do friendly desire, That the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England will be pleased to believe and be persuaded, That nothing was done with
a consulted purpose or foregoing Command, but merely by a casual Chance, and
perhaps by reason of the Fragility and Inconstance of the worldly things; and
so much the more direct their Counsels and Commissions thither, That all
Obstacles, Offenses, and further Wrongs may with all speed be removed out the
way and prohibited, as the States General on their part are prompt and ready to
apply convenient Remedies. They judge that it concerns much the whole
Christian world, and principally the States of the Reformed Churches abroad,
That those Misunderstandings do not grow greater between these Commonwealths,
and that between Neighbors, partakers of the same Faith, should arise any
Dissension which should disturb, interrupt the common and necessary Commerce,
and give occasion, as well to their known as to their secret Enemies, to lay
waits, or to draw into diverse parts those Commonwealths ready to be United in
a common Alliance; and by such means removing from themselves the seat of
Calamities and War, to bring (which God forbid) it to their own destruction: To
prevent so great a danger, and that the evil may not spread further, I am
commanded by times to propound, and do all my best, That by convenient means
there may be a speedy Composure made of what is past; and that there may be
Order taken, That hereafter such unlucky and unhappy Cases happen no more
between the Fleets of both Commonwealths, wherein they Desire, the Dignity and
the Honor of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England may be conserved.

Whereas then the States General do herewith openly Declare to the said
Parliament, That they desire entirely, That all offices of Friendship and
Benevolence may be continued, the contrary may be prevented; and that the
Councels of all sides may be directed to the desired end and conclusion of the
mutual Confederacy; therefore, I do earnestly entreat, That it may please the
said Parliament to hear and understand me without any delay, by their Deputies
or Counsel of State, and proceed without intermission in the just and amicable
former Transactions, to bring the principal Business to an end and conclusion,
as the Extraordinary Ambassadors of the States have Charge and are ready to do.

In the same time I do return my Thanks for the singular Favor done to my Lord
Neuwport, in granting him some days ago one of the Parliaments ships for his
return into the Low Countries; and the said Lord being a Member of the States
of Holland and West-Friezland, I am charged to desire him to stay here, to
communicate Counsels and return with me, which I hope will not be displeasing
to the Parliament, to whose Benevolence I with all Respect recommend me and all
my Offices.

A Translation of the Letters Credential to the Lord Pauw.
The States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries;

WHereas We have found convenient, even very necessary, in the present
Condition of the Affairs in Europe, to send to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, the Lord Adrian Pauw Knight, Lord of Heemstede,
Hogersmilde, Rietwijck and Nieuwerkerk, Counselor Pensionary of Holland and
West-Friezland, and Ordinary Deputy in Our Assembly, from the said Province, as
Our Extraordinary Ambassador; having made election of his Person, as of one, of
which, for his rare Qualities and long Experience, We make a high esteem, and
have a great Confidence; being well acquainted with our good and sincere
Intentions, which have no other Aim, then the Maintaining, Increasing,
Confirming and Strengthening more and more the good Amity, Correspondence and
Alliance between both Nations and States, grounded upon common Interests of
Religion, of State and Commerce; having such Confidence of his Ability,
Prudence, Fidelity and Diligence, that we do refer Our selves to him to express
them viva voce, to the said Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; and
chiefly, the Zeal that We do continue to have for all what may concern the
common Good and Security of both Nations: Wherefore We entreat with earnestness
and with all Our Affection, the said Parliament of the Commonwealth of England
by these Presents, That they be pleased to give a favorable Audience to the
said Our Extraordinary Ambassador, and to give him absolute Credence as to Our
selves, in all that he shall say and propound of Our part in this present
condition of the Affairs of both Commonwealths.

Done at the Hague in Holland, the Fourteenth of June, One thousand six hundred
fifty two.
To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
Friday the 11th of June, 1652.
Mr. Speaker by way of Report, acquaints the Parliament with what was delivered
by the Lord Pauw Ambassador Extraordinary from the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces, at his Audience in the House this day, and presented the
Paper delivered in by the said Lord Ambassador Extraordinary, and the Translate
thereof in English, which was this day read.

Ordered by the Parliament, That these Papers be referred to the Council of
State; And that it be likewise referred to the said Council, to hear what the
said Lord Ambassador Extraordinary has further to say, and to Treat with him;
they holding close to the former Answers and Declarations the Parliament has
made, and report it to the Parliament with all speed.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

The Lord Pauw's Speech at his Audience in the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
WHereas it has pleased my Lords the States General of the United Provinces to
send me, besides their Extraordinary Ambassadors, in the same quality, to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; and having yesterday had the Honor
to Declare in their full Assembly the true subject of my coming, and the
sincere Intentions of my Superiors: Therefore, I think it to be my duty to
appear likewise before this Honorable Council to present my Credential Letters,
and wish your Honors all felicity and good success in the direction and
managing of so great Affairs as are to them committed by this great
Commonwealth. And as I have Declared unto the said Parliament, so do I likewise
Declare again with truth and certain knowledge, That my Lords the States
General have always had, and have at this present more then at any time before,
a very great desire to maintain, increase, and keep faithful the good
Friendship, straight Alliance, and perfect Correspondence which has so long
endured between both Nations and States, whereof there has been heretofore
many notorious and manifest testimonies: It is most constant, That my Superiors
have nothing more in their hearts, then to see a finishing and conclusion of
the Treaty of Alliance between both Commonwealths; to the end, That thereby a
straighter Union and brotherly Concord may be established, to subvert and
destroy all Plots and Divisions which would trouble and much endanger the one
and the other, as also make them less considerable to the Christian world. This
is (my Lords) the very aim of the Enemies of the Reformed and Orthodox
Religion, making a certain account, That they will be able by such a
Disagreement and Division, not only to weaken both States, but to bring them
also to the utmost extremities. But both People being blessed by the Lord with
that precious gift of the true Religion, and wonderfully provided, besides the
Spiritual, with Temporal Benedictions, by the benefit of Navigation and
Commerce in all parts of the World: and my Lords the States General, judging
that the first ought necessarily to be conserved, and the other be looked to,
the Religion maintained, and the State secured, did believe, That all those
Inconveniences can be no better prevented, then by joining the Souls and Goods
of both Commonwealths, and by this means make them able, with Gods assistance,
to shun all Michinations to the contrary. Therefore, the unexpected news of the
meeting of the two Fleets, and the Offenses given of both sides has brought no
small Trouble amongst the General States, who have thereupon judged most
necessary to dispatch extraordinarily and speedily to inform the Parliament of
the Commonwealth of England, and this Honorable Council, and to perform such
Endeavors, made choice of me that have been admitted in both Assemblies of the
States General and of those of Holland and West-Friezland, and acquainted with
their most important and most secret Counsels and Deliberations, to witness
here with most certain knowledge of the matter, and no less truth and
faithfulness, That no Deliberation was made, no Resolution taken, no Commission
directly or indirectly given to displease in any ways the Commonwealth of
England to offend them, and much less to set upon their Fleet or Ships; but
that on the contrary, there was Command given to deal with them in all places
as with the best Friends, and to show them all kind of Favor and Courtesy.
And as in the said unhappy meeting things have been on both sides otherwise,
and very unwarily acted, whereof I made yesterday a large Relation, which I do
not intend to mention again at this present, nor to revive that which ought to
be buried and entirely forgotten. Notwithstanding, having understood out of the
last. Answer delivered to our Ambassadors, that there is a Satisfaction
demanded for what is past, and Security for the future; And my Lords the States
conceive it to be necessary, That all Misunderstanding and Mis-construction of
what is lately passed in the said Encounter may be taken away, and both States
secured from the like Inconvenients hereafter; As also, that it be proceeded
without delay in the continuating and perfecting the Treaty of Alliance so far
advanced already: And moreover, That it be considered of the most convenient
and reasonable Means which may remove the shadows of all Suspicion and
Mistrust; and that such Orders be made which the Fleets shall be bound to
follow hereafter; to which purpose I have sufficient Instructions from my
Superiors. I desire therefore that it may please Your Honors to commit some of
the Members of this Honorable Counsel, with whom I may, as soon as is possible,
begin, continue and finish that which may serve to the Satisfaction of both
States, and removing of all Differences: To which I must add here, That my
Superiors did never pretend nor shall pretend to dispute the Honor and Dignity
of this Commonwealth, which they repute the First and most considerable in
Europe; and wish that by an Union of these two formidable States, they might
secure them both, preserve them from the Conspirations of their Enemies, and
settle by a perfect Intelligence and Confidence their common Peace and Safety.
In the mean time I pray yours Honors, That it may please you by your wise
direction, to order as speedily as is possible, that the evil may not by reason
of this unhappy accident proceed any further, by committing new Offenses,
Pursuits, or taking of Ships, but that all Attempts and such Actions may be
interdicted and stopped, and not by making the wound wider, even uncurable, to
expose our selves to the will and pleasure of our Enemies; being confident,
that we shall be able to find convenient Remedies to remove friendly and
happily the present Differences, to the Confusion of those who wish and expect
it otherwise. I shall be exceedingly beholden to this Honorable Council, if
your Honors grant me a speedy Answer upon these, that I may without
intermission begin so Worthy, Profitable and Necessary work; commending my self
in the mean time with all Respects to your Honors Favor.

Pronounced in the Council of State of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, the 22/12 of June, 1652.
Monday the 14th of June, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
IN pursuance of an Order of Parliament of the 11th of June, 1652. The Council
has appointed the Lord Commissioner Whitlock, Lord Commissioner Lisle, Lord
Viscount Lisle, Lord Chief Justice St. John, Mr. Bond, Mr. Scot, Colonel
Purefoy, Sir Henry Vane, Sir William Masham, Colonel Martin and Colonel Morley,
or any three or more of them to be Commissioners, to meet with the Lord Pauw,
Extrordinary Ambassador to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, from
the States General of the United Provinces, to receive from his Excellency such
Overtures as he shall please to make in writing, and to Confer and Treat with
him thereupon, and make Report thereof to the Council; and that they do meet
with the said Lord Ambassador Extraordinary, at Four of the Clock this
Afternoon, in the usual place for the purpose aforesaid, and so from time to
time as there shall be occasion: And that Sir Oliver Fleming Knight, Master of
the Ceremonies, do signify the same unto his Lordship, and attend him to the
place appointed.

Ex: Jo: Thurloe, Clerk of the Council.

Monday 14. June, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,

THat the Commissioners appointed to Treat with the Lord Pauw, Extraordinary
Ambassador of the United Provinces, Do demand of the said Lord Ambassador, a
sight of the Powers and Authorities given to him by his Superiors to treat and
conclude upon such matters and things as he has to offer; and acquaint him,
That the Parliament Desires, That all speed and expedition may be used on his
Excellencies part in this present Treaty desired by himself; assuring his
Lordship, That nothing shall be wanting on the part of the Council of State
which may be any way conducing to bring the same to a speedy issue.

Ex: Jo: Thurloe, Clerk of the Council.

A Summary of what the Lord Adrian Pauw, Extraordinary Ambassador of the States
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, has propounded to the
Deputies of the Honorable Council of State of the Parliament of England, the 24
/ 14 of June, 1652.
THe said Lord Ambassador having heretofore abundantly Declared, That the
States General (as it will be found and always appear) have no ways
deliberated, neither in public nor in private, much less given any Charge,
Order or Commission for committing the least Offense against the Parliament of
the Commonwealth of England, their Fleets, Ships, Officers or Subjects, but
rather they should be met with the usual Civilities and Kindnesses, and with
the ordinary Expressions of Friendship; therefore none can any wise call into
question their sincere Intentions for the maintaining and increasing the
ancient and common Amity.

For the same reason, That cannot be imputed to the said States General which
happened lately between both Fleets, nor should thence arise any Discontent or
Offense, nor any cause of attempting against their Subjects, being a thing
directly contrary to the ancient Friendship and Correspondence between both
Nations: And the said Encounter having happened by mere Chance and without any
design, the said Lord Ambassador has propounded, Whether it were not better to
lay aside that which is passed, in so much that it should be taken of both
sides as a thing not done, and so all be left as before; and that there might a
speedy order be taken for the redress of what has been done since, in such
sort, as no External nor Internal mark may remain of the same.

Nevertheless, if the pleasure of this Honorable Council is otherwise, although
the said Ambassador has plainly and sincerely related all which is come to the
knowledge of his Superiors concerning what is passed, having received (as also
the other Ambassadors) besides the former Informations, before his departing,
several remarkable and considerable Attestations in probanti forma, and has
heard that there are here quite other and contrary Informations, whence it does
appear, That the parties are disagreeing in their Evidences, and so it is a
hard matter to judge clearly of the Fact.

The said Ambassador therefore has thought fit to propound, That the things
passed should be more exactly examined, and necessary Informations made by
either of the parties, or conjunctim by both; that after certain knowledge
gotten, the truth may be discovered by Commissioners specially deputed of both
sides upon this matter, to know which of the two has made the first attempt,
and given cause to the following Disorders.

The said Ambassador does Declare, That if it may appear that the Admiral of
the States General has made the first Assault, he shall not only be disowned
in the like case, and his Fact disapproved of by the said States General, as
having transgressed against their Orders and Commission, but they shall also
cause him to be punished for the same, according to the importance of his
Attempt, for having disobeyed their Commands, and chiefly for having given just
cause of Offense to their good Friends and Neighbors: desiring also of this
Honorable Council, that if on the contrary it be found true by the
Informations, That the Admiral of the Commonwealth of England has given
occasion to the said Encounter, and has the first Assaulted, it be likewise
Declared, That the Parliament will in that case disown the said Admiral, and
command the same punishment to be put upon him.

It is to be believed, That the sincere Intentions of the States General will
not only appear, and all suspicions be taken away, but that the means of a
just Reparation and necessary satisfaction will be easily found, other States
and Commonwealths having taken the same course and followed the same method
with good success, whereof the Lord Ambassador has produced diverse examples.

And to the end that the like Inconveniences may no more happen hereafter, the
Lord Ambassador has Declared, That the States General have never had the least
intention, nor have yet any at this time, to lessen in no ways the Honor and
Dignity of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; but that they have
given command heretofore, as also since the late unhappy Accident, new Order,
That upon meetings and salutings of the Fleets or Ships of War, concerning the
striking down of the Flag, and what belong to it, there should be the same
Honor done to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England as was formerly
done during the other Government, hoping by this means to give and receive
content reciprocally.

And as it is most necessary to confirm the mutual Friendship between both
Nations, That the negotiation of the Treaty between both Commonwealths be
advanced and brought to an end as soon as can be, the said Lord Ambassador has
represented and earnestly desired, That since the Lords Extraordinary
Ambassadors have after diverse Conferences, by their last Remonstrance,
manifested their Superiors Intention concerning the said Treaty, it should also
please the Honorable Council to express and signify theirs clearly, that it
may appear what Differences are yet to be reconciled, that all Difficulties may
be removed, to come the sooner to a good, firm and lasting Conclusion, by which
the minds may be on both sides pacified, and an everlasting and undissoluble
good Intelligence established. Moreover, the said Ambassador has instantly
desired; That all ways of Fact and Offenses be inhibited and stopped by Order
of the Honorable Council, and chiefly, That the Persons, Ships and Goods of the
Subjects of the United Provinces, as well Military as others, be indifferently
freed and released from their Restraint and Detention, and all that have been
or are by Force detained, be set at Liberty; and that the Innocents may receive
no more hurt or trouble, as we are ready and resolved to do the same of our
part.

The said Lord Ambassador has also desired it may please the said Honorable
Council to make known to him, without loss of time, their good Intentions and
Resolution upon what is abovesaid; and chiefly upon the Continuation of the
Treaty begun, the Cessation of all ways of Fact upon the relaxation of the
Ships detained and arrested persons and goods of the Subjects of the United
Provinces, seeing he has lost no time to Declare sincerely from his Superiors,
and assure the said Honorable Council of the continuation of their good
Affection and perfect Friendship.

14th of June, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
THat the Commissioners appointed to Treat with the Lord Pauw, Extraordinary
Ambassador from the United Provinces, do insist upon a sight of his Authorities
before they proceed to this Treaty.

A Paper from the Lord Pauw
the 15th of June, 1652. To the Right Honorable, The Council of State of the
Commonwealth of England.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the States General of the United Provinces
having had the Honor to come twice in Conference with your Honors
Commissioners, and there to propound several things concerning the quality he
comes in, and the re-establishing the good Friendship and perfect Intelligence
of both Nations, entreated this Honorable Council, That it may please your
Honors to consider what the said Commissioners shall Report, that he may
receive a speedy and favorable Answer, as also be excused for making so much
instance, seeing that he is forced to it by the conjuncture of such pressing
Affairs, and for timely preventing of the inconvenients which might follow.

Whereupon a Conference being had, the Lord Pauw, to manifest his Powers to
Treat and Conclude, insisted on his Credentials and three Passes granted to
him, the Copies whereof were by him delivered in, and are as follows:

The States General of the United Netherlands,
To all those that shall hear these Presents read, or see, Greeting;
KNow ye, That we do expedite several Affairs of Importance, found good to
dispatch into England the Lord Adrian Pauw Knight, Lord of Heemsted,
Hogersmilde, Ritwick, Newkerk, Counselor Pensioner of Holland and
West-Friesland, Deputy Ordinary of the said Provinces to our Assembly, and for
this present our Extraordinary Ambassador; Therefore we do herewith Command and
Require all Lieutenants, Admirals, Vice Admirals, Commanders and Captains of
the Ships of War of these Countries hereunto Ordained, or by his Excellency to
be Ordained and Commanded, That they shall in their respective Ships Receive
and Transport the Baggage of the said Lord of Heemsted into England, and to do
therein all what our said Extraordinary Ambassador of them shall require,
Accommodating him during his said Passage in their said Ships, and Respecting
him according to their duty: And having landed our said Lord Extraordinary
Ambassador with his Train and Goods in England, to do and perform further what
they already may be commanded, or may yet be willed, as shall be required at
the hands of those that it concerns; Of all which the said Lieutenants,
Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Commanders and Captains shall not fail, under pain to
incur our highest Indignation.

Done in the Hague under Our Seal Paraphure, and the Signiture of our Clerk,
this 14th June 1652. Signed, BOVCHORST.
By the Order of the High Lords, the States General, Signed, B. RVYSCH.


The States General of the United Low Countries,
To all those that shall see or hear the reading of these, Greeting;
KNow ye, That having found good, for the dispatch of Affairs of Importance, to
dispatch into England the Lord Adrian Pauw Knight, Lord of Heemsted,
Hogersmilde, Ritwick, Newkerk, and Counselor Pensioner of Holland and
West-Friesland, Deputy Ordinary of the said Provinces in our Assembly, going in
an Extraordinary Embassy, We therefore Will and Command thereupon all
Lieutenants, Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Commanders and Captains of the Ships of
War of these Countries, That they take in and Transport the Baggage and Goods
of the said Lord our Ambassador Extraordinary, in their respective Ships, and
Transport the same over into England, in manner as the said Lord Extraordinary
Ambassador shall desire to Transport, and as his Lordship shall command and
desire; Accommodating also his Lordship on shipboard, and using all Respect to
the said Extraordinary Ambassador, his Train and Baggage; and having landed
them in England, to do further as they shall be commanded, or already are
commanded, or may yet be commanded, as appertains to all that it concerns
of all the said Lieutenants, Vice-Admirals, Commanders and Captains which shall
not perform their Duty, shall be punished according to our highest Indignation.

Given in the Hague under our Catchet or Seal Paraphure and sign of our Clerk
on the Fourteenth day of June, 1652. Signed, BOVCHORST.
By the Order of the said High and Mighty Lords States General, Signed, B.
RVYSCH.


The General States of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
To all that shall see these Presents, Greeting;
WHereas, for the common good of Christendom, and for the advancement of
Affairs of great Consideration, Importance and Consequence, we have found good
to send toward the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England the Lord Adrian
Pauw Knight, Lord of Hemsted, Hogersmild, Rietwick, Niewerkirk, etc. Counceller
Pensioner of Holland and West-Freizland, Deputy in Ordinary from this Province
in our Assembly, in quality of our Extraordinary Ambassador, requiring all
Lieutenants, Governors, Chiefs, Colonels, Captains, and Men of War, Guards of
Bridges, Ports and Passages, all places; and besides, all other Justices,
Officers and Subjects of the said Commonwealth of England, to suffer him with
his Train, Servants, Followers, Goods and Baggage, to go, pass and repass
freely, and without trouble both by water and land, without doing him, or
giving him, and suffering to be given him, made or done, any trouble,
hinderance or disturbance: But rather, all aid, help, favor and assistance
necessary and requisite, and that we would acknowledge the same most willingly
in time and place.

Given at the Hague in our Assembly under our Seal Paraphure and signing of our
Clerk, the Fourteenth of June, 1652. Was Marked A. BOUCHORST.
And lower it was Written, By Order of the said States General was Signed, B.
RUYSCH.
With the Signet of the said General States in red Wax.

Tuesday the 15th of June, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,

THat Report be made to the Parliament of what the Counsel have Ordered and
Directed touching the Conference with the Lord Pauw, Extraordinary Ambassador
from the Lords the States General, and of the Papers by him delivered to the
Commissioners of the Counsel, That by these Papers it not appearing to the
Council that the said Ambassador has any power to Treat or Conclude; The
Counsel have thought fit humbly to present and submit the whole to the
Consideration of the Parliament for their Judgment thereupon.

Translation of the Letter of the Lord Pauw to the Lord President of the
Council of State.
My Lords,
HAving communicated to my Lords the Ambassadors Extraordinary of the United
Provinces to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, what passed in my
Audience and Conference with the Commissioners of the Council of State, and
having showed unto them the Instructions and Orders of my Superiors, they have
thought fit to address the enclosed Paper to my Lords of the said Counsel of
State: But for as much as Sir Oliver Flemimg Master of the Ceremonies has
signified unto me, That their Excellencies had thought fit to make a Report of
the whole Business to the Parliament this morning, I judged it convenient to
entreat your Excellency, That the said Paper may be put into the hands of the
Reporter, to be communicated (as well as the other Propositions and Papers) to
my Lords of the Parliament: Praying God (my Lord) to bless these Affairs for
his Glory and the Prosperity of both Nations, I will remain ever

The 16/26 June. 1652. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Adrian Pauw.

For my Lord the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, President of the Council of
State of the Commonwealth of England.
The Paper of the Three Extraordinary Ambassadors, mentioned in the former
Letter.
My Lords,
THe Lord Adrian Pauw, Lord of Heemsted, Ambassador Extraordinary of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, having communicated to us what passed at the
Conferences with the Commissioners; And having showed unto us his Instructions,
and all the Orders of the Lords States General of the said United Provinces, We
would not omit to assure your Excellencies, that we have found the whole in as
good Form and as Valid as can be desired; And we are very well content, by
virtue of the Powers which have been given us and exhibited and approved, to
obliege our selves and subscribe whatsoever the said Lord of Heemsted has
Transacted and Negotiated in Prosecution of the said Orders; As also whatsoever
he may Transact or Negotiate as above, either by himself or jointly with us, as
shall be thought most conducing to the better perfecting of the Treaty of
Alliance between the Commonwealth of England and the United Provinces of the
Low Countries.

Given the 26th of June, 1652.
Thursday the 17th of June, 1652.
Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,
THat upon Consideration of the Report made from the Council of State, the
Parliament does think fit and order, That the Council of State do proceed with
the Lord Pauw, Ambassador Extraordinary from the Lords the States General of
the United Provinces, according to former Directions.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

A Paper received from the Lord Pauw, 17 June, 1652. To the Right Honorable,
The Council of State.
THe Ambassador Extraordinary of the States General of the United Provinces of
the Low Countries, find himself necessitated to Demand most instantly another
Audience of the Lords Commissioners of the Honorable Council, and that as soon
as possible may be, as well to receive from them the most desired Answer upon
those things that he has already propounded in the last Conferences, as also
to make to their Honors, according to the express Charge he has from his
Superiors, others Overtures upon things of so high Concernment, that they can
suffer no Delay; Therefore he desires earnestly, That this just Demand be as
soon as can be granted unto him.

A Translation of the Paper of the Lord Ambassador Pauw, 17 June, 1652.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces has represented to the
Lords Commissioners of the Honorable Council of State, in the third Conference
held this day, as follows:

That the States of the United Provinces have showed themselves, and are yet
resolved to remain fast to the Amity and intimate Correspondence with this
Commonwealth, as they have yet of late made it appear, by granting, during
these falling out, to the Company of English Merchants Adventurers settled in
Holland, all the Security and Protection that they have desired, even with this
annexed Promise, To continue in the same good will toward them, though the
Distemper should proceed further.

That which happened about Dover or the Downs should not breed a general Quarrel
between the two States, but that the same Mischance should be taken for a
personal action, for which those are to answer who shall be found to have
exceeded their Commission.

And to the end that this Business might be composed according to the Fact, and
the necessary satisfaction done, That it were most fit and expedient to have it
examined by Commissioners deputed of both sides, to have that person punished
which shall be found guilty according to the use and Maxims of all States and
Commonwealths, by which means, their quiet and tranquillity, as well within as
without with their Neighbors, is conserved.

Moreover, That the Ships of War meeting at Sea, and behaving themselves as
before and during the time of the former Government, there shall be there upon
no more dispute hereafter.

And that when the Confederation now to be done shall be concluded, according
to the earnest desire of the States General, the Friendship between both States
and their Subjects shall be more perfect, permanent, confident and inviolable;
and the truly Orthodox Religion, which they by Gods special favor do profess,
shall have a most potent and sure protection.

The said Ambassador having again propounded the aforesaid means, and having
added to them several Reasons and Arguments of great Strength, has desired to
be informed thereupon of the intent of the Honorable Council of State, offering
to answer and give satisfaction upon the remaining Difficulties.

Or otherwise, That it might please the Lords Commissioners to confer with him
upon that matter, or to propound on their part what they may find to be
reasonable and just to compose speedily that unhappy Accident, promising to
contribute of his side all that shall any ways be in his power, with his most
earnest Entreaties, That the Honorable Council might be without delay
acquainted withal, and that the time and present Affairs might be so well
husbanded, that the Business might be compounded by convenient ways, and
without interruption of the public Peace and further exacerbation of the
Minds and Spirits of both Nations. All which the said Ambassador has
recommended and offered with much Affection to prevent all Provocations and
Inconvenients.

The Answer of the Council of State to the Summary of the Lord Adrian Pauw,
Extraordinary Ambassador of the States General of the United Provinces,
presented to the Council the 24/14 of this instant June.
WHat the thoughts and judgment of the Parliament have been concerning the
late Intentions of the Lords your Superiors, and the late Actings of your Fleet
within the very Roads of England; your Excellency has understood by the
Parliaments Answer given unto the three Papers of the Extraordinary Ambassadors
of your State before your Excellencies arrival here; which Answer, together
with the state of the Fact, and the Examinations thereupon had, and then given
in, your Lordship takes notice of in your Papers now before the Council;
neither does any cause appear to vary from that Judgment upon any thing since
offered by your Excellency. And since the Attempt made by the Fleet of the
United Provinces, with the Preparations thereunto (all projected and acted by
way of surprise and in a time of Treaty) had the same prevailed, would have
highly hazarded the safety of England. It cannot stand with reason, That this
Commonwealth after such a Warning and great Preservation (which they owe only
to God) should leave it self naked and exposed to the like danger for the
future, or suffer it self in a case so evident and notorious, under pretense of
more solemn Examinations, or from examples of other States which suit not with
this case, to be diverted from applying Remedies agreeable to the nature of
this evil. And therefore the Council cannot admit of what is propounded by your
Excellency, either as to the passing by what is done, or attending the way of
Examinations mentioned in your Papers, which to them seem needless, dilatory,
and impracticable.

Touching the overture of re-admitting the late Treaty begun by the other Lords
Ambassadors Extraordinary of your Nation, after so high a breach thereof, we
conceive it cannot be seasonable until the Wound now under Cure be througly
closed and healed.

And whereas your Excellency has thought fit frequently to assert the amicable
Mind and Intentions of the Lords your Superiors toward this Commonwealth, and
has given instances of some late Orders and Acts tending to the expression of
the same; specially concerning the Honor and Respect to be paid unto this
Commonwealth at Sea (being the ancient and undoubted Right of this Nation) and
granting of the Protection desired by the English Merchants now at Rotterdam:
The Parliament has not been wanting on their part from time to time to
manifest their desires of Amity with the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
nor to afford unto the people thereof residing here all necessary Protection
though undesired; Nevertheless, in the present posture of Affairs it cannot
reasonably be expected, That this State should forbear the prosecution
mentioned in the Parliaments said Answer for the ends therein expressed.

White Hall, 19. June, 1652.
A Translate of a Paper of the Lord Ambassador Pauw of the 1/22 July June,
desiring a Conference with the Commissioners of the Council of State.
To the Right Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces, having 29th / 19th of
this instant about the Evening, received by the hands of Sir Oliver Fleming the
Answer which the Honorable Council of State has been pleased to give him, upon
the Summary of those things by him propounded the 24th / 14th, He finds
himself bound to Demand most instantly another Conference with the Lords
Commissioners of the Council, that he may explain unto them more particularly
and more fully his Superiors Intentions, and the better perform the Duty of his
Office.

Another Paper of the Lord Pauw of the 21th of June, 1652.
To the Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces having the 29th / 19th of
June in the Evening something late, received by the hands of Sir Oliver
Fleming, the Answer which the Honorable Counsel has been pleased to give him
upon the Summary of the things propounded the 24th / 14th of the same Month.

He has thought himself bound for the better performance of the Duty of his
Employment, to assert again here ingeniously as he has done before, according
to the Notice and Knowledge he has of the most intimate Deliberations and
Consultations of the States General his Superiors, That they having no ways
propounded, deliberated nor resolved to give any Suspicion, or the least
occasion of Offense against the Fleet or Ships of this Commonwealth: He did
believe, That it would have been sufficient to take away all conceits of the
contrary; He has also truly represented the Accident happened between the two
Fleets by Dover or the Downs, as it came to the knowledge of his Superiors by
sincere Attestations of trusty and blameless Persons: And has, to avoid all
further Contestations, in stead of insisting upon those Proofs, opened a way by
which the true and infallible Knowledge of the same might have been found out,
and by that means the satisfaction done that could be lawfully pretended.

Therefore that mischance cannot be any ways imputed to his Superiors, who never
had the least thought, nor in any sort contributed toward the Infraction of
the Friendship, which has always been most dear to them, and less toward the
Interruption of the Treaty of Confederation; for the perfecting of which they
have had, and have still here their Extraordinary Ambassadors.

That may sufficiently appear by the firm and constant Resolution of his
Superiors, that have never been wlling to grant any Letters of Mart or Reprisal
upon the continual Complaints and reiterated Petitions, even the Importunities
of the Persons interessed in the ships taken, arrested and confiscated here,
for fear of giving any occasion of Discontent to this Commonwealth.

The same is clearly seen by the Protection granted to the English Company
settled at Rotterdam (though ex superabundanti, and they had no need of the
same) to express more specially their good Intentions, the which may be also
justified by all their actions; none of this State having yet to this present
received the least Damage, Offense or Injury for all the said Proceedings; even
our ships of War having rather suffered themselves to be brought into the Ports
of England, and there to be detained, then endeavored to defend themselves
against those whom they have always made account to be their good Friends, as
having never heard of any publication to the contrary.

And to make that Testimony of Friendship the more Authentical to this
Commonwealth, His Superiors have sent a second extraordinary Embassage, to
disabuse all those that might be pre-occupated or misinformed, and to help the
furthering and perfecting of the said Treaty.

But in case all those Overtures and means of Reconciliation be rejected, and
it be resolved here to make use of those ways, which in stead of asswaging
shall increase the evil, and which being against all Maxims of all States and
Commonwealths (who never give their Judgment upon Signs, Presumptions and
Suspicions, but upon Infallible and Unrepreachable proofs, and as clear as the
Sun is at noon, and who during a Treaty do always command most strictly a
cessation of all ways of Fact) shall the more surprise my Superiors, and cause
strange Alarms to their Peoples, by making those suffer which are guiltless and
come from far, who never had the least suspicion or heard the least rumor of a
falling out between both States.

Whereupon, the said Ambassadors must needs be very much surprised and sorry,
desiring, That the said Lords Commissioners be pleased (that no way for a happy
Agreement may be neglected) to propound for on their part some other expedients
(seeing they have expressed in their last Answer given to the other
Extraordinary Ambassadors, That the most sweet ways will be always the most
pleasing to them) which may be fit, satisfactory and convenient to compose as
soon as can be that unhappy Business, and restore all things in their first
temper.

And that in the mean time they be also pleased to inhibit all ways of Fact,
and to give Order, That the Ships detained may be speedily set at liberty,
praying very earnestly the Honorable Council to explain their mind thereupon,
as also to give an Answer upon the last Articles of the Paper exhibited the
27/17 of June, to make him the more able to contribute his best Offices for the
good and strengthening of the two Commonwealths.

This 21 June / 1 July 1652.
Another Paper of the Lord Pauw 23 June, 1652.
To the Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces considering the
importance of the Affairs now in hands, and the eminent dangers that threaten
both States, is forced to be importunate with your Honors, in recommending most
earnestly the care of your Answer upon his last Conference, and entreating you
with all his Affections, That the same may be a convenient and lawful means to
assway the Differences and restore the Union and perfect Intelligence between
both Commonwealths and their reciprocal Subjects.

This 23 June / 3 July 1562.
The Answer of the Parliament to that part of the Paper given in by the Lord
Pauw, whereby he desires the Commissioners of the Council to propound what they
shall think reasonable and just to compose speedily the present Differences
between this Commonwealth and the Lords the States General of the United
Provinces.
Friday the 25th of June, 1652.
THat the Lords the States General of the United Provinces do pay and satisfy
unto this Commonwealth the Charges and Damages this State has sustained and
been put unto, by the Preparations of the said States General, and their
Attempts this summer; the Particulars whereof shall be in due time produced.

II. That upon the Payment of the Sum to be agreed up on as aforesaid, for
Charges and Damages, or securing the same to the satisfaction of the
Parliament, there shall follow immediately thereupon a Cessation of all Acts of
Hostilility, and the Ships and Goods taken since the late Differences shall be
released.

III. The two former Propositions being assented unto, and put in Execution,
the security for the time to come, which the Parliament does expect, is by both
States contracting a firm Alliance, and Consistency of Interest for the good of
both; which the Parliament of England is willing on their part by all just Ways
and Means to endeavor.

Friday 25o Junii, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
Ordered,

THat the Commissioners appointed formerly to meet and Treat with the Lord
Pauw, Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces, Do deliver unto the
said Lord Ambassador the Answer of the Parliament of the 25th of June instant,
to that part of the Paper presented unto them by the Council, from the said
Lord Pauw, whereby his Lordship does desire the Commissioners of the Council to
propound what they should think reasonable and just, to compose speedily the
present Differences between this Commonwealth and the Lords the States General
of the United Provinces.

Ex: Jo: Thurloe, Clerk of the Council.

A Paper of the Lord Pauw, 26 June, 2652.
To the Right Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces, having yesterday had a
Conference with the Lords Commissioners of the Counsel, and received from them
two Papers upon the same Subject; He desires earnestly they will be pleased to
give again order without loss of time, for a new Conference with the said Lords
Commissioners, that some things may be better explained and cleared of both
sides, and a speedy Composure made of the Business.

This 26 June / 6 July 1652.
Another Paper of the Lord Pauw, the same day.
To the Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces has propounded at a
Conference held the 26 of June / 6 of July 1652 with the Lords Commissioners of
the Council of State the following Articles.

That the States General having been forced for the Reasons already alleged,
to make extraordinary Preparations at Sea, have been put to exceeding great
Charges, which do continue yet at this present.

That their Subjects, beside the extreme great Losses they have had heretofore
at Sea, have received very great ones by the Letters of Mart granted as well
against the French as against the said Subjects of the United Provinces, and
upon some other pretenses.

That the State and their subjects have suffered much, and received great
Damages of late by the taking and spoiling of several Ships of War, and by the
Arresting of all the Merchants ships.

And that if it should be thought of a Reimbursing of the charges and damages,
they should be weighed of both sides one against the other, and that it should
be considered, whether they have not been greater on the United Provinces side.

However there must a reasonable Estimation be made, and the Business not
referred to aproduction of Accounts, which requires a long Examination.

And if the said Commissioners be pleased to cause that Estimation to be made
in moderate Terms on their part, it will appear from thenee whether there is at
this side any willingness or intent to Compound the things passed according to
reason and friendly, or whether there is a Design to propound things impossible
and unfeasible.

As concerning the Confederacy between both Commonwealths, and the mutual Help
assisting one another against those that shall offend or assault them, the
other Extraordinary Ambassadors have made the true Intentions of their
Superiors known thereupon, and are ready to go on in the same Negotiation, and
to bring it to an end without loss of time.

If the said Lords Commissioners do think fit that the said Confederacy should
be more ample and more strict, that will not only be more pleasing to the said
Ambassador, but he also entreats very earnestly, that he may be clearly
informed thereupon.

Putting at the same time into consideration, whether it will not be most
convenient, even most necessary to give order, That the Fleets do not come near
nor engage any more one with the other; the said Ambassador fearing much it
should soon be commanded otherways at the other side, chiefly if the abovesaid
Order be not speedily given here.

And desiring moreover, That the Ships which are arrested may be speedily
released, and that no Prize may be longer detained, to the end that the Minds
being something pacified, they may be rather invited by mutual Friendship and
Love, and of their own accord, then brought by constraint to unite again by an
undissoluble Confederacy.

As also, That the said Ambassador may receive upon these so speedy and so
favorable a Declaration, that he may with more hope of success use his
Endeavors with his Superiors, and effect what in this conjuncture of time and
Affairs, is most expedient and necessary, and that he may do it without delay,
according to the Express Order he has from his said Superiors, which he is
bound to follow exactly.

The Council of State having considered of the Paper this evening delivered in
by their Commissioners from the Lord Pauw Extraordinary Ambassador of the Lords
the States General of the United Provinces, and finding therein no clear or
direct Answer to the last Paper of Demands tendered unto his Excellency in the
name of the Parliament, They do desire a speedy and positive Answer thereunto,
at least unto the first Article thereof, especially, because that being
assented unto, the Council might speedily apply themselves to a reasonable and
moderate ascertaining the sum; to the end, That immediately upon performance of
the second Article, all acts of Hostility might be forborne, and restitution
made of the Ships and Goods detained. The third Article in the nature thereof
not requiring so present a Transaction.

White Hall, 26. June, 1652. Ex: Jo: Thurloe Clerk of the Council.

A Paper from the Lord Pauw the 17th of June, 1652.
To the thrice Illustrious Council of State;
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces having considered the
Answer delivered unto him yesterday at evening by Sir Oliver Fleming upon the
Considerations heretofore by him propounded, does most instantly crave, That it
may please this thrice Illustrious Council of State to grant him one other
Conference this afternoon, that he may more particularly deduct the Intentions
of his Superiors, and withal likewise satisfy both their Excellencies and his
own duties.

Signed, Adrian Pauw.
This 27 June / 7 July 1652.
Another Paper of the Lord Pauw, 27th June, 1652.
To the Right Honorable, The Council of State.
WHile the Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces was busied about
the writing of the Answer upon the Paper delivered to him yesterday very late
by Sir Oliver Fleming from this Honorable Council, he was to his great grief
informed, That this Commonwealths Fleet was gone to Sea to execute some design.

The said Ambassador has also by several Letters received Order from his
Superiors, That in case he could not obtain, by all possible endeavors, the
Cessation of acts of Hostility, he should with all speed return back again into
the Low Countries to acquaint them with his Negotiation.

And as the said Ambassador can advance no further in the said Negotiation of
which he was charged to give an Account to his said Superiors with all speed,
he therefore desires to be admitted to morrow to take his leave of this
Honorable Council, to go over as soon as can be in the ship of War whereof John
Verhaef is Captain, who was commanded to bring him hither and back again; and
that he may have a Letter or a Pass of the Honorable Counsel, to be transported
over without any hinderance or trouble, and without being molested or arrested
by the Parliaments Ships.

The other Extraordinary Ambassadors having in the mean time informed and
showed him that they had received the like Order and Command, have entreated
him to demand in their name, That they may also at the same time to morrow have
Audience to take their leave of this Honorable Council; as also be provided of
such Ships as they shall have need of for the Transport of their Persons, Train
and Baggage; as also with such Passes as shall be necessary for the security of
their Passage.

The said Ambassador desires, That he may receive a speedy Answer upon these,
being a thing of very great Importance.

27th June, 1652. At the Council of State at White Hall.
UPon Consideration of the Report made of the Paper delivered in to the
Commissioners this evening by the Lord Pauw, Extraordinary Ambassador from the
United Provinces, The Council hold themselves obliged to represent the same to
the Parliament, which they shall do upon Tuesday morning at their first siting,
and in the mean time can give no other Answer to the said Lord ambassador upon
this subject.

Ex: Jo: Thurloe Clerk of the Council.

A Paper of the Lord Pauw of the 28th June, 1652.
To the Right Honorable Council of State.
THe Extraordinary Ambassador of the United Provinces having seen the Answer of
the Honorable Council given upon his Proposition made yesterday, has thought
fit to Declare again, That his Intention is to do his best when he shall be
arrived in his Country, That upon the Overtures made to him, or can be yet
made, there may be such convenient means and fit expedients found, chiefly to
make all misapprehensions and alienations of minds, as well as all Acts of
Hostility cease; That a fair Agreement upon the Business passed, and
consequently a firm Union and Confederacy between both States, as also a good
settlement between both Nations may ensue, from which their own Prosperity and
Happiness may flow, and all Inconveniences be prevented for the future.

And as his Resolution is godly, Honest; and if it succeeds, most conducing
to the common safety; as also, that it must be speedily, and before things
proceed further, put in execution.

The said Ambassador desires, That it may please to the Honorable Council to
weigh all these, and to Order, That all may be done that may be for that
purpose, toward the promoting of the same.

And as the time is most precious, it will be very necessary, That he may
speedily be admitted to his Audiences; as also, he may soon have the fit
Expeditions concerning the Ship that brought him, and stays for his return at
Gravesend, to bring him back again into the Low Countries, with the Pass he
has demanded for his security, and to avoid all misfortunes that might meet
him at Sea.

The said Ambassador does wholly persuade himself, that the Honorable Council
will be pleased to give Order, That in consideration of his Quality, he be used
in the same manner at his departure and taking of his leave, as he has been at
his coming and reception, for which favor he thanketh the Honorable Council
most kindly.

Another Paper of the same Date.
To the Right Honorable Council of State.
THe Extrordinary Ambassador has thought fit to propound here, whether this
Honorable Council could not approve, That after his Report made to the Lords
the States General his Secretary, or some other faithful person, should be sent
to maintain and foment the mutual Correspondence, and deliver as well as
receive from both States, what may serve to the compounding of things passed,
and to the re-establishing of the Union and Confederacy.

And whether to this end the Honorable Council would be pleased to command such
Passes to be granted, by virtue of which, he might freely and safely come back
and stay here, as long as the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, or the
Lords States General may find it convenient.

Or otherwise, That it may please to the Honorable Council to name or denote
here, some body that be agreeable to them, and fit to receive the Letters that
might be written upon that subject, and to solicit the Answers thereunto.

A Paper of the three Ambassadors, dated 28 June, 1652.
To the Council of State of the Commonwealth of England.
WHereas we the Ambassadors of the Lords States of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries, by their last Letters have received Order, without any delay, to
make haste again to our Country, and there to give an account of what we have
here done; We therefore do earnestly pray this Senate to suffer us, that we
take, as it befits us, leave of this most Illustrious Assembly, and may have
ships that may conveniently serve for our own Transportation, and for that of
our Train and Goods; and besides, That such safe Conducts or Passes be granted
us that may make our Journey safe. Here are some of our ships ready, viz.
Captain Jaep den Boer, with three smaller Vessels of the City of Dort.

Signed, I: Cats. G: Schaep. Vandeperre.

The Lord Pauw's Speech in Parliament, at his taking leave, 30. June, 1652.
Right Honorable,
THe States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, have first
sent their Extraordinary Ambassadors to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, to do their earnest endeavors for the strengthening and confirming of
the ancient Amity and Friendship between both Nations, and for the Establishing
of an everlasting Alliance between both States, and to bring those things to a
happy conclusion for the common Utility and Security; and afterward the Lord
William Newport, a Member of the States of Holland and West Friezland, to take
away some Doubts, and to witness more fully of the good Intentions of our
Superiors concerning the Treaty of Confederacy.

At last it has pleased the said Lords States to prepare, some few days ago, a
new Extraordinary Embassage to the said Parliament, and to give me that
Employment, with an express Command to bear again over and above, witness of
their faithful dealing, and of their most sincere intention toward this
Commonwealth; and to dissolve and remove all the strange and unthought of
accidents, and all the stoppings and hindrances thereby caused and opposed to
their good intent; by which means, I might by all my endeavors promote to a
happy Conclusion, the Treaty of Alliance already begun.

To what end it has been propounded amongst other things, That there should be
an Enquiry and Examination made by fit persons of both Commonwealths, of all
what lately passed as was done between the two Fleets without any Design, but
by mere chance, and a just and lawful Satisfaction stated: For we do witness
and protest before God and all the Christian world, as well as in the presence
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, That the States have not had
the least mind of Offending or Troubling this Commonwealth, much less of
committing any Hostility against them; but rather that they have had nothing
more in their hearts then to Entertain and Maintain with this State all true
Friendship and firm Peace; even to come to a stricter Union and Confederacy
with them.

But as it has unhappily happened, That after extraordinary Pains taken, and
all the best Endeavors done of all sides to conserve the common Quiet, and
remove all hindrances, both Embassages have not only missed their Ends, but
that to the contrary, not only great Troubles have been given, extraordinary
Losses have been caused, but huge Dangers; as also Acts of Hostility not looked
for, neither at any time before declared, are threatened from the English Fleet
to the States of the United Provinces.

Both Embassage has thought fit to prevent the ensuing Evils, and upon a
Business so unusual, to return into their own Country to give an Account of
their Negotiation to their Superiors, and to be acquainted with their further
Commands.

To that end we do present our selves together to the Supreme Authority of this
Commonwealth, declare, That we have a Command to return back, and that we are
ready to rake our Journey.

We have given notice to the Honorable Council of State of this Commonwealth,
of those things that are necessary to us for our Transport, according to our
Quality and the season, and do look and wait for an Answerthereupon, hoping
that the necessary Expecitions shall be done.

In the mean time we cannot be wanting to our Duty; but are forced again to
desire most earnestly; That all our ships that have been brought into the Ports
of England, and there detained of late against our thoughts, and before any
Declaration of Hostility issued our, and whereof the Commanders are unawares
and guiltless, having not given the least, nor to no body occasion of Dispute;
may be relcased and suffered to go freely, with their officers, mariners,
merchandises, packs and loads, and the whole company, and to perform their
Journcy without any Wrong or Injury; which we do pretend to be due to our old
Friendship, to the Right of Nations, and have been observed between Christian
Peoples, as well as we hope to have it granted by the Justice and Equity of
this Great and most Honorable Assembly.

Furthermore, We do entreat with all our hearts the great God of Heavens, who
is the Author and Promoter of Peace and Concordance, That he will be pleased to
afford such thought and counsel to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, as may tend to the mutual Peace of both States, to the conservation of
the Christian Reformed and Orthodox Religion, which has no better Foundations
then upon Peace, and can never better thrive and flourish then by Peace, and
will without any doubt be afflicted and destroyed by our Troubles and falling
out; As also that be will in his Mercy prevent the Destructions and Miseries of
Wars, and bestow abundantly his Heavenly Blessings upon both Commonwealths; We
shall end upon these Wishes. And being commanded to Repair in haste into our
country, we shall with all thankful Acknowledgement for all Favors done to us,
as well as with all due Respects, take our leave of this most Honorable and
Supreme Assembly of the Commonwealth of England, with confidence that they will
not deny us those things which we have already expressed, and are granted every
where to the Ambassadors for their quality and security.

Pronounced and delivered to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, the
30. June / 20. July 1652 by the Extraordinary Ambassadors of the States General
of the United Provinces.

We do besides deliver a Petition put into our hands by the Dutch Merchants,
Desiring they may enjoy the same Security and Protection which has been lately
granted in the best Form to the English Merchants in our Provinces.

We desire also at last, That besides the two Dutch Men of War, there should be
another of those that are in the Downs granted to us for our Passage, seeing we
are a very great Company, wherein are some Women of Quality, with much
Carriage, which will put us to great Inconveniences, besides the heat of this
season, except we be fitted with the said shin.

FINIS.

