Die Martis 5 Octobris. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Committees of both Houses of Parliament
appointed to sit during the Recesse, That good and strong Watches shall be set
in all the high ways within twenty miles of London, and in all Villages upon
or near thereunto, that notice be taken of all loose and disorderly people
which do keep in the said high ways, or lodge in any of the said Villages,
that thereupon they may be apprehended, and sent to their several dwellings,
whereof the Justices of Peace for the Cities of London and Westminster, and of
the several Counties of Middlesex, Surrey, Essex, Kent, Hertfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire, are desired to take special care, and that it
be published by beating of a Drum in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
in the Suburbs of the same, that all the Officers and Soldiers of the late
disbanded Army, and all others which cannot give a good account of the cause
of their stay thereabouts, shall be commanded forthwith to leave the said City
and places adjoining, and to repair to their own home, upon pain of such
Imprisonment and other punishments as by the Laws and Statutes of the Land are
to be inflicted upon such offenders.

And that all such as do voluntarily desire to pass beyond the Seas in their
own persons, shall repair to the Custom house, where Order is taken that they
may have Passes delivered unto them.

And all Inn keepers, Alehouse keepers, and others his Majesty's Subjects, are
required to receive or harbor none in their Houses, but such as they know and
will answer for: And if any other resort unto them that are suspicious persons,
they shall forthwith give notice to the next Constable, that so they may be
apprehended and carried before the next Justices of Peace, to be examined and
disposed of as is formerly directed.

It is further Ordered, That no person whatsoever upon pretense of His
Majesty's Service, shall be exempted from the Watches and Wards appointed by
this Order, but only for his own person, and is to find another to serve in
his place at his own charge, according to former presidents.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641


