Die Sabbathi 24 Iulii 1647.
THe Lords and Commons having seen a printed Paper entitled, A Petition to
the Lord Mayer, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in the Guild Hall
assembled, under the name of diverse Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and
Soldiers of the Trained Bands, Auxiliaries, and others, young men and
Apprentices, Sea-Commanders; Seamen, and Watermen, together with a dangerous
engagement of the same persons by Oath and Vow concerning the Kings present
coming to the Parliament upon terms far different from those which both
Houses after mature deliberation, have declared to be necessary for the good
and safety of this Kingdom, casting reflections upon the proceedings both of
the Parliament and Army, and tending to the imbroiling the Kingdom in a new
War: And the said Lords and Commons taking notice of great Endeavors used by
diverse ill-affected persons to procure Subscriptions thereunto, whereby well
meaning people may be mis-lead, do therefore declare, That whosoever after
publication or notice hereof shall proceed in, or promote or set his name to,
or give consent that his name be set unto, or any way join in the said
Engagement, shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of high Treason, and shall
forfeit life and estate, as in cases of high Treason accustomed.

ORdered that this Declaration be published forthwith by Order of the Lord
Mayor, Sheriffs, and Committee of the Militia by beat of Drum and sound of
Trumpet in the Cities of London, Westminster, and within the Lines of
Communication.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1647.


