Veneris Vicesimo sexto Augusti, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
for the more speedy and effectual provision of sufficient Treasure to be
employed in quenching this unnatural War now kindled in the heart of this
Kingdom, by Papists, Persons Popishly affected, Traitors, and Delinquents about
His Majesty, That the several Persons here under-named, or any three, or more
of them, do forthwith repair unto the several Houses or Places of abode of all
the Inhabitants, as well Freemen, as other Resiants or Inhabitants within the
(...) which they, or any three, or more of them shall think fit, to be repaired
unto; And in the name of both Houses of Parliament do give hearty thanks to so
many of them as have already contributed by way of Loan, or Gift, any Money,
Plate, Horse, or Arms, according to the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament, heretofore published in that behalf, Assuring all and every of
them, that the said Houses are very sensible of their alacrity and duty
therein, And do resolve to be as careful of their safety and welfare, as of
their own, and to live and dye with them in this cause: And likewise, that the
said persons here under-named, or any three, or more of them do acquaint, not
only those, but especially the rest of the said Inhabitants who have not yet
contributed with the necessity of subscriptions for Plate, and Money, still
pressing, and accordingly desire, and stir up them, and every of them to
under-write in a Book provided for that purpose (and wherein their names shall
be Registered, whether they under-write or no) such sums of Money and Plate as
may testify their real and full performance of their late Protestation, and
sacred Vow to Almighty God, and of their readiness to join with the rest of
the well affected Subjects of the Kingdom; and us the Lords and Commons, who
are resolved to pursue this work with our Lives, Persons, and Estates, for
their preservation as well as for our own. And because the success of this
necessary design, depends much upon the speedy dispatch thereof: It is
therefore further desired, that all such Persons as shall hereupon subscribe as
aforesaid, be desired by the parties employed to take their subscriptions,
instantly to bring in one third part of the said Money or Plate subscribed by
each of them respectively to the Treasurers for Money or Plate formerly
appointed in the Guild Hall London, who shall thereupon give Receipts for the
same in manner and form already Ordered and used* And that the second third
part of their said Subscriptions be likewise brought in to the Persons and
Place aforesaid at the end of one Month next after their Subscriptions; And
the last payment at the end of the second Month next after their said
Subscriptions. For all which, both Houses of Parliament do hereby engage the
Public Faith of the Kingdom, that they shall be repayed, with 8. li. per
Centum allowance for the same, according to the said former Propositions. And
because the Lords and Commons are very sensible of the good affections of the
Citizens of London, their great service to the Public, and readiness to
supply the occasions of Parliament: As also, considering their great and
extraordinary charge now to be exspended in raising two Regiments more of Foot,
and four Troops of Horse, during these times of trouble and imminent danger;
together with other necessary provisions for the defense and safety of the
City: For the encouragement of the said Citizens, and others, liberally to
subscribe to lend Money and Plate upon the Propositions, besides what they have
done already; It is further Ordered, That the Treasurers appointed to receive
the Money and Plate to be subscribed as aforesaid, shall out of the same pay
unto Tho: Adams, Alderman of the said City, and Treasurer, appointed for this
purpose, the sum of Twenty five thousand pounds, toward the great and
extraordinary charges the said City shall be at for the Reasons aforesaid, viz.
One third part thereof to be paid out of the first payment that shall be made by
the said subscribers; One other third part at their second payment; And the
other third part at the third payment, which the said Subscribers shall make to
the Treasurers aforesaid.


