royal blazon or coat of arms CR


A PROCLAMATION Concerning the Payment of the Watch-Money by the Citizens of
Edinbrugh.
FORASMUCH, as the Magistrates and Council of Edinburgh, for the Ease and
Convenience of the Neighbors and Inhabitants of this City, has raised an
Company of Foot Souldiers' by virtue of a Commission from the Kings most Sacred
Majesty for Guarding thereof, and which Company is now actually upon Duty; And
seeing in order to their Payment, there has been great pains and care taken by
them to make a List of the whole Inhabitants liable to Watching: and a certain
small Sum weekly to be paid by the persons contained in the said List, which
are now put in the hands of the Constables, to be Collected by them within
their respective Bounds; and whereupon, there is an Act of the Town Council
made, the twelfth day of July last by past, which is likewise approven by the
Kings Majesty. And the sa^d Magistrates and Council considering, That the said
Soldiers has been some time upon Service, and that it will take likewayes
sometime for the Constables to Ingather and Collect the said Watch-mony, and to
the effect that the Inhabitants liable in paym^nt thereof, may have timeous
warning to pay in to the said Constables their respective Proportions.
Therefore, the said Magistrates, did ordain, one of the Officers of the said
Town of Edinburgh To command and charge, in Our Sovereign Lords Name, and in
name and behalf of the Lord Provost, Baliffs, and Council of this Burgh, that
each of the Inhabitants and Neighbors within the same, contained in the
respective Lists, whereof, the Constables has an Authentic double subscribed
by the Magistrates, that they pay in to the respective Constables within their
Bounds, a Months Watch-silver, which begins from the 24th of August last, (upon
which day the said Company entered upon Duty) and that at, or before the
seventh day of September Instant, and Monthly thereafter in time coming upon
the first lawful day of each Month: Certifying all such persons whose Names are
contained in the said Lists, and who do not make punctual payment of their
respective Proportions, and that Monthly, as said is, that they shall be
poinded to the double value of their said Months Proportion; Declaring, that
the Poinds taken for payment of the said Watch-mony, shall not be restored
unless Redeemed upon Payment the very next day after the poinding: As likewise,
with Certification, that those persons who shall be refractory in payment of
their said Watch-mony, that they shall be looked upon and holden as Contemners
of Authority, and accordingly shall be punished in their persons. And to the
effect the Constables may attend carefully upon their Duty in receiving of the
said Watch-mony, they are hereby discharged from going forth of this Bu^gh
unless they lay down some solid Way for Payment in their absen^e, of the
Proportions of Watch-mony payable by the Inhabitan^s within their respective
Bounds: Certifying the said Constables who do in the contrair, that their
Houses shall be poinded to the double value of the Watch-mony contained in
their Lists. And ordains this present Proclamation to be Intimat at the Market
Cross of this City by sound of Trumpet, and the samine to be printed, that none
may pretend Ignorance

Given at Edinburgh, September 1st. 1632. I. R.
God save the King.
Edinburgh Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1682.


