INSTRUCTIONS Agreed upon in PARLIAMENT FOR COMMISSIONERS, For Surveying the
Forest of Sherwood; The Forest, or Chase of Needwood; The Forest, or Chase of
Kingswood; The Forest, or Chase of Ashdown, or Lancaster great Park; and
Endfield Chase.

In pursuance of an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act and
Declaration, touching several Acts and Ordinances made since the twentieth of
April 1653. and before the third of September 1654. and other Acts, etc.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.

Instructions, agreed upon in Parliament, for Joseph Ayloffe, Thomas Skipwith,
Jeremy Baynes, Adam Air, Esqs James Robinson, and William Mar, Gent.
Commissioners for Surveying the Forest of Sherwood: Robert Franck, John Kensey,
Thomas Watts, Esqs and George Sargeant Gent. Commissioners for Surveying the
Forest, or Chase of Needwood: James Stedman, Robert Tailor, Thomas Tanner, Esqs
and John Halsey, Gent. Commissioners for Surveying the Forest, or Chase of
Kingswood: Henry Dewell, William Dawges, Joseph Gamage, Esqs Richard Johnson,
Gent. Commissioners for Surveying the Forest, or Chase of Ashdowne, or
Lancaster great Park: John Baynton, Hugh Webb, Esqs Major Rolph, and Nicholas
Gunton, Gent. Commissioners for Surveying Endfield Chase, in pursuance of an
Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act and Declaration, touching
several Acts and Ordinances made since the twentieth of April 1653. and before
the third of September 1654. and other Acts, etc.
I.YOu, or any three or more of you, Surveyors for each Forest or Chase, are
forthwith to repair to the said Forest and Premises, for which you are
Commissioners, and by all lawful ways and means, to inform your selves of the
Perambulations, and other Metes and Bounds thereof, as the same was settled by
Act of Parliament, in the seventeenth year of the late King Charles; and
thereupon Survey the same. And in your Surveys, you are distinctly to express
how much is open and common waste ground, how much thereof is the proper soil
of the Commonwealth, and by whom the residue thereof is claimed, and to set out
by Metes and Bounds, that proportion of waste, the soil whereof is the
Commonwealths.

II. You are to enquire and inform your selves, and in your Surveys distinctly
to express, what person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, Parish, or
Hamlet, do claim any common Herbage, or Pawnage, Turbary, or Estovers, within
any the Premises, whether the same be claimed in right, or because of
Vicinage, or whether the said Commons be stinted or without number.

III. You are to examine and inform your selves, what Cottages have been
Erected, contrary to the Laws in Force, upon the said soil of the
Commonwealth, and by whom, and by what pretense the same have been Erected,
what Rents or Services they pay, or ought to pay, and certify, which and how
many of them you judge fit to continue or be demolished.

IV. You are to Survey any part of the Premises, which are holden in several,
and to which any person or persons, who hold the same, do make claim, from and
after such time and times, as the same shall by disallowance of the claim be
determined to belong to the Commonwealth, or for which no claim is made, or
shall be made before the Twentieth day of July next ensuing; as also to
certify the same, as so much belonging to the Commonwealth, either as the
ancient right thereof, or by reason of not making due claim thereunto.

V. You are to put in writing, upon the door of the Public Meeting Place,
Commonly called the Church or Chapel, in every Town or Parish, within the said
Forests or Chases, and in every Market Town, within, or adjacent to the Bounds
and Limits of the same, at what time and place you appoint to receive and
proceed in the Examination of the said claims of all persons, Bodies Politic
or Corporate, Parish and Hamblet.

VI. You, or any three, or more of you, Commissioners for surveying of Sherwood
Forest, together with any two only of the persons hereafter named on the
behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and other persons concerned therein,
(that is to say) Jervas Piggot, Charles White, William Cartwright, Robert
Butler, and John Hacker, Esqs and Thomas Bristow Gent. You, any three or more
of you the. Commissioners for the Survey of the Forest or Chase of Needwood,
together with any two only of the persons hereafter named on the behalf of the
Proprietors, Commoners, and other persons concerned therein; that is to say,
William Whitby, Zachary Babbington, Thomas Pudsie, Henry Stone of Wanson, and
Daniel Watson, Esqs you, any three or more of you the Commissioners for
Kings-wood Forest, together with two only of the persons hereafter named on
the behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and other persons concerned therein;
that is to say, Thomas Hodges, Nehemiah Collings, Samuel Codrington and George
Reymond, William Grig, and Adam Bainham, Esqs you, any three or more of you,
the Commissioners for Ashdown Forest or Chase, or Lancaster great Park,
together with any two only of the persons hereafter named, on the behalf of
the Proprietors, Commoners, and other persons concerned therein; that is to
say, Anthony Shurley, Anthony Stapelly, William Freeman, Richard Boughton, and
Thomas Jenner, Esqs you, any three, or more of you the Commissioners for
Endfield Chase, together with any two only of the persons hereafter named on
the behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and other persons concerned therein;
that is to say, Sir Richard Lucy Knight, John Barns, Paul Nichol, Mr. Wilford
of Hadley, and Henry Marsh of Shely, Esqs are to examine all the Claims already
made and to be made as aforesaid, of every or any person or persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, or Inhabitants claiming any Mannours, Lands, Tenements,
Common of Pasture, Estovers, Herbage, Pasturage, Turbary, Profits, Rights,
Advantages, Apprendre, Liberties, and Franchises within the said Forests or
Chases respectively, and the Evidences and Proofs touching the same; and for
that end have hereby power to send for and examine Witnesses upon Oath touching
the same; and in matters of Fact appearing doubtful, to any two of the said
Jarvas Piggot, Charles White, William Cartwright, Robert Butler, John Hacker and
Thomas Bristow, for the Forest of Sherwood; to any two of the said William
Whitby, Zachary Babbington, Thomas Pudsey, Henry Stone, and Daniel Watson, for
the Forest of Needwood; to any two of the said Thomas Hodges, Nehemiah
Collings, Samuel Codrington, and George Reymond, William Grig, and Adam
Bainham, for the Forest of Kings-wood; to any two of the said Anthony Sherley,
Anthony Stapelley, William Freeman, Richard Boughton, and Thomas Jenner, for
the Forest of Ashdown and Lancaster great Park; to any two of the said Sir
Richard Lucy, John Barns, Paul Nichol, Mr. Wilford, and Henry Marsh for
Endfield Chase: the Trial of the Fact shall be by consent of you, or any three
of you Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase by an indifferent
Jury. And to the end indifferent Iuries shall and may be returned for trial of
such matters in Fact; you, or any three, or more of you, Commissioners for each
respective Forest or Chase, together with any two of the persons aforesaid,
nominated and appointed on the behalf of the Proprietors and Commoners, and of
all other persons concerned in each respective Forest or Chase, are hereby
required to select out of the Freeholders Book in each respective County
wherein any of the said Forest or Chases shall lie, threescore persons good and
lawful men living out of the Bounds of the said Forests or Chases, and
uninteressed in the same, and to certify their Names unto the High Sheriff of
each respective County, and upon the desire of any three or more of you the
Surveyors of the respective Forest and Chase, the said Sheriffs respectively
are hereby required from time to time to summon and return a Jury out of the
said threescore persons, for the trial of all, every, or any such matters in
fact, and the persons so to be summoned and returned, are hereby required to
make their appearances, and serve as Jurors accordingly, unto which Jurors,
you, or any three of you, have hereby power to administer an Oath respectively,
and to charge them to inquire of the truth of the matter in Fact in that
behalf: and in case any matter of Fact shall be held fit by any two of the
persons nominated on behalf of the Proprietors and Commoners in each respective
Forest or Chase, to be tried by Jury, shall not be consented unto by you the
Commissioners, or any three of you, for each respective Forest or Chase, then
the state of the Case to be certified to the Committee of Appeal, appointed by
Parliament, hereafter mentioned, who are to give order touching the same, as to
them, or any four of them shall seem fit. And in case you the several
Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase, shall have any reasonable
cause to except against any Verdict given by any Jury, you, or any three of
you, for each respective Forest or Chase, are to certify your Exceptions to
the same Verdict, to the said Committee of Appeal, who shall take such order
therein as shall be just and equal.

VII. You or any three or more of you Commissioners for each respective Forest
or Chase, together with any two of the aforesaid persons appointed on the
behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and persons concerned therein, are to
allow unto all and every person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, Parish
or Hamblet, their Successors, Heirs, Executors and Administrators, other then
the late King, Queen or Prince, or any of their heirs, and all claiming, by,
from or under them or any of them to their use, and interest or use, for them
the late King, Queen and their heirs, concerning only such trust or use for
them or any of them, and so much of the premises as is liable to such use and
trust, All Right, Title, Interest, Right in Law and Equity, Annuities,
Commodities, Fees, Franchises and other Profits, which they, or any of them now
have or ought to have enjoyed, or had Right or Title unto, in or to any the
said Claimed Premises, before the Twenty fifth day of March, One thousand six
hundred forty one, other then by virtue, or in right of ye Custody of the said
Forest or Chase, or any Office belonging to the same, the exercise whereof is
now ceased, or which by Deafforestation of the said Forest shall cease and
determine; And in case you, or any three or more of you Commissiners for each
respective Forest or Chase, together with any two of the aforesaid persons
appointed on the behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and persons concerned
therein, shall not agree to allow or disalow any Claim, the same shall be
certified, together with the respective reasons touching the same, to the
Committee of Appeal hereafter mentioned.

VIII. In examining and alowing the said Claims, you are not to stand upon
forms, or any improper wording of Claims, or upon the Claiming any things
inconsistent one with another, but to make alowance according to the right
which shall appear upon Evidence, or be found by Jury as aforesaid.

IX. You, or any three or more of you, Commissioners for each respective Forest
or Chase, together with any two of the aforesaid persons appointed on the
behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and persons concerned therein, are to set
forth such competent proportion out of the open and common waste ground,
wherein Interest or Profit, or Franchises, or other things shall be claimed and
allowed, as aforesaid, and of the Wood thereupon growing, as you or any three or
more of you Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase, together with
any two of the aforesaid persons appointed on the behalf of the Proprietors,
Commoners, and persons concerned therein, shall judge to be a competent
satisfaction for and in respect of the respective Interests, Profits,
Franchises, or other things claimed and allowed as aforesaid, and reserve the
residue for the Commonwealth; distinguishing by certain Marks and Bounds, the
parts see out for the Commonwealth, ye Lords of the Soil, and the Commoners,
and ascertaining by what person, and in what time and manner the same shall be
separated and fenced; And in case you or any three or more of you Commissioners
for each respective Forest or Chase, together with any two of the aforesaid
Persons appointed on the behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and Persons
concerned, shall not agree therein, then you or any three or more of you
Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase, together with any two of the
aforesaid Persons appointed on the behalf of the Proprietors, Commoners, and
Persons concerned therein, shall either jointly or severally certify your
proceedings therein, and the Causes and Reasons thereof unto the said Committee
of Appeal, who upon consideration thereof, and hearing what can be said on both
Parties, shall settle and determine the same, as to them or any four of them
shall seem just and reasonable.

X. You or any three or more of you Commissioners for each respective Forest or
Chase, together with any two of the aforesaid Persons appointed on the behalf
of the Proprietors, Commoners, and Persons concerned therein, are to consider
what Lands and Tenements held in several other then what is the Commonwealths,
ought to yield Composition for the Deafforestation thereof, and what ought to
be free from Composition, and ascertain the same; and thereupon to set out of
the said open and common Waste such proportion for Composition, or such other
Composition, as the Equity of the Case shall require, and as to you or any
three or more of you Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase,
together with any two of the aforesaid Persons appointed on the behalf of the
Proprietors, Commoners, and Persons concerned therein, shall seem reasonable
for, and in respect of the the Deafforestation thereof; And in case you or any
three or more of you, Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase,
together with any two of the aforesaid Persons appointed on the behalf of the
Proprietors, Commoners, and Persons concerned therein shall not agree, then you
or any three or more of you Commissioners for each respective Forest or Chase,
together with any two of the aforesaid persons appointed on ye behalf of the
Proprietors, Commoners, and Persons concerned, shall jointly or severally
certify your proceedings therein, together with the Causes and Reasons unto
the said Committee of Appeal who upon consideration had thereof, and hearing
what can be said on both sides, shall settle the same according as to them or
any four of them shall seem just and equal; And from and after the settlements
aforesaid made, the said Forests and Chases, and all the Manors, Lands and
Tenements, lying within the Meets and Bonds thereof, shall be Deafforested to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, and as if the same had never been Forest;
And as well the present as all former Owners, Possessors of any part of the
said Forest, or of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, lying within
the Meets and Bounds thereof, their Heirs, Successors, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, shall be for ever acquitted and discharged of and
from all former and other Wastes, Purprestures, and Assarts, Trespasses, and
offenses against the Forest Law, done or suffered in or upon the same.

XI. You are not to allow the Claim of any person or persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, Parish or Hamblet, to any Demeasn Lands in possession or in
reversion, or to any other profits or advantages which have formerly been
granted by Lease, or by Letters Patents, for term of Lives or Years, under a
Rent reserved thereupon (which Rent was due and payable according to the said
Reservation) by virtue of any general words comprehended in any Grant or
Grants, from the late King, Queen or Prince, or from the Trustees named in the
Act for Sale of the Honors, Manors and Lands of the late King, Queen or Prince,
unless the premises so claimed, be particularly mentioned in the said Grant or
Grants, and valued in the particular, upon which the said Grant or Grants have
been grounded respectively.

XII. After the right or proportion of or belonging to the Commonwealth, either
as the ancient proper Soil thereof, or by such Compositions and Agreements as
aforesaid, shall be ascertained, you are to inform your selves what the present
yearly value of the said Lands (in case the same were enclosed) may be, as the
Wood and Timber is now growing upon the same, what the value will be, being
enclosed, what the charge of enclosing the same will amount unto, what
improvement may be made in case the same be cleared and disburthened of the
Wood and Timber, either by Farming, granting Leases, or otherwise disposing
thereof, and what may be most advantageous to the Commonwealth, what quantity
of Wood and Timber may be taken away and sold and vended thereabouts, and in
what time, and what the value thereof may amount unto, and certify unto Thomas
Coke, William Bosevile, John Sparrow, William Kenwrick, William Scot, William
Steel, Sylvanus Tailor, Thomas Hubbert, Cornelius Cook, or any four or more of
them, Trustees nominated by Ordinance for Sale of four Forests or Chases,
reserved for Colateral Security to the Soldiers.

XIII. You are to consider what Highways are necessary to be allowed throughout
the premises, or any part thereof, what proportion of ground will be sufficient
for that purpose, in what place the same may most conveniently be laid out, by
whom, and in what manner the Fences adjacent to them shall be made and kept, and
set out the Meets and Bounds accordingly.

XIV. You are to take special notice of all Thriving Timber of Oak, and Elm,
which shall be found growing upon any part of the premises, and certify
distinctly in each Survey, where any such Timber does grow, the number of such
Trees respectively, how many Loads of clean Timber is in them, of what value
the Lop, Top, and Bark of such Trees are, how far they grow from the nearest
part of any Navigable River, and what price by the Load the said Timber is
worth upon the place.

XV. You shall keep a Diary or Iournal of your proceedings, and within ten days
after full Execution of these Instructions respectively, or sooner if you shall
be thereunto required, certify under your Hands and Seals, or under the Hands
and Seals of three or more of you, the Surveys by you taken, and other your
proceedings touching the premises, unto Thomas Coke, William Bosevile, John
Sparrow, William Kenwrick, William Scot, William Steel, Sylvanus Tailor, Thomas
Hubbert, Cornelius Cook, or any four or more of them, nominated Trustees by the
Ordinance for Sale of four Forests or Chases, reserved for Colateral Security
to the Soldiers.

XVI. For the speedy and effectual execution of these Instructions, you are to
employ an able Clerk and a Messenger for each Forest or Chase respectively, and
to allow your Clerk five shillings per diem, and your Messenger three shillings
per diem, and you are also to hire laborers two or more for each Forest or
Chase to carry your Chains and Instruments for measuring and apportioning of
the premises, not allowing them nor any of them, more then one shilling and six
pence per diem, for so many days as you shall have occasion to use them for
your convement dispatch thereof, and to certify what charge you are at therein
to the said Trustees, who are to allow the same upon your Account.

XVII. You are, if need shall require, hereby Authorized by your selves, or by
such Clerk or Clerks as you shall thereunto appoint, to search, peruse, and to
take Copies, or Extracts of all or any Records or Evidences, lying in the Tower
of London or elsewhere, for the clearing and making out of the Commonwealths
Title to the premises, without paying any Fees therefore.

XVIII. That the Lord Lambert, General Desborow, Colonel Sydenham, Sir Gilbert
Gerrard Knight, John Trever and Josias Bernars, Esquires, or any four of them,
the Committee of Appeal appointed by the Parliament, to hear and determine all
and every the matters and things which shall be certified unto them, according
to these Instructions or otherwise, touching the Rights of the Commonwealth,
the Proprietors, Owners and Commoners in the said Forests and Chases
respectively; as also all other matters and things whatsoever, not particularly
named in these Instructions, which shall be any Obstruction in and touching any
the matters aforesaid, and for that purpose may send for, and examine witnesses
upon oath; which oath the said Committee of Appeal, or any four of them are
hereby authorized to Administer; And the Determination of the said Committee in
and touching the same, shall be final; And in case the said Committee of Appeal
shall be divided equally, Then the Lord Commissioner Fines shall settle and
determine the matter, upon hearing all the Reasons of the said Committee of
Appeal, whose Determination shall be final.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1657.


