NINE PROPOSITIONS OF Both Houses of PARLIAMENT Concerning The raising of
Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for the defense of the KING, And both Houses of
Parliament.

Ordered by the House of COMMONS, That these Propositions be forthwith Printed
and published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com'.

Die Jovis 2d. Junii, 1642.

An Order by the House of Commons assembled in Parliament to summon the Members
to appear the 16. day of June. 1642.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. for N. Allen. 1642.

WHereas it appears, That the King (seduced by wicked Council) intends to make
War against His Parliament, and in pursuance thereof, under pretense of a
Guard for His Person, has actually begun to leavy Forces both of Horse and
Foot, and sent out Summons throughout the County of York, for the calling
together of greater numbers, and some illaffected Persons have been employed in
other parts to raise Troops, under the color of His Majesty's Service, making
large offers of reward and preferment to such as will come in; And that His
Majesty does with a high and forcible hand protect and Keep away Delinquents,
not permitting them to make their appearance, to answer such affronts and
injuries as have been by them offered unto the Parliament; and those Messengers
which have been sent from the Houses for them, have been abused, beaten, and
imprisoned; so as the Orders of Parliament, which is the highest Court of
Justice in this Kingdom are not obeyed, and the Authority of it is altogether
s^orned and vilified; and such persons as stand well affected to it, and
declare themselves sensible of these public calamities, and of the violations
of the Privileges of Parliament, and common Liberty of the Subject, are bafled
and injured by several sorts of malignant men who are about the King, some
whereof, under the name of Cavaliers, without having respect to the Laws of the
Land, or any fear, either of God or man, are ready to commit all manner of
outrage and violence, which must needs tend to the dissolution of this
Government, the destroying of our Religion, Laws, and Liberty, and Propriety,
all which will be exposed to the malice and violence of such desperate persons
as must be employed in so horrid and unnatural an act, as the overthrowing of
a Parliament by farce, which is the support and preservation of them: All which
being duly considered by the Lords and Commons, and how great an Obligation
lies upon them in Honor, Conscience, and Duty, according to the high trust
reposed in them, to use all possible means in such cases, for the timely
prevention of so great and irrecoverable evils, they have thought fit to
publish their sense and apprehension of this imminent danger, thereby to excite
all well affected persons to contribute their best assistance, according to
their solemn Vow and Protestation, to the Preparations necessary for the
opposing and suppressing of the traiterous attempts of these wicked and
malignant Counselors, who seek to engage the King in so dangerous and
destructive an enterprise, and the whole Kingdom in a civil War and destroy
the Priledges and Being of Parliaments; This recourse to the good affections of
those that tender their Religion, and just Liberties, and the Enjoyment of the
blessed fruits of this present Parliament, which were almost ready to be
reaped, and are now as ready to be ruined by those wicked hands; being the
only remedy left them, under God, and without which they are no longer able to
preserve themselves, or those by whom they are entrusted.

1. They the said Lords and Commons do Declare, That whosoever shall bring in
any proportion of ready Money, or Plate, or shall underwrite to furnish and
maintain any number of Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for the preservation of the
public Peace, and for the defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament
from force and violence, and to uphold the Power and Privileges of Parliament,
according to his Protestation, it shall be held a good and acceptable service
to the Common wealth, and a testimony of his good affection to the Protestant
Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of this Kingdom, and to the
Parliament, and Privileges thereof.

And because a considerable aid cannot be raised by few hands, and the
condition of all men's estates and occasions, is not always proportionable to
their Affection; The Lords and Commons do Declare, That no man's Affection
shall be measured according to the proportion of his offer, so that he express
his good will to this service in any proportion whatsoever.

2. And it is further Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That
whosoever shall bring in any Money or Plate, or shall furnish and maintain any
Horse, Horsemen, and Arms for the purposes aforesaid, shall have their Money
re-paid, with the Interest, according to Eight pounds per cent. and the full
value of their Plate, with consideration for the fashion, not exceeding one
shilling per ounce, and shall have full recompense for all their charge, in
finding, furnishing, and maintaining of Horse, Horiemen, and Arms; and for this
both Houses of Parliament doingage the public Faith.

3. And it is Ordained, That Sir John Wallaston, Knight and Alderman, Alderman
Touse, Alderman Warner, and Alderman Andrews, shall be the Treasurers to
receive all such Money, and Plate, as shall be brought in for the purposes
aforesaid. And that the Acquitrances of them, or any two of them, for the
Receipt of the same shall be a sufficient ground for the Party so lending Money
or Plate, to demand the same again with the Interest, and likewise
consideration for the fashion of the Plate.

4. It is Ordered, That shall be Commissaries to value the Horse and Arms that
shall be furnished for this service; and that a signification under the hands
of them, or any two of them of such values of the Horse and Arms, and of the
time when they were first brought in, shall be a Warrant to demand satisfaction
according to the said values, and they shall keep an account of the time, from
the first Inrolment of any such Horse and Horsemen, That such as find and
maintain them, may be re-paid according to the rate of 2. s. 6. d. perdiem, for
so long time as they have maintained them in this service; And the Commissaries
are to attend at Guildhall, for the receiving and inrolling of such numbers of
Horse as shall be brought in.

5. It is Ordered, That whosoever shall bring in Money, or Plate, or shall
provide and maintain Horse, Horsemen, and Arms for this service, shall do
according to their duty therein. And the Lords and Commons do engage the Power
and Authority of Parliament, to save them harmless from all prejudice and
inconvenience that may befall them by occasion thereof.

6. It is Ordered, That the Members of either House who are present, shall be
desired to Declare in their Houses respectively, what Money, or Plate they will
bring in, or what Horse, Horsemen, and Arms they will find and maintain.

7. It is desired, That all such as have their residence in or about London, or
within 80 miles, will bring in their Money, Plate, or Horse, within a fortnight
after notice; and they that dwell farther off, within three weeks.

8. And because every Person may not be provided with present Money, or with
Horse, or not have his Plate with him, which he means to bring in, and yet
resolves to contribute his part within the time limited, and that it is
necessary it should be presently known what the provision will be, for the
effecting of this great and important service; It is Ordered, That the
Committees of either House, appointed for that purpose respectively, shall
receive the subscriptions of such Members of each House, as have not declared
themselves in the House, or are absent upon the public service, or for their
private occasions. 2. That the Committee of London entrusted with the Militia,
shall receive the subscriptions in London and Middlesex. 3. That some Persons
nominated by the Knights and Burgesses of each County, and approved by both
Houses, shall be appointed to receive the subscriptions in the several
Counties.

9. And lastly, it is Declared, That whatsoever is brought in, shall not at all
be employed upon any other occasion, then to the purposes aforesaid; which are
to maintain the Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and His Person, in
His Royal Dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace
of the Kingdom, and the Privilege of Parliament, against any force which shall
oppose them. And this by the direction of both Houses of Parliament.

Die Jovis 2d. Junii, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That the
several Members of this House, do forthwith give their Attendance upon the
public Service of this Commonwealth with which they are entrusted by their
Countries. And the Sheriffs of the several Counties of this Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales are required to give Notice of this Order unto all such
Members of the House of Commons as are within their respective Counties; and
speedily to make return of such their doings, unto the Speaker of that House:
And all such as shall not make their personal appearance by the sixteenth day
of this instant June, in the House of Commons, shall each one forfeit one
hundred pounds, to be disposed of to the Wars in Ireland, and undergo such
further censure and punishment as the said House shall think fit for so great
neglect of their duty in a time that so necessarily requires their assistance.

Provided always, That all such as are specially employed by this House, are
to remain in such employments, until they shall have particular directions for
their return.

Ordered that it be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

