EDINBURGHS JOY FOR HIS MAJESTY'S Coronation in ENGLAND.
ROom there, Give way a little to Edinensis, What? Why? is not whiffling
Caledonius gone; certainly he has been only Babbon-struck, or Priest-stab'd, I
need not fear he will peep out again; his muzzel'd mouth and hapshakled pen dar
neither mute nor give a dash against so potent an etc. else surely the Wag had
been discovering the Affairs of our Scots World, (for further I believe he
durst not) what his Parliament which he magnified so much (and yet deservedly)
had been acting this three weeks bygone; and indeed it could have been well
wished that that unparalelled act which cut off root and branch, every thing
which either might kindle or give life to Rebellion had been timeously made
known, that all Fanatics whatsoever might know what they have to trust to from
us, and so bid farewell, (or father fare-ill) to all the trash and trumpery
hanging on and annexed to both the Covenants.

But what then? must Caledonia suffer, because of Caledonius overshooting
himself, let him go search, and bestow his Stock to purchase Foreign
Intelligence from Vtopia if he will, yet we ought to know our selves; That
Smatterer in Latin would have called this ((...)) especially what Edina the
Metropolis is doing to express her Joy in behalf of her Dread Sovereigns
glorious Coronation in England; April 23. 1661. On which day set apart for
Thanksgiving, the Lord High Commissioner accompanied with the Officers of
State, and His MAJESTY'S Lifeguard in rich Furniture and sumptuous Apparel,
under the Command of Mr. Murray Brother to the Earl of Athole, went from the
Palace of Holy rude-house to the Parliament House, where they heard Sermon
Preached by that reverend Divine D. James Sharp, quite of another strain then
that at Scoone, Anno 1651. Here our late proceedings were repented, and not
justified: (but lest it befall me as it did to Caledonius) I pray in that
Sermon view page 10. A King abusing his Power, etc. page 17. and page 4. there
are many sins, etc. (:) to the great honor of the Preacher, and satisfaction
of the Auditory. It was no less cheerfully and cordially done through the
other Congregations of the City, and blessed be God for it among other glorious
recoveries, Priest and People are restored to their wits.

Sermon ended, the Lord Commissioner returned to the Royal Palace attended by
great numbers of Nobility, Knights and Gentry, and all Feasted at one time, and
at several Tables in a most splendid and magnificent manner: And that nothing
might be wanting to complete the Solemnity, the Lord Commissioners Lady with
her Daughters at the same time in another Room entertained many Ladies of
quality with all the rarities and delicacies imaginable, and with such
admirable Consorts of Music as hardly could been expected from a Nation so
depressed: Toward the middle of Dinner, His MAJESTY'S Health begun by the Lord
Commissioner, a sign given from the Tarras, the Canons of the Castle begun to
thunder, which was answered from the Cittadell of Leith with the like roaring;
and the great pyramide of Coals and Tar-Barrels which was in the out Court of
the Palace was likewise given fire to, which for its greatness was
extraordinary, and if it had been on the top of a hill in the night time, for
two miles about it would showen light to have sung Te Deums in the smallest
Print, and put into a sweat any that had been frozen with the greatest fit of a
cold, and at the same distance too. After Dinner, the young Lords and Ladies
came out and Danced all sort of Comtrey Dances and Reels, and none busier then
the young Lord Cleremont Son to the Lord Commissioner who was so ravished with
joy, that if he had not been restrained he had thrown Rings, Chains, Jewels and
all that was precious about him into the Fire.

Now let us take a little notice of the great signs of Joy manifested by our
Ancient and good Town of Edinburgh: After the Lord provest Sir Robert Murray,
with the Bailies, Common Counsel and other Magistrates had turned up their
Spiritual Thanks to Heaven for so blessed an occasion, then they went
altogether to a place appointed for the purpose, and in a most magnificent
manner, regalled themselves with those humane lawful Refreshments, which is
allowable for the Grandour of so Eminent a Blessing: By that time their Feast
was finished, the Bonefire Bells allarmed them to mind the carrying on the
Work of the Night: The Lord Provest, with the Magistrates, each of them with a
white Batton in their hands, and the rest of the Counsel, appeared at the
Cross, which was disposed in a most hospitable piece of Pagiantry, viz. A
splendid representation of a Vineyard, with all the Cognizances of Bachus, and
under a large Winetree of swelling and Ruddy Clusters, did that same god of
Frolicks, bestride a Hogs-head of the most gracious Claret: he was accompanied
with his Uncle Silenus, and some half a score of most lovely and wanton
Bachides: this same Grave and Spungy Moderator, by Proclamation, gave most
ample permission to all mankind, for the space of twelve hours by the clock, to
be as madd with mirth as their imaginations could fancy: The Indulgence was no
sooner pronounced, but Streams of Claret gushed from the Conduits: Trumpets,
Fluts, and all sort of Carrousing Instruments which might skrue up the
passions, did forthwith sound a Charge: the breaking of Glasses, and tumbling
of Goblets amongst the Commonality, made a greater noise then the clashing of
Zrexes Armies Armor did at a narrow Pass, when they were upon a Rout. But
indeed, the Magistrates with a most becoming gravity, and extraordinary
cheerfulness, did round the Healths of His MAJESTY, and Royal Relations. By
this time all the private Bonefires was at their height: then as the Lord
Provest had formerly appointed, there was five hundred Musketeers of the
Train-bands, commanded by John Fullertoun Captain of the first Regiment and his
respective Officers that were not upon Duty, viz. Captain John Dunbar, Captain
Robert Baird, Captain Thomas Wilson, Captain William Hamiltoun, Captain Thomas
Crawford, Captain Thomas Brand, Captain John Johnstoun, all these Worthy
Persons being of approven Loyalty, Discretion and Courage did in a straggling
way, descend so far as to officiat as Sergeants, to keep the crowd from the
Lord Provest and Magistrates, as he marched along to the Palace Royal, the
above mentioned Musketeers in gallant order marching before the Magistrates and
Common Counsel. In the Rear of whom, there were four hundred Citizens with
Partisans, led by Captain John Mien, first captain of the second Regiment, and
the several Captains thereto belonging, viz. Captain James Scot, Captain James
Curry, Captain David Boyd, Captain Alexander Pearson, Captain Edward Cleghorn,
Captain Robert Gray, Captain George Trumble, all of them of equal
qualifications with the others: The Worthy Person who commanded this Squadron
of Partisans, viz. Captain John Mien, because there be others of the same name
in Town, it is fitting he be distinguished; for this is he who has lost three
several Stocks in providing His MAJESTY'S Forces with Arms, and that he be not
mistaken to be one of these who served His MAJESTY the wrong way, take notice
that his first was in providing the Marquess of Montrosse, which was so
considerable, as would have overset any ordinary spirit: The second was with
the same success when Duke Hamiltoun enterprised His MAJESTY'S relief, in Anno
1648. A third which was greatest of all, was immediately before His MAJESTY'S
going to Worster, where he had a Ship loadened with Ammunition for the use of
the Country made Prize by the Usurpers: Yet notwithstanding all these losses
and mischiefs which succeeded one another, God Almighty is pleased to prosper
his undertakings, and particularly in the diligent discharge of his trust, when
he was Thesaurer to Heriots Hospital, where he was most instrumental in
procuring the removal of all these obstructions, which did vitiate the Will of
the Foundator, so that now it may be properly termed an Hospital. But that
which has rendered him most famous, was his kindness to His MAJESTY'S
prisoners; for besides* relieving many Gentlemen's sons from the Barbados, he
never scrupled to engage person and fortune for any that were by the Usurpers
secured upon jealousies, and all these courtesies he purchased without either
being shaken, or dissembling his Royal Principles. Thus much we have made known
of this honest Subject and Noble Good Fellow, that others hereafter may be
encouraged to do handsome actions, so at lest they can never want the merit of
fame and admiration.

But let us return to the Lord Provest, who with this Guard of Musketeers and
Partisans, came to the Lord Commisstoners Bonefire, where he was entertained by
many Noblemen and Ladies, and at the rounding of the Royal Health, our Fire-men
acquit themselves with admirable Vollies of Shot: In fine, there could be
nothing more expressed of an Universal and Superlative Joy. And as the Lord
Provest returned to the Town, he was regalled at the Bonefires of several
persons of quality, and for a time, gravity was laid aside to give place to all
sort of Frisking and Gamboling, and nothing was more out of fashion and
ridiculous, then to see any one man in the space of three minutes, not to be
hanging two of them in the Air with Capriols. But amongst all our Bontadoes
and Caprices, that of the immortal Jenet Geddis, Princesse-of the Trone
Adventurers, was most pleasant, for she was not only content to assemble all
her Creels, Basquets, Creepees, Fums, and the other Ingredients that composed
the Shope of her Sallets, Radishes, Turnips, Carrets, Spinnage, Cabbage, with
all other sort of Pot Merchandise that belongs to the Garden; but even her
Weather Chair of State where she used to dispense Justice to the rest of her
Langkale Vassals, were all very orderly burned, she her self countenancing the
Action with a high flown Claret and Vermilion Majesty.

In all this pleasant madness which was strange, there was not any
inconveniency at all happened, and even amongst the Canalia, there was not the
least disorder. And to conclude the days. Jubilee, we were advertized of joyful
tidings from the North, to wit, the Provincial Synod of the Church of Aberdene,
has made a solemn acknowledgement of all their rebellious Defections,
Hypocrisies and Oppressions, by which they either misled the people against His
MAJESTY, or trampled upon their Brethren who refused to commit Idolatry with
either of the Dagons, National or League: They have ordained before the
beginning of Sermon on the Sundays, that the reading of the Holy Scriptures,
and Prayers, be used as formerly before the Rebellion, that Glory to the Father
shall be sung at the ends of Psalms, that the Lords Prayer be likewise said by
the Ministers, either at their first or second Prayer: that Parents who
presents their Children to be Christened repeat the Creed, and be obliged to
educate their Children in the Christian Faith, and no more mention to be made
of the Articles of the Covenant: They have in Imitation of our State, cancelled
all these Kirk Acts that might relapse us in Rebellion. And Petitioners are
hourly expected to supplicate the Parliament, to have the Government of the
Church restored. It appears, these Worthy Divines of the North will as their
Laics been, has frequent examples of Loyalty, so they will be now of
Repentance, and the proverb of Raro vidi Clericum paenitentem, we hope shall
now perish, if the rest of the Brethren be so happy as to imitate them. And it
is not much to be doubted, for as yet we hear of few Synods but the greatest
part are blushing at their bypast actions, particularly that of Stirling, who
by the discretion of Master Mungo Murray that sit with them, have likewise
exspunged all these Acts that grated upon Loyalty and Obedience. The truth is,
most of them begins now to see that they have been but the steps of Great-mens
ambition to tread upon, and the weakest of them does likewise know when such
aspiring Spirits gains the top of the wall, that they then throw away the
Ladder that mounted them, and that now their greatest security with the
tranquillity of the Kingdom will be, not to dispute His MAJESTY'S Commands,
which who ever refuses, let him be Anathema Marinatha.

Advertisements.
THe Horse Race of Lanerk Institute by King William above 600 years since, but
obstructed these 23. years by the iniquity of the Times, is now restored by Sir
John Wilkie of Fouldon, as being loath so Ancient a foundation should perish,
and for that effect he has given gratis a piece of Plate of the accustomed
value, with a silver Bell and Sadle to the second and third Horse; It is to be
run the third Tuesday of May.

The Race of Haddington is to be run on the 22. of May next, the Prize is a
most magnificent Cup; this same Ancient Town famous for its Hospitality, has
many times sadly smarted by the Armies of Enemies, yet this glorious Revolution
has salved up all their miseries as very well was made appear by the noble
Entertainment given to the Lord Commissioner at the Lord Provest William Seaton
his Lodging, when his Grace made his entry to this Kingdom.

It was no sooner noised that we was to be Mercurius for the Good Town, but we
was alarmed with innumerable Advertisements, as being obliged to serve every
one according to his Stationall handling; amongst the rest, one appeared for
Caledonius, promising a munificent recompense to purchase the Copy of a Latin
Ballad made of him; he could not tell whether it was in laudem or vituperium,
Alas poor Caledon thy Enemies though few, thinks thy back at the wall, and so
would smite thee, what may we expect then, a short time of it, for flattery
does not become us, and we dar not tell Truth as thou did.

Printed in the Year, 1661.


