A NEW DECLARATION of the Lords and Commons in Parlialiament assembled, in
answer to his Majesty's Letter to the Lord Major and the Court of Aldermen of
the City of London, and concerning his Declaration to the County of York at
Heyworth Moore by His last special Summonds, Luna 20. day of Junae, 1642.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament that this Declaration be forthwith Printed
and published, Joh: Brown Cler. Parl.

With a Letter from the Lord Paget, Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Buckingham, to the Earl of Holland, showing the readiness of that County to
obey the Ordinance of Parliament touching the Militia And the examination of
the Lord Magwire, Colonel Read, Cousin-germane to Tyrone, Capt. Mac Mallion,
Brother-in-Law to Philomy O-neale, the Relation being truly taken from their
own mouths word for word as follows, before a Commitee of both Houses in the
Court of Wards on Monday the 21. of June, 1642.

London Printed for W. Gay. 1642.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons concerning a Paper directed by his
MAJESTY to the Lord MAYOR and Sheriffs of London, Dated June fourteenth, 1642.
WHereas in a paper inscribed to our trusty and well-beloved the Lord MAYOR,
Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London, dated the fourteenth of June 1642.
It is affirmed that great labor is used to persuade his MAJESTY'S Subjects to
raise Horse and to furnish money upon pretense of a Guard for the Parliament,
but in truth to be employed against his MAJESTY, The Lords and Common do
declare that the design of those Propositions is, as was formerly declared, to
maintain the Protestant Religion, the KINGS Authority and Person in his Royal
Dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the Peace of the
Kingdom and privileges of Parliament, against any force which shall oppose
them. And they do further declare, that as the forces already attending his
MAJESTY and the preparation which his MAJESTY is now making of Arms, Horse and
Ordinance from within his Kingdom and without, at first colored under the
pretense of a Guard, do evidently appear to be intended for some great and
extraordinary Design, so they give just cause of fear and jealousy to the
Parliament. And do fully justify those Votes of the KINGS intention of levying
War against the Parliament, to be altogether free from any imputation of
scandal as is injuriously cast upon them by that paper; For so long as his
MAJESTY shall continue those levies and preparation. The Lords and Commons in
Parliament, having been so often threatened and reviled for their proceedings
about Hull, and the Militia, so necessarily undertaken for the good and peace
of the Kingdom, they cannot be secured by his MAJESTY'S solemn Protestation
alone, expressed in this and other Declarations, That all his desires and
purposes are for the public peace, and that he has not the least thought of
using force, except he be compelled to it for the defense of his Person and
protecti of the Laws, seeing his MAJESTY in a Declaration published at Hyworth
More, does interpret the protection of the Laws in such a manner as gives
just and full occasion to believe, that by protecting the Laws, his MAJESTY
intends force upon, or against those who shall submit to the Ordinance of the
Militia, it appears by diverse expressions of his MAJESTY, he has discovered
an intention of making some attempt upon Hull. And because in both which cases
they do declare that whatsoever violence shall be used either against those
who exercise this Militia, or against Hull, they cannot but take it as done
against the Parliament.

And whereas the Houses have upon loan received great sums of money for the
service of Ireland, from the Companies of the City of London, (for which they
give them grtat and hearty thanks.) They do declare that these sums shall
be dispended as the former have been to that only service. Notwithstanding an
Infinuation laying an aspersion upon them as if they had done otherwise.
Further, whereas it is declared to the great reproach of the Parliament, that
the sums desired toward the raising of Horse and Arms is contrived upon
general pretenses by some few Factious persons we leave it to the World to
judge how it is possible, that Houses should have all their members, seeing
diverse of them are by his Majesty summoned to York, and there contrary to
the Laws of the Land; and privileges of Parliament detained, may be protected
from the Justice of both Houses.

And secondly, how that can possibly be called a Faction which is done by both
Houses of Parliament, the greatest Court of England, the most faithful
Council his Majesty has. But at such language as this they wonder not,
considering by what wicked Council his Majesty's affairs are guided, and by
what malignant spirits his Majesty's affections to the Parliament of late have
been misled.

Both Houses well weighing the premises do forbid any Majors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, or other Officers whatsoever to publish or spread that paper as they
will answer their contempt to the Parliament. And do assure themselves that
neither his Majesty's commands nor his threats will withdraw or deterrmen well
affected to the public from doing their duty, in contributing such money,
horse and plate, as will be necessary for the preserving the being of
Parliament, the peace of the Kingdom, and those other ends before mentioned,
for which they are desired. The dangerous and mischievous intentions of some
about his Majesty being such, that whatsoever is most precious to men of
conscience and honor, as religion, liberty, and public safety, are like to
be overwhelmed and lost in the general confusion and calamity of the Kingdom,
which will not only question, but overthrow the Charter of the City of London,
expose the Citizens, their Wives, and Children to violence and villainy, and
leave the wealth of that famous City, as a prey to those desperate and
necessitous persons.

The Lords and Commons as they hope by this means those horrid Mischiefs may be
prevented: So those of the City (which contribute hereunto) whereof none are so
mean and base, as to deserve the reproaches cast on them by that paper. And all
his Majesty's good Subjects may be assured that in doing their duty herein,
they shall be protected and secured in their persons, Liberties, and Estates,
by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament, according to their
former engagements, which they will ever faithfully perform.

A copy of a Letter sent from the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, To the Right Honorable the Earl of
Holland; showing the great readiness of that County, to obey the Ordinance of
the Parliament touching the Militia.
I Have received so great expressions of my Countrymen of Buckinghamshire, of
their good affections to the Public, and ready Obedience to the commands of
Parliament, in the present Muster this day begun for a fourth part of this
County, that I held it my duty to make your Lordship acquainted here with, to
the end an account may be given of it to the Parliament, if your Lordship shall
think fit.

Ten of my Deputy Lievtenants met me this morning at Beckonsfield, where we
called over the Train Band, consisting but of one hundred and fifty men, who
made a very good appearance with their Arms and supplies, and as full as they
have been formerly upon any other summons. Besides eightscore Volunteers and
upwards within this Division, presented themselves to us very well armed, and
exercised in two Companies; more in number then the Trained Band; summoned to
this place. I am also informed of another Company of an hundred and fifty
Volunteeres more within this Division, that intend to show themselves in our
way to the next place of meeting, and of another Company of an hundred more,
who there intend to meet us, besides the Trained Band.

This public testimony of my Countrymens good affections, for the safety of
the King and Kingdom, I thought not unfit to make known. And rest

Beckonsfield 23. May. 1642. Your Lordspips most dutiful son, and humble
servant, WILLIAM PAGET.


News from York. WITH HIS MAJESTY'S PROpositions to the Lords there.
SIR,
I Conceive my Lord of Lindsey is Admiral of England, and the Lord o^ O^mond
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The King has this day made diverse Propositions to
the Lords here; As, First, to have the Declaration of both Houses of the ninth
of May to be disavowed.

Secondly, to have Justice in Hull business.

Thirdly, to have the Militia declared to be his right.

Fourthly, to have tumults punished.

Fifthly, to have the Parliament adjourned to Oxford, Cambridge, Winchester,
York, Coventry, Bristoll, Nottingham, or any of those places where his Majesty
shall command, and other things which I have not leisure to add.

To morrow they meet again, and I believe the maine question will be, whether
a Declaration shall be made here, or the Lords to agree here, and vote in the
House, and in what equipage to go. Our Court increases daily, and we believe,
notwithstanding the offer of an hundred thousand pound, by the Common Council,
that the King may have as much money from the Citizens as they, and I believe
here is ground for such a conceit. Here is no possibility for the Kings
sudden remove hence, though some think he may step hence to Lincoln, for
three or four days, to settle that Country, but I am not of that opinion,

The examination of three notorius Rebels before a Committee sitting in the
Court of Wards.
THey were brought last Monday before a Committee of both Houses, sitting in
the Court of Wards, where when they first appeared at their examination before
the Committee, they answered, that they were Recusants, and being borne and
brought up in the same Religion, which the Catholic Church of Rome profess^d,
they were also resolved to live and die in the maintenance thereof: renouncing
whatsoever shall be in opposition to the same. And that though the might be
supposed to be Rebels, and so reputed, yet they did nothing (as they strongly
did asseverate) but what the lawfulness of their Consciences did suggest unto
them. Wherepuon it was Ordered by the House, that they should be committed to
strong Custody, till the further censure of the House.

FINIS.

