NEW PROPOSITION Propounded to the City of LONDON By the LORDS and COMMONS,
Concerning the raising speedy Aid for the relief of HVLL.

Whereunto is annexed the Parliaments Resolution concerning Sir JOHN HOTHAM,
and all those that are faithful to the Commands of the PARLIAMENT.

Ordered that this be Printed, and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



Whereunto is annexed, His MAJESTY'S Declaration to the Parliament concerning
Peace or War with Hull.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for F. S. July, 15. 1642.

New PROPOSITIONS propounded to the City of London.
HIs Majesty having an intent to besiege Sir John Hotham, a Member of the House
of Commons, and by their appointment Governor of his Majesty's Town of Hull,
and to that end having summoned all the Gentlemen Freeholders and others that
had underwrit for Horse for His Majesty's service, giving them command to march
toward Hull, there to attend His Majesty's further pleasure.

Sir John Hotham having intelligence of his Majesty's intention, thought it
necessary to use the best prevention that he could to secure the Town from
being taken, knowing how disadvantagious the loss thereof would prove to the
proceedings of Parliament, and the Peace of the Kingdom, and that he might
altogether be left destitute of means to prosecute his Service begun, he sent
out a a party of his men, with command that they should fetch in all the
Cattle and Sheep, that they could find within four Miles of the said Town,
which being accordingly performed, he gave order that the sluices should be
drawn up, and that they should drown the Meadows 3. miles round, to prevent
the Kings Forces of marching too near, he being not able to vie for the
present with so great a power.

His Majesty having received intelligence of what Sir John Hotham had done,
drew his Forces to Beverley, and from thence surrounded them at four Miles
distance, stopping all passages either to or from Hull withal cutting of all
means of relief either by Sea or Land, taking away the Springs of fresh
water, by that means to starve them up, nevertheless Sir John Hotham sent
private intelligence to the Parliament, certifying what he had done, and in
what estate himself and the Town was, which the Lords and Commons taking into
consideration, thought it necessary to declare their resolution to the world,
as follows.

Whereas Sir John Hotham has been forced for the prevention of the sudden
surprisall and destruction of the Town of Hull, to let in some Tides from
Humber, upon the grounds adjoining to the said Town.

They have therefore promised and assured all persons whatsoever that are
owners or Farmers of the said grounds, which are impaired by this overflowing
of the Water, full and ample satisfaction for any loss they shall sustain.

Likewise, they do promise to second and save harmless all such persons as
shall either by Sea or Land furnish them with any provision of Victual, Beer,
or any other thing, and also make good payment for the same, also that all
persons of the said Town, as stand well affected to the service and stand
close in their fidelity and assistance to the Governor thereof, they do
hereby assure them that they are resolved that they shall receive encouragement
and protection from them, answerable to such a service.

Likewise, they for the speedy relief of the said Town have used their utmost
endeavor to raise supplies of men and Arms, as may appear by their
Propositions to the City of London.

1. That the Propositions should be tendered to the Common Council of London,
that they would consider of a way, for the speedy raising of 10000 men within
the City.

2. That the said men should be forth with listed to Officers, trained and
entered into pay.

3. That they shall march into any part of this Kingdom by the direction and
Authority of Parliament.

4. That if the Citizens of London shall find any Arms toward the setting
forth of these men, if any Arms be lost or spoiled, they shall be made good
unto them.

5. That seeing there is such preparation with the King in the North, they
desire that these Propositions may be put in execution withfn four days.

His Majesty's Message to the Parliament, of the eleventh of July.
BY Our former Declarations, and this Our Proclamation (which We heerewith send
you) you and all Our good Subjects may see the just grounds of our present
lourney toward Our Town of Hull. Before We shall use force to reduce that
place to its due Obedience, We have thought fit once more to require you, that
it may be forthwith delivered up to us, (the business being of that nature
that it can admit no delay) Wherein if you shall conform your selves, we shall
then be willing to admit such addresses from you, and return such Propositions
to you, as may be proper to settle the Peace of this Kingdom, and compose the
present distractions. Do your duty herein, and be assured from Us in the word
of a King, that nothing shall be wanting on Our part that may prevent the
Calamities which threaten this Nation, and may render Our People truly happy.
If this our gracious Message shall be declined, GOD and all good men judge
betwixt Us. We shall expect to receive satisfaction herein by your Answers to
be presented to Us at Beverley upon Friday being the fifteenth day of this
present July, 1642.

FINIS.

