AN ORDINANCE AND DECLARATION Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

That the Lord Major and Citizens of the City of London, for the better
securing and safety thereof, shall have full power and authority according to
their discretion, to trench, stop, and fortify all highways leading into the
said City, as well within the Liberties as without, as they shall see cause.
And for the better effecting thereof, shall impose upon all the Inhabitants
within the same, upon every house worth (...) year six pence, and every house
of greater rent after the rate of two pence in the pound.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this (...)
Ordinance shall (...) forthwith Primed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamento.

April 25 Printed for John Wright, in the Old. Bailey. 1643.

Die Martis, 7. Martii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord
Major, and Citiz^ns of the City of London, for the batter securing and safety
of the said City, Suburbs, Parliament, City of Westminster, and Borough of
South warke, shall have power to trenth and stop all such highways, and by
wa^s leading into the said City, as well within as without the Liberties, as
they shall because; And shall also have full Power and Authority according to
their discretion, ^o fortify and entrench the places aforesaid with such
out-workes, and in such places as they shall think meet; And for his and their
furtherance and Assistance, to call in all or any Deputy Lieutenants, Justices
of the Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Ministers, Officers, and other
his Majesty's loving Subjects to be ayding and assisting, as they will answer
the contrary at their peril. And it is further ordered, that the Deputy
Lieutenants, and Justices of P^ace for the County of Middlesex, and Surrey,
City of Westminster, and Borough of Southwarke, or any thr^e or more of them
within their several and respective limits shall have power to impose upon the
Inhabitants within the said Trenches and Fortifications, and without the
liberties of the said City, toward the charges of fortifiing the said places
as aforesaid, upon: every House that shall be let for, or may be valued worth
five pound per year, sir pence: And for every House of greater rent after the
proportion of two pence* in the pound, that the T^nant of the said House paieth
if he hold it at a Racke-rent, or otherwise, after the rate that the said house
shall be valued to be worth: Which Assessement shall be forthwith made and
collected in all the Parishes, Precincts, and Liberties aforesaid* and paid to
the Treasurer chosen, or to be chosen, by the Common Council of the City of
London, to be disbursed as aforesaid, the said money to be paid by the said
Tenant or Inhabitant where houses are inhabited, who is to deduct the same out
of his next Rent payable to the Landlords, if it be a Rack-rent, and by the
Landlords where Houses shall stand empty: And it is further ordered, That
whereas the Common Council of London, have in this time of imminent danger
passed an Act for the fortifiing of the City of London, and other places above
mentioned. In pursuance whereof a Committee of Common Council men and others,
are appointed and have already proceeded in the said Fortifications before this
Ordinance could be effected, It is hereby declared, that their said pursuance
of that Act, and executing the same is a good service to the Commonwealth, and
the said parties, and all such Ingeneers or others that shall be employed by
them shall be by power of Parliament saved harmles both for what they have
do^^, and shall do herein for time to come.

Finis.

