Die Lunae 4. Martii 1643.
An Ordinance for the Regulating of the Rates on the Customs and Excise of
Tobacco.
FOrasmuch as the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have taken notice
of the Rates, Customs, and Excise, laid and imposed on Tobacco of all sorts,
to be greater and higher than it will now well bear, in regard of the
disturbance of Trade in foraign parts, and present distractions of this
Kingdom: For the regulating whereof, and for the encouragement and ease as well
of the Importer, as Ingrosser, and Seller of Tobacco;

It is Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all Tobaccoes of the
English Plantations, imported or remaining in the hands of the Merchant or
Importer, or the Ingrosser or Buyer thereof, shall be liable to such Rates for
the Excise, and such rules observed for the same, as are set down and
prescribed in a late Ordinance of the 23. December, 1643. And for all Spanish
Tobacco, not of the English Plantation, imported and remaining in the hands of
any Merchant or Importer, or the Ingrosser or Buyer thereof, at the day of the
date of this Ordinance, there shall be paid only six pence for every pound
Excise for the same. Provided alvvayes, that no person shall have any benefit
of this moderation, but only such as shall within foureteen days after the
publication of this Ordinance, make his personal appearance at such Office of
Excise, under which his dwelling place shall be, and there deliver in a true
particular account of all such Spanish Tobaccoes, not of the English
Plantations, as were remaining in his hands at the date of this Ordinance, and
for which the Excise has not been paid as a foresaid, and shall presently,
according to the respective rate of six pence upon a pound weight, pay and
clear the said duty of Excise, for all such Tobacco as he had at, or before
the day of the date hereof, remaining in his hands, but be proceeded against
without favor or pardon, according to the said former Ordinance of Excise of
the eleventh September last.

And it is further ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that for all
Tobaccoes which have not before this Ordinance, paid the Custom and Excise, or
shall from the day of the date hereof be Imported by any Merchant or others,
into the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port and Town of
Barwicke, the Importer or Ingrosser thereof, shall pay Custom and Excise for
the same, as follows, viz. For all Spanish and other Tobacco, not of the
English Plantation, the Importer shall pay six pence for every pound weight for
Custom, and the Ingrosser or first Buyer, one shilling Excise for the same.
And for all Tobaccoes of the English Plantations, which shall be Imported as
aforesaid, the Importer shall pay one penny per pound Custom, and the
Ingrosser or first buyer, two pence per pound for Excise of the same, which
respective sums of one shilling and two pence, are to be paid by the
Ingrosser or buyer, upon sale thereof, as is prescribed in the said Ordinance
of the eleventh September last.

And lastly, It is ordered and ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that no
part of the Customs or Subsidy paid by the Merchant or other, at the time of
the Importation of his Tobacco, as is expressed in the second Article in the
Book of Rates, shall be allowed by the Commissioners of the Customs, or other
officer or officers of the several Custome-houses, to any Merchant or others
upon the exportation of any Tobaccoes. Any order or Ordinance heretofore made
to the Contrary in any wise, notwithstanding: Provided that this Ordinance
shall continue in force for the space of one whole year from the day of the
date of this Ordinance, and no longer.

Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London, by Richard Cotes, and John Raworth, 1644.


