An Order of Parliament, FOR A THANKSGIVING: Together with a DECLARATION OF
The Grounds and Reasons of it.


EVer since that Wonderful and unexpected Victory, which the Lord was pleased
the last Summer to give unto a small Party of the Parliaments Forces then in
Dublin, against that numerous and potent Army under Ormond, which was a Door of
Hope to the Parliament, and their Army then on their way for Ireland, That the
Lord, who had made so open a way for them, would vouchsafe his Presence with
them, to carry on and perfect that Work which himself had so eminently begun in
that admirable Providence, wherein he had, as it were, by a Worm threshed the
Mountains: The same gracious Hand has gone along from time to time with his
Servants there, vouchsafing them many Victories, giving in many strong Cities,
Towns, Castles and Garrisons into their hands, raising up their Spirits,
overcoming great Difficulties, furnishing seasonable Supplies, and dismaying
the hearts of the Enemies, and that in such a Series of continued Successes, as
is just matter of high Admiration, and perpetual Thankfulness in all that truly
fear the Lord, and love his Cause and People. And seeing every Addition of
Mercy, is a further Obligation to Thankfulness and Duty; and that the Lord has
been pleased, as a further Manifestation of his Goodness, to give up into the
hands of the Parliament Forces there, Carlo, a Garrison of much Strength and
Importance; Waterford, a great and populous Town, and the most considerable
Harbor in all Ireland, upon Saturday the Tenth of August instant; together with
the strong Castle of Duncannon, since likewise Surrendered upon Articles: The
Parliament of England have thought fit not to let such great Mercies pass,
without an especial return of Thankfulness, but to publish the Narrative
thereof, as it comes to us in a Letter from the Deputy General of Ireland;
(viz.) The effect whereof is as follows: The Deputy having received at the
late Leaguer before Catherlagh, several Alarms of great Forces of the Enemies
rising and appearing within the Counties of Cork, Kerry, Limrick and Tipperary,
to the distressing and endangering of our Parties and Garrisons in those parts;
where the Enemy threatened to destroy our Quarters, and probably designed a
conjunction of their most considerable Forces, in order to the Relief of
Waterford, and an Attempt upon that small party that was left to Block it up;
after he had disposed diverse of his Forces to secure Carrick, to repel and
oppose the Enemy in Carbery, and the Western parts, and to march to the Relief
of our Forces in Kerry and Limrick, leaving Sir Hardress Waller with the Body
of the Army, to carry on the business about Catherlagh, did himself draw down
with a small party of Foot toward Waterford, to Beleaguer it more straightly:
Coming before Waterford with those Foot, and some small parties left there
before, to Block it up at a distance, applied himself to a closer Siege of it,
making two Quarters within shot of their Walls, which with our Foot at the
Abbey on the other side of the Water, kept them close within the Town on every
side; and then trying them with a Summons, the Enemy within so despised our
small Numbers, as that they made an offer, as if they durst set open one of
their Gates, and let in all our Foot to make the best of it: And to that being
answered, It was but a vain Brag, and they durst not make it good; they in
Reply, for their Honors sake, seemed to adhere to their former Vanity, but with
such conditions and cautions, as they might be sure would not be accepted: But
that the Power of God might appear in our despised Weakness against this Pride
of Man, These Sons of Honor, as they would be thought, did even in both the
same Letters, unequally subjoyn to these high Vapors, an offer of Treaty for
Surrender: During which time, News came from Catherlagh, That it had pleased
God, beyond, or much before Expectation, upon our Men's Battering, and then
taking by Storm (without Loss on our part) a small Tower on their Bridge over
the Barrow, to bring down the Enemies hearts to a Treaty, and Surrender of that
strong and important Place. Hereupon the Deputy conceiving Waterford to be
attemptible by force in one or two places, though otherwise exceedingly
fortified: while preparations were made for that Attempt, the Lord wrought upon
the hearts of the Enemy to desire a Treaty, without their terms of Honor, which
formerly they insisted on; by which, after high Demands, rejected on our part
with Indignation, they were on Tuesday the Sixth of this instant August,
brought to Surrender upon Articles, which was performed on Saturday following;
At which time there marched out about Seven hundred men well armed, the
Townsmen more numerous then before was believed, and the Town better Fortified
in all parts, and more difficult to be attempted then our Forces conceived,
there being many private Stores, sufficient to have maintained them a long
time: whereby we may see the Hand of God, in over-powering the hearts of the
Enemy, which was the only cause of their present Surrender. By this of
Waterford and Catherlagh, God was pleased to extend his Hand toward Duncannon,
the Enemy there (though a Priest were Governor) having on the same Saturday,
with Colonel Cooks leave, sent one to Waterford, to see whether it were
Surrendered, did on the Eleventh of this Month desire a Treaty, which produced,
through the same Divine Mercy, a Surrender of the same Castle of Duncannon,
upon Articles, on Saturday the seventeenth of this Month; since which time,
the strong Garrison and Castle of Charlemount is likewise Surrendered, whereby
the whole Province of Ulster is now entirely in the Power of the Parliament.

FOr all which great Mercies, the Parliament does Order and Appoint, That all
Ministers of the several Congregations within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the late Lines of Communication, and Weekly Bills of
Mortality, do in their respective Churches and Chapels return humble Thanks
unto Almighty God, on the next Lord's Day, being the First day of September
next: And all Ministers of all other Churches and Chapels within England,
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, do upon that day Fortnight, being the
Fifteenth day of the said Month of September, render Thanks to God for the
same. And that upon the said respective days, all and every the said Ministers
do Read this Order and Narrative in their said Congregations, immediately
after the Psalm before the Sermon, for the better stirring up of the hearts of
the People to praise God for the same.

Die Veneris, 30o Augusti, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order and Declaration be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.


