An Order for the six Regiments to Advance toward READING.
By the Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Committee for the MILITIA of LONDON.
THE Committee for the Militia of London, and parts adjacent within the Lines
of Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bill of Mortality,
apprehending that the taking and possessing of Reading by the Kings Forces,
will be a very great means to hinder Trade and Victuals, and all other
intercourse unto the Cities of London and Westminster, from the West part of
the Kingdom, to the very great detriment of the said City and parts adjacent,
and being moved by the Parliament, and also by my Lord General his Excellency,
have thought fit to propound unto the several Commanders and Officers of, and
belonging to the said Forces, to draw forth speedily, some considerable
strength, to join with his Excellency for prevention thereof. And finding them
most ready and willing to undertake the Service, and six Regiments being
forthwith to March for that purpose, the several Ministers of the Parish
Churches within the parts aforesaid, are desired on the next Lords day, being
the eighth of October, 1643. Effectually to stir up all those Soldiers which
belong to the said Regiments, Cheerfully upon summons by Drums or otherwise,
to repair to their Colors, and to March forth with their Commanders
accordingly, the same tending to the preservation of our Religion, Lives, and
Liberties, and of all that is dear unto us. And all Constables, and other his
Majesty's Officers within the limits aforesaid, are required to be aiding and
assisting in the execution of the premises, as they shall be directed by the
several Commanders and Officers of the Regiments aforesaid.

Guildhall London, the 7. of October, 1643.
Let this be read and published, as is desired.

ISAAC PENNINGTON, Mayor.


