AN ORDER OF The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; For all Papists,
Officers, Soldiers of Fortune, and all other Delinquents that have adhered to,
or assisted the Enemy in the late War against the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, to
depart out of the Lines of Communication and twenty miles distant at the least,
before the Eighteenth of this present DECEMBER, Or else to be imprisoned and
proceeded against as TRAITORS, Except such Persons as are herein Excepted.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled taking notice of the great
Confluence and resort of Papists, Officers, and Soldiers of Fortune, and such
as have borne Arms against the Parliament of England, and have adhered to and
assisted the Enemy in the late War, unto the Cities of London and
Westminster, and other parts within the Lines of Communication, Do for the
prevention of such Inconveniences as may thereby arise, think fit to Order,
And it is hereby Ordered by the said Lords and Commons, That all Papists
whatsoever, And all Officers, and Soldiers of Fortune, and other persons that
have borne Arms against the Parliament of England, or have adhered to or
assisted the Enemy in this late War, not being under restraint, do before
the eighteenth day of this instant December, Depart out of the said Cities of
London and Westminster, and Lines of Communication at least twenty Miles
distant from the the said Lines. And if any such person shall continue within
the said Lines, or the said distance of twenty Miles from the said Lines, after
that time, such person shall be apprehended, imprisoned, and proceeded against
as a Traitor.

And the said Lords and Commons do further Order that all such persons do
forbear, upon the penalty aforesaid, to return or come within the said Lines,
or the said distance of twenty Miles, without License under the hands of the
Committee appointed for Compositions at Goldsmiths Hall.

And the Committee of the Militia of London, and their Sub-Committees in their
several Limits respectively, are hereby required to keep strict Guards and
Watches, and cause frequent Searches to be made, and to take care for the due
Execution of this Order.

Provided that this Order, or any thing therein contained shall not extend to
any person or persons, who shall obtain License under the hands of the
Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, to continue within the Limits aforesaid, for
attending their Compositions only.

Provided that this Order or any thing herein contained shall not extend to any
person or persons who came in to the Parliament before the first day of June
1645. and are cleared by both Houses of Parliament for their Delinquency, or to
any person or persons that have since come in and and made their peace with the
Parliament, and sued out their pardons.

Provided also that no Peer of this Realm shall resort unto the Committee of
Goldsmiths Hall for License to continue within the Limits aforesaid, but shall
repair only unto the House of Peers for their said License. This Order to
continue for the space of two Months after the said eighteenth day of December,
and no longer.

12. December 1646.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, That this ORDINANCE
be forthwith printed and published by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet on
Monday morning next: And that the Committee of the Militia of the City of
London do take care that it be published accordingly.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband. December 14. 1646*


