Die Martis, 19 Julii, 1642.
AN ORDER OF Both Houses of Parliament, FOR ENCOVRAGEMENT OF VOLVNTIERS Within
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, to use and execise in a
disciplinable manner under such Commanders, and in such Places as shall be
appointed by the Lord Lieutenants, and others according to the Ordinance of
Parliament. For which Service they shall have the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament for their Indemnity for so doing.
WHereas well-affected Persons within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, may be desirous as Volunteers, to Exercise themselves in the use of
their Arms, by peaceable Training, and marching under the Lord Lieutenants, and
others appointed by the Ordinance of Parliament; It is thought fit, and so
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all such person
or persons whatsoever in the several Counties, Cities, Towns Corporate, and
other places within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, as shall
desire, and willingly submit themselves to be Trained, and Exercised in the use
of their Arms under the Lo: Lieutenants, and others of the several Counties,
and Cities of England and Wales, authorized by Ordinance of Parliament, or
under such Captains appointed by them may from time to time hereafter in a
peaceable and orderly way assemble themselves in companies to Train, and learn
to Exercise themselves in the use of their Arms, and order of marching at such
convenient times, and in such places as shall be thought fit by their
Commanders, or Captains appointed by the Lo: Lieutenants for that purpose,
until other order shall be herein taken by both Houses of Parliament; And that
they shall be saved harmless for so doing, by the Authority of both the said
Houses; And that all Majors, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
and other His Majesty's Officers, that shall encourage and assist the said
persons in the peaceable and quiet Training, and Exercising themselves as
aforesaid, shall be held by both Houses of Parliament to have done a very
acceptable service therein; And that they, and every of them shall have the
Authority of both Houses of Parliament for their indemnity for so doing.

Ordered that this be forthwith Printed.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by L. N. and J. F. for E. Husbands and J. Franck, and are to
be sold at his shop at the King's Head in Fleetstreet. July 28. 1642.


