AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Authorizing the
Committee of Lords and Commons for the ARMY and Treasurerrs at WARS, For the
better levying and orderly issuing forth of the Sixty thousand pounds per
mensem, assessed or to be assessed by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament of
the 23. June last past, to have the care and managing of that whole Business,
as to those ends and purposes in the said Ordinance, and in this present
Ordinance, are expressed.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 28. 1647.

23 Septembr. 1647.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For Members of
both Houses to be a Committee for the ARMY, for disposing of the Sixty thousand
pounds a Month.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament of the Three and twentieth of June last
past (entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
For the raising of Moneys to be employed toward the maintenance of Forces
within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight; and for
the speedy Transporting of, and paying the Forces for the carrying on of the
War of Ireland) the Monthly sum of Sixty thousand pounds is to be forthwith
Assessed on the respective Counties, Cities and places therein mentioned,
within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, to continue for Twelve
Months from the Five and twentieth of March last past, 1647. until the Five
and twentieth of March next, 1648. but no persons are nominated and appointed
by the said Ordinance to receive and issue the s^id Moneys; To the end
therefore that the Moneys appointed to be Taxed and Lovied by the said
Ordinance of Parliament, may be more orderly received and issued out, The Lords
and Commons in Parliament assembled have Ordained, and be it Ordained by
Authority of Parliament, That Sir John Wollaston Knight, Thomas Adams, John
Warner, Thomas Andrews, and George Witham, Aldermen of the City of London,
Francis Allein, and John Dethick of London, Merchants, shall be Treasurers at
Wars for the receiving and issuing forth of all the Moneys to be assessed,
levied and paid by ^ertue of the said Ordinance of the 23 of June last past,
for the purposes therein mentioned, according to the Directions hereafter
expressed. And be it likewise Ordained, That the said Treasurers at Wars shall
receive from the several Collectors and Officers appointed and to be appointed
by virtue of the said Ordinance, all the Moneys to be taxed, levied and paid by
virtue thereof; And all and every the said Collectors and Officers are hereby
enjoined and required to pay unto the said Treasurers all the said several sums
of Money which shall be by them received by virtue of the said Ordinance, to be
by the said Treasurers issued forth to the intents and purposes therein
mentioned, and the charges incident to the same: And that every County, City,
Borough and other place, may be fully assessed, according to the Rate by the
said Ordinance of the 23. of June last, intended to be taxed and assessed upon
them: And in case there should be default in any of the Commissioners appointed
by the said Ordinance, in the making of the said Assessment, or in any County,
City, Borough or other place in paying of the sums assessed, or to be assessed,
or any negligence or default in any Assessor, Collector or other Officer,
Minister or Agent appointed or to be appointed by virtue of the said Ordinance;
And for the more effectual carrying on of the whole work, Be it Ordained, That
the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Kent, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of
Pembroke, the Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Denbigh, the Earl of Warwick, the
Lord Viscount Say and Seal, the Lord Wharton, the Lord Howard, Mr. Solicitor,
Sir Henry Vane junior, Mr. Crew, Mr. Pierrepont, Colonel Mountague, Nathanael
Fiennes, Sir John Evelyn, Mr. Ellis, Mr. Reynolds, Colonel Venne, Mr. Thomas
Hodges, Mr. Pury, Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Bond, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Scawen, Sir
Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Mr. Leman, Mr. Luke Hodges, and Mr.
Robert Jenneur, Mombers of the Commons House of Parliament: And the said
Treasurers, or any five of them, whereof four to be Members of either of the
Houses of Parliament, shall have the care and managing of the Businesses upon
the said Ordinance, for the better bringing in of the moneys assessed or to be
assessed upon or by virtue of the said Ordinance, for payment of the said
Forces therein mentioned, and of the charges incident thereunto, with all such
Powers and Authorities to them or any of them, given, limited and expressed in
an Ordinance of Parliament bearing date the fifteenth day of February, 1645.
And the said Committee and Treasurers, or any five of them as aforesaid, shall
have full power, and they are hereby authorized in as full and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as are given, limited or mentioned in an Ordinance of
Parliament dated the Twelfth day of June, 1645. unto the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall for Scots Affairs, to manage the Ordinance of the Twentieth of
February, 1644. to cause the full and speedy assessing, collecting and bringing
in of the said moneys, either by making Dispatches, appointing of Forces, or
giving Directions, Rules or Instructions, or otherwise to cause obedience
thereunto, as to them in their wisdoms and good discretions shall seem most fit
and expedient, be it by Fine or Imprisonment of the parties offending, the Fine
not exceeding Twenty pounds, to be employed for the use of the aforesaid Forces
mentioned in the said Ordinance.

And be it farther Ordained, That the Receipt of the said Treasurers, or any
two of them, shall be a sufficient Discharge to every Collector or other person
that shall pay in any money that shall be taxed, levied and paid by virtue of
the said Ordinance of the Three and twentieth of June last past: And that the
said Members of the House of Commons, or any five of them, shall have power,
and are hereby authorized to give Warrants to the said Treasurers at War, or
any two of them, for the issuing forth of such moneys as they shall receive by
virtue of the said Ordinance; And in the same Warrant it shall be expressed for
what purpose the money contained in the same is to be issued: And the said
Warrants, with a Receipt thereupon under the Hand of the party to whom the same
is directed to be paid, or his Assignee or Assignees, shall be a sufficient
Discharge to the said Treasurers and every of them, for so much as they shall
thereupon issue forth. And it is also Ordained, That all the moneys raised or
to be raised by virtue of the said Ordinance, shall be employed only for the
purposes, uses and intents therein mentioned and expressed, and no otherwise:
And no Warrant shall be made from the said Committee, or any other, or if
issued, shall be obeyed, but only for the purposes aforesaid.

And it is also farther Ordained, That the said Treasurers at Wars for their
pains in receiving and issuing forth of all the moneys raised or to be raised
and received by virtue of the said recited Ordinance, and this present
Ordinance, and in consideration, they shall execute the employment of the
Treasurer at Wars, shall have three pence for every pound they shall receive
and issue forth of the moneys taxed, levied and paid by virtue of the said
recited Ordinance, or this present Ordinance; And shall also have three pounds
five shillings four pence per diem, to be disposed of as they shall think fit,
for the payment of such persons as they shall think meet to make use of, for
the better execution of the said employment of Treasurer at Wars, and all other
charges allowed to Sir Gilbert Gerrard as Treasurer at Wars, and shall issue
moneys for the same without any farther or other allowance, the said allowances
to be paid monthly.

And be it farther Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said Committee
and Treasurers at Wars do make due allowance and payment of all Freequarter
taken by any the Forces mentioned in the said Ordinance, since the said Five
and twentieth day of March last, and also from henceforth to be taken by them,
or any of them, according to such proportions, and in such manner as they or any
of them did allow the same, or cause to be paid out of the assessments for the
Army in the association; and to put in execution the Instructions, Rules and
Directions, made and Ordained in that behalf by both Houses of Parliament,
bearing Date the Sixteenth day of May, 1645.

Resolved, etc.
THat John Braudlin Esquire, Peter Fisher Gentleman, Robert Damon Gentleman, be
added as Commissioners in the County of Suffolk, to the Ordinance for
Threescore thousand pounds a Month, for the Armies of England and Ireland.

Resolved, etc.
That John Braudlin Esquire, Peter Fisher Gentleman, Manuel Sorrel Gentleman,
and Robert Damon Gentlman, be added as Commissioners in the County of Suffolk,
to the Ordinance for Threescore thousand pounds a Month, for the Armies of
England and Ireland.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

