AN ORDINANCE OF EXPLANATION AND Further Enlargement of a former ORDINANCE Made
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for Sequestration of Delinquents
Estates.

With an Oath for renouncing of POPERY.

August 19. 1643.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Laurence Blaikelocke, and are to be sold at his Shop near
Temple Bar. Aug. 21. 1643.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, in Parliament, for explanation of a
former Ordinance for sequestration of Delinquents estates.
FOr explanation and enlargement of an Ordinance lately made by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, for Seizing and Sequestring the Estates both Real and
Personal of certain kinds of notorious Delinquents;

Be it now Declared and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons assembled, That
in the number of such Delinquents and Papists, who shall come within the
compass of the said former Ordinance, and to all Intents and Purposes to be
proceeded against, as notorious Delinquents or Papists, expressly described in
the said Ordinance, shall be reckoned and accounted, all such as voluntarily
absenting themselves from the usual places of their abodes, or dwellings,
Trade, Offices, or Employments, and have gone, or shall go to any of the Kings
Armies, or other Forces raised without consent of both Houses of Parl. and have
there continued, or shall there continue, and shall not within ten days after
Seizure or Sequestration of their several goods or estates, or stay made of
their Rents by force of the said Ordinance (which said Sequestrators are hereby
required to do) show sufficient cause to be allowed by the Committee of the
County, City, or Place in which the said Seizure or Sequestration, or stay of
Rents, is, or shall be made, of such their absence, going, and continuing in
any of the said Armies or Forces: And all such as shall fraudulently imbezle,
conceal, or convey away, all, or any part of their goods, money, or estate,
without valuable consideration, or not bona fide thereby preventing or avoiding
the payment of any taxes or Assesments laid upon them by any Ordinance of both
Houses of Parl. or any distress or seizure in case of non-payment thereof; or
that after any such Tax or Assessment laid on them, convey themselves away, or
refuse to be spoken with, whereby any Tax or Assessment laid upon them by
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament cannot be executed upon them or their
estates, according to the true meaning and purport thereof: or that wittingly
or willingly conceal or harbor any goods or persons of Delinquents, within
this or the said former Ordinance, or that have had any hand in the late horrid
and desperate Conspiracy and Treason of Waller, Tompkins, Challinor, and their
Confederates, whether they be already, or hereafter shall be Convicted to be
privy or consenting thereunto (except such as being not yet convicted shall
discover and confess all that they know thereof, within the time limited by
both Houses of Parliament, to such person or persons as are or shall be
appointed to take such discove^^^s and Confessions) or that shall sue or molest
any person or persons who shall have yielded obedience or conformity unto the
Orders, Ordinances, or Commands of both Houses of Parliament, or have been, or
shall be employed by authority of both the said Houses, for, or by reason of
any thing done, or to be done, in execution or performance thereof, or that
have willingly harbored any Popish Priests or Jesuits in their houses or
dwellings since the 29 of November 1642. or that shall hereafter so harbor
any: And all and every person or persons which at any time heretofore have been
convicted of Popish Recusancy, and so continue, or that have been or shall be
thereof Indicted, and such their Indictwents removed by Certiorary, or being
not removed shall not by appearance and Traverse be legally discharged, before
Seizure or Sequestration made of their goods or estates, or stay of their
Rents, by force of this, or the said former Ordinance, or that have been at
Mass, at any time within one whole year before the 26 day of March 1643. or
shall hereafter be at Mass; or whose Children or Grandchildren, or any of
them living in house with them, or under their, or any of their Tuition and
Government, shall be brought up in the Popish Religion: and all such persons as
being of the age of 21 years, or above, shall refuse to take the Oath hereafter
expressed; which Oath any two or more of the said Committees for Sequestration,
in every County, City, or place respectively, or any 2 Justices of the Peace,
or the Major, Bailiffs or other head-Officer of any City or Town Corporate,
shall have ^^wer to administer to any such person or persons; The Tenor of
which Oath follows, in hac verba, viz.

The Oath.
I A. B. Do abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in General, and over my Self in Particular; And I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever; And I do also believe, that there is not any Purgatory; Or that the
Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, or Images, ought to be worshipped, or that any
worship is due unto any of them; And I also believe that Salvation cannot be
Merited by Works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said Points; I do
abjure and renounce, without any Equivocation, Mentall-Reservation, or secret
Evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the common and
usual meaning of them.

So help me God.

Shall forfeit as Papists within this and the said former Ordinances, and
Seizure and Sequestration of two third parts of all their goods and estates
Real and personal, and sale of such proportion of their goods so Seized and
Sequestered, shall be made, and their Rents and estates disposed of, in such
manner and proportion, and by such persons as by the said Ordinance of
Sequestrations is appointed for Papists.

And for the better discovery of such Delinquents and Papists, in this, and the
said former Ordinance described, and of their estates; Be it further Ordained,
by the said Lords and Commons, That over and besides the former power given by
the said Ordinance of Sequestration to the persons trusted and employed in the
said Service, the said Committees for Sequestrations, or any two or more of
them respectively, shall have power further hereby, to examine by Oath or
otherwise, all and every person or persons (other then the parties themselves
so declared to be Delinquents) that probably may be able to discover such
Delinquents and Papists, or that may be trusted with, or privy to the keeping
or concealing of the goods or estates of any such delinquent or Papist, or that
shall owe any thing to any such delinquent or Papist, and such as shall refuse
so to be examined, or to declare the whole truth therein, so far as he shall
be so required, shall be committed to safe Custody by the said Committee, or
any two or more of them, employed for their ex^minations, till he or they shall
conform him, her, or themselves.

And that such person or persons as shall first find out and discover to one
or both Houses of Parliament, or to any Committee authorized for this Service,
or to any of their Agents or Officers, any such moneys, goods, debts, or
estates (if the same be imbezelled, eloyned, concealed, or conveyed away, as
aforesaid) shall do therein an acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and
shall have and receive for his p^ins therein 12. d. in every twenty shillings,
so discovered after Seizure or sale thereof made, and receipt of the money
arising thereupon, or out of the Rents or estate so discovered, the same to be
paid unto him by the respective Committees, or Treasu^ers trusted with the
moneys that shall be received upon the Sale, or Proceed thereof, without any
further or other Warrant, and shall further receive such other reward for his
extraordinary service therein, as by the said LORDS and COMMONS shall be
further appointed and Ordered: And for the more speedy and effectual Seizure,
and obtaining possession of all such Debts, Goods, and estates, as aforesaid,
discovered, or to be discovered.

It is further Ordained, That over and besides the Power given by the said
former Ordinance for Sequestration, the several and respective COMMITTEES,
appointed for this Service, or any two, or more of them, shall hereby have
Power to authorize their several Collectours, and Agents, employed herein, to
break open all Locks, Bolts, Bars, doors, or other strength whatsoever,
where any such estates, moneys, or goods, are or shall be, upon probable
grounds made appear to the said Committees or any two of them, and by them
allowed in writing under their hands, to be provided that some or one of the
said Committee, or the Solicitor, or Constable, or some other known Officer of
that County or Place; and one other person or persons of credit and trust be
present at the doing thereof; and it is further ordained, that an exact
Inventory, subscribed by all their hands, be taken of all particulars
whatsoever, which shall be seized by virtue of these Ordinances: and one part
of the said Inventory in writing so subscribed, delivered to the owner or
owners of the said money, goods, or estates, or other things so Inventoried, or
to some person trusted with the keeping thereof. And that where any Rents,
Debts, or Estate pertaining to any Delinquent or Papist within this or the said
former Ordinance for sequestration shall be found due, and the Debtor refuses
or neglects to pay the same, upon any pretense whatsoever, reasonable time
being given to provide it, after it be come payable, and demand thereof made,
the said Committees, their Collectors or other Agents whom they shall authorize
thereunto under their hands in writing, shall hereby have power to distraine,
seize, carry away, and sell so much of the goods and estate of every such
person so refusing or neglecting as aforesaid, as may fully satisfy the said
Rents or other Debts, together with all charges of seizure, removal, and sale
of goods for satisfaction of the said Rents, or Debts: And if any person or
persons shall stand out or forbear to make payment of any sum or sums of
money which he or they ought to pay by virtue of this or any other Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament whatsoever, made for the raising of moneys, until a
distress be taken for the same; that then he or they so standing out or
forbearing, shall pay such double charges for all such seizures, removeall, and
sale of their goods, as the Committee or any two or more of them respectively
shall allow or appoint; the same to be levied and taken out of the goods and
estates of such persons so standing out or forbearing, by such as shall be
employed to distraine for, and seize the principal sum. And if any person or
persons shall undertake for the forth coming of any goods or estate at any
time seized, by force of this or the said former Ordinance, all and every the
said goods or estate shall be particularly Inventoried, and the Inventory
thereof signed and subscribed by three or more persons of credit, and after
given in to the Committee, under whom the persons making the seizure shall be
employed; and if it shall after happen, that any of the said goods or estate
be imbezilled or wanting, or be denied or refused, or not delivered to the
said respective Committee, or to their Collectors, requiring the same by order
of the said Committee, or any two or more of them respectively, that then the
said Committee, or such as they shall authorize thereunto, shall have power to
seize, carry away, and sell so much of such undertakers goods or personal
estate, and profits of his Lands and Tenements, as may fully satisfy for the
goods or estate so wanting, imbezilled, or not delivered; and also so much
double charges for the seizure, carriage, and sale of the said undertakers
goods or estate so to be seized and sold, as the said Committees, or any two or
more of them, shall allow.

And for the better enabling of the said several Committees, and their Agents,
to make sale of all such goods and estates as are and shall be by them seized,
and are appointed to be sold by this or the said former Ordinance.

It is further declared and ordained, that after the apportioning and setting
out of some necessary maintenance (if it be desired) for the wives and children
of such Delinquents whose goods and estates are and shall be seized (which
allowance or maintenrnce the said several and respective Committees, or any
two or more of them respectively, shall hereby have power to make, so, as they
allow not the wife and children of one Delinquent above one fifth part of his
goods and estate so seized) they shall authorize and require their Collectors
and Agents to make sale of the residue or remainder of the said goods by the
Candle for ready moneys to be paid at the delivery of the goods so sold,
within ten days after the seizure thereof, giving notice of the said sale in
writing upon some posts or walls in the most open and eminent places near the
place of sale two days before the said sale, due appraisment being first made
thereof by two skillful appraisors, being men of some quality, and known
integrity, from time to time to be chosen with the advice of the Solicitor for
sequestrations, by the Committee trusted with the seizure and sale of the said
goods: which appraisment shall be made in the presence of some of the said
Committees, Solicitor, or Treasurer of the same County, City, or place
respectively, and not otherwise. And for the more speedy dispatch hereof, it is
further ordained, that the Committee of Lords and Commons for sequestrations
shall receive no information against the particular C^mmittee of any County,
City, or place for sequestrations in any cause of this kind, till the matter
has first been certified under the hands of two or more of the said
respective Committees by whose Agents and Ministers the goods or estate of the
Delinquent were seized: Or in case the said Committees refuse to certify the
special matter, or that otherwise Certificate cannot be had. And be it
ordained, that honest, able, and sufficient Collectors be appointed in every
County, City, and place for this service, and their neglects or defaults be
certified to the Houses, or to the Committee of Lords and Commons for
Sequestrations.

And that all and every person and persons, who shall be employed in this
service, or shall do any thing in pursuance of this or the said former
Ordinance for Sequestrations, shall therein have the protection of both Houses
of Parliament for their Imdempnity, and be held and este^med as persons doing
an acceptable service to the Commonwealth.

And it is further ordained, that every Collector within every County City and
place respectively, who shall receive any moneys in kind, or make sale of any
goods, shall deliver the moneys so received or raised by sales, to the
Committee for sequestrations within the said County City, or place, where such
moneys shall be received, or to such Treasurer as they shall appoint, or other
person authorized to receive the same within seven days next after the said
Collectors receipt thereof, upon pain of forfiture of twelfe pence for every
twenty shillings, received or levied by sale as aforesaid, and remaining in his
or their hands, which Committee or Treasurer, shall take order for the safe
sending of all, and every sum so received to the Treasurer at Guild Hall in
London appointed for this purpose, Monthly, or more often, as they shall be
thereunto required by the said Treasurors at Guild Hall, or by the said
Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, or by the Committee of Lords
and Commons for advance of moneys; and that the several Committees,
Collectors, and Treasurers respectively, shall have power to give acquittances
and discharges for the several sums by them received, which shall be
sufficient discharges to the parties concerned in that behalf.

And it is further ordained and declared, That Master Hobson, Master
Bernardiston, Master Hill, and Master Samuel Avery, Citizens of London, shall
be and are hereby appointed, and authorized to be Treasurers at Guild Hall
London, to receive all moneys raised and to be raised upon, or by virtue of
this, or the said former Ordinance for Sequestrations, and shall make entries
thereof in fair books ^o be provided for that purpose, as also of the names of
the persons, from whom, and the time when they receive the same, and of their
disbursements and payments out; for which their pains and service, they shall
have three pence in every pound, which they shall so receive to be debated out
of the said sums received.

And it is further ordained that no Treasurers trusted with any part of the
said moneys, shall issue out any of the said moneys by way of payment, loan,
or otherwise, (except as in this Ordinance is appointed) otherwise then and in
such manner as is directed by former Ordinance for issuing out of moneys; and
for the more exact and perfect keeping of all accounts touching the premises;
it is yet further ordained, that every Collector shall from time to time, make
and keep a sure and perfect Inventary of all and every the moneys, goods, and
estates by him seized, another of the sale or other disposal thereof; both of
which shall be subscribed under the hands of two or more persons of credit that
were present at the said seizures or sales, besides his own, and that he make
and ingrosse a duplicate thereof in parchment, fairly written, one part whereof
he shall leave with the particular Committee, under which he is employed; and
the other part after examination thereof, he shall deliver to the Solicitor
for that place, who shall transmit the same to the Committee of Lords and
Commons for advance of money subscribed by the said Solicitor, and Collector,
and two of the said particular Committee of the place from whence it is
transmitted, all which accounts and duplicats shall be made and sent up to
London in such manner and so often as the said Committee of Lords and Commons
for advance of money, shall from time to time order and appoint: Provided
always, and be it ordained, that it shall be lawful for the respective
Committes for sequestrations, or any two or more of them to accept of ready
money for the goods of the said Delinquents or Papists, or any of them which
shall or are to be seized according to the value thereof, in leiw and
satisfaction of the said goods, and thereupon the seizure and sequestration, as
to the same, to be discharged.

And be it ordained that if any person shall wittingly or willingly conceal
and harbor any of the goods of any Delinquents within this or the said former
Ordinance (he knowing such person to be a Delinquent) that then such persons
shall forfeit treble the value thereof, to be levied upon his or their goods
and estates, by the said respective Committee or Sequestrators, or any two or
more of them, or their agents, to the uses appointed by the said Ordinances for
Delinquents Estates.

FINIS.

