Die Lunae, 8 Aprilis, 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for continuance
of the Excise or New-Impost for one whole year longer, To commence the eleventh
of September next, 1644.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled have found it necessary
to continue the several Rates and Charges of Excise and New-Impost, mentioned
and expressed in an Ordinance of both Houses, dated the eleventh of September
last; Be it hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That the said Ordinance of the eleventh of September last, and every
Clause, Sentence and Article therein contained, and now in force, and the
several Rates of Excise and New-Impost imposed and directed by the said
Ordinance, or any other Ordinance or Ordinances concerning the government and
ordering of the Excise since made, which at present are in force, shall
continue and be received upon all and every the Commodities therein mentioned
and charged, thorowout the Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick, for one whole year longer, to commence the eleventh of September next
ensuing the date hereof. And it is further hereby ordained and declared, That
John Towse Esquire, Alderman of the City of London; Thomas Foot Esquire,
Alderman of the City of London; John Kendrick Esquire, Alderman of the City of
London; Thomas Cullum Esquire, Alderman of the City of London; Simon Edmonds,
John Lamott and Edward Claxton of the said City of London Esquires, the present
Commissioners of the Excise, shall remain and continue chief Commissioners and
Governors of the whole Office and Receipts of the Excise and New-Impost, in
and through the whole Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick; and shall and may do and execute, and cause to be done and executed,
all and every the Clauses, Articles and other thing and things whatsoever,
ordained, mentioned and contained in the said Ordinance of the eleventh of
September last, or in any other Ordinance or Ordinances concerning the Excise,
which at present are in force, in the same manner and form as they are directed
and authorized thereby to do and execute, for and during the said term of one
year longer, to commence from the eleventh of September next following, as
aforesaid; with the like Allowances as at present, of six pence upon every
twenty shillings raised and levied out of the Receipts of the Excise and
New-Impost.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum

London, Printed by Richard Cotes and John Raworth.


