AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, AGAINST
Unlicensed or Scandalous PAMPHLETS, AND For the better Regulating of PRINTING.

28 Septembr. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler.Parl.D.Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 30. 1647.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, against
Unlicensed or Scandalous Pamphlets, and for the better Regulating of Printing.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled taking notice of the many
Seditious, False and Scandalous Papers and Pamphlets daily printed and
published in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, and thence
dispersed into all parts of this Realm, and other parts beyond the Seas, to the
great abuse and prejudice of the People, and insufferable reproach of the
proccedings of the PARLIAMENT and their Army; for the better suppression
thereof, and prevention of the like inconveniences in time to come, do Order
and Ordain, and be it Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That
what person soever shall Make, Write, Print, Publish, Sell or Utter, or cause
to be Made, Written, Printed, Published, Sold or Uttered, any Book, Pamphet,
Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet or Sheets of News whatsoever (except the same be
Licensed by both or either House of Parliament, or by such person or persons as
shall be thereunto Authorized by one or both Houses of Parliament) with the
Name of the Author, Printer and Licenser thereunto prefixed, shall for every
such Offense, suffer, pay and incur the Punishment, Fine and Penalty hereafter
mentioned; that is to say, The Maker, Writer or Composer of any such Unlicensed
Book, Pamphlet, Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet or Sheets of News, shall forfeit
and pay Forty shillings, or be Imprisoned in the Common Goal for the County or
Liberty where the Offense is committed, or the Offender shall be found, until
he shall pay the same, so that the said Imprisonment exceed not Forty days; The
Printer to forfeit and pay. Twenty shillings, and suffer the like Imprisonment,
until he pay the same, the said Imprisonment not exceeding Twenty days, and
likewise to have his Press and Implements of Imprinting seized and broken in
pieces; The Bookseller or Stationer to forfeit and pay ten shillings, or be
Imprisoned in like manner until he pay the same, the Imprisonment not exceeding
Ten days; And the Hawker, Peddler or Ballad-singer to forfeit and lose all his
Books, Pamphlets and printed Papers exposed to sale, and also to be whipped as a
Common Rogue in the Liberty or Parish where the said Offender shall be
apprehended, or the Offense committed.

And it is farther Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the several and
respective Members of the Committees for the Militia in London, Middlesex and
Surrey, and all Majors and other head-Officers of Corporations, and all
Justices of the Peace of the several Counties, Cities and Liberties within this
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, and every of them in their respective
Liberties and Jurisdictions, be hereby authorized and required to put this
Ordinance in execution; and all Constables, Headboroughs, and other Officers
and Ministers are hereby authorized and required, together with such assistants
as they shall call unto them, to enter into any Shop or House where they shall
be informed, or have good cause to suspect any such unlicensed Pamphlets and
Papers are Printed, Sold or Uttered, and to take and seize the same, and
likewise all Presses and Implements of Printing, and to bring them, together
with the Offenders and all other Offenders against this Ordinance, before the
said Members of the Committees, Majors, head-Officers and Justices of the
Peace, or any one of them, that the Fines, Pains and Penalties beforementioned
may be imposed and inflicted upon the same Offenders, according to the
intention and meaning of this Ordinance. And it is also Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That the view of any one Justice of the Peace,
head-Officer or Member of the Committees aforesaid, or the Oath of one credible
Witness (which Oath in such cases they and every one of them are hereby
authorized to administer) shall be a sufficient conviction of any Offender in
the cases before-recited; And the same Justice of the Peace, Major or other
head-Officer or Member of the Committees aforesaid, have hereby Authority to
dispose one Moiety of the Fine paid by virtue of this Ordinance, to the
Collectors for the Poor of the Liberty or Parish where the Offense is
committed, and the other Moiety to the person or persons who shall discover and
prosecute the said Offenders. And finally it is Ordained, That all persons
acting any thing by virtue of this Ordinance, shall be saved harmless and
indempnified by Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, That the Penalties in this
Ordinance expressed, shall not extend to acquit any person or persons that
shall Make, Write, Print, Publish, Sell or Utter, or cause to be Made, Written,
Published, Sold or Uttered, any Book, Pamphlet, Treatise, Ballad, Libel, Sheet
or Sheets of News that shall contain any Seditious, Treasonable or Blasphemous
matter, but the Offenders in that kind shall be liable to such farther
penalties as by the Laws of this Land are provided, or by Authority of
PARLIAMENT shall be adjudged according to the penalty of such Offenses.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

