Die Jovis 29. Febr. 1643.
AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons Assembled IN PARLIAMENT, Enabling the
Commissioners of the Customs to make sail of certain Parcels of Currants
formerly seized upon by Order of Parliament: And that the Moneys so arising be
paid to Sir WALTER EARL for the use of Reformado Officers.
WHEREAS several Parcels of Currants have since the last day of September
1642. been brought into the Port of London, and several other Ports and Creeks
within this Kingdom, contrary to an Ordinance of Parliament made the twenty
sixth day of August 1642. In which respect they have by the Officers and others
thereunto authorized, been Seized upon, as forfeited; But not being put to
Sail, or otherwise disposed off, do begin to perish, and if some course be not
taken for the disposal of them, are likely to become of no use. It is Ordained
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Commissioners of the Customs
do take Accounts of the said several Parcels of Currants within the Port of
London, or any the Out-ports; And do forthwith nominate and appoint certain
persons of trust to make sail thereof, to such as will give most for them,
allowing one fourth part of the Money raised thereby, to such persons as did
Seize the same, and reserving the Remainder for such uses as are hereafter
expressed: And whereas over and above the Zant Currants brought into the River
of Thames in the Ship Faulcon, now lately arrived, diverse other parcels of
Currants which were taken out of the Ship Lion, and the Ship Angel, lately
arrived in the Downs, and since gone for Holland, to the quantity of thirty
Tuns, or thereabout, are likewise brought into the said River in Barques, and
other Vessels. It is further Ordered by the said Lords and Commons, That the
Commissioners and Officers of the Customs, do make Entries thereof, and suffer
the same to be Landed; The Merchant or Owners paying six shillings for each
hundred weight, over and above the Customs and Excize due for the same: And
that all and every the Sums which shall be raised by any the ways or means
aforesaid, excepting the said Customs, and the fourth part of the Seizures
before mentioned, shall by the said Commissioners and Officers, be paid over
unto Sir WALTER EARL, for and toward the Payment and satisfaction of the
Arreares due unto Reformado Officers.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

London Printed by L. N. for LAURENCE BLAIKLOCK, and are to be sold at his shop
near Temple-Barre. March 13. 1644.


