22. Febr. 1644.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament; Commanding all
Officers and Soldiers, upon pain of Death, to repair to their Colors within
Eight and forty hours after notice of this Ordinance.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, That all Officers and Soldiers (other then such as shall have leave
or License, from the Lord-Generall, or other Commander in chief, shall and do
within Eight and forty hours after notice of this Ordinance) upon pain of Death
repair to their several Colors: And all Officers are hereby enjoined to take
special care to keep their Soldiers together, as they will answer the
contrary at their extremest peril. And for the more speedy and effectual
execution of this Ordinance, It is further Ordained, That the several
Committees of the several and respective Counties, Cities and places, shall
immediately upon receipt hereof, cause the same to be published, in every
Market Town and Parish Church within their respective Limits. And it is further
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Committees and Deputy Lieutenants
of the several Counties aforesaid, or any one of them shall apprehend every
Soldier, who after publication hereof shall not repair to their Colors,
according to this Ordinance, and commit them to prison, and with all convenient
speed take order, that every person so committed, may be sent to his Commander
in chief, To the intent they may be proceeded against according to the course
of War: And every person, that after publication of this Ordinance, shall
willingly harbor or entertain any Officer or Soldier, that has or shall
depart from his Colors (without the Pass of his superior-Officer) shall, for
every Day that he shall so harbor or entertain, forfeit the Sum of Ten
Shillings, to be leavyed by the Warrant of the said Committees, or any two of
them, by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods; And the Committees are
hereby required and enjoined to leavie the said Fines accordingly.

22. Febr. 1644.
ORdered, That Colonel Manwaring be required to cause this Ordinance to be
published by sound of Drum and Trumpet in London, and Lines of Communication:
And those Committees and other persons to whom it does appertain without the
Line, are also required to publish the same in their several Counties, Towns
and Parishes where any Soldiers are, by like beat of Drum, and Trumpet.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw: Husbands. 1644.


