8. Septembr. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For taking away
the Fifth part of Delinquents Estates, formerly granted by an Ordinance of
Parliament for maintaining of the Wives and Children of Delinquents.
WHereas by a late Ordinance of Sequestration it is amongst other things
Declared and Ordained, That the Committees of the several counties shall have
power to assign maintenance out of the Lands of Delinquents, to their several
Wives and Children, so as the same exceed not the Fifth part of the Lands or
Goods so Sequestered: And whereas by occasion hereof, diverse Wives and Children
of Delinquents may resort hither, only to obtain the said Fifth part, and may
be ready to do ill offices to the Parliament; The Lords and Commons, to prevent
the said mischief, and other of like nature, Do Ordain, That no Wife, Child or
Children of any Delinquent, who shall come from their own habitation into the
Parliament Quarters, with or without their Fathers or Husbands, from the Kings
Quarters, shall have, hold and enjoy any Fifth part by the said Ordinance: And
therefore they do Ordain, That all such Allowances hereafter to be made to such
Wife or Children, shall be utterly void. And if any such Wife, Child or
Children shall return from the Kings Quarters, without leave of both Houses:
The Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of Parliament in the several counties,
or any two of them, or any of them, are hereby authorized and required to take
care, that they be commanded to return back into the Kings Quarters; And if
they shall not return, upon command given to them by the Deputy Lieutenants or
Committee, or any two of them, they shall hereby have power to commit them,
until they shall give security for to return. And be it further Ordained, That
no Children of any Delinquents shall have any Fifth part, but such as shall be
educated and brought up in the Protestant Religion.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
September. 11. 1645.


