AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR Keeping of
Scandalous persons from the Scacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER, the Enabling of
Congregations for the choice OF ELDERS, AND Supplying of Defects in former
Ordinances and Directions of PARLIAMENT Concerning CHURCH GOVERNMENT.

Die Sabbathi, 14. Martii. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Hononorable House of
Commons. March 16. 1645.

Die Sabbathi, 14. Martii. 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Being very sensible of the
great Duty which lies upon them to setle Matters concerning Religion and the
Worship of Almighty GOD; And having continually before their Eyes, the COVENANT
which they have so solemnly taken for the performance thereof, and the manifold
motives and encouragements thereunto, which are given them from GOD himself, by
a special Hand of Providence, pouring forth daily mercies upon them: In
discharge of their Duty, and in pursuance of the said Covenant, and in
thankfulness to God for all his Mercies, having diligently applied themselves
to that Work of his House by his Grace and assistance, they have made some
progress therein, not withstanding the exigency of other Affairs, accompanied
often times with great and imminent dangers; And notwithstanding the great
difficulty of the Work it self in diverse respects, and particularly in the
right joynting of what was to be settled with the Laws and Government of the
Kingdom, the want whereof has caused much trouble in this and other States;
yet by the merciful assistance of God, having removed the Book of
Common Prayer, with all its unnecessary and burdensome Ceremonies, and
established the Directory in the room thereof; and having abolished the
Prelatical Hierarchy by Archbishops, Bishops, and their Dependants; and instead
thereof, laid the foundation of a Presbyterial Government in every
Congregation, with Subordination to Classical, Provincial, and National
Assemblies, and of them all to the Parliament; Although it cannot be expected
that a present Rule in every particular should be settled all at once, but that
there will be need of Supplyment and Additions, and happily also of alterations
in some things, as experience shall bring to light the necessity thereof; yet
were the Fundamentals and Substantial parts of that Government long since
settled in persons, by and over whom it was to be exercised, and the nature,
extent and respective Subordination of their power was limited and desined;
only concerning the Administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, how
all such persons as were guilty of notorious and scandalous Offenses, might be
suspended from it, some difficulty arising, nor so much in the Matter it self,
at in the Manner how it should be done, and who should be the Judges of the
Offense: The Lords and Commons having it always in their purpose and
intention, and it being accordingly Declared and Resolved by them, That all
sorts of notorious scandalous Offenders should be suspended from the Sacrament;
For the preventing of an indefinite, and unlimited power in the Elderships,
they held it fit for the present, That the particular Cases of such scandalous
Offenses should be specified and enumerated, with express Declaration, That
further provision should be made by Authority of Parliament, for such Cases as
were left out of the said enumeration; which accordingly having since taken
into their serious consideration, and having had several debates thereupon as
the difficulty of the Matter required, which has taken up much time, for the
avoiding, as far as possible may be, all Arbitrary power; and that all such
Cases wherein persons should be suspended from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, might be brought to the Cognizance, and pass the Judgment of the
Parliament, who were bound in Justice as well to take care that none be in
injuriously detained from that Ordinance, as to give power whereby such may be
kept away who are unfit to partake therein; And to the intent also that a full
and speedy course may be settled to enable the several Elderships to suspend
all such Offenders from the Lords Supper, without having recourse to the
Parliament it self from all parts of the Kingdom upon every such emergent Case,
which might prove troublesome and tedious, and give liberty to such notorious
and scandalous Offenders to communicate a long space in the said Ordinance; and
to the Intent likewise, That all such Cases coming first from the particular
Elderships, may after they have passed the Judgment of Parliament, return
again to all the several Elderships within the Kingdom, to proceed upon them
from time to time in like manner as in the Cases enumerated. For the ends and
purposes aforesaid, and also for supply of some defects in the former
Ordinance, and Directions of Parliament, concerning the choice of ELDERS, and
some other Matters;

I. BE it Ordained, that there be forthwith a choice made of Elders throughout
the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, in the respective Parish
Churches and Chapels, according to such Directions as have already passed both
Houses, bearing date August the nineteenth, One thousand six hundred forty and
five, and since that time; and all Classes and Parochial Congregations, are
respectively hereby Authorized and required forthwith effectually to proceed
therein accordingly.

II. That notice of the Election of Parochial and Congregational Elders, and of
the time when it shall be, be given by the Minister in the public Assembly,
the next Lords day but one before; and that on the said Lords day a Sermon be
Preached preparatory to that weighty business.

III. That such Elections shall be made by the Congregation, or the major part
of them then assembled, being such as have taken the National Covenant, and are
not persons under Age, nor servants that have no Families.

IV. That the Tryers of Elections of Elders, shall have power to receive, hear,
and determine all exceptions brought in to them concerning undue Elections; and
to that end to call before them all such persons so elected, and accepting such
Election, and to send for such Witnesses as shall be nominated unto them by
such persons as shall bring in such exceptions; and shall have power to examine
upon Oath, both the persons bringing in such exceptions, and the said
Witnesses, concerning any undue proceedings in the manner of the said Election,
and concerning all matters of Ignorance or Scandal objected against the party
elected, and expressed in any Ordinance of Parliament, to be a sufficient cause
of suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (and of which, any
Eldership by any Ordinance of Parliament has cognizance and jurisdiction) and
that shall be proved to have been committed within one whole year before the
exceptions exhibited; and that the persons against whom the exceptions are
taken, shall have like liberty to produce Witnesses to be examined in like
manner on their behalf.

V. That the Tryers shall have power to examine, whether the Elders that are to
be chosen, be so qualified as is expressed in the Ordinance or Directions which
has passed both Houses.

VI. That in case the Election of any Elder of a Congregation upon just proof
and examination, be found by the Tryers appointed for that purpose to be
unduely made; the said Tryers may order such Elder to be removed, and another
to be chosen in his place.

VII. That the Chapels or places in the Houses of the King and His Children,
shall continue free for the exercise of Divine Duties to be performed according
to the Directory, and not otherwise.

VIII. That the Chapels or places in the Houses of the Peers of this Realm,
shall have the like freedom.

IX. That the Savoy Parish shall bell reckoned within the eleventh Classis of
London.

X. That the Chapel of the Rolls, the two Sergeants Inns, and the four Inns of
Court, shall be a Province of themselves.

That the Presbytery of the Chapel of the Rolls, the two Sergeants Inns, and
the four Inns of Court, shall be divided into two Classes.

That Lincoln's Inn, Gray's Inn, Serjeants-Inn in Chancery Lane, and the Rolls,
shall be one Classis: That the two Temples, and Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet,
shall be the other Classis.

XI. That the Classical Assemblies in each Province, shall assemble themselves
within one month after they shall be constituted and this Ordinance published,
and shall thenceforth hold their meetings monthly by adjournment, or oftener if
need be, in such a certain place as shall be most convenient for the ease of
the people.

XII. That out of every Congregational Eldership, there shall be two Elders or
more, not exceeding the number of four, and one Minister sent to every Classis.

XIII. That all persons guilty of notorious scandalous offenses, and more
particularly, all renouncers of the true Protestant Religion, professed in the
Church of England; and all persons that shall by preaching or writing, maintain
any such errors as do subvert any of those Articles, the ignorance whereof do
render any person excluded from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: And all
persons that shall make any Images, or Pictures of the Trinity, or of any
person thereof: And all persons in whom malice appears, and they refuse to be
reconciled; and the same appearing upon just proof, all such persons may be
suspended from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

XIV. That in every Province persons shall be chosen by the Houses of
Parliament, that shall be Commissioners to judge of scandalous offenses (not
enumerated in any Ordinance of Parliament) to them presented; And that the
Eldership of that Congregation where the said offense was committed, shall upon
examination and proof of such scandalous offense (in like manner as is to be
done in the offenses enumerated) certify the same to the Commissioners,
together with the proof taken before them, and before the said certificate, the
party accused shall have liberty to make such defense as he shall think fit
before the said Eldership, and also before the Commissioners, before any
certificate shall be made to the Parliament. And if the said Commissioners
after examination of all parties, shall determine the offense so presented and
proved to be scandalous, and the same shall certify to the Congregation, the
Eldership thereof may suspend such person from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in like manner as in cases enumerated in any Ordinance of Parliament.

XV. That such persons as shall be chosen for Commissioners to judge of
notorious and scandalous offenses as aforesaid, shall be men of good
understanding in matters of Religion, sound in the Faith, prudent, discreet,
grave, and of unblameable conversation, and such as do usually receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as Members of a Presbyterial Congregation.

XVI. That if any person shall commit any scandalous offense (not enumerated in
any Ordinance of Parliament) upon the day of the Administration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the face of the Congregation after it is
assembled, the Minister of that Congregation may forbear to administer the
Sacrament to such a person for that time, and he shall within eight days after
certify the said offense and forbearance unto the Commissioners aforesaid; and
upon certificate so made, the said Commissioners shall proceed thereupon as in
other cases not enumerated, and shall make certificate of the case or cases,
with their opinions, to both Houses of Parliament with all speed: And thereupon
the Parliament shall proceed to a final determination of the case, and send the
same determination thereof to the Parish where such offense shall have been
committed; and as often as the like case shall fall out in any Congregation,
the Eldership thereof having notice of such determination, shall proceed
thereupon as in case of offenses enumerated in any Ordinance of Parliament.

XVII. That the said Commissioners upon notice given to them or any two of
them, of any case of scandal befaln (whereof they ought to have cognizance by
virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament) shall assemble themselves in such
certain place within that Province, as may be most convenient for the ease of
the people: And thereof shall give timely notice to the Ministers of that
Province whereof they are Commissioners, and being met shall adjourn their
meeting from time to time, for such time as the case shall require.

XVIII. That the Eldership of each Congregation, or the major part of them, as
also the Classis of each Province or major part of them, and also the
Provincial Commissioners or the major part of them after they shall be
assembled, shall have power by warrant under their hands (in all cases whereof
they have cognizance, by any Ordinance of Parliament) to convent before them
all persons, against whom any complaint shall be brought by virtue of any such
Ordinance, and all such witnesses as shall be named according to any such
Ordinance for the discovery of the Truth of such complaint; and in case any
such person shall refuse to appear, not being a Peer of this Realm, Member of
the House of Commons, or Assistant of the House of Peers, or Officer of either
of the Houses of Parliament, then upon complaint made to the next Justice of
the Peace, the party refusing shall be brought before him; and in case of
obstinate persisting, shall be committed by the said Justice of Peace till he
submit to order.

XIX. That if any Member of a Congregation shall by virtue of any Ordinance of
Parliament for any offense of scandal, be suspended from the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper; and being so suspended, shall offer himself to any other
Congregation to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper together with them,
such Congregation having notice of such suspension, shall not without
certificate from the Congregation whereof he is a Member, admit him unto the
Sacrament.

XX. That any Minister of a Congregation may be suspended from giving or
receiving, and any Elder from receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for
the same causes, and in the same manner, and have the like benefit of Appeal as
any other person may by any Ordinance of Parliament; and after such suspension
of the Elder from the Sacrament, the Elder so suspended, shall not execute that
Office during his suspension, until the Appeal be determined; and if upon
Appeal the suspension appear to have been just, then another to be chosen in
his place.

XXI. That in all cases of Appeal to the Classical, Provincial, or National
Assembly, they shall have power respectively to proceed thereupon by
examination of Witnesses and otherwise, in such manner as the Congregational
Eldership from which the Appeal arises are enabled to do by any Ordinance of
Parliament, and shall certify such their proceedings unto the said Eldership.

XXII. That in case of such suspension of any Minister, the Classis whereunto
the said Congregation does belong, shall appointsome fit person or persons for
the supply of that place during such suspension, and shall have power to allow
convenient maintenance for that end, out of the profits belonging to the
Minister so suspended, and have hereby power to sequester and employ the sane
for that purpose.

XXIII. That in all cases of suspension of any person from the Sacrament, the
party suspended (upon manifestation of his or her repentance before the
Eldership by whom the party was suspended) shall be admitted again unto the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the suspension thenceforth shall be void.

Provided, That if the said Commissioners or any two of them shall not
determine the case so certified as aforesaid to them from the Eldership within
six weeks after the Certificate to them made, The party is hereby enjoined to
forbear coming to the Sacrament until the cause shall be determined, or until
he give satisfaction to the Eldership.

FINIS.

