AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For putting the
County of Surrey into a posture of defense, by the better regulating of the
Trained-Bands,

And raising other Forces of Horse and Foot, for the preservation and safety of
the said County, and the pay of such Foot as shall belong to the Garrison of
Farnham-Castle.

Die Martis, 1 Julii, 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, Jul. 3. 1645.

Die Martis 1 Julii 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, for putting the County of Surrey into a posture of defense, by the
better regulating of the Trained-Bands, and raising other Forces of Horse and
Foot, for the preservation and safety of the said County, and the pay of such
Foot as shall belong to the Garrison of Farnham-Castle.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament taking into their serious
considerations the necessity that all the Counties of this Kingdom and Dominion
of Wales, in this time of imminent danger, should put themselves into a posture
of defense by raising of Forces both of Horse and Foot, for the necessary
defense and safety of their Counties, from the incursion of those raised
against the Parliament, which daily plunder and spoil in all parts where they
come: And finding that the County of Surrey has not as yet been put into such
a posture of defense as was expected, by reason of differences which have there
arise, by reason of one Ordinance of Parliament for the said County, bearing
date the seven and twentieth of July, one thousand six hundred forty and
three, which was then passed upon a present occasion of danger that would not
admit of a long debate, as by the Preamble of the said Ordinance does and may
appear.

Now, for the better settling of the said County, and the enabling them fully to
put themselves into a posture of defense, it is thought fit, and so ordained and
declared, that the Militia of the said County shall be hereafter regulated and
executed according to the tenor of this present Ordinance, and in no other
manner.

Be it therefore ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that for the intents and purposes
before mentionned, the County of Surrey shall forthwith be put into a posture
of defense, and shall raise Forces of Horse and Foot for the defense of the
said County, in manner and form following in this Ordinance expressed, and no
otherwise: And that the Lord-Lievtenant, or in his absence, the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the said County, or any two or more of them, shall
forthwith, after notice or receipt of this Ordinance, issue out their Warrants
to the Constables and Headboroughs of the several Parishes, or to any two or
more of the most able and fitting persons of the Parishes within every
respective hundred or division, thereby requiring them at certain times and
places prefixed, to deliver to them a List or Schedule of the names of all
persons within their several and respective Parishes, from the age of sixteen
to sixty, (being of ability of body) and of all other persons whatsoever worth
one hundred pounds or more, in Lands or Goods: and of all Horses and Mares
above four years of age, and the names of the Owners, and of all Arms, Guns,
and other useful weapons for the War, with the names of the Owners of them,
except such men and arms as are now, or shall be hereafter listed in the
Trained-bands and Trained-troopes. And that the said Lord-Lievtenant, or in his
absence the Deputy-Lievtenants, or any two or more of them, shall hereby have
power to charge the said parties with horse and arms, so as no person be
charged with a Harquebusier or light horse, unless he has one hundred pounds
per annum in Lands, or be worth one thousand two hundred pounds in Goods and
Lands; nor with a Dragoon, unless he be worth four hundred pounds in goods,
or forty pounds per annum in lands; nor with a whole foot-arms, unless he be
worth one hundred pounds in goods, or fifteen pounds per annum in lands.

And be it further ordained, that all persons well-affected, being charged and
listed to serve as aforesaid, or the major part of them, shall within their
several and respective divisions forthwith, and so from time to time as cause
shall be, propound and nominate Colonells, Lievtenant-Colonells,
Serjeant-Maiors, and Captains over them, being men of ability, and men
well-affected, and found faithful from the beginning of these troubles; which
said Officers being approved and allowed of by the Lord-Lievtenant, or in his
absence by the Deputy-Lievtenants, or any two or more of them within the said
County, shall have commissions accordingly from the said Lord-Lievtenant of the
said County.

And be it further ordained, that all and every person and persons whatsoever,
which shall by virtue of this Ordinance be charged to provide horse or arms as
aforesaid, shall every month, after they are so charged, pay to the Treasure
appointed by the Lord-Lievtenant, or in his absence by the Deputy-Lievtenants,
or any two or more of them for the said County; the several sums of money
following, viz. For every horseman twelve pence, for every footman six pence,
toward the providing of trumpets, drums, colors, and other charges incident
to the said service.

And be it also ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be
lawful for the Lord-Lievtenant, or in his absence for the Deputy-Lievtenants
of the said County of Surrey, or for any two or more of them within the said
County, from time to time, so long as the said service shall continue, by
warrant under their hands and seals, to be directed unto the several and
respective high-Constables of the hundreds within their several divisions of
the said County, to assesse and tax, by indifferent rates, upon the Inhabitants
of the said County, so much money as shall be requisite for the payment of such
experienced Majors, Lievtenants, or other inferior Officers as shall be
necessary for the said service, to be allowed of as aforesaid, and they shall
be paid according to the establishment of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Army, whilst
they are in service, and a moytie of their half pay when they lie still; as
likewise for the other Officers and Soldiers pay, when they are in service,
according to the pay of horse and foot in the said Army, and not above; and for
such other charges as will be incident and necessary for the said service. And
if any part of the County shall perform service, and any other part shall not
bring up their proportion of men, then that part shall be enforced, as is
hereafter prescribed, by the Lord-Lievtenant, or in his absence by the
Deputy-Lievtenants, or any two or more of them, to pay for such Soldiers as
they shall be defective in, to make all parts equal in charge.

Provided always, That this extraordinary Charge and Imposition of Arms do not
continue any longer then during this time of imminent danger, and that it shall
be no President for the future.

Provided also, that no Peer of this Realm, nor any Assistant or Officer of the
House of Peers, or their menuall servants, or any Member or Officer of the
House of Commons, or their menuall servants, be charged by this Ordinance, but
that it be left to his or their good affection what they will do in this
Service.

Provided also, That if any person or persons whatsoever shall be overcharged
by the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two of them of the said County, that then the
Lord Lieutenant of the said County shall, hereby have power to ease such person
or persons overcharged, as in his discretion he shall think fit. And if any
Officer or Soldier of the Trained-Bands or Troops, or of any other Forces of
Horse or Foot to be raised at any time hereafter in the said County by virtue
of this Ordinance, shall refuse or neglect, upon Summons according to this
Ordinance of Parliament, to attend their Charges and Duties in their several
and respective Charges and Places, to appear with their Horse and Arms, or to
send some other man with their Horse and Arms, as they are or shall be charged
withal; every such Defaulter, for every such Offense, shall be fined by the
said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or
more of them, not exceeding the Sum of ten pounds, and imprisoned till the said
Fine be paid. And if any person or persons, who by any former Ordinance of
Parliament may be Impressed, have been, or hereafter shall be charged by the
Lord Lieutenant, by the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, to
serve in the Arms of any person or persons charged as aforesaid to find Arms
or Horse, do or shall refuse or neglect to appear at Musters, or to serve upon
such, or in such Arms; he or they so refusing or neglecting, shall by the said
Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, by the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or
more of them, be fined, not exceeding the sum of Forty shillings, and
imprisoned till the said Fine be paid, and the said person or persons so
refusing have conformed themselves unto the said Service.

And it is Ordained, that the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, the
Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, of the said County, may
imprison all such as shall be mutinous, or Disturbers of the Peace, and may
fine them, not exceeding the sum of Five pounds: And that it shall be lawful
for the said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, the Deputy Lieutenants, or
any three of them, to draw together the Troops and Companies which are raised
or shall be raised by virtue of this Ordinance, or any part of them, and lead
by themselves, or by such as the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, any three
or more of the Deputy Lieutenants shall appoint, into any part of the said
County, and with them to Oppose, Resist, Kill and Slay all such as in any
Hostile manner declare themselves as enemies to the King and Parliament: and
that it shall and may be lawful for the said Lord Lieutenant, or in his
absence, for the Deputy Lieutenants, or any one of them, in the said County, to
charge Carts, Carriages and Horses, for the necessary Service of the
Parliament, allowing for every Cart with Five horses Twelve pence per Mile
outward only, and so ratably for more or fewer horses, and for every single
horse after the rate of Two pence per Mile outward only. And in case any shall
refuse, upon reasonable notice, to provide their Carts, Carriages and Horses,
to be made use of for the Service aforesaid; it shall be lawful for the said
Lord Lieutenant, or in his absence, for the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two of
them, to imprison the owners of the said Carts, Carriages and Horses, or to
impose a Fine-upon them, not exceeding the sum of Ten pounds.

And it is Ordained, that the petty-Constables, and Overseers of the poor of
the several Parishes within the said County, and such other persons as shall
be nominated by the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, by the
Deputy Lieutenants of the said County, or any two or more of them, shall be the
Collectors of all Sums of Money as shall by virtue of this Ordinance be imposed
or set upon any person or persons within the said Parishes: which said Sums of
Money so to be set and collected as aforesaid, shall be paid unto the
high-Constables of the several Hundreds within the said County; and, in
Corporations, to the Mayor or other head-Officers of the said Corporations, who
shall receive and pay over the said Sums to such Treasurer or Treasurers as
shall be appointed in the several Divisions by the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his
absence, by the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County, or any two or more of
them, who are to issue forth the same for the Use and Service of the said
County, by the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, by the vote of the major
part of the respective Deputy Lieutenants of the said County present at such
Meetings as shall be appointed for that purpose, and by their Order, in
pursuance thereof, under their hands, and not otherwise. And the said
Treasurers are hereby required to keep a perfect Account of all such Moneys as
they shall receive and pay by virtue of this Ordinance, and to deliver copies
of the said Accounts unto the said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, to the
Deputy Lieutenants, or any of them of the said County: and the said Treasurers,
for their Charge and Pains, shall be allowed Two pence in the Pound for all
such Sums of Money as they shall receive and issue forth by Authority as
aforesaid. And if any person or persons chargeable by this Ordinance shall not,
within Six days after demand or notice to be left at their dwelling house, or
usual place of abode, pay the Sum or Sums on him or them assessed or set as
aforesaid; it shall be lawful for the said Collectors, or any one or more of
them, to levy such Sum by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of the person
and persons so assessed or fined, rendering to the party the overplus of the
said sale, if any shall happen to be; and in case of Resistance, to call to
their assistance any of the Trained-Bands, or Companies of Volunteers, or other
Forces of the said County, who are hereby required to be aiding and assisting
to the Constables or other Collectors in the premises, as they will answer the
contrary. And if any person or persons which shall be assessed or fined as
aforesaid, having not sufficient Distress, or neglect to pay either their
Assessement or Fine to the Constables or other Collectors appointed, within
Twelve days after it shall be demanded; the Lord Lieutenant, or, in his
absence, the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, upon the returns
of the names of such who shall refuse or neglect, shall charge the said person
or persons with double as much as he or they were assessed or fined: And if the
said persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the said Sum so doubled within
other Twelve days after it shall be demanded; that it shall be lawful for the
said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, the Deputy Lieutenants of the said
County, or any two or more of them, to commit the said person or persons so
refusing or neglecting to prison. And in case the said Treasurers,
high-Constables, petty-Constables, Overseers of the Poor, or other Collectors
to be nominated as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to levy and receive the
Sums of Money to be assessed and set by virtue of this Ordinance; it shall be
lawful for the said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, the
Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, of the said County, to fine the
said Treasurers, high-Constables and Collectors, not exceeding the sum of
Twenty pounds, to be levied upon them by such person or persons as shall be
appointed by the said Lord Lieutenant, or, in his absence, by the
Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, by way of Distress and Sale of
their Goods, rendering to the party the overplus of the said Sale, if any happen
to be.

Provided always, that the Forces raised by virtue of this Ordinance shall not
be carried out of the said County without the consent of the Lord Lieutenant,
or, in his absence, of the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them.

And it is further Ordered and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Committees hereafter named, or any three or more of them, and no other, shall
have Power and Authority to rate and tax such Sums of Money upon the said
County, as at some general Meeting of the said Committee shall be agreed to be
fit and necessary for the paying of such Officers and Soldiers of the Castle
of Farnham and the Garrison there, as likewise for the Troop of Horse which is
now raised and maintained by the said County for the defense thereof, and for
such other charges as shall be thought fit and necessary for the defense and
safety of the said County, at some general Meeting of the said Committee, and
the same to levy in such manner as is appointed for the levying of Money for
raising and maintaining of the Forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
in the Ordinance for that purpose; the said Committee to consist of these
persons, and no other: Viz. Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Henry Earl of
Kent, Charles Earl of Nottingham, William Lord Munson; Denzill Hollis Esquire,
Benjamin Weston Esquire, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, Sir Ambrose
Brown Baronet, Sir Poynings Moore Baronet, Sir Thomas Jervoice, Sir Richard
Onstowe, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir John Dingley, Sir John Lenthall, Sir John
Howland, Sir William Ellyot, Sir Richard Bettenson, Sir Matthew Brand, Sir
Robert Parkhurst, Sir Robert Wood, Sir Robert Needum, and Sir John Evelyn,
Knights; John Lisle, Nicholas Stoughton, George Farewell, Henry Tunstall,
Anthur Onslow, Robert Goodwyn, George Evelyn of Wotton, Henry Weston, Thomas
Sands, John Goodwyn, Edward Bish junior, Henry Campion, Francis Drake, Robert
Wood, John Farewell, Thomas Lock, John Cartwright, Edmund Jordan, Arthur
Squibb, John Turner, Thomas Smith, Richard Brown, Esquires; Robert Houghton,
Cornelius Cook, Richard Wright, George Snelling, Thomas Hudson, Henry Hardwick,
Robert Holman, Sackford Gunson, Robert Purse, Robert Meade, Colonel Rowland
Wilson, and James Shirley, Gentlemen.

And it is likewise ordered and ordained, that there be once in a month a
general meeting of the said Committee in some indifferent place in the said
County, to be appointed by the Major part of the said Committee, at which
meeting the said Committee, or the Major part of them there assembled, are
hereby required and authorized to appoint what shall be respectively acted and
performed, and by whom, in the several parts of the said County, as well for
the executing of this Ordinance in what concerns them, as for the executing of
all other Ordinances heretofore made, and yet in force, to be excuted in the
said County: for the execution whereof, in their several and respective
divisions, the Committees above named, or any three or more of them, are hereby
enabled and authorized.

And it is further ordered and ordained, that there be an account monthly
given to the said Committee; at their said general meeting, of what shall be
done therein, by the several and respective Committees, in their several and
respective divisions and allotments.

FINIS.

