AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT;

For putting the Associated Counties OF Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, Huntington,
Hertford, Cambridge, Lincoln, The Isle of Ely, and the Cities of Lincoln and
Norwich into a Posture of Defense;

By the better Regulating of the Trained Bands, and Raising other Forces of
Horse and Foot, for the preservation and safety of the said Counties and Cities.

ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament that this Ordinance be
forthwith printed and published.

Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Middle Temple. July 5. 1644.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for putting the
Associated Counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, Hantington, Hertford,
Cambridge, Lincoln, the Isle of Ely, and the Cities of Lincoln and Norwich into
a Posture of Defense, by the better regulating of the Trained-Bands, and
raising other Forces of Horse and Foot, for the preservation and safety of the
said Counties and Cities.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the sad and manifold Oppressions and Miseries that now do
threaten the utter Ruin and Desolation of this Kingdom in general, and the
Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hertford, Lincoln, Huntington,
The Cities of Norwich, Lincoln, and Counties of the same, and the Isle of Ely
in particular; And how necessary a thing it is, that all men well-affected,
having any bowels of compassion toward their afflicted Country, should in
these times of Imminent danger, put themselves into a Posture of Defense, by
raising of Forces both of Horse and Foot, for the defense and safety of the
said Associated Counties and Cities, from the Invasion and Fury of the Irish
Rebels, Popish and ill-affected persons, who seek the Ruin and Destruction of
the whole Kingdom in general, and the said Associated Counties in particular:

Be it Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
and by the Authority of the same, That for the intents and purposes before
mentioned, the said Associated Counties and Cities shall forthwith be put into
a Posture of Defense, and shall raise Forces of Horse and Foot for the defense
of the said Association; And that the Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants of
the said several and respective Counties and Cities, or any two or more of
them, shall forthwith after notice or receipt of this Ordinance, issue out
their Warrants to the Constables and Overseers of the ^^^erall Parishes, or to
any two or mo^^ (...) the most able and fitting persons of the parishes within
every respective Hundred or Division, thereby requiring them at certain times
and places prefixed, to deliver unto them a List or Schedule of the Names of all
persons within their several and respective Parishes, from the Age of Sixteen
to Sixty (being of ability of body) and of all other persons whatsoever, worth
an Hundred pounds or more in Lands or Goods; And of all Horses and Mares above
four years of Age, and the Names of the Owners; And of all Arms, Guns, and
other useful Weapons for the War, with the Names of the Owners of them, Except
such Horses, Men and Arms as are now, or shall be hereafter Listed in the
Trained-Bands and Trained Troops; And that the said Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, shall hereby have power to charge the
said parties with Horse and Arms, so as no person be charged with a
Harquebushier or Light Horse, ^^^^sse he has One hundred pounds p^^ ^nnum in
Lands, or be worth One thousand two hundred pounds in Goods and Lands, nor with
a Dragoon, unless he be worth four hundred pounds in Goods, or forty pounds
per annum in Lands; nor with a foot Arms, unless he be worth one hundred
pounds in Goods, or Ten pounds per annum in Lands.

And be it further Ordained, That all persons well-affected, being charged and
listed to serve as aforesaid, or the Major part of them, shall within their
several and respective Divisions forthwith, and so from time to time as cause
shall be, propound and nominate all Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Sergeant
Majors and Captains over them, being men of ability, and men well-affected;
which said Officers being approved and allowed of by the Lord Lieutenants or
Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them within their respective
Counties and Cities, shall have Commissions accordingly.

And be it further Ordained, That all and every person or persons whatsoever,
which shall by virtue of this Ordinance be charged to provide Horse or Arms as
aforesaid, shall every Month after they are so charged, pay to the Treasurers
appointed by the Deputy Lieutenants, or any two of them, for the several and
respective Counties, the several Sums of Money following, viz. Every Horse,
Twelve pence, every Foot Six pence, toward the providing of Trumpets, Drums,
Colors, and other charges incident to the said Service.

Provided always, that this extraordinary charge, and imposition of Arms, do
not continue any longer then during these times of imminent danger, and that it
shall be no President for the future.

Provided also, that no Member of either House of Parliament, nor their Meniall
Servants, nor any of the Assistants of either of the said Houses, be charged by
this Ordinance, but that it be left to his or their good affection, what they
will do in this Service.

Provided also, that if any person or persons whatsoever shall be overcharged by
the said Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any two of them of the
respective Counties or Cities, that then the said Lord Lieutenants or Deputy
Lieutenants, or any three or more of them of the respective Counties or Cities,
shall hereby have power to ease such person or persons overcharged, as in their
Discretions they shall think fit. And if any Officers or Soldiers of the
Trained Bands or Troops have heretofore, since the First of August, in the year
of our LORD, One thousand Six hundred forty three, refused or neglected; or if
they or any other Forces of Horse or Foot, to be raised at any time hereafter,
shall refuse or neglect upon Summons, according to this or other Ordinance of
Parliament, to attend their charges and duties in their several and respective
places, or to appear with their Horse and Arms, or to send some other Man with
such Horse or Arms as they are or shall be charged withal, Every such
Defaulter for every such offense, shall be Fined by the said Lord Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more of them, not exceeding the sum of Twenty
pounds. And if any person or persons in the said several and respective
Counties, who by a former Ordinance of Parliament may be Impressed, have been,
or are hereafter, shall be charged by the said Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, or any two of them to serve in the Arms of any person or persons
charged as aforesaid, to find Arms or Horse, do or shall refuse or neglect to
appear at Musters, or to serve upon such Horse, or in such Arms, he or they so
refusing or neglecting, shall by the said Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or
more of them be Fined, not exceeding the sum of Forty shillings, and Imprisoned
until the said Fine be paid, And the person or persons so refusing, have
conformed themselves unto the said Service.

And it is Ordained, That the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenants, or any
three or more of them, or the standing Committee of the several and respective
Associated Counties, may Imprison all such as shall be mutinous or Disturbers
of the Peace, and may Fine them, not exceeding the sum of Five pounds: And that
it shall be lawful for the said Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any
of them, to draw together the Troops and Companies which are to be raised by
virtue of this Ordinance, or any part of them, and with the consent of the
Major part of any of the said Troops and Companies, to Conduct and lead by
themselves, or by such as they or any three or more of them shall appoint, into
any of the said Associated Counties, and with them to Oppose, Resist, Kill and
Slay, all such as in any Hostile manner declare themselves as Enemies to the
King, Parliament and Kingdom: And that it shall and may be lawful for the said
Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any one of them in their several
and respective Counties, to charge Carts, Carriages and Horses, for the
necessary Service of the Parliament, allowing for every Cart with Five Horses,
after the rate of Twelve pence per Mile, outward only, and so rateably for
more or fewer Horses, and for every single Horse, after the rate of Two pence
per Mile, outward only.

And in case any shall refuse upon reasonable notice to provide their Carts,
Carriages or Horses, to be made use of for the Service aforesaid, It shall be
lawful for the laid Deputy Lieutenants, or any one of them, to Imprison the
Owners of the said Carts, Carriages or Horses, or to Impose a Fine upon them,
not exceeding the sum of Ten pounds.

And be it Ordained, That the petty Constables, and Overseers of the Poor of
the several Parishes within the said respective Counties, and such other
persons as shall be nominated by the Deputy Lieutenants of the said Counties,
or any two of them, shall be the Collectors of all sums of Money, as shall by
virtue of this Ordinance be Imposed or set upon any person ^r persons within
their said Parishes, and for their pains they shall be allowed Two pence in the
pound for all Moneys so by them Collected and leavyed; which said sums of Money
so to be set and Collected as aforesaid, shall be paid to the high Constables
of the several Hundreds within the said respective Counties, and in
Corporations, to the Major or other head Officer of the said Corporations, who
also shall have Two pence in the pound allowed unto them for their pains of
making out their Warrants, and receiving and paying over the said Moneys to
such Treasurer or Treasurers as shall be appointed in the several Divisions,
by the Deputy Lieutenants of the several and respective Counties, or any two
or more of them, who are to issue forth the same for the use and service of the
several and respective Counties, by the Vote of the Major part of the
respective Deputy Lieutenants present, or any three of them present, and by
their order, in pursuance thereof under their hands and not otherwise.

And the said Treasurers art hereby required to keep a perfect Account of all
such Moneys as they shall receive and pay by virtue of this Ordinance, and to
deliver Copies of their said Accounts unto the standing Committee of their said
several and respective Counties; and the said Treasurers for their charge and
pains, shall likewise be allowed Two pence in the pound for all such sums of
Money as they shall receive and issue forth by Authority as aforesaid; And if
any person or persons chargeable by this Ordinance, shall not within Six days
after demand, or notice to be left at their dwelling house or usual place of
abode, pay the sum or sums on him or them assessed or set as aforesaid, It shall
be lawful for the said Collectors, any one or more of them, to leavie the sum
by way of Distress, and sale of the Goods ofg the person and persons so
assessed or fined; And in case of Resistance, to call to their assistance any
of the Trained Bands or Companies of Volunteers, or other forces of the said
respective Counties, who are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to the
said Constables or other Collectors in the Premises, as they will answer the
contrary: And if any person or persons which shall be assessed or fined as
aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to pay either their Assessment or Fine to
the Constables or other Collectors appointed, within Twelve days after it
shall be demanded, The Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or
more of them, upon return of the Names of such, who shall so refuse or neglect,
shall charge the said person or persons with double as much as he or they were
assessed or fined; And if the said persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the
said sum so doubled, within Twelve days after it shall be demanded, That it
shall be lawful for the said Lord Lieutenants, or Deputy Lieutenants of the
said respective Counties, or any two or more of them, to commit the person or
persons so refusing or neglecting to Prison; And in case the said Treasurers,
high Constables, petty Constables, Overseers of the Poor, or other Collectors
to be nominated as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to leavie and receive the
sums of Money to be assessed, and set, by virtue of this Ordinance, It shall be
lawful for the said Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any two or more
of them of the several and respective Counties, to fine the said Treasurers,
high Constables and Collectors, not exceeding the sum of twenty pounds to be
leavyed upon them by way of Distress, and sale of their Goods, and by such
person or persons as shall be appointed by the said Deputy Lieutenants or any
two or more of them.

Provided always, That the Forces to be raised by virtue of this Ordinance,
shall not be carried out of the said several and respective Counties wherein
they are or shall be raised, otherwise then as before in this Ordinance is
declared, without the consent of the said Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants
and Committees of the several and respective Counties, or the greater part of
them.

FINIS.

