Die Veneris 4 October. 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament: For sending
forth Five Regiments out of the City of LONDON; and parts adjacent.
IT is this day Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that
the Committee of the Militia of the City of London and parts adjacent, within
the Lines of Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly bills of
Mortality, shall have power, and is hereby authorized to command the Red and
Blue Regiments of Trained Bands of the said City; and the Red Regiment of
Trained Bands of Westminster; the Yellow Regiment of Trained Bands of the
Borough of Southwark; and the Yellow Regiment of Auxiliaries of the Hamblets of
the Tower, consisting of five thousand men, or thereabouts, and such other
Forces as they shall think fit, either of Horse, or Foot, raised or to be
raised under the command of the said Committee of the Militia, within the
Limits aforesaid, to March from the several parts aforesaid, according to the
Discipline and order of War, under the conduct and command of such Major
General, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, as the
said Committee shall appoint, together with all such necessary provisions of
Arms Ammunition, Ordnance, and other Carriages, and to join with such other
Forces of Horse and Foot, as are under the command of the Earl of Manchester,
and Sir William Waller, or either of them, according as they shall be directed
by both Houses, or the Committee of both Kingdoms; to resist and subdue the
Forces raised without authority of Parliament; and to recover, and preserve
such places as are now possessed by the Enemy.

And for prevention of such inconveniences, as by experience has been
discovered to fall out in former expeditions by giving great sums of money
before hand to hired Soldiers, and by their refusing to serve; unless they
may have their own demands.

It is further ordained, That no advance shall be henceforth given before hand,
to any Soldiers hired, or to be hired, besides their weekly pay; and that the
Committee of the Militia, and their Sub-committees respectively, shall have
power to Impresse within their several Limits, all such persons as shall be by
them thought fit to be hired, to serve in this expedition, excepting such
persons as are excepted in the Ordinance of Parliament, made the 12 of July
last, 1644.

And it is further ordained, that the said Committee shall have power, and is
hereby authorized to call back such Forces as they shall command to march
forth by virtue of this Ordinance, when they shall think fit; and that all the
said Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Captains, Officers, Soldiers, and other
persons under the command of the said Committee of the Militia, whether
Masters, or Servants, shall obey the directions of the said Committee of the
Militia from time to time, upon pain of imprisonment, or expulsion out of the
Limits aforesaid, and such other punishments as the said Committee shall think
fit to impose upon them by reasonable Fines, or according to the course of
War: and to levy the said Fines, by distress, and sale of their goods, and
to employ the same for the service of the City, as the said Committee shall
appoint: And all Sub-committees made, or to be made, Constables, Headboroughs,
Provost Marshals, and other Officers, are hereby required to be aiding and
assisting from time to time for the better furthering and effecting all such
services as are contained or intended by this Ordinance, according as they
shall be directed by the said Committee within the Limits aforesaid; as they
will answer the contrary under the penalties herein mentioned.

And it is further ordained, that all such Forces as shall be sent forth by the
said Committees of the Militia, by virtue of this Ordinance, shall be paid
during their continuance abroad by the Parliament, according to the new
establishment of the Army under his Excellency the Earl of Essex.

And it is further ordained, that the Sub-committees appointed, or to be
appointed by the said Committee of the Militia shall have power, and are hereby
authorized to cause all or any the clauses contained in this Ordinance to be
put in due execution, when, and as often as they shall receive directions from
the said Committee; and as well the said Committee, as also their
Sub-committees, and all other persons acting in the Premises, according to the
true intent of this Ordinance, shall be saved harmless by the authority of
both Houses of Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1644.


