Die Veneris 15. August. 1645.
An Ordinance of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament for the
continuance of the Monthly Assessement for the maintenance of the Scottish
Army.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament bearing Date the 20 of Febr. 1644.
Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for
the raising and leavying of the monthly sum of 21000. l. toward the
maintenance of the Scottish Army, under the Command of the Earl of Leven, by a
monthly Assessement upon the several Counties, Cities, and Towns of the
Kingdom of England* therein mentioned: It is Ordained, That there shall be
several sums of money taxed, leavyed, and paid toward the maintenance of the
said Army upon the several Counties, Cities and Towns therein mentioned, by a
monthly Assessement, to continue for four Months, beginning the first of
March 1644 and since expired. Be it Ordained, And it is now Ordained by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the said Ordinance, and every
Clause therein contained, the several Taxes and Payments therein expressed,
and the Power and Authority thereby given and appointed to all and every the
Committees and persons or any of them named or mentioned in the said Ordinance,
shall be in force and continue for the space of four Months longer, to begin
from the first of July, 1645. to all intents and purposes* as if the said
Ordinance had bin at first made to have continuance for eight Months, from the
first day of March 1644.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith Printed and Published.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Perliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the Old-Bayley, 16 August
1645.


