Die Martis 4. April. 1648.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For the better
payment of Tithes and Duties to the Ministers of the City of London.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament of the eighth of November. Anno. Dom.
1644. entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
for the true payment of Tithes, and other such Duties, according to the Laws
and Customs of the Realm, there is a Proviso, That the said Ordinance, or any
thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Tithes, Offerings, Yearly
payments, or other Ecclesiastical Duties, due or to be due for any Houses,
Buildings, or other Hereditaments within the City of London, or the Liberties
thereof, which be otherwise provided for by Act of Parliament: And whereas some
doubt and scruple has been made, whether the Lord Major of the said City of
London be sufficiently authorized to relieve such Ministers within the said
City or the Liberties thereof, as have been put into any Benefice or
Ecclesiastical Living by way of Sequestration by both or either Houses of
Parliament, or by the Committee for Plundered Ministers, or any other Committee
of Parliament; Be it therefore Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament assembied, That the said Proviso in the before
mentioned Ordinance of the eighth of Novem. 1644. be hereby repealed and wholly
made null and void, and that the said Ordinance of the eighth of November 1644.
and the Ordinance of the ninth of August. 1647. entitled, An additionall
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the true
payment of Tithes and other Duties; and the Ordinance of the 23. of August,
1647. entitled, An Ordinance for keeping in godly Ministers, placed in Livings
by authority of Parliament, and all other Ordinances of Parliament, concerning
the payment of Tithes, Rates for Tithes, Rents, or other Duties, do extend unto
the said City of London, and the Liberties thereof, and be put in execution by
the Lord Mayor of the said City for the time being; or by any two Justices of
Peace within the said City or Liberties thereof, who are hereby authorized and
required respectively, to require and command the aid of all Constables and
other Officers, that shall be by the said Lord Mayor or Justices of Peace, as
aforesaid, appointed for their assistance in the due execution of this
Ordinance, as well within their several Parishes or Precincts as without, as
well in cases of Sequestration as otherwise, to all intents and purposes, and in
the like manner, as in and by the said Ordinances is Ordained, Limited and
appointed to be executed and done, in any other place or places within the
Kingdom of England by the respective Justices of Peace, and other Officers in
the said Ordinances mentioned.

Provided, That this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
construed to extend to the payment of any other kind of Tithes Payments, Rents
or Duties, then such as have been paid at any time since the beginning of this
Parliament, or two years before.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorun

FINIS.

