official insignia
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For relief of
the Subject, who have been prejudiced by stopping and discontinuing of Writs of
Error, Which said Writs are to be sealed with the Great Seal of England,
Ordained and Established by both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration the
great prejudice and inconvenience that may and does accrue to the subject by
the stopping and delay of Writs of Error, and also by discontinuing of Writs of
Error by the Courts not sitting in the Exchequer Chamber, and by the not
effectual putting in execution the Commands of the Great Seal of England
ordained and established by both Houses of Parliament; Do Order and Ordeine,
that all Writs of Error brought in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
sealed with the said Great Seal and attested under the hands of any three or
more of the Commissioners of the said Great Seal, whereof one Lord to be one,
shall be signed by such of the Judges as are or shall be the ancient Judge then
attending the said Courts or any of them respectively, and that such signing by
any one of the said Judges in the absence or vacancy of the Chief Justice, or
any other ancient Judges shall be as good and effectual as if the same had
been signed by the Chief Justice or other ancient Judge, any law, usage or
other matter to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And be it further
Ordained, that whereas diverse Writs of Error returnable in the Exchequer
Chamber are discontinued by the not coming of the Judges there without any
default of the parties prosecuting the said Writs, Be it Ordained that new
Writs of Error being taken out, the Judges of the Court to whom they shall be
directed shall allow of the said Writs of Error in the same manner as they
allowed the former Writs, that so Execution may be stayed till the same can be
determined, And that all Judges, Officers, and Ministers, and other persons
shall duly perform, obey and execute all such things as they or any of them
shall be commanded or required to do in their several offices or places by
force and virtue of the said Great Seal, as they should or ought to have done
by force or virtue of any Great Seal of England, under pain of answering
their Contempt therein to both Houses, and loss of their places.

15 May* 1644.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed at London for Edw. Husbands. 1644.


