AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For taking,
stating and determining the ACCOUNTS of all such Officers and Soldiers, or
Widows of the said Officers and Soldiers that have served the Parliament in the
late Wars, and have not been under the Entertainment and Pay of the particular
Counties or Associations of this Kingdom, nor are of the present Army under the
Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax.

Die Veneris, 1 Septembr. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Ordinance for taking,
stating and determining the Accounts of all such Officers and Soldiers, or
Widows of the said Officers and Soldiers, that have served the Parliament in
the late Wars, and have not been under the Entertainment and Pay of the
particular Counties or Associations of this Kingdom, nor are of the present
Army under the Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, passed both Houses on Thursday
20 Julii, 1648. be forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
September. 5. 1648.

Die Jovis, 20 Julii, 1648.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For taking,
stating and determining the Accounts of all such Officers and Soldiers, or
Widows of the said Officers and Soldiers that have served the Parliament in the
late Wars, and have not been under the Entertainment and Pay of the particular
Counties or Associations of this Kingdom, nor are of the present Army under the
Command of Thomas Lord Fairfax.

BE it Ordained, and it is Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That Henry Broad, Richard Wilcox, Nicholas Bond, James Prince, and
Thomas Richardson, shall be a Committee for taking, examining, allowing and
determining the Accounts of all such Officers, Soldiers, Artificers and
Waggoners, and of all Officers and Soldiers that have served the Parliament in
the late Wars, and have not been under the Entertainment and pay of the
particular Counties and Associations of this Kingdom, or of the present Army
under the Lord Fairfax, as well for their pay, as for the Money and Goods they
have received from the State, or from any person or persons during the time of
their Services, in order to their pay, or the Service of the Parliament, and
for which they ought to be accomptable; which said Committee hereby Ordained,
or any three of them shall have power, and are hereby authorized and required
to take, examine, allow and determine the Accounts of the said Officers and
Soldiers, as well for their pay, as for the Money and Goods they have received
from the State, or from any person whatsoever, during the time of their
Services, in order to their pay, or the Service of the Parliament, according to
an Ordinance of the Eight and twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred forty
and seven, and the Instructions therein mentioned, entitled, Instructions
agreed upon by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, to be observed in
taking, examining and determining the Accounts of all Officers and Soldiers who
have actually and faithfully served under their Command in the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales, from or since the beginning of these Wars (Any
former Order or Ordinance of both or either House of Parliament concerning the
taking and determining the Accounts of the Soldiery of this Kingdom and
Dominion of Wales, under the command of the Parliament, or any clause therein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding) And that every
Member of the said Committee hereby Ordained, before he enter upon the said
Service, shall take an Oath before the Speaker for the time being of either of
the said Houses, for the due execution thereof; Which Oath the several Speakers
for the time being of both the said Houses shall have power, and are hereby
authorized to administer, The tenor whereof shall be as follows; Viz.

I A.B. do swear, That according to my best skill and knowledge, I shall
faithfully and truly demean my self in taking, stating and determining the
Accounts of all such persons as shall come before me, in execution of an
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, For taking, stating and determining the
Accounts of all such Officers and Soldiers, or Widows of the said Officers and
Soldiers that have served the Parliament in the late Wars, and have not been
under the Entertainment and Pay of the particular Counties or Associations of
this Kingdom, nor are of the present Army under the Command of THOMAS Lord
FAIRFAX, according to the tenor of the said Ordinance, and the Instructions
therein mentioned; And that I shall not for fear, favor, reward or affection,
give any allowance, or conceal, spare or discharge any, nor receive or take
directly or indirectly, by my self, or by any other to my use, any Fee, Reward
or Gratuity whatsoever, from any person or persons concerned as Accomptants by
this Ordinance, nor any Profit or Advantage whatsoever, other then that Salary
appointed by the Parliament, and expressed in an Ordinance of the date of these
presents: So help me God.

And the said Committee shall have power, and are hereby authorized and
required, by Warrant under their Hands, or the Hands of any three or more of
them, to send for, and require from all Muster-Masters, Commissaries,
Treasurers, Receivers, Paymasters, and all other Officers and persons
whatsoever, that have paid any Money, or have been entrusted and employed in
any Army, Brigade, County or Garrison, or otherwise under the command of the
Parliament, or have paid any Money by Order or Directions of one or both Houses
of Parliament, or by any Committee or Committees of Parliament, All Books of
Musters, Payments, Accounts, Lists, upon which payments of Arrears in part have
been or are to be made, or authentic copies thereof under their Hands (and
upon their Oaths to be administered by the said Committee, or any two of them,
which they have hereby power and authority to administer) And also all
Certificates and other Papers and Vouchers whatsoever: And are by all other
ways and means so to inform themselves, as may conduce to the best and most
effectual execution of this service. And all Muster-Masters, Commissaries,
Treasurers, Receivers, Paymasters, and other Officers and persons as aforesaid,
are hereby required to give obedience to every such Warrant accordingly: And
the Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom are also hereby
Ordered to be ayding and assisting to the said Committee by this Ordinance
Ordained, in giving them or any two or more of them access and free leave to
see and peruse any Accounts, Books or Vouchers remaining in their custody, when
and so often as the said Committee shall have occasion to make use thereof in
order to this service. And the said Committee hereby Ordained, or any two of
them shall have power, and are hereby authorized to administer an Oath as they
shall see cause, to all Officers and Soldiers who shall make their addresses to
them for the stating and determining their Accounts, according to this
Ordinance and the Instructions therein mentioned (or to any person who may be
concerned in any such Account, or is enabled to give any evidence for clearing
the truth thereof:) The tenor of which Oath shall be as follows; Viz.

I A. B. do swear, That I shall according to my best knowledge, give in to this
Committee a just and true Account of all and every sum and sums of Money by me
(or by my appointment, or to use) received for my Pay, or otherwise in Money or
Goods, in order to the service of the State, by virtue of any Order or
Ordinance of both or either of the Houses of Parliament, or by color or
pretense of any such Order or Ordinance, or for which I am any way chargeable
or accomptable, without any concealment whatsoever: So help me God.

And the said Committee, or any three of them shall have power, and are hereby
authorized to give out Debenters under their Hands to the said Officers and
Soldiers, for so much Money as shall appear to them to be due upon their
Accounts, allowed and determined according to the said Instructions and this
present Ordinance; which Accounts and Debenters shall be fairly Entered and
Registered into a Book or Books to be kept for that purpose by the Register
Accomptant, who shall attest under his Hand as Register, the Entry of every
Debenter to be given forth by the said Committee as aforesaid, before the same
be delivered to the parties therein concerned, whom the said Committee have
hereby power to appoint, being one of themselves. And it is hereby Ordained and
Declared, That all Officers and Soldiers that shall receive Debenters from the
said Committee as aforesaid, may sell, assign and set over the Moneys due upon
those Debenters to such persons as they shall think fit; and all such person
and persons to whom such Moneys so due shall be assigned, set over and sold,
have hereby power and authority to demand and receive the same, as if the said
Debenters were in their own Name or Names: Provided, That every such assignment
be first showed to the said Committee, and an Entry thereof made by their
Register to be by them appointed as aforesaid, to the end it may be the better
known to whom the State is indebted. And it is hereby further Ordained and
Declared, That for the Moneys as shall appear to be due by such Debenters as
shall be so Signed, Registered and given out by the said Committee as aforesaid,
The State shall be liable to the payment thereof to the said Officers,
Soldiers, or their Widows or Orphans, and the same shall be paid and satisfied
out of Two third parts of the Lands and Estate of all Delinquents mentioned and
comprehended in the three first Qualifications of the Propositions for
Delinquents, sent to the King into the Isle of Wight, not formerly disposed of,
or the Fines that shall be set upon those Delinquents by the Houses, and also
out of the Moneys arising out of the remaining part of all the Lands and
Revenues of all the late Archbishops and Bishops of England and Wales,
appointed to be sold by several former Ordinances, after such Engagements
satisfied as are already charged thereupon: Provided always, That if any
surcharge can be brought upon any Account whatsoever, made and stated by the
said Committee, within two years next after Debenters shall be given as
aforesaid, That then defalkation shall be made thereof out of the said
Debenter, so as it do not exceed one third part of the whole Debenter: And it
is hereby further Ordained, That in case any doubt or difficulty shall at any
time arise in stating of any the Accounts beforementioned, so as the said
Committee cannot clearly proceed to the determination thereof according to the
said Instructions, Then in every such case the said Committee may make their
addresses to the Committee of the Army, for their advice and direction therein,
which they are hereby required and authorized to give accordingly, as to their
best discretions shall seem meet; which Direction by way of Order, shall be a
sufficient Rule and Warrant for the said Committee (by this Ordinance nominated
and appointed) to proceed by, to the allowance and determination of all such
Accounts accordingly. And it is hereby further Ordained and Declared by the
authority aforesaid, That the said Committee or any two of them have power and
authority to administer to the said Register Accomptant, and to the several
Clerks, Messengers, or other necessary officers and persons by them to be
employed in and about the said service, an Oath for their and every of their
faithful demeanor, The tenor of which Oath shall be as follows, Viz.

I A.B. do swear, That according to my best skill and judgment, I shall
faithfully, and diligently and truly demean my self in the Office of (...)
wherein I shall be employed by this Committee: So help me God.

And it is lastly Ordained, That the said Committee or any three of them shall
have power and authority to state, audite and determine the Accounts of all
such Officers and Soldiers (as shall be referred to them by the Committee of
the Lords and Commons for the Army) that have been of the Army under the
command of Thomas Lord Fairfax, for services by them done in other Commands
then of the said Army, and to return the same Account so stated to the said
Committee. And the said Lords and Commons do further Ordain and Command, as
well all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other
Officers and Ministers of Justice, as also all Colonels, Captains, and other
Officers and Soldiers under the command of the Parliament, to be ayding and
assisting to the Committee in the due execution of this Ordinance. And it is
lastly Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the Committee and every one
of them and their Clerks and other Officers to be employed in and about the
said service, according to the tenor and effect of this present Ordinance,
shall be therein protected and saved harmless by the power and authority of
both Houses of Parliament.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

29 Augusti, 1648.
THe Committee herein abovenamed were severally sworn before me the day
aforesaid,

William Lenthal Speaker.

FINIS.

