Instructions for the Surveyors of the late Archbishops and Bishops Lands,
which are to be surveyed.
THat the Trustees as aforesaid shall have power to nominate one, two, three,
or more Surveyors to survey the Premises, or any part of them as they shall
think fit, and that the surveyes and returns made by any such one, two,
three, or more Surveyors, shall be good and effectual to be proceeded upon,
notwithstanding any Clause in any Ordinance of Parliament to the contrary.

That the Surveyor or Surveyors appointed, or to be appointed by the Trustees,
shall survey, and inquire what Timber building, open Quarries, or Mines are
upon any of the Premises, and certify the condition and values thereof.

That no Surveyor, or any his Child or Children, or any in trust for him or
them, shall be admitted to be a Purchaser of any part of the Lands surveyed, or
to be surveyed by himself, upon pain of losing his or their Purchase Money,
and the Purchase to be void.

Provided, that nothing in the Instructions, Oath, or in this present
Ordinance, shall be construed to compel the Surveyors to make any
admeasurement of the Lands, or any particular Survey, and of the number of
Acres, unless they in their discretion shall think fit; the intention of the
Houses being, That the said Surveyors should make a speedy return of their
several surveyes, to the end that a speedy sale may be made thereupon.

Instructions to be observed by the REGISTER.
I. THat he do receive all Surveyes, and Certificates to be returned by the
Surveyors, and immediately after the receipt thereof, fairly enter and
Register the same in Books, to be kept by him for that purpose, and in an
orderly manner fyle, bundle up, and safely lay up, and keep the Originals.

II. That he do weekly or oftener certify unto the Contractours, what Surveyes
and Certificates are returned to him, and of what Manours, or otherwise as the
case shall require.

III. That upon Warrant and Direction from the Contractors, he do make forth,
and fairly ingrosse in Parchment, particulars of all such Manours, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, Buildings, Woods, or other things surveyed and
certified into his Office, by the Surveyors, whereupon the Contractors are to
proceed, or intend to make any sale, and that he do examine and sign the same
particulars, and deliver them to the Contractors.

IIII. That upon Contract or Agreement made by the Contractors, for any
Manours, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Buldings, Woods, or other thing
contained in any particular made forth, signed and delivered unto them by the
Register, the said particular be returned to the Register, together with the
Order of Agreement or Contract made with the Purchasors thereupon.

That upon return thereof, he do forthwith rate the particular, and ascertaine
the purchase Money, how much it comes to, at how many years Purchase the
parliculars contracted for are sold, and enter the same upon the said
particular, together with such other proceedings as shall be required by the
Contract.

That he do return the particular thus rated and ascertained to the
Contractors, who are to sign the same, to attest the Agreement, and thereupon
to desire and give Warrant to the Trustees to draw up and seal conveyances
thereof to the Purchasors accordingly.

That all particulars thus finished, together with all proceedings thereupon,
be fairly entered or registered by the Register, and be safely kept by him as
Records, and that after such entering and registring thereof, the Register do
deliver the said particulars unto the Trustees to perfect the sale as aforesaid.

And to the end this service may be performed in such manner as the Register
may be able from time to time to give an account of all proceedings; (if he
shall be required) to the Parliament himself, or one of his Deputies, are to
attend upon, and enter all Orders and Proceedings before the Contractors.

That he do weekly make Certificate to the Treasurers, Comptroller, and
Register, accomptant of all Rents, and all Rates of particulars, and of all
Moneys payable upon any Contract upon any particular, how much thereof is to
be paid in hand, and how much to be forborne, and for what time, and how, and
in what manner the sum or sums to be forborne are to be secured.

That he do methodize and put in good order all Charters, Evidences, and
Writings, belonging to the late Archbishops, and Bishops, and all Books or
Survey, and other things to be delivered to his care and custody, to be kept by
him as Records, and make Catalogues of them, and fit them in such manner, as
the Subject may readily see, and have Copies (if he desire it) of whatsoever
shall be brought into the Registers Office, and be under his charge and custody.

17. November. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That there he an
aditionall allowance of three hundred pounds per annum, allowed and paid unto
Mister Alderman Fowke, for his sallary, for his execution of the place of
Comptroller of the Receipts of Moneys mentioned in the Ordinance, for the
appointing the sale of the late Bishops Lands, over and above the two hundred
pounds per annum, appointed by the said Ordinance.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

