AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, For Thursday
next to be a day of Thanksgiving within the Lines of Communication. And
throughout the whole Kingdom the 27. of this instant June, for the great
VICTORY. Obtained against the Kings Forces, nere Knasby in Northamptonshire
the fourteenth of this instant June. And Ordered to be forthwith printed and
Published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Together with two exact Relations of the said Victory The one from Lieutenant
General Cromwell to the Speaker of the house of Commons. The other from a
gallant Gentleman of public employment in that service, who relates all the
particulars of the whole day, and what persons on both sides were taken,
wounded, and Killed

London Printed for Ed. Husband June the 17. 1645.

SIR,
BEing Commanded by you to this service, I think my self bound to acquaint you
with the good hand of God toward us and you, we marched yesterday, after the
King, who went before us from Daintry to Harborough, and quartered about six
miles from him, he drew out to meet us, both Armies engaged, we after three
hours fight (very doubtful) at last routed his Army, killed and took about
five thousand, very many Officers, but of what quality we yet know not; We
took also two hundred Carriages, all he had, and all his Guns, being twelve in
number, whereof two were Demy-cannons, two Demy-Culverins, and I think the rest
were Sacres. We pursued the enemy from three miles short of Harborough to nine
beyond, even to the sight of Leicester, whether the King fled; Sir, this is no
other but the hand of God, to him alone be the glory, wherein none are to share
with him. The General served you with all faithfulness and honor, and the
best commendation I can give him, is, I dare say he attributes all to God, and
had rather perish then assume it to himself, which is an honest, and a
thriving way, yet as much bravery may be given to him in this Action, as to a
man.

Harborough 14 of June, 1645. O. CROMWELL.

The Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of public employment in the late
service near Knaseby.
BOth Armies were drawn in Ba^talia in a great field near Knaseby by ten in
the morning, each wing of both sides charged other, with that eagerness, that
they had not patience to shoot of one piece of Ordnance, our Dragoones begun
the Battle Flancking the right wing of the Enemies Horse as they charged our
left wing of Horse, the Foot charged not each other till they were within
twelve paces one of another, and could not charge above twice, but were at push
of Pike, the Enemies Foot gave a little back, and so did some few of ours, and
then the right wing of our Horse (wherein the General was in person) charged
in the Flancke of the blew regiment of the enemies Foot, who stood to it, till
the last man, abundance of them slain, and all the rest surrounded, wounded,
and taken, these (the hope of their Infantry) being lost, Horse and Foot gave
back, we advanced on after them in order our Horse flancking* our Foot, and
after one charge more, became Masters of all their Infantry, and took about
three thousand prisoners, the Enemies Horse ran a pace, but still our Horse,
though one would have beaten ten, (such a fear was the Enemy possessed with
all) would not pursue in heat but take the Foot to flancke them, the King
cried out, face about once and give one charge and recover the day, our Men
Horse and Foot came on with that courage, that before ever we gave fire they
faced about and ran clee^e away, and happy was he that was best mounted, and
Livetenant General Cromwell; pursued with the Horse after them on a Curre^^e
about twelve or thirteen miles, within two or three miles of Leicester, and
having taken eight pieces of Ordnance in the Field, whereof two were
Demicannon, one whole Culverine, took all the rest of their Ordnance and their
Carriages, Bag and Baggage* abundance of Coaches, and rich Plunder, Carts with
Boats and great store of Biscuit and Cheese, (a seasonable refreshment for our
soldiers that had marched so hard, and the night before had not a bit of Bread
to a regiment for their refreshment,) the Foot and the Train Marched this
night to Harborough (four miles) where our head quarter is. Time will not give
me leave to enlarge my self on particulers otherwise it were worth your
knowledge and fit to be had in memory, I shall not attribute more to one
Commander then to another, for indeed they did as gallantly, as ever men on
earth could do, and so did the Enemies foot, which before the battle we
least valued, Rupert and Maurice (having at least two thousand Horse more then
ours that charged, were so well received by our men though our left wing gave
back a little as their hearts were broake at the first* that which made our
Horse so terrible to them, was the thicknes of our reserves and their orderly
and timely coming on, not one failing to come on in turn; About the
beginning, the day was doubtful, but blessed be the name of our God, in one
half hour the field was won and the Enemy gone, to God alone be the praise,
it becomes not me to say any thing of my Generals, Major Generals, or
Livetenant General Cr^mwells carriage in this battle, I leave it to all men,
on the place to relate it, who cannot but admire their valor, and thus has
the Lord gone along with this new molded Army, so much contemned by many and
left as sheep to the slaughter by others, but from the beginning I was
confident, a blessing from heaven did attend this Army, there were in it so
many pious men, men of integrity, hating vice, fighting not out of
ambitiousnesse or by ends, but aiming at Gods glory and the preservation of
Religion, and Liberty, and the destruction of the Enemy which was never in so
fair a way as now is, if peoples hearts would yet be moved to redeem
themselves from slavery and all join as one man, If this advantage be improved
(as what a wearied out and tired Army is able to do, will be done) with the
blessing of God, and an addition of some fresh horse, ours being worn off
their legs, the Enemy in all probability will not this Summer get head again,
and I hope in the Lord, never more considerable in the field, some observations
I had in the time of Battle in the carriage of things, that one great
encouragement to the common Soldier to fall on, was the rich Plunder the enemy
had (their purses also being full of Money, the Plunder of poor
Leicestershire, God turned to be one means of their ruin, and indeed our
soldiers got plenty, the Irish women Prince R^p^rt brought on the field (wives
of the bloody Rebels in Ireland (his Majesty's dearly beloved subjects) our
soldiers would grant no quarter too, about 100 slain of them, and most of the
rest of the whores that attended that wicked Army are marked in the face or
nose, with a slash or cut. I viewed the dead bodies, from the Battle to
Harborough, truly I estimate them not to be above 700, together with those
slain in the fields running away, but in pursuit between Harborough and
Leicester, and by towns, conceived about 300 more slain, abundance wounded,
persons of great note fell, one with a star and a red cross on his coat,
conceived to be the Duke of Lenox four Lords came mortally wounded to
Harborough, but durst not stay, we took all the foot Colors in the field, the
Kings own Colors, with the Lion and Crown, with this Motto, Dieu and mon
droit; The Queens Colors, and the Princes Colors, and the Duke of Yorkes
Standard; We got the Plunder of the Kings Coach, his Cabinet, etc. The enemies
word was, Queen Mary, ours. God is our strength, and so he was indeed. They had
bean stalks in their hats, we nothing; some of ours of their own accord had
white Linen, or paper in their hats. A party of theirs that broke through the
left wing of Horse, came quite behind the rear to our train, the Leader of
them being a person somewhat in habit like the General, in a red Mountero, as
the General had, he came as a friend; our Commander of the guard of the Tra^ne
went with his hat in his hand, and asked him how the day went thinking it had
been the General; The Cavalier whom we since heard was Rupert, asked him and
the rest, if they would have quarter, they cried no, Gave fire and instantly
beat them off; It was a happy deliverance, we had slain on our part none above
a Captain I yet hear of, and in all not 250. to my best judgment, and I
viewed the ground where the bodies lay, the honest and valiant Major general
wounded Colonel Butler, Colonel Francis Major Horton, Captain Potter, one of
the Commons of Parliament, Colonel Ireton, and some other Officers of note
wounded; The Provost Marshall says, he has in all about four thousand
Prisoners, whereof above 400. are Officers, four Colonels, 12 Lieutenant
Colonels, many Majors, 60. Captains, besides Lievtenants and Ensigns. The
Soldiers have already brought in to the General, above 40. Standards and
Colors, he gives each man a reward, Sir Jacob Ashley's Coach was taken with
great store of Plunder, also some Letter, of Nicholas the liar, wherein he has
this expression in his Letter to the King, That the Parliament had given
particular Direction to the General to kill the King, and to give him no
quarter, the rest of his stories are like this; We took 5000. Arms on the
field, but the Soldiers were so greedy of Plunder and pursuing the enemy, that
the Country got some of them. Sir Jacob Ashley was near taking, we got the
Cap of his head; The Army is marching toward Leicester, and will not give the
Enemy time to rally; our Horse are close in the rear of them, Colonel
Rossiter came seasonable to the engagement, and charged where the General was,
and is still in pursuit of the enemy, I could say more had I time to sleep, I
rest yours, etc.

Harborough, June 15. two in the morning. We took one Colors of Horse, with a
pair of horns, Come Cuckolds, was the Motto; as soon as our men had it in
possession, they held the Horns and Motto toward the Enemy, and so charged
them.

Langdels Brigade ran away basely, and lost the King the day.



Die Lunae Iunii 16. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That Thursday next shall be
set apart for a day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, in all the
Churches and Chappells within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Lines
of Communication, and weekly bills of Mortallity, For the Great, and Glorious
Victory obtained by the Parliaments Army under the Command of Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, against the Forces of the KING. And M. Marshall and M. Vines be
desired to preach at Christ-Church, before the Parliament. And that the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council do meet the Parliament there. And it is
further Ordered, That Friday being the twenty seventh day of this instant June,
be set apart for a public day of Thanksgiving for this Victory in all the
Churches and Chappells in the several Counties of the Kingdom under the power
of the Parliament.

Henry Elsyng Cler. Parl. Dom Com.

FINIS.

