AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

For the raising and securing of 42000. li. for the payment of the Guards of
the City of London, and for repayment of such poor persons as have voluntarily
contributed any Money, Plate, etc. upon the Propositions (not exceeding the sum
of 10. li.) in the year 1642. and are not able to double the same.

As also for explanation of the former Ordinance for raising of 200000. li. for
the service of this Kingdom and the Kingdom of Ireland.

Die Jovis 3. Junii, 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Jovis, 3. Junii, 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the raising
of forty two thousand pounds, and for explanation of the former Ordinance for
raising of two hundred thousand pounds for the service of this Kingdom, and the
Kingdom of Ireland.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament intending to raise the sum of
forty two thousand pounds, for the uses herein after expressed, do hereby
Declare and Ordain, That every person who has advanced any Moneys, Plate, or
Horse, with their Furniture and Arms, or has lent any Moneys for or upon any
the particular occasions or services, mentioned in the late Ordinance,
Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for
securing of all those that shall advance two hundred thousand pounds for the
service of this Kingdom, and of the Kingdom of Ireland. That such persons may
for every sum of Money which they shall further lend, for or toward the
advancement of the aforesaid forty two thousand pounds, be secured a like sum
more to be paid out of the Grand Excize, and all other the several securities
given and assured by the said late Ordinance, and in such manner as is therein
and thereby provided and appointed, which of them shall first happen together,
with the Interest due thereupon, after the rate of eight per cent. per ann.
till Principal and Interest be fully discharged in course after the former
engagements; for which the Grand Excize, and all other the said several
securities now stand engaged, be fully satisfied and discharged; as for
example, If there be owing to any person one hundred pounds Principal, which
with the Interest thereupon for three years past, will make one hundred twenty
four pounds; he adventuring one hundred twenty four pounds more, shall be
secured, as is aforesaid, for the whole two hundred forty eight pounds, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser sum, and according to the Interest due
thereupon; And also that he shall be paid his Interest, which shall be then
due, after the rate of eight per cent. per ann. every six Months, out of the
Receipt of the Grand Excize. And the said Lords and Commons do hereby declare
and Ordain, That Sir John Wollaston Knight, and Alderman of London, and the
rest of the Trustees for the sale of Bishops Lands, appointed by an Ordinance
of Parliament, Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, for the lessening of the number of the Trustees for the sale of
Bishops Lands, and the Survivors and Survivor of them. And the Heirs of the
Survivor of them shall stand and be seized of all and singular the Counties
Palatine, Honors, Manours, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the
Premises settled, and vested in them and their Heirs and Assigns, in and by
the said Ordinance, excepting as is therein excepted; and shall take and
receive all the Rents, Revenues, Issues, and Profits, hereafter due and payable
for the Premises, or any part of them, until sale shall be made of the same
to the uses, intents, and purposes herein after mentioned and declared, after
the former sums lent and secured thereupon, or which are to be satisfied and
paid out of the same, shall be fully satisfied and discharged; And that John
Blackwell senior of Mortlake in the County of Surrey, Esquire, and the rest of
the Contractors for Bishops Lands, and William Gibbs Alderman of London, and
the rest of the Treasurers formerly appointed for receiving the Moneys which
shall arise upon the sale or proceed of Bishops Lands; And John Fowke, Alderman
of London, Comptroller, and his Deputy or Deputies, and Henry Elsynge Esquire,
Clerk of the House of Commons, Register, and his Deputy or Deputies, and
Colonel Robert Manwaring, Register Accomptant, shall continue in their said
several Trusts, Offices, and places respectively; and shall hereby have power
severally and respectively, to do all other acts and things, as in and by the
said first recited Ordinance, or any other Ordinances, Declarations, or
Instructions of Parliament, heretofore in that behalf made, they, every, or any
of them respectively, are authorized, directed, and appointed, to act or do,
excepting what is otherwise directed in and by this present Ordinance, until
sale shall be made of the Premises, to the uses, intents, and purposes herein
after mentioned: And also that James Bunce Alderman of London, and Richard
Glyde, and Lieutenant Colonel Lawrence Bromfield Citizens of London shall be,
and continue Treasurers for the receiving and paying out of the said forty two
thousand pounds hereby intended to be raised, which they shall do at Weavers
Hall in London, or any other place where they, or the major part of them shall
think fit, and shall do, act, and execute all other Acts and things
whatsoever for, or concerning the receiving and paying of the said forty two
thousand pounds as fully and amply, and in such manner respectively as is by
the said first recited Ordinance appointed, and declared for and concerning the
receiving and paying of the said two hundred thousand pounds therein mentioned;
and that the aforesaid Robert Manwairing shall be Register Accomptant of all,
and singular the Accounts and Registries, and do and execute all Acts and
things concerning all and singular the Premises mentioned and contained in
this present Ordinance respectively as fully and amply, and in such manner and
form as is formerly ordained and appointed by the said first recited
Ordinance, or any other Ordinances heretofore made in that behalf
respectively; Aad that the said James Bunce, and the rest of the Treasurers
before named, and the said Robert M^nwaring, and their respective Clerks shall
have, and receive the same respective allowances and salaries continued,
allowed, and paid unto them respectively for this present Service, as in and by
the former Ordinances is limited and appointed to them for the like respective
services therein expressed and required; And that all persons who have
voluntarily lent any Moneys, Plate, or Horse with their furniture and Arms
upon the Propositions by virtue of any Ordinance, Declaration, or Instruction
of both Houses of Parliament, shall have the same allowed in such manner, and
upon such Certificates, and shall have all such benefits and advantages as in
and by the said late Ordinance is expressed and appointed, and that it shall
and may be lawful to and for every person, or persons, to whom any money is
owing upon the Public Faith, or otherwise as is aforesaid, or any who shall
have any moneys due to him or them by virtue of this present Ordinance to grant
or assign his or their said Debts, or any part thereof to any other person or
persons whatsoever, and that such Assignees shall have all such benefits and
advantages thereof, and thereupon as in and by the said first recited Ordinance
is granted and allowed; and that every person and persons, who shall lend any
moneys upon this present Ordinance shall be demeaned in like manner; and shall
have all such benefits and advantages whatsoever, by defalcation upon Purchases
in course after the former engagements shall be fully satisfied and discharged,
or otherwise, as fully and amply and in such sort and manner as by the first
recited Ordinance is granted and allowed: And that every person or persons who
shall wittingly and willingly produce, and bring into the Register-Accomptant
any forged Acquittance or Certificate, shall undergo such penalty as in and by
the said Ordinance is declared and appointed; And that every person or persons
who shall have his Ticket allowed, and entered by the Register Accomptant in
his Book, and shall not bring in his money thereupon according to this present
Ordinance within eight days after such entry, to the Treasurers hereby
appointed for the same, shall undergo such penalty as in and by the said
Ordinance is declared and appointed; And the said Lords and Commons do hereby
declare, ordain, and appoint, that the said Treasurers shall pay twelve
thousand pounds, part of the said forty two thousand pounds to be advanced upon
this Ordinance unto the Committee of the Militia of the City of London, or such
as they or any nine of them shall appoint to be disposed by the said Committee,
or any nine of them for and toward the paying of the Arreares already due for
the Guards of the said City, or which shall hereafter become due for the same,
and such other requisite charges asmay concern the same; And that the Warrant
of the said Committee, or any nine of them in writing under their hands to the
said Treasurers for the payment of the said forty two thousand pounds, or any
part thereof, shall be a sufficient discharge to the said Treasurers for the
same, and that thirty thousand pounds being the residue of the said forty two
thousand pounds, shall be paid to such poor persons as have voluntarily
contributed any Moneys, Plate, or Horse with their furniture and Arms upon the
Propositions in the year 1642. and are not able to double the same, not
exceeding the sum of ten pounds, to any one such poor person in such
manner as shall be hereafter directed and appointed by both Houses of
Parliament; And that the Warrant of such who shall be thereunto hereafter
appointed by both Houses of Parliament, in writing under their hands, shall be
a sufficient discharge to the said Treasurers for the same. And the said Lords
and Commons do hereby Declare and Ordain, That the said forty two thousand
pounds shall not be disposed or employed, nor paid out by the said Treasurers
to any other uses or purposes then such as is herein before limited and
appointed. And be it further Declared and Ordained, That the said Treasurers
shall receive all sums of Money due and payable out of any the securities
aforesaid, from the hands of the Treasurers there already appointed, or who
hereafter shall be appointed, and as they shall receive the same (deducting
charges and allowances) shall again pay out, and divide such Moneys to the
Lenders by one fourth part of their whole debt that shall be owing to them, in
course as they did pay in their Money, with the interest then due; and so from
time to time till the whole be paid: And that the said Treasurers shall keep
true and perfect Accounts of all Receipts, Disbursements, and Payments, of or
concerning the said forty two thousand pounds, and shall give in their
Accounts to the Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom for the
time being; who are hereby required to take the same every six months, and
thereupon to give discharges to the said Treasurers; And after such discharges,
the said Treasurers shall not be further questioned for or concerning any of
the matters for which they have had and received such discharges: And the
Commissioners of the Grand Excise, are hereby required and authorized, to pay
unto the said Treasurers every six months all such interest as shall be then
due for any sum or sums of Money lent upon this Ordinance, upon their
Certificate thereof in Writing, in such manner as is expressed and appointed in
the said first recited Ordinance, concerning the interest due or to be due
according to the said Ordinance; And that the said Commissioners of Excise, and
the respective Treasurers of any the Treasuries, or Receipts hereby engaged for
the securities aforesaid, shall respectively from time to time pay unto the
Treasurers hereby appointed for that purpose, all and every sum or sums of
Money due and payable by this present Ordinance, which shall come to and be in
their said Treasuries or Receipts in course as is aforesaid; And the Receipts
of the said Treasurers hereby appointed, or any two of them, shall be a
sufficient discharge to the said Commissioners of Excise, and the Treasurers of
the said several Treasuries, and Receipts respectively; And be it further
Ordained, That no Grant or Assignment, hereafter to be made upon the Receipts
of the Grand Excise, or any of the aforesaid securities, shall precede this
present Ordinance, whereof the said Commissioners and respective Treasurers are
to take notice accordingly: And it is further Ordained, That the Excise and new
Impost, mentioned in the Ordinance of the eleventh of September, 1643. or any
Ordinance or Ordinances of this present Parliament, made in explanation or
continuance thereof, shall be continued, taken, and put in due execution,
until such time as all sums of Money payable by virtue of this present
Ordinance shall be paid and satisfied. And it is also Ordained, That this
present Ordinance, and every Article, Clause, and thing therein contained shall
be pleadable, and may be given in evidence in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Justice, or other Courts; And the Judges of the said Courts are hereby
required, to allow and admit thereof accordingly. Provided always, That all
such sums of Money as shall be lent upon this present Ordinance with the
respective Tickets or Receipts of Money formerly lent, as is aforesaid, which
shall be thereby doubled, shall be secured as is aforesaid, although the full
sum of forty two thousand pounds shall not be advanced (as is intended.) And
for a further explanation, and better putting in execution as well of the
aforesaid late Ordinance, as of this present Ordinance, The said Lords and
Commons do hereby Declare, and Ordain, that the said James Bunce Alderman, and
the rest of the Treasurers, or any two of them, are hereby authorized, and
required to give Receipts to the Parties who have lent, or shall lend any money
toward the raising of the aforesaid two hundred thousand pounds, or the said
forty two thousand pounds, both for the sum or sums now lent, or to be lent
in ready money, and the like former sum or sums due upon the Public
Faith, or otherwise, according to the said Ordinances, and ascertained by the
said Robert Manwaring, which are or shall be doubled by them; Which Receipts
given by the said Treasurers, or any two of them, for the said two hundred
thousand pounds, and such Receipts as are to be given for the said forty two
thousand pounds, shall be a sufficient ground to such persons to whom the same
are, or shall be given, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns to
require, and receive the same. And also that the said Treasurers hall pay unto
the said Lenders in course every six Months, the Interest which shall be then
due by the said Ordinance, or this present Ordinance, after the aforesaid rate
of Eight per Cent, out of such moneys as they shall then have received. And
further, that the said Treasurers, or any of them shall have free Liberty and
Power from time to time, as occasion shall require, to peruse and examine the
Books of Receipts and Disbursements of the several Treasurers and
Commissioners of the said Treasuries, and Receipts engaged for the security
aforesaid, to the end that they may see, and find out, what sum and sums of
money are, or shall be come into the said Treasuries and Receipts, toward the
repayment of the moneys which are or shall be due, and payable by the said
Ordinances. And the Treasurers and Commissioners of the said Treasuries and
Receipts, engaged for the security aforesaid, are hereby required to show unto
them their said several Books of Receipts and Disbursements, and to suffer
them to peruse and examine the same; And shall also from time to time pay unto
them such moneys due and payable by the said Ordinances which shall be then
received, and come into their said Treasuries and Receipts for the repayment of
the Principal, and Interest of the sums due by the said Ordinances. And
lastly, be it Declared and Ordained that the Committee of Lords and Commons
formerly appointed for the allowing of incident Charges to the former
Treasurers appointed by the Ordinance for the sale of Bishops Lands, or any
five of them, shall have power and authority to allow the like incident charges
to the said James Bunce, and the rest of the Treasurers respectively.

Provided always that the aforesaid sums of ten pounds, or under, intended
for the repaiment of poor persons shall be paid only to such poor persons, or
for their proper use and benefit, and not to any persons who have bought, or
shall buy of them any such Tickets or Receipts as if aforesaid.

FINIS.

