Die Martis, 19 August. 1645.
AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the setting
forth ships of war, for the more secure fishing for Herring the next season.
WHereas upon the Petition of diverse Fishermen for the Herring fishing the last
years season, praying that some ships of War might be set forth to Sea to
preserve them from Pirates, and other Sea-rovers; and for the defraying of that
charge, a duty or rate might be set and received on every Last of Herring, The
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament did by their Ordinance of the six and
twentieth of August, 1644. lay, and impose a duty of three shillings upon every
Last of Herring, (each Last containing ten thousand Herrings) which should be
taken that season by any Fisherman; And for every Last of Herring such
fisherman should sell at Sea, should pay the sum of five shillings over and
above the former three shillings; And if any Fishermen should bring on shore
any Herring to dry, or barrel them to his own use, that then he pay for every
Last so landed the sum of five shillings over and above the said former three
shillings. And it was farther ordained, that every person whatsoever that
should buy any Herring that season, and land the same to barrel or dry, should
pay after the rate of five shillings for every Last by him so bought, as in and
by the said Ordinance more at large it does and may appear. Now forasmuch as
the said Ordinance is expired, and the said Fishermen having again by their
humble Petition desired, that in regard of the necessity of having some ships
of War to be set forth for the next Herring season, and for the defraying the
charge thereof, the like duty and rate may be set on every Last of Herring,
Which the said Lords and Commons taking into consideration do ordain, that
the like duty be hereby imposed on every Last of Herrings, which shall be taken
this next Herring fishing season, as was set and laid on them by the said
Ordinance of the six and twentieth of August, 1644. And that such sum or
sums of money as shall be raised on the said duty by virtue of this Ordinance
shall be paid to the said Miles Corbett and Edward Owner, Esquires, Thomas
Johnson, Thomas Gooch, Bayliffes of the Town of Yarmouth, or any two of them,
or unto such persons as they shall depute under their hands and Seals for that
service, to be by them or their said deputy or deputies issued out of the said
service, as they shall from time to time receive order from the Committee of
the Navy appointed by Parliament, who are likewise hereby authorized to do the
same.

And it is further ordained, that the said Committee of the Navy shall have
power to contract for such a convenient number of ships for this service as
they shall think fit, not employing above the number of three hundred
Mariners.

And it is lastly ordained, That every other Article and clause in the said
Ordinance of the six and twentieth of August, 1644. contained, shall be
observed, stand and continue in full force and power.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock at Temple-barre. September. 2. 1645.


