AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT* For the Raising
and Collecting of Ten thousand pounds,for and toward the Redemption of
Distressed CAPTIVES.

Die Martis, 8. Julij, 1645.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament* that this Ordinance
be forthwith Printed and Published.

Jo: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, July 15. 1645.

Die Martis 8. July 1645.
Whereas by an Act made this present Parliament, Entitled, an Act for the
relief of the Captives taken by Turkish, Moorish, and other Pirates, and to
prevent the taking of others in time to come, a Subsidy of one per Cent. was
imposed on all goods and Merchandise exported out of, or imported into this
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, which was to be one first part more
then the Customs and Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, according to the Book of
Rates: Since the Passing of which Act, the House of Commons by Order of the
tenth of March 1641. for diverse reasons did Order, That Bonds should be taken
by the Collectors of that duty to stand to the Order of Parliament: And whereas
both Houses of Parliament intending to carry on that good work, did on the 24.
of October 1644. Order, that only one fourth part of the moneys due by the said
Bonds being one shilling in every twenty shillings Custom, should be paid by
the respective Merchants of the City of London, having by their Petition set
forth ye great inconveniency that might happen, as well in relation to the
Advancement of the work, as to the unequal burden that might rest upon the
well-affected Merchants, in regard sundry persons ill disposed to that work, and
disaffected to the Parliament, did, during the time of the said Act, make ill
use of the favor of the Parliament; and did fraudulently make entry of their
goods in the names of insolvent and unknown persons, by whom Bonds were
likewise sealed. And the duty being now required, no such persons appear, nor
moneys can be collected for the carrying on of that work; yet the said
well-affected Merchants being desirous that the work might go on, are ready not
only by way of Advance forthwith to pay in all such monyes as they themselves
owe upon those bonds, but likewise willing to discover the fraud in those
il-affected persons, and to use their best endeavors, to recover in the moneys
due upon such Bonds so as they might be enabled by an Ordinance of Parliament
for continuance of that duty of one fourth per Cent. for another year to
reimburse themselves out of the one moiety of the Collections of that duty or
otherwise all such moneys as they shall pay in and advance as aforesaid. It is
therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; That
Samuel Avery, Esquire, Alderman or the City of London, Walter Pell, Robert
Lowther Rouland Wilson Senior, Thomas Hodges, William Methold, Edmund Cason,
Robert Abdy, Samuel Mico, Charles Snelling, Richard Leg, Thomas Rich, Jonathan
Andrews, Nathaniel Wright, Thomas Burnell, Richard Chiverton, Nathan Wright,
Richard Hill, Benjamin Delannoy, William Vincent, Henry Hunt and Hugh Wood, or
any three of them shall be a Committee, and have power to receive from the
Chamberlain of London, who is hereby required to deliver all such Bonds of
Merchants heretofore taken for the satisfying of that duty by virtue of the
said Order of the 10. of March 1641. And shall have further power to receive
all moneys due upon the said Bonds, from the several Merchants, according to
the Rule following: That is to say, of all such Merchants, that shall before
the 24. of July next, voluntarily pay in the one fourth part of the one per
Cent. in obedience to the Ordinance of the 24. of October 1644. Upon their said
Bonds they shall accept thereof, and deliver up their Bonds cancelled to the
respective Merchants; but of all others, which shall refuse to accept of the
benefit of this Ordinance, and to pay in their moneys on their Bonds by the day
prescribed, or any others that they shall discover fraudulently to have made
their entries in unknown names to elude the Ordinance of Parliament, They shall
have power to require and receive the whole duty of one per Cent. or the whole
penalty of the said Bonds, as they shall think fit. And if any shall refuse
upon demand to make such payment, then to leavy the same by distress upon the
goods and Estates of such persons, and the same to sell and dispose of for the
satisfaction of the said Bonds, and the overplus if any shall be, to return it
to the parties so refusing. And for the better execution of this service, they
shall have power to send for parties, Witnesses, other then Peers, papers, and
Records at a certain time and place, where they shall constantly sit. And it is
further Ordained, That after the sum of Ten thousand pounds shall be raised and
Collected upon the said Bonds, for the carrying on the said work, such
Merchants shall, on, or before the said 24. day of July, pay in their said
moneys in obedience to this Ordinance, shall be repaid the same out of the
surplus of such moneys, as shall arise upon the said Bonds in turn as they did
pay in their moneys, and what part shall be wanting for the full reimbursement
of every particular Merchant, shall be paid out of the one moiety of the
Receipts that shall be Collected in the Port of London, on an Ordinance of
Parliament passed this present day, for the continuance of the said duty of one
fourth of one per Cent. from the 10. of December next inclusive. Provided, if
any Merchant shall not pay in the money due by his Bonds, on or before the 24.
of July as aforesaid, shall not enjoy the benefit of this Clause* or any thing
in this Ordinance (...).

And it is further Ordained, That this Committee shall have power to appoint a
Treasurer to receive and issue (...) moneys as shall be Collected on the said
Bonds as he shall receive order from time to time from the Committee of the
Navy appointed by Parliament, which shall be to him a sufficient discharge, and
to employ such other person or persons in the execution of this service, and to
give such reward for their care and pains, as to them with the approbation of
the Committee of the Navy shall be thought fit.

Lastly, it is Ordained, That if after the said 24. day of July, any person or
persons shall be discovered eluding of the said Ordinance of Parliament for the
payment of that duty to have made fraudulent entries, and to cause bonds to be
giver in the names of unknown or insolvent persons, such persons so discovered
shall be liable to the penalty of the said bonds, and to such further
punishment as shall be thought fit by Parliament to be due to offenses of that
nature one moiety of the said Fine and penalty shall be to such person or
persons that shall make such discovery, and the other moiety to the State, to
be employed, to and for the Redemption of the said distressed Captives* And the
Committee of the Navy are to take care for the putting this Ordinance in
execution, and to give such* further Instructions from time to time, as shall
be needful for the better carrying on of this Service.

Jo: Brown, Cleric.
Parliamentorum.

