AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT. For the true
payment of TITHES And other Duties, and for continuance of an Ordinance of the
ninth of August, 1647.

Die Veneris, 27 October. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this Ordinance for the true
payment of Tithes, and other duties, be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright, at the King-Head in the Old-Bayley. 1648.

Die Veneris, 27. October. 1648. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, For the true payment of Tithes and other Duties, and for
continuance of an Ordinance of the ninth of August, 1647.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Do Order Ordain and Declare,
That the Ordinace of Parliament of the ninth of August, Anno Dom. 1647.
Entitled, An Addition Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, For the true payment of Tithes, and other Duties, shall continue,
remain and be, and hereby is continued, to remain and be in full force and
strength, from the last day of October, Anno Dom. 1648. until the first day of
November, An. Dom. 1650. any proviso of limitation, or restraint for ceasing,
or determination thereof therein contained, or to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided always that upon all appeals to be brought into the
Chancery, the party appealing shall lay down in Money, either with to Justices
of Peace, by whom any Order shall be made, according to the purport of the said
Ordinance, or in the court of Chancery, the full value of the Tithes adjudged
before the said Justices, together with the treble Damages and Costs, the which
Costs so to be deposited shall not exceed ten pounds, or in default thereof no
appeals shall be received or admitted; And it is likewise Ordained, That the
penalty of forty shillings upon Constables, petty-Constables, and other
Officers limited and appoined in and by the the said Ordinance for neglecting
to do their Duties, shall be leavyed by way of distress and sale of the Goods
of such Persons so neglecting or refusing, by warrant from the said Justices of
Peace, and by such Persons as shall by them be thereunto Authorized, the same
to be employed to the use of the poor of that Parish where such Constable,
petty-Constable or other Officer does inhabit.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

