A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God in his Great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
Vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that
our Preservation is due next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of ORANGE, whom God has Chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us and our Posterity: and being
highly Sensible, and fully Persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of ORANGE, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion will no
doubt bring a Blessing along with Her upon this Nation. And whereas the Lords
and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of ORANGE, and therein
desired Them to accept the Crown, who have accepted the same accordingly. We
therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, together with the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, do with
a full Consent, Publish and Proclaim according to the said Declaration, WILLIAM
and MARY, Prince and Princess of ORANGE, to be KING and QUEEN of England,
France and Ireland, with all the Dominions thereunto belonging, Who are
accordingly so to be Owned, Deemed, Accepted, and Taken by all the People of
the aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from henceforeward bound to
acknowledge, and Pay unto them all Faith and true Allegiance; Beseeching God,
by whom Kings Reign, to Bless King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, with long and happy
Years to Ring over us,

GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

The Na(...) of the King His Council in England.
Prince (...) Archbishop of Canterbu^^, D. Norfolk, M. Halyfax President, M.
Winchester, E. Danby Lord Thesaurer, E. Oxfoord. E. Shreusberry Secretary of
State, E. Bedfoord, E. Bristol, E. Dovenshire Steward of his Majesty's
Household. (...)inghame, (...) Mackesfeild, Lord Chamberlane of his Majesty's
Household, V. Falconberg. V. Mardont, V. Newport Bishop of London, L. Wharton,
L. Delamare, L. Montague, L. Lomlies(...) L. Chur(...) Min-heer(...) S. Henry
Sid(...), ^ecretary of State* S. Robert Howard, S. Henry Capel, S. Henry Powel,
Mr. Edward Russel, Mr. Richard Hamden, Mr. Buscoen,

Whitehall, Febr. 13.
This morning the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons being Assembled at
Westminster, and having agreed upon an Instrument in Writing, for Declaring the
Prince and Princess of Orange, King and Queen of England, France and Ireland,
with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and presented the
same to their Highnesses in the Banqueting House, and received their Consent
thereto: The said Lords and Commons about Eleven of the Clock came down to
Whitehal-Gate, where the Officers of Arms, Sergeants at Arms, Trumpets, and
other Persons concerned in the Solemnity, being Assembled, by Order from the
Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England: Sir Tho. St. George Knight. Garter
Principal King of Arms, having received a Proclamation, and the said Officers
of Arms being Ordered by the House of Lords forthwith to Proclaim the same,
York Herald (after the Trumpets had thrice sounded) Proclaimed it at
Whitehal-Gate accordingly (the said Garter Reading it to him by Periods) in the
presence of the said Lords and Commons and Multitudes of People there
Assembled, who concluded the same with repeated Acclamations of Joy, from
whence they proceeded in this manner. First, the Head Bailiff of Westminster
with his Men; Next, the Knight Marshals Men, than a Class of Trumpets, followed
by the Sergeant Trumpeter; Then an Officer of Arms singly, followed by six
other, each accompanied with a Sergeant at Arms; Then Garter King of Arms with
the Proclamation, accompanied by the Usher of the Black-Rod; Then the Lord
Marquess of Halifax, who executes the Place of Speaker in the House of Lords,
in his Coach, attended by Sir Roger Harsnet, Eldest Sergeant at Arms, with his
Mace; Then Henry Powle Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, in his Coach,
attended by Sergeant Topham, with his Mace; Then the Duke of Norfolk, Earl
Marshal of England in his Coach, followed by the rest of the Peers in Order,
all in Coaches; Lastly, the Members of the House of Commons in their Coaches.
Thus they proceeded to Temple Bar, where the Gates being shut, two of the
Officers of Arms (attended by a Sergeant at Arms, and two Trumpets) knocking
the reat, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex coming to the Gate, and being
informed of the Occasion of their Coming, Ordered the Gates to be opened, and
the Whole Proceeding entered (except the Bailiff of Westminster, and his Men,
who went off there) and the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen receiving them
in their Formalities, a second Proclamation was made between the two
Temple-Gates; and the said Aldermen, Sheriffs and Lord Mayor falling into the
Proceeding, at Woodstreet-end in Cheapside Their Majesty's were Proclaimed a
Third time; and so at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill a Fourth time; each
Proclamation being echoed with Universal Acclamations of Joy by the Multitudes
of People which crowded the Streets, Windows and Belconies; The Streets all the
way from Temple Bar to the Royal Exchange being lined with four Regiments of
the City Melitia. Thus the Ceremony ended* and the Night was concluded with
Bonefires, and Ringing of Bells, and all other Expressions of Duty, and
Affections to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM, and Queen MARY, with hearty Wishes
for Their long and happy Reign.

Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno 1689.


