blazon or coat of arms
By the Parliament: A PROCLAMATION Commanding All Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and other Romish Priests, to depart out of this Commonwealth.
THe Parliament of England being informed, That many Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and other Romish Priests are come into this Nation, and do here with great
boldness Celebrate their Idolatrous Masses, exercise all Offices of their
Profession, and seduce the People from the true Religion, and from their Duty
and Obedience to this Commonwealth; For which Offenses against the Laws of this
Nation, some of those Romish Priests being found here, have lately been
convicted and Executed according to Law; and others of them being within the
same Danger, are liable to the same Punishment, and their Lives within the
power of Justice: The Parliament nevertheless being willing, That the like for
the future, both the Offense and the Punishment may be avoided, and fit warning
given for that purpose; and for the prevention of the great Mischiefs arising
to the People of England, by such Romish Priests being among them (whereby God
is dishonored, and the Peace of this Commonwealth endangered) Have thought fit
to Publish and Declare, and do hereby Publish and Declare, That all and every
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, and other Priests, Deacons, Religious and
Ecclesiastical persons whatsoever, made, ordained or professed by any
Authority, Power or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or pretended from the Sea
of Rome, do, and shall be before the First day of March, One thousand six
hundred fifty and two, depart forth out of England and Wales, and Town of
Berwick: And for that purpose, That it shall be lawful to all Officers of
Ports, to suffer the said Jesuits, Seminaries and Romish Priests to ship
themselves, and to depart thence into any Foreign parts before the said First
day of March: And that if any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Romish or
Popish Priests, after the said First day of March, shall be found or taken
within England or Wales, or the Town of Barwick; or departing by force of this
present Act, shall hereafter return into this Nation, or any the Territories
thereof, That they and every of them so found, taken, and returning, shall be
liable unto, and undergo the penalty of the Laws here in force concerning them
or any of them, without hope of Pardon or Remission for their said Offense or
Offenses. And because there may be some Romish Priests and Jesuits in restraint
in diverse parts of this Nation, The Parliament does will and command all
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all Keepers of Prisons, within Twenty days after the
publishing of this Proclamation, to advertise the Council of State, appointed
by Authority of Parliament, of the Names of such Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
other Romish Priests that are in their Custody, and for what cause, and by whom
they were committed; to the end, That thereupon the Council of State may give
Order for their Enlargement and Transportation, if they see cause, which they
are hereby Authorized to do: And the Parliament does charge and command, All
Justices of Peace and other Officers whatsoever, to be vigilant and careful to
do their duties herein, and be diligent in Discovering and Apprehending of all
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other Romish Priests that shall remain here or
come into this Commonwealth, or any the Territories thereof, contrary to this
Proclamation: And the Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, are hereby
authorized and required to affix the said Great Seal unto this Proclamation,
and to cause the same to be Published and Proclaimed in all Counties of this
Commonwealth, according to the usual course.

Wednesday the Fifth of January, 1652.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.


