CR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION
ALthough it can no way be doubted, but that His Majesty's Right and Title to
His Crowns and Kingdoms, is, and was every way completed by the death of His
most Royal Father of Glorious memory, without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a
Proclamation, yet since Proclamations in such Cases have been always used, to
the end that all good Subjects might upon this occasion testify their Duty and
Respect; And since the Armed Violence, and other the Calamities of many years
last past, have hitherto deprived us of any such opportunity, wherein we might
express our Loyalty and Allegiance to His Majesty, We therefore the Lords and
Commons now assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom now
present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously acknowledge and Proclaim, That immediately upon the Decease of our
late Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England,
and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and Lawful and undoubted Succession, Descend and come to
His most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the Second, as being Lineally, Justly, and
Lawfully next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; and that by the Goodness
and Providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, the most Potent, mighty, and undoubted King: And thereunto We most
humbly and faithfully do Submit and Oblige Our Selves, Our Heirs, and
Posterities for Ever.

God Save the King.
Tuesday May 8, 1660.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Proclamation be
forthwith Printed and Published.

WILL: JESSOP Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament.

London, Printed by Edward Husbands and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Commons
House of Parliament.


