AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS And COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT WHEREBY All
Vintners Are required to bring in the MONEY, due for the half EXCISE, of all
WINES remaining in their Hands, at, or before the eleventh of September last,
According to two former ORDINANCES of PARLIAMENT, of the eleventh of September,
and the first of October.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes and John Raworth. 1643. November. 8.

Die Martis, 7. November. 1643.
THE Lords and Commons having been informed, That the Vintners of the City of
London and Westminster, and 10 Miles compass, as also throughout the Country,
have, notwithstanding the favorable provision made for them, by the several
Ordinances for Excise, the eleventh of September, and the first of October,
delayed to pay the half Excise, thereby Limited and appointed to be paid by the
said Vintners for such Wines as were upon their hands, at, or before the
eleventh of September last.

It is hereby ordained by the said Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That if any Vintner shall delay or neglect, without further warning, to bring
in all such sums of Money as shall be due for Excise of Wines upon their hands,
at, or before the eleventh of September last, into such Office of Excise, under
which their Habitation is comprehended, within ten days after publication
hereof, within the respective places; That then every such Vintner shall after
expiration of the said ten days, be liable to pay whole Excise for all such
Wines as the Merchant and Cooper, by the said Ordinance is enjoined. And in
default thereof, by delay, or not payment of the said whole Excise, every such
Vintner shall be proceeded against, without delay, by distress, or otherwise,
according to the Ordinance of Excise.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl.D. Com.

FINIS.

