THE PETITION AND ARTICLES Exhibited in Parliament against JOHN POCKLINGTON,
Doctor in Divinity, Parson of Yelden, in Bedford, hire, Anno 1641.

Jer. 23. v. 15. Therefore thus says the lord of Hosts, concerning the
Prophe^s; behold I will feed them with wormwood, and make thens dr^n^e the
water of gall; for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is proph^nenesse gon^ forth
into all the Land.



Imprinted at London, 1641.

ARTICLE, J.

HE has within these few years, in his Church of Yelden turned the Communion
Table Altarwise.

ARTICLE, II.

He bows to or before this Altar, very low; as often as either he passes by
it, or makes his approach thereunto.

ARTICLE, III.

He shows more outward reverence to the Altar, then to the name of God: for
one time in the Church protesting before GOD, and his holy Altar, when he made
mention of the Altar, he turned himself toward it, and made low obey sance
before it, but at the name of God he showed no such respect.

ARTICLE, IV.

He has placed a Cross in a Cloth behind the Astar, called the Altar-cloth.

ARTICLE, V.

He uses much to magnify the Cross; and once in his Sermon speaking of Moses
his prayer against Amalecke, he said, that Moses spread forth his arms in the
form of a Cross, and that that posture of his was more availeable with God
then his prayer.

ARTICLE, VI.

He has caused a Bell to be hung up in his Chancell, called a Sacring Bell,
which the Clarke always rings at the go^ng up to Se^ond Service, which he
performs with variety of postures, sometimes turning his fa^e toward the
South sometimes toward the East, and sometimes toward the West.

ARTICLE, VII.

He has cansed two clothes to be made, which He calls Corporals; and these be
uses to lay over the Bread in the Sacrament; and each of these h^^n five.
Grosses on it, one at each corner, and one in the middle.

ARTICLE, VIII.

That he refused to give the Sacrament on Easterday, Anno 1638. to 12. or 14.
of his Parishioners, tho they had acquainted him before, that they intended to
receive on that day, according to their usual custom; and though at the time
of the administration of the sacrament, even from the beginning thereof to the
end, they kneeled at the railes (for otherwise he would not administer it to
them at any time) yet He still passed them by, and sent them away without it,
to their great reproach and discomfort; having no just cause so to do.

ARTICLE, IX.

He has also composed and published two books of Pamph^ets, the one intituted
Sunday no Sabbath, the other Altar Christianum, wherein he justifies and
defends all those Innovations in Religion that have bin unhappily introduced
into this Church, which also he practices by himself; and besides in those
books he asserts and maintains diverse wicked, Popish and Antichrishian
points, to the great danger and damage of this Church and state, justifies;
sundry Popish canoni^ed Sain^s for true Saints and Martyrs of God and censures
our own English Martyrs (mentioned in M. Foxes Calender, before his book of
Acts and Monuments, set forth by public Authority, and approved by the whole
Convocation, Anno 1579.) for Traitors Murderers, Rebels, and Heretics.

ARTICLE, 10.

He affirms and maintains the dedication and consecration of c^urches by
Prayers and that (as he says) from the Doctrine and Decrees of Popes of the
first and best times, and confirmed by the Doctrine and practice of the holy
Catholic Church. And he censures the Centurists for bold and impious, because
they condemn and brand such kind of Popish Consecration of wood and stones, for
the Mystery of iniquity, Alt. Chr. ca^ 10. page 52.

ARTICLE, XI.

He teaches and affirms, that the distinction of pl^ces in the Church (...)
ancient ^^^and observed even from the Apostles (...) ^^verall places in the
Church were appo^^^ed or the ^^e^gy, and for the Laity, Alt. Chr. c. 8. p. 43,
44. And these several places had several degrees of holine^^^. And it orium
was the place for the Laity, and that was less holy; but Presbyterium was the
place for the Clergy and this was more holy. And in the holy place namely the
Chancell or Presbytery, there was a Throne or Chair placed.

ARTICLE, XII.

But He bethinks himself, and says, that this Chair was not in all Churches,
but only in the Churches of Bishops; and that such a Chair was in the Church
of Jerusalem and Rome: and then after affirms, that the Succession of Bishops
in such a Chair, was one thing that kept St. Augustine from departing out of
the bosom of the Catholic Church; for he brings him in, saying thus, The
succession of Priests from St. Peter, keeps me of right in the Church: the
name of this Catholic See (that is, of Rome) keeps me in, Alt. Chr. p. 47.

The Copy of the Petition. To the right Honorable, the Lords of the upper
House of Parliament, The humble Petition of I. H. of Cardington in the County
of Bedford, Gentleman.
Humbly shows,
THAT John Pocklington Doctor of Divinity, Rector of the Parish Church of
Yelden in the County of Bedford, Vicar of Waresly in the County of Huntington,
Prebend of Lincoln, Peterborough, and Windsore, has bin a chief Author and
Ringleader in all those Innovations which have of late flowed into the Church
of England.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take the premises into your
just and pious consideration, and to convent the said D. Pocklington before
you, to answer the same, that so he may receive such condign and exemplary
punishment, as may deter all others from the like dangerous Attempts, and I
innovations: and your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

FINIS.

