Die Mercurii, 2o Octobr. 1650. RESOLVES of Parliament, Concerning RATES for
Composition of Delinquents.
THe House this day, according to former Order, proceeded in the Debate of the
Report made from the Committee of the Army touching Delinquents:
REsolved upon the question by the Parliament, That all such Delinquents whose
Compositions having been set, have not paid in all or any part thereof at the
times limited, and for non-payment have incurred the Penalties formerly
imposed, and shall pay in their whole Fines, or such part thereof as yet
remains unpaid, with Interest for the same since the time the same should have
been paid; viz. All such whose Habitations are within Fourscore miles of
London, before the Tenth day of November next ensuing; And all other at a
greater distance, before the Four and twentieth day of November aforesaid,
shall be discharged from the said Penalties: And the Commissioners for
Compounding with Delinquents, are Ordered to return to the Parliament, or such
as they shall appoint to receive the same, the Names of all such Delinquents as
shall not within the respective days herein before limited, pay in the whole
Fine imposed on them, with Interest as aforesaid, in order to the speedy Sale
of their Estates.

Resolved, That for the enabling such Delinquents to perfect their Compositions
as are willing to Compound, The said Commissioners be empowered, if it shall
appear to the said Commissioners that a Delinquent is not able to raise his
Fine without Sale of some part of his Estate, To give a full discharge to such
reasonable proportion of the Estate as they shall think fit to give way to the
Sale of, toward the raising of such Fine as is or shall be imposed, so as the
residue of his Estate shall be liable to make good any Forfeiture which the
Delinquent shall incur by undervaluing any part of the Estate Compounded for;
Provided License be obtained from the said Commissioners, and the Fines paid
within the times limited by means of such Sale.

Resolved, That all such Delinquents, who upon the setting of their Fines have
had Saving to certain parts of their Estates, under several pretenses, that the
said Estates were litigious, Shall have liberty to Compound for such part of
their Estates so saved and reserved, at the same Rate and Value that they
Compounded for the other part of their Estates, if they shall perfect the same
within the times limited; viz. All such Delinquents as are inhabiting within
Eighty miles of London, before the Tenth day of November next ensuing, and all
others further distant before the Four and twentieth of November aforesaid; And
in default thereof, the Estate of any person or persons so saved or reserved,
shall be liable to be sold as the Lands of other Delinquents uncompounded for,
unless the Commissioners for Compositions, etc. shall upon good cause shown
give further time for such saving or Reservations to continue.

Resolved, That all such Delinquents, whose Compositions have been set, as
shall within the respective times before mentioned discover to the said
Commissioners any part of their Estate, which at the time of their Composition
was under-valued or concealed, and ought to havebeen Compounded for (shall in
such case where no Information is depending, or Judgment given) be admitted to
Compound for such part of his or their Estate so under-valued or concealed as
aforesaid, according to the Rates and Proportions at which they did formerly
Compound, so as they pay in their whole Moneys before the Four and twentieth
day of November next ensuing; And that all such Delinquent against whom any
Information is depending or Judgment given, or who shall be discovered by
Information of any other person then themselves within the times before
limited, shall be admitted to Compound at the Rates and Proportions following;
viz. Every person who has formerly Compounded at a Tenth part of their
Estates, shall Compound at a full Sixth part of what is so undervalued or
omitted; Every person who has Compounded formerly at a Sixth part, shall pay
one full Third part; And all such who formerly did Compound at a Third, shall
pay one full Moiety of what is concealed or under-valued respectively,
according to the present Rules for Compositions so as the said persons do pay
the whole Fines to be imposed upon such omissions or under-valuations before
the said Four and twentieth of November.

Ordered by the Parliament, That these Votes be forthwith Printed and
Published; And that it be referred to the Commissioners for Compounding, to
take care the same be sent to the Sheriffs in the respective Counties, who are
enjoined and required immediately after receipt thereof, to publish the same,
or cause them to be published in all Cities Boroughs and Market Towns, and
affixed and set up in the places accustomed.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.


