A SACRED Vow and Covenant TAKEN By the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament: Upon the discovery of the late horrid and Treacherous Design, for
the destruction of this Parliament, and the Kingdom.

Together with the Names of those Members of the House of COMMONS which have
taken the said Vow and COVENANT.

Also another Vow and COVENANT to be taken by the Armies and Kingdom.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That the Vow and Covenant taken by the
Members of this House shall be Printed, and the names of such Members likewise
that took the same: And also the Vow and Conant to be taken by the Armies and
Kingdoms.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands, ad are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple. June 12. MDCXLIII.

Die Martis 6 Junii 1643.
This Oath and Covenant was taken by the Lords and Commons.
WHereas there has been, and now is, in this Kingdom, a Popish and Traitorous
Plot, for the subversion of the true Protestant Reformed Religion, and the
Liberty of the Subject. And in pursuance thereof a Popish Army has been
raised, and is now on foot in diverse parts of this Kingdom: And whereas there
has been a Treacherous and horrid design lately discovered, by the great
blessing and especial providence of God, of diverse persons, to join themselves
with the Armies raised by the King, and to destroy the Forces raised by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London and
Westminster with the Suburbs, by Arms to force the Parliament, and finding by
constant experience, That many ways of Force and Treachery are continually
attempted to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament and Kingdom;
and that which is dearest, The true Protestant Religion; and that for the
preventing and withstanding the same, it is fit, That all who are true hearted
and Lovers of their Country, should bind themselves each to other in a sacred
Vow and Covenant.

I A. B. In humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this nation, which have deserved the
Calamities and Judgments that now lies upon it: And my true intention is, by
Gods grace, to endeavor the amendment of my own ways. And I do further in the
presence of Almighty God Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That in order to the
security and preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and Liberty
of the Subject, I will not consent to the laying down of Arms so long as the
Papists now in open War against the Parliament, shall by force of Arms be
protected from the Justice thereof; And that I do abhot and detest the said
wicked and treacherous Design lately discovered; And that I never gave, nor
will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will according to my power
and vocation oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like nature: And
in case any other like Design shall hereafter come to my knowledge, I will
make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best conduce to the
preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe, That the Forces
raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for their just
defense, and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of
the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King; that I will, according to
my power and Vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their consent: And
will likewise, assist all other persons that shall take this Oath, in what they
shall do in pursuance thereof, and will not directly or indirectly adhere unto,
nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King, without the consent
of both Houses of Parliament. And this Vow and Covenant I make in the presence
of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform
the same, as I shall answer at the great day, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed.

The Names of those Members of the House of Commons, that have taken the new
Oath, and Covenant Agreed on. 6 June. 1643.
MAster Speaker, Master White, Sir Robert Harley, Sir Nevill Pool, Sir Robert
Pie, Sir Thomas Cheek, Sir Oliver Luke, Sir Beauchamp Saint-John, Mr.
Oldsworth, Sir Will. Armyn, Mr. Pym, Sir Henry Vane, Jun. Sir Benjamin Rudyard,
Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Hatcher, Lord
Ruthen, Mr Samuel Brown, Mr. Valentine, Sir Harbotle Grimston, Colonel Jo.
More, Mr. Jenner, Sir John Evelyn Jun. Mr. Hollis, Mr. Downs, Mr. Blackiston,
Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir John Wray, Mr. Brown of Kent, Sir Henry Anderson, Mr.
Barwis, Sir Peter Wroth, Mr. Cecill, Mr. Scowen, Mr. Bainton, Mr. Corbet, Sir
John Harrison, Mr. Brett, Sir Christopher Yelverton, Mr. John Harvey, Mr.
Harbotle Grimston, Mr. John Seldom, Sir John Clotworthy, Mr. Peirpoint, Sir
Ralph Verner, Sir Henry Ch^lmley, M. Edmund Dunche, M. John Glyn, Sir Will.
Litton, M. Tr^nchard, M. William Cage, Sir Simonds D'Ewes, M. Gilbert
Millington, M. William Ellis, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Anthony Irby, Sir
Thomas Jervais, M. Edward Dowse, M. Hugh Rogers, Sir John Hippesley, M.
Sergeant Wild, Sir Dudley North, M. Lawrence Whitacre, Sir John Curson, M. John
Wastall, M. Cornelius Holland, Colonel Walter Long, M. George Gallopp, M.
Will. Bell, M. Skynner, M. John Nash, M. James Cambell, Sir John Young, Sir
Robert Parkburst, M. Edward Exton, M. Edward Thomas, M. Harbert, M. Nathaniel
Stevens, M. Moyle, M. Young, M. Michael Noble, M. William Whitacre, M. William
Cawley, M. Jo. Harris, M. Thomas Lane, M. Owner, M. Edward Pool, M. Arthur
Jones, M. Campion, M. Billstrode Whitlock, M. Tailor, M. John Jepson, Sir John
Potts, M. Richard Lee, M. Thomas Sandis, M. Tho. Eden, M. Henry Lucas, M.
Richard Harmon, M. John List, M. Robert Goodwyn, M. William Ashhurst, M. Jo.
Nutt, Sir Nath. Barnardiston, M. Thomas Hoyle, M. John Gurdon, M. Robert
Reynolds, M. Hen. Darley, M. Samuel Vassal, M. John Goodwyn, Sir Roger North,
M. John Browa of Dorcetshire, M. Richard Rose, M. Giles Green, M. Thomas Moore,
M. Edmund Prideaux, M. Roger Hill, M. Williiam Strode, M. Dennis Bond, M.
Edward Ash, M. Richard Moore, M. Louche Tate, M. Robert Nicholas, M. William
Smith, M. Will. Spurstoe, M. Framlingam Gaudy, Sir Alex. Denton, M. Lowry, M.
Thomas Hodges, M. Humphry Salleway, Sir Peter Wentworth, M. Fountain, M.
Jervaise, M. William Wheeler, M. Fitz-Williams, M. Richard Jennings, Sir Henry
Ludlowe, Sir Edward Bainton, Sir Edward Littleton, M. Knightley, M. Francis
Drake, M. Jesson, M. Henry Pelham, M. Thomas Earl, Sir George Stonchouse, M.
Martin Lister, Master Francis Rouse, Master Ralph Ashton, Master Henry Martin,
Master John Roll, Sir John Dreydon, Master Philip Smith, Master Squire Bence,
Master Peregrine Pelham, M. Anthony Bedingfield, M. Jo. Adured, Sir Jo.
Corbett, Thomas Lord Wenman, Sir John Holland, Sir Henry Vane, Sen. M. George
Mountague, M. James Finnes, Sir William Massam, Sir Henry Heyman, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir Thomas Middleton, M. Peregrin Hobby, M. Maynard, Sir Guy Palms, Sir
Norton Knatchball, Sir Philip Parker, Sir Will. Playters, M. George Buller, M.
Simond Snow, L. Cranborne, M. William Basset, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir Edward
Partriche, Sir Ambrose Brown, M. Jo. Fettyplace, Sir Francis Knollis, M. Edward
Wiagate, M. William Glanvile, Sir Jo. Coke, Sir Roger Burgoine, Sir Thomas
Pelham, Sir John Francklyn, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Thomas Hutchinson, M.
Wynwood, Sir Thomas Soams.

This Vow and Covenant to be taken by the Armies and Kingdoms.
WHereas the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament have Declared, That
there has been, and now is a Popish and traiterous Plot for the subversion of
the true Protestant Reformed Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject; And that
in pursuance thereof, a Popish Army has been raised, and is now on foot in
diverse parts of this Kingdom: And have further in a solemn manner Declared,
Vowed, and Covenanted, That in order to the security and preservation of the
true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, they will not consent to
the laying down Arms, so long as the Papists now in open War against the
Parliament shall by force of Arms be protected from the Justice thereof. And
whereas the Lords and Commons have declared, That there has been a treacherous
and horrid Design lately discovered by the great blessing, and especial
Providence of God, of diverse persons to join themselves with the Armies raised
by the KING, and to destroy the Forces raised by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs,
and by Arms to force the Parliament: And the said Lords and Commons finding by
constant experience, That many ways of force and treachery are continually
attempted, to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament and Kingdom,
and that which is dearest, The true Protestant Religion: And that for the
preventing, and withstanding the same, they have thought fit, That all who are
true hearted, and lovers of their Country, should bind themselves each to
other in a sacred Vow and Covenant, in manner and form as follows, and
accordingly.

I A. B. In humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
calamities and judgments that now lie upon it; And my true intention is, by
Gods grace, to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; And that I do abhor
and detest the said wicked and treacherous design lately discovered; And that
I never gave, nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will,
according to my power and vocation, oppose and resist the same, and all other
of the like nature: And in case any other Design shall hereafter come to my
knowledge, I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best conduce
to the preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe, That the
Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament are raised and continued for
their just deseace, and for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and
Liberties of the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King; I do here, in
the presence of Almighty God, Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That I will according
to my power and vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses
of Parliament, against the Porces raised by the King without their consent; And
will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath, in what they
do in pursuance thereof; And will not directly or indirectly adhere unto, nor
shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King without the consent of
both Houses of Parliament. And this Vow and Covenant I make in the presence of
Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the
same, as I shall answer at the great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall
be disclosed.

FINIS.

