THE RATES OF THE EXCISE AND NEW-IMPOST Set and imposed by Parliament on the
several Commodities imported, hereafter mentioned, to be paid and Collected
from the 21st. day of December 1649.

blazon of the Commonwealth

Die Veneris 21. Decembris, 1649

Hen. Scobell. Cleric. Parliament.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes and T. Newcomb. 1649.

The Rates of the Excise and New Impost set and imposed by Parliament on the
several Commodities imported, etc.
Die Veneris 21. Decembris, 1649.
l. s. d. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament. per pound weight two
shillings Excise to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer 00 02 00 Resolved, etc. 00 00 04 Resolved, etc. per pound weight, to
be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 06
Resolved, etc. India, which has not paid the Excise, as which shall hereafter
be imported immediately from India, shall pay three pence in the pound weight
for Excise, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer. 00 00 03 Resolved, etc. India, which has not paid Excise, as that
shall hereafter be imported being not immediately brought from India, shall pay
four pence per pound weight for Excise, to be paid by the first buyer thereof
from the Merchant or Importer. 00 00 04 Resolved, etc. per pound weight six
pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00
00 06 Resolved, etc. 00 00 03 Resolved, etc. per pound weight two pence, to be
paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 02
Resolved, etc. per pound weight three pence half penny, to be paid by the first
buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 03 Resolved, etc.
Muscovadoes as others, which come from other places, as well already imported
not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per
pound weight two pence half penny, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from
the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 02 Resolved, etc. Candy white Sugar, as well
which are already imported not having paid Excise, as which shall hereafter be
imported, shall pay per pound weight for Excise eight pence, to be paid by the
first buyer from the Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 08 Resolved, etc. Candy
brown Sugar, as well which are already imported not having paid Excise, as
which shall hereafter be imported, shall pay per pound weight for Excise six
pence, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 00:
00: 06 Resolved, etc. per cent' according to the values set upon them in the
book of Rates of Merchandises, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the
Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent', according
to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first
buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved,
etc. per cent', according to the values set upon them in the said book of
Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 07:
10: 00 per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent. according to the values set upon them
in the said book of Rates to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the
Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent' according
to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates; to be paid by the first
buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent' Resolved,
etc. per cent' according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates;
to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 07: 10: 00
per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent' according to the values set upon them in the
said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or
Importer. 07: 10: 00 per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent' according to the values
set upon them, in the said book of Rates, to be paid by the first buyer thereof
from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent' Resolved, etc. per cent'
according to the values set upon them in the said book of Rates, to be paid by
the first buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer. 05: 00: 00 per Cent'
Resolved, etc. per Gallon, to be paid by the first buyer thereof from the
Merchant or Importer. 00: 00: 04 Resolved, etc. Aqua vitae or Strongwater,
shall pay One shilling per Gallon 00 01 00 Resolved, etc. per Gallon, to be
paid by the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 00 01 00
Resolved, etc. 05 00 00 Resolved, etc. 00 00 01 Resolved, etc. England, Wales,
or Town of Berwick which is or shall be shipped or conveyed by water, shall pay
One halfpenny upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer of such Salt,
at the place of landing or unloading thereof 00 00 0012; Resolved, etc.
England, Wales, or town of Berwick, and not shipped or conveyed by water,
shall pay One halfe-penny upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first Buyer of
such Salt upon the first delivery thereof 00 00 00^ Resolved, etc. England,
Wales, or town of Berwick, which has once paid Excise, shall pay One farthing
upon every Gallon, to be paid by the maker of such Salt upon Salt, before such
time as the same shall be put to sale 00 00 00^ Resolved, etc. 00 00 00
Resolved, etc. per cent. to be paid by the first Buyer thereof from the
Mer^^ant or Importer 05 00 00 per cent. Resolved, etc. per cent. to be paid by
the first Buyer thereof from the Merchant or Importer 05 00 00 Resolved, etc.
Resolved, etc.

Hen. Scobell, Cler. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

