TWO ORDINANCES of the LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:

I. Concerning the Names of the Committee for the Associated Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hertford and Huntington, together with
Instructions for the said Committee. II. For Explanation of a former Ordinance
for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates: with an Oath for renouncing of
Popery.
Also Three special Orders; viz.

I. That the Divines of the Assembly that are Resiants of the Associated
Counties, and now attending the Assembly, be desired to go down into their
several Counties, to stir up the people to rise for their defense. II. That
the Lord General the Earl of Essex, be desired to grant a Commission to the
Earl of Manchester, to be Sergeant Major General of all the Forces of the six
Associated Counties. III. That the said six Associated Counties shall forthwith
raise a Body of Ten thousand Foot and Dragoons to withstand the Enemy.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, that these Ordinances, Instructions, and
Orders, be forthwith printed and published:

H. Elsynge, Cler, Parl. D. Com.



Aug. 14. Anno Dom. 1643.

Die Martis 8. Augusti, 1643. An ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, for naming a Committee for the Associated Counties, of Norfolk,
Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hertford* and Huntingdon.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the great danger of the Protestant Religion, and the advancement
of Popery by a Popish Army, and the daily Rapines, Pillagings, Burnings, and
spoylings of his Majesty's good Subjects in many parts of this Kingdom, by
several Armies of Horse and Foot raised, consisting for the most part of
bloody minded Papists, Irish Rebels, Atheists, Forreiners, and of the
Prelaticall party; And especially seeing that the Earl of Newcastle, with his
whole Army, since the late surrendering of Gainsborough unto him, is marching
toward and ready to fall upon the Associated counties of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Essex, Cambridge, Hertford and Huntingdon: Therefore the said Lords and Commons
have thought it most necessary, and do hereby Ordain, Nominate, and Appoint,
Sir John Hobart Knight and Baronet, Sir John Palgrave Knight and Baronet, Sir
Miles Hobart, Sir Thomas Hoogan, Sir Thomas Gaudy, Sir Isaac Ashley, Sir Edward
Ashley, Knights* Thomas Windham, John Spylman, John Cook, Gregory Goulsall,
Francis Jermy, Robert Woods, Robert Wilton, William Cook, Thomas Weight, Martin
Sidley, Thomas Sotherton, John Brewster, and Thomas Russell of Basham,
Esquires, for the said county of Norfolk. Sir Edmund Bacon, Sir William Spring,
Knights and Baronets, Sir Thomas Barnardiston Knight, Sir William Soam,
Theophilus Vaughan, Maurice Barrow, Thomas Baker, Nathaniel Bacon of Friston,
Nathaniel Bacon of Ipswich, Robert Brewster, Francis Bacon, Edmund Harvey,
Isaac Appleton, Thomas Tirrill of Gipping, James Hobart, Gibson Lucas, Thomas
Cole of Haverill, William Bloyse, and William Laurence, Esquires for the said
county of Suffolk. Sir Thomas Honywood, Sir William Roe, Sir Henry Holcroft,
Sir Richard Everard, Knights, John Sayer, Arthur Barnardiston, John Wright,
Richard Harlarkinden, Edward Palmer, Timothy Middleton, Dean Tindall, William
Humfreevile, John Eldred, John Eliston, of Gesthorp, Robert Galthorp, William
Atwood of Wrightbridge, John Atwood of Muchshwaltham; Esquires, Samuel Read,
Doctor of Physic, John Young and John Sorrel, Gent. for the said county of
Essex. Sir John Cuts, Sir Thomas Martin, Knights, Oliver Cromwell, Francis
Russell, Thomas Coke, William March, James Tompson, Thomas Ducket, Robert
Castle, Robert Clerk, Edward Clench, Dudley Pope, Thomas Bendishe, John
Welbore, Richard Foxton, Esquires, and Samuel Spaulding, Gent. for the said
county of Cambridge. Sir John Garrat Baronet, Sir John Witterreung Knight, Sir
John Read Baronet, John Hayden, Ralph Freeman, William Leaman, William
Priestly, Gabriel Barber of Hertford, John Robotham, Henry Mewtis, Ralph
Pemberton, Captain Richard Porter, Adam Washington, John Scrogs, Alexander
Wild, Thomas Took, John King, Esquire: for the said county of Hertford. Sir
Miles Sands junior, Knight, John Hubart, Humberston March, Esquires, and Thomas
Castle Gent. for the said Isle of Ely. John Thacker Major, Adrian Parmiter,
John Tooly, Edmund Burnam, Matthew Peckover, Henry Wats, Matthew Lindsey,
William Symonds, Aldermen of the city of Norwich, John Greenwood Sheriff of the
same, Samuel Smith Esquire; for the said county of the city of Norwich. Onslow
Winche, Torrell Jocelyne, Oliver Cromwell, Thomas Tempter, John Castle, Abraham
Burwell, and Edward Mountague, Esquires; Robert Vinter, Robert Harvey, and
Garvall Fulwood, Gent. for the said county of Huntington; or any seven or more
of them, three whereof to be Deputy Lieutenants, and the whole seven to consist
of one out of every the said counties respectively, and one out of the city of
Norwich, to be a standing and constant Committee, who shall have power to order
the Affairs of the said Associated counties, according to their Instructions
hereafter specified.

And for the better effecting of the premises, the said Committee, or any seven
or more of them as aforesaid, shall be resident at Cambridge, or at some other
of the Frontier Towns of the Association, or some other convenient place within
the said counties, and shall have power to adjourn themselves, from time to
time, and from place to place, as they shall think fitting. And the said Lords
and Commons in Parliament, do hereby nominate and command, Thomas Sotherton and
Martin Sidley, Esquires for the county of Norfolk; Edmund Harvey and Thomas
Cole, Esquires for the county of Suffolk; Sir William Roe Knight, and Timothy
Middleton Esquires for the county of Essex; Thomas Ducket, and Thomas Castle,
Esquires for the county of Cambridge; Henry Mewtis and Ralph Freeman, Esquires
for the county of Hertford; Onshow Winche and Abraham Burwell, Esquires for the
county of Huntingten; and Samuel Smith, Esquire for the county of the city of
Norwich, presently to attend this service. And after they or (or more of the
said Commissioners) shall have sat fourteen days, then the minor half of the
said Committee to be free, and they to send for so many others in their stead,
out of every the said respective counties and city of Norwich, and the major
half there still to remain other fourteen days, and then they also are free;
and they then to send for seven others, one out of every the said counties and
city of Norwich as aforesaid; and to change the Committee by half at once
successively during these troubles, or till further order be taken, giving
notice from time to time, to them which are to succeed, the six days before
they are to make their appearance at the appointed place. Also if seven or more
of the Commissioners before named shall be present in this service, three
whereof or more to be Deputy Lieutenants of the several and respective
counties, the whole number shall have power to Vote, and the major part to rule
the Vote.

Instructions for the Committee of the Associated Counties.
IMprimis, That the said first Committee so appointed as aforesaid, and all
other the said Commissioners before named, are hereby strictly required to make
their appearance according to the manner of the appointment by this present
Ordinance* and in these times of eminent danger, to use all diligence to
promote the service they are entrusted withal.

2. That they have a special care that all the Frontiers, and the Isle of Ely
be supplied with fitting Forces to resist all sudden surprises or invasions;
and shall from time to time send out Scouts to discover how, and in what
manner, any enemy approaches near to the Frontiers that thereby they may have,
and give timely notice of any approaching danger, and this to be done at the
general charge of the Association.

3. That the said Committee shall order and dispose of all the Associated
Forces sent to them by the said Counties in such sort and manner as they shall
think fit, and best for the safety of the said Associated Counties; And if at
any time they shall find occasion of more Forces fit to be raised by the
Associated Counties, they shall give notice thereof, to the Deputy Lieutenants,
that fitting supplies may be made thereof, and that every County may see their
Forces paid.

4. That all Forces raised before this Ordinance in the Associated Counties,
shall be paid their Arreares if any be unpaid, by money raised out of the six
Associated Counties, and city of Norwich, according to their proportions.

5. That the said Committee shall take a special care that an acomptant be
appointed to Register all the Warrants and directions of the said Committee,
and that they require the said Acomptant or Register to make and keep a perfect
Account how all moneys are paid in there by any of the Associated Counties, and
how the same be issued out, and shall give them such reasonable allowance for
their pains.

6. That they have a special care, that no stranger shall come in, or inhabit
within the Town of Cambridge, or the Isle of Ely, without the Approbation of
the said Committee, upon Certificate of his or their good affections to the
King and Parliament; and also that they bring a Certificate under four of the
Deputy Lieutenants hands of the county from whence they come.

7. That all Soldiers that run away, shall be remanded back to the Colors, or
sent to the Goal; and all those that harbor, are to be fined and imprisoned,
they knowing them to be runaway, and to be further punished, as my Lord
General, and the Deputy Lieutenants of their respective counties, or any two
of them shall think fit, the fine not exceeding five pounds every offense.

8. That the Commissioners for Sequestration in the aforesaid Counties
respectively, do presently execute the Ordinances of Parliament for
Sequestrations, or else to be certified by the said Committee to the Houses of
Parliament, to be proceeded against for their neglect; And the said Committee
shall have power to put in execution all Ordinances of Parliament where there
is any neglect.

9. That every Member of the House of Commons, and the Governors of Cambridge
that are Inhabitants of the Six counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hertford,
Huntingdon and Cambridge, and of the city of Norwich, shall be of the said
Committee.

Die Jovis 10. Augusti, 1643.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Divines of
the Assembly that are Resiants of the Associated counties, and now attending
the Assembly, are hereby desired to go down in to their several counties, to
stir up the people in those several counties, to rise for their defense.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Jovis 10. Augusti, 1643.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Lord
General the Earl of Essex is hereby desired, to grant a Commission to the Earl
of Manchester, to be Sergeant Major General of all the Forces of the six
Associated counties.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Jovis 10. Augusti, 1643.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the six
Associated counties shall forthwith raise a Body of ten thousand Foot, and
Dragoons, to withstand the Enemy. And that four thousand Foot, formerly Ordered
to be raised in these six Associated counties, or which are already raised,
shall be accounted part of these ten thousand.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons is Parliament, for explanation of a
former Ordinance for sequestration of Delinquents estates.
FOr explanation and enlargement of an Ordinance lately made by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, for seizing and sequestring the Estates both Real and
Personal of certain kinds of notorious Delinquents;

Be it now Declared and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons assembled, That
in the number of such Delinquents and Papists, who shall come within the
compass of the said former Ordinance, and to all intents and purposes to be
proceeded against, as notorious Delinquents or Papists, expressly described in
the said Ordinance, shall be reckoned and accounted all such as voluntarily
absenting themselves from the usual places of their abodes, or dwellings,
Trade, Offices, or Employments, and have gone, or shall go to any of the Kings
Armies, or other forces raised without consent of both houses of Parl. and have
there continued, or shall there continue, and shall not within ten days after
Seizure or Sequestration of their several goods or estates, or stay made of
their Rents by force of the said Ordinance, which said Sequestratours are
hereby required to do, show sufficient cause to be allowed by the Committee of
the County, City, or Place in which the said Seizure or Sequestration, or
stay of Rents, is, or shall be made, of such their absence, going, and
continuing in any of the said Armies or Forces: And all such as shall
fraudulently imbezle, conceal, or convey away, all, or any part of their goods,
money, or estate, without valuable consideration, or not bona fide thereby
preventing or avoiding the payment of any taxes or Assessements laid upon them
by any Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, or any distress or seizure in
case of non-paiment thereof; or that after any such tax or assessement laid on
them, convey themselves away, or refuse to be spoken with, whereby any tax or
assessement laid upon them by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament cannot be
executed upon them or their estates, according to the true meaning and purport
thereof: or that wittingly or willingly conceal or harbor any goods or persons
of Delinquents, within this or the said former Ordinance* or that have had any
hand in the late horrid and desperate Conspiracy and Treason of Waller,
Tompkins, Challenor and their Confederates, whether they be already, or
hereafafter shall be convicted to be privy or consenting thereunto (except
such as being not yet convicted shall discover and confess all that they know
thereof, within the time limited by both Houses of Parliament, to such person
or persons as are or shall be appointed to take such discoveries and
Confessions) or that shall sue or molest any person or persons who shall have
yielded obedience or conformity unto the Orders, Ordinances, or Commands of
both houses of Parliament, or have been, or shall be employed by authority of
both the said houses, for, or by reason of any thing done, or to be done, in
execution or performance thereof, or that have willingly harbored any Popish
Priests or Jesultes in their houses or dwellings since the 29. of November
1642. or that shall hereafter so harbor any: And all and every person or
persons which at any time heretofore have been convicted of Popish recusancie,
and so continue, or that have been or shall be thereof indicted, and their
Indictments removed by Certiorary, or being not removed shall not by appearance
and Traverse be legally discharged, before Seizure or Sequestration made of
their goods or estates, or stay of their Rents, by force of this, or the said
former Ordinance, or that have been at Mass, at any time within one whole year
before the 26. of March 1643. or shall hereafter be at Mass; or whose Children
or Grandchildren, or any of them living in house with them, or under their, or
any of their Tuition and Government, shall be brought up in the Popish
Religion: and all such persons as being of the age of 21. years, or above shall
refuse to take the Oath hereafter expressed; which Oath any two or more of the
said Committees for Sequestration, in every County, City, or place
respectively, or any two Justices of the Peace, or the Major, Bailiffs or other
head-officer of any City or Town Corporate, shall have power to administer to
any such person or persons (The Tenor of which Oath follows, in haec verba,
viz.

The Oath.
I A. B. Do abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular; And I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever; And I do also believe, that there is not any Purgatory; Or that
the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, or Images, ought to be worshipped, or that
any worship is due unto any of them; And I also believe that Salvation cannot
be Merited by Works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said Points, I do
abjure and renounce, without any Equivocation, Mentall-reservation, or secret
Evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the common and
usual meaning of them.

So help me God.)

Shall forfeit as Papists within this and the said former Ordinances, and
Seizure and Sequestration of two third parts of all their goods and estates
Real and Personal, and sale of such proportion of their goods so seized and
Sequestered shall be made, and their Rents and estates disposed of, in such
manner and proportion, and by such persons as by the said Ordinance of
Sequestrations is appointed for Papists.

And for the better discovery of such Delinquents and Papists, in this, and
the said former Ordinance described, and of their estates; Be it further
Ordained, by the said Lords and Commons, That over and besides the former power
given by the said Ordinance of Sequestration to the persons trusted and
employed in the said service, the said Committees for Sequestrations, or any
two or more of them repectively, shall have power further hereby, to examine by
Oath or otherwise, all and every person or persons (other then the parties
themselves so declared to be Delinquents) that probably may be able to discover
such Delinquents and Papists, or that may be trusted with, or privy to the
keeping or concealing of the goods or estates of any such delinquent or Papist,
or that shall ow any thing to such delinquent Papist, and such as shall refuse
so to be examined, or to declare the whole truth therein, so far as he shall
be so required, shall be committed to safe custo die by the said Committee, or
any two or more of them, employed for their examinations, till he or they shall
conform him, her, or themselves.

And that such person or persons as shall first find out and discover to one or
both Houses of Parliament, or to any Committee authorized for this Service, or
to any of their Agents or Officers, any such moneys, goods, debts, or estates
(if the same be imbezelled, cloyned, concealed, or conveyed away, as aforesaid)
shall do therein an acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and shall have and
receive for his pains therein 12. d. in every twenty shillings, so discovered
after Seizure or sale thereof made, and receipt of the money arising thereupon,
or out of the Rents or estate so discoverered, the same to be paid unto him by
the respective Committees, or Treasurers trusted with the moneys that shall be
received upon the Sale, or Proceed thereof, without any further or other
Warrant, and shall further receive such other reward for his extraordinary
service therein, as by the said LORDS and COMMONS shall be further appointed
and Ordered: And for the more speedy and effectual Seizure, and obtaining
possession of all such Debts, Goods, and Estates, as aforesaid, discovered, or
to be discovered.

It is further Ordained, that over and besides the Power given by the said
former Ordinance for Sequestration, the several and respective COMMITTEES,
appointed for this Service, or any two, or more of them, shall hereby have
Power to authorize their several Collectours, and Agents, employed herein, to
break open all Locks, Bolts, Bars, Doors, or other strength whatsoever,
where any such estates, moneys, or goods, are or shall be, upon probable
grounds made appear to the said Committees or any two of them, and by them
allowed in writing under their hands, to be provided that some or one of the
said Committee, or the Solicitor, or Constable, or some other known Officer of
that county or Place; and one other person or persons of credit and trust be
present at the doing thereof; and it is further ordained, that an exact
Inventorie, subscribed by all their hands, be taken of all particulars
whatsoever, which shall be seized bo virtue of these Ordinances: one part of
the said Inventorie in writing so subscribed, delivered to the owner or owners
of the said money, goods, or estates, or other things so Inventoried, or to
some person trusted with the keeping thereof. And that where any Rents, Debts,
or estate pertaining to any Delinquent or Papist within this or the said former
Ordinance for sequestration shall be found due, and the Debtour refuses or
neglects to pay the same, upon any pretense whatsoever, reasonable time being
given to provide it, after it become payable, and demand thereof made, the said
Committees, their Collectours or other Agents whom they shall authorize
thereunto under their hands in writing, shall hereby have power to distrain,
seize, carry away, and sell so much of the goods and estate of every such
person so refusing or neglecting as aforesaid, as may fully satisfy the said
Rents or other Debts, together with all charges of seizure, removal, and sale
of goods for satisfaction of the said Rents or Debts: And if any person or
persons shall stand out or forbear to make payment of any sums of money which
he or they ought to pay by virtue of this or any other Ordinance of both Houses
of Parliament whatsoever, made for the raising of moneys, until a distress be
taken for the same; that then he or they so standing out or forbearing, shall
pay such double charges for all such seizures, removal, and sale of their
goods, as the Committee or any two or more of them respectively shall allow or
appoint; the same to be levied and taken out of the goods and estates of such
persons so standing out or forbearing, by such as shall be employed to distrain
for, and seize the principal sum. And if any person or persons shall
undertake for the forth coming of any goods or estate at any time seized, by
force of this or the said former Ordinance, all and every the said goods or
estate shall be particularly Inventoried, and the Inventory thereof signed and
subscribed by three or more persons of credit, and after given in to the
Committee, under whom the persons making the seizure shall be employed; and if
it shall after happen, that any of the said goods or estate be imbeziled or
wanting, or be denied or refused, or not delivered to the said respective
Committee, or to their Collectours, requiring the same by order of the said
Committee, or any two or more of them respectively, that then the said
Committee, or such as they shall authorize thereunto, shall have power to
seize, carry away and sell so much of such undetakers goods or personal
estate, and profits of his Lands and Tenements, as may fully satisfy for the
goods or estate so wanting, imbezilled, or not delivered; and also so much
double charges for the seizure, carriage, and sale of the said undertakers
goods or estate so to be seized and sold, as the said Committees, or any two or
more of them shall allow.

And for the better enabling of the said several Committees, and their Agents,
to make sale of all such goods and estates as are and shall be by them seized,
and are appointed to be sold by this or the said former Ordinance,

It is further declared and ordained, that after the apportioning and setting
out of some necessary maintenance (if it be desired) for the wives and children
of such Delinquents whose goods and estates are and shall be seized (which
allowance or maintenance the said several and respective Committees, or any
two or more of them respectively, shall hereby have power to make, so, as they
allow not the wife and children of one Delinquent above one fifth part of his
goods and estate so seized) they shall authorize and require their Collectors
and Agents to make sale of the residue or remainder of the said goods by the
Candle for ready moneys to be paid at the delivery of the goods so sold, within
ten days after the seizure thereof, giving notice of the said sale in writing
upon some post or walls in the most open and eminent places near the place of
sale two days before the said sale, due appraisment being first made thereof
by two skillful appraisors; being men of some quality, and known integrity,
from time to time to be chosen with the advice of the Sollicitour for
sequestrations, by the Committee trusted with the seizure and sale of the said
goods: which appraisment shall be made in the presence of some of the said
Committees, Sollicitour, or Treasurer of the same County, City, or place
respectively, and not otherwise. And for the more speedy dispatch hereof, it is
further ordained, that the Committee of Lords and Commons for sequestrations
fhall receive no information against the particular Committee of any County,
City, or place for sequestrations in any cause of this kind, till the matter
has first been certified under the hands of two or more of the said respective
Committees by whose Agents and Ministers the goods or estate of the Delinquent
were seized: Or in case the said Committees refuse to certify the special
matter, or that otherwise Certificate cannot be had. And be it ordained, that
honest, able, and sufficient Collectours be appointed in every County, City,
and place for this service, and their neglects or defaults be certified to the
Houses, or to the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations.

And that all and every person and persons, who shall be employed in this
service, or shall do any thing in pursuance of this or the said former
Ordinance for Sequestrations, shall therein have the protection of both houses
of Parliament for their Indemnitie, and be held and esteemed as persons doing
an acceptable service to the Commonwealth.

And it is further ordained, that every Collectour within every County, City
and place respectively who shall receive any moneys in kind, or make sale of
any goods, shall deliver the moneys so received or raised by sales, to the
Committee for Sequestrations within the said County, City, or place, where
such moneys shall be received, or to such Treasurer as they shall appoint, or
other person authorized to receive the same within seven days next after the
said Collectours receipt thereof, upon pain of forfeiture of twelve pence for
every twenty shillings, received or levied by sale as aforesaid, and remaining
in his or their hands, which Committee or Treasurer, shall take order for the
safe sending of all, and every sum so received to the Treasurer at Guild Hall
in London appointed for this purpose, Monthly, or more often, as they shall be
thereunto required by the said Treasurours at Guild Hall, or by the said
Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, or by the Committee of Lords
and Commons for advance of moneys; and that the several Committees,
Collectours, and Treasurers respectively, shall have power to give acquittances
and discharges for the several sums by them received, which shall be
sufficient discharges to the parties concerned in that behalf.

And it is further ordained and declared, that Mr. Hobson, Mr. Bernardiston,
Mr. Hill, and Mr. Samuel Avery, Citizens of London, shall be and are hereby
appointed, and authorized to be Treasurers at Guild Hall London, to receive all
moneys raised and to be raised upon, or by virtue of this, or the said former
Ordinance for Sequestrations, and shall make entries thereof in fair books to
be provided for that purpose, as also of the names of the persons, from whom,
and the time when they receive the same, and of their disbursements and
payments out; for which their pains and service, they shall have three pence in
every pound, which they shall so receive to be debated out of the said sums
received.

And it is further ordained that no Treasurers trusted with any part of the
said moneys, shall issue out any of the said moneys by way of payment, loan, or
otherwise, (except as in this Ordinance is appointed) otherwise then and in
such manner as is directed by former Ordinance for issuing out of moneys; and
for the more exact and perfect keeping of all accounts touching the premises;
it is yet further ordained, that every Collectour shall from time to time, make
and keep a sure and perfect Inventorie of all and every the moneys, goods, and
estates by him seized, another of the sale or other disposal thereof; both of
which shall be subscribed under the hands of two or more persons of credit that
were present at the said seizures or sales, besides his own, and that he make
and ingrosse a duplicate thereof in parchment, fairly written, one part whereof
he shall leave with the particular Committee, under which he is employed; and
the other part after examination thereof, he shall deliver to the Solicitour
for that place, who shall transmit the same to the Committee of Lords and
Commons for advance of money subscribed by the said Solicitour, and Collectour,
and two of the said particular Committee of the place from whence it is
transmitted, all which accounts and duplicates shall be made and sent up to
London in such manner and so often as the said Committee of Lords and Commons
for advance of money, shall from time to time order and appoint: Provided
always, and it be ordained, that it shall be lawful for the respective
Committees for Sequestrations, or any two or more of them to accept of ready
money for the goods of the said Delinquents or Papists, or any of them which
shall or are to be seized according to the value thereof, in lieu and
satisfaction of the said goods, and thereupon the seizure and Sequestration, as
to the same, to be discharged.

And be it ordained that if any person shall wittingly or willingly conceal and
harbor any of the goods of any Delinquents within this or the said former
Ordinance (he knowing such person to be a Delinquent) that then such persons
shall forfeit treble the value thereof, to be levied upon his or their goods
and estates, by the said respective Committee or Sequestratours, or any two or
more of them, or their agents, to the uses appointed by the said Ordinances for
Delinquents Estates.

FINIS.

