Two ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: One
Commanding that no Officer or Soldier either by Sea or Land, shall give any
Quarter to any Irishman, or to any Papist borne in Ireland, which shall be
taken in Arms against the Parliament in England.

The other For the better observation of the monthly Fast, thorowout the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales: Together with some Directions to the
Officers within their several Liberties, diligently to make search for, and
take notice of all persons that either follow their work, or sit in Taverns or
Victualling houses on that day.

Die Jovis 24. October. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances be
forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright in the old Bayley. 26. October. 1644.

Die Iovis 24. October. 1644.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England do Declare, That
no Quarter shall be given hereafter to any Irishman, nor to any Papists
whatsoever borne in Ireland, which shall be taken in Hostillitie against the
Parliament: either upon the Sea or within this Kingdom, or Dominion of Wales:
And therefore do Order and Ordain, That the Lord General, Lord Admiral, and
all other Officers and Commanders both by Sea and Land shall except all
Irishmen, and all Papists borne in Ireland. out of all Capitulations,
Agreements, or Compositions hereafter to be made with the Enemy, and shall upon
the taking of every such Irishman or Papist born in Ireland, as aforesaid,
forthwith put every such Person to death. And it is further Ordered and
Ordained, That the Lord General Lord Admiral, and the Committees of the
several Counties, do give speedy notice hereof to all subordinate Officers and
Commanders by Sea and Land respectively who are hereby required to use their
utmost care and circumspection that this Ordinance be duly executed. And
lastly, the Lords and Commons do Declare, that every Officer and Commander by
Sea or Land, that shall be remiss or negligent in observing the Tenor of this
Ordinance, shall be reputed a favourer of that bloody Rebellion of Ireland, and
shall be liable to such condign punishment as the Justice of both Houses of
Parliament shall inflict upon him.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, For the better
observation of the monthly Fast. 24 Aug. 1642.
Whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, upon the request of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by and with their advice and
consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of his good
Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland; (that there might be a general
humiliation of all the estates of this Kingdom before Almighty God in Fasting
and Prayer) was graciously pleased to Command the keeping of a monthly Fast;
and to the end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to
leave such without excuse, as should not duly keep and observe the same) did
afterward by his Proclamation of the 8 of January 1641. appoint that the same
should be generally, publicly, and solmnly holden and kept, as well by
abstinence from Food, as by public Prayers, Preaching, and Hearing of the Word
of God, and other Religious and holy Duties in all Cathedrals, Collegiate, and
Parish Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales (without any exception) on the last Wednesday of every Month, to
continue during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which His
Majesty did straightly charge and command should be reverently and devoutly
performed by all His Subjects, as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and
would avoid his heavy indignation against this Land and People; and upon pain
of such punishments as may justly be insticted upon all such as shall confe^^^e
or neglect so Religious a work and duty.

And whereas the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, have received
diverse Informations from several parts of this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales,
of the great neglect of the due observation and keeping of the said Fast upon
the days appointed, and of the prophanations of the same by many irreligious,
ill affected, loose, and scandalous persons, as we^l of the Clergy as others,
who are so far from afflicting their souls, and loosing the bands of
wickedness, as that they provoke the wrath of Almighty God, and make so pious
a means to procure his blessings, the occasion of greater Judgments.

For the prevention whereof for the time to come, the Lords and Commons do
Order, Declare, Ordain, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate, and
Parish Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, (without any excepti^n) upon every Lords day, next and immediately
before any the days appointed for the said public Fast, the Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Minister, that upon that day shall Officiate, or exercise in any of
the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or Chapels, shall give
public notice in every of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or
Chapels respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing immediately after Sermon or
Prayer ended in the forenoon before the Congregation be dismissed, earnestly
exhorting and persuading all the people to the solemn due keeping and
religious observation of the whole day appointed for the said Fast, and that
they would repair to some Church or Chapel, there diligently and reverently
to attend all such holy Duties as shall be used in the observance of the same;
that they forbear to use all manner of Sports and Pastimes whatsoever, and
their ordinary Trades and Callings upon the said day, as well Carriers,
Waggoners, Carters, Waynmen, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters, Shopkeepers,
Laborers, or any others using any Art, Trade, Mystery, or Manual Occupation
whatsoever, and that all Wintners, Taverners, Alehouse-keepers, and keepers of
Victualling-houses, do forbear to keep open their Doors, Bulks, or Shops, or
to sell or utter (except in cases of extr^me necessity) any Wine, Beer, Ale,
or Victual, till the public Exercises and religious ^uties of that day in the
respective Cathedrals, Coll^giate, Parish Churches and Chapels be past and
over.

And lastly, all and every the Justices of the Peace, Majors, Bayliffes,
Constables, Church wardens, and other Officers inhabiting or residing within
the limits or precincts of any such Cathedral, Coll^giate, Parish Church or
Chapel, are hereby required to take special notice as well of such Parson,
Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to officiate in any of the said
Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chapels, upon any such day
appointed for the said Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do the
same, or not do or cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn
manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast day
at the time, and in manner as aforesaid, and forthwith to return their names,
and the names of all such (from time to time) as shall wilfully offend herein,
in contempt of the Laws, His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, unto some
one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the County
where such offense is or shall be committed, that some speedy course may be
taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein, according to the
Laws.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public Calamity, to the
great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

Now that more particular notice may be given to all such that shall offend
herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them, It is Ordered
by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, that all Constables (or their
Deputies shall the day before every public Fast, repair to every house within
their several and respective Liberties, and charge all persons, that they
strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk through their
said Liberties, diligently serching for, and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following the work of their calling, or sitting in Tavernes,
Victualing, or Alehouses* or any other ways shall not duly observe the same,
and they are hereby required, to return the names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such Informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their Liberties guilty of the least offense
unto the Committee for Examinations that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance, and all Constables are to observe these
directions, from time to time, so long as the said Public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



FINIS.

