TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The Humble REMONSTRANCE and Petition of the LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT.
Most gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most humble and Loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, do with all faithfulness and zeal to yonr Majesty's Service,
acknowledge your Royal favor and protection to be a great blessing and
security to them for the enjoying and preserving of all those public and
private Liberties and Privileges which belong unto them; and whenever any of
those Liberties or Privileges shall be invaded or broken, they hold
themselves bound with humility and confidence to resort to your Princely
Justice for redress and satisfaction. And because the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament are the Birthright and Inheritance not only of themselves, but
of the whole Kingdom, wherein every one of your Subjects is interressed. The
maintenance and preservation whereof does very highly conduce to the public
peace and prosperity of your Majesty and all your People; they conceive
themselves more especially obliged with all humblenes and care* yea, with all
earnestness and constancy of resolution and endeavor to maintain and defend
the same. Amongst other the Privileges of Parliament; They do with all
dutiful reverence to your most excellent Majesty declare that it is their
Ancient and undoubted Right; That your Majesty ought not to take notice of any
matter in agitation and debate in either Houses of Parliament, but by their
information and agreement; and that your Majesty ought not to propound any
Condition, Provision or Limitation to any Bill or Act in debate or preparation
in either Houses of Parliament; or to manifest or declare your consent or
dissent, approbation or dislike of the same before it be presented to your
Majesty in due course of Parliament: and that every particular Member of
either House has free liberty of speech to propound or debate any matter
according to the order and course of Parliament: and that your Majesty ought
not to conceive displeasure against any man for such opinions and propositions
as shall be delivered in such debate, it belonging to the several Houses of
Parliament respectively to judge and determine such errors and offenses in
words or actions as shall be committed by any their Members in the handling or
debating any matters depending.

They do further declare that all the Privileges above mentioned have been
lately broken to the great sorrow and grievance of your most humble and
faithful subjects in that Speech which your Majesty made in Parliament to
both Houses upon Tuesday last the 14th. of this present Month of December, in
that your Majesty did therein take notice of a Bill for impressing of Soldiers
being in agitation in the said Houses, and not agreed upon: and that your
Majesty did therein offer a Salvo Jure, or provisionall Clause to be added to
that Bill before it was presented to your Majesty by the consent of both
Houses, and did at the same time declare your displeasure against such persons
as had moved some doubt or question concerning the same Bill. All which they
do affirm and declare to be against the ancient lawful and undoubted
Privileges and Liberties of Parliament.

And therefore they most humbly beseech your Majesty by your Royal Power and
authority, to maintain and protect them in these and all other the Privileges
of your high Court of Parliament, that you will not for the time to come break
or interrupt the same. And that none of your loyal Subjects may suffer or
sustain any prejudice in your Majesty's favor or good opinion for any thing
done or spoken in Parliament. And for the reparation of your loyal Subjects in
this their just grievance and complaint, for the breaches of their privileges
above mentioned, and prevention of the like, for the time to come. That your
Majesty will be pleased to declare and make known, the name or names of the
person or persons, by whose misinformation and evil council your Majesty was
induced to the same, that so he or they may receive such condign punishment,
as shall appertain to justice in that behalf. And this they most humbly
desire, and as your greatest and most faithful Council shall advise your
Majesty to perform, as that which will be, not only a comfort to themselves,
but likewise a great advantage to your Majesty, by procuring and confirming
such a confidence and unity betwixt your Majesty and your People, as may be a
foundation of Honor safety and Happiness to your Person and Throne, as they
stand bound always to pray for, and endeavor.

Imprinted in the Year, MDCXLI.


