TWO ORDINANCES OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; VIZ.

The first, enabling the Committee of the Admiralty to grant Commissions to
such Merchants as shall set out Ships at their own charge; And the said
Merchants to have Letters of Mart to take all Ships, Goods and Merchandise of
any persons whatsoever in Arms against the King and Parliament, or assisting
the Rebels in Ireland.

The second, for the Sequestring of the Estates of Spies and Intelligencers;
And the Fifth part of such Estate to be given to such persons as discover them.

Also, an ORDER to prevent such persons as are committed to Prison by Authority
of Parliament, from going abroad without Order from the said Authority.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Ordinances and Order be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edw. Husbands. November 10. 1643.

Die Martis, 24 October, 1643. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, for enabling the Committee of Admiralty to grant Commissions to
such MERCHANTS, etc.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament having received certain notice of a
cessation of Arms concluded with the Rebels in Jreland, And of a purpose to
send an Army from thence into this Kingdom against the Forces of the King and
Parliament, for the maintenance of the Popish Hierarchy, and the utter Ruin of
Religion in all His Majesty's Dominions, if God prevent not. It is Ordered,
That all such Merchants, and others who shall be willing to set out Ships at
their own charge, shall have Letters of Mart to take all the Ships, Goods, and
Merchandise, of any person or persons whatsoever in Arms against the King and
Parliament, and not within the protection of Parliament, or that shall be
ayding or assisting to the Rebels of that Kingdom, or of any other in Arms
against the Parliament in either of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, or
Jreland; And the Committee of the Admiralty are required to grant Commissions
to such persons accordingly.

Ordered that this Order be printed and published, and set upon the Exchange.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis, October 31. 1643. A Declaration and Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament; For Sequestring the Estates of Spies and
Intelligencers; and the Fifth part of such Estate to be given to such persons
as discover them.
WHereas by the frequent Intercourse of Persons and Intelligence) contrary to
the use and custom of War) between the Cities of London and Westminster, and
other parts of the Kingdom, and the persons of the King and queen, and Forces
raised by the King against the Parliament and Kingdom; opportunity has been
given for the plotting and contriving the late treacherous and horrid Design;
and in case the said Intercourse and Intelligence should continue, the same way
will still be open for any other of the like nature in time to come; As also
for the frequent conveying of Moneys, and other Provisions for the supporting
of this unnatural War: For the preventing whereof, be it Declared and Ordained
by the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, That no person or persons
whatsoever, shall from henceforth repair or go from the said Cities of London
and Westminster, or from any other parts of the Kingdom, unto the person of the
King or queen, or Lords of Council, abiding with him or her, or to any person
or persons within any of the Kings quarters, leaguers or Garrisons, or that are
within any of the Armies raised by the King; nor shall give or hold any
Intelligence by Letters, Messages or otherwise, with the persons of the King
and queen, or other persons aforesaid, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament, or Warrant from the Lord General of the Forces raised by the two
Houses, or from the respective Officers that shall command in chief any of the
Forces. And the said Lords and Commons do further declare, That the person or
persons who shall do to the contrary hereof, shall be proceeded against, as
those within the Ordinance for Sequestration. And shall be further accounted,
as persons that do adhere unto those that have levied War against the
Parliament and Kingdom, and be liable to the same punishment. And be it further
declared and Ordained, for the better and more effectual execution of the
premises, That the person or persons that shall discover any of the persons
offending as aforesaid, shall have one Fifth part of all such benefits and
profits that shall acrue, or grow, by reason of the seizing and sequestring of
their Estates, according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, and
of the said Ordinance of Sequestration. And in case any person or persons after
the last of June, having knowledge of the said offenders and offenses, shall
not within convenient time reveal the same unto the Speakers of both Houses of
Parliament, or to the Lord General, or other Officers commanding in chief, the
said person or persons shall incur the like penalties and forfeitures as are
herein provided, against the said principal offenders.

Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration and
Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis, October. 31. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That whatsoever
Prisoner is committed by this House, or by any Authority derived from this
House to any Prison, and permitted to go abroad without the Order of this
House, or of others Authorized by them; That it shall be taken as an Escape,
and that the Keepers be proceeded against accordingly for the same.

And this Order is to be printed and published, and sent to every Prison.

H: Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

