One Blow at the Feet of the Imposing Formal Quaker's Image: or rather an
Epistle of Love and good Will to them, to show them their great Weakness (if
not Folly) in saying Thee and Thou; and also for not putting off the Hat, and
not paying of Tyths; Writ by Nich. Eed, one of their Society, until J.
Kilburne, and N. Geats (two Preachers) were moved by a Proud and Lying Spirit,
to cast great Reproachful Lies upon me, which they in Justice (which is one of
the least Marks of a true Christian) ought to make out their Assertions, or
else to acknowledge their Failings; which I have long ago laid before them in
Print.
January the 7th. 1692/3. This may be Printed, Ed. Bohun.
A Few Words, by way of Counsel and Advice (for the present time) to the
Quakers in general; but more particularly to all the honest, upright-hearted,
and younger sort, whether young in Years, or lately convinced; and may justly
serve for a Reproof for the High and Lofty, Proud Formal Hypocrites among them,
which are, through a fiery Zeal, so fierce for their outward Orders, that all
which come not to take up a Profession of these three things, and several
others, are judged unworthy to be received into their Church Fellowship or
Body, though other wise never so honest, yet without a due Observation of these
things, according to their Prescriptions to many of them, do hold forth by
their Judgment, that a Person can never come to have true inward Fellowship,
with the Invisible Head, and only Savior of the World

First, Concerning Thee and Thou, the Quakers themselves, as well as the
general part of Christendom, do declare and hold forth, that the Soul is
Immortal, and the Body is Mortal; then I pray, may not I believe, and also ask
the moderate Quakers, whether there be not two Beings in every Man and Woman;
and then seeing it is so by their Judgment, whether it be not according to the
Form of sound Words, to say You to a Man or Woman, though a thing they do
mightily exhort their Hearers against, often telling them, Keep to the form of
sound Words, use plain Language, and stand in the Cross to thy own Will, (in
thesesmall things) or else thou will never come to inherit the Crown; and it
may be, tell them, (I will not say a great Lie) This is the Word of the Lord to
thee, whosoever thou art that art guilty in shunning the Cross; and then say, I
accuse no particular, but speak the Truth to all, as Love opens and springs in
my Heart, that thou may not flee the Cross, and miss the Blessing, and end
thy Days in Sorrow. If the Quakers Object, and say, The Soul and Body being
united together, make but one Being and Person; and therefore we cannot speak
the Truth to our Neighbor, if we say You to one; and the Scripture uses no
such Custom, as for what is used in the Scriptures, you know, many of you have
in public Testimonies, and in Print, denied that to be the Rule of Faith and
Life, yet the Scriptures do not make a Man an Offender for a Word; for God
looks more at the Truth and Sincerity of the Heart, than the outside show.

Again, If they object, and say, We know the old Man, put off with his Deeds,
and the fleshly part is Crucified. Answer, I know Hypocrites were always as
ready to justify themselves as You, and I knew some Preachers (and heard of
many) counted very Eminent and Ancient among you, that were as ready to
justify themselves as you, which were so viciously given to Women, that they
had great Bellies laid to them, which would not have been done, if their Flesh
had been Crucified.

Now Paul did not speak so highly of himself, as though he had already attained
to the Resur^ection, but said, I labor to keep my Body under, and to bring it
in Subjection, lest when I have Preached the Gospel to others, I my self should
be a cast away; at first, some pretended the Spirit led them into Yea and Nay;
then what Spirit was that which led them out of it again? Yet I do not blame
you in this, for words at best should signify nothing but a true Declaration
of the Heart and Mind. Concerning the putting off your Hat, what Scripture can
be shown against such a civil Respect among People, where it has been so long
used? The Scripture says, Give no Offense to Jew nor Gentile, etc. as much as
in you lies; but this has given Offense to many. Now the Scripture says,
Honor all Men, love the Brotherhood, Fear God, and Honor the King; yet I
believe true Honor does stand and consist in a true Love, and willing
Obedience one to another in all Just Commands and Requirings. This is true
Honor, thus to serve one another in Love, and thus to serve our chief
Magistrate and his Ministers under him; this is according to God's Ordinance;
but this putting off the Hat is but an outward show, or civil Respect, which
one may have toward another, (without the Breach of any Law, or Command of God
that ever I knew of) but the true Honor is a more inward thing. Now put the
Case thus, that a Man may pass quietly about his Business, if he observe and
perform this civil Respect which they do require of their Apprentices and
Servants, though they will not give it to the King: But if any say to me, when
John fell down at the Angel's Feet to worship him, the Angel forbid him, and
said, See thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants. But this is no thing to
my Discourse, I am not Pleading for one to worship another, but only for that
civil Respect, which may be given one to another, without falling down as to an
Image to worship; this was as true from the beginning, as when the Angel spoke
it to John; for the Lord was only to be worshipped. But did Jacob transgress
against God (think you) when he bowed his Body to the Grouud to his elder
Brother, and his Handmaids and Wives bowed to him also, Genesis 33. and when
Jacob taught his Servants to say, It is a Present sent unto my Lord Esau, do
you think he sinned in all this? Genesis 32. 18. and when David had Saul at his
Mercy, and also had the Promise of the Kingdom, yet he said, I will not put
forth my Haad against my Lord. 1 Samuel 24. 10. and do you think the Prophet
wanted your outward Orders to walk by, and so sinned for want of it? When he
said, I pray thee, O my Lord, the King, let my Supplication I pray thee, be
accepted before thee, Jer. 37. 20. And what if any Quaker now, in the true Fear
of God, should pull off his Hat to the King, (or civil Magistrate) and say,
Your Servant my Lord, etc. do you think he would be ever the worse Man, if he
did it from a true inward Sense of what was his Duty to the King? etc. Or do
you think it is not your Duty to serve them in Love, or because so many do use
this in Deceit, shall not a true Man use it at all? It cannot reasonably be
supposed that our King and Magistrates looks to be bowed unto as Gods, upon
the Score of Worship, because they do allow so much Liberty of Conscience; but
for my part, I (and I do believe Thousands more) do know, that you Formal
Quakers have not your Fellows among all sorts of Protestants, for requiring and
compelling (according to your Power) to be bowed down unto, in matter of Faith
and Conscience, in things relating to Worship: and you to cry out so against
others for Giving and Receiving Honor or Titles of Honor, as My Lord, etc.
counting it Blasphemous Titles; See what a Father amongst you received, as at
large in the Quakers Principles, Doctrines, Laws and Orders, reprinted, p. 12,
13. which was taken out of some Letters sent to G. F. in his Life time.

Dear G. Fox, Who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life reaches through us
thy Children: whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest; in
which thou Rulest and Governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is Established
in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without end. -- Josiah Coal, dear and
precious one, in whom my Life is bound up, and my Strength in thee stands; by
thy Breathings I am nourished, by thee my Strength is renewed, blessed art thou
for evermore; Life and Strength comes from thee, Holy one, -- daily do I find
thy Presence with me: for I cannot reign but in thy Presence and Power: Pray
for us all, Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for evermore. I am
thine, Begotten and Nourished by thee, and in thy Power am I preserved. Glory
to thee, Holy one, etc. John Audland. If G. Fox had not liked these, why had he
not buried it, and reproved them that gave it; but instead of burying it, G. W.
has this Passage in his Innocence against Envy, p. 18. Now, seeing a high
Father (or King) amongst you, received such Titles, and another justifies it
as well as he can, in saying, How proves he? They gave and intended those Names
and Titles to the Person of G. F. and not to the Life of Christ in him, whereof
he was a Partaker, etc. The beginning of their Writing is Proof enough of it,
Dear G. F. etc. But if I take it in your Sense, then why may not you as well
bow and submit to the Life of Christ in the King; do you make a Reprobate of
him, and refuse to submit upon that Score? O base, O base, my Brethren, when
will you come to see the Spirit of Pride, which leads you to say in your
Hearts to others, Stand off, come not near me, I am Holier than thou; did
those, who bewitched the Galatians, (think you) use greater Socery than you.

But if you object, and say, We know God led us into these low outside, as some
may esteem them, foolish things; and God may, and often does confound the
Wisdom of the Wise, and make their Knowledge Foolish; and he does this often
by weak and foolish means.

Answer. That is true, and may not God do the same now to a Hypocritical
People? Pray search your selves with the Light you so much preach, and see
where there be not a just Cause for the Lord to deal so by you.

Concerning Tyths; I do not believe Tyths to be due to any Gospel-Minister by
Divine Law, (neither do I believe that your King and Parliament would have
settled it upon the Church, had it not been done before they came) yet
nevertheless, I can pay it, and do find as much Peace in my Conscience in doing
of it, or more than I did in denying it; and I do now pay it, not for fear of
wrath, but in Reference to the Example of Christ; who, although no Divine Law
required him to pay tribute, yet he paid it to an Heathen Emperor for Peace
sake (being an outward thing.) And his Apostle did exhort us to perform our
Duty to the outward Power, set over us by God himself; St. Paul says, Let
every Soul be subject to the higher Power, Romans 13. meaning the outward Power,
concerning outward things, or else why did he say, For this cause pay you
Tribute and Custom; and when he writes to Titus, exhorts him to put others in
mind to obey Magistrates, Titus 3. 1. and Peter says, Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. Now some
Quakers have expounded Peter thus, for the Lords sake, (mind that, say they)
that Ordinance of Man which upholds Antichristian Laws, (as that of Tyths)
cannot be for the Lords sake; and therefore exhorts to bear a Testimony against
them; but pray Brethren, is not this to revile the King and Government, and so
against the manner of Christ, the Prophet Jeremiah, the Apostles, and also
against the Law of Moses, who said, Thou shall not revile, Exodus 22 28. And
with what an Impudent Face can you suppose the King and Parliament have not as
Lawful Power under God to make Ordinances concerning outward things, and to
require a Submission of the People in general, as G. Fox had, and G. Whitehead
and his Council has over their People in particular. If you say, you believe
they have a Lawful Power to make Ordinances concerning outward things, then say
I, Why do not you teach the People actually to submit? Do you think a good
Conscience leads you to suffer for a Testimony against a Lawful Power? or do
you think, because some have expounded Paul to the Romans thus, Let every Soul
he subject to the higher Power, for there is no Power but of God; that is, say
they, the Power of Truth within, which we are setting up; that is it, the Soul
should submit unto, and it is upon this Score; that they teach the People, not
to submit actually to the outward Supreme Power; do you think the Supreme Power
have not as much Divine Law on their side, for that Ordinance of Tyths, as you
formal Quakers have for your Ordinance of Women's Meetings, distinct by
themselves, and apart from the Men? Pray, Brethren mind the Exhortation of the
Prophet, who said to the Church in his Age, Bring your Necks under the Yoke of
the King of Babylon, and serve him; for why will ye dye? Jerem. 27. 11. I
believe (if any dosuppose so) you will not say; King William is one of the
Kings of Babylon; but if a Spirit of Pride and Imposition over others
Conscience be some of the Marks of Babylon's Kings; then G. Fox was, and G.
Whitehead is more like Kings of Babylon, than King William. But some may say,
Jer. 51. 6. says, Fly out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every Man; his
Soul be not cut off in her Iniquity, for this is the time of the Lord's
Vengeance. Very well, this compared, seems as though that might be allowed in
Captivity, which might not in Deliverance; so if you could look back, and
consider how little your Work (in throwing down Tyths) is the forwarder for
Forty Years Labor in Sufferings, you might have good Ground to kneel down in
Obedience and Peace in the Will of your Heavenly Father, praying him (in his
time) by the Supreme Power, to take off that, and all other Burdens from the
Poor: and this your Obedience might be better in his sight, than all your
Offerings against the King's Law. But to strive so hard for your Deliverance
before the Lord's time, you may bring your selves the more into Bondage.

And again, you Quakers, that are so much for your own Rights and Properties,
what good reason can you show against the Impropriators Tyths? you deny that
also (which does not go to maintain a false Worship) are there not many Widows
and Fatherless Children, whose Maintenance lies altogether in that? will you
allow them other Maintenance, if you could keep that from them? Does your
pretending that you are led by a Divine Power, give you a Prerogative to do an
unjust thing? But this is the Quakers great reason against the Priest's Tyths,
they say it goes to maintain a false Worship, and to maintain God's Enemies.
Answer, It was the manner of Hypocrites to discern Moats in their Brothers
Eyes, when they did not see the Beam in their own, (so before you stone others
for Adultery, cleanse your selves;) Does not the Priest preach, God was in
Christ, Reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Sin, and also
lays the danger of Sin before them, which goes on in it after a wilful
manner? and so he sets before the People the Joys of Heaven, and Terrros and
Pains of Hell; and them Priests, which do perform in their place, what they
believe is their Duty to God according to the Light and Knowledge God has
given them; why may not they find Merc^ of the Lord, as well as you? and if God
have bestowed more upon you, than he has upon them, and you walk not
answerable (as many of you do not) you will be worthy of more Stripes; and as
for their being God's Enemies, if it be so, it is your Duty to leave Judgment
and Vengeance to the Lord.

But suppose the King and Parliament should hearken to you Quakers, so as to
throw down the Tyths, Church and Priests altogether; (what would become of all
the Babes and Lambs amongst them, your Breasts would be unnatural to them?) it
would kindle such a Fire and Flame about their Ears, that all the Wisdom and
Power you have would not be able to quench it. So it would be more Wisdom to
hearken to Jeremiah and Peter, (at this time) and submit to this Ordinance of
Man for the Lord's ^ake: then you would show your selves a little more like the
Lord, which is a Power of Love to all; but if you have but little of this at
Heart, then exercise something of Christian Prudence in submitting, and let
your Moderation be seen to all Men; for who knows how nigh the Day of the
Lord is at hand, to render a Recompense to every one according to his Works.
The Quakers may say to me, If it were upon some other account, I could pay it,
but this I cannot pay: Come, I will reason a little with you, why cannot you
submit to this Ordinance, as well as some other, which some of you have
declared against, as well as you did against this, viz. against Fighting; you
said you could not pay to the maintaining of that which was for the destroying
Men's Lives with carnal Weapons; but you have paid toward the former Wars
against Holland, and do pay now; which doubtless have, and will destroy a
Multitude of Men's Lives. Now, my Brethren, why should you be so much against
this outward Ordinance of Tyths, which was never ordained to destroy Men's
Lives, but rather to save their Lives by feeding them; and as the Case stands
now, you are not bound to join in their Worship, but by giving so much Money or
Goods, (which are but outward things) here is nothing required of bowing to it
in your Hearts or Minds.

And again, when I in Weakness did refuse to pay Tyths, the Minister was so
fair to me, he said, If you cannot give it me as my due, give it me out of
Charity, and give me what you will: yet I took the Advice of the Quakers, and
went to Goal; and when I and others were there, we were ready to seek such
Favor of the Jailer as the Priest offered; and if he would show us any
kindness, and leave us to our Freedom, we were very ready to give him a Reward;
and so concerning his Fees, which was judged as unfit to be paved as Tyths;
yet, if he would leave it to us, if we gave him as much, or more This was not
judged a miss.

Now, to conclude, although I may err or fail through Weakness; yet I cannot
be a Heretic, because I do what I believe (...) my Duty.

They have spoken against me with a lying Tongue: They compassed me about with
words of Hatred, and fought against me without a cause. For my love they are my
Adversaries, but I give my self unto Prayer, Psalm 109. 2, 3, 4, 5.

THE END.
London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by J. Gwillim, Bookseller,
over against the (...) James, in Bishopsgate-street: and Edw. Swain, (...) the
Faulcon-stairs, near the Bank-side, in Southwark. 1693.


