Die Mercurii, 29 Januarii, 1644.
Two Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for
Continuation of the several Ordinances of Excise or New-Impost until the 11
of September, 1646.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled have thought fit to
continue the several Rates and Charges of Excise or New-Impost already settled
and established by Authority of both Houses. Be it hereby Ordained by the said
Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all and every the Ordinances
touching the Excise or New-Impost, and every Clause, Sentence, Article, and
other thing and things in them and every of them contained and expressed and
now in force, as well for the Governing and Ordering of the Excise, as for the
settling, laying, and imposing several Rates and Charges upon sundry and diverse
Commodities, shall, next after their and every of their particular and
respective Expirations, be, and hereby are continued, prolonged, and to be
received in and thorowout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick, until the first day of April, One thousand six hundred forty six.
And it is further Ordained and Declared by Authority aforesaid, That John
Towse, Thomas Foot, John Kendrick, Thomas Cullum, and Simon Edmonds, Esquires,
and Aldermen of the City of London; John Lamott and Edward Claxton of the same,
Esquires, the present Commissioners of Excise or New-Impost, shall remain and
be the chief Commissioners and Governors of the whole Office and Receipts of
the Excise and New-Impost in and through the whole Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick; and shall and may do and execute all and every
the said Ordinances, Clauses, Articles, and other thing and things in all and
every the said Ordinances contained, mentioned, and expressed, in the same
Manner and Form, and to the same Intents and Purposes, for, during and until
the said first day of April, One thousand six hundred forty six, with the like
Allowance of Six pence upon every Twenty shillings that shall come in upon the
Receipts of the Excise or New-Impost. And it is further Ordained, That the said
Commissioners, and their Sub-Commissioners, shall make and deliver up their
respective Accounts in such manner as is directed and prescribed by the
Ordinance of the One and thirtieth of August last past. And it is likewise
Ordained, That as well all and every the said Commissioners, their
Sub-Commissioners and Officers, as all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, who shall do, or cause any thing to be done in pursuance of this
Ordinance, shall be protected, saved harmless and indempnified, by Authority
of both Houses of Parliament.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Lunae, 3 Feb. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Ordinance
concerning the Receipts and Commissioners of Excise, passed both Houses on
Wednesday last the Nine and twentieth of January, One thousand six hundred
forty four, shall be enlarged, and continue in force in the same manner it now
is, until the Eleventh of September which shall be in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred forty six.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.


