TWO DECLARATIONS OF THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND CONCERNING
SCOTLAND.

Together with several PROCEEDINGS OF THE Commissioners Appointed by the
PARLIAMENT For Ordering and Managing Affairs in SCOTLAND.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

A Declaration of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, concerning the
Settlement of Scotland.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England esteeming it a necessary care
and obligation that lies upon them, to improve the Power which God has now
given them, for the Advancement of the Glory of God, and the good and welfare
of the whole Island, Have thought fit to nominate and appoint Commissioners
forthwith to repair into Scotland, for effecting the same; And do hereby
Declare,

First, As to what concerns the Advancement of the Glory of God, That their
constant Endeavors shall be, To promote the Preaching of the Gospel there, and
to advance the Power of true Religion and Holiness; and, That God may be served
and worshipped according to his mind revealed in his Word, with Protection and
all due Countenance and Encouragement therein to the People of that Nation,
from those in Authority under the Parliament.

Secondly, They do Declare, As to what concerns the Freedom to be established
to the People there, and the Security to this Commonwealth to be had for time
to come, That Scotland shall and may be Incorporated into, and become one
Commonwealth with this of England; whereby the same Government that is
established here, and enjoyed by the good People of this Nation, under the Free
State and Commonwealth of England, as now settled without King or House of
Lords, may be derived and communicated unto them, with such convenient speed,
as the same can be made practicable amongst them.

Thirdly, They do Declare, As to Satisfaction and Repairation, that they intend
and expect, for the vast Expenses and Damages which this Commonwealth has
already undergone, by reason of the Invasion in the year One thousand six
hundred forty eight, by the Scots Army under the then Duke Hamilton: The War
which they necessitated England to, for their own Defense; and, The late
Invasion by the Army under Charles Stuart; and, For and toward the lessening
the future charge of this Commonwealth, All the Lands, Houses, Goods and
Revenue whatsoever belonging to the said Charles Stuart, pretended King of the
Scots, or to the Crown or State of Scotland; and, All the Estates whatsoever,
Real or Personal, of those who did Invade England, under Duke Hamilton, in the
year One thousand six hundred forty eight, or were advising, contriving or
promoting thereof, or in any way ayding, abetting or assisting thereunto; or,
Who were in Arms under the said Charles Stuart, or were any way ayding, abetting
or assisting to him in Scotland: or, Who did with the said Charles Stuart lately
invade England, or were ayding, abetting or assisting thereunto; or since the
same have raised Arms, or been Promoters, Abettors or Assisters thereof, in
Prosecution of the said Invasion; or in Opposition to the Forces of the
Parliament of England remaining there, Shall be Confiscated and Forfeited to
the use and benefit of the Commonwealth of England; Except such who have, since
the Battle of Dunbar, on the Third of September, One thousand six hundred and
fifty, deserted the said Charles Stuart, and not born Arms since against the
Parliament; As also such, whose Merits and Services to this Commonwealth, have,
or shall render them capable of being taken into a more favorable consideration
by the Parliament.

Fourthly, The Parliament do Declare, That all such persons of the Scottish
Nation, as are not comprehended within the former Qualifications, but have kept
themselves free from the guilt of those things which have compelled this War;
and shall now, upon the Discovery of their own true Interest, be disposed to
concur with, and promote the Ends formerly and now Declared by the Parliament,
Shall be taken into the Protection of the Parliament, and enjoy their Liberties
and Estates, as other the Free People of the Commonwealth of England.

ANd forasmuch as the Parliament are satisfied, That many of the People of
Scotland, who are Vassals or Tenants to, and had dependency upon the Noblemen
and Gentry, (The chief Actors in these Invasions and Wars against England) were
by their Influence drawn into, and have been involved with them in the same
Evils; It is hereby Declared, That all those who are already, or shall within
Thirty days after the publication hereof on this side the River Tay, and within
thirty days after publication hereof beyond the River Tay, and within thirty
days after the publication hereof beyond the River Spey, put themselves under
the Protection of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and conform
themselves to their Government and Regulation, Shall not only be pardoned for
all Acts past, but be set free from their former Dependencies and
Bondage-services; and, Shall be admitted as Tenants, Freeholders and Heritors,
to Farm, hold, inherit and enjoy from and under this Commonwealth, proportions
of the said Confiscated and Forfeited Lands, under such easy Rents and
reasonable conditions, as may enable them, their Heirs and Posterity, to live
with a more comfortable Subsistence then formerly, and like a Free People,
delivered (through Gods goodness) from their former Slaveries, Vassalage and
Oppressions.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, for
Ordering and Managing Affairs in Scotland.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England having Declared their Intentions
concerning the Settlement of Scotland, and appointed Us their Commissioners to
publish and make known the same to the people of this Nation, and to use our
Endeavor, whereby the said Settlement may with most satisfaction and speed be
effected, and the whole Island, through the goodness of God, brought to an
happy and lasting Peace: We do therefore by virtue of the power on that behalf
given Us, Authorize and require you, to meet in some convenient place within
your Shire, and there to nominate and elect (...) Persons of integrity and good
affection to the welfare and peace of this Island; which said persons so
elected, with full power on your behalf, for effecting the premises, are to be
with us at Dalkieth upon the (...) day of (...) Given under our Hands at
Dalkieth (...) this (...) day of 1651.

To the Heretors and Rentallers of the Sheriffdom of (...)
By the Commissioners of he Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, for
Ordering and Managing Affairs in Scotland.
ALthough the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, in their Declaration
concerning the settlement of Scotland, Have in the Article that concerns
Religion, and the Advancement of the power of Godliness held forth, That the
Uniontendred by them to Scotland, for making it one Commonwealth with England,
shall be (through the assistance of God) so managed, as may conduce to the real
good and encouragement of all those that fear God in both Nations; and that the
People throughout the whole Island may become such, as amongst whom the Lord
may delight to dwell.

And have likewise, together with what they publish concerning Forfeiture and
Confiscation of Estates, held forth in their said Declaration, favor to several
sorts of persons according to their respective Qualifications, expressed and
contained therein: Yet to the end the good Intentions of the Parliament may be
more fully understood by all, and brought to happy effect, according to the
trust and power committed to us: We Declare,

That for promoting of Holiness, and advancing the power of Godliness, all
possible care shall be used for publishing the Gospel of Christ, in all parts
of this Land, and provision of maintenance made and allowed to the faithful
Dispensers thereof; together with such other encouragements as the Magistrate
may give, and may be expected by them, who demean themselves peaceably and
becomingly, to the Government and Authority by which they receive the same. As
also, that care shall be taken for removing of scandalous Persons, who have
intruded into the Work of the Ministry, and placing of others fitly qualified
with gifts, for the instructing of the people in their stead. And that such
Ministers whose Consciences oblige them to wait upon God in the administration
of spiritual Ordinances, according to the order of the Scottish Churches, with
any that shall voluntarily join in the practice thereof, shall receive
protection and encouragement from all in Authority, in their peaceable and
inoffensive exercise of the same; as also shall others, who not being satisfied
in Conscience to use that Form, shall serve and worship God in other
Gospel-way, and behave themselves peaceably and inoffensively therein.

We shall likewise take care as much as in us lies, that in places of Trust
throughout this Nation, Magistrates and Officers fearing God may be set up, who
according to the duty of their place, may be a terror to all evildoers, and
even to them whose licentious practices (though under pretense of Liberty and
Conscience) shall manifest not to walk according to godliness and honesty. And
by virtue of the power on that behalf given us, We do further Declare, That all
persons within the Qualifications of Favor, expressed in the Parliaments
Declaration, being Inhabitants within the Borough of (...) that shall in
pursuance thereof live peaceably under, and yield obedience unto the Authority
of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England exercised in Scotland, are
capable of, and shall enjoy the respective Benefits and Favors held forth in
the said Declaration, and shall have such further Grants and Confirmations for
the completing thereof, as shall be found requisite. And we do lastly Declare,
That all Merchants, Tradesmen and Handy-Crafts men within the said Borough, not
having in Lands and Goods above the clear value of Five hundred pounds
sterling, (not being Prisoners at Wars, or Soldiers of Fortune in Commission)
who shall also in pursuance of the said Declaration, live peaceably under, and
yield obedience unto the Authority of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England exercised in Scotland, shall not only be freed and discharged from all
Forfeitures and Confiscations of their Estates, for any thing formerly done by
them in reference to the Wars, but be received into the Protection of
Parliament, and enjoy such Liberties and Immunities, as also such Leases and
Grants of Confiscated and Forfeited Lands, as upon consideration of their
respective qualities and deserts shall be thought fit. Provided the favor held
forth in this Declaration, extend not unto any persons, commonly known by the
Name of Moss-Troopers, or any other who have murdered or killed any Soldiers
contrary to the Laws and Custom of War; or any English people contrary to the
Laws of Scotland.

Given under our Hands at Dalkieth, the (...) day of February, in the year of
our Lord, 165^
By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, for
ordering and managing Affairs in Scotland.
THe Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, having taken the settlement of
Scotland into their serious consideration, and those things which in the
establishing of the Government there, may be acceptable to God, and for the
good and welfare of the People. And forasmuch as the due Administration of
Justice and Right, does effectually conduce thereunto: And the Parliament
having in pursuance thereof, Authorized and Commanded us to use our utmost
Endeavors, that Justice be done to all the People of Scotland, Equally and
Impartially without respect of persons, and as may be most for their ease and
relief. And finding it necessary since our coming hither, that for those ends
Judicatories be speedily erected, to the effecting whereof in a settled and
orderly way, more time will be required then the present condition of Scotland,
by reason of the long want of Administration of Justice will permit; we have
thought fit to make the same known unto the People of Scotland. And likewise,
That in consideration of the present Exigency, we shall by virtue of the Power
unto us given in that behalf, by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
forthwith appoint and authorize persons to the Administration of Justice unto
the People of Scotland, who are to be continued for some short time, until the
Judicatories and Courts of Justice may in a more solemn and lasting way be
established.

And we do further, for and in the name of the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England, Declare, That no Power, Jurisdiction or Authority, derived from, by
or under Charles Stuart, who pretends himself King of Scotland, or any of his
Predecessors, or any otherwise then from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, be used, exercised or enjoyed within Scotland, the Isles, or any the
Territories thereof; and do hereby forbid, adnul and make void the use or
exercise of any Power Jurisdiction or Authority whatsoever within Scotland, the
Isles, or any the Territories thereof, other then such as is or shall be
derived from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, whereof all persons
of whatsoever condition or quality are to take notice, and required not to do
to the contrary thereof in any ways, upon the Pains and Penalties that may
thereupon ensue. And, that none may pretend ignorance hereof, We have commanded
this Declaration to be Printed and Proclaimed at the Market-cross of Edinburgh,
and the other Burghs within Scotland, where Proclamations have usually been
made.

Given under our Hands at Dalkieth, the 31th of January, in the year of our
Lord, 1651. Ol. St. John. G. Fenwick. H. Vane. Rob. Titchborn. J. Lambert.
Rich. Salwey. R. Dean. Geo. Monck.


A Declaration of the Parliament of Enggland, in order to the Uniting of
Scotland into one Commonwealth with England.
WHereas the several Shires and Buroughs of Scotland hereafter mentioned, have
by their Deputies assented unto the Tender of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, That Scotland shall and may be Incorporated into, and
become one Commonwealth with England; whereby the same Government that is
Established here, and enjoyed by the Good People of this Nation, under the Free
State and Commonwealth of England, as now settled without King or House of
Lords, may be derived and communicated unto them, with such convenient speed as
the same can be made practicable amongst them; That is to say, The Shires of
Barwick, Haddington, Roxborough, Linlithgo, Dunbarton, Dumfreeze, Witon,
Forfar, Aberdeen, Bamf, Bute, Lanerk, Kinkardine, Nearn, Sterling, Clackmannon,
Edinburgshire, Fife, Pebles, Selkirk, Orkney and Zetland, and Pearth; And the
Buroughs of Edinburgh, Aberdeen, St Andrews, Pearth, Rothsea, Dundee,
Aberbothick, Lauther, Haddington, Dunbar, North Berwick, Linlithgo,
Queens-Ferry, Sterling, Rugland, Witon, Forfar, Montross, Bamf, Breichin,
Brunt-Island; Crayl, Jedborough, Dunbarton, Cullein, Amstroder-West,
Pittenweyn, Elgin, Cowper, Kinghorn, Innerkething, Kooleross, Kilrenny,
Amstrother-East, Selkirk, Disert, Glasgow, Innerness and Kircaldy; as by the
several and respective Declarations, signed under the Hands of the said
Deputies of Shires and Buroughs, and presented to the Parliament, and there
now remaining, does appear.

Upon consideration whereof the Parliament have Resolved, That a Bill be
brought in for making the said Union accordingly; and do Declare, That the
People of this whole Island shall be represented in One Parliament, and be
Governed by their successive Representatives therein; and that the People of
Scotland shall send Members to serve in the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, in such proportion and at such time, as shall be hereafter declared.

And as to the particulars for the effecting hereof, and settling of the Laws
and Government in Scotland, and other things necessary for completing the said
Union, the Parliament do think fit, That a certain number of Deputies, to be
Chosen and Commissionated in manner hereafter expressed, do attend the
Parliament, or such persons, and at such places as the Parliament shall
appoint, on the behalf of the Shires and Buroughs of Scotland consenting to
the said Union, with full power to effect the premises: And for-this purpose
the Parliament does Declare, That the respective Shires and Buroughs of
Scotland, unto whom Warrants for Electing Deputies to meet with the
Commissioners of Parliament at Dalkieth, have been formerly sent by the said
Commissioners; and who in pursuance thereof have by their Deputies or
otherwise, declared their Consent unto the said Union, which has been received
and allowed by the said Commissioners of Parliament; or such Shires and
Buroughs as shall, after the publishing of this Declaration, and before the
time herein appointed for the new Election of Deputies, declare their Consent
unto the said Union, to the effect of what has been already declared by the
rest of the Shires and Buroughs, and such Declaration of theirs be accepted
and allowed of by the Commissioners of the Parliament, or the Commander in
chief for the time being in Scotland, shall be capable of choosing and sending
Deputies for the intent aforesaid: And all such Shires and Buroughs as
aforesaid, that is to say, The Heritors and Rentallers of the said Shires, and
the Neighbors and Burgesses of the said Buroughs respectively, are hereby
authorized and required to meet at some convenient place within their
respective Shires and Buroughs, at some time before the end of the Month of
July next, and then and there to Elect and Choose for their Deputies
respectively, persons of known Integrity, and such as have declared their
Consent to the said Union, in like Numbers as formerly they were authorized to
do by the Commissioners of Parliament residing at Dalkieth in Scotland, which
persons so Elected, are to be commissionated by their respective Shires and
Buroughs, according to the Tenor following:

WE Underwriters (...) being authorized and required by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, to Elect (...) persons of known Integrity, and who
have declared their Consent, That Scotland be Incorporated into, and made One
Commonwealth with England; with power on our behalf, to meet with the rest of
the Deputies of Shires and Buroughs at Edinburgh, at or before the Twentieth
day of August, One thousand six hundred fifty two; and there by Vote of the
major part of Deputies present, to Elect Fourteen persons to represent all the
Shires of Scotland consenting to the Union as aforesaid; and Seven persons to
represent all the Buroughs consenting as aforesaid, to attend the Parliament
of England, or such as they shall appoint, as is directed by their Declaration
bearing Date the Five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred
fifty two; and to have full power for effecting the matters expressed in the
said Declaration, Do give and grant for us and in our Name, and in the Name and
behalf of (...) unto (...) full power to attend the Parliament of England, or
such persons as they shall appoint, for effecting the matters expressed in the
said Declaration, and to do all things requisite for the perfecting the said
Union; holding firm and stable what shall be so done by our said Deputies, to
all intents and purposes, as if we our selves had been in person present and
done the same.

And are to meet at Edinburgh at or before the Twentieth of August next, and
out of themselves to Elect Fourteen persons to represent all the said Shires,
and seven persons to represent all the said Buroughs; which One and twenty
persons are to make their repair to the Parliament of England, or to such
places in England as the Parliament shall appoint, upon the First day of
October, One thousand six hundred fifty two, with Commissions to them or any
Eleven of them, from the rest of the said Deputies of Shires and Buroughs,
according to the Tenor hereafter expressed:

WE Underwriters, Deputies for the several Shires and Buroughs hereafter
named, That is to say, (...) being thereunto authorized by our said Shires and
Buroughs, in pursuance of the Declaration of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England in that behalf, Dated the Five and twentieth day of
March, One thousand six hundred fifty two, have nominated and elected of our
Number (...) to represent our said Shires, and (...) to represent our said
Buroughs; which said One and twenty persons are to attend the Parliament of
England, or such persons as the Parliament shall appoint, in pursuance of and
for the ends expressed in their said Declaration: And we do hereby give and
grant, for us and in our Name, and in the Name and behalf of the said Shires
and Buroughs, unto the said One and twenty persons or any Eleven of them, full
power to bring to effect the matters expressed in the said Declaration, and to
do all things requisite for the perfecting the said Union; holding firm and
stable, what shall be so done by our Commissioners, to all intents and
purposes, as if we our selves had been in person present and done the same.

And before the said Deputies do proceed to the Election of persons at their
said meeting at Edinburgh to attend the Parliament as aforesaid, they are in
the presence of such as for that purpose shall be thereunto appointed by the
said Commissioners, or by the Commander in chief of the Forces for the time
being in Scotland, by writing under their Hands to declare their Consent to the
Union in manner following:

I A. B. being chosen and deputed by (...) do declare my willing Consent unto
the Tender of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, That Scotland be
Incorporated into, and made One Commonwealth with England, whereby the same
Government that is established in England without King or House of Lords, may
be derived to the People of Scotland; and that I will be True and Faithful unto
the said Government, and live peaceably under, and yield obedience unto the
Authority thereof exercised in Scotland.

And for defraying the Expenses of the said Deputies appointed as aforesaid to
attend the Parliament upon this Service, it is thought sit, and hereby
declared, That twenty shillings Sterlin by the day be allowed unto each of the
said Deputies during this service, from the time of their setting forth for
England; and that according to the said proportion of Twenty shillings Sterlin
by the day there be advanced unto each of the said Deputies, three Months
allowance, which is to be paid them upon the place by the Commissioners at
Leeth out of the Public Revenue there, who are hereby authorized and required
to issue the same accordingly.

And the Commissioners of Parliament for Managing the Affairs of Scotland, or
such as they shall appoint, are hereby authorized and required to cause this
Declaration, by such persons as they shall appoint, to be published and made
known unto the respective Shires and Buroughs as aforesaid, in such manner, as
they may not pretend Ignorance thereof; and such Publication shall to all
intents and purposes be as effectual, for the authorizing the said Shires and
Buroughs to proceed to this Election of Deputies as aforesaid, as if
particular Summons for that purpose had been granted unto each of them.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

