Die Martis, 23. Maii, 1648.
Two Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For putting
all Delinquents, Papists, Ministers, Officers and Soldiers of Fortune that
have adhered to the Enemy during the late War, out of the Cities of London,
Westminster, late Lines of Communication, and Twenty miles distant. With the
several Qualifications and Penalties therein expressed.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do Declare and Ordain, and be
it by Authority of Parliament Ordained and Declared, That all Papists
whatsoever, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and all other persons
whatsoever that have borne Arms against the Parliament, or have adhered to, or
willingly assisted the Enemy in this late War, not being under restraint, and
not hereafter excepted, shall at, or before the Five and twentyeth day of this
instant May, 1648. depart the Cities of London and Westminster, and the late
Lines of Communication, and all other places within Twenty miles of the said
late Lines of Communication. And if any the persons aforesaid shall continue
within the said Lines, or within Twenty miles distance of the said late Lines
of Communication, after the said Five and twentyeth day of May, 1648. such
person or persons shall be apprehended, imprisoned, and proceeded against as
Traitors.

And for the better execution of this Ordinance, it is further Ordained and
Declared by the said Lords and Commons, and by Authority of Parliament, That
the Lord Major of the City of London, and all Justices of Peace within the said
City and Liberties thereof, and the Committee of the Militia of the said City,
or any one or more of them, and the Justices of Peace of the several Counties
of Middlesex, Hertford, Essex, Kent, and Surry, and of the City of Westminster
and Liberties thereof, and the several Committees of the Militia of the said
City of Westminster and Liberties thereof, and of the Borough of Southwark,
Hamblets of the Tower and Suburbs, or any one or more of them in their
respective Liberties and Jurisdictions, shall and may, and are hereby
authorized and required to make search for, and apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended all Papists and Popish Recusants whatsoever, and all Officers and
Soldiers whatsoever that have borne Arms against the Parliament of England,
or have adhered to, or willingly assisted the Enemy in this late War, that are
or shall be found within the said Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs
and Liberties thereof, or within the late Lines of Communication, or Twenty
miles distant thereof, after the said Twenty fifth day of this instant May,
1648. and all such persons so apprehended and taken, and brought before them,
or any one of them, as abovesaid, to imprison, and commit to some common Jail
or Prison, or to safe custody.

And all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other His Majesty's Officers
and Subjects are to be aiding to the said Justices of Peace, and Committees of
Militia in execution of this Ordinance. And in case any Jailer, Constable, or
other Officer to whom any the persons aforesaid shall be committed, shall permit
such person or persons to go at liberty, without the special Warrant or
discharge of the said Lord Major, Justices of Peace, or Committees of Militia
by whom they were so committed, that the same shall be taken and adjudged an
escape; And such Jailer, Constable, and other Officer shall be proceeded
against, and punished as for an escape, according to Law: And this Ordinance is
to continue for the space of Six months from the said Five and twentyeth day of
May, 1648. Provided, That nothing in this Ordinance shall extend to such
persons aforesaid, who having their Habitations within the Lines of
Communication, or within the said space of Twenty miles, have made their
Compositions, and paid in or secured their Fines, or have taken the Negative
Oath and Covenant, or that shall be authorized by both Houses of Parliament, or
being really attending their Compositions at Goldsmiths-hall, shall be
permitted by the Committee of Lords and Commons for Compositions, there to
continue within the said late Lines of Communication for the perfecting their
said Compositions.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 16. Junii, 1648.
Whereas by Ordinance of Parliament bearing date the 23 of May, 1648. it is
Ordained, That all Papists, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and
other persons whatsoever that have borne Arms against the Parliament; or have
adhered to, or willingly assisted the Enemy in this late War, or before the 25
of May last, to depart Twenty miles from the Cities of London and Westminster,
and late lines of Communication; and in case they do not, they are to be
apprehended, imprisoned, and proceeded against as Traitors.

And whereas in the said Ordinance there is a Proviso, that nothing shall
therein extend to such persons who having their Habitations within the Lines of
Communication, or within the said space of Twenty miles, have made their
Compositions, and paid in or secured their Fines; or have taken the negative
Oath and Covenant; or that shall be authorized by both Houses of Parliament; or
being really attending their Compositions at Goldsmiths-hall, shall be
permitted by the Committee of Lords and Commons for Compositions, there to
continue within the said late Lines of Communication for the perfecting of
their said Compositions, by reason of the large extent of which said Proviso:
And also, because as the same is drawn, it is dangerous for any Officer so much
as to apprehend any of the said Delinquents, if he be within the benefit of the
same, which falls not within common notice, many Officers do thereby take
occasion to neglect their duty in apprehending the aforesaid Delinquents, who
are out of the benefit of the aforesaid Proviso.

For the preventing and removal of the said mischiefs, it is hereby Ordained
by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the said Proviso, and
every Clause thereof be from henceforth repealed, and made void and null; and
that those of the aforesaid Delinquents, who shall be exempted from the penalty
of the said Ordinance of the 23 of May last, are, and shall be only such, who
having their usual Habitations within the said late Lines of Communication, or
within the said space of Twenty miles have made their Compositions, and paid in
or secured their Fines, and such whose Estates being not worth Two hundred
pounds in Lands or Chattels, have taken the negative Oath and Covenant, and
have their usual Habitations within the said Lines of Communication, or within
Twenty Miles thereof as aforesaid, or such who from the said 23 of May, have
been, or hereafter shall be authorized by both Houses of Parliament, or who are
now actually Compounding at Goldsmiths-hall, and since the 23 of May have been,
or shall be hereafter permitted by the Committee of Lords and Commons for
Compositions, there to continue within the said late Lines of Communication,
only for so long time as shall be thought necessary by them for settling the
Fine and payment, and securing of the Money upon the said Composition; Provided
that those who have their habitations out of the said Lines, and within the
Twenty miles aforesaid, shall not continue within the said Lines of
Communication, unless they have particular License from both Houses of
Parliament, or from the Committee at Goldsmiths-hall, renewed since the said 23
of May last for such cause as aforesaid.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That it shall be lawful for any Constable
or Officers hereunto authorized, upon suspicion, to apprehend any such
Delinquents, and secure them till they make i^ appear that they are within any
of the aforesaid Qualifications; and every such Officer for performing of his
or their duty therein, shall be saved harmless and indempnified by both Houses
of Parliament.

It is hereby further declared, That this Ordinance, and the said former
recited Ordinance of the 23 of May, 1648. are intended to extend, and do
extend to all sequestered Ministers that are sequestered for Delinquency or
Scandal; Provided also, That every such Papist and Delinquent within this
Ordinance, as shall stay within the Lines of Communication, or within Twenty
miles thereof after the Nineteenth day of this instant month of June, contrary
to this present Ordinance, and not within the Qualifications, or Licensed as
aforesaid; shall also (beside the punishment of Imprisonment, forfeit and pay
the sum of Twenty pounds; one moity thereof to be paid to the person or
persons who shall discover such offenders; and the other moity to the Treasurer
for the maimed Soldiers, for the use of the said Soldiers to be levied by
Distress, and sale of their Goods, rendering to the owner the overplus by
Warrant under the Hands and Seal of any Three of the said respective Committees
of Militia where they are apprehended; and the said Offender or Offenders shall
not be released without payment of the said Money.

Provided, That this Ordinance, or any Clause therein contained, shall not
extend to any such person or persons as have perfected their Compositions, and
sued out their Pardons under the Great Seal of England.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

YOu are hereby desired to cause the Constables in your Ward in their several
Precincts and Liberties to make diligent search, and to apprehend and secure
all such Delinquents as are Expressed in the Ordinances abovesaid: and this
search to begin at Eight of the clock this night; and the Inhabitants of the
said Ward are hereby desired and appointed to assist the Constables herein, as
need shall require. Dated at Guild hall, London, the (...) of June, 1648.

To the Deputy and Common-councell-men in the Ward of (...) who are hereby
desired to be jointly or severally present with the Constables to see this
Warrant duly executed.


