AN ACT OF THE COMMONS Assembled In PARLIAMENT, Establishing the present
Commissioners for the CUSTOMS.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his shop near
Temple Bar. 1650.

An ACT of the COMMONS assembled in Parliament.
WHereas by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, of the sixteenth of
December, One thousand six hundred forty seven, the payment of a Subsidy of
Tonnage and Poundage is ordained to be paid upon all Goods and Merchandise, to
be exported out of, or imported into this Commonwealth of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Barwick, in such sort as in the said Ordinance is
expressed, the said payments to continue from the six and twentieth of March,
One thousand six hundred forty eight inclusive, unto the six and twentieth day
of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
fifty one inclusive, As by the said Ordinance more at large appears; And
whereas the Parliament have since, That is to say, upon the four and twentieth
of April now last past, nominated and appointed Edmund Harvy, Robert
Titchborne, Mark Hildeslye, Daniell Tailor, and Edward Parks, of London
Merchants, the present Commissioners and Collectors of the Customs; It is now
enacted and declared, and be it by Authority of Parliament enacted and
declared, That the said Edmund Harvy, Robert Titchborne, Mark Hildeslye,
Daniell Tailor, and Edward Parks, the present Commissioners and Collectors of
the Customs, are and shall be Commissioners and Collectors thereof; And by
this Act, they the said Edmund Harvy, Robert Titchborne, Mark Hildeslye,
Daniell Tailor, and Edward Parks, and their Deputy and Deputies by them to be
authorized under their Hands and Seals, are enabled to collect and receive
upon account all such sum and sums of money, which from and after the one
and twentieth day of July, one thousand six hundred forty nine, shall by virtue
of the said Ordinance, or any Act or Declaration of Parliament made sithence,
be payable or paid for Customs, or Subsidies, or otherwise, for or in respect
of Goods or Merchandises exported out of, or imported into the Port of London,
and all other Ports in the Commonwealth of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Barwicke, in such sort as the duties of Tonnage and Poundage have been
formerly collected by Samuel Avery Alderman of London, and other the late
Commissioners of the customs, and in such manner as by the said Ordinance, or
other Acts, Declarations or Orders of Parliament, and Instructions as the said
late commissioners received, Or that the said Edmund Harvy, Robert Titchborn,
Mark Hildeslye, Daniel Tailor, and Edward Parks, shall hereafter receive from
Parliament, or the Committee of Parliament appointed for the Navy and Customs,
or shall be by them ordered or directed. And it is further enacted and
ordained, That the said Edmund Harvy, Robert Titchborne, Mark Hildeslye,
Daniell Tailor, and Edward Parks,, shall have the same power and authority, And
to do all act or acts, thing or things whatsoever that Samuel Avery,
Christopher Pack, Richard Bateman, Charles Lloyd, and Walter Boothby, or any
of them, or any Customer or Collector for the Port of London, or any the
Out-Ports, by Law, by any Act or ordinance of Parliament, or otherwise might
lawfully do. And it is further enacted and ordained, That the several person
and persons nominated and appointed since the three and twentieth of April now
last past, or to be nominated and appointed by Parliament, or by the Authority
thereof to keep a Checque in the Port of London, or in any other Port, Harbor,
or Creek within this Commonwealth, or to be Surveyor, Searcher, or Waiter
within the said Port of London, or in any other Port, Harbor or Creek within
this Commonwealth, shall respectively have the same power and authority: And
to do all and every Act or Acts, thing or things whatsoever, that any former
Comptroller, Surveyor, Searcher, or Waiter of the Port of London, or any other
of the said Ports of this Commonwealth, by Law, by any Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, or otherwise might have lawfully done. And it is further enacted
and ordained, That all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Constables and
other Officers; All Admirals, Vice-admirals, Captains and Commanders, or other
Officers of Ships: All Officers of the Admiralty, All Colonels, Captains, and
other Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and of the Trained Bands of the
Commonwealth, and all other persons whatsoever, be aiding and assisting to the
said Commissioners, their Deputies and Officers abovesaid, in collecting,
securing and receiving the said Customs and Duties as abovesaid, and in
suppressing all Tumults, Ryots, and other force that is or shall be had, or
made against them, and every or any of them, in the execution of this present
Act, and all other persons in their aid and assistance. And it is further
enacted and ordained, That from henceforth no Officer or Officers of the
Customs, shall take or receive from the Merchant, or any other person any
moneys by way of Fee or gratuity for any Certificate, Bill or Cocquet, or any
other thing whatsoever. And in case they or any of them shall receive any Fee
or gratuity, contrary to this act, upon proof thereof they shall forfeit their
places. And it is further provided and enacted, That the said Edmund Harvy and
the rest of the said Commissioners shall and may be removable from the said
employment, as the Parliament shall think fit and order.

Hen: Scobell, Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

