A DECLARATION OF THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Expressing
their REASONS FOR The Adnulling and Vacating of these ENSUING VOTES.

15 Januarii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration and
Votes be forthwith printed and published.

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Jan. 18. 1648.

A Declaration of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, expressing
the Reasons of these ensuing Resolutions: viz.
Die Martis, 12 Decembr. 1648.
Resolved, etc. THat the Vote of the 8 of June, 1648. for the Revoking of the
Orders of the 7 of Sept. the 9 of Sept. and the 27 of Jan. 1647. for disabling
Commissary Lionel Copley, Denzil Hollis Esquire Sir John Clotworthy, Col: Edward
Massey, Mr. Walter Long, and others, from being Members of this House, was of a
dangerous consequence, and tending to the destruction of the Justice and Peace
of this Kingdom, and is hereby Repealed.

Resolved, etc. That the Vote of 30 Junii, 1648. whereby this House did concur
with the Lords, that for opening a way toward a Treaty with his Majesty for a
safe Peace, That the Votes of the 3 of January, 1647. Forbidding all Addresses
to be made to or from the King, be taken off, was highly dishonorable to the
proceedings of Parliament, and apparently destructive to the good of the
Kingdom.

Die Mercurii, 13 Decembr. 1648.
Whereas the 17 of August, 1648. this House did concur with the Lords, That
for opening a way toward a Treaty with his Majesty for a safe and
well-grounded Peace, these Votes following should be, and were revoked, and
taken off (viz)
1. Resolved, That the Lords and Commons do Declare, That they will make no
further Addresses or Application to the King.

2. Resolved, By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That no
Application or Address be made to the King, by any person whatsoever, without
the leave of both Houses.

3. Resolved, By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the person
or persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalty of
high Treafon.

Resolved, That the Lords and Commons do Declare, That they will receive no
more any Message from the King; and do enjoin, That no person whatsoever do
presume to receive; or bring any Message from the King to both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, or to any other person.

Resolved, etc. That that Vote for Revocation of the said Votes, was highly
dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently destructive to
the good of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That the Vote of 28 Julii, 1648. That a Treats be had in the
Isle of Wight with the King in Person, by a Committee appointed by both Houses,
upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court, was highly
dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently destructive to
the good of the Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That the several Votes of 10 November, 1648. concerning the
banishment of George Lord Goring, the Earl of Holland, the Lord Capel, Sir
Henry Lingen, Henry Hastings Esquire now called the Lord Loughbrough, Major General
Rowland Laughorn, and Sir John Owen, are destructive to the Peace and quiet of
the Kingdom, and derogatory to the Justice of the Kingdom, and are hereby
revoked and made Null.

Resolved, etc. That the Vote of the 10 of November, 1648. That James Earl of
Cambridge be fined the sum of 100000 l. and that he be kept close Prisoner,
until he make payment of the said fine, be and is hereby revoked, and he left
to Justice.

Resolved, etc. That the Vote of the 2 of August, 1648. That the Commissioners
intended to be sent unto his Majesty to Treat with him, shall have power to
Treat with his Majesty in the Isle of Wight, upon such Propositions as shall be
offered by him, was destructive to the Peace of the Kingdom, and is hereby
repealed and made Null and void.

Resolved, etc. That the Vote of 5 Decembr. 1648. That the Answers of the King
to the Propositions of both Houses, are a ground for the House to proceed upon
for the settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom, is highly dishonorable to the
Parliament, and destructive to the Peace of the Kingdom, and tending to the
breach of the Public Faith of the Kingdom.

The Declaration upon the precedent Votes.
THe greatest service which a Parliament can do to a King, is to let Him
understand the disorders of His, State, that by wisdom they may be amended: For
as every disease ends, either by death or curing; so do disorders (which are
the diseases of a State) either end with the Subversion of that State, or else
by a Universal Reformation.

Upon serious consideration whereof, and to exonerate the people of this Land
from the sundry exorbitant Oppressions, daily multiplied upon them, which
threatened the ruin of many private Families, and the public desolation of the
Kingdom; We the Commons of England, in this present Parliament assembled,
Having with much faithfulness and affection to the public Good of this Realm,
labored for these eight years last past, with many great fears and dangers;
undergone many difficulties and calamities, and suppressed many distempers and
disorders, in opposition to a Malignant Party in this Kingdom; who would have
unslaved the bodies and souls of the people of this Nation, by the bringing in
of Popery, and seeing up of Tyranny: Both which we have so amply manifested to
the whole world, in our former Declarations, as we judge it needless here again
to repeat. Yet we cannot be so injurious to Truth, as not to remember how for
the Redress of which Abuses, and for bringing the contrivers thereof to condign
punishment, We did often make our just complaints to the King; First, by many
humble Petitions, then by Remonstrances and Declarations: Which not taking any
effect, but justice being still denied us, the main obstructions whereof did
constantly flow from the Kings immediate Design, Which diverse ways will most
evidently appear, if we do but call to remembrance, how he did not only require
the English Army raised by his Command, in opposition of the Scots, to march up
against the Parliament and the City of London, but practiced with the same
Scottish Army it self to do the same; offering to corrupt them, by the donation
of the four Northern Counties, and the Plunder of the City of London. In the
second place, how suddenly and unexpectedly he went into Scotland,
notwithstanding our earnest Endeavors and Desires to the contary. Thirdly, how
he countenanced, if not contrived and authorized that horrid Rebellion in
Ireland, wherein were murdered in the Province of Ulster only (not to speak
of the rest of that Kindgdom) and that in the space of eight weeks only, above
One hundred and forty thousand Protestants, by so many varieties of cruel
deaths, as all the first ten Persecutions against the Primitive Christians
could never parallel. And lastly, his withdrawing from the Parliament, and
setting up of his Standard against it, The like never before practiced by the
worst of our Kings; by which means the Regal Power (which was intended for the
Weal and Defense of the people) being hereby turned against them, rendering
thereby Ireland (the purchase of our Ancestors) in apparent hazard of being
utterly lost, our Trade by Sea and Land to be decayed, our Estates to be
wasted, and some hundreds of thousands of our Nation slaughtered and massacred.

We hereupon despairing of any good return of Justice from the King, did appeal
unto the great God of Heaven and Earth for the same; who after four years Wars,
did give a clear and apparent sentence on our side, by delivering into our
hands all the Castles, Towns, and Persons of our Opposites, even of the King
himself, or forcing them to fly the Land, and in Foreign parts to remain as
Exiles.

And whereas it pleased God by these his mercies, to put us into such a
condition of power, that if we did not make England the happiest Nation in the
world; not only this present Age, but all Posterity would judge, that either
we wanted wisdom to do it, or will to effect it. Yet here again we were
encountered with unexpected difficulties, by the apparent defection of some of
our own Members, who (not regarding the glory of God, nor good of the
Commonwealth, but being carried away by base avarice, and wicked ambition) did
labor the bringing in of the King again, with all his faults, without the least
repentance or acknowledgment of his former Transgressions either against God,
or his People.

And having to that purpose by many subtilties of theirs, improved their Party
amongst us, to a considerable number, they endeavored to do that by fraud,
which by open force of Arms our greatest Enemies had so often failed in.

To which and, finding that nothing but the Army could obstruct their design,
it whom they had observed more then a bare mercenary Spirit, as having by the
extraordinary blessing of God finished the War in so short a time after their
undertaking of it; Manifesting thereby, That their affections to the public,
exceeded that of their particular employment, doing so much service in a few
months for the Parliament, as if they had plotted to have made themselves
incapable of serving them any longer.

Whereupon they first attempted, to send the greatest part of it into Ireland;
the Scottish Army being at the same time possessed of the four Northern
Counties, the Person of the King Himself being also in their power; the two
Keys of this Kingdom, Barwick and Carlisle, in their hands; besides, the Town of
Newcastle (being the main and most necessary support of London, and the
Southern parts for firing) wholly at their devotion. All which signified
nothing else, then that we should abandon those of our own Blood and Country
(who had faithfully and religiously served us) to cast our selves into the
protection of a Foreign Nation, who had besides a Foreign Interest.

But failing in this their first attempt, in the second place (after the going
home of the Scots) they labored to break this Army by Disbanding it, which
otherwise (as they feared) would have broken their Designs.

But that not succeeding, their next work was to raise the City of London in
actual arms against it: Wherein being likewise disappointed of their
expectations, some of them for the same being charged by us with High Treason,
and other High Crimes and Misdemeanors; most of them so charged, having left
the Land, and some others for the same being imprisoned: The King in the mean
time showing no manner of contrition, or giving the least hopes of any good
accommodation, after seven Addresses made unto him in vain.

We thereupon judging it not fit, that the obstinacy of any one man (how great
soever) should ruin so many thousand good people of this Kingdom, did Vote, no
further Addresses to be made unto Him (as being a Person incapable of any
further Trust:) But did declare, That we would settle the present Government,
in such a way, as might best stand with the Peace and Happiness of this Kingdom.

And which we had long since (by Gods assistance) happily effected; had not a
Malignant Party amongst the Seamen, the like in the Counties of Essex, Surrey,
Sussex, and the City of London; many of which have since been in actual Arms
against us, by their pressing and urgent Petitioning of the Parliament for a
Personal Treaty with the King at London, and to disband the Army; thereby
diverted, and frustrated, our earnest and hearty desires.

Which Petitions of theirs, though most of them delivered in a tumultuous
manner; and all of them, in such a way, as if they were resolved to admit of no
denial; yet were so countenanced by a disaffected number amongst us (who in all
probability did correspond with them in their Engagements) as some of the
Petitioners had thanks given them, after they had manifestly broken the
Privileges of Parliament. Besides, the Matter being so repugnant to all
Reason, that the granting of it, as the case then stood ( Wales being in some
measure revolted, the Scots hourly expected to come in, Kent and Essex in arms,
and a very considerable part of the Navy abandoning of their Trust) had been at
one stroke to undo all that ever God had done for the Parliament, and to render
all his Mercies vain and fruitless.

And that we might be the more diverted from settling the Peace of this
distracted Kingdom, the said persons (taking advantage of the sundry
engagements the Army was then employed about, and that at once, in diverse
remote parts of the Realm; and of the absence of sundry well-affected Members,
acting in their several respective Counties, for the quenching of that flame,
which these persons in all likelihood by their artifices had kindled, did by
the subtilty of many terrifying Arguments, and threatening Petitions (making the
world believe, as if there was an impossibility to settle the Peace of the
Kingdom without the King) not only recall those Votes of Non Addresses to the
King (made upon such and so many Reasons of great weight and high concernment
for the good of the people, as unto the least of which they never gave any
Answer) but did likewise recall such Members of this House, as stood charged (as
aforesaid) with high Treason, and other high Crimes, without Answering or
giving any satisfaction to the least part of their Charge.

And notwithstanding that God by the setlement of Wales, the miraculous and
speedy reducing of Kent, the defeat of the Earl of Holland, the containing of
the major part of the City of London in their due obedience, the confusions
arising in the Revolted Navy, the Rendering of Colchester; and lastly, the most
incomparable Defeat of Duke Hamilton and his Army, did manifest to Earth, that
Heaven was opposite and displeased with those their Councels, and that once
more God from above, had given sentence for the Parliament against the King.

Yet these Members (as if they would resist the will of Heaven, and in despite
of God himself, bring the King home with Honor, Safety and Freedom) did
notwithstanding proceed to make such Propositions to the King at the Isle of
Wight, for a safe and well-grounded Peace; as if they had been granted and kept
(of which there was no probability) would but have returned the people again to
their former slavery; forasmuch as by these Propositions neither this
Parliament, nor any succeeding one, was put into a capacity of ever being able
to make any good Laws, the King being still suffered to continue his Negative
Vote, so long opposed, and so strongly Voted and Declared against by this
Parliament, thereby leaving still in his power a check to any just Desire of
the people.

Which Personal Treaty thus carried on, without any one previous Proposition
for the honor of the Treators, or security of the things treated for (both
which were once thought necessary by those very men, who now gave way to this)
as it could not choose but abundantly satisfy and delight the disaffected party
of the Kingdom; so the good and honest minded people thereof (who had ventured
their lives and fortunes with us in the common cause) did apprehend it with
much horror, even trembling to consider, That whereas they expected a happy
Peace should have been the price of their blood, and the reward of their
labors, a peace thus concluded, would have proved but the beginning of their
future miseries; and did not stick to complain, That hereby we had left them in
a far worse estate, after all their Victories, then when they undertook the
Wars with us in our lowest condition.

Which we cannot condemn them for, when we remember withal, That this Treaty
was entertained upon such Propositions, as the King himself also should make;
which was formerly held to be so destructive to any well settled peace, as
neither the Houses of Parliament, nor the Commissioners for the Kingdom of
Scotland, did think it fitting to admit, when he was in his greatest height of
power.

Neither can we believe, That any Agreement we could have made with the King in
the Isle of Wight (in the condition he was then in) would ever have been
observed, either by himself, or any of his Party. For setting aside the bare
name of Honor, Safety and Freedom, which the Treaty did pretend unto, neither
the King, nor any of his, did ever hold him in any other condition then that of
a Prisoner.

For clearing whereof, besides that in His Message sent to both Houses, October
2. He proposes to have liberty to come to Westminster, and to be restored to a
condition of absolute Freedom and Safety; which can import no other, then that
he judged himself at that present (being in the time of Treaty) to be deprived
of both. And His Letters to a prime Magistrate of the City of London declare,
That he held himself at that time as great a prisoner as ever. And the Prince
in his Declaration made at Goree, says plainly, That the King in truth is
still in prison; and invites the Earl of Warwick to join with him to rescue his
Father from his unworthy imprisonment.

And since enforced Oaths are (in many men's judgments) not necessary to be
kept, what assurance could we have, That He (who so often had failed of his
promises made to us, when he was free, and at his own disposal) would make that
good to us, when he came to be re-established in His Royal Power, which he had
obliged himself to do, when he was in durance, and a prisoner.

And since hardly any example can be produced, either Foreign, or Domestic,
of any Prince once engaged in a War with His Subjects, that ever kept any
Agreement which he made with them, longer then mere necessity did compel him
thereto: The examples whereof to the contrary, are so many and so manifest; and
the late bloody violation of the Peace betwixt the Crown of Spain, and those of
Naples, is so fresh in our memories, as we cannot expect any Propositions
agreed upon at the Isle of Wight, should bind the King more, then the
Fundamental Laws, and Coronation Oath; besides, his often Protestations, and
Engagements in the Name of a King, and of a Gentleman, which He has so often
violated.

And if we had disbanded our Army, is there any thing more probable upon earth,
then that the King would have raised another: Which if he should have done, and
we not endeavored to do the like, what were that neglect, but an apparent
betraying of our Cause and Trust? Giving up that without a stroke, which we had
acquired and made good by so many victories. And if we should have taken up
Arms, what were it, but putting of the Realm again into a new Combustion?
Wherein, whether God would bless us as before, since we made no better use of
his former mercies, as it is only in his Divine Wisdom to determine, so it
would be little humane providence or policy in us (if it be not a bold
temptation of God) to put it any more to the trial.

And notwithstanding, that it pleased God so to harden the Kings heart, that he
would not abolish Episcopacy, but only suspend it; and consented, that the
Bishops Lands should be let for a long term only, the old Rents being still
reserved for their maintenance; whereas we had sold the said Lands outright,
and the old Rents were all that many had bought of the Bishops Estates; yet so
willing were these men to comply with the King, as they were not only
contented that the Buyers (who adventured upon the Public Faith of the
Parliament) should be defrauded of their Bargains (some of them wholly, all of
them in part) but that Episcopacy it self, which they had Covenanted to
extirpate, should yet remain in the root; and a more then probable conjecture,
that it might recover it self again.

And whereas the King would not consent to the capital punishment of any one
Delinquent (there being only one offered unto him, namely, David Jenkins (the
rest being beyond the Seas, and out of our Power) yet contrary to their
Covenant, and contrary to the main (if not only) end, of making this War
(which was to bring Delinquents to condign punishment,) they did in this also
acquiesce in the Kings Answer.

Which in plain terms was to decline the cause of the people, and to assert
that of the Kings; betraying thereby our own Cause, and justifying His, making
that good by this only action, which our greatest adversaries have ever
constantly upbraided us withal; which was, That we had no Justice on our side,
because we durst never bring any of them to judgment.

Which Actions of theirs, being apparently contrary to all that which the
Parliament had from the beginning of their troubles held out to the People, and
which were the only Motives to induce them to undertake this War; So as by
this means Episcopacy remaining still in the Root, wanting only a little
warmth of fair weather, to make it bud forth again; and in the interim no care
taken at all for the constant settlement of Religion: And on the other side,
for want of justice upon the Capital Offenders, all good men discouraged, and
even repenting that they had ever undertaken the Cause; which would have been
by this Agreement so vilely and unequally stated, as if the Kings party should
be an hundred times beaten, they must be an hundred times indempnified: But on
the other side, if the Parliaments Party should happen to be at the loss but
once, all the godly people in the Land should have been destroyed for the
present, and the very cause of Liberty and Religion it self endangered to be
lost irrecoverably for the future.

And whereas God having so eminently owned this Cause, that the Enemy could
never prevail against it, either by open force of Arms, or any secret
machination of their own devising: Hereby, through the treachery of some, unto
whose Trust the defense thereof was committed, the Cause should not only at
this time be utterly lost, but all Posterity for ever discouraged to take up
Arms, or join with a Parliament again; Against whom if for the King any should
get the Victory, all Honors, Profits, and worldly Felicities, would
consequently offer themselves to be the reward of their labors; and if they
should happen to be overcome, there would be no Tribunal on Earth, whereby to
punish them, or call them to account for their Actions.

Wherefore, unless we should deny the goodness of our Cause, which God has
adjudged on our side, by the gracious blessings of so many signal Victories;
Unless we should betray our Friends, who have engaged with us upon our Votes of
Non-Addresses, to the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes; Unless we should
value this one Man, the King, above so many Millions of people, whom we
represent; and prefer his Honor, Safety, and Freedom, before the Honor, Safety,
and Freedom of the whole Nation; Unless we should scorn and contemn any Peace,
which the great God of Heaven and Earth (our assured help in our greatest
distresses) has given us; and that we must rely only upon such a Peace,
which the King (a mortal Man, and our implacable Enemy) shall allow us; Unless
we should give our selves up to the slaughter, and suffer our own Members to
undermine the Parliament and the Kingdoms Cause; Unless we should stake All
which we have, to the Kings Nothing, and Treat with him, who has not any thing
to give us; and after God has put us in Possession of All, and more then we
asked, then we must Treat with the King, whether we shall have it or no.
Lastly, Unless we should value the blood of so many Innocents, and the Army of
so many Martyrs, who have dyed in this Cause, less then the blood of a few
guilty persons, by what Name or Title soever styled, We could do no less then
repeal those Votes before specified, as being highly repugnant to the glory of
God, greatly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament, and apparently
destructive to the good of this Kingdom.

Yet we are resolved (by Gods assistance) and that speedily, so to settle the
Peace of the Kingdom by the authority of Parliament, in a more happy way, then
can be expected from the best of Kings.

FINIS.

