AN ACT OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, TOUCHING The Regulating of the
Officers OF THE Navy and Customs.

Die Martis, 16 Januarii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Act entitled, An Act
of the Commons assembled in Parliament, touching the Regulating of the Officers
of the Navy and Customs, be forthwith printed and published:

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Jan. 18. 1648.

Die Martis, 16 Januarii, 1648.
An Act of the Commons assembled in Parliament, touching the Regulating of the
Officers of the Navy and Customs.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious consideration
the manifold Distempers of the Navy, and the great decay of Customs, occasioned
by evil, malignant, unfaithful and supernumerary Officers, employed both by Sea
and Land, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth, Do Enact and Ordain, and
be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of Parliament, That all Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Surveyors, Wayters, Collectors, or any other person or
persons, that at the time of making this Act and Ordinance, or that hereafter
shall hold any office or other place of Trust in the Custom-house of London, or
in the Custom-house in any other Port, Creek or Place within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick; All Officers of the Ordnance,
or Stores, or Provisions belonging to the Stores, Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition
belonging to the Commonwealth; All Commissioners, Victuallers of the Navy, and
other Officers in or belonging to the Victualling-office of or for the Navy of
this Kingdom; All Captains, Masters, Boatswains, Gunners, Pursers, Ship
carpenters, or any other Officer or Commander, belonging to any Ship or Vessel
belonging to the Commonwealth; All Officers or other persons that have any
office or place of Trust in any public Yard, Dock or Wharf, or other place
belonging to, or concerning the Navy of this Kingdom; All persons that do or
shall hold any command, either by Sea or Land, in any Ship, Storehouse or Dock
belonging to the Commonwealth, or the Navy of this Kingdom; All Masters and
officers of the Trinity-house, that has voluntarily aided or assisted the King
with moneys, Arms, Plate, Victual or otherwise, either by Sea or Land, since
the year of our Lord 1641. in the former or latter Wars against the Parliament;
or that since the first of March, in the year of our Lord 1647. has contrived,
promoted or abetted any of the Petitions or Engagements for the Kings coming to
London; or that raised or abetted any Tumult against the Parliament since the
24 of July, 1647. within the cities of London or Westminster, or Liberties
thereof, or within the counties of Surrey, Kent, Essex, Middlesex, Hertford,
Cambridge or Sussex; or that were counselling, ayding, assisting, abetting to
the Revolt of any the Ships employed in the service of the Commonwealth, since
the first of June, 1648. or that has or shall imbezle, or secretly convey, or
steal away any Arms, Powder, Cables, Victual, Timber, or other Stores belonging
to the Navy of this Kingdom; or that have taken any Reward or Gift of any
Merchant, or other person or persons, of, for or concerning the Customs, other
then the Fees due and accustomed, That then all and every the Officers and
persons abovenamed, from and after the first day of February next ensuing,
shall be, and are hereby Declared, and made incapable and disinabled to hold
any office or place abovesaid, and his former Office or Place of Trust, as
abovesaid, to be void and forfeit to all intents and purposes. And the
Commissioners hereafter named, or any five or more of them, shall and may
nominate and appoint other six and able persons in the room and place of such
Officers and persons so disinabled as abovesaid; and the persons so named and
appointed by them, to certify to the Committee of the Navy: But in case the
said Offices, or any of them be not necessary and useful to be continued, but
shall be found superfluous and unuseful, that then the said Commissioners, or
any five of them, shall have power to make void and discontinue the said place,
for the saving of unnecessary charge to the State, and trouble unto Merchants,
and carrying on the service to the best advantage: And if any person or persons
whatsoever, being made incapable as abovesaid, shall yet continue and occupy
such place, and not avoid the same, That then the said person so offending,
upon due proof made thereof, and his conviction thereupon, shall forfeit the
sum of Two hundred pounds for the first day, and Ten pounds per diem for every
day after that he or they shall continue in the said place or places. And if
any person or persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the said sum within
fourteen days after due proof made of their incapacity as abovesaid, that then
the Estate of every such person shall be Sequestered until the Fine be paid;
the one moiety within one Month after conviction as abovesaid, to the
Discoverer, the other moiety shall within the like space of time be paid in to
the Treasurer for the Navy, for the time being, to be disposed of for the use
and service of the Navy. And to the intent that this Or^inance may speedily and
impartially be put in execution, The said Commons in Parliament assembled do
Ordain and Appoint, and be it by Authority of Parliament Ordained and
Appointed, That Alderman Thomas Andrews, Mr. William Barkley, Mr. Maurice
Thomson, Mr. Richard Shute, Col: William Willoughby, Mr. William Pennoyer, Mr.
Samuel Pennoyer, Mr. Stephen Estwick, Mr. John Holland, Mr. John Langley, Mr.
Richard Hill, Major Robert Thomson, Mr. James Russel, Mr. Samuel Moyer, Mr.
Jonathan Andrews, and Mr. Richard Hutchinson, who together with the
Commissioners of the Navy for the time being, sitting in Mincing-Lane London,
or any five or more of them, except such of them as are disinabled by the Act
as abovesaid, shall be, and are hereby Declared Commissioners; and have full
power, and are hereby required and authorized to put this present Act and
Ordinance in execution; and have power to send for the Officers and persons
abovenamed, or any other person or persons as they shall judge necessary, as
Witnesses or otherwise, and to minister and give an Oath to all such the
persons, other then the persons offending in such cases respectively, wherein
they are or shall be accused before them. And in case any person or persons
summoned to appear before them, or any five of them as abovesaid, shall neglect
or refuse to appear before them, the sai^ Commissioners, or any five or more of
them, shall have power to send for such the persons in safe custody; and all
Sheriffs, Majors, Justices, and other Officers, are hereby required to be
ayding and assisting to them, and such persons as are by them employed as
abovesaid. And it is further Declared, Enacted and Ordained by authority
aforesaid, That all persons so to be named by the said Commissioners to the
Committee abovesaid, shall and may forthwith execute such places to them
appointed, until the same be otherwise ordered and directed by the said Commons
assembled in Parliament, or otherwise by the Committee of the Navy, for some
disability or offense in the party so placed as abovesaid, that shall be proved
or made known to the said Committee of the Navy. And to the intent that the
stock of the Navy may be improved to the utmost benefit for the guard of the
Seas, It is further Ordered, That the persons abovenamed, or any five of them,
shall have power from time to time, to require of any person employed in any of
the Officers aforesaid, an exact and true Inventory of all the provisions
belonging to the Navy in their hands, and to send for and examine their Books
of Account, that they may be enabled by these or any other the like good ways,
to inform themselves of the behavior, fidelity and usefulness of the Officers
employed in this service. And for the better Regulating of the Customs and
Officers thereof throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick, the said Committee, or any five of them, shall and may have the
like full power to call before them, and to take the like account and
examination of all and every Officer and Officers belonging to the several
Custom-houses aforesaid. And it is further Enacted and Ordained, That the said
Commissioners, or any five of them, shall have power to examine what Places,
Officer or Officers are unuseful, unnecessary in the Navy or Customs, or in the
office of Victualling and Ordnance, and make void the said offices and places;
and no Officer or person shall thenceforth use or occupy the said office or
place, for the easing of the charge of the State: But for such Officers as
shall be thought fit to be continued, The said Commissioners, or any Five of
them, are to settle and establish such a competent increase of Sallaries, as
may be answerable unto the pains to be taken, for their maintenance, and
whereby they may not be necessitated, nor receive any Bribe or Fee of the
Merchant, or use any other indirect ways to the prejudice of the State; and
their whole Sallaries to be presented unto the House of Commons, or the
Committee of the Navy for their allowance and approbation. And it is further
Enacted and Ordained, That from and after the same day of February next, no
Officer or Officers shall take or receive from the Merchant, or any other
person, any moneys by way of Fee or Gratuity, for any Certificate, Bill or
Cocket, or other thing whatsoever; And in case they or any of them shall
receive any Fee or Gratuity, contrary to this Act, upon proof as aforesaid,
they shall forfeit their places, and incur other penalties aforementioned. And
be it Enacted and Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said Committee
herein nominated, and all persons acting for or under them by their direction,
shall from time to time receive at the hands of the Treasurer for the Navy, all
such expenses and disbursments as shall be by them issued forth in this
service; And that the Committee for the Navy appointed Members of this House,
shall issue forth their Orders and Warrants for the payment of the same
accordingly. And lastly be it Enacted and Ordained, That the said Committee of
Merchants shall from time to time have power to present to the Lord Admiral or
Committee for the Navy, such Ships as they shall find necessary to be employed
for Convoy of Merchants Ships out and home, for advancement of Trade, and
benefit of the Commonwealth.

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

