The Declaration agreed upon by the Committee of the House of Commons appointed
to sit in the Guildhall in London, to consider of the safety of the Kingdom,
and of the City of London. And of the preserving the Privileges of Parliament.
Master Wild Sergeant at Law, sitting in the Chair of that Committee. 6. Jan.
1641.
WHereas the Chambers* Studies, and Truncks of M. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerige,
M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, Members of the House of Commons, upon Monday
the 3. of this instant January, by color of His Majesty's Warrant have been
sealed up by Sir William Kilegrey, and Sir William Flemen and others; which is
not only against the Privilege of Parliament, but the common Liberty of every
Subject: Which said Members afterward, the same day were under the like
color, by Sergeant Frances, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary
to all former Presidents and Privileges of Parliaments demanded of the
Speaker, sitting in the House of Commons to be delivered unto him, that he
might Arrest them of High Treason: And whereas afterward the next day His
Majesty in His Royal Person came to the said House attended with a great
multitude of men armed in warlike manner, with Halberts, Swords, and Pistolls,
who came up to the very door of the house, and placed themselves there, and in
other places and passages near to the said house, to the great terror and
disturbance of the Members thereof, then sitting, and according to their duty,
in a peaceable and orderly manner, treating of the great Affairs of England and
Ireland: And his Majesty having placed himself in the Speakers Chair, demanded
of them the Persons of the said Members to be delivered unto him, which is a
high Breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and inconsistent with
the Liberties, and Freedom thereof. And whereas afterward his Majesty did
issue forth several Warrants to diverse Officers, under his own hand, for the
apprehension of the Persons of the said Members, which by Law he cannot do,
there being not all this time, any Legal charge or Accusation, or due
Processes of Law issued against them, nor any pretense of charge made known to
that house; all which are against the Fundamental Liberties of the Subject,
and the Rights of Parliament. Whereupon we are necessitated, according to our
duty, to declare, That if any Person shall arrest M. Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerige, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, or any of them, or any other
Member of Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant issuing out from the
King only, is guilty of the Breach of the Liberties of the Subject, and of the
Privilege of Parliament, and a public enemy to the Commonwealth. And that
the Arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or of any other Member of
Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a Legal proceeding against
them, and without consent of that house, whereof such Person is a Member, is
against the Liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of Privilege of Parliament;
And the Person which shall Arrest any of these Persons, or any other Member of
the Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the Commonwealth.

Notwithstanding all which we think fit further to declare, that we are so
far from any endeavor to protect any of our Members, that shall be in due
manner prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament for Treason, or any other misdemeanor, That none
shall be more ready and willing then we our selves, to bring them to their
speedy, and due trial, Being sensible that it equally imports us, as well to
see Justice done against them that are criminous, as to defend the just Rights
and Liberties of the Subjects, and Parliament of England.

This is the true Copy which was sent from the Committee, to Joseph Hunscott
for to print.


