The 21. of August. 1643.
WHereas the Committee for the Militia in the City of London by virtue of an
Ordinance of both-houses of Parliament, Dated the seventeenth day of this
instant month of August, have power to command the shutting up of all shops
within the lines of Communication to the end the Inhabitants thereof may the
better fit themselves for the defense of the said City and parts adjacent, and
forasmuch as the said Committee have been moved, as well by a Committee of
Lords and Commons in Parliament, as from his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to
send forth of this City some speedy aid for the relieving of the City of
Gloucester, now in great distress by reason of the enemies Army, wherewith they
are besieged: And the said Committee conceiving that the City of London and
parts adjacent cannot be long in safety, if that City be lost, they have
thereupon resolved forthwith to send out a Force both of Horse and Foot, for
the relief of the said City of Gloucester. And for the better furtherance of
that service, the said Committee of the Militia, do hereby require all persons
inhabiting within the Lines of Communication, immediately to shut up their
shops, and to continue them so shut up until Gloucester be relieved, or until
further order shall be given by both Houses of Parliament, or this Committee,
and to apply themselves to the furthering of this so necessary a service, and
the Officers of the Regiments of Trained Bands and Auxilliary Forces, which by
lot are appointed to go in this Expedition, are required to return to the
said Committee, as well the names of such persons of the said Regiments, as
shall neither March with the rest, nor appoint other sufficient men to go in
their room, and of such as shall in any sort hinder this Expedition, to the
end such course may be taken with them; as this discovery of their ill
affection to the safety of this City and parts adjacent deserves, as also the
names of such Volunteers not Listed in the said Regiments, as shall go in this
Expedition; to the end they may receive the like pay which the rest do, and
also be taken notice of as persons well affected to the City, Parliament, and
Kingdom.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes. 1643.


