
WHereas Information is given to the Parliament, That John Mordant Esquire son to
the late Earl of Peterborough, Col. Edward Massey, commonly called Major
General Massey, Charles Stuart, commonly called the Earl of Leichfield, Sir
Thomas Leventhorp Knight, William Compton Esquire son to the late Earl of
Northampton, Thomas Fanshaw, son of Sir Thomas Fanshaw Knight, and Richard
Brown Citizen of London, commonly called Major General Brown, stand Charged
with several Treasonable Designs and Practices against the Commonwealth, and
that some of them have of late been seen to be joined with a Body of Horse in
Arms and Rebellion against the Parliament; And all and every of them stand
violently suspected to be Engaged in the same Treasonable Design with Sir
George Booth Knight, lately in Arms against the same:

And whereas the persons above named, and every of them, have of late absented,
and do still absent themselves from their respective Dwellings and Places of
Habitation, and no account can or will be given by their or any of their
respective relations, where they or any of them are; The Parliament have
thereupon thought fit to Declare and Command, and by this their Public
Proclamation do Declare and Command, That they and every of them upon or before
the Seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord God One thousand six
hundred fifty and nine, do render themselves to the Parliament or Council of
State; to which, if they and every of them do not conform and submit unto, then
he or they respectively making default therein, shall be accounted and taken as
guilty of the said Crimes they stand respectively Charged with, and shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken as Engaged with the said Sir George Booth in his
Rebellion and Treasonable Design as aforesaid: And their respective Estates
shall be, and are hereby Declared to be Forfeited and Confiscate to the use of
the Commonwealth. And they do further Command all Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs, Mayors, Constables and all other Officers, Civil or Military, and all
other the People of this Commonwealth, to use their utmost care and diligence
for the apprehending of the persons abovesaid, and every of them; and after the
apprehending of them or any of them, to bring or cause to be brought, him or
them so apprehended, to the Council of State.

And for Encouragement therein, the Parliament does Declare, That whosoever
shall apprehend them or any of them, and bring them to the Council of State as
aforesaid, for every one of them so apprehended, shall have the sum of One
hundred pounds of lawful Money.

And to the end that no person or persons whatsoever may pretend ignorance of
the danger that shall or may fall on them who shall Harbor, Entertain or
Conceal any of the persons above named, hereby Commanded to render themselves;
the Parliament do therefore hereby Declare, That the Laws and Statutes
heretofore made and provided against persons that do Entertain, Comfort, Harbor
or Conceal persons Convicted of High Treason, shall be put in Execution against
all and every person and persons whatsoever, who shall Entertain, Comfort,
Harbor or Conceal the persons above named, or any of them.

Given at Westminster the Third day of September, in the year of our Lord 1659.
Saturday, September 3. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and
Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by JOHN ^ELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold at
the seven Stars in F^^^^^^, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.


