A DECLARATION OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Concerning the
JURISDICTION OF THE Admiralty.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
1648.

Die Sabbathi, 23 September. 1648.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament, entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, for settling the Jurisdiction of the Court
of Admiralty, dated the 12 of April, 1648. It is Ordered and Ordained, That all
Causes which concern the repairing, victualling and furnishing provisions for
the setting of Ships or Vessels to Sea; and all Causes of Bottomrey, and
likewise all Causes of Contracts made beyond the Seas, concerning Shipping or
Navigation, or Damages happening thereon, or other Damages arising at Sea in
any Voyage; and likewise all Causes of Charter, Parties or Contracts for
Freight, Bills of Lading, Mariners wages, or Damages in Goods Laden aboard
Ships, or other Damages done by one Ship or Vessel to another, or by Anchors,
or want of laying of Buoys, be within the Cognizance and Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty Court; and that the said Court may proceed therein, according to the
power and directions in the said Ordinance given. Now whereas there is a
Question made, Whether the Causes now lying under prohibitions still
undetermined, notwithstanding they are of the same nature with these aforesaid,
and comprehended in the said Ordinance, shall be proceeded in, and finally
determined by the Judges of the Admiralty, or Judges Delegates, according to
the true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance, as well as those Causes
which are and shall be begun since the date of the said Ordinance; It is
Ordered and Declared by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That all Causes
which have now long lain under prohibitions, by reason of the unsettlement of
that Jurisdiction, be proceeded in, and finally determined, and the Decrees and
Sentences put in execution, according to the directions given in the said
Ordinance, and true meaning and intent thereof, as well as those that are or
shall be begun since the making of the same: And that the Judges of the
Admiralty appointed in the said late Ordinance; And likewise the Judges
Delegates nominated under the Great-Seal, or that from time to time hereafter
shall be appointed and nominated, do and may proceed therein, and finally
determine the same, and the Decrees and Sentences put in execution accordingly.
And that it is further Ordered and Declared by the Commons in Parliament
assembled, That those Causes that are or shall be begun during the three years
limited in the said Ordinance, be not molested or interrupted by prohibitions,
though not fully determined within the three years limited therein, being
comprehended as aforesaid within the said Ordinance:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl D. Com.

FINIS.

