THE CHARGE OF THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, Against Charles Stuart, King of England,
Of High Treason, and other High Crimes, exhibited to the High Court of Justice,
By John Cook Esquire, Solicitor General, appointed by the said Court, for, and
on the behalf of the People of England.

As it was read to Him by the Clerk in the said Court, as soon as Mr. Solicitor
General for the Kingdom had Impeached Him, in the name of the Commons of
England, at His first Araignment, Saturday, Ian. 20. 1648.

Examined by the Original Copy. Imprimatur,

Gilbert Mabbot.



London, Printed for Rapha Harford, at the Gilt Bible in Queens-Head-Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1648.

THE Charge of the Commons of England, against CHARLES STUART, King of England,
Of High Treason, and other High Crimes, exhibited to the High Court of Justice,
Saturday, January 20. 1648.
The Court being sat, and the Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Cook, Solicitor
General, spoke thus; My Lord, In behalf of the Commons of England, and of all
the people thereof, I do accuse Charles Stuart, here present, of High Treason,
and High Misdemeanors: And I do, in the name of the Commons of England, desire
the Charge may be read unto Him, which the Clerk then read, as follows;

THat the said CHARLES STUART, being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power, to Govern by, and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise; And by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the People, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; Yet nevertheless, out of a
wicked Design, to erect and uphold in himself an unlimited and Tyrannical
power, to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the People; Yea, to take away, and make void the foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of mis-government, which by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the
Right and Power of frequent and successive Parliaments, or National meetings
in Council; He, the said Charles Stuart, for accomplishment of such his
Designs, and for the protecting of himself and his adherents, in His and Their
wicked Practices to the same Ends, has Traitorously and maliciously levied War
against the present Parliament, and the People therein Represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and two, At Beverly, in the County of
York; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of July, in the year aforesaid, in
the County of the City of York; And upon, or about the twenty fourth day of
August, in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham (when, and
where He set up His Standard of War;) And also on, or about the twenty third
day of October, in the same year, at Edg-Hill, and Keinton field, in the County
of Warwick; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the same year,
at Brainchford, in the County of Middlesex: And upon, or about the thirtieth
day of August, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and
three, at Cavesham-bridg, near Reding, in the County of Berks; And upon, or
about the thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at, or near the
City of Gloucester; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the
year last mentioned, at Newbery, in the County of Berks; And upon, or about the
one and thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred forty and four, at Cropredy-bridg, in the County of Oxon; And upon, or
about the thirtieth day of September, in the year last mentioned, at Bodmin,
and other places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall; And upon, or about
the thirtieth day of November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbery
aforesaid; And upon, or about the eighth day of June, in the year of our Lord,
one thousand six hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester; And also,
upon the fourteenth day of the same month, in the same year, at Nasebyfield,
in the County of Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of
them, and at many other places in this Land, at several other times, within the
years aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
forty and six, He the said Charles Stuart, has caused and procured many
thousands of the free-people of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions,
Parties, and Insurrections, within this Land, by invasions from foreign parts,
endeavored and procured by Him, and by many other evil ways and means. He the
said Charles Stuart, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both
by Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned; but also has renewed, or
caused to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament, and good people of
this Nation, in this present year, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, in
the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other Counties
and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea; And particularly, He the said
Charles Stuart, has for that purpose, Given Commissions to his Son, the Prince,
and others, whereby, Besides multitudes of other persons, many such, as were by
the Parliament entrusted and employed, for the safety of the Nation; being by
Him or His Agents, corrupted; to the betraying of their Trust, and revolting
from the Parliament, have had entertainment and commission, for the continuing
and renewing of War and Hostility, against the said Parliament and People, as
aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural Wars by Him, the said Charles Stuart,
levied, continued, and renewed, as aforesaid, much Innocent blood of the
Free-people of this Nation has been spilt; many Families have been undone, the
Public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed, and miserably decayed;
vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land
spoiled, some of them even to desolation.

And for further prosecution of His said evil Designs, He, the said Charles
Stuart, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels and Revolters, both English and Forraigners; and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the behalf
of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil practices of Him, the said Charles
Stuart, have been, and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
Personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to Himself and
his Family, against the public Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and
Peace Of the People of this Nation, by, and for whom he was entrusted, as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He, the said Charles Stuart has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said Unnatural, Cruel, and
bloody Wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines,
Burnings, Spoils, Desolations, Damage and Mischief to this Nation, acted or
committed in the said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (saving on the behalf of the People of
England, the liberty of Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart; and also of replying to the Answers which the
said Charles Stuart shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or any other
Charge that shall be so Exhibited) does, for the said Treasons and Crimes, on
the behalf of the said People of England, Impeach the said Charles Stuart, as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public, and Implacable Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: And pray, That the said Charles Stuart, King of
England, may be put to answer All and Every the ^remises, That such
Proceedings, Examinations, ^ryals, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had,
or shall be agreeable to Justice.

FINIS.

