Die Jovis 24o. Iulij, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, That in regard those Soldiers
taken prisoners by Sir Thomas Fairfax, which have cheerfully listed themselves
for the Service of the Parliament against those bloody and barbarous Rebels of
Ireland, could not possibly be yet transported into that Kingdom, have for
their necessary sustenance all that charitable benevolence collected for them,
by virtue of the Order of the Commons assembled in Parliament of 27o. Junij,
1645. That upon Sunday next, being a day of Thanksgiving and great rejoicing,
for several blessings bestowed upon this Kingdom; That all the Ministers of
the several Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and Westminster,
Lines of Communication, and the Weekly Bills of Mortality, be especially
desired, both in the fore-noon and afternoon of the next Lords day, to move
effectually their respective Congregations, to contribute their Charity toward
the relief and transportation of those Soldiers, which are willing to
adventure their Lives in so pious and honorable employment. And all such
Moneys as shall be collected by the respective Officers and Churchwardens for
this Service, shall be paid over on Monday next, to Alderman Bunce, Alderman
Kenrick, and the rest of the Treasurers appointed to receive the fourscore
thousand Pounds upon the late Ordinance for Ireland. And the Committees for the
Adventurers for Ireland, sitting at Grocers-Hall, are desired to give their
best assistance for the advancing of this charitable Contribution, which shall
be issued out for the relief of the said Soldiers, in such manner as by
warrant from the Committee of Prisoners shall be from time to time directed.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


