THE Narrative and Reasons Of the Honorable House of COMMONS, Concerning the
TRIAL of the LORDS IN THE TOWER. Delivered at a CONFERENCE WITH The LORDS, May,
26th. 1679.

London, Printed in the Year, 1679.

THE Narrative and Reasons Of the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS, Concerning the
Trial of the LORDS in the Tower, etc.
THE Commons have always desired, that a good Correspondence may be preserved
between Both Houses. There is now depending between Your Lordships, and the
Commons, a Matter of the greatest Weight; In the Transaction of which, Your
Lordships seem to apprehend some Difficulty in the Matter proposed by the
Commons.

To clear this, the Commons have desired this Conference; and by it, they hope
to manifest to You Lordships, that the Propositions of the House of Commons,
made by their Committee, in Relation to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
have been only such as are well warranted by the Laws of Parliament, and
Constitution of the Government, and in no sort Entrench upon the Judicature of
the Peers: But are most necessary to be insisted upon, that the Ancient Rights
of Judicature in Parliament, may be maintained.

The Commons readily acknowledge, that the Crimes charged upon the Earl of
Powis, etc. are of deep Guilt, and call for speedy Justice: But withal, they
hold any Change in Judicature in Parliment, made without Consent in full
Parliament, to be of Pernicious Consequence both to His Majesty, and his
Subjects: And conceive themselves obliged to transmit to their Posterity, all
the Rights, which of this Kind they have Received from their Ancestors, by
putting Your Lordships in mind, of the Progress that has already been between
the Two Houses, in Relation to the Propositions made by the Commons, and the
Reasonableness of the Propositions themselves: They doubt not, to make it
appear, that their Aim has been no other than to avoid such Consequences, and
to preserve that Right; And that there is no Delay of Justice on their Part.
And to that end, do offer to Your Lordships the ensuing Reasons and Narrative,
that the Commons, in bringing the Earl of Danby to Justice, and in the
Discovery of the Execrable and Traitorous Conspiracy, (of which the Five Popish
Lords now stand Impeached; and for which, some of their Wicked Accomplices have
already undergone the Sentence of the Law, as Traitors and Murderers) have
labored under many great Difficulties, is not unknown to Your Lordships: Nor
is it less known to Your Lordships, that upon the Impeachment of the House of
Commons against the Earl of Danby for High Treason, and other High Crimes,
Misdemeanors, and Offenses, even the Common Justice, of Sequestring him from
Parliament, and forthwith Committing him to safe Custody, was then Required by
the Commons, and Denied by the House of Peers; though he then Sat in Their
House: Of which, Your Lordships have been so sensible, that at a Free
Conference the Twelfth of April, last, Your Lordships declared, That it was the
Right of the Commons, and well warranted by Presidents of former Ages; That
upon an Impeachment of the Commons, a Peer so Impeached, ought of Right to be
ordered to withdraw, and then to be Committed: And had not that Justice been
denied to the Commons, a great Part of this Session of Parliament, which has
been spent in Framing and Adjusting a Bill, for causing the Earl of Danby to
Appear, and Answer that Justice from which he was fled, had been saved; and had
been employed for the Preservation of His Majesty's Person, and the Security of
the Nation, and in Prosecuting the other five Lords. Neither had he had the
Opportunity of Procuring for himself, that Illegal Pardon, which bears Date the
First of March, last past; and which he has now Pleaded in Bar of his
Impeachment: Nor of wasting so great a Proportion of the Treasure of the
Kingdom, as he has done since the Commons Exhibited their Articles of
Impeachment against him. After which time, thus lost by reason of the Denial of
that Justice, which of Right belonged to the Commons, upon their Impeachment;
The said Bill being ready for the Royal Assent, the said Earl rendered himself;
and by Your Lordships Order of the Sixteenth of April, last, was Committed to
the Tower: After which, he pleaded the said Pardon; and being pressed, did at
length declare, That he would Rely upon, and abide by that Plea. Which Pardon
pleaded, being Illegal and Void; and so, ought not to bar or preclude the
Commons, from having Justice upon their Impeachment. They did there-upon (with
their Speaker, on the Fifth of May, Instant, in the Name of themselves, and of
all the Commons of England) demand Judgment against the said Earl, upon their
Impeachment; not doubting, but that Your Lordships did intend, in all Your
proceedings upon the Impeachments, to follow the usual Course and Method of
Parliament; but the Commons were not a little Surprised by the Message from
your Lordships, delivered them on the seventh of May, thereby Acquainting them,
that as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, had ordered the tenth of May
Instant, should be the day for hearing the Earl of Danby, to make good his Plea
of his Pardon; and that on the thirteenth of May, the other five Lords
Impeached, should be brought to their Trial; and that your Lordships had
Addressed to his Majesty for Naming of a High-Steward, as well in the Case of
the Earl of Danby, as the other five Lords; upon Consideration of the said
Message, the Commons found that the Admitting the Lords Spiritual to exercise
Jurisdiction in these Cases, was an Alteration of the Judicature in Parliament;
and which extended as well to the Proceedings against the five Lords as the
Earl of Danby; and that if a Lord High Steward should be Necessary, upon Trials
or Impeachments of the Commons, the power of Judicature in Parliament upon
Impeachments, might be Defeated by suspending or denying a Commission to
Constitute a Lord High Steward, and that the said days of Trial appointed by
your Lordships, were so near to the time of your said Message, that these
matters, and the Methods of Proceedings upon the Trials, could not be Adjusted
by Conference between the two Houses before the day so Nominated; and
Consequently the Commons could not then Proceed to Trial, unless the Zeal which
they had for speedy Judgment against the Earl of Danby, that so they might
proceed to the Trial of the other five Lords, should Induce them at this
Juncture, both to Admit an enlargment of your Lordships Jurisdisdiction, and
sit down under these or any hardships (though with the hazard of all the
Commons Power of Impeaching for the time to come) rather than the Trial of the
said five Lords should be deferred for some short time, whilst these matters
might be agreed and on settled; for Reconciling differences in these great and
weighty matters, and for saving that time which would necessarily have been
spent in debates, at Conferences between the Two Houses, and for Expediting the
Trials, without giving up the Power of Impeachments, or rendering them
ineffectual, the Commons thought fit to propose to your Lordships, that a
Committee of both Houses might be appointed for this purpose; at which
Committee, when agreed to by your Lordships, it was first proposed, that the
time of the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, should be put off till the other
matters were Adjusted; and it was then agreed, That the proposition as to the
time of Trial, should be the last thing Considered; and the Effect of this
agreement, stands reported upon your Lordships Books; after which, the Commons
Communicated to your Lordships by your Committee, a Vote of theirs, viz. That
the Committee of Commons, should Insist upon the former Vote of their House,
that the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in any proceedings against
the Lords in the Tower; and that when that matter should be settled, and the
method of proceedings Adjusted, the Commons would then be ready to proceed upon
the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby; against whom, they had before
demanded Judgment; and afterward to the Trial of the other five Lords in the
Tower: which Vote Extended as well to the Earl of Danby, as the other five
Lords: but the Commons have as yet received nothing from your Lordships toward
an Answer to that Vote; save that your Lordships have acquainted them, that the
Bishops have Asked leave of the House of Peers, that they might withdraw
themselves from the Trial of the said five Lords, with Liberty of entering their
usual protestation: And though the Commons Committee, have almost daily
declared to your Lordships Committee; that that was a necessary point of Right
to be settled, before the Trials; and offered to Debate the same, your
Committee always Answered, that they had not any Power from your Lordships,
either to Confer upon, or to Give any Answer concerning that Matter.

And yet Your Lordships, without having given the Commons any satisfactory
Answer to the said Vote, or permitting any Conference or Debate there-upon, and
contrary to the said Agreement, did on Thursday the Twenty-Fourth of May, send
a Message to the Commons, declaring, That the Lords Spiritual, as well as
Temporal, had ordered, That the Twenty-Seventh of this Instant May be appointed
for the Trial of the five Lords.

So that the Commons cannot but apprehend your Lordships have not only departed
from what was agreed on, and in Effect laid aside that Committee Constituted
for Preserving a good Understanding betwixt the two Houses, and better Dispatch
of the weighty Affairs now Depending in Parliament, but must also needs
conclude from the said Message, and from the Vote of your Lordships of the
14th. of May, That the Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay and sit in Court
till the Court proceeds to Guilty or not Guilty, and from the Bishops asking
leave (as appears by the Lords Books) two days after the said Vote that they
might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the five Lords, with Liberty of
entering their usual Protestations, and from their persisting still to go on
and give their Votes in proceeding upon the Impeachments, that their desire of
leave to withdraw at the said Trial, is only an evasive Answer to the
forementioned Vote of the Commons, and chiefly intended as an Argument for a
right of Judicature upon Proceedings upon Impeachments; and as a Reserve to
Judge upon the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon; and upon these and other like
Impeachments; although no such Power was ever Claimed by their Predecessors,
but is utterly denied by the Commons.

And the Commons are the rather Induced to believe it so intended, because the
very asking to withdraw, seems to imply aright to be there, and that, they
cannot be absent without it; because by this way they would have it in their
Power, whether or no for the Future, either in the Earl of Danby's Case or any
other, they will ever ask Leave to be Absent, and the Temporal Lords have like
Power of Denying Leave, if that shall be Admitted once necessary.

The Commons are therefore Obliged not to proceed to the Trial of the five
Lords the twenty seventh of this instant May, but to adhere to their aforesaid
Vote. And for their so doing, besides, what has been now and formerly by them
said to your Lordships, do offer you these Reasons following.

THE REASONS.
1. BEcause your Lordships have Received the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon,
with a very long and unusual Protestation; wherein he has Aspersed his Majesty
with false Suggestion, as if his Majesty had Commanded or Countenanced the
Crimes he stands Charged with: And particularly, Suppressing and Discouraging
the Discovery of the Plot; and endeavoring to Introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical way of Government: which remains as a Scandal upon Record, against
his Majesty; tending to render his Person and Government odious to his People.
Against which, it ought to be the First and Principal Care of Both Houses, to
Vindicate his Majesty, by doing Justice against the said Earl.

2. The setting up a Pardon to be a Bar of an Impeachment, defeats the whole
Use and Effects of Impeachments: And should this Point be admitted, or stand
doubted, it would totally discourage the Exhibiting any for the Future; whereby
the Chief Institution for the Preservation of the Government, (and
consequently, the Government it self) would be destroyed. And therefore, the
Case of the said Earl, which in Consequence concerns all Impeachments whatever,
ought to be determined before that of the five Lords, which is but their
particular Case, and without resorting to many Authorities of greater
Antiquity. The Commons desire your your Lordships, to take Notice (with the
same Regard they do) of the Declaration, which that Excellent Prince, King
Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, made in this behalf, in his Answer to the
Nineteenth Proposition of Both Houses of Parliament: Wherein, stating the
several Parts of this Regulated Monarchy, he says, The King, the House of
Lords, and the House of Commons, have (each) particular Privileges: And among
those which belong to the King, he reckons Power of Pardons. After the
Enumerating of which, and other his Prerogatives, his said Majesty adds thus:
Again, That the Prince may not make use of this high and perpetual Power, to
the Hurt of those for whose Good he has it; and make use of the Name of
Public Necessity, for the Gain of his private Favorites and Followers, to the
Detriment of his People; The House of Commons (an Excellent Conserver of
Liberty) is solely entrusted with the First Propositions, concerning the
Leavyes of Moneys, and the Impeaching of those, who for their own Ends, (
though Countenanced by any Surreptitiously-gotten Command of the King) have
Violated that Law, which he is bound (when he knows it) to Protect: And to the
Protection of which, they were bound to advise him; at least not to serve him
in the contrary. And the Lords, being trusted with a Judicatory Power, are an
excellent Skreen and Bank, between the Prince and People, to assist each
against any Encroachments of the other; and by just Judgment, to Preserve that
Law which ought to be the Rule of every One of the Three, etc. Therefore, the
Power legally placed in Both Houses, is more than Sufficient, to prevent and
restrain the Power of Tyranny, etc.

3. Until the Commons of England have right down them against this Plea of
Pardon, they may Justly apprehend that the whole Justice of the Kingdom, in
the Case of the Lords may be Obstructed, and defeated by pardons of like Nature.

4. An Impeachment is Virtually the voice of every particular Subject of this
Kingdom Crying out against an Oppression, by which every member of that body
is equally wounded; and it will prove a matter of ill Consequence, that the
Universality of the People should have Occasion Ministered and Continued to
them, to be Apprehensive of utmost danger from the Crown, from whence they of
right expect protection.

5. The Commons Exhibited Articles of Impeachments against the said Earl,
before any against the five other Lords, and demanded Judgment upon those
Articles; whereupon your Lordships having appointed the Trial of the said Earl,
to be before that of the other five Lords; now your Lordships having since
inverted that Order, gives a great Cause of doubt to the House of Commons, and
raises a Jealousy in the hearts of all the Commons of England; that if they
should proceed to the Trial of the five Lords in the first place, not only
Justice will be Obstructed in the Case of those Lords; but that they shall
never have right done them in the matter of this Plea of Pardon, which is of so
fatal Consequence to the whole Kingdom, and a New devise to frustrate public
Justice in Parliament.

Which Reasons and Matters being duly weighed by your Lordships, the Commons
doubt not but your Lordships will receive Sa^^^^^ction concerning their
propositions and proceedings; and will agree, that the Commons ought not, nor
can without deserting their Trust, depart from their former Vote, Communicated
to your Lordships: That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in any
proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and when that matter shall be
settled, and the Methods of proceedings Adjusted, the Commons shall then be
Ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby, (against
whom they have already demanded Judgment) and afterward to the Trial of the
other Five Lords in the Tower.

This is a true Copy carefully examined, and published to prevent abuses by
false ones.

FINIS.

