Die Mercurii, 17. Decembr. 1645. An Order of the Commons assembled in
Parliament, CONCERNING All such persons as have come in from the Kings
quarters, before the first of this instant December.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all such persons as have
come in from the Kings quarters, being Soldiers of Fortune, and submitted to
the Parliament before the First of this instant December; and also those five
Colonels and Officers that came in with Captain Pickering from Worcester,
taking the Oath in the Ordinance of the Fifth of April, 1645. and the National
League and Covenant, shall forthwith depart out of the City of London and Lines
of Communication, and give Security to appear when they shall be required, to
submit unto all Ordinances of Parliament, not to act or counsel any thing
against the Parliament; And not to return to the said City of London, or come
within the Lines of Communication without leave from this House; and shall
thereupon have Passes to go to their own habitations, or to their Friends,
within any of the Parliaments quarters being no Garrison, and to reside there:
This Security to be given to the Committee of Examinations, who are hereby
Authorized to take the same. Provided, that if any of them shall return to the
said City, or come within the Lines of Communication, without such leave as
aforesaid first obtained, then they and every of them shall be taken and
proceeded against as Spies.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet. December 18. 1645.


