From the Committee of Sequestrations, sitting at Cambden House in Maiden lane,
London.
IT is desired by the Committee for Sequestrations of the estates of Papists
and Delinquents within the Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor, That for the ease of
those who have already liberally contributed to the Parliament, and for the
better putting in execution the Ordinances for Sequestrations, the Ministers
and Lecturers of each Parish do the next Lords day (being the first of October)
give public notice in each Parish Church, That the rents and estates of all
Papists are to be sequestered by the said Ordinances, and of all such who have
voluntarily contributed any aid or assistance to the Forces raised against the
Parliament, or have gone, or shall go to any of the Kings Armies, or other
Forces raised without consent of both Houses of Parliament, and have there
continued, and shall not, within ten days after Sequestration of their
estates, show sufficient cause to the said Committee of their absence; and of
all such as shall fraudulently imbezzle, conceal, or convey away any part of
their estate, without valuable consideration, thereby preventing the payment of
any Taxes or Assessements laid upon them by any Ordinances of both Houses of
Parliament; or that, after any such Tax laid on them, convey themselves away,
whereby such Tax cannot be executed on them, or on their estates, according to
the said Ordinances: And that for the discovery of such estates so imbezzeled
and concealed, belonging to such Papists and Delinquents as aforesaid, the said
Ordinance allows twelve pence in the pound, to be paid to every person so
making discovery to the said Committee.

Dated at Cambden House aforesaid, the 28 of September. 1643. Hen. Linch, Clerk
to the said Committee.

Let this be read and published, as is desired* Isaac Pennington, Mayor.


