17. Junii, 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the
high-Constables of the several Hundreds in the counties of Berks, Buckingham,
Middlesex, and Surrey, in whose Divisions any sick and maimed Soldiers of the
Parliaments Army are or shall be quartered or Billeted, do take special care
that the said Soldiers be furnished, and supplied with Lodging and Bedding,
fitting for men in their condition: And the said high-Constables are hereby
authorized and required to send their Warrants and Precepts to the
petty-Constables of all Towns near adjoining to those Towns and Houses where
the said Soldiers are quartered, for the bringing in of Bedding, if need
require, for the use of the said Soldiers, till it shall please God to restore
them to health.

And it is further ordered, That the Committee for Sequestration of the
several counties above mentioned, out of such Bedding as by virtue of the
Ordinance of Parliament for Sequestration, shall be seized for the use of the
Commonwealth, shall deliver so much thereof as shall be needful, to the
Treasurers appointed by this House for maimed Soldiers, or to such as they
shall appoint, for the use of the said fick and wounded men: And that the
high-Constables shall take care to restore such Bedding as shall be by them
supplied, to the Owners thereof; As also, That the above mentioned Treasurers
for maimed Soldiers, do take care that the Bedding by them received from the
Committee for Sequestration, be not imbezilled, but carefully kept and
accounted for to the use and service of the Commonwealth.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


