Die Mercurii, 15 Maii, 1644.
An Order of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for the removal out of the
Cities of London and Westminster, and Line of Communication, all Recusants,
wives of Recusants, and the wives of such persons as are in Arms against the
Parliament:
Together with all suspicious persons, or such as have lately come from Oxford,
or any of the Kings quarters.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that directions
be given to the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen, Common Council, and the
Committee of the Militia, to take some special and strict course for the
removal of all suspicious Persons, all such as have lately come from Oxford,
or any other of the Kings quarters, Recusants, the wives of Recusants, and the
wives of such persons as are in Arms against the Parliament, out of the cities
of London and Westminster, the Suburbs, the Innes of court, and Chancery, and
all other places within the Line of Communication, and to take some course to
prevent the return of them, or the coming in of any other; And likewise to take
order, That all the Forces of the cities of London and Westminster, Suburbs,
and Line of communication, may be put in a posture ready to march at two hours
warning; And that they will give order, that good Watches, by faithful and
good men may be kept at all the Guards, and upon all the Avenues to the city.
The like directions mutatis mutandis to be sent to the several and respective
Committees of the several and respective counties. They are further required,
that if upon the search after suspicious persons, they shall meet with any
Soldiers, that they take course that they may be sent to their colors, to be
proceeded with according to their demerits, and the usual course of War.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands. May 18. 1644.


