AN ORDER OF the House of Parliament concerning the gathering in of the
Pole-moneys.
Die Veneris, May 6, 1642.
ORdered that the Knights and Burgesses of every County be forthwith enjoined
to write unto the several Sheriffs of every County, that they require all the
Commissioners of their respective Counties, to make present return of all such
Certificates of the Pole-mony, as have not yet bin returned according to the
former Order of this House, and also be enjoined to take into their custody the
several Certificates of every several County already returned respectively,
and to examine the true state of them, and that where they find any
Certificates not returned or defective, that they forthwith give notice unto
the several Commissioners of each County inhabiting within forty miles of this
City, to make their returns by the last of this instant May, and all those
beyond that distance by the twentieth of June next, and being so by them
examined, that they take a speedy course to return the same unto the Committee
for Accounts and Pole Money at such time as they shall be required by the said
Committee, who have agreed to call for them with all speed, and to digest them
into form, that so they may present them unto the House, and to begin with the
City of London and Westminster, according to a former Order in that case. And
it is further ordered, that the Sheriffs of the several Counties respectively
do certify into how many several divisions, the Commissioners of the
several Counties did divide themselves within the Counties for the collecting
of the Polemoney.

Printed by A. N. for John Franck.


