A LETTER FROM The House of Commons assembled in THE Parliament of ENGLAND at
WESTMINTER, To the Right Honorable and Right Reverend, THE Lords, Ministers and
others of the present GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Church of Scotland sitting at
Edinburgh,

CONTAINING A NARRATIVE OF The Proceedings of the Parliament of England in the
Work of Reformation, and of their Resolutions to maintain the Government of the
Kingdom established by Law, and of their Endeavors for Settlement of Peace, and
for Preservation of the Union between the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
1648.

For the Right Reverend, Mr. George Gillespy, Moderator of the General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland at EDINBURGH.
SIR,
I Am commanded by the Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, to send
you the enclosed Papers, which they desire you to communicate from them unto
the Right Honorable and Right Reverend, the Lords, Ministers and others of the
present General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, or to their Commissioners;
which being all I have in Command, I shall only add, that I am,

Sir, Your very loving Friend, WILLIAM LENTHAL, Speaker.
Westminster, August 3. 1648.
WE the Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, taking it into our
consideration, That however the late possessing of Berwick and Carlisle, and the
coming of the Scottish Army and Forces into this Kingdom, be most notorious and
unparalleld Breaches of the Solemn League and Covenant, and the many Treaties,
National Agreements, and Acts of Parliament passed both in England and Scotland.

Yet, because we are assured these impious and unwarrantable Actions cannot be
done with the Approbation and Consent of the Religious and Well-affected people
of the Kingdom of Scotland; and that we understand there are very few amongst
these who are in this Engagement against us, that first engaged with us in the
Covenant and Cause, but such as have been professed Enemies to them, however
they be now content to pretend thereunto, that they may the better deceive the
people of this Kingdom: We are unwilling to impute such Evils to the Nation in
general, but to those persons that own and appear in them, whom we are
confident, God (that has still so remarkably manifested his displeasure
against Truce Breakers) in his due time will judge, whatever we may suffer in
the mean while.

Therefore we now send to you, that it may appear we will not by any
provocation be induced to withdraw our selves from those in Scotland who retain
their former Principles, and still own the Cause wherein we have (with blessing
from heaven) been so long engaged and solemnly United.

And because the Enemies thereof have been very industrious in prosecuting a
Design to hinder the Work of Reformation in this Kingdom, by raising many
Scandals and Reproaches upon us; and by unworthy Insinuations of our Ends and
Intentions, and false Representations of our Actions and Proceedings, which
they have framed suitable to the several present stirring Distempers, the better
to foment Discontents in all sorts of people against us; charging us, That we
do not intend any thing in the Work of Reformation (though they do more malign
what we have done already, then desire we should do more) That we have a
purpose to alter the Government of the Kingdom, That we are Enemies to Peace,
and to the Union of the Kingdoms, and such like. Therefore, That by such
practices neither you may be abused, nor we further wronged, We have thought
fit for our own necessary vindication, to give you (in the first place) a short
view, how far (through the assistance of Almighty God, to whom alone be the
glory) the two Houses of Parliament have proceeded in the work of Reformation,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Enemies to Truth, and the great dangers
and difficulties which have been raised, to hinder them, by the force and
power, Plots and Designs of the Popish, Prelatical and Malignant party in this
Kingdom, with whom the Scottish Army are now joined in Forces and Counsels.

It is very well known how great a party in this Kingdom were engaged for
upholding of Prelacy, yet they, notwithstanding all discouragements and hazards
to themselves, have taken away and extirpated that Government, so disagreeable
to what is practiced in other Reformed Churches, and prejudicial to the power
of Godliness.

And because the peace of the Church, and power of Religion cannot long
continue without good Order and Discipline established therein, they called an
Assembly of Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Divines from all parts of the Kingdom,
with whom some Commissioners of the Church of Scotland joined, to sit at
Westminster; and after Consultation had with them, Both Houses took away the
Service Book, commonly called The Book of Common Prayer, and established A
Directory for Worship, commanding the practice of it in all the Churches and
Chapels of this Kingdom: And, in stead of Episcopacy they have set up
Presbyterial Government in the Church, which is already settled in many parts of
the Kingdom, and do (by Gods assistance) resolve to pursue the further
perfecting and establishment of it in all parts, both in England and Ireland.

They have approved and passed The Confession of Faith (or Articles of
Christian Religion) as it came from the Assembly of Divines, with some small
Alterations (only some small part is yet under consideration) the rest being
printed and published by Authority of Parliament.

They have passed a greater and less Catechism that came from the Assembly of
Divines.

They have taken away all Superstitious Ceremonies and Popish Innovations.

They have given Authority for the Demolishing of all Representations of any
Persons of the Trinity, Saint or Angel, and taking away all Altars, Crosses,
Crucifixes, Pictures, and all other Monuments of Idolatry and Superstition in
any Church, Chapel or Place within this Kingdom.

They have passed an Ordinance for the punishing of Blasphemies and Heresies.

They have passed an Ordinance for the Ejecting of Scandalous Ministers and
Schoolmasters; and thereupon have removed many, in whose stead they have placed
godly and able Men.

They have passed an Ordinance, That none shall enter into the work of the
Ministry, but such as are Ordained thereto.

They have given all the Encouragement, and made the best provision they could
for the maintenance of a godly Preaching Ministry through the Kingdom, not
only in removing the Ignorant and Scandalous, but in augmenting Maintenance
for painful Ministers, both out of the Impropriations of Bishops, the Estates
and Revenues of Deans and Chapters, and out of the Impropriations of
Delinquents, which they bought out and settled upon Churches that wanted
maintenance, to a very great value.

They have purged the Universities and chief Schools of the Kingdom (which are
the Seminaries of Learning, and Education of Youth) of many Heads of Houses,
Fellows and Scholars as were Superstitious, Prelatical and Malignant, and have
placed in their stead such as are well-affected to Reformation of Religion, and
Uniformity with other Reformed Churches.

They have passed several Ordinances for the better Observation of the Lords
day, and days of public Fast and Thanksgiving, and have condemned all
Licentious practices upon those days; and have ordered the Books formerly
written in favor of them, to be publicly burnt.

They have suppressed all Stage Plays and Interludes (the Nurseries of Vice and
Profaneness.)

And although we must needs say, That the greatest let and impediment which we
have met with in settling the Reformation of Religion (according to the
Covenant) has come from His Majesty, who by His refusing hitherto to grant our
Desires for the taking away of Episcopacy and the Service Book, and to settle
the Directory for Worship, and Presbyterial Government; and by denying his
concurrence to establish them by Act of Parliament, has given great occasion
to men of unsound Judgments, to spread their Opinions and Errors (which is not
unusual in times of Reformation) when the settling of it is long delayed.

And further, by his declaring in his late Message from the Isle of Wight, That
he thinks himself obliged both as a Christian and as a King, to employ whatever
power God shall put in his hand for the upholding of Episcopacy, he has given
great encouragement to the Popish, Malignant and Prelatical party to endeavor
by Plots and Designs, and now again by open force, the reintroducing of
Episcopacy and the Service Book, which by the Conjunction of the Scottish Army
with their Forces, they have now great hopes to effect; yet (by Gods assistance
who has helped us hitherto) it shall be our care and endeavor against all
dangers and discouragements whatsoever, to proceed in the work of Reformation
until it be perfected.

For other things wherewith we are commonly aspersed; as, That we should have
intentions to alter the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom; both Houses
have endeavored so to stop the mouth of malice by declaring several times
formerly, and of late the 26. of May, That they will not alter the Government
by King, Lords and Commons, that we shall need to say no more of it.

And for our desires of Peace, our seven several Addresses to the King, with
Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, will sufficiently speak for
us: And although the several denials which we have received from his Majesty
formerly, and the present preparations for War by the Malignant party of both
Kingdoms under pretense of Peace, might wholly discourage us, yet we
(notwithstanding all the hazards that may attend it) now again agreed to try
whether a Peace can be settled by a Treaty with his Majesty in the Isle of
Wight, upon the Propositions presented to him at Hampton Court, wherein we
shall (by the help of God) approve our selves such as are both desirous of a
firm Peace, and mindeful of the trust reposed in us by the people of this
Kingdom, for the securing of Religion and their Liberties.

As for our desires to preserve the Union and Brotherly Agreement betwixt the
Kingdoms, we shall not here say much about it, because the whole Transaction
betwixt our Commissioners and the Parliament, and Committee of Estates of
Scotland will be printed, wherein it will appear what was offered, in order to
give them real satisfaction in our Engagements to them for the Service of their
Armies in England and Ireland, to which we could never get any Answer; and what
they demanded in the name and by the command of both Houses, from the
Parliament and Committee of Estates of Scotland, concerning several English
Delinquents and Incendiaries then in Scotland, which by Treaties and Acts of
Parliament passed in both Kingdoms, ought to have been delivered to be tried in
the Kingdom of England; but in stead of giving them up, they were countenanced
and encouraged, consulted and agreed with to seize and hold the Towns of
Berwick and Carlisle in the Kingdom of England, which by Acts of Parliament,
and several Treaties and Agreements of both Kingdoms, were not to be garisoned
without the consent of both Parliaments.

And when in pursuance of those Treaties and Agreements, our Commissioners did
declare those Traitors and Enemies to this Kingdom that had Garisoned them, and
required the like Declaration from the Parliament and Committee of Estates of
Scotland, it would not be assented unto, although very often pressed; but in
stead thereof, all manner of Provisions were sent unto them, and the Commanders
in those Garrisons (though many of them notorious Papists) had much freedom and
countenance to their proceedings by persons of eminent power in Scotland;
whereas notwithstanding we had notice there was some design for seizing these
Towns, which might have been prevented by our timely putting Forces into them,
yet to avoid the guilt of breach of Treaties, we rather resolved to run the
hazard which did ensue, then to bring that imputation upon our selves: And now
it appears, these Towns were but taken in trust to be delivered to the Scottish
Forces, who however they do publicly declare for Religion and the Covenant,
yet the Papists and Delinquents, not only in Berwick and Carlisle, but in
other parts of the Kingdom, who are professed Enemies to Religion and the
Covenant, and do kill, plunder and pursue those who have been faithful in them,
are so well satisfied of their ends and intentions, that they join and hazard
their lives and fortunes with them.

Whilst these forementioned Councels and Compliances were thus on foot in
Scotland with those that are declared Enemies to the Peace of this Kingdom, and
the grounds of the Union of both Kingdoms; The Parliament of Scotland did send
us a Paper of Desires, dated the 26 of April last, which in the Letter wherein
they were enclosed are called Demands, that implies a right which upon
examination will not be found; yet the Houses were so desirous to give the
Parliament of Scotland all possible satisfaction, that they did not take
exception thereunto, nor to the person by whom they were sent, who was accused
before them for endeavoring the Revolt of the Forces under the Lord Inchiquin
in Ireland, which then had happened; Nor did they insist upon the first
granting of their aforesaid just Demands made to the Parliament and Committee
of Estates of Scotland, but perceiving so strange an Alteration in Scotland,
they judged it fit for them to try in the first place, whether Scotland would
own the Cause wherein we had both been engaged; And therefore (after our
Commissioners had acquainted the Committee of Estates with our Declaration of
the 6 of May last, concerning our full Resolutions to maintain and preserve
inviolably the Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms)
they did return Answer to this purpose, That we did offer to join with the
Parliament of Scotland in the Propositions presented to the King at
Hampton Court, and in making such further proceedings thereupon as should be
thought fit for the speedy Settlement of the Peace of both Kingdoms, and
preservation of the Union, according to the Covenant and Treaties; And when we
should receive their Answer thereunto, the Houses would be ready to give
further satisfaction in those things which should not entrench upon the
particular Interests of the Kingdom, and Privileges of the Parliament of
England. But to these, all the Answer our Commissioners could obtain from the
Parliament or Committee of Estates of Scotland, was, That they could return us
no Answer, till just satisfaction were given to their Desires of the 26. of
April.

Afterward we agreed upon a Personal Treaty with the Kings Majesty upon the
Propositions, (He first consenting to three Propositions, which in substance He
had granted in former Messages) And the Houses sent to the Committee of
Estates, that Scotland would join with them, and that they would prepare such
Propositions as they thought fit for that Kingdom: But to this neither we nor
our Commissioners received any Answer, until a Scottish Army had invaded this
Kingdom, and then it was sent with a Declaration; of which we will say no more
in this place, but that considering they were bound by Treaties and Act of
Parliament to give us three months warning before their making War with us, it
had been more Honorable that their Declaration had rather come before, then
followed after their Army.

By all which, and by their vigorous pursuing the raising of their Army, before
they sent their desires, and ever after, before they knew what Answer would be
returned to them by the Houses, it does appear, That this invasion was intended
and resolved upon, let us say or do what we would; wherein they have too little
considered how many obligations did lie upon them to the contrary; how much
this their Engagement tends to the utter ruin of poor Ireland, who by their
drawing away so many of the British and other Forces to join with them, and
disinabling us to send them relief, is exposed to eminent hazard; how much to
the dishonor and danger of the Reformed Religion in all Christendom, and how
highly the God of Truth and Peace is provoked by it; which evils seeing we have
on our parts so much labored to prevent, we doubt not but God will be with us,
and the prayers of his people for us; And that those who have dealt falsely in
striking hands with the common Enemy, to kindle a new fire betwixt these
Kingdoms, shall themselves perish therein.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

