THE NARRATIVE AND REASONS Which were delivered by the House of Commons TO THE
LORDS, AT THE Last CONFERENCE touching the Trials of the LORDS in the TOWER.
THE Commons have always desired that a good Correspondence may be preserved
between the two Houses.

There is now depending between your Lordships and the Commons a matter of the
greatest weight, in the transactions of which your Lordships seem to apprehend
some difficulty in the matters proposed by the Commons.

To clear this, the Commons have desired this Conference, and by it they hope
to manifest to your Lordships, That the Propositions of the House of Commons
made by their Committee, in relation to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
have been only such as are well warranted by the Laws of Parliament, and
Constitutions of the Government, and in no sort entrench upon the Judicature of
the Peers, but are most necessary to be insisted upon, that the ancient Rights
of Judicature in Parliament may be maintained.

The Commons readily acknowledge, that the Crimes charged upon the Earl of
Powis, Viscount Stafford, Lord Petre, Lord Arundel of Wardour, and Lord
Bellasis, are of deep guilt, and call for speedy Justice; but withal, they
hold, that any change in Judicature in Parliament, made without consent in full
Parliament, to be of pernicious consequence, both to his Majesty, and his
Subjects, and conceive themselves obliged to transmit to their posterity all
the rights which of his kind they have rece^ed from their Ancestors: and by
putting your Lordships in mind of the progress that has already been between the
two Houses, in relation to the propositions made by the Commons, and the
reasonableness of the propositions themselves; they doubt not to make it
appear, that their aim has been no other, than to avoid such consequences, and
preserve that right; and that there is no delay of Justice on their part; and
to that end, do offer to your Lordships the ensuing Reasons and Narrative; that
the Commons in bringing the E. of Danby to Justice, and in discovery of that
execrable-and traitorous Conspiracy (of which the five Popish Lords now stand
Impeached, and for which some of their wicked Accomplices have already
undergone the sentence of the Law as Traitors and Murderers), have labored
under many great difficulties, is not unknown to your Lordships.

Nor is it less known to your Lordships, that upon the Impeachment of the House
of Commons against the E. of Danby for High Treason, and other high crimes,
misdemeanors, and offenses, even the common justice of sequestring him from
Parliament, and forthwith committing him to safe custody, was then required by
the Commons, and denied by the House of Peers, though he then sat in their
House; of which your Lordships have been so sensible, that at a free Conference
the 10th of April last, your Lordships declared, that it was the right of the
Commons, and well warranted by presidents of former ages; That upon the
Impeachment of the Commons, a Peer so impeached ought of right to be ordered to
withdraw, and then to be committed; and had not that Justice been denied to the
Commons, a great part of this Session of Parliament, which has been spent in
framing and adjusting a Bill for causing the E. of Danby to appear and answer
that Justice from which he was fled, had been saved, and had been employed for
the preservation of his Majesty's person, and the security of the Nation, and
in prosecuting of the other five Lords; neither had he had the opportunity of
procuring for himself that illegal pardon, which bears date the first of March
last past, and which he has now pleaded in bar of his Impeachment; nor of
wasting so great a proportion of the treasure of the Kingdom, as he has done
since the Commons exhibited their Articles of Impeachment against him.

After which time thus lost by reason of the denial of that Justice which of
right belonged to the Commons upon their Impeachment, the said Bill being ready
for the Royal assent, the said Earl then rendered himself; and by your
Lordships Order of the 16th of April last, was committed to the Tower; after
which he pleaded the said pardon, and being pressed, did at length declare he
would rely upon, and abide by that plea; which pardon being pleaded, being
illegal and void, and so ought not to bar and preclude the Commons from having
Justice upon the Impeachment; they did thereupon with their Speaker on the
fifth of May instant, in the name of themselves, and all the Commons of
England, demand Judgment against the said Earl upon their Impeachment, not
doubting but that your Lordships did intend in all your proceedings upon the
Impeachment, to follow the usual course and method of Parliament.

But the Commons were not a little surprised by the Message from your
Lordships, delivered them on the 7th of May, thereby acquainting them, That as
well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, had ordered that the 10th of May instant
should be the day for hearing the E. of Danby to make good his Plea of Pardon;
and that on the 13th of May the other five Lords impeached, should be brought
to their Trial, and that your Lordships had addressed to his Majesty for naming
of a Lord High Steward, as well in the Case of the E. of Danby, as the other
five Lords.

Upon consideration of this said Message, the Commons found, that the admitting
the Lords Spiritual to exercise Jurisdiction in these cases, was an alteration
of the Judicature in Parliament, and which extended as well to the proceeding
against the five Lords, as against the E. of Danby; and that if a Lord High
Steward should be necessary upon Trial on Impeachment of the Commons, the power
of Judicature in Parliament upon Impeachments might be defeated, by suspending
or denying a Commission to constitute a Lord High Steward.

And that the said days of Trial appointed by your Lordships, were so near to
the time of your said Message, that these matters, and the method of proceeding
upon the Trial, could not be adjusted by Conference between the two Houses,
before the day so nominated; and consequently the Commons could not then
proceed to Trial, unless the zeal which they have for speedy Judgment against
the Earl of Danby (that so they might proceed to the Trial of the other five
Lords) should induce them at this juncture, both to admit the enlargement of
your Lordships Jurisdiction, and to fit down under these or any hardships
(though with the hazard of all the Commons power of Impeaching for time to
come) rather than the Trial of the said five Lords should be deferred for some
short time, whilst these matters might be agreed on and settled.

For reconciling differences in these great and weighty matters, and for saving
that time which would necessarily have been spent in Debates and Conferences
betwixt the two Houses, and for expediting the Trial, without giving up the
Power of Impeachment, or rendering them ineffectual.

The Commons thought fit to propose to your Lordships, that a Committee of both
Houses might be appointed for this purpose. At which Committee (when agreed to
by your Lordships) it was first proposed that the time of Trial of the Lords in
the Tower, should be put off till the other Matters were adjusted; and it was
then agreed, that the Proposition as to the time of the Trial, should be the
last thing considered. And the effect of this Agreement stands reported upon
your Lordships Books.

After which the Commons communicated to your Lordships by your Committee, Vote
of theirs, (viz.) that the Committee of the Commons should insist upon their
former Vote of their House, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote
in any proceedings against the Lords in the Tower, and that when that Matter
should be settled, and the Method of Proceedings adjusted, the Commons would
then be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby,
against whom they had before demanded Judgment, and afterward to the Trial of
the other five Lords in the Tower, which Vote extended as well to the Earl of
Danby, as the other five Lords; But the Commons as yet received nothing from
your Lordships toward an Answer of that Vote, save that your Lordships have
acquainted them, that the Bishops have asked leave of the House of Peers, that
they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said five Lords, with
Liberty of entering their usual protestation.

And though the Commons Committee have almost daily declared to your Lordships
Committee, that that was a necessary point of Right, to be settled before the
Trial, and offered to debate the same, your Committee always answered, That
they had not any power from your Lordships, either to confer upon, or to give
any Answer concerning that Matter.

And yet your Lordships without having given the Commons any satisfactory
Answer to the said Vote, or permitting any Conference or Debate thereupon, and
contrary to the said Agreement, did on Thursday the 22d of May send a Message
to the Commons, Declaring that the Lords Spiritual as well as Temporal, had
ordered that the 27th of this Instant May be appointed for the Trial of the
five Lords.

So that the Commons cannot but apprehend that your Lordships have not only
departed from what was agreed on, and in effect laid aside that Committee,
which was constituted for preserving a good Understanding betwixt the two
Houses, and better dispatch of the weighty Affairs now depending in Parliament,
but must also needs conclude from the said Message, and the Votes of your
Lordships on the 14th of May; That the Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay and
sit in Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty or not Guily. And
from the Bishops asking leave (as appears by your Lordships Books two Days
after your said Vote) that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the
said Lords, with Liberty of entering their usual Protestation, and by their
persisting still to go on and give their Votes in Proceedings upon the
Impeachment; That their desire of leave to withdraw at the said Trial, is only
an Evasive Answer to the beforementioned Vote of the Commons, and chiefly
intended as an Argument for a Right of Judicature in Proceedings upon
Impeachment, and as a Reserve to Judge upon the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon;
And upon these and other like Impeachments, although no such Power was ever
claimed by their Predecessors, but is utterly denied by the Commons: And the
Commons are the rather induced to believe it so intended, because the very
asking leave to withdraw, seems to imply a Right to be there, and that they
cannot be absent without it.

And because by this way they would have it in their Power, whether or no for
the future, either in the Earl of Danby's Case, or any other, they will ever
ask leave to be absent; And the Temporal Lords a like Power of denying leave,
if that should once be admitted necessary.

The Commons therefore are obliged not to proceed to the Trial of the Lords on
the Twenty-seventh of this Instant May, but to adhere to their aforesaid Vote:
And for their so doing, besides what has been now and formerly by them said to
your Lordships, do offer you these Reasons following.

REASONS.
I. BEcause your Lordships have received the Earl of Danby's Plea of Pardon,
with a very long and unusual protestation, wherein he has aspersed his Majesty
by false suggestions, as if his Majesty had commanded or countenanced the
Crimes he stands charged with; and particularly, suppressing and discouraging
the Discovery of the Plot, and endeavoring to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical way of Government, which remains as a scandal upon Record against
his Majesty, tending to render his Person and Government odious to his people:
against which it ought to be the first and principal care of both Houses to
vindicate his Majesty, by doing Justice upon the said Earl.

II. The setting up a Pardon to be a Bar of an Impeachment, defeats the whole
use and effect of Impeachments; and should this point be admitted, or stand
doubted, it would totally discourage the exhibiting any for the future; whereby
the chief Institution for the preservation of the Government (and consequently
the Government it self) would be destroyed. And therefore the Case of the said
Earl (which in consequence concerns all Impeachments whatsoever) ought to be
determined before that of the said Five Lords, which is but their particular
Case.

And without resorting to many Authorities of greater Antiquity, the Commons
desire your Lordships to take notice (with the same regard they do) of the
Declaration which that Excellent Prince, King Charles the First of blessed
memory, made in this behalf, in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions of both
Houses of Parliament; wherein stating the several parts of this regulated
Monarchy, he says: The King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, have
each particular Privileges: And among those which belong to the King, he
reckons power of Pardoning. After the enumerating of which, and other His
Prerogatives, His said Majesty adds thus: Again, That the Prince may not make
use of this High and perpetual Power, to the hurt of those for whose good he
has it, and make use of the name of public necessity, for the gain of his
private Favorites and Followers, to the detriment of his people; The House of
Commons (an Excellent Conserver of Liberty, etc.) is solely entrusted with the
first Propositions concerning the Levies of Moneys and the Impeaching of those
who, for their own ends, though countenanced by any surreptitiously-gotten
Command of the King, have violated that Law which he is bound (when he knows
it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were bound to advise him,
at least not to serve him in the contrary. And the Lords being trusted with a
Judicatory Power, are an excellent skr^en and bank between the Prince and
People, to assist each against any Encroachments of the other, and by Just
Judgments to preserve that Law which ought to be the Rule of every one of the
Three, etc. Therefore the Power legally placed in both Houses, is more than
sufficient to prevent and restrain the Power of Tyranny, etc.

III. Until the Commons of England have right done them against the Plea of
Pardon, they may justly apprehend, that the whole Justice of the Kingdom, in
the Case of the Five Lords, may be obstructed and defeated by Pardons of like
nature.

IV. An Impeachment is virtually the voice of every particular subject of this
Kingdom, crying out against an Oppression, by which every member of that Body
is equally wounded; and it will prove a matter of ill consequence, that the
universality of the people should have occasion ministered and continued to
them, to be apprehensive of utmost danger from the Crown, from whence they of
right expect protection.

V. The Commons exhibited Articles of Impeachment against the said Earl, before
any against the Five other Lords, and demanded Judgment upon those Articles:
whereupon, your Lordships having appointed the Trial of the said Earl to be
before that of the other Five Lords. Now your Lordships having since inverted
that Order, gives a great cause of doubt to the House of Commons, and raises a
jealousy in the hearts of all the Commons of England, that, if they should
proceed to the Trial of the said Five Lords in the first place, not only
Justice will be obstructed in the Case of those Lords, but that they shall
never have right done them in the matter of this Plea of Pardon, which is of so
fatal consequence to the whole Kingdom, and a new device to frustrate public
Justice in Parliament.

Which Reasons and Matters being duly weighed by your Lordships, the Commons
doubt not but your Lordships will receive satisfaction concerning their
Propositions and Proceedings; and will agree, that the Commons ought not, nor
can, without deserting their Trust, depart from their former Vote communicated
to your Lordships; That the Lords Spiritual ought not to have any Vote in any
proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and when that matter shall be
settled, and the Methods of Proceedings adjusted, the Commons shall then be
ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Earl of Danby, (against whom they have
already demanded Judgment) and afterward to the Trial of the other five Lords
in the Tower.

FINIS.

