Instructions for DEPUTY Lievtenants which are members of the House of Commons,
and other Lievtenants of several Counties concerning the last PROPOSITIONS:
Together with the names of the Commissaries, who are to inroll and value the
Horses and Arms according to the Propositions.

Ordered that this be forthwith printed.

H. Elsying Cler. Par. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by A. Norton for Edw. Husbands and John Frank, June 17, 1642.

Instructions for Deputy Lievtenants, etc.
THat the Deputy Lievtenants of each County which are members of the House,
shall have authority to tender the Propositions to the other Deputy Lievtenants
of the same County, and take their subscriptions, and all such Deputy
Lievtenants, or any two of them, as shall subscribe according to the
Propositions, shall have authority to assemble, and call together all such
persons as they shall think fit, and to tender those Propositions to all such
persons as shall be present; or to any persons within their Counties
respectively, and receive their subscriptions, and the said Deputy Lievtenants,
or any two of them, shall have authority to name such, and so many persons as
they shall think fit; to assemble and call together every person, or to repair
to their several houses, or dwellings within their respective Countyes, and to
take their Subscriptions, which Subscriptions are by them to be returned to
such persons as shall be appointed Receivers in the respective Countyes, who
shall from time to time certify the sums, values, or proportions of such
subscriptions to the Treasurers of London.

2. The said Deputy Lievtenants, or the greater party of them, shall have power
to name receivers in their several Counties, and all such as shall either
before or after their subscriptions pay, or bring in any Money or Plate, shall
deliver the name to such person or persons as shall be appointed by the said
Deputy Lievtenants, or the greater part of them, under their hands to be
receivers, which the said persons so appointed shall cause to be delivered to
the Treasurers in London, named in the said Propositions, and shall receive
acquittances from the said Treasurers, in the name, and to the use of the
several persons, from whom they shall receive such Money or Plate, and shall
deliver such Acquittances to the several persons to whom they do belong, and
all such as make such returns of Money or Plate, shall receive reasonable
allowance from the Treasurers for the same, according to their discretions.

3. All that find Horses shall presently send them up to London, according to
the Propositions.

4. In those Countyes where no Commissions are issued to those that were
nominated for Deputy Lievtenants, or none have been nominated, there the same
authority to be given to such Justices of the Peace, or other Gentlemen of
those Countyes, which shall be named by the Knights and Burgesses of those
Countyes, and approved by both Houses, as is to the Deputy-Lievtenants in the
first instruction.

5. That the time of notice shall be taken to be from the time that every man
bears the Propositions first read by the Authority aforesaid.

6. It is ordered that Captain Burrell, Master Loyd, John Smith of London
Gentlemen, and Francis Dowet of London Gent. be Commissaries to inroll and
value. The Horses and Arms to be raised according to the Propositions.

FINIS.
Directed that this be forthwith Printed.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


