Die Martis, 4 April. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Greenhil and Mr.
Pocock, Treasurers of Christs-Church, do out of the Nine thousand one hundred
pounds reserved out of the Moneys at Goldsmiths-Hall for indigent persons, pay
proportionably (as the Moneys will hold out) the Officers and Soldiers whose
Names are contained in the List presented to this House by Auditor Wilcox;
taking especial care, and endeavoring all means, That no Moneys be paid to
those that shall appear to have been engaged against the Parliament about July
or August last. And Mr. Potter Clerk to the Committee of the Military Garden,
is appointed to be present at the time of payment with Mr. Greenhil and Mr.
Pocock, with his Books of the five Qualifications, and the former List by which
they have received any former Moneys, whereby none of them may be twice paid,
nor any paid that are not comprehended within the five qualifications.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the several persons that
do clamor at the doors of the House, demanding any Arrears from the Parliament,
do repair to the Knights and Burgesses of the several and respective Counties
and Towns, upon whose Entertainments they, their Husbands or Fathers were
employed in the Service of the Parliament, or any two of them; The which
Knights and Burgesses, or any two of them respectively, are hereby authorized
and required, to examine the justness of their Demands, and as they shall see
cause, to certify the state of it to the House, to the end the House may take
such course for their Relief and Satisfaction in the several Counties and
places where they served, as may be just and Honorable to the Parliament.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Orders be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
April 6. 1648.


