Die Lunae, 28 Junii, 1647.
THat it be referred to the Commissioners with the Army to be very earnest with
the General, that effectual course may be taken, that no discouragement or
obstruction may be given by the Soldiery to the due levying and bringing in
the Excise and other Assessements and Payments to the Parliament.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

An Order of His Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by
the Parliament, in pursuance of the Order aforesaid.
WHereas it has pleased the honorable House of Commons, by their Order of the
twenty eighth of June last past, to recommend unto me, That an effectual course
may be taken that no Discouragement or Obstruction may be given by the
Soldiers to the due levying and bringing in the Excise and other Assessements
and Payments to the Parliament: And to the end that such Obstructions may be
prevented, I do hereby require all Officers and Soldiers of the Amy under my
Command, that they do not in any kind discourage or obstruct the due levying
and bringing in of the Excise and other Assessements and Payments to the
Parliament. And if any Officers or Soldiers shall notwithstanding go about to
hinder or obstruct the same, I do hereby require the Officer commanding in
chief at present, the Troop, Company or Regiment, in those parts where such
Obstruction shall be given, to send the Officers or Soldiers so offending in
Custody to the Head-Quarter, that they may be proceeded against for their
Contempt of this Order. And in case of any tumultuous carriage by any persons,
tending to the obstructing the due levying of Excise and Payments, as
aforesaid; the said Officers and Soldiers are to be aiding and assisting for
the suppressing of the same.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Wickham, the first day of July, 1647. T.
FAIRFAX.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes and Ruth Raworth. 1647.


