THE REPORT Made to the Honorable House of COMMONS, December. 15. 1699. BY THE
Commissioners appointed to Enquire into the Forfeited Estates OF IRELAND.

LONDON; Printed in the Year M.DCC.

The Report made to the Honorable House of Commons, by the Commissioners
appoined to enquire into the Forfeited Estates of Ireland, December. 15. 1699.
May it please your Honors;
1. ACcording to the powers given us by a late Act of Parliament, made in the
10th and 11th years of his Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for granting his
Majesty the sum of one million four hundred eighty four thousand and fifteen
pounds one shilling eleven pence three farthings, for disbanding the Army,
providing for the Navy, and for other necessary Occasions; we have enquired
into and taken an account of the Forfeited Estates in Ireland, and do humbly
lay before your Honors this our following Report, as the result of our
Proceedings.

2. But first we must humbly crave leave to represent to your Honors the many
difficulties we have met with, which we fear may render our Enquiry less
satisfactory than otherwise it might have been.

3. It is usual for the General Governors of this Kingdom, when they are
removed from their Employments, to carry away the Books and Papers relating to
their proceedings during their Government: which we apprehend may have been
some hindrance to our Enquiry.

4. Soon after the Battle of the Boyne, Commissioners of Forfeitures were
appointed under the Great Seal of Ireland, who substituted Commissioners in the
several Counties then in his Majesty's possession; these Sub-Commissioners
acted very vigorously, and made returns of great quantities of Goods forfeited,
but several of the Books we were not able to get, which was a great
disadvantage to our proceedings; those Returns having been made whilst the
mischiefs were fresh, and the resentments high between Protestants and Papists,
and consequently with less favor than has since been shown.

5. Many Commissions for taking Inquisitions have been issued both from the
Chancery and Exchequer that are not sped: others have been imperfectly taken,
and worse drawn up: some have never been returned, nor so much as the Records
made up by the Escheator.

6. Great quantities of Land found in the Inquisitions, have not been put in
Charge to his Majesty, nor appear in the Rent Rolls; and many Denominations
appear in the Rent Rolls, of which no Inquisitions were taken; and a great many
other parcels of Lands are mentioned in the Grants which are neither mentioned
in the Inquisitions nor Rent Rolls; and some in the Sub-Commissioners Books,
that are found no where else; and there may be many more of which we can trace
no footsteps.

7. As we cannot complain to your Honors of any direct disobedience to our
Authority, so we must take notice, that we had from few Offices that dispatch
which was necessary to the work we had the honor to be employed in: but
whether this proceeded from any unwillingness to obey us, the multitude of
other business, or the irregular methods of keeping their Books, we do not
affirm.

8. Particularly the Books of the Commissioners of the Revenue relating to the
Forfeitures, are so ill and confusedly kept, as much delayed us in our
proceedings: but this we do not attribute so much to the Commissioners of the
Revenue, as to the shifting this Enquiry from one Commission to another; which
has been done five times since the Battle of the Boyne: So that no
Commissioners (if they were disposed to it) have been able to take any steady
view of the Forfeitures, and digest them into Method.

9. By this means, we have been forced to examine such vast bundles of Records
and Volumes of other Papers, as have taken up much of that time which might
have been employed in the examination of the values, and enquiring into the
mismanagement of the Forfeitures; which appear to us very great: tho by the
distance of time, the agreement of the parties concerned, the death of some,
the departure of others out of the Kingdom, most of the tracks are worn out; so
that we found it very difficult, and in many cases impossible, to come at a
true information.

10. Besides, there appeared to us a very great backwardness in the people of
this Kingdom to give any information; which, in our humble opinion, does not
proceed from any dislike to the business of our Commission, or disobedience to
the Authority that sent us, but from the fear of the Grantees and persons in
power, whose displeasure in this Kingdom is not easily born: besides, reports
seemed to us to have been industriously spread abroad and generally believed,
that our Enquiry would come to nothing, and was only the effect of a sudden
Resolution; which hindered many persons from making considerable discoveries:
but we humbly conceive if such fears were removed, the Forfeitures would appear
much greater.

11. Added to all these difficulties, our business it self was so voluminous,
and consisted of so many parts, that an exact Scrutiny into all the particulars
could not have been made in a much longer time than we were confined to; but
such an account, as under these disadvantages we were able to acquire, we do
with all humility lay before your Honors.

12. The Persons outlawed in England since the 13th day of February, 1688, on
account of the late Rebellion here, amount in number to 75, and in Ireland to
3921, all which, with their Additions, and Counties in which they were
Outlawed, appear in a Book delivered in with this Report, N. 1.

13. The Estates that the said persons, or any of them were possessed of, or
interested in, either in Law or Equity, since the 13th day of February 1688,
that came to our knowledge; together with the Proprietors names, the number of
Acres, the County and Barony in which they lie, the value of them per annum,
and the total value, appear in a Book delivered in with this Report, N.; 2.

14. But the gross number of all Acres belonging to Forfeiting Persons in each
County, the yearly and total value (esteeming a Life at 6 years purchase, and
an Inheritance at 13 years; which we apprehend to be at this time the value of
the Lands of this Kingdom) appear to be as follows, viz. Acres profitable.
value per Ann. value total. a. r. l. s. d. l. s. d. In the County of Dublin
34536 16061 6 208796 18 In the County of Mead 92452 1 31546 4 6 410100 18 6 In
the County of Westmeath 58083 1 14633 12 6 190237 2 6 In the County of Kildare
44281 1 16551 18 6 215175 6 In the County of Catherlogh 26303 7913 11 6 95872 2
In the County of Wicklow 18164 2719 3 35348 19 In the County of Wexford 55882 2
7551 10 6 98169 16 6 In the Queen's County 22657 5002 8 9 65031 13 9 In the
King's County 30459 3 6870 18 89321 14 In the County of Kilkenny 30152 2 5243 3
6 68161 5 6 In the County of Longford 2067 2 348 9 9 4530 6 9 In the C. of
Lowth and 'T. of Drogheda 22508 6331 11 82310 3 In the County of Cork 244320
32133 12 6 417737 2 6 In the County of Kerry 90146 3652 11 9 47483 12 9 In the
County of Clare 72246 12060 17 156791 1 In the County of Waterford 21343 4190
10 54476 10 In the County of Limerick 14882 3 4728 10 6 61470 10 In the County
of Tipperary 31960 3 8888 12 115552 2 6 In the County of Gallway 60825 10225 4
83528 19 In the County of Roscommon 28933 5808 15 69767 2 In the County of Mayo
19294 3186 5 6 37598 3 In the County of Sligoe 5562 2 998 17 6 12985 7 6 In the
County of Antrim 10103 3 1944 18 6 25284 6 In the County of Down 9079 1016 6
13212 4 6 In the County of Ardmagh 4962 688 7644 In the County of Cavan 3830 1
478 12 6 6222 2 6 In the County of Monaghan 3832 558 16 7264 8 In the County of
Fermanagh 1945 389 5057

All these Lands in the several Counties aforesaid, as far as we can reckon by
Acres, being added together make 1060792 Acres, worth per an. 211623 l. 6 s. 3
d. value total 2685130 l. 5 s. 9 d. (besides the several Denominations in the
said several Counties, to which no number of Acres can be added, by reason of
the imperfection of the Surveys) which we humbly represent to your Honors as
the gross value of all the Lands forfeited in Ireland, since the 13th day of
February 1688.

15. Next we think it our duty to acquaint your Honors, what proportions of
these Lands have been restored to the old Proprietors, by virtue of the
Articles of Limerick and Gallway, and by his Majesty's favor.

16. Three Letters, one from her late Majesty Queen Mary, of ever blessed
Memory, dated the 15th of March 1691/2; to the Right Honorable the Lord Sdn-y,
Sir Charles Porter Knight, and Thomas Lord C-n-ngs-by, then Lords Justices, and
Chief Governors of this Kingdom; one other Letter from her said late Majesty,
dated the 6th day of May, 1693, to the said Lord Viscount S-dn-y, then Lord
Lieutenant, and General Governor of this Kingdom; and to the Privy Council
there for the time being; and one other Letter from his Majesty, dated the 24th
day of May, 1694, to the Right Honorable Henry Lord C-pel, Sir Cyril Which
Knight, and William Duncombe Esquire then Lords Justices of this Kingdom; and to
the Privy Council there for the time being, were severally sent unto them;
empowering them to hear and determine the Claims of all persons pretending to
be within the Articles of Limerick and Gallway: and in pursuance of the said
Letters, 491 persons were adjudged within the Articles aforesaid. The names of
which persons, with their Additions, and times of their Adjudications, appear
in a Book delivered in with this Report, N.3.

17. Afterward, a Commission dated the 25th day of February, in the 8th year
of his Majesty's Reign, passed under the great Seal of Ireland, impowering the
Judges of the several Courts here, or any five of them, to hear and determine
the Claims aforesaid: And in pursuance of that Commission, 792 persons were
adjudged within the Articles aforesaid. The names of which persons, with their
Additions, and the times of their Adjudications, appear in a Book delivered in
with this Report, N 4.

18. The Estates that the persons have been restored to by virtue of their
Adjudications, contain 233106 Acres of Land, amounting in yearly value to 55763
l. 6 s. 6 d. value total 724923 l. 4 s. 6 d. The particular number of Acres
belonging to persons adjudged, the County and Barony in which they lie, with
the yearly value, and what the whole Interest is worth, appears in the Book N.
2.

19. And here we presume not to judge, whether the Letters from his Majesty, or
the late Queen, to the Lords Justices, did give them any legal authority to
summon the Subjects from all parts of the Kingdom, give Oaths, adjudg without
Jury, and levy Money under the name of Fees; (we finding no Act of Parliament
to warrant the same) which we humbly submit to your great Wisdom.

20. Further, we think it necessary to inform your Honors, that the Fees in
the said Courts were so extravagant, that Mr. Palmer (who acted as Register in
the right of Mr. Poultney, and divided the profits with him) demanded of Mr.
Luke Dillon, for the Fees of his Fathers Adjudication, eighty six pounds; and
Mr. Steel, Crier of the Court, fifteen pounds more. Nor could Mr. Dillon get
out the order to reverse his Fathers Outlawry till he had paid fifty two pounds
in ready Money to Mr. Palmer, and gave him his Bond for fourteen pounds more;
and had paid Mr. Steel five pounds, besides ten pounds which he had paid Mr.
Palmer for Orders; the Cause being continued in the Court near two years. Nor
was this a single case, for many more have paid great Sums of Money on the
like account, the charge of entering a Claim only before we acted in our
Commission being near five pounds, tho by express words in the Articles of
Limerick, no person ought to pay any Fees, but to writing Clerks.

21. We may add to this, that the proceedings of the Court of Claims are almost
universally complained of, and we fear with too much reason. Some persons
having been adjudged without posting their Claims, others within a day or two
after, before the Kings Council or Witnesses could be ready; which was contrary
to the Rules of the Court it self, that required fourteen days between the
posting every Claim, and the Adjudication. It was also observable, that if any
person would disclaim his Estate, he met with very little difficulty in being
adjudged, tho afterward there could be no obstacle in the reversing his
Outlawry; and consequently to be restored to his Estate. In general, it seems
to us, that there have been great miscarriages in the said Court, and that in
many cases the Articles of Limerick and Gallway have been expounded too
beneficially in favor of persons Outlawed, and often on the oath of one
witness, who, we humbly conceive, cannot not be convicted of Perjury, either by
common or Statute Law. By this means, we apprehend a great many persons have
been restored to their Estates, that upon review would be found to belong to
his Majesty. To come to a more particular knowledge of which, we sent to the
said Mr. Palmer for the Minutes of the Adjudications; but he having taken them
in Shorthand only, and never since transcribed them, we could not get such an
account, as was sit to lay before your Honors. We shall only take notice of
one thing that seems to us very extraordinary, that more persons were adjudged
within Articles since the Commencement of our Enquiry, than had been since the
making of the said Articles.

22. Next we are to acquaint your Honors what Estates have been restored to
the old Proprietors, by Reversal of Outlawries, or his Majesty's Pardon.

23. The Reversals are of two sorts, such as have been in pursuance of
Adjudications, all marked in N. 3 and 4, in distinct Columns for that purpose:
the Estates restored by Reversals are already computed under the consideration
of persons adjudged.

24. The other sort are such as have been reversed by his Majesty's or the late
Queen's Letters, or Orders to the Lords Justices; which with all Pardons, and
the considerations inducing the same, past since the Defeat at the Boyne,
amounting to sixty five, appear in a Book delivered in with this Report, N. 5.
The Estates restored to the several Persons pardoned, or that have their
Outlawries reversed by his Majesty's favor, contain 74733 Acres, worth per An.
20066 l. 8 s. 3 d. value total 260863 l. 7 s. 3 d. The particulars thereof,
what Estate belongs to each person, in what County and Barony it lies, what is
the yearly and total value, appear in the Book N. 2.

25. And here we think it proper to take notice to your Honors, that as well
by the general report of the Country, as by several Observations of our own, it
appears probable to us, that many of the persons aforesaid, have obtained his
Majesty's Favor, by gratifications to such persons as have abused his
Majesty's Royal Compassion. But when we touched on this subject, we found
difficulties too great to be overcome, most of these matters being transacted
in private, and with Persons out of this Kingdom; however, we shall lay before
your Honors some instances, where it appears to us, that Money has been given
to restore persons forfeiting to their Estates.

26. The Right Honorable the Lord B-ll-w, released a Statute Staple of 1000 l.
principal Money, and seven or eight hundred pounds Interest to the Lord R-by
(which was due from Sir William W-ntw-rth, Father to the present Lord R-by, to
the Lord D-l-ke, Father to the present Lord B-ll-w) in consideration that he
would use his Interest with his Majesty to procure his Pardon, which he did
accordingly, and his Pardon soon after passed; he also released to the Lord
R-mny, all the profits of his Estate, which his Lordship had enjoyed near three
years, amounting to about as many thousand pounds, in consideration his
Lordship would not give him any molestation in passing his Pardon.

27. John Kerdiff, of Kerdiffstown in the County of Dublin Gent. gave to Mrs.
Margaret Vniack 200 l. or thereabouts, to make use of her Interest with the
Lord R-mny, to obtain his Majesty's Letter, to have his Outlawry reversed;
which was accordingly done, the the particular case of this Man deserved
Compassion.

28. Sir John Morris paid to Mr. Richard Vniack five hundred pounds, whereof
three hundred pounds were paid to Mrs. Vniack, for her Interest in the Lord
R-mny to procure his Pardon, which was accordingly done.

29. Henry Morris Esquire gave one hundred pounds to Mrs. Margaret Vniack to obtain
his Majesty's pardon, which was accordingly done.

30. John Hussy of Leistip, Esquire upon his being informed by Mr. Bray and Mr.
Roscoe, Agents to the Lord Athl-ne, that he would not get his Outlawry
reversed, without giving him a general Release of all demands to the Lord
Athl-ne, he did it, whereby a Mortgages of three hundred pounds, which he had
upon the Lord L-mr-ck's Estate, then in grant to the Lord Athl-ne, was
released; who appeared not to us to have known of the said Mortage, or to have
had any benefit thereby.

31. Edmund Roch, Gent. gave Mr. Richard Darling, Agent to the Lord R-mny, five
hundred pounds, for his Interest in procuring his pardon, which by the means of
the Lord R-mny was obtained (as we believe.) But the said Roch was outlawed on
the Statute of Foreign Treasons, tho never out of the Kingdom.

32. John Bourke Esquire commonly called Lord B-ph-n, agreed to pay 750 l. to Mr.
Andrew Card, for the use of the Lord Alb-m-rle, in consideration he would
procure his Majesty's Letter to have him restored to his Estate and Blood;
three hundred pounds of the said Money was to be paid when he was restored to
his Estate, and the residue some time after. In pursuance of the said
Agreement, a Letter was sent to the Lords Justices, to be communicated to the
Commissioners of the Court of Claims, in favor of the Lord B-ph-n, in order to
have him adjudged within the Articles of Gallway; but nothing being done
thereon, it was agreed that a Bill should be transmitted into England, in order
to pass into a Law in Ireland, to restore the Lord B-ph-n to his Estate and
Blood; the consideration suggested in the Bill was to educate his Children in
the Protestant Religion, and let his Estate to Protestants. It was further
provided in the said Bill, that nine thousand pounds should be raised upon the
said Estate for payment of Debts, and a certain part of the said Estate
appropriated for the maintenance and provision of his Children; but in reality
7500 l. of the said Money was to be paid to the Earl of Alb-m-rle, and the
remainder (as we believe) to the persons concerned in negotiating the said
Agreement. This Bill was brought into the House of Commons of Ireland, but the
Agreement taking wind, and the House resenting that their Authority should be
made use of to support such a clandestine bargain, and finding several
allegations in the said Bill false, they rejected it. Afterward a new
agreement was made, viz. that there should be a Grant to the Lord R-ss in
trust, that the Money to be advanced for procuring the said Grant, should be
first raised out of the Estate, and next, that the Profits should be applied to
the payment of Debts, and after to the use of the Family of Clanrickard. In
pursuance of the Agreements aforesaid, a Letter was procured from his Majesty,
and three thousand pounds paid to Thomas Brodrick Esquire for the benefit of the
Lord Alb-m-rle.

33. Having now laid before your Honors an account of all the Estates
belonging to persons outlawed since the 13th day of February 1688. and also
what Estates have been since restored by Articles, and what by his Majesty's
favor, we will proceed to acquaint your Honors what Grants have been made,
and also what Custodiums are yet in being of any of the said Estates, and to
whom.

34. There have past since the Battle of the Boyne under the Great Seal of
Ireland, 76 Grants and Custodiums; a Book whereof, with the dates of the
Letters Patents, and the Considerations, we have delivered in with the Report
N. 6. Some of the most considerable Grants we here particularly lay before your
Honors, the number of Acres and Considerations.

35. To the Right Honorable the Lord R-mny 3 Grants now in being, containing
49517 Acres, in consideration of Services done.

36. To the Right Honorable the Earl of Alb-m-rle 2 Grants now in being,
containing 108633 Acres in Possession and Reversion, in consideration of
services done.

37. To William B-nt-nck Esquire commonly called Lord W -- dst-ck, 135820 Acres of
Land; no particular consideration mentioned in the Grant.

38. To the Right Honorable the Earl of Athl-ne 2 Grants, containing 26480
Acres, in consideration of services done in the reduction of Ireland.

39. To the Right Honorable the Earl of G-llw-y one Grant, containing 36148
Acres, in consideration of many good and faithful services by him performed.

40. To the Right Honorable the Earl of R-chf-rt 2 Grants, containing 39871
Acres, in consideration of Services done.

41. To the Marquess of P-z-r 2 Grants, containing 30512 Acres, in
consideration of services done.

42. To the Right Honorable the Lord C-n-ngsby 5966 Acres, with several
Chiefrys, Tithes, and many Houses in the City of Dublin, with 1000 l. Mortgage,
in consideration of Services done.

43. To the Right Honorable the Lord M-ntj-y 11070 Acres for 21 years, in
consideration of his Services done in the War of Ireland, the losses he
suffered in his Estate, the Imprisonment of his Father in the Bastile, and his
being killed in the Battle of Steynkirk.

44. To the Honorable Thomas Keightly Esquire 2 Grants, containing 12381 Acres for
99 years, as a portion for his Daughter Mrs. Kaetherine Keightly, who was a
dependant on her late Majesty Q. Mary of ever blessed memory, and in
consideration of a pension of 400 l. per ann. and his lossesin the War.

45. To Colonel Gustavus Hamilton 5382 Acres, whereof 1900 are no part of the
Forfeitures; in consideration of his great and early service in the War of
Ireland, his wading through the Shannon, and storming the Town of Athlone, at
the head of the English Granadeers.

46. To Dr. John Lesly 16077 Acres, in consideration of his early service in
the War of Ireland, his great expense in raising and arming considerable
numbers of men, and fighting at the head of them in several Engagements.

47. To Thomas Pendergaest Esquire now Sir Thomas Pendergast Baronet, 2 Grants,
containing 7082 Acres, upon the most valuable consideration of his discovering
a most barbarous and bloody Conspiracy to Assassinate the King's Most Excellent
Majesty, to destroy the Liberties of England, and in consequence the Protestant
Religion throughout Europe.

48. To Mr. John Baker 1647 Acres, in consideration of the great and memorable
services his Father Colonel Henry Baker performed in the defense of the City of
Londonderry.

49. To Thomas Corry Esquire 2 Grants, one of a Mortgage of 2000 l. in Fee of
several Lands in the County of Wicklow, due to Sir Edward Scott from the Earl
of T-r-ne; the other of 1725 Acres. The considerations mentioned in the Letters
Patents, are, his House being burnt, and his having furnished the Garrison of
Enniskilling with provisions and materials to the value of 3000 l. at his own
expense. But enquiring into the merits of this Gentleman, it appears to us,
that he gave no assistance to the Garrison of Enniskilling; that in the Town of
Enniskilling he publicly declared, he hoped to see all those hanged that took
up Arms for the Prince of Orange; and his House was burnt by the said Garrison.

50. The rest of the Grants, with the former, appear in the Book N. 6. and are
comprehended in the general values.

51. It is to be observed, that all the Acres mentioned in this Report, are
meant Plantation Acres, which bear a proportion to English as 441 is to 264.

52. It is further to be observed, that the Estates abovementioned do not yield
so much to the Grantees as they are here valued at: for as most of them have
abused his Majesty in the real value of their Estates, so their Agents have
imposed on them, and have either sold or let the greatest part of them at great
under value.

53. We are further to take notice, that most of the Lands in the several
Grants aforesaid, were granted under the Exchequer Seal in Custodium for small
numbers of years, or during pleasure, either to the present Grantees, or other
persons; by which means very little profit of them has accrued to his Majesty.
The greatest part of the Custodiums are now expired, but those few yet in
being, appear in a Book at the lower end of the Grants, N. 6.

54. In the next place we humbly acquaint your Honors with the several
Encumbrances that affect the Estates forfeited and not restored; and here we
shall take notice of such only as are found by Inquisition, or have been
allowed by his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, most of which last, have been in
pursuance of her late Majesty's Letter, dated (...) to the Lords Justices of
Ireland, which required, that all Protestants should try the validity of their
Encumbrances in the most speedy manner, without subjecting them to dilatory or
chargeable methods.

55. All the Statutes, Judgments, Mortgages, or other Debts, which appear to us
as aforesaid to affect the Estates not restored, amount to 161936 l. 15 s. 6 d.
the particulars whereof appear in a Book delivered in with this Report, N. 7.
The reality of the said encumbrances, which of them have been made upon a
valuable consideration, and what have been since discharged by Receipt of
Rents, or otherwise, we have had neither time nor opportunity duly to examine,
but we humbly conceive there are many deductions to be made upon the following
considerations.

56. In all Judgments, and Statutes, we have set down the Penal Sums, not being
able to know what Interest is due upon the several particulars.

57. It appears probable to us, that oftentimes the Judgment and Mortgage is
for the same Debt.

58. It is probable, that many of the said Judgments are only for performance
of Covenants, and the defeazances remain in the hands of the Covenanters.

59. In many cases, Protestants and Papists have been equally bound, and the
whole Debt is demanded on the Lands of the forfeited persons, tho there may be
other security.

60. It does appear that many Deeds and Copies of Judgments were produced to
the Juries in several Enquiries, and found without any proof of the execution
of such Deeds, or the considerations therein expressed.

61. It is probable that in many cases the Statutes and Judgments have been
satisfied, and do not appear discharged upon Record.

62. Many encumbrances have been bought up by the Grantees, their Agents, and
Under-purchasers, and oftentimes at small values, and are kept on foot to cover
the Estates, tho probably they might have over-paid themselves by the
Preception of Profits.

63. Many persons have been put in possession of the Lands encumbered, by virtue
of her late Majesty's Letter, and have received all or a great part of their
Debts.

64. It is probable, that several of the Encumbrances have been taken in trust
for forfeiting persons, and many others were entered into covenously.

65. In conclusion it appears to us, that all the contrivances possible were
made use of by some of the Grantees, or their Agents, to make the encumbrances
appear great, tho we believe if they were duly enquired into, they would be
found considerable, but that a great part of them might have been paid off by
the preception of Profits before this time: however we humbly conceive that at
present they will be much more than discharged, by the personal and other
Forfeitures not before valued, which we now humbly lay before your Honors.

66. As we informed your Honors before, soon after the Battle of the Boyne,
Commissioners under the Great Seal of Ireland were appointed, who had power to
seize and dispose of the forfeited Goods and Chattels to his Majesty's use;
these appointed Sub-Commissioners in the several Counties then in his Majesty's
Possession, who made returns of great quantities of Goods and Chattels, which
they valued at 13552 l. but at so moderate computations, that every Horse was
valued at twenty shillings, every Cow or Ox at fifteen shillings, Sheep at half
a Crown a piece, and other things proportionably. So that it appears very
probable to us, that if the said goods had been disposed of to the best
advantage, they might have yielded between two and three hundred thousand
pounds; but before that could be done, upon representation of the then
Commissioners of the Revenue, the Power of disposing by the said Commissioners
of Forfeitures, was superseded by a Letter from his Majesty within nine days
after the granting their Commission, and placed in the Commissioners of the
Revenue: By this means so much time was lost before their Books and Goods
seized by the Sub-Commissioners could be transferred to the Officers of the
Revenue, that the greatest part of them were either embezeled by the
Sub-Commissioners of Forfeitures, or the Commissioners of the Revenue; or else
plundered by the Army at their return into Winter Quarters: so that it does not
appear to us, that there was ever accounted for to his Majesty above the value
of 44000 l. Besides these, there were great quantities of other Goods in the
Inquisitions, which we do not find ever came to his Majesty's use, and many
more were seized by private Men. Indeed the Plunder at that time was so
general, that some Men in considerable Employments were not free from it, which
seems to us a very great reason why this matter has not been more narrowly
searched into; particularly the Lord C-n-ngsby seized a great many Black
Cattle, to the number of Three Hundred or thereabouts, besides Horses that were
left in the Park after the Battle of the Boyne, and which we do not find ever
were accounted for to his Majesty; he also seized all the Plate and Goods in
the House of Sir Michael Creagh (Lord Mayor of the City of Dublin for the year
1689) which are generally thought to amount to a great value, but this last is
said to be by Grant from his Majesty; there were several Rich Goods and other
Householdstuff delivered by the Commissioners of the Revenue, to the then Lords
Justices, the Lord S-dn-y and Lord C-n-ngsby, which we do not find were ever
returned accounted for to his Majesty, or left in the Castle at their departure
from the Government.

67. Farther, there were several other quantities delivered by order of the
Commissioners to Sir Charles Porter, Major General Kirk, and others, which have
not been returned; and a great deal more by the General Officers of the Army,
which it is said his Majesty has since discharged.

68. If we may believe the general reports of the Country, very many persons
have made their advantages of these Forfeitures; but the time was so distant,
the Proofs so difficult, and withal the hopes of getting any part of them back
again so remote, that we rather chose to prosecute more material enquiries, and
therefore can give your Honors no farther information concerning them.

69. But since the values of the before mentioned Goods and Chattels are so
uncertain, we make no estimate of them, but will proceed to take notice of some
debts due by Judgment, and Statute, and a few Mortgages due to forfeiting
Persons not restored; which amount to 120013 l. 13 s. 10 d. as appears in a
Book delivered in with this Report N. 8.

70. And here it may be observed, that these Debts are liable to all the
objections made against the Encumbrances before mentioned; only with this
difference, that as the Encumbrances may be presumed to be in a great measure
satisfied by the preception of Profits, the Creditors being many of them in
Possession by her late Majesty's Letter in favor of Protestant Creditors, or
at least that the full Interest has been paid out of the Rents; So in the
other, the full Penalty is due, no Interest appearing to be paid since the
Forfeiture, and therefore we humbly conceive may be taken as so much in
Discount against Encumbrances.

71. And here we crave leave further to observe, that almost all the said
Judgments were found in the Court of Exchequer only; and from a mistake of our
Orders, no return has been made from either of the Courts of Law; by which
means we believe many more Debts appearing upon Record to be due to Forfeiting
Persons not restored may be omitted.

72. There are yet to be computed 297 Houses in the City of Dublin, 36 Houses
in the City of Cork, with 226 Houses Situate in the several Cities and Towns of
this Kingdom, together with 61 Mills, 28 Fairs and Markets, 72 Rectories and
Tithes, Chief-rents amounting to 283 l. per annum, and six Ferries and
Fisheries, lying within the several Counties and Baronies of this Kingdom; the
Forfeitures of Persons not restored: which we value in gross at 5000 l. and
place here among the personal Forfeitures, toward the discharge of
Encumbrances; and if we add the Debts due to Forfeiting Persons (as we humbly
conceive) we shall fully discharge the Encumbrances aforesaid; and if there
were room to apprehend any deficience, yet the Chattels real of persons
comprehended within the Articles of Limerick, which by the construction of the
said Articles they were not to be restored to, would fully (as we apprehend)
make up any defect that might remain after the allowances aforesaid.

73. It appeared to us by our observations in the Country, that a great part of
the Lands called unprofitable in the Survey (except those in Kerry, which we
account as nothing) are now profitable Acres, and many of them as good Lands as
any of the Kingdom; and tho they are not comprehended within our valuations,
yet are in themselves considerable.

74. We have computed the forfeited Estates according to the present value, and
the current price of Coin here, were they now to be set, without any regard to
beneficial Leases made before the Forfeitures; and because we found it
impossible either to come to a reasonable knowledge of the number of them, and
which are real and fraudulently set up, we think it most proper to make a
general allowance for the same, by way of discount on other particulars: and if
all the unprofitable Acres be cast in, it may near answer the difference of
value the now beneficial Leases do make from the present intrinsic value
exclusive of them.

75. And lest this allowance should be thought insufficient, we humbly conceive
the Woods of the Kingdom now standing on the Forfeited Estates not restored,
may be worth Sixty thousand pounds: which we believe (if thrown in) will answer
the difference, provided some speedy care be taken to prevent farther waste.

76. But lest our allowances on the particulars aforesaid should not be
esteemed sufficient, we throw in all denominations of Lands, to which we could
annex no number of Acres, not receiving any light either by the Surveys,
Commissioners Books, Inquisitions, or our enquiries in the Country: and because
they are quantities of Land that vastly differ from one another, both in value
and number of Acres, we make no certain estimate of them, tho it seems very
probable to us, that they amount to Seventy or Eighty Thousand Acres; which we
humbly conceive will much more than answer all the deficiencies before
mentioned.

77. And here we shall take notice of the general waste committed on the
Forfeited Woods of this Kingdom, particularly on the Woods of Sir Valentine
Brown in the County of Kerry, where to the value of twenty Thousand Pounds has
been cut down and destroyed: and the waste on the Woods of the late Earl of
Cl-nc-rtys Estate, now in Grant to the Lord W -- dst-ck, is computed at Twenty
Seven Thousand Pounds: And indeed so hasty have several of the Grantees, or
their Agents, been in the disposition of the Forfeited Woods, that vast numbers
of Trees have been cut and sold for not above six pence a piece: and the like
waste is still continuing in many parts of this Kingdom, and particularly at
this instant, the Right Honorable Sir John Hely Lord Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas here, and Peter Goodwyn, joint Purchasers of the Lands of
Feltrim within six miles of Dublin, of the Right Honorable the Lord C-n-ngsby,
are now cutting down the very ornamental rows and Groves about the mansion
House: great waste has been made, and yet is commiting on the Woods of
Oshaghnessy in the County of Gallway, purchased by Toby Butler Esquire for
about 2500 l. which is valued to above 12000 l. and when we appointed some
persons to view and value the said Woods, the said Toby Butler did prosecute
them by Indictment for so doing.

78. Besides all the forfeitures before mentioned, there are great numbers of
persons guilty of the late Rebellion, and within no Articles, and never
prosecuted; and many have appeared on the Exigent, which to this day are
continued under Bail; and some of them were this last Summer Assizes tried and
Acquitted: and indeed it does appear to us, that the Freeholders of this
Kingdom through length of time, and by contracting new Friendship with the
Irish, or by interpurchasing with one another, but chiefly through a general
dislike of the disposition of the Forfeitures, are scarce willing to find any
persons guilty of the late Rebellion, even upon full Evidence.

79. By reason of this delay of prosecution, many good Estates (by the death of
Parties) have been lost to his Majesty.

80. And notwithstanding all this, it seems probable by the multitude of
discoveries offered us, that if right methods were taken, and proper
encouragement given, a great Sum of Money might be raised out of the
forfeitures that lie concealed.

81. There has been so great a neglect in the prosecution of his Majesty's
Title, that no Inquisition went into Connaught till the year 1695, which gave
the forfeiting persons time and leisure to set up what encumbrances they
pleased: and when they were issued, the findings were almost as the Counsel of
the forfeiting person thought fit. And indeed by the great disproportion of
Protestants to Papists, which is computed at not one to fifty, and so very few
Protestant Freeholders being within most Counties of that Province, so little
Justice is to be had there, that the Province it self seems scarcely reduced to
his Majesty's Obedience: a late instance might be given, at the last Assizes
for the County of Gallway, where near forty persons were brought on their
Trials for the late Rebellion, and the majority of the Jury that had them in
Charge were Officers in the late King James's Army, and adjudged within
Articles, and after that 'twere needless to say they were all acquitted: Tho by
accident 'twas discovered, that one Kirevan, one of the persons then on Trial,
was in actual Rebellion, and an Officer under the Foreman of the Jury, who was
sworn to that Fact; which was a surprising difficulty to the Jury, who not well
knowing how to acquit him upon so direct a proof, resolved that the Dice should
determine, and so the Jury among themselves threw the Dice, and the Lot falling
upon one Mr. Pendergast, he did absent himself accordingly, and so no Verdict
was given on the said Mr. Kirevan, who was thereupon bound over to appear the
next Assizes at Gallway to take his Trial.

82. The House of Clanrickard have a vast Territory within that Province, with
few or no Protestant Tenants thereon, the greatest part whereof by the
Attainder of the Lord B-ph-n (who is only Tenant for Life) is now vested in his
Majesty: and we humbly Conceive if proper methods were now taken by setting the
said Estate to Protestant Tenants by Leases for Lives renewable for ever,
'twould greatly increase the Freeholders, and thereby secure the Property, and
advance the Protestant Interest of that Province.

83. And in the next place we do Humbly Acquaint your Honors that several of
the Grantees have raised great sums of Money by sale of their Lands and
Estates, in the whole amounting to 68155 l. 3 s. 1 d. as does hereafter more
particularly appear, (viz.) The Right Honorable the Earl of Athl-ne has sold
so much of his Grant, as amounts to the Sum of 17684 l 12 s. And here we think
we ought to take notice that the Lord Athl-ne's Grants are confirmed by Act of
Parliament of Ireland. The Right Honorable the Earl of R-mn-y has sold so much
of his Grants, as amounts to 30147 l. 11 s. 1 d. of which 5323 l. 14 s. 7 d.
remains unpaid in the Purchasers Hands. The Right Honorable the Earl of
Alb-m-rle has received in England 13000 l. Sterling, by sale of part of his
Grant. The Right Honorable the Lord C-nn-ngsby has sold to the value of 2200
l. And Thomas Keightly Esquire has sold and received to the value of 5123 l. 10
s. -- amounting in the whole to 68155 l. 3 s. 1 d.

84. We are also to acquaint your Honors, that there have been several
Proclamations and other Public Assurances given, that a fourth part should be
granted to such as should discover any concealed Forfeitures: to some of the
Discoverers Grants have been made, and they appear in the Book of Grants N. 6.
and others affirm they have not yet received any Satisfaction, the whole (We
believe) are under the value of two thousand Pounds per annum.

85. And here we may take notice, that the Forfeitures in general,
notwithstanding they appear to be so considerable, have been rather a charge
than profit to his Majesty; which might seem very extraordinary, if we did not
acquaint your Honors that many obscure Men that had little or nothing since
the reduction of Ireland, are now reputed Masters of considerable Estates, and
some of them very great ones: nor does there appear any visible cause of their
acquiring such sudden Riches, but by fishing into these Forfeitures; indeed
the whole management has been so intricate, as if it was designed to make the
knowledge of it a Mystery, which has proved sufficiently advantageous to these
Men, tho very much to the detriment of his Majesty, who by this means has been
deceived in the value of his Grants, and in many cases has given much more
than he intended, as we conceive.

86. There is nothing seems to us to have contributed more to it, than the
setting the forfeited Lands by Cant in the City of Dublin, and not in the
several Counties in the Kingdom: For by that means very few persons would come
to Town at a great Charge and neglect of their Affairs, when they were sure to
be out-bid by the Agents to Great Men, who aimed only to get into possession,
and had Interest enough afterward to have all or most of their Rents remitted.
Upon this consideration Mr. Attorney General, and William Conmelly Esquire
canted Lands in the County of Kilkenny worth about 200 l. per annum, to more
than 20000 l. per annum: So that private Men who had no Interest, found it in
vain to contend; besides, they were overawed by the Authority often of those
that bid against them, which weighed much in this Country.

87. By these methods, when others were driven off the Stage, they took the
Lands at their own rates, oftentimes (as we conceive) agreeing not to bid
against one another; particularly Thomas Brodrick Esquire and the said Mr. Conmelly
(who took vast quantities of Lands, and in a great measure governed the Cants,
few Persons daring to bid against them) acted in Partnership in all they took
in the Year 1695, and ever since; and let it afterward to under-tenants at
greater Rents, which is more observable in Mr. Brodrick, who was a
Privy-Counseller, and appointed by the Lord C-p-ll to inspect the Cants, having
been informed they were managed much to his Majesty's disadvantage.

88. Nor could it be expected they should be better regulated, when many of the
immediate Officers of the Revenue took parcels of these Lands, and some were
taken in trust for the very Commissioners themselves, and particularly the
Lands of Kerdiffs-town were let to Henry Fernley, who was a nominal Person in
trust for Mr. Culliford, at 31 l. 16 s. per annum, tho actually canted to 84 l.
Several other forfeited Lands have been taken by Mr. Culliford, and great
quantities of Goods seized by him, to his Majesty's use, which he afterward
converted to his own.

89. Besides the great abuses in the management of their Cants, we humbly
represent to your Honors one instance of a considerable Estate that was set
without any Cant at all, by direction of the Lords Justices, for at least one
thousand pounds per ann. less than it was then worth; and for a term of sixty
one years, tho by a Letter from his Majesty, dated the (...) day of March School,
they were commanded to Let it for a term not exceeding twenty one Years, and at
a time too when one Year and half was unexpired in another Tenant. This is a
Lease of the Estate of Sir Valentine Brown and Nicholas Brown Esquire commonly
called Lord K-nm-re, within the Counties of Kerry and Limerick, made to John
Blannenhasset and George Rogers Esquires, then Members of Parliament of this
Kingdom.

90. Having already laid before your Honors the most material parts of our
Inquiry, we now crave leave to make a short abstract of our valuations, before
we conclude our Report.

The whole forfeited Estates since the 13th day of February 1688, we value at
2685130 l. 5 s. 9 d.

l. s. d. The Estates restored by Articles we value at 724923 4 6 The Estates
restored by favor, we value at 260863 7 3 The Debts affecting the Estates
forfeited and found by Inquisition, or allowed by order of the Exchequer, we
compute at 161936 15 6

Against which we balance the Estates due to forfeiting Persons not restored,
amounting to 120013 l. 13 s. as also all Houses, Tithes, Mills, Fairs, Markets,
Chief-rents, and Ferries worth about 50000 l.

Against the beneficial Leases, we balance all the Leases called unprofitable,
and also all the Woods yet standing upon the forfeited Estates, which we
compute may be worth about 60000 l. and the Chattles real of Persons adjudged
within Articles, never brought to any account.

But lest Allowances should not be thought sufficient, we throw in all
denominations of Lands that have no number of Acres annexed to them, which we
cannot believe will amount to less than seventy or eighty thousand Acres, and
consequently if valued in proportion with other Lands, will come to at least
14000 l.

The Estates yet undiscovered seem to us very considerable, but we can make no
probable valuation of them. the Sums received by the Grantees from the Sale of
their Estates amount to 68155 l. 3 s. 1 d.

We have taken no notice of any Debts due to Persons restored, or of any
encumbrances affecting their Estates.

And after the several Allowances beforementioned, there yet remains 1699343
l. 14 s. which we humbly lay before your Honors as the gross of all the
Estates forfeited since the 13th of February 1688. and not restored.

We shall now conclude our Report by laying before your Honors one other Grant
of a considerable value, which we are apprehensive does not fall within the
Letter of our Enquiry; but since the benefit of some forfeited Leases or
Holdings are therein granted, we chose rather to lay the whole Grant before
your Honors, than be thought defective in any part of our duty, or what might
be expected from us.

A Grant under the Great Seal of Ireland dated the 30th of May 1695, passed to
Mrs. Elizabeth V-ll-rs, now Countess of Ork -- -y, of all the Private Estate of
the late King James (except some small part in grant to the Earl of Athl-ne)
containing 95649 Acres, worth 25995 l. 13 s. per annum; value total 337943 l. 9
s. the Particulars whereof, (viz.) the number of Acres in each County and
Barony, the value per annum, and value total, appear in a Book delivered in
with this Report, N. 9. There is payable out of this Estate, two thousand
Pounds per annum to the Lady Susanna B-ll-sis for her Life; and also one
thousand pounds per annum to Mrs. Godfrey for her Life, and almost all the old
Leases determine in May 1701, and then the Estate will answer the values
abovementioned. All which with the utmost deference we humbly submit to your
Honors.

Dublin. Signed, Fra. Annesley, John Trenchard, Ja. Hamilton, Hen. Langford.

FINIS.
To Francis Annesly, John Trenchard, James Hamilton, and Henry Langford,
Esquires, Commissioners with us in the Execution of so much of a late Act of
Parliaament, made in England, as relates to the Enquiring into, and taking an
Account of the forfeited Estates of Ireland.
The Memorial of Henry Earl of Dr-gh-da, Sir Francis Brewster, and Sir Richard
Leving Knights.
Gentlemen,
WE having jointly acted with you in the Execution of the Power to us given by
a late Act of Parliament made in England, unto this present day, and having
Signed and Sealed three Books of Outlawries N. 1. three Books of Forfeitures N.
2. and also three Books of Adjudications at the Council Board, N. 3. and three
Books of Adjudications at the Court of Claims, N. 4. and three Books of Pardons
and Reversals N. 5. and three Books of Grants N. 6. and three Books of
Encumbrances N. 7. and three Books of Debts due to forfeiting Persons not
restored N. 8. which we conceive contain the Substance of the Account required
from us by the said Act; and our Secretary having drawn up the Report, by the
immediate Directions and Privity of some of you, We have been present at the
first and second Reading thereof, and have delivered our Sentiments concerning
the several Paragraphs thereof, which in all amount to the number of ninety, or
thereabouts; after having done our utmost Endeavors to satisfy You and our
Selves, and to come to a perfect Agreement with you for the public Good, on
the 28th day of this instant November; three Parts or Books of the said Report
were prepared, read, and compared, and contain amongst other things, the
Paragraph concerning the private Estate of the late K. James, which we have
before affirmed in our Opinions, was not any forfeited Estate, within the
meaning of the said Act; and the said Paragraph was much altered from what it
was on the 24th day of October last, or at any time after, till the 23d day of
this instant November, at which time it appeared that mention is therein made
of forfeited Leases, which are Granted, together with the said Estate, tho
neither the continuances of such Leases, nor the value of them above the
reserved Rent, nor other certainty of the said Leases does appear to us. We
have declared, and do declare, that whenever the aforesaid Matters shall
appear, we will join in the Reporting of whatever is a Forfeiture, within the
meaning of the said Act: Whereupon you were told by Henry Earl of Dr-gh-da,
that we could not give an Account to the last Paragraph containing the said
private Estate, nor to Paragraphs 8, 10, 25, 32, 66, 78, 79.

But that we would agree to all the said Report, except the abovementioned
Paragraphs.

Which you, Gentlemen, opposing, the said Earl did enter on one of the Books,
or parts of the Report, addressed to the Honorable the House of Commons, a
writing to the Effect following.

We agree to all the above Report, except the 8, 10, 25, 32, 66, 78, 79
Paragraphs, to which we cannot Assent, for reasons which we will be ready to
lay before your Honors when we shall be thereunto required; which being
written, we Signed and Sealed the same, and pray you to join with us therein,
or to subscribe your Names above the said writing, thereby testifying your
Assent to all the Paragraphs in the said Report.

But you, Gentlemen, insisting upon your Majority, of four to three, have not
only refused to sign the said Book addressed to the House of Commons, but have
taken the other Books, containing the said Report, and addressed to his Majesty
and the House of Peers from us, and will not suffer us to join with you in such
manner, as will (as we conceive) both answer the ends of the said Act, and
satisfy our Minds in matters which we are to Certify upon our Oaths.

And when you propounded to us to make a separate Report, which we thought no
way convenient for the Service; you yet were not willing to let us have Copies,
either of that we had agreed to, or dissented from.

We therefore pray you, as well in consideration of the Public Trust reposed
in us all, as of preserving a good Correspondence amongst us, that you will not
be any hindrance to our Writing and Subscribing, and Sealing on the other Books
and Parts of the Report addressed to his Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, in such manner as we have done on the Book addressed to the
Honorable the House of Commons; we leaving you sufficient space above such
Writing of ours, to Subscribe and Seal the whole Report; which if it be not
done already, we will Consent to make such Alterations as to make that feasible.

And we do insist, and in virtue of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, pray and
caution you, that you do not obliterate, cancel, or otherwise deface what we
have (as we believe) solemnly Signed, Sealed, and delivered, as aforesaid,
pursuant to the said Act; but that the same, without Alteration, be laid before
the Honorable House of Commons.

And we do likewise make instance to you, that we may be ordered, and not
hindered from having Copies of the Paragraphs we have agreed to, but more
especially, and speedily, those to which we cannot agree, to the end we may not
be hindered by you from laying before his Majesty, and the two Houses of
Parliament, the reasons why we cannot give our Assent to the said 8 Paragraphs.

We also put you in mind of the several Instances we have made to you, of
comparing at our Board the original Depositions taken before us, with the Entry
thereof in our Book, and signing such Book by us, after due comparing; which we
think extremely necessary to be done, because the original Depositions appear
too much blotted and interlined, and are thereby capable of great Alterations,
which may tend to the discredit of our Proceedings.

And lastly, we pray you, and insist, that this our Memorial be kept ready to
be produced amongst the Papers and Proceedings of our Commission.

Given and delivered unto you under our Hands and Seals this 29th day of
November, 1699.
A Copy of a Letter to the Lord Ch-nc-ll-r of England; And the like Letter
being sent to the Speaker of the House of Commons, the House would not hear it
read, as not Signed by a Quorum of the Commissioners sent.
Our very good Lord,
WE having been appointed Commissioners, with four others, for executing so
much of the late Act of Parliament made in England, as relates to the forfeited
Estates of Ireland; and having acted jointly with them therein, to the
Expiration of the Time limited by that Act, and from that time attended the
putting in order, and perfecting the matters of our Enquiry, unto this present
day; and having with them Signed and Sealed the several Books containing the
Names of the forfeiting Persons, the particulars and Values of the forfeited
Estates, Real and Personal; the Counties and Baronies wherein they lie, the
several Grants and Dispositions of the Forfeitures, and the Considerations
thereof; the Reversals of Outlawries and Pardons, of forfeiting Persons, and
their Considerations, and how and by whom procured; we conceive that we have
thereby, in all essential matters, answered the ends of the said Act, and
completed the Trust reposed in us.

But since it was thought convenient, that a Report of our Proceedings should
be also made, for the better Explanation of the Books which contain the
Substance, and to render them more useful and intelligible; We gave a general
Consent that the Secretary should draw it up, but gave then no particular
Directions our selves concerning the same.

The draught of which being produced, we excepted against several of the many
Paragraphs contained in it; some for not being within the Power given us by the
Act, and others as not warranted by Depositions or other Proof; and after many
Debates with the other Commissioners, We desiring to comply with them as much
as possible, agreed to eighty two Paragraphs of the Report, containing more
than all that related to the Books, and excepted only against about eight
Paragraphs, tho we were not fully satisfied with several of those which we had
passed in the manner they are expressed.

And when in these few matters our Reasons could not prevail, but that they
overruled us by a pretense of a Majority, of four against three; and having
labored to influence us by private Letters, Instructions, and Directions,
which they affirmed they had received from several Members of the Honorable
House of Commons, we did not insist further on having those eight Paragraphs
left out of the Report.

But when the Report was Engrossed, and came to be Signed on Tuesday the 28th
instant, as we were content the other four should Sign and Seal the same, as
they thought fit; so we desired to Sign and Seal the same, as an Approbation of
all contained therein, except those Paragraphs; and accordingly on that part
thereof addressed to the House of Commons, one of us did write words to the
Effect following, We agree to the above Report, except the 8th, 10th, 25th,
32d, 66th, 78th, 79th, Paragraphs, and the Paragraph wherein the private Estate
of the late Duke of York is included, to which we cannot agree for Reasons
which we will be ready to lay before your Honors, when you are pleased to
require them from us. And afterward we Signed and Sealed the same, praying the
other Commissioners to Sign and Seal as they thought fit, and offering to Sign
and Seal the other parts of the Report addressed to his Majesty, and the House
of Peers.

But they then instantly pretending to make an Order against what we did,
refused either to Sign with us, or in a space left for them above our Writing,
and hastily took away the other two parts of the Report, which we had offered
to perfect, and also took from us that part which we had already perfected.

We then Adjourned, by Consent, till four in the Afternoon this day, and
understanding that they had pretended to make an Order for Cancelling the
Report which we had Signed and Sealed; and seeing at the time of our meeting,
that most of the Papers belonging to our Commission were taken away; We with
all speed delivered to them a Memorial, under our Hands and Seals, offering
thereby to Sign and Seal the other two parts of the Report in the manner we had
done the former, and to leave in them a greater space for the other
Commissioners to Sign and Seal above us, and if desired, to amend even that
which was done before, praying them not to cancel what we had perfected.

We also put them in mind that we had often made Request to them, to compare
the original Depositions which were taken before us, and were much blotted and
interlined, and capable of great Alterations, with the Entries thereof in our
Books, and that we might all of us Sign and Seal the said Entries; and we also
prayed them to give us Copies of those Paragraphs to which we had agreed, and
more especially those to which we dissented, that we might be the better able
to represent to the most Honorable House of Peers, the Reasons of our
disagreement to these Paragraphs. But finding no Success, and the other
Commissioners owning to us, that they had, after our Adjournment the last
Night, and after we were gone away, cut off that Leaf of the Report on which we
had written our Consent, and put our Hands and Seals; and they insisting, that
unless we would declare our Consent to all the Paragraphs, we should declare it
to none, and refusing absolutely to let us Sign the said Report in any manner
that might express our disagreement to any part of it: We think our selves
under a necessity of applying to your Lordship to lay this matter before the
most Honorable House of Peers, that we may have an opportunity to show that we
have joined in the execution of all the matters required of us by the said Act;
and likewise the Reasons why, being upon our Oaths, we could not agree to those
Paragraphs we excepted to. We are

Your Lordships Most faithful humble Servants, Dr-gh-da, F. Brewster, Ri.
Leving.
DVBLIN, Nov. 29. 1699.
House of Commons, January 16. 1699.
Irish Commissioners attending. Sir Richard Leving first called in by himself.

Mr. Speaker. SIR Richard Leving, The House having being informed of something
that you have said to a worthy Member of this House (which I am confined to
examine you to) I may name the Person, because you have said it, as the House
is informed, to more than one: The Member's name is Vernon, and it is in
relation to some Discourse that passed between you and one or more of the
Commissioners for the Irish Forfeitures concerning the private Estate being put
into the Report. The House requires you to give an Account of what you informed
that worthy Member.


Sir Richard Leving. Mr. Speaker, I shall very readily obey the Commands of the
House; but before that, I would inform you (if it be the pleasure of the House)
of all that then passed.


Mr. Speaker. Pray take your own Method, give an account of what you know.


Sir Richard Leving. There was a Debate arose between the Commissioners
concerning the reporting the private Estate: Upon that Debate I was of opinion,
That that Estate ought not to have been reported, because not within our power
by the Act: Upon this a Debate happened, and several Reasons were offered why
this might be understood to be a Forfeiture; one Reason that was given was,
that the Estate was the late King James's Estate, and so it was forfeited. To
which answer was made, That if K. James had forfeited it, yet it was not within
the Act, because the words of the Act confined our Enquiry to Forfeitures since
the 13th of February, 1688. When that was said, there was another of the
Commissioners that did say, I was always of opinion that this was a Forfeiture
within the Act, because tho King James had not forfeited before, yet he coming
into Ireland on March 15. 1688. he committed Treason against King William, and
Queen Mary, and forfeited that Estate. It was then objected, that this private
Estate of the late King was parcel of the Possessions of the Crown of England,
and was vested in him as parcel of the Crown of England, and the Crown being
vested in K. William and Queen Mary by an Act of Parliament made in this
Kingdom, which settled the Crown in K. William and Q. Mary; the Crown and all
the Possessions were vested in them Feb. 13. 1688. so that that Estate being
actually in his Majesty then, and tho otherwise it might have been conceived,
that K. James had forfeited afterward, tho not then attainted, it could not be
conceived how he could forfeit that Estate, because it was before in the King
and Queen. And the same Gentleman that urged, that upon the 15th of March King
James landed in Ireland and committed Treason, pleased to say, I don't dislike
the 30th of January, nor the Deed that was done that Day; I like both the Day
and the Deed. I confess I was surprised at it, and said, if those be your
Reasons, and this is your Agreement, I declare I will never join in it.

One of the Commissioners at this time was absent, but the next day that
Gentleman was brought into the Room with the other Commissioners, and then this
was debated again, and upon that Debate much of that matter was spoke over
again (not that relating to the 30th of January) but then it was again urged
that that Estate might be said to be forfeited, and the same Objections were
repeated, and it seemed to be assented to by the other Commissioners, that it
was not strictly a Forfeiture, and some of them said it might not be within the
Commission; then it was asked, Why then will you report it? And one of the
Gentlemen did answer that it was a villainous Grant, and therefore fit to be
exposed; I did not write down the words at that time, because I had then no
intention of making any complaint, or publishing these matters. But since they
have cut off our Hands and Seals from the Report, it made us think it necessary
to do what we have done. And it being said by a Commissioner not here, but in
Ireland, If we take it not to be within our Commission, why will you do it? why
will you report it? for it will fly in the King's Face: To which another
answered, Why the Commission flys in the King's Face; if you will not fly in his
Face, you cannot execute this Commission, or you must not execute it, one of
them two.

Upon this it was further urged, That this matter should be reported; and one
of the Commissioners said, Tho it was not clearly within the Act, yet he had
received several Letters from several Members of this House to report this
matter, and he said it was as good (or contained in the Letter, that it was as
good) do nothing as not to report it. There was upon this an expression by one
of the Commissioners, that a great Person was concerned [That was my Lady
Ork-y] and the application of that was, that if he was so tender of that
Person, we should not join with them in any thing else: For, Sir, the Debate
was grown to this pass, whether if we did not join in this thing, we should
join in any thing else. This I think is the substance of what I told that
worthy Member: if I am asked as to any other Person, I shall give you a true
Account.


Mr. Speaker. I am commanded to ask you who was by upon this discourse between
you and the rest of the Commissioners concerning the differences in opinion,
and how many, and particularly at that time that one of the Commissioners did
say that he thought that since it was not in your Commission to report that
Grant, it would be a flying in the King's Face, etc.


Sir R. Leving. It was the day that the Commissioner that was sick first came
to us, I believe about the 24th of October last: There was present at that time
the Lord Dr-gh-da, Sir Francis Brewster, Mr. Annesly, Mr. Trenchard, Mr.
Hamilton, Mr. Langford, the Secretary, and my self, all were in the room when
this was said.


Mr. Speaker. Who was it said it was a flying in the King's Face, and who made
answer that the Commission did fly in the King's Face?


Sir R. Leving. It was my Lord Dr-gh-da said the first part, and Mr. Hamilton
was the Person that said the other.


Mr. Speaker. Who said that concerning the 30th of January, that it was a good
Day and a good Deed?


Sir. R. Leving. That was the day before the other Discourse was; there was all
but Mr. Trenchard, who was sick and came next day.


Mr. Speaker. Who said it, and upon what occasion?


Sir R. Leving. It was not a particular direction to any person as I remember;
but it was spoke by way of Answer: it was told Mr. Langford when he came in,
the Objection that was made against this being returned as a Forfeiture, etc.
And then he said, I was always of opinion that this was a Forfeiture, and that
Kings might forfeit as well as others; and he thereupon said, he did not
dislike the 30th of January.


Mr. Speaker. You mentioned that some of the Commissioners said they received
Letters from Members of Parliament to insert this Grant into the Report: Please
to repeat who had them, and from whom?


Sir R. Leving. The first time I heard mention of any such Letter was the first
night: After we rose we went to Mr. Trenchard's Chamber, who was sick, to
consult; for this Debate occasioned some concern in our minds, and we did
apprehend some breach amongst us, and went to his Chamber to see if we could
come to an accommodation, and offered Mr. Trenchard and the rest of the
Gentlemen present, That if they would take the whole Report without the private
Estate, and sign it, we could join with them, and if they would put in an
Article of the private Estate, they might sign it by themselves: for we thought
if we could not agree to it, we would be no hindrance to them if they thought
fit to do it; and then Mr. Trenchard said, he had Letters from several Members
to report this private Estate, and that it would signify nothing if we did not
report it.


Mr. Speaker. Did he say that from himself, or that it was in any Letter?


Sir R. Leving. I do not say that positively, he showed me no Letter.


Mr. Speaker. Did he name any Member?


Sir R. Leving. I do not remember that he named any Member.


Mr. Speaker. Who was present at that time in Mr. Trenchard's Chamber?


Sir R. Leving. Most of those Gentlemen I have named were there the next day.


Mr. Speaker. Who was by?


Sir R. Leving. My Ld Dr-gh-da nor Sir F. Brewster were there, but the rest
were there, and the Secretary I believe was there. The next day when we met
again, there was present, as I informed you, all the Commissioners, and then
Mr. Trenchard amongst other Discourse did express himself in the said manner,
and Mr. Annesly said that he had received Letters from Members of the House.


Mr. Speaker. But Mr. Annesly, nor Mr. Trenchard did not tell you the Contents
of those Letters, nor from whom they received them.


Sir R. Leving. They said they had Letters to report this Estate, but they did
not as I remember name any body, tho I did hear from my Ld Dr-gh-da and Sir
Francis Brewster, that they had named Persons, but I did not my self take
particular notice of any Body.


Mr. Speaker. Did they produce any Letter, or show you any?


Sir R. Leving. Not then.


Mr. Speaker. When did you see any?


Sir R. Leving. I did see a Letter the next morning, and that Letter was showed
to me by Mr. Annesly, but I did not think that Letter came up to the point they
spoke over night.


Mr. Speaker. Can you remember the Contents of it?


Sir R. Leving. I had rather refer my self to the Letter, I believe Mr. Annesly
has it.


Mr. Speaker. Who wrote it?


Sir. R. Leving. Must I name him?


Mr. Speaker. Yes, the House expects it of you.


Sir R. Leving. His name is Mr. Arthur Moore: And I did then take notice of it
to Mr. Annesly, that this Letter did not amount to what they told us the night
before.


Mr. Speaker. You say you said to Mr. Annesly, you told us of a Letter you
received from some Members to report this private Estate, but this Letter does
not come up to what you told us. Upon which Mr. Annesly answered as for
himself, If we do not report that private Estate, we had as good do nothing.


Sir. R. Leving. I don't say so: Upon recollection, I do now believe that those
Gentlemen Mr. Trenchard and Mr. Annesly did say that there was contained in the
Letter that Expression, that if they did not put that Estate into the Report,
they had as good do nothing; but when I once saw that Letter, I thought they
had imposed upon us.


Then Sir P. Leving withdrew, and all the rest of the Commissioners that were
then in town, with their Secretary, were ordered to be brought in.

And accordingly Sir Francis Brewster, Mr. Annesly, Mr. Trenchard, Mr.
Langford, and Mr. Hooper their Secretary were brought in.

Mr. Speaker. Gentlemen, I am commanded to enquire of you, and if you please
you may speak severally to it: The House has been informed of some discourses
among you Gentlemen of this Commission, when you differed in opinion about
returning of King James's private Estate; the first time Mr. Trenchard was not
there, and the next day that Mr. Trenchard was brought there: but I think the
Discourse the House would enquire after was the 2d day when Mr. Trenchard was
there, which was to this Effect, That some Argument being given why this Estate
was Forfeiture, and other Arguments being given it was not, one of the
Commissioners, as this House has been informed, should say, if it be not
within our Commission, it is a flying in the King's face. Upon which another
Commissioner made answer, Why the Commission it self flies in the King's face;
And for what are we sent hither but to fly in the Kings face, or to that effect?


Members. No, no.


Mr. Speaker. I beg Pardon if I mistake, the words were to this effect: The
Commission flies in the King's face, and if you will not fly in his face, you
must not, or you cannot execute this Commission. You are all said to be present
when these words were spoken; So you will please to give account severally to
the House what passed upon this occasion, and what you remember of it. Sir
Francis Brewster, if you please.


Sir Francis Brewster. I beg leave to say, I am sorry for any differences
between us, and that we were as hearty as any in the execution of this
Commission. But for the matter of the words now spoke of, there was some
Discourse concerning the reporting that private Estate: Sir R. Leving said, it
was not within our Enquiry. To which some Reply was made, why if it was not
within our Commission yet it might be fit to be reported. My Ld Dr-gh-da made
answer, If it be not within our Commission, then it will be to fly in the
King's face to report it. Another then said, the Commission flies in the King's
face, and we cannot act in this Commission, unless we fly in his face; I think
that was said by Mr. Hamilton. Upon which some other Arguments went on to
enforce the passing of it. At last some of the Commissioners said they had a
Letter from several Members of the House of Commons, that gave them reason to
believe they should report this Estate. I think it was said by Mr. Annesly:
Upon which Sir R. Leving made answer, I do not think these Gentlemen have
changed their minds, that was, that Forfeitures might be made by Kings: upon
which it was answered, you are mistaken, a great many of your Friends are now
come over to us; and they urged it still more, and at last they said they had
had several Letters about it. I must confess I made answer, I know not whether
you have had any Letter, I never had any: But I must needs say, if I had no
other reason I should not sign this Report, for I think I ought not to be
directed by any private Member of the House of Commons, and that no Letter
should prevail with me to do it, I am loath to name any one.


Mr. Speaker. The House expects it.


Sir F. Brewster. I think they named Mr. Harcourt.


Mr. Speaker. Who named him?


Sir F. Brewster. Mr. Annesly. He did not say in his Letter particularly, but
did say something to that purpose, that if we did not report the private
Estate, we had as good do nothing; and he said it was so in the Letter.


Mr. Speaker. Was you at Mr. Trenchard's Chamber the first night that he was
not at the Commission, the night before he was brought thither?


Sir F. Brewster. No, Sir, I was not.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Annesly, If you please to give an Account of what you know of
this matter, you hear to what the House has a mind to be informed; it is as to
the Discourse that happened amongst you the Commissioners the 2 days you
differed in opinion concerning the inserting of this Grant into your Report,
and particularly as to the words spoken by Mr. Hamilton, or what else you heard
then.


Mr. Annesly. Truly Mr. Speaker, I never expected to have been called to an
account for any thing that was said among the Commissioners in Ireland upon
their debates, or that any Gentleman in Commission with us would have acted
such a part here; otherwise I should have been more observant thereof; but the
particular Expressions which some of us are charged with by the Evidence now
given, are of so extraordinary a nature, that I could not easily have forgotten
them; flying in the face of the King is so great a Reflection and so foolish an
Expression, that I think I could not have passed it by without the Censure it
deserved. Sir, I do affirm to you upon my Reputation, my Credit, and all that
is dear to me, that I never heard the least Reflection upon the King by any of
the Commissioners, either in their Debates or otherwise in execution of their
Authority.

When I had the Honor to be appointed by you one of your Commission, I
naturally reflected upon the part I was to act in it, the many enemies I must
in likelihood create upon a faithful Discharge of my Duty, as well amongst Men
in power, the Grantees, as the Purchasers, and others claiming under them; of
which I had some knowledge, having been formerly in Ireland. However, I was
resolved upon a very short notice not only to subject my own private Concerns
to Disappointments, but to dispose of other Men's business, with which in the
way of my profession I was entrusted, to their best advantage in my absence.

In discharge whereof I did act (and I hope it will appear I did so) with all
imaginable Integrity. And it will be my hard fortune, if after such my
Endeavors I should fall under your Displeasure.

As to what is alleged with respect to Mr. Harcourt, I do not remember that I
ever mentioned his Name upon any Debate at our board, whereby to influence any
Man in his Judgment: nor indeed upon any other account, except in private
Conversation, by drinking his Health, and by expressing my self with that
gratitude which became me toward one whom I had received particular
Obligations from and deserved well from me.

I never had any Letter from Mr. Harcourt that took the least notice of the
private Estate, nor indeed that related to the execution of our Commission,
except in one Letter he said I might easily imagine with what pleasure he heard
of the success of our Labors, and that he was glad to find by the account I
gave him, that the Forfeitures were likely to answer the End for which we were
sent over, and that was the only Letter I received from him during my stay in
Ireland; hearing abroad of such a Letter being mentioned in the House, I looked
all the Letters I received from any of the Gentlemen of this House during my
stay in Ireland; but I own I am very unwilling to produce the Letters of any
person who favored me with his correspondence, and do hope I shall not be
obliged to it.


Mr. Speaker. For that you will have the further pleasure of the House; but do
you say you never heard of those words of flying in the King's face, or that
your Commission did fly in the King's Face?


Mr. Annesly. From the time we first began to execute our Commission, till our
Power was determined, I never was absent one hour, I think I may say one moment
from business, and I assure you I never heard those words, nor any thing like
them, fall from any one of the Commissioners. As to the Debate among the
Commissioners about returning the private Estate, some hot words did pass, and
I will take notice to you (if you please) of some of them.

The Gentleman on my left hand did give very abusive Language to one of the
other Commissioners.


Mr. Speaker. To whom?


Mr. Annesly. To Mr. Trenchard. Another of the Commissioners said, he would
battle it with us at the Bar of the House of Commons.


Mr. Speaker. Who was that?


Mr. Annesly. That was my Lord Dr-gh-da. Says Sir Francis Brewster, I have as
good Friends as you, meaning Mr. Trenchard, and we shall be as well heard there
as you. Mr. Trenchard answered, I don't fear what you can do, if you will not be
an Evidence against me: the ill Language Sir Francis gave forced that
Expression from him; the Resentments were high, and the rest of the
Commissioners then present endeavored to pacify and make them Friends; I own I
then little suspected that Sir Francis, that took the Expression so ill, would
have made good Mr. Trenchard's words at this Bar; if I had, I should have taken
more notice of what passed. There might be some other particulars that Sir F.
Brewster has charged us with, which I may have omitted answering; if you please
Sir to remind me of them, I will give them the best Answer I can.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Trenchard, if you please to give the House an Account of what
you know of this matter.


Mr. Trenchard. I was present at the Debate about the private Estate, which was
managed with great warmth, and much said on both sides; but I do not remember
one word which this Gentleman speaks of that was directly so said, I do own
there were some words that might give umbrage to this Accusation with those
that were resolved to misunderstand them. The occasion was this; My Ld
Dr-gh-da, as I remember, or Sir Richard Leving said it would be flying in the
King's Face to report this Grant: Upon which one of the Commissioners replied;
my Lord, We have heard too much of this Argument already, and it is time to have
done with it; we were not sent here to flatter, and if the enquiring into the
mismanagement of the Forfeitures be a flying in the King's Face, then our whole
Commission is a flying in his Face. It Is not dishonouring but vindicating his
Majesty, to show he has been abused by ill Men; and I doubt not but he will
desert them when he has discovered it, as the best and wisest Princes in all
Ages have done. More than this, I do affirm upon the Reputation of a Gentleman,
and the word of an honest Man, was not said whilst I was at the Board.


Mr. Speaker. Who said the words you have repeated?


Mr. Trenchard. 'Twas I, Sir.


Mr. Speaker. You don't remember that Mr. Hamilton said any thing as to the
flying in the King's Face?


Mr. Trenchard. I do affirm that Mr. Hamilton to the best of my memory (and I
think I could not mistake it) did not say any words relating to that matter,
more than that since we had enquired into the private Estate, and it was known
in both England and Ireland, we should be thought bribed and corrupt if we did
not report it: but I am very sure he said no words dishonorable of his
Majesty; and if he had, I would have resented it at the time, as I suppose
these Gentle men would have done, and called upon others to have taken notice
of it.


Mr. Speaker. What words did you hear said in your Chamber?


Mr. Trenchard. A great part of the time I was in that Kingdom, I was confined
to my Chamber being sick, which I impute in a great measure to the fatigue of
our Commission, during which time I had the favor to be visited sometimes with
ten or a dozen in an Evening, sometimes twice the number of the People of the
best Fashion in that Country, and amongst the rest, my own Brethren often
obliged me with their Company; without doubt in this time many subjects were
discoursed of, but the particulars of any one discourse I do not remember. I
never treasure up what is said in private Conversation, and if I did, I scorn
to tell it.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Langford, you hear what the Gentlemen have given an account
of, it is of what passed between you about putting the private Estate into the
Report, and whether upon my Ld Dr-gh-da's saying it would be a flying in the
King's face, Mr. Hamilton answered, Our Commission flies in the King's face?


Mr. Langford. I was present when this debate happened about the private
Estate, and it was with a great deal of heat. It was objected by my Ld
Dr-gh-da, that it would be a flying in the King's face to report the private
Estate, and was not in our Commission. It was answered by Mr. Trenchard, we had
that too often mentioned, to put us by the Execution of this Commission; that
we did not think the discovering Abuses, a flying in the King's Face; but that
on the contrary, we should do Service to his Majesty to lay the matter before
him, that he might see how the Grants were disposed of, and how he was deceived
in them; and he thought it was also necessary that both this House and the
Kingdom should know it.


Mr. Speaker. What did Mr. Hamilton say?


Mr. Langford. I did not hear Mr. Hamilton speak one word relating to the King,
or this Point.


Mr. Speaker. Do you know of any Letters from Members of this House?


Mr. Langford. No, Sir, I had not the Honor to be acquainted with many
Members; I had no Letter my self, nor did I see any.


Mr. Speaker. You are accused about words of your own.


Members. Do not ask him to that.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Hooper, You hear to what purpose you are called in?


Mr. Hooper Yes, I do, the whole matter seems strange to me, I have not been
absent from the Board, except when I was sick at Limerick, one hour during the
whole Execution of this Commission: nor did I hear one word spoken reflecting
upon his Majesty, unless the insinuation, that doing our Duty would be flying
in the King's Face, which I think was a great reflection upon him; and I think
Mr. Trenchard has very well repeated his own words. I am sure in substance they
are the same. I am confident there was no Letter produced whilst I was at the
Board, from any Member: and I believe by what Conversation I had with the four
Commissioners, they never had any but what was fit to be produced; and for the
substance of what Mr. Annesly and Mr. Trenchard have said, I know it to be
true, I never heard Mr. Hamilton speak but with great Honor of the King, and I
do positively assert, to the best of my Memory, he never said any such thing,
as is alleged against him, at the Board. I am confident I was present at all
the Debates about the private Estate, and do remember three dissenting
Commissioners did immediately declare themselves against the inserting it in
the Report; three others that are present did as readily declare for it; so
that Mr. Hamilton being in a manner solely left to determine this matter,
complained that it was a great Hardship upon him; for, says he, my Lord Ork --
y is my Relation and my Friend, and besides I am a Tenant to the private
Estate, and it is very severe that the decision of this matter should lie upon
me. He added, he should be very well pleased if the Objection had been made
sooner, and perhaps it might have had more weight with him; and truly, Mr.
Speaker, it did not appear that there was one of the Commissioners for above
five Months, but seemed to be peremptory for the Reporting it, and accordingly
Sir Richard Leving, and Sir Francis Brewster, joined in the Examination of many
Witnesses, to the value of it at Limerick, and other places, till about five
days before the Power of the Commission ceased, when I moved the Board that I
might have some Direction about that Estate; and they made an Order that I
should immediately prepare the Report, and put this in it. And Mr. Hamilton
gave this Reason when he joined with the Commissioners, We have made so great a
noise about this Estate, by examining so many People to the Value, and sending
for the Rent Rolls of it, that it is now the public Discourse that it will be
Reported; and I know the World must needs say that we are Bribed and Corrupted
if we do it not; if it was possible, I should be glad to be excused; but I will
rather lose my Friend, I will rather lose my little Estate than be thought
guilty of Bribery and Corruption, and so gave his Consent to the Reporting of
it; and for the words relating to flying in the King's Face, I affirm they are
false.


Sir F. Brewster. I desire to speak a few words: You were pleased to ask me to
give an Account of what passed about the words, flying in the King's Face, and
I find the House expects I should give an Account of the whole that passed
then; and I beg leave to say farther, that when the Debate was about the
private Estate, and those words were said, about flying in the King's Face,
which my Ld Dr-gh-da, and others will take their Oaths of, and I believe Mr.
Hamilton will not deny; at the same time this was said by Mr. Trenchard, I hear
you talk of flying in the King's Face, I hope it is not flying in his Face; but
this I must tell you, it is a villainous Grant and ought to be exposed; upon his
speaking so, words arose, and that Gentleman gave me ill Language, but my
Language was not so bad, but he was forced to beg my Pardon at the Board, and I
did not his; there he stands, let him deny it if he can.


Mr. Trenchard. Sir, it is true, I did ask his Pardon, and the Occasion was
this, as Mr. Annesly has acquainted you, I was provoked by his opprobrious
Language to reply, I feared him in no Capacity but as an Evidence, which he
took very heinously, he repeated the word Evidence; he said 'twas below a
Gentleman, below a Man of Honor, that such a one ought to be shunned by all
civil Conversation, that I had better have stuck a Dagger in his Heart, than
have called him an Evidence; which now I think, Mr. Speaker, he will not resent so
highly. This put the Board in great disorder, and one of the Commissioners
whispered to me, (I think it was the absent Member, but I am sure all agreed in
it) you know he is a very simple old Fellow; and tho he gave the Affront, you
are in the wrong that you are capable of being Angry with him. Truly, Sir, I
was conscious to my self that I was much to blame, to suffer my self to be
provoked by him; and therefore that the Debate might be interrupted no longer,
I asked his Pardon. As to the other part I am charged with, that I called the
Grant of the private Estate a villainous Grant, I directly deny it. 'Twas
possible I might say 'twas an extravagant Grant, an unreasonable Grant, an
unconscionable Grant, that the King was imposed upon and deceived in this
Grant, to give that for 5000 l. per Annum, which is worth between five and six
and twenty thousand. These are words that amount to it, and might fall from me,
but that I used the word villainous I positively deny; it is a word I don't use
in my ordinary Conversation, a word that never comes out of the mouth of a
Gentleman, and is false.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Annesly, It Is understood that you received a Letter from a
worthy Member of this House Mr. Moore, and I think you told us that you had
that Letter, and all other Letters that you had received from any Members; I
know not whether the House will order the rest, but that worthy Member desires
that his Letter may be produced if you have it.


Mr. Annesly. Mr. Moore has desired it, has he?


Mr. Harcourt. I desire mine too.


Mr. Speaker. Mr. Harcourt would have his too.


Mr. Annesly. It is with great Regret that I bring the Letters of Gentlemen
here, especially those I received from any of the Members of this House, who
did me the honor to correspond with me at that time; tho I think there is
nothing written in them that any Man need decline owning. And therefore, I
think it will be more for their Service to show them, lest they may be
suspected for what they don't deserve: If this House obliges me to lay them all
before them, I must submit.


Members. No, no.


Mr. Speaker. But that Gentleman desires you to produce his.

And Mr. Harcourt also desires his.


Mr. Annesly. I have but four in my Hand, one from Mr. Moore, one from Mr.
Harcourt, the rest are from Mr. Sloane.


Mr. Sloane. I desire he will produce mine too.


Mr. Speaker. I think you named but three, Mr. Sloane desires his too.


Mr. Annesly. There are two from Mr. Sloane, one from Mr. Harcourt, and the
other from Mr. Moore.

Which Letters Mr. Annesly delivered in to the Clerk.


Mr. Annesly. I think it my Duty to say something for Mr. Hamilton who is
absent, and that is to assure you that I never heard any words fall from him,
that were unbecoming a Gentleman fit to be entrusted by you in this Commission;
and as for that which is said of Mr. Trenchard, it is false as to my hearing of
it; I was present at all the Debates, and I do not remember the least thing
that ever came from him, reflecting upon the King or his Grants, in the whole
course of our Conversation, otherwise than as he has told you himself.


January 15.
A Motion being made, that the four Commissioners for Irish Forfeitures, who
signed the Report presented to this House, have acquitted themselves in the
Execution of that Commission with Understanding and Integrity; and a Debate
arising thereupon,

Resolved,

That the Debate be adjourned till to morrow 12 a Clock.

Ordered,

That all the Commissioners for Irish Forfeitures who are in Town, and their
Secretary, do attend the House to morrow at 12 a Clock.

January 16.
The House resumed the Debate of yesterday, and Sir Richard Leving was called
in and examined, and then withdrew.

Then Sir Francis Brewster, Mr. Annesly, Mr. Trenchard, Mr. Langford, and Mr.
Hooper, were called in and examined, and then withdrew.

There having been diverse groundless and scandalous Aspersions, cast upon
Francis Annesly, John Trenchard, James Hamilton, and Henry Langford, Esquires,
four of the Commissioners for the Irish Forfeitures;

Resolved, That the said four Commissioners have acquitted themselves in the
Execution of that Commission, with Understanding Courage, and Integrity.

Resolved,

That Sir Richard Leving, one other of the said Commissioners, has been the
Author of the said groundless and scandalous Reports, upon the four
Commissioners before mentioned.

Resolved, That the said Sir Richard Leving be committed Prisoner to the Tower
of London, for the said Offense.

And he was committed accordingly.

FINIS.
(...)
