
THat the Bill, Lord have mercy upon us, with a large red Cross be set upon
the door of every house visited with the Plague.

2 That all the Stuff in the house where any have been visited of the Plague
be well aired, before they be discharged, or the house opened.

3 The house visited with the Plague to be shut up, whether any person therein
do die or not: And the persons so shut up to bear their own charge, if they be
of ability.

4 No person to be removed out of any infected house, but by leave of the
Magistrate.

5 If any person shall flee out of any house, at the time when the said house
shall be infected with the Plague, such persons so fleeing to be pursued by Hue
and Cry, and the house where they shall be found to be shut up, and they
restrained in some such place as the Magistrate of the place where they shall
be found shall think fit.

6 That the Pavements in the Streets be made sufficient, and so continued; The
Kenels kept sweet and clean; The soil of the said Streets to be carried away,
and all annoyances to be removed: And such inhabitants as shall refuse to pay
the reasonable rates assessed on them for payment of the Scavingers which shall
cleanse and carry away the soil, be distrained by their goods for payment
thereof according to Law.

7 That if any persons shall turn out of their houses any Servant or Lodger
being sick, power to be given to the Magistrate or Officer to put them into
their said house again, or otherwise the said persons to provide sufficient
maintenance for them; And upon refusing so to do (being able persons) to
distrain the goods of such persons (for the charge) that shall so turn them out
of doors.

8 If by order of the Magistrate any persons visited be removed out of their
house or Lodging, to the Pesthouse or other place, when they be recovered and
in perfect health, the said Magistrate to have power and full authority to
return and settle the said persons in their houses or Lodging from whence they
were so taken out, without contradiction of their Landlords or any other.

9 That all such Magistrates or other persons that shall be trusted with this
service may be enabled to do all other things necessary, and pursuing the
execution of these Orders, as occasion shall require.

10 That all Collectors in the several Parishes shall be hereby required to
perform their duty in the collecting of the sums assessed upon the said
Parishes, according to Law; And such as shall fail in the performance of their
duties therein, shall be liable to such penalties as shall be inflicted by
Parliament.

Die Iovis 9. September. 1641.
Ordered this day by the Lords in Parliament that the abovesaid Orders shall be
Printed and published.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


