A Public DECLARATION and PROTESTATION of the secured and secluded Members of
the House of Commons; Against the treasonable and illegal late Acts and
proceedings of some few Confederate Members of that dead House, since their
forcible Exclusion, 13. Febr. 1648.
WE the secured and secluded Members of the late House of Commons, taking into
our sad and serious Considerations the late dangerous, desperate and
treasonable proceedings of some few Members of that House (not amounting to a
full eighth part of the House if divided into ten) who confederating with the
Officers and General Council of the Army, have forcibly detained and secluded
us (against the Honor, Freedom, and Privileges of Parliament) from Sitting
and Voting freely with them, for the better settling of the Kingdoms peace; and
contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, their Protestation, the
Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Declarations and Remonstrances of both
Houses, to His late Murdered MAJESTY, His Heirs, and Successors, the whole
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and to all foraigne States and
Nations (since our exclusion and forced absence from their Counsels, by reason
of the Armies force) most presumptuously arrogated and usurped to themselves
the Title of, The supreme Authority of this Kingdom: and by color and
pretense thereof, have wickedly and audaciously presumed, without and against
our privities or consents, and against the unanimous Vote of the House of
Peers, to erect a High Court of Justice (as they term it) though never any
Court themselves, to Arraigne and Condemn His Majesty against the laws of
God, and the municipall Laws of the Realm: which Court (consisting for the
most part of such partial and engaged Persons who had formerly vowed His
Majesty's destruction, and sought His blood) most illegally and unjustly
refused to admit of His Majesty's just Reasons and exceptions against their
usurped Jurisdiction; and without any lawful Authority or Proof against Him,
or legal Trial, presumed most traitorously and impiously to Condemn and
Murder Him: and since that, have likewise presumed to Try and Arraigne some
Peers, and others Free Subjects of this Realm for their Lives, contrary to
Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of
the Subjects, to the great enslaving and endangering of the lives and liberties
of all the Free People of England.

And whereas the said confederated Commons, have likewise tyrannically and
audaciously presumed contrary to their Oaths and Engagements aforesaid, to
take upon them, to make Acts of Parliament (as they term them) without our
privity or assents, or the joint consent of the King and House of Lords,
contrary to the Use and Privileges of Parliament and known Laws of the Land,
and by pretext thereof have traitorously and wickedly endeavored to
Dis-inherit the Illustrious CHARLES Prince of Wales, next Heir to the Crown,
and actual KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, immediately after
His said Royal Fathers barbarous Murder, by right of descent; and proclaimed
it Treason, for any Person to Proclaim Him KING; (whereas it is High Treason
in them thus to prohibit His proclaiming) and have likewise traitorously and
impudently encroached a Tyrannical and lawless Power to themselves to vote
down our ancient Kingly and Monarchical Government, and the House of Peers;
and to make a New Great Seal of England without the King's Portraicture or
Style, and to alter the ancient Regal and legal style of Writs, and
Proceedings in the Courts of Justice; and to create New Judges, and
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and to dispense with their Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and to prescribe New Oaths unto them contrary to Law, (though
they have no Authority by any Law, Statute, or Custom to administer or injoyne
an Oath to any man) and thereby have traitorously attempted to alter the
fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and to subvert the freedom,
privileges and being of Parliaments; for which Treasons, Strafford and
Canterbury (though less criminal) lost their Heads this last Parliament, by
some of their own prosecutions, and the judgment of both Houses.

We in discharge of our respective duties and obligations both to God, the
King, our own Consciences, our bleeding dying Kingdoms, and the several
Counties, Cities and Buroughs for which we serve, do by this present Writing,
in our own Names, and in the Names of all the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs
which We represented in Parliament, publicly declare and solemnly protest
before the all-seeing God, the whole Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the world, that we do from the bottom of our hearts abominate,
renounce and disclaim all the said pretended Acts, Votes, and proceedings of
the said confederate Members, (acted under the Armies power against our
Consents) as treasonable, wicked, illegal, unparliamentary, tyrannical, and
pernicious both to the King, Parliament, Kingdoms, and all the free borne
People of this Realm; extremely disadvantagious and dishonorable to our
Nation, scandalous to our Religion, and mere forcible Usurpations, and
Nullities void in Law to all intents and purposes; which we, and all the
Freemen of this Kingdom, and all the Kingdoms and Dominions thereto
belonging, are bound openly to disavow, oppugn, and resist as such, with our
purses, arms, lives, to the last drop of our bloods; and to which, neither We,
nor any other can, ought, or dare to submit or assent in the least degree,
without incurring the guilt of High Treason, and the highest perjury, infamy
and disloyalty. And in case the said Confederates shall not speedily retract,
and desist from those their treasonable practices, and tyrannical usurpations;
(which We cordially desire and entreat them by all obligations of love and
respect they have to God, Religion, their King, Country, and Posterity timely
to do.) We do hereby denounce and declare them to be Traitors and public
Enemies both to the King and Kingdom, and shall esteem and prosecute them,
with all their wilful Adherents, and voluntary Assistants as such; and
endeavor to bring them to speedy and condign Punishment, according to the
Solemn League and Covenant; wherein, We trust the whole Kingdom, all those
for whom We serve, and the Lord of Hosts himself to whom We have sworn and
lifted up our hands, hearts, and fervent prayers will be aiding and assisting
to us, and all our Brethren of Scotland and Ireland who are united and
conjoined with us in Covenant to our God, and Allegiance to our Sovereign King
CHARLES the Second, Who (we trust) will make good all His destroyed Fathers
Concessions which really concern our peace, or safety, and secure us against
all force and tyranny of our Fellow Subjects; who now, contrary to their Trusts
and former Engagements, endeavor by the mere power of that Sword, which was
purposely raised for the protection of our Persons, Government, Religion,
Laws, Liberties, the KING'S Royal Person and Posterity, and the Privileges
of Paaliament) to Lord it over Us at their pleasure, and enthrall and enslave
Us to their armed violence, and lawless martial Wills; which we can no longer
tolerate nor undergo, after so long fruitless and abused patience in hope of
their repentance.

FINIS.

