Die Jovis 9o Septembr. 1641.
WHereas it does appear to this House by certain Informations received from
diverse parts of this Kingdom, that the Pole Money does generally come to a far
less sum, then by the true intent of the Act it both might and ought to do
(which as we are credibly informed) is caused by the undue and partial
Certificates and Assessements brought into the Commissioners by the Messors,
and also by the great neglect of the Commissioners, who have not reformed such
Certificates and Returns, as by the Law they are required; But have in many
places favored and eased themselves, their friends, tenants, and neighbors
unjustly, whereby the true meaning of the Law has been much frustrate, to the
great prejudice of the Kingdom, and neglect of the good intentions of this
House; Therefore, upon serious consideration, both of giving just satisfaction
(by the equallitie of proceeding in this service) to such as have paid their
several sums due by the Act, as also for the supplying of the emergent
necessities of the Common wealth;

It is this day Ordered by this House, that the Commissioners in their several
Counties respectively, Authorized for this service, shall without delay appoint
some convenient times and places in their several divisions for their meeting,
when and where, with the assistance of such able and discreet persons as they
shall think fit to call before them, They shall take a strict and impartial
review of the several Certificates, and particular rates (...) (...)d, or
allowed; And shall carefully endeavor fully to inform themselves of every
person either omitted, or not rated, as by the Act he, she, or they ought to
be, To the end that every one may be rated according to their several Degrees,
and Estates, And also that the several sums formerly Assessed may be levied
upon every one of the defaulters according to the Act: And that the said
Commissioners do cause all and every such sum or sums of Money, as shall be
upon this review taxed, to be collected, and levied either by the former
Collectors by them appointed, or, if just cause shall be, by such others newly
to be nominated as they shall conceive to be well affected to the indifferent
and equal proceeding of this so important a service.

And it is further required, that the Commissioners aforesaid shall with all
convenient expedition return all such sums of Money as shall be by them
received, unto such persons as are authorized to receive it by the Act of
Parliament and Orders of this House.

And they shall also return exact and particular Certificates of their
proceedings unto the Committee appointed by this House to receive them. And if
any Commissioner or Commissioners shall be found to have neglected the
execution of this Order, he, and they must expect to be called to answer his
and their disobedience or neglect thereof to this House. And for the better
advantage of this weighty service,

It is further Ordered, that all such several Members of this House, as are
Commissioners by this Act, shall upon the next Adjournment or Recesse, join
themselves in assistance with the Commissioners in their several Counties, who
may thereby be the better resolved of all such doubts as shall, or may arise,
And also may be quickened in that service by having the sense of this House more
clearly imparted to them concerning the urgent and pressing necessity that this
Leavy should be made according to the true intent of the Act, which service is
much conducing to the peace, safety, and benefit of this Kingdom, and to the
honor of this House.

Resolved upon the Question;
That this Order shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


