blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651) Die
Martis, 3 Octobr. 1649.
Resolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament,

THat all and every such poor person and persons as did voluntarily in the year
1642. contribute any Moneys, Plate, or Horse with their Furniture and Arms,
upon the Propositions in the year 1642. not exceeding the sum of Ten pounds,
and are not able to double, shall have both Principal and Interest paid.

Resolved, etc.

That the sum of Fifteen thousand pounds, parcel of the sum of Thirty thousand
pounds at Weavers-Hall, appointed by former Ordinances to go toward payment of
Public Faith, be set aside for the satisfaction of the persons in the former
Vote intended.

Resolved, etc.

That such persons as are now in Prison, which did voluntarily in the year
1642. contribute any Moneys, Plate, or Horse with their Furniture and Arms,
upon the Propositions in the year 1642. and are not able to double, shall be
satisfied both Principal and Interest out of the remainder of the said sum of
Thirty thousand pounds.

Resolved, etc.

That the several Committees in the respective Counties in England and Wales,
be authorized and required to examine and certify the several sums contributed
as aforesaid, by the respective persons intended within the several Votes
aforesaid, together with Interest for the same, and to certify the several
particulars before the First day of January next, unto the Committee of
Indemnity, who are not to receive any such Certificates after the said First
of January next.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Votes be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.


