To the right Honorable Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX K. (His Excellency) General of all
the Forces raised for the regaining of Englands Liberty; the Honorable the
Commanders in chief, and others the Commanders and Soldiers of that pious and
victorious Army; Now appearing (as Englands Champions) for the maintenance of
Gods honor, and this their native Countries just Liberty, Peace, and
Tranquillity.
The humble Petition of all the inslaved Christians in the several
Slaughter-houses of this Kingdom (called Gaols and Prisons) being your Brethren
and Fellow-Common of England (conceived to be about 10000. in number)
imprisoned for Debt, and by Arbitrary Power, and other illegal restraints,
contrary to the Law of God, and all other Nations both Christian and Pagan, and
flatly against the Contents of the great Charter of Englands Liberty, formerly
purchased, and now again regained by the blood of many thousands of the
Commons of England. in all humility complaining, Shows,
THat by the ancient and fundamental common Laws of England Mirror of Justice
cha. 5. Int. 1. number. 57
declared and asserted by the great Charter of our Liberties 9 of Hen. 3. cha,
8.
Magna Charta, no man's person was to be Imprisoned for Debt, nor his Sureties
to be troubled, if the principal Debtor were able to pay: But their Estates
only made liable (in the two third parts thereof) to satisfy the Debt: Which
Statute being the inexpugnable fortress of Englands Freedom, Has not only been
32. times confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, in former Kings reigns,
Cooks Instit. 4 part P. 35. Anno 3. Caro. Anno 17. Caroli
but also has been since ratified by our Sovereign Lord King Charles, both by
the Petition of Right, 3o Car. and by Act passed by his Majesty's royal assent
this present Parliament ( Anno 17. Caroli.) Against which Charter, All Statutes
and Judgments formerly made or given, or hereafter to be made or given, are 28
of Ed. 1. c. 1. 42 Ed. 3 cha, 1.
by several Acts declared to be null and void: Fleta p. 1. c. 26. Bracton P. 3.
fol. 105. and 137. Britton c. 5. fo. 14. Mirror c. 2. s ct. 9. also c. 5. sect
1. 8 Ed. 2 Fits Coron. 432. 7 Edw. 3 BR. rot. 44. 24 He. 8 Diet 249. Ple Com.
360. Cook l. 3. fo. 44. lib. 8. fo. 100. vox plebis P. 55, 56, 57. Oppressed
man's Oppression P. 2, 3, 4.
And that neither those that are imprisoned for Debt at the Kings suit only,
nor any others committed for Treason, Felony, Murder, or Trespass, before
conviction or attainder, ought to be put into Irons, or otherwise to be
punished, but only to be safely kept; Prisons being only for custody and not
for punishment to the Prisoners. Mirror c. 4. sect. 9.
And whereas by the said common Laws of England, Gaolers that detain their
Prisoners in Prison, by color of right for their fees until they dye, or cause
their Prisoners to perish by famine, beating or wounding, by hard usage,
strickt or close Duress, or by putting them into Irons or Dungeons which
procure their death, are guilty of Homicide or Manslaughter.

That by the said Laws, Gaolers or Guardians of Prisons are prohibited to spoil
their Prisoners of their goods, or to take any thing from them, for, by, or
under any pretense of Fees, either at their coming into the Prison or going out
Mirror c. 5. sect. 1. Mirror 52, 53.
: And whereas likewise, all manner of Extortions, Oppressions and illegal
vexation of Sherifes, Gaolers, and Prison-Keepers, exercised and practiced upon
their Prisoners, is strictly prohibited and defended by diverse good and
wholesome Laws and Statutes of this Realm 4 Ed. 3. c. 10 23 He. 6. c. 10. 3 Ed.
1. c. 26. 25 Ed. 3 c. 17. Liberty against slavery fo. 4, 5, 7.
: And Gaolers and Guardians of Prisons (and Sherifes) are to take nothing for
the execution of their offices, but only of the King, except 4 pence to be
required and taken of the Prisoner at the time of his discharge and not before,
conferred on them by the Statute of the 23. of Henry 6. chap. 10.

That contrary to these good Statutes (and the great Charter of Englands
Liberty) the persons of the free-commons of England are still most unjustly and
cruelly (for an unlimited time) inslaved in the several Gaols and Prisons, and
thereby inhumanly robbed of their just and precious Liberties, Estates and
Callings, whereby they, their wives and children are exposed to the cruel wills
of their Oppressors, and so become the very specticle of misery; not pityed by
any, nor hitherto by the State regarded nor relieved: Notwithstanding their
many several Petitions (for these 6 years past) presented to them for Release
from this Egyptian bondage. That in pursuance of their uncontrouled inhumane
cruelties, Gaolers and Prison-keepers have and daily do enforce from Prisoners
their goods and moneys, illegal fees and excessive Chamber-rent; viz. Fees of a
Mark, five Mark, five pound, and ten pound, and for Chamber-Rent from each
Prisoner no less then 5 s. 8 s. 10 s. 16 s. yea from some 20 s. a week, and in
the Common Wards, where nothing of Right ought to be by them required or taken;
they exact from each poor prisoner (although two lodged in one bed) no less
then 14. pence a week, besides diverse others unexpressible exactions. That many
hundreds of prisoners have been (as some still are) by Gaolers and
Prison-keepers and their hellish Substitutes close imprisoned in Chambers and
Dungeons, for diverse days, months and years, assaulted, bearen, wounded,
robbed, and violently at midnight dragged out of their own beds and lodged are
then sold bare ground; Tormented and decripped by Iron Fetters, starved and
violently murdered; yea, some kept in Irons (hands and feet) till their
Excrements coming from their body rotted their fundaments; Others being by
their creditors discharged, are notwithstanding by Gaolers detained in Prison
merely for their own unjust exacting fees, where many have thus miserably
perished: And also usually coming Felons and Murderers with Debtors, contrary
to the Statute of safety: Thus Prisons are none other then places of Torment,
ruin, and destruction to the Commons of England; and Gaolers and Prison-Keepers
none other then tormenters and lawless executioners of their own cruel wills,
who, although complained of, yet the Prisoners just complaints are not heard,
but they still suffered to persist in these their cruel illegal courses, and
like vipers sucking the vital blood of the poor Prisoners, and defrauding them
of their Legacies and Collection moneys gathered in every County of this Realm,
and Courts of Justice for their relief, they murder the poor innocent, to whom
they deny the privilege which is by them daily afforded unto Felons.

The premises justly weighed, and for that Imprisonment of the body for 10, 20,
30, or 40. years, discounts not one penny of Debt to the Creditor, but only for
a time brings the Grift of wicked gain to the Lawyers and Attorneys covetous
mills of ungodly contention, with inevitable ruin to the Debtor, his wife,
children and family; Lawyers, Attorneys and Gaolers being none other then poor,
distressed, inslaved Englands Canker-worms, and devouring Caterpillars of men's
Estates, Liberties and lives. The Law of England being a Law of mercy and
preservation to the people, and not a law of Tyranny, Oppression and
Destruction, as hitherto it has been and still is i; By which law the the two
third parts only of the Debtors Estate is made liable to the satisfaction of
his just Debts, the rest being reserved to the Debtor for his future
subsistence and education of his children, and the persons acquitted from
future trouble for the same.

Your poor distressed and unjustly inslaved Petitioners do therefore humble
beseech you (in the bowels of compassion) to commiserate this their grievous
unlimited oppressive condition of being; and according to the rules of justice
and charity (and the pious sensibility of your unjustly inslaved Brethrens
misery) to be pleased, amongst other your weighty and humble Addresses to the
high and honorable Court of Parliament, to present these our grievances and
just requests with desire, That according to the fundamental Laws of the land,
the persons of all the Commons of England may be restored to their ancient,
legal and just Liberties (as at the first); and that the current of Justice may
be freely opened to all; That so the poor Commons of England may not still be
enforced (by mercenary Lawyers and contentious Attorneys) to buy Justice for
the corrupt price of iniquity; nor at such high rates as hitherto they have
been enforced to do, to the utter ruin of their Estates, Houses, and Families:
Your Petitioners not being able to acquit themselves from this inhumane
slavery, by the abominable, unlimited, chargeable course of the law, practiced
by all the mercenary instruments of contention, in Petty-fogging latin and
Pedlers French, by these supporters of contention; And also that Gaolers and
Prison-Keepers may be regulated in their illegal, unlimited tyrannical power,
potency, cruelty, and exactions, that so we and the posterity of this whole
Nation being freed from this Egyptian bondage, may have just cause to eternize
the memory of your Excellency and the rest of the honorable Commanders and
plous Soldiery (truths faithful Champions) as of the true and faithful
restorers of the ancient and just birthright, and liberty of the inslaved
Commons of England: And your Petitioners, their wives, and children, and
families (as bound] shall ever pray for a blessing on your faithful endeavors,
and for the speedy successes of this bleeding Kingdoms cause by you taken in
hand, to Gods glory and Englands Peace and Tranquillity.

Subscribed for themselves, and all others their imprisoned and un justly
inslaved brethren and fellow-Commons of England, By John Baynes. Rubine
Cunningham. Richard Carter. John Robinson. Richard Raynolds. George Bishop.
Richard Gardner. Richard Fletcher. Thomas Madgwicke. William Hayse.


And I rebuked the Nobles and Rulers, saying, You exact usury every one of his
brother, and I set a great Assembly against them; For I was very angry when I
heard the cry [of the oppressed] and I said, Our flesh is as the flesh of our
Brethren, our children as their children: and low bring into bondage our sons
and our daughters: And I said, It is not good, that which ye do; ought ye not
to walk in the fear of our God, Nehemiah 5.5, 6, 7, 9? But ye have not
proclaimed Liberty every me unto his neighbor, Ier. 37.17. For if thy brother
be waxen poor and fallen to decay, then thou shall relieve him, yea though he be
a stranger, that he may live with thee: Ye shall not oppress one another, Levit.
26.17.35. And ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment: But in righteousness
shall thou judge thy neighbor, Levit. 19.15. Jer. 9.5, 6, 8, 9.
To the right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT assembled at West
minster. 1643.
The humble Petition of diverse well affected Commons of England, in the behalf
of themselves and others their inslaved Fellow Commons, (...) for Or^^^ and
other illegal restraints, within the several Prisons in the Kingdom, conceived
to be about 10000. in number (at the least) Complaining,
Shows,
THat these their fellow Commons Inslaved, having formerly, by several
Petitions addressed themselves to this Honorable assembly, for their undeniable
Birthright (which is their Liberty) and aquittance from this unlimitted
Imprisonment fastened on them, and us; And the posterity of this whole Nation,
By the covetous Instruments of contention, through their unexpressible abuse of
Magna Charta, which is the only Sure Contract and perpetual Law, between the
King and his Subjects, In all which They nor We, have hitherto reaped any
Redress According to our just Expectation: That in the 3. year of the King, The
body of this Commonwealth being Sensible of many Sufferings, Occasioned by the
breach of Magna Charta, The Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament,
Petitioned his Majesty for Confirmation thereof (Which Implies their consents
to it) To which his Majesty then assented and since Confirmed (Which Implies an
Act, and a legal confirmation) whereby we truly apprehend, That all latter
Statutes made in Contradiction thereof, Tending to the betraying of the
Subjects Liberty (By inslaving their Persons) are absolutely become Null, and
cannot now stand in force, as by the 42. of Ed. 3. c. 1. appears, For the
lesser must needs give Place to this Greater. It having also bin maintained in
this Honorable assembly, That the Commons must be eased in their Persons from
this Slavery of Imprisonment being a free born people and no Slaves nor
villians, Imprisonment being flatly against Magna Charta, which is the only
foundamental Mother Law of this Kingdom, Purchased (and now again Regained) by
the blood of many thousands of our Ancestors, 26 Edw. 3. c. 4
Friends and Allies.

The premises Considered, and for that it is well known, that imprisonment of
the body for 10. 20. 30. or 40. years together, discounts not one penny Debt to
the Creditor, but only (For a time) brings Grist to the Lawyers and Atturnies
mills of Wicked contention, Gain (...) and his Substitutes, with (...) to the
Poor Debtor (his Wife, children, and Family) who by this Cruelty is Debarred of
his precious Liberty; livelihood, and calling: your petitioners therefore
humbly pray, that according to the pious Rule of Justice and Charity, and the
fundamental Law of this Land. All the persons of the Commons of England may be
Restored to their ancient Legal and just Liberty (as at the first) and the
Current of Justice freely opened to all, which your Petitioners humbly Conceive
cannot be truly Effected: so long as Lawyers and Atturnies (The Covetous
Mercinary Instruments of contention) be permitted to sit in the House, who are
Conceived to be the only Obstructions of Justice in this Kingdom. This being
done, your Petitioners as also their unjustly Inslaved Brethren will then (as is
hoped) be Enabled to partake of Justice Freely: and not still be Enforced (by
Lawyers and Atturnies) to buy it for the Corrupt price of Iniquity, nor at such
high Rates as hitherto they have done, to the utter Ruin of their Estates,
Houses and Families: And that according to Magna Charta, the Debtors Estates,
(if any Remaining) may be made Liable (In the two third parts thereof) to the
satisfaction of their Just Debts, By which great Charter, a Charitable
Consideration is had to the future Subsistence of the Debtors, their wives and
children, and also that Prisons may be Regulated, and Prison keepers, abridged
of their Illegal, unlimitted, Tyrannical Power, Potency, and Exactions. That so
we and all our Posterities being freed from this Egyptians bondage, may have
Just cause to Eternity the memory of his Majesty, and of this Honorable
assembly, as of the Restorers of their Ancient and Just Birthright and Liberty.

1646.
To the Honorable the House of Commons in Parliament assembled. The humble
Petition of diverse well affected Commons of England, in the behalf of their poor
in slaved Brethren, languishing in several Prisons within this Kingdom.
Most humbly shows,
THat this Honorable Assembly was pleased some 5. years since to hear the
Petition of the poor prisoners for Debt, and to refer the same to a Committee
(whereof Henry Martine Esquire was then Chairman) for the drawing up of an
Ordinance for their remedy and redress, which was done accordingly, But yet
hitherto unhappily obstructed, whereby many poor Prisoners (their wives and
children) for want of timely redress, have since perished, and many others are
consumed and utterly disabled to subsist. Now for that the said Ordinance was
long since resolved on, and by M. Martine brought into this Honorable House to
be read; Yet there hitherto obstructed, so as the hearts of the oppressed
(though this long delay) ready feign within them, their miseries being thereby
augmented, and for that also, a great number, who have with all fidelity served
the Parliament, and have not received their pay (Due) are at this present
Imprisoned for their debts, which they can no ways satisfy until they have
received their arrears for the said service, by which means many of them have
perished, and the rest likely to perish miserably, and their families to be
utterly ruined.

Your poor Petitioners therefore in the bleeding sense of their (unjustly
inslaved) brethrens extreme sufferings, do humbly pray; That ye the chosen,
convened for their deliverance from oppression and injustice, and for the
preservation of their just Rights and Liberties, will now (after so long time of
their expectancy (in durance and misery) be pleased forthwith to comiserate
their deplorable estates, and according to your duty, the fundamental Law of
the Land, and Petition of Right; seriously to consider the premises, and
speedily according to justice, to assign unto every of them their just liberty
and freedom, from this unjust bondage and slavery; They having long cried and
none have regarded this their unjustly imposed miserable Thraldom; in which not
only the present Petitioners, but the posterity of all the freeborn Commons of
England are merely concerned; this being by you accomplished, then not only
your Petitioners, but future generations shall be ever bound to call you the
blessed instruments of justice, for the Regaining of their ancient and just
Rights and Liberties.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, Levi. 19.15. Thou shall not oppress
nor vex the stranger, the widow, the fatherless child, nor the poor. For if
thou afflict them and they cry unto me, I will surely hurt their cry: And my
wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword: and your wives shall be
widows, and your children fatherless, Exodus 22.21, 22, 23, 24. Therefore
execute true judgment, show mercy and compassion every man to his Brother, and
oppress not the widow, the stranger, nor the poor, and let none of you imagine
evil against his brother in your heart, and execute the judgment of truth and
Peace in your Gates, and l^ve (...) false oaths Zach. 7.9, 10. Zach. 8.16, 17.
Nor sell justice for the price of iniquity as hitherto you have done. vivat rex.


FINIS.
Many more Petitions of the like nature being from time to time presented, have
bin obstructed, and the parties greived, not heard nor releived, but their
miserable Bondage rather augmented, and they thereby discouraged from renewing
their complains against these their Egyptian taskmasters, viz. Lawyers,
Attorneys, Gaolers, and cruel creditors, Distressed, and miserably inslaved,
Englands Canker-wormes, and devouring Caterpillars of men's Estates, Liberties,
and lives, and fomenters of all Contention, Tyranny, and Oppression.

vivat Rex.

