A LETTER to a Friend concerning the BILL for Resuming the Forfeited Estates in
Ireland.
SIR,
THOUGH I was always of your Opinion, and thought our Constitution happily
Tempered, both to preserve it self, and promote the Happiness of the Community;
yet, did I never look so nearly into the Advantages of the Aristocratical Part
of our Polity, and the Power which the Lords have in the Legislature, as
lately, since the Debates have happened about Resuming the Kin'gs Grants: To
any considering Person it must seem a mighty Security to us, That a Bill, after
it has had the Assent of the Delegates of the People, necessarily requires the
Concurrence of the Lords, before it can have have the Sanction of a Law. They
have an Oppottunity, upon a more mature Deliberation, of weighing the Arguments
on both sides; of considering what Affections promoted it; and discovering
whether it be Profitable and Just, and ought to pass into a Law or no. In such
Deliberations their Lordships are always swayed by Principles of Honor; and,
not owing the Part they have in making Laws to Popular Elections, are not under
the hard Necessity of Gratifying any greedy, or unreasonable Desires of any
part of the People. To humor any Party, or Faction, they are not constrained
to violate Public Justice, to abandon the King's, or their own Right, and to
break that Balance which they have always kept in our State. Perhaps, when
they seriously consider the Matter, they may find, that they have not often had
more Reason for Exerting their Power, than in the Bill they are now possessed
of. Since you desire it, I will give you my Thoughts, what it is they justly
may, what probably they will do; I must in short assure you, That when I
consider, how tender they are of their Reputation, how glorious they reckon it,
to act Consonantly to themselves, and to stick to the Principles of Justice and
Honor which determined them before, my Opinion is, they cannot get over the
Difficulties of this Bill. The Reasons you shall be Judge of.

You may remember, that on the last day of December, 1690, an Engrossed Bill,
For Confiscating the Lands of the Rebels in Ireland, and applying them to the
use of the War, was sent from the Commons to the Lords House. January the 5th.
His Majesty, at the Adjournment of the Parliament, told both Houses, That he
would not make any Grant of the Forfeited Lands, till there was another
Opportunity of settling that Matter in Parliament. After the Adjournment the
Lords met again on the 31st. day of March, at which time the Engrossed Bill lay
before them. They had then an Opportunity (if I understand what that word
signifies) of passing the Bill, and settling that Matter. Had they done it, and
His Majesty had refused his Royal Assent, there had been some show of Reason
for Peoples making a Noise about his Promise; as things stand now there is none.
Their Lordships let that Bill fall, as they did another the year following, and
the Commons did several others. Their Reasons are Manifest: They would not
dispose of those Forfeitures, because 'twas His sole and undoubted Right by his
Prerogative, (which is the Common Law of the Land) to grant them away as he
pleased. Besides the Matter of Justice, they were of Opinion, That it would be
more our Interest, to let the World see that we Honored the King, and would
give him his Due, than to employ those Lands to the use of the War. I dare not
in this Matter Arraign their Judgment, or say 'twas contrary to Justice, or the
Public Good. I know Money is very valuable, especially when we want it, as we
did at that time: But perhaps (as their Lordships thought) we purchase it too
dear, when to obtain it, we break through the settled and ancient Rules of our
Constitution; Invade the King's Right; and place a particular Mark of
Unkindness on Him. It Is plain to any thinking Person, without making any
Enquiries, that they let that Bill fall, because they thought it Unjust:
Otherwise it cannot well be denied that they were unkind to their poor Country,
engaged at that time in a long and expensive War, in depriving it of the great
Sum that was proposed to be raised out of those Forfeitures. If to stave off
this Imputation any one will say, that for the good of their Country they let
them lie, till they should be granted away, Improved, and made much more
Valuable. This would be the highest Affront, for it is what never could enter
into the Thoughts of Men of their Lordships nice Honor. If then they let that
Bill fall, because they thought it Unjust, they cannot well pass this which has
infinitely greater Hardships in it. What then would be straining at a Gnat (if
the Bills be compared in all their Circumstances) will be swallowing a Camel
now. They gave up a Bill which left a third Part to the Disposal of the King,
because they thought the whole was his Due; this deprives Him of the whole. We
had then a War with a great and powerful Enemy, which we had reason to fear,
would be long and Chargeable, now by His Mastesty's Conduct we enjoy Plenty and
Peace. Then the Matter had been Amicably Accommodated between the King and his
Parliament, without any Symptoms of Affront and Unkindness to His Majesty; now
the Rancor of His worst Enemies at Home, and the Desires of their Friends
Abroad are gratified. Then the Injury which they boggl'd at, reached only to
the King; the present Bill does not only Affect Him much more Sensibly, but it
Wounds our Constitution, and hurts Men of all Orders and Degrees.

His Ma;esty's part in it is very extraordinary: He sees (notwithstanning what
a late Author has irsinuated to the contrary) what no English Monarch ever did,
all His Grants refum'd, without any Saving for His Prerogative. If the Lords
will not interpose, but He be forced to pass the Bill, (for considering
Circumstances, so I must express it) He must give His Assent to a Bill, which
destroys the Articles of Waterford, Signed with His own Hand: He must give up
His Prerogative, which at His Coronation He Swore to Maintain: He must Proclaim
to His Subjects, That 'twill be madness in them, whenever Troubles or
Rebellions happen, to regard their Country, or take up Arms for Him who has it
not in His Power to Reward; a thing of dangerous and ill Consequence to Him and
His Kingdoms: He must take away the Rewards of Loyalty and good Services He has
given; and consent to the Ruin of Multitudes, for whose Preservation He has
hazarded His Blood.

If a Bill which bears thus hard upon His Majesty, can be said to be truly
Calculated for the common Good, yet we cannot avoid entertaining another Opinion
of it, if it seem to affect our Polity. We generally glory in our Constitution,
and think that we have all the Advantages of Democracy, Aristocracy, and
Monarchical Government, without the Defects or Exorbitancies of either, because
nothing can pass into a Law, till it has been duly examined by the King, Lords,
and Representatives of the People. This is generally reckoned the happy
Temperament of our Constitution: But what becomes of it, if the Delegates of
the Commons, to a Bill, which can only have its Rise in their House, can tack
Foreign Clauses which it shall not be in the Power of the Lords to Examine? If
this be the Right and Privilege of the Commons, they may with that consolidate
all other Bills, and so take the whole Legislature into their own Hands.

Besides these great Inconveniences, the Lords will find that great Multitudes
are grieved in this Bill, who could not be touched in that which they formerly
let fall. They, who by the King's Grace and Favor, enjoy those Forfeited
Estates, are Legally seized of them: For it must be owned that a Grant made by
His Majesty, whether of Crown Lands, or Forfeitures, makes a good and legal
Title. This is the Title by which many of the Lords hod their Estates; it is
what admits of no Controversy in our Laws; it is what the Lords allowed when
they let the Bills dye in their House, and gave up the Forfeitures to His
Majesty. It Is likewise to be considered, That as His Majesty, by Fighting our
Battles, and hazarding His Life, acquired a better Title to give, than
generally our Kings have done, so the generality of the Grantees made their
Titles stronger in Equity, by their great Services. To resume therefore from
them, will be more than barely taking away what Men are legally possessed of.
This Bill does not save any one great Man; (I mean, of the Protestant
Communion;) None of His Majesty's nearest Friends who ought to be considered,
if not for their own Merit, yet for His Sake: Not that Noble Foreigner who
Commanded our Army, and put an end to the War in Ireland; though the Commons
caressed Him for His Services: Nor another who had a good part in that
Successful Expedition, though his Grant is Charitably employed in Supporting
his poor Persecuted Countrymen: Nor another Noble Person of our own Country,
who ventured hard, and Traveled far to procure the Happiness we enjoy; though
his good Services were confider'd in two former Bills, yet is he not regarded
in this. The Lords, who derive their Honor from our Kings, and many of their
Estates from their Grants, are the most competent Judges of these Hardships;
and can very well see of what ill Consequence 'twill be to their own Order, to
pass this Bill, and destroy that Perogative of the Crown, which is the Source
and Fountain of their Grandeur.

Another great Hardship of the Bill is, That it destroys that Right which
Purchasers have in those Lands, and deprives them of the Money they laid out.
If they purchased under a Title that is good in our Law, they are legally
Seized; if so, the Lords will Judge whether it be a Hardship or no, to turn Men
out of their Freeholds. They who are for the Bill, say, they purchased a bad
Title. The Title had been good enough, if it had been left to stand upon its
own Bottom: If it be invalidated afterward by an Act of Parliament, that is
not the Fault of the Title, nor of those who purchass'd it. In prejudice of the
Title, they say, the House of Commons Addressed the King, and prayed he would
not dispose of the Forfeitures. If the King had a Right to them by Law, that
Address (if there had been such an Address, as there never was) could make no
Alteration in the Title, for an Address of the House of Commons cannot alter
the Law of England. To strengthen their Argument, they urge the King's Promise.
What did he Promise? That he would never dispose of the Forfeitures? If Men are
inclined to overlook that Respect which is due to Majesty, and tax the King
with breach of Promise, yet they ought to consider what a Reproach it is to
themselves to mistake the Sense of very plain English. They who consider His
Majesty's Words, will see that the Lords (to say nothing of what the Commons
did themselves) Cancelled all the Obligations of his Promise: And the
Purchasers, who took all their Encouragement from the Lords, thought what their
Lordships did, was of as great Force to Strengthen, as the Commons Address was
to make void a settled and undoubted Right.

Besides these Purchasers, there are others whose Cases, I Am told, are very
deplorable. They who knew the State of Ireland at that time, say, That in the
late Troubles the Protestants every where in the Country were Plundered by the
Irish, and driven out of their Habitations. After the Reduction of that
Kingdom, the English, whose Cattle and Goods had been generally taken away, and
in many places, their Houses burnt, not being able to hold their former Leases,
were, very generally speaking, destitute of Settlement, and Habitation. To many
of them Leases were made by the King, whilst the Lands were in his Hands.
Afterward His Majesty's Grantees made it a Rule to encourage them. This was
occasioned by an unlucky, and (as it appears) wrong Notion conceived by them,
that it would promote the English and Protestant Interest in that Kingdom, to
encourage Protestant Tenants. This Bill deprives all these of the Fruits of
their Labor for many Years: It makes void their Leases without any
Consideration for their Improvements, which have raised the Value of the Lands;
it turns them out of their Habitations, and (as I am informed by those who
understand the Genius of the Country) in effect puts them into the Hands of the
Irish, who will certainly bid most for them. Were the Bill free from the heavy
Clogs it is loaded with, could no other Objection be made against it, than this
one great and general Calamity that it brings (as I Am very well informed) on
many thousand Protestant Families, this alone were enough to terrify the Lords
from passing it. They who would not seize the Forfeitures, when the King only
had a Property in them, because they would not invade his Right, will hardly
think it reasonable, after Nine Years time, when People are settled in their
Habitations, to turn them out, and resume their Improvements, and the Sweat of
their Brows, to defray the Charge of the War.

These Hardships are generally allowed, but it is said, that they now are only
to be Bewailed, not Remedied. The Lords, they say, Must make no Alterations,
because it is a Money Bill: It Is pity it should be so. I always thought a Money
Bill, which was priviledg'd from the Inspection of the Lords, was that in which
the Commons raised Money by a fair and equal Tax on the People, whose
Representatives they are. If Men's Estates were seized in gross, I imagined
that ought to be reckoned a Penalty or Mulct rather than a Tax laid on them by
their Representatives; Besides, I don't remember that any Money has ever been
paid upon such a Bill in Ireland. To Consolidate Clauses, how Heterogeneous
soever, with a Money-Bill, and call them part of it, is a very ready way to
lodge the whole Legislature in the Commons; but it is a great Solecism in
Speech, and a Contradiction in our Constitution. What will not pass currently
hereafter in a Money-Bill, if the Clause which strikes at several Men of
Knowledge and Integrity, and renders Members of Parliament incapable of being
Commissioners of the Excise, be now Adopted into that Family? This is not only
foreign to the Bill, but of most dangerous consequence to the Commonwealth.
That, we know, which secures the Peace and Happiness of our Community, is, the
mutual Confidence which the King and his People have in each other. To Enact
therefore a public Distrust, to tell the People so Solemnly, that worthy Men,
whom they have Chosen for their Representatives, are not to be Trusted in the
King's Service, is, to create in People Jealousies and Suspicions of the King,
and to hazard the Safety of the public.

I have, Sir, tired you with a longer Letter than I designed, I now shall only
desire you to Reflect upon what the Lords did formerly, and then consider,
when-'it is possible they should pass this Bill; A Bill which bears so hard upon
the King; Which cramps the Power of the Lords, and consequently affects the
Constitution of England; Which Deprives Grantees and Purchasers of the
Freeholds they are legally possessed of; and Turns others out of their
Habitations and Improvements; Which Destroys many other Legal Titles; Which
sets up a severe Inquisition in Ireland; and Vests a Power in the Inquisitors
too great to be given to any of the Sons of Men.

Notwithstanding these Severities, it is said, That the Lords must pass the
Bill, because the Necessity of our Affairs requires it. I cannot see what
pressing Necessity there is for us to do what we think Hard, and seem to
Condemn. The English Land Tax Bill may soon be recovered: The Purchase Money of
the Irish Forfeitures requires a considerable time to have it brought into the
Exchequer. If Money must be raised on those Lands, it may be done without
Resuming His Majesty's Grants, without Seizing the Freeholds of Grantees and
Purchasers, or the Labors of others; and that with greater Expedition, and
infinitely more to the Satisfaction of the People of England, than 'twill be
now: For if this Bill pass you will see such Calamities follow it, as will
Grieve all the merciful and tenderhearted People of England; but the
Advantages which you expect by it you will never see.

I forgot to tell you that His Majesty, after the Lords let the first Bill
fall, and Absolved Him from His Promise, staid almost Three Years before He
made any one Grant.

I ask your Pardon for the trouble of so long a Letter.

I am, Your very humble Servant, R. E.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1700.


