blazon or coat of arms
An Order of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and the Council of
State, for continuing the Powers of the Commissioners for Indemnity.
WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
transferring the Powers of the Committee for Indemnity, The Powers and
Authorities which any Committee or Committees of Parliament had to give
Indemnity to, or to save harmless and Indempnified, any person or persons
whatsoever who have acted by Authority, or for the service of the Parliament,
were transferred unto, and were vested and settled in and upon Samuel Moyer,
James Russel, Edward Winslowe, Josias Berners, William Molins, Arthur Squibb,
and Richard Moor, with several other Powers and Authorities mentioned and
contained in the said Act, which said Act was to continue and be in full force
until the first of July 1653. and no longer, It is Ordered and Declared, by his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and the Council of State, That all the
Powers and Authorities given by the said Act unto the said Commissioners named
therein, or to any former Committee or Committees of Parliament for Indemnity,
be and are hereby vested and settled in and upon the said Samuel Moyer, Josias
Berners, Arthur Squibb, and Richard Moor, and upon Edward Carry and George
Foxcroft Esqs Who by the Authority hereof, or any three or more of them, are
empowered to do and execute all and every the Powers and Authorities granted,
limited, or appointed by the said Act, or by any other Act, Ordinance or Order
of Parliament for Indempnitie.

Provided that this Order and Authority shall continue and be in force until
the first day of November 1653.

July 1. 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That this Order
be forthwith Printed and Published. JOHN THURLOE Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Thomas Brewster, and by and for Henry
Hills, MDCLIII.


