AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His Highness The Lord Protector AND HIS PRIVY
COUNCIL, Appointing a Committee for the Army, AND Receivers-General for the
first Six Months Assessment, of the Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds
by the Month upon England, Commencing the 24th of June, 1657.

depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp

Saturday 22o August, 1657.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector, That this Order and Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

Will: Jessop, Clerk of the Council.



London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness the
Lord Protector, 1657.

AN ORDER AND DECLARATION Of His Highness The Lord Protector AND HIS
PRIVY COUNCIL, Appointing a Committee for the Army, AND Receivers-General for
the first Six Months Assessment, of the Assessment of Thirty five thousand
Pounds by the Month upon England, Commencing the 24th of June, 1657.
WHereas by an Act made this present Parliament (Entitled, An Act for an
Assessment at the Rate of Five and thirty thousand Pounds by the Month upon
England, Six thousand Pounds by the Month upon Scotland, and Nine thousand
Pounds by the Month upon Ireland for three Years, from the Four and twentieth
of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven, for a Temporary Supply
toward the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth) it is
amongst other things Enacted, That the several Rules, Directions, Clauses and
Proviso's mentioned and contained in an Act of this present Parliament
(Entitled, An Act for an Assessment upon England, at the Rate of Sixty
thousand Pounds by the Month for three Months, from the Five and twentieth
day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, to the Four and twentieth
day of June then next ensuing) and the Powers and Authorities thereby given to
all and every the persons therein named or mentioned, shall endure, and have
continuance until the said Three Years Assessment shall be fully and duly
Collected, Levied and Paid in, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Act; By which said last mentioned Act it is Provibed and Declared, That in
case the Ordering and Payment of the Moneys by the said Act appointed, into the
immediate Receipt of the Exchequer shall be found inconvenient, so as the
Moneys raised thereby cannot be paid in by the times limited in the said Act,
for the seasonable Supply of the Public Service, That then it shall and may
be lawful for His Highness the Lord Protector and Council (if they shall so
judge it fit) to order and direct the Managing, Levying and Payment of the said
Moneys in such a way, method and manner, as the Monthly Assessments for the
Army have been formerly managed, rated and paid, Any thing in the said Act to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Now for as much as the Moneys payable upon the First Six Months of the said
Assessment for Three years, by the said first recited Act, cannot be paid in by
the respective times limited, into the immediate Receipt of the Exchequer, so
as the same may be a ^^^sonable supply for the Public Serv^^^ ^lso that for
Payment of the Army in their several Quarters where they lie, there will be a
necessity of Assigning some part of the said First Six Months of the said
Three years Assessments, in the Counties where the said Assessments are raised;
Therefore, for the more effectual and orderly Managing, Levying, Paying,
Disposing and Issuing forth of the Moneys payable upon the aforesaid First Six
Months of the said Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds by the Month,
commencing the said Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred fifty
seven, and of all and every other Sum and Sums of Money already set apart, and
appointed for the Use and Payment of the Forces of this Commonwealth, or that
hereafter shall be set apart, and appointed for their use before the Twenty
fifth of December now next coming, It is Ordered by His Highness the Lord
Protector, by, and with the Advice and Consent of his Privy Council, That John
Clerk, Richard Lucy, Edward Horsman, James Philips, Gervase Bennet, John
Hildesley and Captain Adam Baynes, Esqs or any Three of them, shall be, and are
hereby Appointed and Authorized to be a Committee for the Army. And it is
further Ordered, That all and every the Powers and Authorities, Rules and
Directions, which were by an Ordinance of His Highness and Council (Entitled,
An Ordinance appointing a Committee for the Army and Treasurers at War)
published the Eight and twentieth of January, One thousand six hundred fifty
and three) or by any Act or Ordinance therein mentioned, expressed to be given
to the Committee for the Army, for the bringing in, disposing and issuing forth
of the Assessments, and Moneys in that Ordinance mentioned or to any other
purpose whatsoever, shall be, and are hereby given and continued to the
Committee for the Army herein named and appointed, for the Managing, bringing
in, disposing and issuing forth of the said First Six Months of the said
Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds by the Month, commencing the said
Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven, and of
all other Moneys that are, or before the said Twenty fifth day of December
next, shall be set apart and appointed for the use of the Armies of this
Commonwealth, and to all other uses, intents and purposes whatsoever; And it is
further Ordered, That the Treasurers at War, and also the several and
respective Commissioners, Receivers-General, Collectors, Sub-Collectors, and
all other persons whatsoever, who are, have been, or shall be entrusted or
employed in the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and paying of the said Six
Months Assessment, and other Moneys before mentioned, or any part thereof,
shall observe such Orders and Directions, as shall from time to time be made
and given forth by the said Committee for the Army, or any three or more of
them, in the due execution of the Powers and Trust hereby given and committed
to them. And it is further Ordered, That John Blackwel the younger, and Richard
Dean, Esqs (the present Treasurers at War) shall be, and are hereby appointed
Receivers-General for the said Six Months Assessment of Thirty five thousand
Pounds by the Month, commencing the said four and twentieth day of June, One
thousand six hundred fifty seven; and the Receivers for ye respective Counties,
Cities, Towns and Places, and every of them are hereby authorized and required
from time to time, to make payment of the several Sums which shall be by them
received of all and every Collector and Sub-Collector, upon the said first Six
Months Assessment, unto the said Receivers-General for the said Six Months
Assessment, at Guild Hall London, (or at such other place as hereafter shall be
by His Highness and Council appointed and directed) to be by them paid into,
and accounted for in the Receipt of His Highness Exchequer; And all and every
the Acquittance and Acquittances of the said Receivers-General for the said Six
Months Assessment, shall be unto the said Receivers for the said respective
Counties, Cities, Towns and Places, and every of them, a sufficient Discharge.

Will: Jessop, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


