ENGLANDS CRISIS: Or, the WORLD WELL MENDED.
Quod libet, id licet His, and quod libet, and licet Audent;
Q^odque audent faciunt, faciunt quodcunque Molestum est.
Belgica sub n^stris pinguescunt Monstra Ruinis.

SInce Religion has not weight enough to counterpoise the Balance, when the
World is laid in the other Scale; nor so much Power over us to conquer our
Prejudices, or subdue our Passions and Resentments: Let us hearken a little, I
pray, to the Importunity of our Interest, and consider what State and Condition
we are in, (and are like to be in) as to those Two Darlings of all Mankind
Liberty and Property; over which as Reasonable Creatures, and with some
Special^ty, as English Men, we ought (and are supposed inclined, to keep a
Watch.

Now if both these, besides our Religion, are almost at the Mercy, and in the
Power of a Company of Men, who by many Demonstrations have showed their E^mity
to our Nation, and their want of Common Justice and Humanity to temper their
Insolences; therefore that they may not become our Masters, it must be high
time to look about us, and to do our selves Right before it be out of our
Power, for as yet (God be thanked) I am satisfi^d it is not, and without our
fault will not be.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth their Style was, The Poor Distressed STATES;
but by the help of that Queen having set their own Sovereign at Bay, and made
themselves a Free State, they soon increased in Shipping (their Neighbors
being otherwise employed) and by Consequence in Trade and Wealth to that
degree, That in the Reign of King James the First, they began to incroach upon
our Fishing, not only refusing to ask Leave; but by disturbing our Fishermen,
even to the breaking their Nets. In short, they would have taken away our
Dominion of the Narrow Seas: So soon like the ungrateful Viper in the Fable,
Did they hiss and offer to sting that Bosom which Cherished and Protected them.

During the Reign of King Charles the First, their Affronts and Insults were
without Number; though that Unhappy Prince being imbroyl'd at Home, by Men of
Dutch Principles, could never get Leisure to call 'em to Account for it. And to
show the World that Gain is their only Godliness, even our own Usurpers (Men of
their own Stamp and Kidney) were necessitated to fight for them a Liberty of
Trade.

In the Reign of King Charles the Second, their Old Reckoning for their Pranks
at Amboyna, enflamed by fresh and continual Encroachments upon our East India
Traffic, compelled that Peaceful Prince to humble them by Two several Wars;
and, yet the late and present Proceedings with us on that side the World do
sufficiently show, That for their Injustice they may indeed be Punished, but
they can never find in their Hearts to Repent.

Now for us to put the Government into the Hands of these Men, who for several
Ages have constantly made it their Business to Impoverish and Ruin our Nation;
and to make them the Protectors of our Religion, who to promote their Trade,
scruple not to renounce Christianity, is such an Instance of a deplorable
Infatuation and Madness, that I stand astonished at the very Reflection, Quos
perdere vule Jupiter dementat prius.

But it is said, and expected, That the Prince of Orange in the Post he is in,
and the Relation he now pretends to have to these Kingdoms, will take Care to
soften or correct the Malignity of the Dutch Humor, and reconcile them to an
Amicable Correspondence. But alas I this thought is too easily overborn by
Matter of Fact; for if the Common Principles of Gratitude, Humanity and Honor
had any Force with them, the Assistance Queen Elizabeth gave them, should have
bound them to an Eternal Friendship with the English Nation: But we see the
contrary; and since they have treated us thus, whilst we had the Sword in our
Hands, What think you must we expect from them if we deliver it up? So (...),
(...) reasonably conclude, that the Pr^^ce of Orange has any Power with them,
or In^ce over them any further than he can serve their (...), Wh^^^ is their
God, or which is worse, if he has, (...) ^ave too much reason to question his
good Nature, (...) ^ood Will to employ it for Our Advantage; (...) first (...)
which has suffered him to drive an Uncle ^^d a (...) into Banishment, and then
to take the Crown not from him only, but for ought appears yet to the contrary,
from a Brother as well as from a Sister and a Wife, notwithstanding the
Obligations of Nature, and his Public Declarations into the Bargain; who,
whilst he came to repair King James's bad Memory of his Promise, had not been
Two Months in England before he openly broke his Own; and whilst he pretended
to leave all to the Decision of a Free and Legal Parliament, he drove the King
away, to make it Impossible to have one. And if Ambition could break through
all the Bonds of Blood and Honor to get a Crown, What can tie him up from doing
all those Mischiefs we felt or feared from King James, and many more to keep
it? He that could do all this, can have no Bowels; and he that has none, may be
a King indeed, like the Stork in the Fable; and such a King as we deserve, and
our frequent Rebellions loudly call for: One that will turn the gentle R^ds in
the Two former Reigns, into Sc^rpions in his Own: One that will have the same
Title to our Service, as the Devil has to the Indian's Devotion, or Dionysius
to the Poor Woman's Prayers: And for his good will to our Nation and the
Prosperity thereof, he has given us a very good Specimen already, by sending to
Holland even in specie all, or the greatest part of the Money borrowed of the
City to support the present exigency of the Government. It is this eager desire
of our Prosperity, that makes him dive under Water, out of the sight of the
English Nobility, to a Dutch Cabal at Hampton Court; and we ca^ see his
desirable Face no more, unless it be to pass Acts t^ empty our Coffers, to
Saint Rebels, or destroy our Church

How sweet soever he is upon us at present (and the is but awkwardly
counterfeited) it is rank Folly to suppose (for William the Conqueror said, and
did so Things at First) that he will trust us with any sort. Power whatsoever,
who have abused what we had, ^ helping him to turn out our own Lawful and
Right^ King, to make room for Himself: And he begins the Game accordingly: For
whilst he sends our Countrymen abroad into Danger, Slavery, or Hardships, he
keeps a Dutch Army (and much the greater part of them Papists) over us at Home,
which may serve us for one good Instance of his Intentions to preserve our
Laws. I was indeed one amongst a great many other easy and well meaning Men,
who with a Fatal Credulity entertained a Belief, That his Design was Honorable;
and one Reason of his Expedition had at lest a show of Justice in the Quarrel;
I mean the Business of the Prince of Wales, which I cannot but confess, some
People managed as if they designed either that we should not believe at all, or
if we did, our belief should be as Implicit as to Successions and Inheritances
here, as that of the Romanist is in his expectation of Inheriting the Kingdom
of Heaven hereafter; but they have cured me of that Disease, and I do no longer
Believe, That he ever intended to perform what he promised in his Declaration,
That he came to restore our Government to it self, and to support our Church,
(which Popish Counsels had indeed put into some Disorder;) for now by a nearer
Converse, and an impartial View of the present Measures, we see these things
were farthest from his Thoughts. By all Observations that can be made, the End
of his coming was, To serve a Covetousness Natural to the Dutch, and an
Ambition and Revenge as Natural to Himself: For now, thank God, we know that
the Preparations for this Expedition were not only begun, but very far
advanced, before the Seven Bishops were sent to the Tower, before the Queen was
Breeding, and before the starting the Magdalen College Case; so that though
the Discontents of the Nation upon those Accounts, served both to promote and
disguise his Designs; they were no Occasion of his first taking them up. And
now his Success has carried him to the Top of his Hopes, he is so far from
redressing our Grievances, that he adds greater, and Himself continues the
greatest of them all. Ad Culmina Rerum Injustos crevisse queror. He has a
Popish Army commanded by Popish Officers, and Papists go in great Numbers to
Mass, at several Chapels, as openly as when King James was here, and with a
non Obstance to all our Laws, enjoy as great P^iviledges.

They that thought these to be G^ievances before, must allow them to be much
more so now, if we take into our Consideration a Speech he made to the
Convention (well said to be Transubstantiated into a Parliament) we may clearly
see that neither his Desire nor Design is to preserve the Church of England, as
is uncontroulably manifest by his Abol^shing Episcopacy in Scotland. But if we
can be quiet still, and get over all these Considerations (and in good Truth a
drowsy negligent Spirit seems to have locked up the Noble Genius of the Nation)
I must lay before you another Consideration, that will be sure to touch to the
Quick.

Peace and Plenty are the C^rdinal Blessings of a Kingdom, and the latter of
these has such an Absolute Dependence upon the former, that Light and the Sun,
Heat and Fire, are not more inseparable. When the Sword moves, Trade stands
still, and the Plough is idle; for no Man will bestow his Pains, and venture
his Money, when he knows not how soon, or who may be Masters of both; and if
their be ^o Trade, there can be no Diffiusive Plenty: For Trade is a kind of
Circulation of Blood, it preserves Health and distributes Nourishment:
Whatsoever therefore brings a War upon the Nation, brings the greatest Plague
upon it that can be; a War abroad ^ometimes may indeed be a kind of Physic to
the Body ^olitick, but a War at home is a Fever in the Bowels: The Ruins of
Churches, Palaces and Public Buildings; and the many indigent and begging
Gentlemen still left amongst us, are sad and fresh Monuments of our Deliverance
from Popery and Slavery, betwixt the Years 40 and 60. In which time it Cost the
N^tion above Twenty Millions of Money, and a Hundred Thousand Lives; and if we
do not before it be dark Night see the things that belong to our Peaca, we must
it possible fall into greater Confusion.

Do but prevail with your self so far as not to let a little consideration be
either troublesome, or uneasy to you, and then you will find, that unless like
Judah and Israel we ^e^d to the King to return in Peace to his own Throne; we
must have a Bloody War till he recovers his Righ^, o^ so long as he lives (for
he has Money, and he cannot want Men, and will never give it over) nor indeed
can the War dye with him, for so long as the Prince of Wales lives, and lives
abroad, and whilst there is a King of France or a Faction in England the War
can never dye; a Calamitous and Bloody War must needs be entailed upon the
Nation, Trading is already sunk extremely, and heavy Taxes are ^oming on a
pace, and the Wheels of the New Government are already so clogged, that Six
Millions of Money will scarce grease them enough to make them glibly turn
round; whilst England that Taxbearing Mule tamely wears one of Jacob's Sons
Inglorious Coat of Arms, Issachar is an Ass Couchant under a Burden of its own
making. All our Comfort is, that in the judgment of the best learned in the
Laws of this Kingdom, this Assembly neither is, nor can be a Parliament; and
indeed it can be no Parliament, but by virtue of a Power which God Almighty
never claimed, I mean Self-Creation, and Dr. Burnet himself is of the same
Opinion, for in the 66 Page of his Collected Papers, speaking of the Convention
that brought in King Charles the Second, and which also afterward voted it
self a Parliament, he has these very remarkable Words, It Is being called
without the King's Writ, was such an Essential Nullity that no subsequent
Ratification could take it away; and if so, the Subjects are not obliged to pay
any Taxes, because no Money can be raised here but by a Parliament; nay, the
Subject not only is not obliged to pay them, but it is also his Duty to refuse,
and then all Assessors, Collectors, and Officers, that Aid or Assist in the
Gathering or Constraining the Payment of such Illegal Taxes, will stand liable
to the highest of Punishments, probably Death, where there is a violent taking,
and also to an Action respectively for all Wrong done and Damages sustained;
and although the King by a General Pardon may Forgive the Crime, yet that will
not relieve them against the Personal Action: Nay! we shall be as false to our
selves as we have been to the King, if we suffer a Company of Men Assembled
without Writs to take upon them such a boundless Authority; it is a very
dangerous thing to depart the least Tittle from any thing that is Fundamental
in the Constitution, and we know not how soon they that do thus, may either
make Parliaments without Elections as well as without W^its, or el^e wholly lay
them aside, both which have been done within the M^mory of Man

Death and Desolation I leave to every Man's priva^^ Reflection, and new Oaths
Imposed upon us against our Consciences under heavy Penalties. The Fellows of
Magdalen College were Expell^d, because they would not violate their
Consciences nor the Oath they had taken, and now Thousands of the Church of
England must be deprived of their Freeholds, and rendered incapable of
maintaining themselves and their Families for the very same R^ason: And to add
to the Comfort of our suff^ring, that was done by a Popish King, this by an
Assembly of Protestants. This is the Prologue, and but the Prologue to the
Tragedy that is like to ensue: And now we have a Fast Proclaimed, to sanctify
Rebellion, and that there may not be any Wickedness done but in the Name and in
the fear of the Lord. We must shut our Eyes, and be wilfully blind, if we do
not discern this Written, as with a Beam of the Sun, That this wretched Nation
must have no Peace, nor exp^ct any good, without doing the King Justice, and
restoring him to his Throne, which is his own undoubted and indefeisable Right;
for if he comes by force and whether we will or no, without Abundance of
Clemency, what may not an injured Monarch do? what must he not do, to secure
himself from a persidious and Rebellious People? And if we consider how King
Charles the First (who did not begin till he had lost almost all the means of
War, Ireland being embroiled, and Scotland against him too) reduced the Rump
Parliament to Extremity, we cannot doubt but that King James, who, besides the
Blessing that attends a good Cause, has Ireland entire, and the principal
Nobility, and Gentry, and the whole Clergy of Scotland on his side; and his
good Subjects of Englands Eyes now opened, will do more than set our new
Government hard, and at last overthrow it.

I cannot forbear inserting what I received in a Letter from an ingenious Hand,
in these Words: It is an Old, but True Observation concerning the People of the
Jews (to whom we of this Nation may in many respects be very fitly compared)
that they never Abdicated their King, but they Abdicated their God, and their
Religion at the same time; Moses, for Example, was their King, and by God's own
Appointment, and the meekest Man upon the Earth; yet even he did but withdraw
for Forty Days into the Mount, but his Rebellious Subjects began to Murmur and
Complain, That he had DESERTED his Government, and left the Throne VACANT; and
having called a great Convention of the Jews, they immediately made to
themselves a GOLDEN CALF at HOREB.

Upon the whole, what in Justice we ought, in Prudence we must do, that is,
call back the King, who to our comfort offers his full Free and General Pardon,
no Crime, no Person excepted, and to leave all our Grievances to be
accommodated by a Free and Legal Parliament, freely chosen, and held without
any manner of constraint, which as it will be a certain Expedient, so it is the
only one, that can Establish the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation; and since
the King has made us the Offer, in Policy as well as Honor, he must keep his
Word, if we will be but so just and kind to our selves as to give him the
meeting in another healing Parliament.

I assure the World I am no Papist, and by the Grace of God never will be; my
expectations and my present Possessions are equally small. I have no pretense
to Greatness* except what arises from an unshaken stedfastness to the
Principles of Religion, and Loyalty, which I shall ever think inseparable.
Nothing could have drawn these Reflections from me, but an invincible fidelity
to Truth, Justice, and my Native Country, upon which I see Ruin and Desolation
rolling like a mighty Wave. May these or some other from a more skillful Hand,
awake and rouse the Sense and Ancient Courage of the Nation, that we may not
need to be beholden to the French whom we hate, for bringing in the King whom
we love, and may we make have to deliver our selves from the impend^ Mischief
of a Dutch Conquest, or from the greatest of (...) Mischiefs the Spirit of
Slavery under a Commonwealth.

Imperium flagitiis aquisitum nemo unquas bonis artibus exercuit. Tacit.

