ENGLANDS Faiths Defender VINDICATED: OR, A Word to clear a most foul, damnable
and scandalous Aspersion, which has been cast upon that Patient and Suffering
Prince, CHARLES II. By some villainous and seditious persons, That he should
have renounced the Protestant Religion, and Church of England, and have
embraced POPERY. Published out of Christian and Loyal Duty, by a Person who
has been faithful ever since he could discern the light from darkness.

PROVE. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. 16. These six things does the Lord hate: yea, his soul
abhors seven.

17. The haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and the hands that shed innocent blood.

18. An heart that imagines wicked enterprises, and feet that be swift in
running to mischief.

19. A false witness that speaks lies, and he that raises up contentions
among brethren.

London, Printed for Charles King. 1660.

ENGLANDS Faiths Defender VINDICATED, etc.
Christian Countrymen,
OUt of that measure of light the Lord has been pleased to afford me in these
gloomy, and days of dismal darkness, I think my self bound both in Conscience
and Duty as a Subject, and as a Christian, to witness against such Diabolical
devices as may be scattered abroad to the dishonor of God, our poor exiled
innocent long-suffering Prince, and of Christian Religion it self, that the
devices of the Devil may not always be seducively prevalent, but that the
misled people may have some light to clear them of damnable doubts; As now of
the falsity of the ensuing, which without doubt in its coming forth in such
damnable colors, has much terrified the Souls and tender Consciences of many
of Gods people. I therefore have taken upon me this ensuing, to Vindicate that
true and fundamentally grounded-Protestant, and Defender of the Faith and
Church of England, CHARLES the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc.

Give me leave then, and I hope without offense I may answer for the absent; if
not, I Will presume: for it cuts my very Soul to hear such notorious Scandals cast
upon that most innocent Prince, which would pass for current, should none rise
up to reprove the backbiters: But let them hear what the Apostle says, 1 Pet.
2.1. Wherefore laying aside all maliciousness, and all guile, and all
dissimulation, and envy, and all Evil speaking. Then, now that the men of the
Times, who under pretense of Holiness, Zeal and Religion, have subverted this
late glorious Church and State, and brought it to nothing, but a ruined heap of
innumerable Calamities. Now that God in some measure has opened the eyes of
the people to discern their wicked detestable, infernal, and out of measure
sinful actings; now that they see their Plots discovered, and that they fear
some doleful Ca astrophe to Crown their perniciously public destructive
Labors; the Counsels now on foot portending an unlucky Omen toward them, they
have gone to consult with their Master, who hitherto has still backed them on
to all their damnable Designs, who now seeing there is no probability left in
them to advance his Kingdom here, has forsaken them, to run for a space at
their chains length, upon that Stage wherein they have Acted with a Devilish
Plaudite so many direful Tragedies, that they may receive the shame and
derision of the Multitude, until such time as the hand of an earthly
Executioner shall recommend them to the Stygian Charon (according to the Poets.)

Seeing thus he has cancelled their Commissions, and denied them his
assistance, they call a Grand Convention, to see what they can do, and hope by
the strength of their own Arguments, that they shall dive out of the Hell of
Hells within them, to remount the Saddle which of late has given them so
scurvy a turn on the dirt; and nothing is so conducent to the affair in this
extremity, but to give out this:

What, are the People possessed with some Infernal, that they will readmit of
that Religion, which at the price of so much Blood, Treasure, and other
perilous hazards, has been expunged this Commonwealth? Know they not the
blindness and ignorance of the Papists, and that it is a sure way to Perdition?
and will they make that Apostate, great Papist grown, Charles Stuart, their
King? Surely the Lord has left them, and given them up to a state of
Reprobation. Well, we will wash our hands, and the guilt of their Souls be upon
their own heads.

Thus vent they their damnable Forgeries, which bear no other impression, than
that of Hell: But God will confound their hellish inventions, and bring to
light their works of darkness. God reveals the hidden works of darkness, and
brings to light the counsels of the wicked. What (says the Psalmist) does
the wicked man do? behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood, etc. Psalm. 7.14, 15, 16. And 1 Cor. 1.19.
The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it is written, He
catches the wise in their own craftiness.

Dear Friends, Examine your selves, and your own Consciences will tell you,
that the wisdom of these Hyyocrites is a lie, and their hopes shall perish.
Reason with your selves my following Arguments which I shall presently lay
down, and I am confident you will sign them as a confirmation to your troubled
Souls, That he is no other than a true Protestant according to the Church of
England; and I presume, if occasion should require, he would expose himself to
the Martyring Stake, for the Defense of the true Protestant Religion, and
Church of England, and therefore deserves the Title of his Predecessors,
Defender of the Faith.

I could offer many Arguments; though I question not but these two which I
shall here insert, will be sufficient proof to clear the point: And because I
am loath to presume too much upon your patience, I thus lay down my first
Argument, to prove that Charles the Second, King of England, etc. is a true
Protestant; viz. That notwithstanding his being born a Prince to all the
Dignities and Honors of the Crowns and Scepters that his Predecessors have
swayed; His being Banished from all these, and all the Pleasures and Delights
of fruitful England, of which he had had some small smach before his perpetual
determined Exile; That he should be forced to fly for Refuge to Strangers,
hurried and tossed, upon the restless wheel of Fortune, from one place to
another, out of one perilous danger into another, nothing but fears and
dangers encompassing him on every side; Notwithstanding his Eleven years
banished residence to light amongst the chiefest Upholders of Popery; and on
the other side, ballancing with these the large Promises have been made to him
by most Polish Potentates (the Pope himself) for establishment of him in his
Throne and Dignity, provided he would renounce his Religion, and embrace
Popery, weighing his Adversity and Prosperity together: And notwithstanding all
these things, that yet he should stand firm and immovable to his first
Principles, denotes his undoubted Resolution to live and die for the Church and
Protestants of England, and the great grace and mercy of God to be working in
him, who surely has reserved him for some great and glorious Work. This as a
Preamble. Now take the sum of this Argument; to wit, his following Declaration
in the midst of those (though quite different in the Principles of Religion)
from whom he receives his subsistence; and that to Cardinal Mazarine, a great
Instigator of the Papistical Interest, who comes to the King, and and after a
dolorous stating of the Kings most sad and deplorable exiled condition, tells
him what friends and means he would procure him in order to his settlement, if
he would but embrace the pure Religion of the Papists, and renounce the
Heresies of England: And withal, after his establishment, but tolerate the
Papists freely to exercise within his Dominions, and that he would suspend the
Penal Statutes and Acts of Parliament made against them. But mark how the King
declares himself in answer to this subtle Temptation, which completes my first
Argument, That Charles the Second King of England, etc. is a true Protestant of
the Faith of the Church of England.

Sir, I thank you for your affections and love toward me; but your demands are
unreasonable, as against my Conscience, and those Principles of Christian
Religion in which ( in the Church of England) I have been trained up: Then how
can I do that thing, and sin against the Lord? it is better to suffer than to
sin; and I am fully resolved, rather than so to die a Martyr in defense of the
Church of England. And besides, admit I should renounce; such things as in the
latter part you request, lie not in my power to give you satisfaction in: for
such Laws as are made and confirmed by a Parliament (according to the
Constitution of our Government) no King of England can abrogate; and if my
restoration can be accomplished by none but such an unlawful and
unconscionable way, I do here determine to wait with patience upon God in a
perpetual Exile, who if he shall not see an earthly Crown meet for me, I hope
will make me able to say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith: henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, etc.

My second Argument is. That seeing their subtilty could have no prevalency
over his spirit, or their temptations draw him from the Truth, to embrace their
blind and most damnable Errors, they at last contrive to force him to some
solemn Protestation of that nature by violence, but all had the like operation,
in that finding the bottom of their devices, he rather chose to abandon their
Protection, and commit himself to the wide world, without any certain place of
reception or refuge to fly to, than to hazard his precious Soul, dishonor God,
and stigmatize his Progenitors and Royal Predecessors, with so great a mark of
Ignominy, as by submitting to the unlawful, subtle and forcible demands of
those wicked Papists he should. His late escape, or at least some show of an
escape, from his Court at Bruxels, does clearly manifest and make good this
second Argument, That King Charles is a true Protestant of the Church of
England.

These, I hope, will stop the mouths of the slanderers, for their further
venting abroad any more such damnable falsities; at least, ground all good
people from any further belief of them, if they shall dare presume to scatter
abroad any more of the like nature.

Thus having uttered my knowledge and Conscience, I hope you will excuse what I
have said amiss, and ponder this thing, that is of such great Concernment, in
your hearts.

To conclude in a word: Do not all good people desire peace and settlement in
this turmoiled Church, and shipwrackt State? Know ye not the way to peace? and
that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand? then how do you think to
live in peace, whilst we thus labor against the stream? What Government are we
founded upon? know you not? What has our forefathers been always subject unto?
what was the Government they have always found such peaceable living under?
has not 300 Kings and more swayed the English Scepter, and are we grown more
wise than all past generations? Does not the very word of God manifest against
us, Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with them which
are given unto Changes: v. 22. For their destruction shall rise suddenly, and
who knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 28.2. For the transgressions of the
Land, many are the Princes thereof: but by a man of understanding and
knowledge, a Realm likewise endures long. Balance the Miseries and Calamities
have been predominant over you these 11 years, in expectation of this Utopian
Commonwealth, with the Peace and flourishing estate you have lived under, when
Monarchy was your Sovereign, and then you will be able to distnguish the light
from darkness; then will you cry no more, Crucify him, Crucify him, but,
Lord, return us our Judges as at the first, and our Rulers and Counselors as
in the beginning. Does not Nature teach you, that Monarchy runs in English
veins; and you see what Diseases have fallen upon you, by the Corruption which
you have wrought in your blood? Ought ye not to follow the example of God in
all things, for has not he made you in his own likeness? he is the Lord of
lords, and King of kings, a God blessed for evermore. He has granted a
Monarchical Power and Commission to King Jesus: Nay, (according to the
observation of Naturalists) the very Bruits and senseless Animals, both
Walking, Creeping, Swimming and Flying, do govern to our shame: And Custom, (a
second Nature) pleads a Monarchical Prerogative in this Nation, prohibiting the
introduction of any strange and new found Government. And lastly, our Laws are
modellized so aptly for such a Constitution, that the very Lawyers themselves
confess and acknowledge, they cannot in their natural presidential property
comply with any other. (...) seeing it is thus, and that at last you grant
Monarchy the best (which I dare presume none can deny, but such as have
feathered themselves out of the Nations Ruins, and that not out of Conscience,
but wilful obstinacy, thinking thereby to save their estates unlawfully
accrewing unto them) seeing, I say, you have some spacks of Loyalty yet left to
tend that way, ye know that our Government is not Efective but successive: Then
why thus long stand ye gazing on the tedious Exile of you long suffering,
virtuous, and most noble King, the lawful Successor to the Crown of England?
Why are ye not preparing for the day of his Coronation? Surely it will be
performed in such magnificent manner, as never yet was performed at the
Inauguration of any English Prince. For that ye have had 11 years to make
proparations therein: But oh, I fear ye can give but a Tragical account,
therefore up and be doing, for I assure you it is high time: How often has your
King knocked at your doors, but ye would not open? How long has his patience
waited to enter in, but ye would not receive him with the Laurel branch in his
hand? What is it you allege against Charles the Second to be your King? he is
an English Prince, he is Patient, he is Wise, he is Virtuous, he is Merciful,
he is an Understanding Prince, he is Religious, he is Zealous, he is a true
Protestant: Finally, he is all in all that a good King should be; Ergo, as fit
to sway the English Scepter, as ever any one that has sat upon the Throne
before him. If you delight not to see the Glory and Honor of God rent in
pieces, his Church defloured, his Vineyard trampled down, the Food of your
Souls profaned; if you delight not in Blood, and Ruins of Blood, Fire, Famine,
Death, continual Wars, and rumors of Wars, Oppressions, continual Fea s, the
Cries and Shrikes of your Wives and Children, the Ruins of your Houses, the
Destruction of your Estates, the Hissing of all Nations, the Decay of Trading,
the Want of Bread to sustain your selves, the sum of all that ever Horror and
Dissolution can introduce into any Nation: But on the other side, if you
respect the Glory and Honor of God, the Increase of his Church, the
Establishing of the Kingdom of Christ in the uttermost Corners of the Earth,
the Salvation of your own Souls in the Day of the Lord, the Good of your
Selves, Wives and Children, the Abundance of all Temporal Mercies and
Blessings, the Fullness of Trade, and Increase of Traffics, to become the Terror
(as formerly) of all the Nations round about ye; Then Call Home your King from
Exile, and Establish Him on the Royal Throne, that he may Judge the People in
Mercy, Righteousness and Truth. Then shall all People with Joy and Gladness,
with Cheerfulness of spirit lift up themselves, and cry, Long live the King,
and let Him Rule His People unto

THE END.

