ENGLAND ANATOMIZED: Her Disease discovered, and the Remedy prescribed. In a
Speech by a MEMBER of the (so called) PARLIAMENT.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Am not (I fear) the only person, that comes hither hopeless of doing any
other good, (or good any other way) than by opposing (...), and endeavoring to
hinder the designs of those, who have brought the lives, liberties, and
estates of the people of three Nations, to have no other support, than a
Government without any basis or foundation. Although, I hope, we have not any
of us so naturalized our selves in the devill's dominions, by our habitual
crimes, as not to return to the light of reason. Sir, I should willingly be
silent, could the voice and cries, complaints and groans, of the many thousands
in these Nations (that have felt, and feel, the weight of the oppressors) be
heard. But whilst they are not heard, or not regarded; and others (as
unconcerned for them, and too much for themselves) pursue not the trust reposed
at their Elections to sit here, Nolo meam perdere: I will not, must not, dare
not, stifle my reason, barter my conscience, nor lose any opportunity of
declaring what I am, and think, others should be. And when Religion and Law,
the two pillars of a Commonwealth, have Sampson's shoulders (the power of the
Sword) set to pull them down, sit as a calm spectator. You know well, Sir, that
it is the part of such as are called, to consult the concernments of the
Republic; Semper vigilare and populorum suscipere curam; according to that
Encomium of Hector by Livie, Nocturnu vigilans and reipub. providens, etc. But
he that sleeping does nothing, is more commendable, (or rather less culpable)
than he that waking does amiss. Give me therefore liberty, in discharge of my
self, and as concerned for others, to be your Remembrancer of the occasion and
business, for which we that now sit (and others, that, for ought I know, have
as much right as our selves to sit here) were at first convented. And if it
appear (as questionless it is too obvious) that we have degenerated or
deviated, gone contrary to, or, at least, walked out of the good road-way, to
the peace, security, and advantage of the three Nations; I am unwilling to
believe, that any man (out of a supposition that it is too late) will yet
longer deferr to return, and experience to himself, that, Nihil est comodius
vel tutius via Regia. Mr. Speaker, I shall not so much as question, whether
those sitting here, are, or are not, a Parliament. But sure I am, that many
useful Members (if it were such) are wanting, to complete this Body; and as
sure, that it were safest and best to join the Head to the Members. The
Constitution of Parliaments was to consult and advise with the King, for the
government of his Subjects; To that purpose were we called hither: And how far
we have prosecuted that, all Europe, yea, the whole World, is made judge. Let
us make some retro-spection, and take a short survey of the transactions, by,
and amongst us, since our first meeting. We sat not long, before our
inconsiderate folly and arrogance gave the King just cause to absent, and to
decline our actings. It did not then, (to some) but has since (to all)
appeared, that there were two great designs of two sorts of persons, sitting
in the House; one of which (as in charity I do believe of many that were then
Members) was, to purge the Council of the King, and to reclaim the insolence,
and over-haughtinesse, of the Bishops and Clergy: The other, that which has
been since fatally effected, the destruction of them all. How to distinguish
these persons (yet) I know not; there being many Members (doubtless) still in
being, (and some, I hope, sitting here) than were then, and (...) continue,
hearty lovers of their King and Country. But all, or most of us, without
distinction, are too guilty; some, by acting; others, by cowardly suffering
that dismal Tragedy to be acted. I need not prompt your Intellects, in the
nature of those horrid crimes we all have cause to mourn for: I fear, too many
understood too well, and acted deliberately and resolvedly what was intended,
to attain to what they proposed. The sum of all is plain; That out of
pretensions to zeal for God, love to Religion, allegiance and duty to our King,
and care for our Country, we caused so many thousands to be murdered, so many
families to be ruined, the King (whom we promised and protested we would make a
glorious Prince) to be betrayed and beheaded; his Queen banisHed, his Royal
Children exposed to the mercy of Strangers, Religion discountenanced, the
Church defaced, the Laws violated, men's persons imprisoned, their estates
confiscate and sold. And all this to serve our own base ends, to enrich our
selves, and to advance Libertinism, Anabaptism, Quakism, and Papism. Mr.
Speaker, I wish these were not undeniable truths; but such we all know they
are: And yet such, as some, notwithstanding, can add to their confidence in
committing, the impudence of justifying and defending them, asserting their
right and authority by their power and violence: Though it be as ridiculous to
wise men to maintain an Authority, in the subject of dethroning and deposing
their Sovereign, as it is profane and damnable to entrench upon the prerogative
of Heaven. And if the King be, Sicut Vicarius Dei, and Minister in terra; How
dare any, but the great Emperor and Deputer of that Viceroy, undertake or
design his removal. It was, Sir, (no doubt) just cause of sadness, upon the
spirits of all honest persons, that had been too eminent in the prosecution, of
what received so ill success, to have that little power or possibility they
had of retriving, what, before the murder of our late King, seemed possible to
be recovered, wrested from them, by the force and violence of the then, and now
pretenders to reformation, having no other warrant then their rebellious
swords, which has been the only Corrilium they have used, like the unskilful
Physician, Omnium occulos sanare. And when afterward some were left sitting,
that were seriously sensible of their miscarriages, and endeavored to evidence
their remorce, by re-setling and reducing what they found wholly out of frame;
then for some few self-interessed, irreligious, sacralegious persons, by mere
supremacy of power, to enforce their dissolution, and give way to the
succession of a corrupt, Anabaptisticall, Jesuiticall sect of people, to
introduce an absolute arbitrary Government, without Rule or Law, save only
that of the wills of the Legislators, that altered as their occasions and
advantages prompted. What must it then be to us, if there be any hear (as God
forbid the contrary) that dare be honest, to see the Tragedy continued, acting
and acted for so many years together; and when we now pretend an Authority, and
have thereby opportunity to become men again (having hitherto appeared to the
universal spectators, as Beasts, Woolvs, Tigers, and a mere Antropophagi,
devouring, and causing one another to be devoured) and to demonstrate how fully
sensible we are of our fat all and damnable errors, to find the people ready to
be entangled in another Labyrinth, out of which, it is evident to all rational
capacities, there is no clue to conduct us, but that thread of Government which
has been rashly cut in sunder. Mr. Speaker, I must not waste your time, nor
need not (I think) speak much of this subject, all of us having too great
testimony in our selves of the sad truths I mention. But (Sir) I beseech you,
let us not amidst our ills be so desperate, as to believe our selves altogether
unsafe, without attempting greater. No, let us rather take up the Nunquam sera;
and whilst some possibility remains of such a compensatory restitution, as may
render us capable of mercy, do something may procure it. I cannot boast the
Art, whereto some here pretend, of Preaching, although I may more justly now
assert a legal Call, to preach Repentance (evidencing my own by a free
confession) than they to ascend the Pulpit, and become Umpires of Scripture,
without other warrant, than what they collect by abuse of that part on it, which
reaches them to provide for those of their own household, which they have done
so successfully, that they have inverted the Text, and are worse than
Infidells. But, Mr. Speaker, I shall beg your consideration only of two
things; First, Of the condition wherein we, and the three Nations now are; and,
if I may speak my own thoughts freely, I hope I shall speak some of yours too
in them. It Is not unknown, that we were sometimes the wonder of the world,
famous for Good, though now for Evil, and our Nation so Glorious, and happily
enriched with Fruitfulness, Peace and Plenty, and Governed by such wholesome
Laws, that those in League with us, loved and honored us, and our enemies
envied and admired us: And now we are become so hatefully ridiculous, that we
are past the benefit of love or pity, and are, and must be, looked on by all
(save such as by-respects seduceth) as a People without a Government, or
Governors: and what consequence may be from thence expected, is easily
inferred from the fatal dissentions, and general misfortunes of those people
we read of, When there was no King in Israel. I may, Sir, challenge the best,
and most critical Etymologist, to give the Government we now are under (if we
have any) a significant Christian name. I am confident none, or very few here
can think, (what ever it may be expedient for us at present to say or declare)
that it is a Parliamentary Government, every man rational, having so much
natural Logic about him to evince the contrary. Parliaments were never heard
of before Kings, nor never made, legally called, or constituted, but by the
King. If then there be no King, what follows? Cessante causa, cessat etiam
effectus.

But suppose an Impossibility, that there was a Parliament in England which did
survive the King that caused it; yet, was it not dissolved, and legally too,
notwithstanding the Act we door on, that it should not be dissolved but by Act
of Parliament? However, others may truly expound that Act of force, a wrong; we
are estopped by our assent, to say it was illegal. Was the standing at the
Parliament House door, before the late King's death, and with violence denying
entrance to men, duly chosen by their Country, imprisoning their persons, and
appointing a certain number of their own to sit, and directing them to enact
what they had designed, and nothing else. Was that lawful? Were those persons
then left a complete Parliament? and were the rest lawfully secluded? And is it
not as lawful for the same persons, by the same power, when those sitting
begun (or were feared) to be too honest for their purposes, utterly to
annihilate and dissolve them? I beseech you, Sir, let us not befool our selves
into an opinion, of cheating the eyes of the world with a mask, that every one
may see through. But finding now our constitution, and the state of our
maladies; let our next consideration be, how, with the skillful Physician, to
restore our own and the peoples health, so manifestly impaired, and become
almost incurable. To which purpose, (Sir) it will not be amiss to consult,
whether many, yea, most (now) that undertake to prescribe remedies, are fit
persons to administer this kind of Physic. It is a rule most consonant to
reason, in all Trials at Law or Equity, that persons concerned in any cause
depending, shall not have power to assert by their own testimony their right or
interest, much less to adjudge their own properties. And how much more
unreasonable and unjust is it, that those persons who are become purchasers,
and possessed of the Estates and Inheritances of the Person, whose Title upon
no other ground is oppugned, to be judges of his right and interest, and to
give Laws, by no other authority, than what is founded upon Rebellion and
Treasons? And what justice can be expected from men, that have no rule but
their carnal and diabolical principles, to guide their partial agitations to
their own present advantages?

Mr. Speaker, I could wish that more of us, than I fear there are, were of
Menanders judgment; and could be persuaded that, Honestius and tutius est
pauperem esse quam injuste divitem; and that (sure) would deter us from
adventuring upon temporal gain, by an eternal loss; and from digging into
the Mines of other men's treasure, by murders, thefts, rapines, treasons and
rebellions, which must inevitably determine in our own and the peoples
destruction. Let us cast our thoughts a little upon the fate of Ziba,
Achitophel, Absolon, Adonijah, Adoram, Judas, and others, amongst the many
Traitors in Holy Writ; of Persons, Grac^hus, Cataline, Decius-Brutus,
Trebonius, Milo, Caepio, Marcus, Lollius, Bessus, and others, in History
abroad; and Straw, Cade, Tiler, Cromwell, and others at home: And let us not
dare to pursue their hellish stratagems, unless we would willingly suffer the
same destiny. We have, Sir, by sad experience, at too dear a rate, bought and
learned the knowledge of our errors, and how unsuitable the Government we
pretend to is, unto the constitution of these Nations, having introduced
nothing but confusion, and opened the gap to all licentiousness; confirming
that for truth which others heretofore have found, that, Multos Imperitare
malum.

Sir, I shall instantly make an end (for this time) of speaking, and heartily
desire, we all would now begin some seasonable acting. And by way of
prevention, (lest too soon it become too late, to do what now we may; and that
be forced from us, which now, by making a virtue of the necessity incumbent on
us, we may with advantage offer) speedily lay by our private interests, and
reassume the public spirits befitting us; re-call our King, re-settle the
Government under him, bear that durus sermo, freely to surrender what any of
us. (...) from him; and join together with him in a firm establisHment of the
Church and State, Law and Religion; that the Land may once more flourish, and
the honor, plenty, and prosperity of the people be again revived. And that we
(now) should be persuaded thus to do, I find no reason to despair, having such
violent inducements, by the opportunities abroad and at home now tendered us.
The sickly reign of Treason, in all probability, (whether we will or not)
coming near its period, Can we, Mr. Speaker, be so sottish, or bewitched in
our security so much, as to believe our scarlet sins have not ere this reached
Heaven, and that the great Avenger of blood will not soon over-take us, unless
we fly to the Sanctuary of Penitential Expiation? No, Sir, be we assured, if
men concerned should cease to act their duties, Heaven it self, by some
miracle, would create a way to such an eminent Justice. It is for want of this
the Nations mourn; for this, the silent sighs of the immured prisoners, the
longing wishes of our unjustly banished Countrymen, the afflicted mothers
lamentations for their murdered sons; the pitied wants of the innocent
unsuspecting Infants, of their undone Parents, do invoke Heaven. In fine, the
voice of GOD commands, and all good men desire it; let none therefore dare to
contradict it.

FINIS.

