

Monday, June 18. 1660. Two VOTES Concerning the King, and Queens Houses and
Lands.
ORDERED by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That a Stop, and Stay be
forthwith made of all Wastes, in any the Houses, Timber, or Woods Standing, and
being, in, or upon any the Lands, part of the Queens Majesty's Ioynture, in
whose hands soever the same are; And that all Wood and Timber which have been
felled off any of the said Lands, at any time since the 25 day of April last,
whether remaining upon the said Lands, or removed off the Lands, to any other
place or places, shall so remain, and continue, without further disposal, till
the Parliament shall give special order therein. And all persons concerned are
required to take notice hereof, and to observe the same accordingly, at their
Perils.

ORDERED by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That a Stop, and Stay be
forthwith made of all Wastes, in any the Houses, Timber, or Woods, standing,
and being, in, or upon any the Lands, belonging to the Kings Majesty, in whose
hands soever the same are. And that all Wood, and Timber which have been felled
off any of the said Lands, at any time since the 25 of April last, whether
remaining upon the said Lands, or removed off the Lands, to any other place or
places, shall so remain, and continue, without further disposal, till the
Parliament shall give special order therein. And all persons concerned are
required to take notice hereof, and to observe the same accordingly, at their
Perils.

Die Martis 19. die Junij, 1660.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That these two Orders be
forthwith Printed and Published.

JO: BROWN Cleric: Parliamentorum.

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS
most Excellent Majesty. 1660.


