Die Lunae 8 Februarii 1646.
WHereas the Lords in Parliament assembled, did upon the first of this instant
February order, That a Declaration should be printed and published, wherein
amongst other things it was declared, That the Committees of the several
Counties of England and Dominion of Wales, ought not to obey any Order for the
taking off or suspending any Sequestrations until a Committee or Commissioners
for that purpose should be settled by Ordidinance of Parliament: And whereas
since that time there is an Ordinance past upon the sixth of this instant
February, giving power to certain Lords and Commons Members of Parliament,
with some others therein named, to be Commissioners to sit at Goldsmiths Hall
for compounding with Delinquents, and to act according to several Ordinances
or Orders made before the date of the said Ordinance by both or either of the
Houses of Parliament concerning the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall: And that the
said Commissioners should have power to suspend the Sequestration of such
Delinquents as should compound with the said Commissioners: And that such
Suspentions as have been already made by the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall
should stand good. Now the said Lords in Parliament assembled (for the
preventing any scruple that may arise by reason of the said Declaration) do
(upon the settlement made in this business, as aforesaid, by both Houses)
think fit to declare, That the Committees in the several Counties, and all
others whom it may concern* do give obedience to the said Ordinance and every
part thereof.

ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration shall be
printed and published; and that the Sheriffs or their Vnder-Sheriffes shall
take care to carry down several printed Copies of this Declaration; and that
they be delivered unto the several Committees for Sequestrations within the
Counties of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, who are to take
notice hereof accordingly.

Joh. Brown
Cler. Parliamentorum.
London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1646.


