ENGLAND'S New Wonders OR Four Strange and Amazing Relations That have lately
come to pass in England.

I. A strange and Wonder^ull Account of one Mary Blackstone, near Hull in
Yorkshire, who after ten Years Barrenness, was with Child of a M^nstrous
Birth, and de^ivered after ^wo Years going of it, it h^ving 3 Heads, each ^n
Eye in the F^rehead, Serpents twi^ing about each Neck, 4 Arms, and 4 Legs, each
10 Fingers and To^s on the H^nds and Feet; the Privities of Male and Female.
With the Examination of the Mother by the Mi^ister, what answer she ^^ve, her
prayer and Advice to all Women* Not to wish for ^hing^ God sees not Conveni^n^
to g^ve, least fearful punishment ^vertake them, With the T^x^ she chos^ for
her Funeral Sermon, before she dyed, and the substance of the Sermon. By D.
Bo^se; ^I. An Acc^^nt of a mighty Tempest, and the ^ppearing of a ^errible
Fiery Serpent, at Laightown Buz^^d (...) Bed^ordshire ^II An ^ccount of a
mighty Storm of Hail, ^ear Sta^ford in Northampton shire, which destroyed, many
Cattle ^^d Fowl wou^d^d diver^ ^^op^e cause^ great ^nundation, that ^^^^^oyed
several Mils much Corn and other matters, some of the ^n^s being 9 or 10 inches
in Compass ^V. An Account of two ^rmies fighting in the (...), in Bri^any in
France. All very terrible and wonderful.
Licensed according to Order.

^ONDON, Printed for J. Blare at the Loking Glass on Lond^n-Bridg^: and
Reprinted at ABERDEEN by JOHN FORBES, Anno DOM. 1697.

CHAP. I.
A Strange and Wonderful Account of a Monsterous Child with. 3 Heads, 4 Arms 4
Legs, and Eyes in its Forehead, ten Fingers and as many Toes on each Hand and
Foot, born near Hull in Yorkshire. Of the Mothers Confession, Prayer and
Funeral Sermon, etc.

STrange and wonderful are many things we frequently see and hear of, to the
astonishment and amazing of Mankind: Yet if we rightly consider, why GOD sends,
or suffers such things in the world, they may turn to our advantag^, to warn us
from going on in sinful ways, and flee from the wrath that is to come. Where
str^nge Prodigies or Portants are manifested, they are taken usually for
Forerunners of strange Events, and stranger then what I am about to relate,
that have weary lately happened, and are attested (for a credible truth) by
persons of known integrity I may presume, have been hardly heard of in any of
the Modern ages of the world, but to come near to my purpose, and in order, the
First that I shall present you with, is a strange and amazing Account, of a
Prodigeous Monsterous Birth, which is well attested and communicated to us, in
the following manner.

One Mary Blackstour, being married to a Person, at a place near Hull, in
Yorkshire* not being past Childbearing, but in youthful brisk years, was
passionately desirous to have a Child, but God withheld from her the fruit of
the Womb, which made her angry, and often use unbecoming expressions; envying
those that had Children: and so she continued about ten Years, though her
husband was an active man, and likely enough for the bussiness of Generation.
At the end of which time, having taken some provocatives, and other supposed
helps, her belly began to rise, but sometimes again would sink all on a sudden*
Yet nevertheless, she had a strong conceit she was with Child, and would not be
persuaded from the belief, by judicious grave Matrons, who took it for a windy,
spu^gy, or watery mole; which sometimes happens, and is called a false
Conception: Yet the usual time of Women's going being expired, and no sign or
Labor, of Delivery appearing, she began to grow somewhat ashamed of her
^oastings; and imprudently uttered rash wishes or Vows, as she afterward
confessed, to the giving God a just off^nce, to inflict some judgment on her.
Yet her belly continued to grow big; and she felt strange pains, unusual sweats
and faintings, and so it continued near two Years, so that she fa^cied she had
got a Tinpany, or was so believed by others, when indeed it was no otherwise,
for at the end of two Years, from the beginning of her first disorder and
fancying she was with child, she fell into heavy pains as a Women in travel,
but greater and more unusual: this continued some time without any app^rent
hopes of delivery, till the 4th, o^ May last 1696.

On this day, several Women being with her, she was with extraordinary pains
and labor delivered of a monsterous Child to the affrightment of all that were
present, having three Heads, wonderously mishappen, each having one Eye
standing in the forehead, and a small twisting thing in the form of a Serpent
about each neck: It had four distinct Arms and Hands, and on the hands each ten
Fingers: though not quite so open or distinct, some being less in proportion
then usual to others, It had also four Legs, and four Feet, and tho but one
body, yet there appeared seams in it as if two or more were joined, or were
incorporated into one, the Feet had a proportion of Toes to the Fingers upon
the Hands: It had likeways the privy Members of Male and Female, and was
exposed to the view of many Eminent persons, who came diverse Miles to see it:
It was heard to cry from all the Heads at one and the same time, and many other
Observations were taken of it.

The M^ther by the hard pains of her Travel, and this Affrightment, Sorrow and
some other concurrents, fell into a weak Condition, so that her uprising being
dispaired of, she desired a Minister might be sent for (which accordingly was
done) to pray with her, and to give her Spiritual Consolation which was done.
And diverse Questions was asked her, as, whether she was any ways sensible how
she might offend GOD, that might cause him thus for to afflict her with so
Monsterous an Issue? She replied unto this with a faint languishing Voice, that
she believed she had provoked the Divine-Goodness, because that she had been
too passionatly desirous of Children, and now like Rachel, had brought forth a
Benoani, the child of her sorrow: For she had often desired that she might have
a Child though she were made an Example, or suffered never so much upon that
account: Which she believed now had fallen justly upon her. And thereupon she
fell instantly into this

PRAYER.
O Lord God of infinite Mercies, forgive the sins of my rashness and vain
desires, blot out my iniquities, and lay not my sins unto my charge, but give
me patience in all my sufferings: And grant me, O Lord, if it shall be thy good
pleasure, for to restore me to my former Health, that I may live Uprightly;
Soberlie, and in a sincere Godly Life, more then heretofore I have done. But O
Lord, however it shall please thee to deal with me, either in Life or Death, I
do freely and cheerfully resign up my Soul and Body to thy most Merciful
Disposal, and through the Mercies and Mediation of thy only Son, Jesus
Christ, my ever blessed Lord and Savior, Amen.

Then she Exhorted all that came to visit her, especially Women, to be
contented with what GOD was pleased to send, or bestow on them: Not to be too
vehement in their desires after any thing this world can afford, but keep all
their wishes and desires within bounds that they may be pleasing to Almighty
God, who knows best what to give, and what to restrain from us: And not like
Rachell, to cry our (when God restrains the fruit of the Womb) give me Children
or I die: which in some measure, was now her c^se. And she be^ieved, proceeded
from her rash wishes and vehement desire after some Children, desiring for what
had happened after death, for that ^er almost* only failing, and what else had
happened, calling God to witness she had lived chastely and honestly all her
lifetime, as well si^gl^ as in ^he Marriage.

And then finding death approaching, she desired a Sermon might be preached at
her Funeral, for to exhort all to be careful how they spend their days in
Pride, Luxury and Wantonness, least they too sadly repent it in the end:
Appointing it from the Words of our Savior, Luke 15.18.19 I will arise and go
to my Father, and will say unto him: Father I have sinned against Heaven, and
in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants.

From these words it was inferred, that it is a great sin to fly from God, (as
the Prodigal Son did from his Father) on presumption, and hopes to live
ryotously always: But when this is done, and we see we are straightned and
brought to misery under Heavens afflicting Hand, and that our strength and
beauty fades, then it is not too late: For the Prodigal Son, after this was
received, and that not without Rejoicing. That we ought not to be, however, too
confident in any thing as thinking there is any worth in us, that GOD should
have so much regard to us, as to t^ke us into his Favor in our greatest need
and necessity: When we have squandred away the Prime o^ our days, and in
serving our own Lusts: But that we should seek him early that he may be found
of us, and foresake all things for the Love of Christ: that when we come to
dye, we may live with him Eternally. He exhorted the good Women present not so
much to desire Children, as to consider when they have them, to bring them up
in the fear of the Lord: Rachel was passionat, when she found ^he bare no
Children to Jacob, and so, for that she said, Give me Children or I dye. And
indeed she had her last Son Benjamin, to her sorrow, for in her Child bed she
dyed: And thus it might be the case of this woman now departed. And so conclud
all with good and sober Advice, to leave off our sins and follies, and turn to
God with all speed, that he may receive us into the Everlasting Arms of Love,
Amen.

CHAP. II.
An Account of a Terrible Tempest near Laighton-Buzard, in B^dfordshire, May
13, And a strange Fire in the shap of a Serpent, that drew up the Water out of
Shipton brook.

AT sundry timer, strange fiery Meteors have happened in the Air, and very near
the Earth: But I think not in this manner, as I have heard of in any story, and
therefore take of it the following Relation. On the 12th of May, a great
Tempest happened, accompanied with prodigious Rain, Thunder and Lightning, more
terrible then has been known for many years before, which occasioned the next
day violent floods of Water, by coming down the Hills, and overflowing the
Brooks and Rivers; But that which is most remarkable* is, that after a
prodigeous clap of Thunder about Noon, there broke out (as from a cloud) a long
stream of Fire, which appeared greater as it came nearer to the Earth, forming
it self into the shape of a prodigeous Fiery Serpent that appeared, the Tail
dragging on the ground, making a noise like a Whirlwind sindging the Grass in
its way, but that which formed the Head and upper part, was elevated as high as
the highest Trees, or Laightown Steeple, and in the body of the fiery Serpent,
something oculd be seen and plainly discerned, working as if so be it had been
cased up in a glass, whilst a very terrible smoke ascended, and still it moved
on, to the great ter^our and amazement of the people, till it came unto Shipton
Brook, where the Tail dragging on the Water caused a terrible hissing, and
spouted up the Water a great height, dividing as it were, the Brook in its
passage over, and the evaporated water fell down in small Rain a great compass,
and immediately it Thundered and a terrible Storm ensued, in which this body of
fire dissipated and vanished. This is arrested by diverse, who say they were
Eyewitnesses of i^, and much terrified at so dreadful a sight, which had it
appeared in the night time, it would have been far more dreadful and amazing.

CHAP. III.
An account of a terrible Storm of Hail, the Stones as big as Goose Eggs near
Stanford, in Northamptoun-shire, killing diverse Cattle and wounding many
People. With a mighty Flood making very great damage.

ON the 16th of May, prodigeous black Clouds began to gather, which over the
greater part of this, and other Countries adjacent caused a darkness, that had
it not been seen at that time a day, so that people were apprehensive of a
violent Storm approaching, and happy it was for many that they had such Notice,
for immediately the Thunder began to bellow and the lightning to rend the
Clouds, and with prodigeous flashes enlighten the Air, and run along the
Ground, when immediately some great drops of Rain fell, which was followed by
prodigeous Hailstones which wounded diverse that were hasting for shelter,
killed a great many Fowls, and many small Cattle; Some of these stones being
nine or ten inches in compass, of diverse forms, some ragged, some four squair,
some oval, long or round, and some again in the shapes of diverse instruments
falling so violently, that they beat diverse young Trees in pieces, greatly
damnadging the Corn, Pease, etc. and cut off branches of long standing Trees,
thicker than ones finger, lying in such prodigeous Quantities in the ways, for
a great many hours afterward unmelted, so that the Horse-Carts, Coaches, and
Wagons, especially in the narrow ways, could not pass without great
defficultie. The Storm continued about an hou^* and damnified a great many
Buildings, by beating off the Tiles and Thatch, some scores of Pigeons, Rooks,
Daws. etc. have been found dead in the fields* killed by the fall of the Stones
and many Horses, Cows and Oxen, were so bruised and wounded that many of them
are expected not to live, as also several people who were too far from
substantial shelter, or took no timely Warning to get to it. And no sooner were
these prodigeous Stones melted, for the Sun shined out hot a little after but
the Water came pouring down from the Hills into the Valleys and Plains, so
prodigeously, that many Sheep, Swine, and other Cattle were swept away and
driven violently by the Torrent into Meadows, Rivers and other D^pths, and
there perished: Several Mills were t^rown down, that stood on Rivulets, and
some people is said to be drowned in them, and for a time there was a fearful
Inundation, which has done much harm to the Grass and Corn the like for
suddenness and Violence not hav^ing happened in these parts for many Ages.

CHAP. IV.
A dreadful Account of two Armies seen fighting in the Air, near Nantz in
Britany, or France.

STrange and amazing things in this nature, have been seen in Countries, near
some Change and Catastrophy to warn them to a timely Repentance of their sins,
when the Judgments are hanging over their heads before the destruction of
Jerusalem, Armies (with great blasts of thunder and lightning) were seen coming
toward it, and men on horseback (as we find in the Macchabees) running on each
other with fiery spears and lances and many other histories are full of such
prodigies, such a thing happened in Enland, before the unnatural Civil wars
broke out in 1641, and in Germany it has often happened, and forerun some
great calamity.

But now it seems it is come into France, near to the place afoeesaid. As
Letters from the Marquess D' Laverden and others sent to the French Court,
testify, viz. That two Armies were seen fighting over the Heath of Pontive
whilst a great Body of reserved men stood still: That the Engagement lasted two
hours, to the great Terror and astonishment of the Spectators, and then
vanished away: and it was observed the Colors of the one appeared all white,
the other of a bloody color, that former had the Sun in its colors, which
vanished first* and the Truth of the Story being very well attested, it
furnishes abundance of matter of Speculation to all: and there b^ing an account
of it printed in France upon the peopl^s Conjectures that the vanishing of the
Colors with the Sun, In it signified the defeat of Lewis his great
Undertakings; for the Inv^sion of England and further concluding* that the end
of the War would be fatal to their Nation, the thing was surpressed, and the
Printer imprisoned, but that stopped not the murmour and fears of the Vulgar who
being weary of oppression by Taxes, Long for a Peace,

FINIS.
seven-headed dragon


