ENGLANDS MISERY, IF NOT PREVENTED by the speedy remedy of a happy union
between His MAJESTY and this PARLIAMENT.

By His Majesty's concurrance with them, to discard all false flattering
Achitophel-Cavaliers, proud ambitious Prelates, and bloodsuck thirsting Church
Papists, as well as professed about His Majesty's sacred Person and Councels.

Written by a Well-wisher to His King and Country.

Together with the Copy of a Letter sent from a friend in Lancashire, to a
Gentleman in Grays-Inne-Lane.

As also an Order from both Houses of Parliament to the Sheriffs of York and
Lincolnshire for suppressing of Forces that disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. in Goldsmiths Alley. August 18. 1642.

ENGLANDS MISERY.
ENgland never lay panting as at this present by reason of His Majesty's long
absence from his great Counsel of this Kingdom, which is truly conceived to be
the cause of all the disturbance of this Commonwealth. And these Machivillians
(or rather matchlesse-villains) that profess themselves to be friends, when
indeed they are fiends, pretending love, intending mischief to his Majesty and
this Kingdom; having words as soft as butter or oil, when their greatest
Amity, is but dissembled Enmity, with two faces under one hood, like Janus;
and two hearts in a breast like Magus, Adulatores amici in obsequies, hosts in
animis, compti in verbis, turpes in factis, laeti ad prospera, f^agil^s ad
adversa inflati ad obsequia, anxii ad opprobria, immoderati ad Gaudia, fa^iles
ad humana, diffi^il^s ad honesta: Their Aves are vaes to this troubled Nation,
and though they speak favorably we ought not to believe them.

Who murdered Caesar that worthy Emperor in the Senate house at Rome? Brutus
and Cassius those flatterers whom he loved most. Who poisoned that mighty
Conqueror Alexander in the midst of his triumphs at Babylon? Those that
flattered him most, his own cup bearer and kinsman Antipater: Who betrayed
Christ, God and Man, unto the Scribes and Pharisees? his own purse-bearer, that
flattering Judas embracing and kissing him as Flatterers use to do. They find
it an easy way to deceive by friendship, when indeed they make themselves
odious to the whole world, being in the end (by all their plots and
contrivances) found aiming at our lives, shooting at our goods, and wounding
our good names.

I have read that King Xerxes marching toward the Greeks with a huge Army of
Soldiers, called some of this kind of Parasites to him and demanded what was
to be most feared in his Journey.

One says, I do fear that when the Greeks do hear of your power, they will
fly and not abide your band.

Another said, he doubted all Greece was not able to lodge them, or receive
them into their Cities.

A third, That he feared most that the Ocean was not enough for them to pass
over.

A fourth feared the Air had not room enough for the Arrows which they should
shoot off.

The King by this being extremly puffed up with Pride, demanded at last of a
certain Philosopher, named Damascerus, what he doubted most in that war. The
thing that I most fear (says he is this, that these Flatterers will deceive
you. So if his Majesty will be pleased to advise with she great Counsel of
this Kingdom, we shall not need to fear a Civil war in England, nor the Power
of any foreign Foe; But otherwise if the King will still hearken to these
flattering Achitophels, proud Prelates and Papists, I fear they will do this
Kingdom more harm by their whisperings of (Prerogative) and (honor) in
Princes ears, than any enemy foreign or domestique can do by their weapons.

The City Troy which Agamemnon in ten whole years could not subdue, yet Sinon
with his flattery allured the mind of King Priamus, deceived the Nobles, and
enticed the Citizens by his adulation, to their utter ruin and confusion. Who
could move Caesar so much to any thing as Curio the Parasite? Not Pompeius his
Son in Law, nor his Daughter Julia, nor all the Senators of Rome might make
Caesar friend or foe so much as Curio. And who have for these 16 years and
still do seek the utter ruin and subversion of this Nation? But Finches,
Windebanks, Lands, etc. who speaking against their Consciences, to maintain
Popery and superstition, persuade his Majesty to remove from his Great
Council into remote places of this Kingdom for the safety of his Person,
when as his Majesty would be more safe nere his Parliament with one man, than
at Beverley with all his Cavaliers; and yet such as these are sooner believed
than they. Alexanders followers bare their heads aside as he did, and such as
flattered Dionysius in his own presence, did run and iustle one another, and
either stumble at, or overthrow what ever stood before their feet, to infer
that they were as short-sighted and pur-blinde as he: And therefore Princes had
need of other Councillors (besides those that are daily with them that would
admonish them frankly, gravely, and sincerely, and that would counsel them
faithfully; for as much as there is scarce any one in their Courts that do not
run after the splendor of their prosperity, and regard his own particular
profit.

And what Council can be more fit for Princes to harken too, than the great
Council of the Kingdom? What Council so free from flattery, bribery, aiming
at their own ends as they? Who durst have told his Majesty of the illegalitie
of Ship Money, of the several grievances of Courts, of Starrechamber, High
Commission, Court of Honor? Who durst have questioned the Delinquents that
were corrupt Judges in these several Courts? Who durst have spoke for the just
Liberty of the Subject, but he should have been called in question for
speaking against his Majesty's Prerogative in Star Chamber any time these
sixteen years? And who stand or ever stood more for his Majesty's just
Prerogative, honor, and safety, than they have done? Certainly, no age can
parallel their care, pains, and dangers, they have and do undergo for the
safety of King and Kingdom.

It then behooves the Gentry and Commons of this Kingdom to maintain this
Parliament against all opposers, and courageously, if they (for the good of
King and Kingdom command) hazard their dearest lives, to arrest these
flattering Councillors, and bring them from the presence of the King, that his
Throne may be established in Righteousness.

SIR.
WE are very much perplexed in our Country with diverse fears and jealousies;
fain would many of the Gentry and most of the Commons obey the Parliaments
Ordinance of the Militia, but the Lord Strange does so thunder amongst us with
his Commissions of Array, and out Papists grow so cunning, that most of them
come to Church and take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; That we are all
at a stand, we are very fearful of Irish Commanders to be landed at Farmby
this next week to ioyn with these Church Papists I am sure for no good; But to
promote the faction about his Majesty: whereof, if his Majesty were truly
informed, I believe that he would admit no such persons about him, There was a
strange Monster taken near Toxteth-Parke by Miles Mather and his man, about the
bigness of a child of four years old, and like a child in shape from the head
to the navell of the belly, but very hairie, his thighs, legs and feer were
like brass as far as he could conceive: which the said Mather taking into his
arms, thinking it had been alive, and left upon the Seashore by some poor
Traveller out of Ireland, covered it with his cloak, thinking to have carried
it to Liverpoole, and as soon as it received the least heat it wept and
vanished away to his great amazement and wonder. Since which time the said
Mather has been frantique, and is now in cure at Orms kirk under Doctor Shaw.
This is all the news and wonders we have for the present with us, God turn all
to the best. Sir I am

Leverpool, 14. August 1642. Your loving friend to serve you, George Tyrer.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament that the Sheriffs of the
County of York and Lincoln, and likewise the Lords Lieutenants of the said
Counties, and in their absence, their Deputies allowed by Parliament, and the
Justices of Peace, and all other his Majesty's Officers shall suppress all
forces that shall be raised, or gathered together in those Counties, either to
force the Town of Hall, to stop the passages to, and from the same; or in any
other way to disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

