The Nullity of Church Censures: OR A DISPUTE Written by that Illustrious
Philosopher, Expert Physician, and Pious Divine Dr THOMAS ERASTVS, Public
Professor in the University of Heidelberge, and Basil.

Wherein is proved by the holy Scriptures, and sound Reason;

That Excommunication, and Church-Senates or Members, exercising the same, are
not of Divine Institution; But a mere humane Invention.

Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?

But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

But why do thou judge thy brother? -- we shall all stand before the judgment
seat of Christ. So then every one of us shall give an account of himself to
God. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, Romans 14.10, 12, 13.

London Printed for G. L. and are to be sold at the Star in St Paul's
Churchyard, near the West end. 1659.

For the most excellent Medico Chyrurgion John Troutbeck of Hope, late
Chyrurgion-Generall in the Northern Army, his much honored Master and Patron.
Honored SIR:
YOur Concernments in this Book are so many, and manifest, that it would be no
less then Sacrilege in it self, and ungratitude in me, to lance it forth under
the Lookyfate of any other Tutelar. It was done at your Direction, and in your
service received its Birth; therefore cannot be free without your Manumission
and Patronage: And your interest is so great in ^^e parts and qualifications,
which rendered the Author hereof Famous to Posterity, that if I did not fear a
Church-Censure, I would fall into the Pithagorian error, and protest, that the
Authors Soul had again lodged her self in your Body. To tell that the Author
hereof was a great Master of Reason, an expert Physician, and pious Divine, is
a work not at all necessary; for his enemies confess it; and his actions, and
Writings do assert it to all posterity. To speak the same of you, I hold it an
absolute duty laid upon him that is free to bear witness to the Truth, and is
willing at every seasonable occasion, to be thankful to them, by whom he has
profited. And indeed I think, there are none can more truly avouch the same
then my self, who for five years together, had the happiness to be witness, to
so many of your pious, and virtuous actions. It Is true, You never courted the
applause of Men, or overthrow of Widows by long Prayers; neither thought
Preaching a fit Pulley to raise your preferment: you lest these Ginns of
Hypocrisy to Men, that had no better parts to become eminent: of which Nets
any of themselves were ashamed, at least did not use, so soon as they had
caught, what they fished for. But your piety is of a more untainted Tincture.
If we believe (as we ought) what the Apostle in so many, in so pithy words
inforceth: That all things profit nothing without Charity: not tongues, not
faith to remove Mountains, not prophecy it self, not zeal to the fire. It is
kind, it envyeth not, it is not easily moved, it rejoices in the truth, it
bel^eveth, hops, and endures all things: and is no more subject to time,
then eternity is. This is that virtue that makes you pious: this is it that
crowns your actions; and this is it which compels me (in despite of
forgery or envy) to proclaim you religious. How often have I seen you visit the
sick? how often feed the hungry? cloth the naked, comfort Prisoners? What
Soldier of what Regiment, Troop, or Company soever, can say, but you were ever
more willing to affoard, then he was ready to desire, your assistance in your
Art and Medicines? How many Contrymen, both Angles and Scots, have you
helped in their sicknesses and distresses? I have known you liberally bestow on
them whose former degree and parts made ashamed to beg, and nevertheless their
necessities required the help of the meanest: and this was done by you
undeserved, undesired, and without the sound of Trumpet. And the Army you
served, cannot say that ever you forsook them in their greatest hazards or
hardships; though they forsook you in that prosperity, whereof you should have
been a sharer. But it is a rule of Machiavell; That we should fall out with
those, whose benefits conferred on us, we are not able to requite; and this
confidence shall make the people believe, that either we were not obliged, or
at least we have not been unthankful; As for the skill in your profession, I
need say little. Your enemies [if there be any such Beasts] will not deny it.
The whole Island is filled with the Fame, and Monuments thereof; And there is
not an honest scarre shown by the valiant, but is an equal trophy of his and
your glory. And truly I believe not any will question this, but he whose
courage could never affoard, to make him the fit object of your care and
profession. I come to your reason, but that is so piercing, so profound, that I
dare not meddle with its edge, nor search its bottom; least mine should be
divided by the one, and lost in the other, But thus far I dare adventure to
say, that I never saw you do an action, though many seemed trivial, but
always a good effect followed thereon. You never Churched it, nor Kirked it;
yet your wisdom [under the Divine providence] carried you our and up in all
your enterprises. You spoke the truth bluntly, and yet it always left an
impression. You neither professed a Sect nor Sectling, yet you were respected by
all, and employed by most. And your reaching wit was never mistaken in the
greatest designs, which I believe made the designers more willing to quit you.
If this then be not the highest enjoyment of reason, it shall be my desire
always to remain in folly. SIR, (to give no further trouble) I have
Translated this Book at your desire, and have according to my duty Dedicated it
to You; not because either You are, or are not of these Opinions; or that I
desire You to draw out an Act of resolution in reference to either: But that at
this time, when most men seem to be busy in the inquest of truth, You thought
it fit, that this Opinion should likewise come to the Test, in submission to
that word of the Apostle, Try all things, and hold that which is good: We are
commanded here, to try that which we are not commanded to hold: otherwise the
words would be ridiculous. Try all things that are good, and hold that thing
which is good: and so we should try that which we knew to be good, whether it
were good, which is vain, and needless. But all things here, are meant all
Doctrines, all Opinions: and we ought only adhere to that, that is able to
abide the touch of Scripture, and sound reason deduced therefrom. Now whether
this be such a work, or not, I leave it to every triers judgment; and You to
the protection of him, that in the great day of trial, shall save you in mercy;

London 1. of May. 1659. Which is the Devotion of your Servant CHR.

TO THE READER.
BE pleased to be informed, that the defenses of these Theses, against Mr. Beza
and others, are likewise translated; and if thou desire, shall be Printed. In
both which, if thou find not all Answered, that can be said against them; or
has been said by Mr. Beza, Mr. Catherwoods in his Altar Damacenum, Mr.
Gilespy in his Aarons Rod Blossoming; or by the Divines of London in their Jus
Divinum; never believe me to have reason, if thou will be at the pains to
confer their Reasons and Answers, with what is by our Author A^swered and
urged. The Life is somewhat Scholastic and Laconick; Nevertheless to know the
force of his Reasons, is well worth the time that shall so be employed: I
chused rather to be a Pedant in adhereing to the Authors words, and
Construction, then to be too busy in another Labor. Pardon the Errors of the
Press in this Edition: for both my Amanuensis, and the Corrector are
Presbyterians: the next Edition shall make an amendment of these faults which
now we desire thee to amend, etc.

To the Reader that is pious, and desirous of Truth.
THOMAS ERASTUS Physician wishes all health and Happiness.
LEast any, that shall fall on these my Writings, should wonder what causes
induced, yea fully moved me to enter this Dispute concerning Excommunication; I
will briefly and truly relate the original and occasion of the commencement
thereof. It is about sixteen years ago, since some men were seized on by a
certain Excommunicatory-feaver, which they did adorn with the title of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and did contend, that it was holy and commanded of
God to the Church; and which they earnestly did desire should be imposed on the
whole Church. They affirmed the manner thereof to be this, That some certain
Presbyters should sit in the name of the whole Church, and should judge who were
worthy or unworthy to come unto the Lords Supper.

I wondered that then they consulted about these matters, when neither we had
men to be Excommunicates, nor fit Excommunicators: for scarcely the thirtieth
part of the people did understand or approve the Reformed Religion; all the
rest were our violent enemies: so that any man, that was indewed with the least
understanding, could not but foresee, that there would follow on this
necessarily a dangerous schism of the multitude. Therefore at that time, it
seemed to me not good to inquire, how any might be thrown out of the society
of the Church: But on the contrary, I rather judged, that we should use means
to induce most to the knowledge of the truth, and to infold them into the
Church. And they that were to be Overseers herein, did neither in age and
experience, nor in wit and judgment, no nor in carriage and authority, so far
excel the rest, that they should be esteemed able to discharge these matters
worthily. Wherefore when I did see this business, which they so violently
desired, could not go forward without the loss and overturning of the Church; I
often requested them that they should ponder the matter accurately, and that they
should not rashly begin any thing, which afterward they should repent; but in
vain. For although at that time my opinion was, that Excommunication was
commanded in the holy Scriptures; yet notwithstanding I found not the manner
thereof, which they proposed to us, to be commanded there. Wherefore seeing it
seemed that Christ had left the manner thereof free to our own choice, I also
did seriously consider of the way and manner which would most fit our matters,
and draw least trouble with it. In which I used so much more diligence, as I
had observed it to be more destructive to Christianity, not only in former
times, but now also.

Whilst I was in these thoughts, and did inquire what the Ancients had written
concerning these matters, and that I found all things weaker in them then I had
persuaded my self; I was compelled a little to doubt of the whole business:
presently after that, I consulted the Schoolmen, but found nothing better
amongst them. From them I betook my self to the Modern Writers. But even
amongst these men I found nothing more exact or solid: yea I perceived that in
some things they manifestly disagreed amongst themselves; which made me a great
deal more attentive. Therefore, leaving the Interpreters, I returned to the
holy Scriptures: and in my reading I diligently noted, according to my
understanding, what was consonant or dissonant to the received opinion. In
which the confideration of the Jewish Republic and Church did not a little
help me. For I thought thus with my self: The Lord himself does testify, Deuteronomy.
4. that his people has Statutes and Laws so just and wise, that the Institutes
of no people, that the Sanctions of no Republic, that no Ordinances, howsoever
wisely constitute, were able to compare with them. Therefore it is necessary,
that that Church is most worthily and wisely ordered, which comes nearest to
the constitution of the Jewish Church. But in this the matters were so ordered
by God, that we find not any where two diverse Judicatories concerning manners,
the one Politic, and the other Ecclesiastic. What then hinders, that the
Church now also, on whom the most merciful God has bestowed a Christian
Magistrate, should be less content with one Government?

After this I did confer about my thoughts with good, holy and Learned men,
and I did exhort them that they should not lightly ponder the Cause. For it
seemed to me most unnecessary, to put two heads upon one body of a visible
Church, whose commands, decrees and Government were already diverse, so that the
rule of the one was not subject to the care of the other, but the Government of
each in its own kind was supreme. Indeed they would have had their
Ecclesiastical Senate or Presbytery so constitute, that it should have the
supreme power of punishing of vices, yea in the Magistrates themselves:
notwithstanding not with corporal punishments, but with the debarring them
from the Sacrament, first privately, then mixed, if it did not succeed well,
then solemnly and publicly. But I said, I did believe that one Magistrate
appointed by God, could as well now bridle all transgressors, as he could of
old. I did propose for example to my self the most famous Kingdom of Solomon,
which was as it were a type of Christ's Church reigning on this earth. And that
we did not find either under Moses, or under the Judges, or Kings, or under the
Government of these that were called Rulers, such two discrepant Judicators.
Nature denies (says Musculus) two authentic Governments in the same people,
whereof one is not to be subject to the other. I was not a little helped by
those, with whom I conferred: partly because they observed some things better
then I could, partly because they gave me occasion to think of certain other
things more exactly.

In the mean time I kept my self quiet: neither did I reason with any man,
except he provoked me, in this matter; and being provoked, I ever answered most
modestly: because it seemed neither profitable nor necessary to disturb our
Churches with this dispute, whilst no man was known to thrust this form of
Government on them openly. Indeed they who thought it far more sweet and
pleasant to command then to obey, rested not so; but by all arts they could (as
I afterward knew) labored to persuade our most holy Prince, that he should
endeavor to bring some such thing into our Churches. And if some other things
had not withstood it, perchance they had persuaded him. By what scandalous
speeches they did every where traduce me, [Who they knew did not consent to
them, and were not ignorant that I labored, that they might not accomplish
their design] it is needless here to relate.

It fell out afterward, that an Englishman, who was said to have left his
Country by reason of certain vestures in the Church, desired to be graduat
Doctor, and did propose a dispute concerning indifferent things, and vestures.
This dispute our Theologues would not admit, least they should offend the
English, [albeit in his last Theses there was something concerning this matter]
but as it seemed, they esteemed it nothing to disturb our peace; wherefore
amongst other Theses he proposed this, That it behoved in each right constitute
Church, that this order should be kept, In which the Ministers with their
Presbytery chosen for that purpose, should have power to Excommunicate any
sinners, yea Princes themselves. Although I feared that this Dispute was not
appointed in vain, yet I hoped that it would be nothing else but an ordinary
Dispute, not such an one as are appointed for the deciding of Controversies,
but such as are instituted for the exercising of the youth, and for judging of
their gifts, that defire these public honors. Therefore neither would I move
any thing, neither could I by reason of my occasions be present at it. And I
did exhort others, which I did see would Dispute against it, that they would
have a greater care of the good of the Church, then of some few men's
imprudency. Nevertheless one and another disputed, whom if they had not
afterward called, together with me, Profane, Satanick, Diabolick, Turbulent,
Phanatick Persons, enemies to Piety, etc. the Dispute had been nothing but
ordinary.

Indeed, As for my part I can truly affirm, that I never purposed with my self
to Write any thing concerning this matter of Controversy, before I did see and
hear them to carry themselves so immodestly, both in private and public: And
because I was then a great deal more then usually employed [By reason of the
Soldiers, which then Anno. 1568. returned with Duke Casimire, etc. out of
France, laden with diverse diseases] I did note down my thoughts by pieces, as
they did, amongst so great businesses occure to me at any time. Which albeit I
had thrown them together confusedly, and had placed them in no certain order,
for the foresaid cause; partly whilst they were writing over, and partly as
soon as they were written, I gave them to be examined and judged of unto some,
unto whose judgment I attributed much, and of whom I thought my self to be
very well beloved, and that not without cause, though I believed it falsely:
And I did desire them if they found any thing that was truly affirmed, or
solidly proved, that they should freely refute it with better reasons. I did
hope that if I gaind nothing else, yet I would obtain this; That they seeing
our Arguments, would become more calm, and would think that we did not without
reason dissent from them. One of the two chief with whom I resolved principally
to confer, did read three parts of four, before all were written fair over.
Of which being demanded his opinion, he promised he would give it, after he had
read over all. Nevertheless he by the by proposed something concerning the
Leaven, and did think that the consent of the Ancient Church was much to be
esteemed: to conclude, he produced other such like stuff, by which it was most
easy for me to know his mind and opinion. I understood almost at that same
time, that this self same man had written a Treatise of Excommunication, in
which he did approve of the common opinion: which once known, there needed no
doubt to be made what his Answer would be. For I knew, that he would not depart
from that he had once affirmed, without it were for fear of Danger. Therefore
seeing these things which he did oppose were refuted in the last part of my
writing. I offered it all to be judged by the other, whom I esteemed to be as
dear a friend to me, as was living. He did not only receive the Book from me
loathingly, (I know not whether he was admonished before) but did openly
declare, he would not read it: and albeit I did urge it, he declared he was
compelled to it against his will. Nevertheless I left the Book some days with
him, and did entreat him by all means and prayers I could, that he would read
it over, and give me his judgment thereon. Which when I knew by certain reasons
that I had entreated this of him in vain, I took my Book back from him after
twelve days, or thereabouts, that I might require the judgment of others. But
because that writing was of a greater length, then that it could be read in a
short time by more persons, I did contract it into a few Positions: whereby it
might be more easily communicate to many. And in this point my resolution fell
not out unhappily. For both I did know the opinion of many most worthy and
famous Theologues throughout Germany, which was the thing I only desired: And
they were so dispersed amongst the Students, that they who at my entreaty would
not read them, were now compelled to peruse them against their will.

But that it might appear unto all, that I sought no other thing but the naked
truth, I prefixed a Preface, in which I demanded these two things: First, That
all men would diligently examine each parcel, and that they would weigh them
in the Balance of the holy Scriptures, and if they should see me in an Error,
that they should free me there from, that thereby I might likewise free others.
I promised with my very heart [I call God the Searcher of all hearts to
witness] that I would before God and Men give him thanks that would show me my
error. But because I foresaw that would come to pass, which afterward
happened; I desired in the second place, That if they had resolved to reprehend
any thing therein, they would do it in these ways and places, wherein it
should be lawful for me both to Interpret my own words, and to defend justly,
what injustly they should condemn. And although they had ever found me their
most constant Friend, and most ready to serve them in all good Offices,
notwithstanding I could scarcely keep them, by reason of what had passed
before, that they would so deal with me, as I dealt with them. Neither was I
deceived in my opinion: for of my greatest friends, as I foolishly believed,
they became suddenly my enemies, in so much, that they would not any more
deign to speak with me, although in my whole Life I had never hurt them in word
or deed, but had ever labored to deserve well at their hands, which I yet
resolve to do. In the mean time I gave God thanks, that it so happened, that I
should make proof of their faith and good will, rather in such a matter, then
in any other.

In the mean time they were not quiet: for after they did see that they had
tried in vain by the Magistrate, to wring the Theses out of the hands of the
Students, they wrought another way: To wit, under the show of Laws, which are
no where extant: they desired, That as the Theologues did assay nothing in the
professions and rights of others, so they desired that other professors might
be enjoined to abstain from their Schools. If this had been defired sixty years
ago, it had seemed tolerable: how at this time it can be carried, let others
judge. Was it only said to them, that teach Theology for a yearly Salary of some
hundred Florens, Search the Scriptures: Prove the Spirits, whether they be of
God: Prove all things, hold that which is good? I thought the Doctrine of
Theology had been common to all Christians, and that therefore it was every
where taught publicly. What other thing do they desire, when they desire we
should abstain so from their Schools, as they essay nothing in the rights and
doctrines of other faculties?

I believe they would not this, That we should not hear their Lessons, or that
we should not enter that place to Learn. Chiefly seeing they desired that, by
reason of my Theses proposed most modestly. Who I pray has interdicted them
the studies of the tongues, of Medicine, Philosophy, or of the Laws? Is it
because they care not for these Studies, that we should also neglect the Study
of Theology? If we got not more loss by the ignorance of holy Scripture, then
we should receive by our unskillfullness in those matters, perchance we should
gratify them. They will easily vanquish if it be not conceded to any, to
contradict their Statutes. Of old those of the Church of Rome required these
things of us, and they desired it with some more right thereto. But I cannot
gratify either, whilst my Savior Jesus Christ commands me otherwise.

In the Interim it does not move me, that they say, that it becomes not me to
handle Theology: and that in so doing, I do not rightly provide for my own
esteem. It may be it is, because I enquire after the truth without wages. For
if I were hired by a Stipend to teach Theology; I should do nothing in this
Point, according to their opinion different from my Office and Duty. But I
desire nothing else then to understand the truth, to glorify God, and that I
should be rather made ashamed, then that the truth should be trodden on. Christ
in that place spoke not in vain, That they cannot believe, who desire glory of
one another, neglecting the glory of God.

Wherefore when even this had not fallen out according to their opinion, and
that they could not contain their conceived hatred, They begun to oppugn them
with Arguments: which at every opportunity they did propose not without cruel
Criminations. Which albeit they were told me by diverse Men; notwithstanding
for Peace's sake, I easily contemned them: and I hoped it would come to pass,
then when that violence of their mind should begin to languish, and their wrath
was a little cooled, they would be rendered more favorable to us.
Notwithstanding here I was also deceived: for after the first Month almost,
they neither have remitted any thing of their wrath, neither have they forborne
to impugn our writings, partly by reproaches, partly by calumnies, partly I
know not by what Sophistical little reason; wherefore I brought again the
hundred Theses to the forge, and reduced them to seaventy five, and placed them
in their own order; which at first I had placed, not where they should have
been, but where they did occur: I explained something in them more clearly:
and proved something more solidly: To conclude, I labored that I might fully
satisfy the lovers of the truth, as far as could be done in so short a writing.

The Life of that Pious and Learned Philosopher, Physician, and Divine, THOMAS
ERASTUS.
AS it is one of the most proper Attributes of that great enemy of mankind, to
be an accuser of the Brethren: So it has ever been one of the greatest
Stratagems that has been used by his chief instruments, against the Lords holy
ones. For when their dazzled eyes durst no more strive against the glorious
Beams of the Truth, which were ready to consume them; then their only recourse
was to darken the honourers and admirers thereof, by casting a Cloud of black
calumnies upon their Fame and Reputation. Which some smattering (as they call
themselves) Divines have been very of toward our liberal Author: Yet could
not any of his enemies in his own time find any color or cause for the same:
But he was always so admired by all men of all parties, That I thought it most
fit not to present his friends Character, but men's different from him in
opinion, of him. Thomas Erastus was born in Baden in Switzer-Land the year of
our Lord (as Pantaleon believes) 1524. After he was taught the first
Principles of Learning in his own Country; he went to Basil Anno. 1540. Where
he most industriously learned both the Tongues, and liberal Sciences. There,
in the year 1542. he was infected with the plague: but by Gods special grace,
and the Physicians care, he recovered of the Malady. He so courted the sweeter
muses, so that nevertheless he did not forget to aquaint himself intimately
with Divinity: And his continual converse with the holy Scriptures; and his
serious Meditation in Religious Matters taught him, by Gods good mercy, what
was to be followed in the Controversies raised then about Religion.

And although this young man that was so much Inamoured of Learning, was by a
double impediment, kept back from the attainment of his wishes; both by the
disease of his body, and the means of his fortune; Yet notwithstanding he
would not suffer himself, by either of these discommodities to be called away
from the sweet society of the Muses. For although he had a defect in his right
hand, and had not the use thereof in writing, yet he inured his left hand so
much thereunto, that in public he received his Masters Dictates, with a more
current hand, then any of his fellows; and in private, if any thing was to be
committed to writing, it was all happily done by him. Besides being born of
Parents, whose mean fortune inroled him amongst them, that, (haud facile
emergunt, not easily swatter out to any great height; The Lord provided him
with a noble Patron, whose bountiful and liberal hand sustained him, till he
accomplished his studies. He went for Italy and came to Bononia, where he gave
himself fully to the study of the subtilest Philosophy, in which be far
advanced, That he was not esteemed amongst the ordinary sort of that
Profession. From the walks of the Philosophers, he betook himself to the
Gardens of the Physicians: Where he was of such industry, that he was most
acceptable to the ablest Medious; and was judged worthy to be honored with a
public testimony of his skill in that piece of Learning.

Amongst other Masters he had D. Lucas Ghynnst, a good, learned, and
experienced Man, whom he does very much praise in diverse of his Writings, it
was he that wonderfully commended to him a receipt made up of Thenack and
Mithredate. Camillus Franchin, was his fellow in his studies at Bononia, who
afterward became a famous Physician of that City, and ever remained his most
constant friend.

After he had spent nine years in the company of the most famous and expert
Physicians of Italy, he returned to his friends in his own Country, and lived
for a while in the Court of the Prince of Henneberge: and forthwith his
happiness and skill in the practice of Medicine was spread in favorable reports.

Frederick the third Prince Elector Palatine did upon honorable terms call him
thence, and committed to him the public profession of Physic in his ancient
Universitie then flourishing in Heidelberg, and made him the chief Physician
and Counselor by reason of his prudence and uprightness of Life. Whilst he
remained there, the Controversy about the figure in the words of the Lords
Supper again broke fresh out. Erastus did assist the Trope, yea by published
writings; and so was not only a Physician to the body, but soul also; and
afforded most worthy help to the rising and restoring of that Church. In the
year 64. Erastus the Physician was appointed by Frederick Prince Palatine, to
be also together with his Divins at that conference, which was appointed
betwixt the Palatinate and Wittenberg, Theologues concerning Christ's presence
in the Lords Supper in the Monestery of Mouldrun.

After this he went from Heidenberg to Basil: And in the last part of his Life
did honor that Academy with teaching and disputing; of which in the first and
greenest years of his study he had been a Member. He did wonderfully extol
School Disputes in respect they did exercise invention, and judgment, and
confirm the same. And further, be constantly professed that he never returned
from any of those disputes, but always bettered. At length in the year 1583.
in the last of December, he paid his debt unto Nature, and was buried in St.
Martins Church at Basil, with his Monumentall Inscription

Luminum Doctori.
Non Hermes hic Tris-megistus: Heidelbaergensis Basiliensis Lumen; Helvetius
Bodensis, Thomas Erastus conditur

An. Sal. MDXXCIII. Pride. Kal. Jan.
He was of an unblameable Life, and was not ashamed even publicly to
acknowledge any known error, if the matter so required. And was so desirous of
Learning, that he would willingly have died, so that he could but have cleared
those doubts, of which he could not satisfy himself. And allthough he thought
he did not err, and that he had confirmed his own opinion very probably, yet
nevertheless, he was ever ready to give place to them that offered better.

He was most diligent in making inquest into the virtues of medicaments; and
most gravely resolved, that those Physicians must be deceived, that trust
without trial. Whence he was happy enough in his practice, and by the help of
Gods grace, cured many that were heavily diseased of Dropsies, Epilepsies,
Gouts, and other Maladies accounted incurable. Neither had he any man's
authority in such esteem, that it could move him to depart from what was
evident to sense, or agreeable to reason: But he always judged, that truth was
to be taken from the matter it self, and not from authority. He refuted
judicial Astrology in diverse Writings yet extant; And refused Paracelsisme in
a Treatise and other Disputations: yet does not condemn, but commend lawful
Chymestry. He has also written concerning Witches, and their power, etc.
Against Mercenarius de putredine. Comes Montanus: A volume of Epistles and
Disputations. Of Aurum Potabile: Of the occult power of Medicaments.
Dissertations concerning Comets. And in Theology he has published a Treatise
on the Lords Supper without his name; against Schegkius of the one person, and
two natures of Christ. Of Excommunication both Theses, and defenses published
as is supposed by his widow. The names of the Books which he has written, and
are not yet published, are set down by John Gregory Schenckius in his
Bibliotheca Medica. And thus much is testified of his Life by Melchior Adamus a
strict Protestant, according to Calvin's Tenets in his Book De vitis Germanorum
Medicorum.

And a Roman Catholic of no small note, The illustrious James Augustus
Thuanus, President of the Parliament of Paris, does affoard him this true and
handsome Testimony in the seaventy eight Book of his Histories, in the year M.
D. LXXXIII.

This year [saith he] was shut up with the death of Thomas Erastus born at
Baden in Switzer-Land, who canstantly walking in the solid truth and not so
much in the principles dilivered by ancients of both the Sciences, was famous
in this age for his knowledge of Philosophy and Physic. Therefore with valide
Arguments he refuted Astrology, which from the position of the Stars judges of
men's fortunes, and likewise with sound reasons did refute and sharply prosecute
the Paracelsian Medicine which either by its novelty or vanity had enticed so
many wits in Germany and elsewhere. At last having walked out of the humane
Sciences, he likewise handled Divinity, and did thoroughly treat of the
Question concerning Discipline and Church Censures against the opinion of them
of his own party, from whence arose heavy contentions in the Helvetian
Churches. Finally being above threescore years, in this year, in Basil, where
he had professed as he had done long before at Heidelberg, he that had
illustrated Nature by so many learned Monuments, did pay his debt to Nature on
the last of December, and was buried in St. Martins. Thus far he.

Wherefore seeing so famous Men both of his own and other professions have
publicly acknowledged his Piety and Learning, I think they must be cursedly
distracted of their wits, or of a very evil nature that will rather believe
the Pedantick-Machivilian calumny of his enemies, who only in these went beyond
him, than the honorable reports of such Illustrious and Grave personages.

AN EXPLICATION Of that most weighty QUESTION, Whither Excommunication; (as it
debarreth Men that know and embrace Religion, from the use of the Sacraments,
for their Delinquencies,) Be of Divine Institution OR A Humane Invention?
The I. Position.
THe word Excommunication seems to be taken out of the tenth Chapter of the 1
Corinthians: And to signify a removal from that Commiunion which in that
place is called the Body of Christ. And indeed at this time Excommunication is
defined by almost all to be, An exclusion from the fellowship and Communion of
Believers.

II.
There is a twofold fellowship of Believers; The one is internal and
spiritual, The other external or visible and politic. The third sort of
which some of the late Romish-Catholicks do mention, is neither fitly feigned,
nor belongs at all to our present purpose.

III.
And the difference betwixt these two is so great; that he which is
comprehended within either of them, is not likewise necessarily included in the
other. For as that man may be a Member of Christ, that is unjustly thrust out
of a visible Congregation; or is compelled to live and lurk amongst Infidels:
So, all they that are of a visible Congregation, are not also the lively
Members of Christ, whence it follows, that these matters may be different,
which tie us to the one, and not to the other: and which divide us from the
one, and not from the other.

IV.
And indeed we are made Members of Christ, that is; we are joined to the
internal and spiritual society of Christ, and of the faithful, by Faith
alone, which works in Charity: and we fall from this fellowship, only by
Infidelity. Therefore none can ingraff us in, or loppe us off from this, except
only he that can give us living Faith, and can take again the same from us.

V.
But we are made Consorts of the external and visible Church, by the
profession of the same Faith, by the consent we give to the same Doctrine, and
by the using of the same Sacraments. In whatsomever Person these three are
found, he is, so long as they are found in him, accounted for a Member of the
external Congregation of Believers: although he never attain to the inward
Communion of the spirit and mind.

VI.
Therefore he that is thrown out of the external Communion of the Church, that
is, He that is excommunicated; Is debarred either of all these three; or of two
of them; or only of one. But not any ought to be debarred of the two former,
that is, from professing of the Faith, and approving the Doctrine (under which
the hearing of the Word or Doctrine is comprehended) of Christians: but rather
all men are to be invited, and by all means possible are to be induced thereto.

Wherefore it remains, That he that is Excommunicated, is debarred from the
sole (of the foresaid three) participation of the Sacrament: we will consider
afterward, whither the denial of private converse does inseperably adhere
unto this, or may be separate therefro. But this is certain, that not any other
punishment belongs to the essence of Excommunication; for the same may be
inflicted upon Persons, that are not excommunicate; and may not be inflicted
upon the Excommunicate.

VII.
Therefore Roman Catholics have not rightly, besides this Excommunication
(which they call the lesser, and have most properly defined it, to be only a
denial of the Sacrnments) added moreover an other, which they term, the
greater Excommunication, and Anathema: And have against the clear sense of
Scripture, defined it to be an interdiction of Churches private Commerce, and
all other lawful converse; because the Apostle in the 1 Corinthians. 14. openly
shows, that neither the Heathen, nor any other Persons whatsomever were
forbidden from the hearing of the Divine Word, from the Readings,
Thanksgivings, and Prayers of the Christians.

VIII.
It appears from what has been said, that Excommunication is nothing else
then a solemn and public interdiction of the Sacraments, and chiefly of the
Lords Supper. (which the Apostle especially calls a Communion, (...), as was
said in the beginning,) The Elders taking notice, and voycing the same before:
whereby they that sin may repent, and again be admitted to the Sacraments.

IX.
Here then arises a Question, Whither any man for committing of a sin, or
living in filthiness, should be removed from the use and participation of the
Sacraments, he being desirous to receive the same with other Christians?

The Question here is moved concerning him, that professes the same Faith with
us, that has entered the same Church by Baptism; and does not dissent therefrom
in Doctrine, (as we laid it down in the fifth,) but erreth only in life and
manners. This then is demanded; Whither in the holy Scriptures, there is extant
either any Precept or example, whereby it is commanded or taught that such
should be removed from the Sacraments?

X.
Our Answer is, that there is not any such extant; But rather, that contrary
both Examples and Precepts are to be found every where in the Bible.

For we find it written by Moses, Exodus 12.23, 24. Numb. 9. Deuteronomy. 16. That
every Circumcised Male should appear thrice every year before the Lord: To wit,
in the Feast of unleavened Bread, in the Feast of Weeks, and that of
Tabernacles. For that Law commands strangers also, if they be Circumcised, to
celebrate the Passover together with the Jews. And likewise it is commanded
that the unclean; and they that are traveling, should upon the same day of the
second Month, and after the same manner, eat the Passover with the Jews: And
it is moreover added, that he shall be put to death, that shall neglect the
Celebration of the Passover: viz. he that neither travelleth, nor is unclean.
Wherefore God has willed and commanded all the Circumcised to Celebrate the
Passover. Neither has he excluded any from this Sacrament, or from other
Rites, Ceremonies, or Sacrifices except unclean Persons.

XI.
In Leviticus there are diverse Sacrifices commanded for diverse sins, whither
they be committed by ignorance or error, or willingly and wilfully, by which
these sins should be expiate by them that have committed them. Likewise God
commands Deuteronomy. 14. That all (without excepting of the wicked,) should at
Jerusalem eat their Tenths before the Lord: and he adds the cause, that so
they might learn to fear their Lord Jehovah all the days of their lives.
Therefore the Sacraments were Incitements to Piety: and therefore none were
debarred therefrom, but all so much the more invited thereto.

XII.
Verily we do not read that any Person at any time amongst the Jews, was for
the foresaid cause, forbid by the Priests, Levites, Prophets, Scribes, or
Pharisees to come to the Sacrifices, Ceremonies, or Sacraments. The
Highpriests and Pharisees esteemed Christ and his Apostles to be most wicked
Persons: But we do not find during Christ's Life, or after his death, that ever
they went about to debar them of the Sacraments and Sacrifices instituted of
God: yea neither did they chase any Publican Jew, or any other Circumcised
Person that lived impurely, from the Temple or Ceremonies, for they were not
ignorant, that the Law permitted them not to do it. They reprehended indeed
Christ, Mat. 9. that he did eat and drink with Publicans. But they did not in
any place at any time upbraide him, that he Prayed in the Temple with them;
that he was present with them at the Sacrifices and Rites: That with them and
all others he went up to Jerusalem to Celebrate the Passover and other yearly
Solemnities. And for the same reason they were so far from endeavoring to
debar these wicked Knaves and mostcruell Heretics, the Saduces from their
Ceremonies; That they permitted them to ascend to the honor of the
High-Priest-Hood. In the mean time, how much the one hated the other, is clear
out of Josephus History, and the Acts of the Apostles. They would with
stretched out arms have embraced this occasion to be revenged on their
enemies, if it had been lawful.

XIII.
Yea they could not indeed debar the impure from eating of the Passover:
seeing they did not eat it before the Priests, but in their private houses; as
we find that Christ together with his Disciples did Celebrate the last
Passover. For then all the people in some measure did discharge the Office of a
Priest, as Philo the Jew speaking of the Paschall does testify; When every one
of the people do Sacrifice, not expecting the Priests, they being by the
permission of the Law allowed once a year on the day appointed, to discharge
the Office of a Priest. And if in one Family there were too few to eat up all
the Paschall Lamb, they were commanded to call their Neighbors to them, Exodus
12. that they might eat up the whole. The same way seems to be observed in
Circumcision, except that they were not bound only to Circumcise at Jerusalem,
as they were obliged to Celebrate the Passover there: for I do not remember
that I have read, that the presence of a Priest was necessary to that matter.

XIV.
That forerunner of Christ John the Baptist observed the same constantly: when
he Baptized all the Pharisees, and Sadduces, whose manners he fully knew; and
thence openly called them a generation of Vipers,) together with the Publicans,
and all others that came unto him, Matthew. and Luke 3. that they might repent
and amend their former life, and fly from the wrath of God which was to come.
It is not likely, that this eminent man would have admitted men covered with so
many wickednesses, yea impiously and publicly denying the Resurrection of the
dead, except he had well known, that the Law excluded no such persons. For the
Law excludes no Circumcised Person, except the unclean and leprous, as was
said before.

XV.
This uncleanness indeed was a legal Ceremony, and not the impurity of life
and manners, for he was not unclean that had committed any sin or perpetrated
any villainy: But he was unclean that had touched any dead Body, Excrements,
bloody Issues, or such like. For this reason the Pharisees would not enter the
Councell-house, when they delivered Christ to Pilate, to be put to death, least
they should be hindered to eat the Passover. Certes, the Mosaicall uncleanness
did not so figurate out sins, that as those that were defiled with them, were
forbidden the Tabernacle, and converse of others; So they that were guilty of
sin, should be chastis'd and punished by the denying them the Sacraments, or
throwing them out of the visible Church: which is clearly held forth by the
reasons following.

1. Transgressors were not punished with the same punishment that the unclean
were, whilst that legal uncleanness was in force, and together therewith there
were multitudes of wicked persons. How then is it likely, that after these
Ceremonies are removed and abolished, they should have signified these
wickednesses ought to be so punished?

2. Moses should have openly been opposite to himself, whilst he did really
admit those persons to the Temple and Ceremonies, which by the legal
Ceremonies he signified should be debarred the same. For it is certain, that
not any was forbidden the Temple and company of others, for the vitiousness of
his manners. If he had not, according to the appointment of the Law, touched a
dead body, or defiled himself by any other such like means: Therefore he
should have punished them that signified the wicked, and should have left the
wicked themselves (as to this punishment) unpunished: and so he should both
deny and affirm the same thing.

3. Legal impurity was a certain quality and stain of the body, when as
wickednesses are opperations and consist in action. For the cause and wet of
wickedness is brought forth together with us, neither is it punished by man so
long as it brings forth no fruits: Otherwise all men should be
Excommunicated. For we will never be freed from this impurity of soul, so long
as we shall enjoy this mortal life. But the other being only a blemish and
uncleanness of body, is punished by secluding them from dyeting together with
others; although it produce no fruit; that is, although the legal unclean
Person do not offend in any thing against the Law. The works and
transgressions of legal unclean persons; If whilst they were unclean, they
offended against the Law in any thing, were punished by the Magistrate, as
other transgressions were.

4. Our Adversaries confess that all sorts of sins are not to be punished by
Excommunication, whenas the Law commands every purity to be punished by
excluding the Offender from the Tabernacle and public Sacrifices; wherefore
they did not prefigurate all offenses.

5. Not any can be Excommunicate that sins unwillingly; when as men most
frequently became unclean against their wills, and without any fault in them;
yea many times to their great grief. What guilt is to be thought in him, who
against his will, and whilst he was sleeping lost his seed in the night? whose
Wife became menstruous before his expectation? whose Children, Wife, Parents,
did die? or to whom any such thing did happen? But that these vices should be
voluntary, for which men should be excluded from the Sacraments (as some are of
opinion) needs no probation.

6. There was a far heavier punishment appointed for one that should kill a
man against and besides his will; Then a few days or weeks exclusion from the
Sacraments: which was almost the greatest punishment was inflicted on
uncleanness. Because then, an involuntary, and therefore the most easy sin was
chastised with a severer punishment, then the most unclean legal impurity, it
easily appears that the punishment due to this is not to be transferred for
the chastising of wickedness.

7. It frequently came to pass, that the most holy and upright person was made
unclean, and was debarred from entering the Temple and use of the Sacrifices;
whilst the most wicked person without any impediment was admitted to both.
Wherefore if in the Church of God, the punishment of both should be the same,
this person should much more be debarred the use of them then the other.

8. It is clear, That God has not at any time or in any place absolutely
forbidden all legal impurity; for then without doubt he would not have had
some to attend that were dying, or that were infected with some unclean
disease: yea he would not have some to bury the dead, and cleanse the unclean,
by whose means they themselves became also defiled, Numb. 19. And whilst he
willed this, he willed that all legal uncleanness should not be avoided. But
God did forbid all sorts of wickedness to all persons at all times: neither did
he permit them at any time, or in any place to do evil.

9. God commands that wickedness should be repressed with fire, sword,
strangling, stones, stripes, fines, imprisonment, and with other such like
punishments: But he commanded the unclean to be purified by water, and with
other such like means to be purged.

10. He was not esteemed a wicked and condemned person, who was according to
the sentence of the Law, made unclean, and even to the day of his death did
remain such; as when Women in their courses, or Men sick of a Gonorrhaee or
infected with a Leprosy did die. But he that lives so, that even at the hour
of his death, he shall be by good and upright men thought worthy of
Excommunication, he cannot but be eestem'd an unworthy and ungodly person.

11. Legal impurity had no place but amongst one people and for a certain
time. But vices did spring every where amongst all Nations, in all places, and
at all times. Wherefore seeing vices were punished and judged fit to be
punished both by Gentiles and Jews, before ever the legal impurity was
introduced, it certainly signified some other thing, then this punishment of
wicked persons, being much more light then that which would be satisfactory to
the will of God.

12. Every man was purified in a certain space of time, or number of days, by
using certain Ceremonies, of what mind soever he was of, that is, whither he
willingly, or against his will became unclean. But no man is delivered from
wickedness, except he be cordially sorry, and desire truly and earnestly both
to be, and be made better.

13. Every unclean person was purged according to his own judgment, (The
Leprose and some few others being excepted) neither had they any need of Judges
and Elders, who were to discern wither they were rightly purified or not. Our
Adversaries hold another opinion concerning Excommunicate Persons. For in this
point they will have us to follow the judgment of their Elders: and not to
accept of their Assertion, who declare that they are penitent for their sins.

14. He was to be declared sound and clean, who had the whole skin of his body
of one color, though from the crown of his head, to the sole of his feet he
were Leprous: And on the other part he was esteemed unclean, who had his skin
spotted in one or more parts. In wicked persons the case is far different:
for he that is altogether clothed with wickedness (as the Sow that has
weltred in the mire, is altogether durty) is not better then he, who yet
carries some shadow of honesty and godliness.

15. The Leprouse Persons are not commanded to do any thing for their own cure;
but they are only commanded to show themselves to the Priest; that he may
declare whither they be, or be not purified. But wicked persons are commanded
to amend their lives, and that they declared the sorrow of their souls by their
upright and holy conversation.

16. Many became unclean by touching those things, whereby others were
purified, and whilst they were purifying others, Numb. 19. But not any deserve
to be excommunicate for that, by which he goes about to cure and cleanse
those, that are defiled with sin and wirkedness Wherefore if you assert the
figure to corespond, it behooves you to concede, that all they, that by this
means go about to bring the stray into the way, are to be excommunicate.

17. Unclean Persons, according to the Law, were not debarred from all the
Sacraments; for they were commanded to observe all the private rites of their
Country, to observe the Sabbath and feast of expiation, which chiefly held
forth the fruits of Christ's works, and that under pain of death, Lev. 16, and
23. for (as we said before) they were not judged to be condemned and forlorn
Persons. Now whither the condition of excommunicate Persons, according to our
Adversaries opinion, be not far different from this, is not needful further to
be insisted on.

18. Unclean Persons did defile legally the clothes, houses, places and people,
with whom they hold any converse. But wicked men do not defile the Temple or
any other thing, or Persons except those that communicate with them in their
vices. The Temple was not defiled so often as Adulteresses were brought in
thither, Numb. 5. and John 8. And the Publican did not defile the Temple when
he went up thither together with the Pharisee to pray, Luke 18. Certainly the
Pharisee who esteemed him a wicked Person in respect of himself, did not think
himself defiled by his company. When Judas threw back the price of treason, we
do not read that the Temple was defiled by him: neither do we find the
Pharisees complained thereof, which nevertheless would not enter the
Counsell-house, least they should be defiled. But if a woman sick of her
flowers or any other Ishew, or that had a care of a Burial, or had touched a
dead body though unwillingly, were seen in the Temple, then all things became
unclean: neither was it lawful to Sacrifice or use any other worship, till it
was purified. After the same manner Judas did not defile the last Supper by his
villainies: which nevertheless had come to pass, if either he or any other of
the Disciples had touched any dead thing.

To conclude, Legal uncleanness was a figure of our crooked and corrupt
nature, which cannot enter Heaven, unless it be washen and cleansed by the pure
blood of Christ; for as the Tabernacle signified Heaven, and the exclusion from
it, the keeping out from the Heavenly Jerusalem; so the purification by common
or holy water, did prefigure the changing by the death of Christ. The quality
then thereof was not a figure of a work, but of a quality, or of our corrupted
Nature: neitheir did it foreshew how offenses were to be punished (for Moses
had taught this in clear and plain words.) But what our condition was to be in
the life to come, that is, in the Kingdom of Heaven, which the Land of Canaan
did represent: which all are manifestly enough to be seen thoroughly from the
21. of the Revelation. Augustine in his Writeing against the Donatists did
believe it signified the excluding of Heretics. From the many and great
differences that are found betwixt both these impurities, yea a blind man may
discern that the one could not so figure the other as our Adversaries aver.

XVI.
Although Moses lay down no other exception, except that which we have spoken
of, notwithstanding I will answer to another Objection, which may be gathered
from Moses words. For may be after this manner some will reason: The Jews were
commanded by Moses to eat the Paschall without Leaven: which St Paul
interprets to be without corruptness of life, 1 Gor. 5. It must then seem unto
any man very agreeable, That the Lords Supper, which succeeded unto the
Paschall, should be celebrated so that the wicked should be excluded.

XVII.
I answer, first, That indeed it is very unlikely, that God should command any
thing in clear words, and yet at the same time should again forbid the same
figuratively. He commands clearly in a mandate sometimes repeated, that every
Male (except these that were unclean, and were on the way) should celebrate the
Passover. He would not then by the figure of Leaven affright any others
therefrom. There were then enough of evil Men present, that it was not
needful they should be figured by Leaven. Neither did the wicked Men less
appear to the senses, then Leaven it self. Wherefore seeing figures are not
proposed of those things that are present, and that as fully represented
themselves to the senses, (chiefly if the things figured be more known and
frequent them the figures themselves) a figure here is sought after in vain.
Again, Moses does not command him to be debarred the eating of the Paschall,
that had eat Leaven: but commands him to be killed. Wherefore wicked men are
not to be debarred from the Supper, but are to be put to death: which
consequence I shall not unfreely admit: and I heartily wish it may be done: for
I desire nothing more, then that a most severe Discipline concerning manners
may be observed in the Church: but I would wish it such as God has appointed,
and not Man fained. Thirdly, It was lawful for the Jews to eat Leaven all the
year over, except on these seven days of Unleavened-Bread which they begin
with eating of the Passover. If you do apply this unto the Lords Supper, you
must concede, that men may live impurely all the year long; only they must
abstain from wickedness, in the time of celebration of the Lords Supper.
Fourthly, Moses speaks here only of the Paschall, not of the other
Sacraments. Then wicked men should be debarred only from the Lords Supper, but
not from Baptism. Fifthly, The Apostle does not compare the Feast of the Jews
with the Supper of the Lord, but with our whole life. He says we are
Unleavened, as being men which are throwly purged from all Leaven by the Blood
of Christ. Therefore he says it is fitting, that we should live in the
Unleaven of truth and sincerity, and not in the Leaven of malice. There is a
vast difference betwixt Leaven simply so termed: and the Leaven of malice or
verity; for Leaven being so put or taken, is known by all to be figuratively
taken. The Analogick or figurative sense, as the Schoolmen affirm, is not
Argumentative. Certainly whatsoever we shall understand by Leaven, yet
Excommunication cannot hence be held up and established against the clear
command of God.

XVIII.
Nevertheless some may say, that Paul makes mention here of the Passover. But
what does this concern our business? as if indeed this word, Passover, were put
in the new Testament for the Lords Supper. Christ, says the Apostle, is our
Paschall Sacrificed for us, not his Supper. The meaning is, That as the Jews
beginning their Feast of Unleavened-Bread, by the eating of the Lamb, did
after that through the whole Week eat Unleavened-Bread: So likewise you, which
have begun to believe in Christ, and who are purged and unleavened by His
Blood, you ought purely and chastely to spend all the rest of the Week, that
is, all the rest of your life.

XIX.
Now that not any thing diverse to this, is to be found in any other of the
Volumes of the old Testament, is clear from this alone, that the Posterity were
to live according to Moses's Laws and Constitutions. And it was not lawful to
ordain any thing opposite to them, concerning the worship of God. Indeed the
holy Judges, Priests, Prophets, and Kings, debarred none from the Sacrifices
and Sacraments: But rather by all means endeavored to invite all men to the
same. The History of the holy King Josiah is known, 2 Chronicles. 30. who did
convocate all the Israelites, (which he knew newly had offered incense to
strange Gods or Devils) or besides them all those which by reason of the
shortness of time could not be purified, to the celebration of the Paschall.
From which place it is moreover cleared, That the Sacraments are incitements or
invitements to Piety: And that men become better rather by their frequent use,
then by their privation: If together with them they be fully and faithfully
instructed.

XX.
Wherefore excommunication cannot be defended out of the 1. of Isaiah, Psalm
50. and many other such places, in which it is said, that God wills not the
Sacrifices and Oblations of the wicked; for in all such places God reprehendeth
that abuse, that they thought they had most clearly satisfied the will of God,
if they did these external things, howsoever their hearts were affected.
Again, He does not command the Prophet, or any other person by him, to keep
back the wicked from the Sacrifices or Ceremonies: But declares he will not
hear them unless they amend their lives also. The reason of the external
policy of the Church, is other from that of the will of God toward us
approving or disapproving of our actions. Lastly, From the same places after
the same precise manner, it shall be demonstrate, that it is not lawful for
any wicked man to call on the name of the Lord, yea neither to praise nor
thank him: because the Ministers and Elders ought to interdict the sinful of
all these: for God does likewise turn his countenance from these in the wicked:
as is clear from the cited and all other like places. Wherefore if this be
absurd, the other must be absurd likewise.

XXI.
Neither does that make against us which we read in the 1. of Esdras, and 10.
Chapter, for that matter was public, and belonged not to the Sacraments. For
the Magistrate, not the Priest Esdras alone (who nevertheless was one of the
Magistracies, for as Josephus witnesses, they were governed by States, though
they had a Chiestaine) sent forth that decree, that under pain of confiscation
of their good and exclusion (not from the Sacraments and Sacrifices, but) from
the people which were returned from captivity, all men within three days
should present themselves at Jerusalem. We do not question in this place,
whither the Magistrate has right to punish this, or that way: but whither the
Priests could remove dissolute and filthy livers from the Sacrifices? Esdras
could not do this, which was against the command of God. Add, That Moses did
not command Deuteronomy. 7. this punishment, to wit, to be removed from the
Sacraments, to be inflicted on them that had Married strange Wives. And how
Esdras was to punish the transgressors of the Law, is set down in the 7.
Chapter of the same Book, by death, banishment, punishment of the body,
confiscating of their goods, fetters or imprisonment. To conclude, It is a
far other thing to be turned out of the society of those that had come back
from Captivity; then to be debarred the Temple and Sacrifices. For it appears
from the 12. Chap. of Exodus and Numb. 6. that even strangers were admitted to
the Celebration of the Passover, so be they were Circumcised: At that time
also, many of these that had either remained still in Judea: or that being
Natives, had forsaken the impurity of the Gentiles, and had turned to the Jews,
did together with all the others Celebrate the Passover, as it is written in
the end of the sixth Chapter of that Book. These being such persons, were not
debarred the Temple, Sacrifices, or Ceremonies; although they were not numbered
amongst them that had returned out of Babylon. So likewise they removed some
Priests from their Office; because they could not instruct their Geneologies,
as is clear from the 2. of Esdras. From all appears, that it is impossible,
that excommunication can have any help from this.

XXII.
There remains only the ejection out of the Synagogue to be considered,
wherewith diverse persons do wonderfully please themselves; whilst they
produce for excommunication, that which is written John the 9. and 12, 16.
concerning this matter. But here diverse and solid Answers are offered. The
word Synagouge sometimes signifies a place; as when Christ is said to have
entered into the Synagogue, and to have taught them: Sometime it signifies a
meeting, or convention of the people, whither their gathering together was in
the Synagogue, or in any other place; As when we read that the Pharisees
desired the first seats at Banquets, and the first places in the Synagogues. In
the same signification, or in both it is taken Mat. 10. and 23. Where Christ
foretells that the godly shall receive stripes in the Synagogues. And Mat.
10. Mark 13. Luke 12.21. In which places it signifies the public judgment, in
which signification this word is often put by the seventy Interpreters; as we
shall afterward show in its convenient place. In the next foregoing places, as
in Mat. 10. Mark 13. the word (...), Synedrium, and (...), Synagogue are
clearly so put, as if the some should be understood by both. In the other
places, (...), to the word Synagogue are immediately added (...), Kings and
Rulers, as Luke 21. (for which the same Evangelist in the 12. Chapter had put
(...), Magistrates and powers.) Mark 13. Mat. 10. as by the collation of
places is manifestly shown, that the Evangelist or Christ in these last places
did understand nothing else by the words Synedrium and Synagogue then those
judicatories of the Jews, which were exercised by many sitting together: As the
judicatories of the Gentiles are expressed by the words, Kings, Magistrates,
Powers, and Rulers: over which always one was president, or if more then one
did administer judgment, yet it was administrate in one man's name. In these
Convents or Synagogues, they that were judged guilty, were punished with rods,
stripes, buffets, Matthew. 10.23. Acts 17.26. 2 Cor. 11.1. which place any man
may easily understand by the 25. of Deuteronomy. The casting out then out of such a
Synagogue, was a kind of politic ignominy and punishment, and so as it were a
local banishment, as we may conjecture by the fourth Chapter of Luke. It
cannot be drawn to the Sacraments, which were only celebrate in the Temple
(which was but one) and at Jerusalem, except circumcision, and some few others.
It seems to be a punishment not dislike to that, of which we have spoken a
little before, in our explication of the place of Esdras. There is not any that
does not know, that there were such Synagogues in every Town. Therefore whither
the word Synagogue in John be taken for the place, or for the convent it self,
it will not in any part be repugnant to our opinion. And if it shall altogether
be denied to have been politic, yet this will be clear, that it belonged to
Religion; But I do not dispute here, whither he that has an evil opinion of
the true Religion is to be excommunicate. For the Pharisees, says John 9. did
conspire together in this, That they should be thrown out of the Synagogue,
which esteemed Jesus to be Christ: And that, to be in the Synagogue, was only
an honor; and to be thrown out of it an ignominy; It seems that it may be
gathered from this, which is written in the 12. of John, That many chief Rulers
amongst the Jews [in whch number may be Nicodemus was] did believe in Christ,
but durst not confess him, for fear of the Pharisees, least they should throw
them out of the Synagogues: and this reason is added; because they loved more
the glory of men, then the glory of God. Moreover it is clear, that the
Circumcised Publicans were not admitted into the Synagogues (we mean of these
of which we dispute at present.) for the Pharisees would not so much as
confer with them; And upon this account they did backbite Christ; because he
did familiarly converse with them. But I believe not any man of a sound
judgment will affirm, that these men were not admitted to the Passover,
Temple, and Sacrifices. Wherefore to be thrown out of the Synagogue; and to be
debarred the Sacraments and Ceremonies appointed by God, do very much differ:
As appears by all, that has been said already, and is more clearly seen by
the first Chapter of the Acts. For the Disciples being sharply reproved by the
Synagogue, did notwithstanding teach daily in the Temple. Out of how many
Synagogues was the Apostle Paul thrown? Nevertheless the Jews did never
reprehend him, that he entered into the Temple; and offered oblations for
himself and others. And if it could be never so well proved, that to be thrown
out of the Synagogue, and kept back from the Sacraments, were one and the same
amongst the Pharisees [that which at no time can be proved to be true, to have
been, or to be hereafter] Nevertheless they had done this (as they did many
other things) against the express precept of Moses: therefore we should not
follow, but condemn their doing thereof: for we must not live by examples, but
by Law, neither ought we to imitate what is oppsite to the Law of God, except
our intentions be to confound all things. We must follow the examples of good
men and good examples, and not of evil men, and evil examples. I have
therefore handled these things in so many words, yet shortly: because some men
do wonderfully flatter themselves with this Argument, when in the mean time
they deceive themselves and others.

XIII.
This then remains firm, unmovable, and unshaken; That in the old Testament
none were removed from the Sacraments for their delinquencies in manners: But
that every one according to the Law, were rather invited to, then repulsed from
their celebration, by the holy Priests, Prophets, Judges, Kings, yea and at
last even by that most famous and holy forerunner of Christ, John the Baptist
himself.

XIV.
And indeed the Sacraments of the Ancients and ours, are the same, in respect
of the thing signified, as Paul clears in the 1 Cor. 10. wherefore except it
appear that the Law of Moses is either abolished or changed in this point, it
is not lawful for any man to bring in the contrary.

XXV.
For as we use rightly against the Anabaptists this firm Argument, because
circumcision has succeeded to Baptism, and Christ has not in any place forbid
Infants Baptism, therefore it is not less lawful for us to Baptize our
Infants, then it was for the Jews to circumcise theirs: So here likewise, we
can no less soundly reason after this manner. The Lords Supper succeeded to the
eating of the Passover. But vices were not punished by the denial of the
Passover, neither were any for these debarred it: but rather all, especially
the Male, were invited by the Law to the celebration thereof, which seeing in
no place we read to be antiquate and abolished, neither are they indeed to be
punished by the denial of the Lords Supper, nor upon this account ought any to
be rejected. We have said enough concerning the old Testament: now it is
convenient that we descend to Christ and his Apostles, that is to the new
Testament.

XXVI.
After the same manner we do not read that our Lord and Savior Christ did
forbid any the use of the Sacraments: Yea moreover we do not find, that his
Apostles in any place, commanded that such a thing should be done. For Christ
came not into this world to destroy the Law, but to fulfill and perfect the
same. Wherefore seeing the Law commanded all, except the unclean, to celebrate
the Passover, he would not forbid any.

XXVII.
It Is likewise apparent, that Christ never reprehended any, because they used
the Sacraments, and were frequently present in the Temple, and at the
Sacrifices: But only admonished them, that they should use them aright
according to the will and Law of God. He entered always into the same Temple
with the Pharisees, Sadduces, Publicans, with all other evil, together and
with good persons: he was present with them at the same Sacrifices; and
together with the whole people used the same Sacraments: And he was Baptized
likewise with the same Baptism of John, wherewith those wicked persons now
named were Baptized.

XXVIII.
For this same cause he did not keep back from the eating of the last Paschall
Lamb, his betrayer Judas, but he did sit down together with the other eleven
Disciples. And albeit there are some, who go about to prove, that Judas was not
present at the institution of the new Supper (which will be very hard, that I
may not say impossible, to show clearly out of the holy Scriptures,) but that
he went away before it was institute by Christ: Notwithstandinging I believe
none dare deny, but that according to the Law, he was admitted to the eating of
the Passover. Which being granted, our Argument remains unmoved. For whither
he went out before the institution of the other Supper; or went not out (which
is more probable and always believed by more men,) This is ever clear, that he
was present at the first, and was not commanded openly to abstain from the
second. Yea moreover we do not read in any place, that he was commanded by
Christ to go out, that he might not be present at the new Supper. Wherefore if
he went out, he went out of himself, neither went he out for that cause. But we
inquire what Christ did do, not what Judas did. It suffices us that Christ did
not command him to abstain from his last Supper.

XXIX.
It Is frivolous and light, that is brought for excuse; That the fault was not
public, and that therefore he ought not to be removed. For he had then agreed
upon a price with the Pharisees. And in the time of Supper it self, Christ did
open it up to his Disciples, and had made it public; whereby the rather an
example should have been made thereof. Lastly, That this be but something, yet
at least he was noted before that time for a Thief. And although he was such,
nevertheless our Lord committed the Ministry to him, and did honor him with
the power of casting out Devils, of healing the Sick, and of working other
miracles: and to conclude, all the years he was with Christ, he admitted him
together with the rest, to the celebration of the Passover. Is not this
Argument enough, that Christ would not that wicked men should be punished by
the denial of the Sacrament? Certainly it is a greater matter, to admit a
wicked man into the Ministry, then to admit any such an one to the Supper. We
see that Christ let both these fall to Judas.

XXX.
That is also to be observed, that the Disciples at the first Supper, begun to
contend amongst themselves, about the eminency and dignity, nevertheless none
of them were removed for that cause. But moreover he commanded and willed, that
all should drink of the Cup, [in relation to this matter, the reason of the
Cup and Bread is the same,] witness Matthew. 26. which Mark does testify was
done: what other thing can be believed Christ willed by these words then to
confirm those things, which God had of old commanded by Moses? viz. that no
Baptized Person should be excluded from that public and solemn Thanksgiving,
who desire to be present thereat? By which it appears, that not any ought to
be removed from the Table of the Lord, which embraces the Doctrine of Christ,
and suffers himself to be taught of Christ.

XXXI.
Christ will not have his Kingdom [I speak of the externall] on this earth
Circumscribed within narrower boundings amongst Christians, then in old times
he would have it contained and defined amongst the Jews. Therefore as God
commanded all the circumcised externally to be partakers of the same Sacraments
and Ceremonies, and commanded Offenders to be coerc'd and punished with the
Sword and other punishments: So here Christ will have all them that are
Baptized, or are Christians, and have right and true belief concerning
Religion, to use the same external Ceremonies and Sacraments: But will have
those, that are flagitious to be chastis'd by the Magistrate with death,
banishment, imprisonment, and other punishments; hitherto, as it seems
belongs these Parables of the net, marriage, and of the tares.

XXXII.
In the Apostles, especially in the Apostle Paul, we find no fewer, and no less
plain and pithy Arguments. The first is this, That the Apostles are not found
any where either to have taught or exercised the Excommunication. Which
Argument seeming in itself invalide become unanswerable, if we consider, that
they were even unto their deaths most strict keepers of Moses's Laws, which
Christ had not abolished: as every man may know even by the 21. and last
Chapter of the Acts. Wherefore they never tried or would try to repel any man,
which professed himself a Christian, and to believe rightly concerning that
Doctrine, from our Sacraments, which only differed from them of old in the
signs and time signified. For they did not in any place either do or teach any
thing against Moses's commands, which were not abolished by Christ; But they
observed the Law no less diligently afterward, then they did before the death
of Christ. As the chief of the Apostles in the Place newly cited do witness.
For they only suffered the Nations to live without the Law of Moses, and not
the converted Jews: which is diligently to be observed here, because of the
things that follow. And as far as concerns the substance of the Doctrine,
they taught nothing which was different from Moses and the Prophets. For if
they had taught otherwise, their Doctrine had not been judged by them of
Beroea, to be consonant to the Scriptures, Acts 17.

XXXIII.
I will say somewhat more for the sentence of Moses, which is much the very
same which we hold: That there are no reasons found in the Apostle Paul for the
contrary opinion. For in the 1 to the Corinthians and 8. Chapter, he excluded
not those which as yet believed Idols to be some thing: Neither those elevate
and proud swelling Gnostics, who did openly with profane and ungodly
worshippers of Idols, eat things offered to Idols in their very Chapels at
their solemn and public Banquets: That, which God by Moses had clearly
forbidden, Exodus 34. and by the Apostles Acts 15. and lastly by John, 2.
Revelation, this was no less weighty sin, than if any this day should dare to
be present at the Mass of the Roman-Church: which may readily be gathered by
any man out of the tenth Chapter of the same Epistle. Because in this place the
Apostle Paul proves, that such men do declare by this their deed, that they
are no less fellows and commonners of the Devil; Then by the receiving of the
Lords Supper, they testify themselves to be members of Christ's mystical Body.

XXXIV.
Next, in the tenth Chapter, Paul reasons thus: As in old times the Lord did
not spare those that coveted evil things, nor Idolaters, nor whoremongers, nor
tempters, and murmurers against Christ, although they were Baptized with the
same Baptism with all the rest; and did eat the same spiritual food, and
drink the same spiritual drink: So neither will he spare any of you
whatsomever, which are defiled with the same sins, although you eat all of the
same Bread, and drink all of the same Cup with all the Saints. By these it is
perceived. First, That our Sacraments and those of the Ancients were the same,
in respect of the thing internal and Heavenly, otherwise the Argument of the
Apostle would be of no effect. Next it is clear, That many corrupt persons, and
that publicly known to be such, were admitted. Thirdly, This is likewise
certain, That not any was commanded to forbear, as Excommunicate persons are
commanded. The Apostle does not say that such are to be kept back: But he
foretells that they would be punished by God so, as the Ancients were
punished. For Moses together with the Levites did kill a part of them 32. and
the Lord did consume another part with fire, Serpents, with the Sword, and with
the opening up of the earth: which also happened unto the Corinthians; for he
affirms that many of them then were sick, and many of them dead.

XXXV.
In the following Chapter he commands neither the contentious persons, and
Sectaries, neither them that were made drunk in the very celebration of the
Supper it self, nor them that were polluted with other sins to be kept back
from the use thereof: indeed he does not mention, so much as in one word this
interdiction: when as he corrects far less faults, as that every one should
eat at home. How could he in this place not have mentioned this matter, if he
had approved thereof, or thought it necessary in the Church? The Apostle knew
the Law commanded otherwise, and that there was another use of the Sacraments
in the Church: then that by their denial corruptness in life should be
punished. Therefore he commands, that every one should examine himself: but
he does not command that they should examine and approve of one another; he
moreover exhorts them all, that they should strive to eat worthily, least any
should eat judgment to themselves: he does not command them that eat unworthily
to be kept back therefrom, but he threatens them with the Lords chastisement.
He divides the general sort of eaters into two kinds, by their opposite
differences, to wit, in them that eat worthily, and them that eat unworthily:
he commands neither of them not to eat, but he desires that all should eat
worthily.

XXXVI.
Afterward in the second Epistle, Chapter 12, and 13. he does not threaten
them, which after his admonition, had not repented them of the impurity, lust
and licentiousness, which they had committed, with a removal from the Lords
Table; but by the authority and power which was given him of God, he shows
that he would severely and rigorously punish them: which in his own writeings
he does verify often: but he no where tells them of the debarring from the
Sacraments, which is the Question in hand: neither does he command the Elders
or any others to do this. But if he would have had the wicked punished after
this manner, he should have commanded them to be removed from the Sacraments
till they amend: Chiefly seeing he had appointed Elders in the same Church
before, 1 Cor. 6. Chap. and had amended the celebration of the Supper. But we
will perchance speak more of this matter hereafter.

XXXVII.
Even as in the celebration of the Sacraments we see no mention to be made of
Excommunication; so neither do we find any such thing in their Institution. Yea
the Scripture has not made mention of it, where it explains the end and use of
the same. But if they were given to this end to the Church, that they might be
a kind of punishment to the wicked and wickedness, without doubt in one of the
places there would have some mention been made thereof. The ends of the Lords
Supper for which it was instituted are these: That we should solemnly celebrate
the death of our Lord, and give public thanks to him for our delivery: That we
should by our presence teach and testify that we have no other meat and drink
of life, but Christ Crucified, and his Blood shed for us: That we should
declare we repented of our forespent life, think of a better, embrace the
Christian Doctrine, to belong to his Church, in which we should desire
afterward to live holily and godly, and dye therein. Has the Scripture in any
place forbid any man to do these things? But some, you will say, do often return
to their own Bias, and are made no better. I answer, That he who in the
present thinks so, as I have said, by the motion of the holy Ghost is not
repelled by the Scriptures but God knows whither and when at least he shall
persevere in that holy Resolution. It is our part always to hope well of all
men, albeit we will often be deceived; and moreover from our hearts to beseech
God, that he will confirm them and us together in good. In the mean time he
that does evil, is to be reproved and admonisht, that he should prove himself,
lest he eat and drink damnation, as the apposite teaches.

XXXVIII.
To conclude, Are the Sacraments either in authority or dignity more excellent
then the Word? or more necessary by use? not any where save without the Word:
but no man doubts but many both are and may be saved without the Sacraments;
chiefly without the Lords Supper if they contemn them not. It seems the Apostle
thought no otherwise, when he writes that he was not sent to Baptize, but to
Preach the Word. Do not most men call them the visible words? and that they
propose that thing to the eyes, which the Word does to the ears? Why then do we
study to keep men from the Word, but to keep some from the Sacraments, and
chiefly from the Lords Supper? and that against, or at least without the
express command of God? because, say they, the Word was given to all, the
Sacraments were only institute for those, that were converted. I know this;
neither do I speak of Turks, and of the unconverted: but I speak of them that
are called by God into his Church; that are insert threin, and approve of the
Doctrine thereof, and that are desirous at least externally, to use the
Sacraments rightlier.

XXXIX.
I have shown hitherto, that there is no example nor word extant, neither of
Christ, nor of his Apostles of this chastisment or rather coercement of the
ungodly. Wherefore seeing neither the Old nor New Testament have commanded this
form of punishment; but the contrary does occur very often in both, we
deservedly believe, that Excommunication (in so far as it keeps men from
the use of the Sacraments for the wickedness of their life and manners) is
rather a humane invention, then any divine Law. Therefore it seems now
consequent, that we should view those things which they, that think contrary to
this, bring for themselves, and demonstrate that they have no strength in
themselves.

XL.
The command say they is extant in the 18 of Matthew, and in the Epistles of
Saint Paul, but the example is found 1 Cor. 5. Chapter, also the 1 of Timothy
and 1. Chapter. Of these we will speak in order: And first of that place which
is in Matthew.

XLI.
Christ's purpose in this Chapter was not to institute a new government, or a
form of exercising Excommunication, but to instruct his Disciples how they
should avoid offense in repelling of private injuries. For because these that
immediately pursued the right before the Magistrate, (chiefly before a Heathen
and profane Magistrate, to which then the Jews were subject) did oft-times
offend the weak; first he exhorts them, that they should rather forgive
injuries, then in every cause to run to the Magistrate. In this part he does no
other thing then call into memory that command of Moses in the 19. of Exodus
which Syracides in his 19. Chap. likewise does more largely handle. Then he
commands that if they should perchance be compelled to bring their Cause
before the Magistrate, that they should not accuse their Brethren the Jews
before the Romans, before first they had desired the asistance of their own
Magistrate in vain. If indeed they would avoid scandal, the Apostle delivers
the same command to the Corinthians the 1.6. Chap. (which place is as it were
an Exposition upon this,) viz. that the Christians should not rashly go to Law
together before the Gentiles. Therefore the genuine sense of this place and
Chapter is this: when thy Brother, that is, when a Jew does unto thee an
injury, study how by thy self alone to reconcile him to thee, if thou alone
cannot prevail, take two or three with thee and try it again: if neither so,
thou can deliver thy self from the wrong, tell it to the Synedrium, that is,
tell it to the Magistrate of thy People and Religion. But if he will not hear
him, then you may proceed against him without the offense of any, as you will
proceed against the Publicans and Heathens, (who will not suffer themselves to
be brought to any other Tribunal, but that of the Romans.) that should wrong
you.

XLII.
That this is the proper and legitimate interpretation of this place is
manifestly shown by all the circumstances and whole series of the discourse,
but chiefly by the conclusion. First Christ does not discourse in this place of
the weighty and public sins that belonged to his Country Religon, and rites,
the punishing of which belonged to the Synedrium: but he speaks of private
injuries, the power of remitting of which belonged to every man: this proves
evidently that which I have said, that the whole contexture of the discourse is
in the singular number. If thy Brother oeffnd against thee ((...),) reprove him
betwixt thee and himself alone: tell the Church if he will not hear thee, etc.
After the same manner also he speaks, Luke 17. if thy Brother ((...)) sin
against thee, and immediately if thy Brother sin seven times in one day
against thee, and return to thee, and shall say, that he is sorry, forgive him.
We cannot interpret ((...),) against the Church; for seeing he says
afterward, tell the Church, the sense will be, O Church, tell the Church.
Neither can it signify the same, that thou being conscious: for neither the
nature, nor circumstances of the word or speeches will suffer this: for
presently after is added, betwixt thee and himself alone. How then if he sin, I
being conscious to it, and did not sin against me only and alone, am I alone
compelled to admonish him alone? am I not rather commanded to reprove him,
together with them, against whom he has properly sinned? but Christ does not
concede, that I should first go to him with others: therefore he speaks of an
injury done by my Brother against me only. As likewise how shall the words of
Luke agree with this interpretation, when he says, if thy Brother shall return
to thee, forgive him? shall we likewise say here, that to thee, is put for thou
knowing it? but what then will forgive him signify? Must we also say here that
it is, be thou conscious to his forgiveness? did the prodigal Luke 15. sinning
against Heaven, sin, Heaven being conscious there to? how we shall sin against
our Brethren by doing evil is clear, 1 Cor. 8. but the nature of this place is
different. Truly the speech and words do not suffer us to take them of any
other but for private injuries; which you your self may remit to the penitent;
but if he will not of himself repent, you must use all means that he may
repent. Secondly, The same is proved, because the Apostles did understand
Christ's words any otherwise, as is manifest by Peter's Interogation on whom he
asks: Is it enough that if my Brother sin against me seven times, I forgive
him seven times? Peter was not ignorant that he neither should nor could of
himself alone remit those sins which belong to the Church and diverse others.
Thirdly, The word to the proves this, Christ says not let him be to us, let
him be to the Church, let him be to others; but let him be to thee alone, which
has suffered, or does suffer an injury by him, as a Publican. Albeit chief
speaks to all the Apostles alike, nevertheless he commands that the
offender should be esteemed as a Publican to him only that was hurt by him: and
that after the admonition of the Church; therefore he speaks not of these
things which belong to the whole Church, or to many others: but of these things
which belong to every single man. Fourthly, He speaks of such sins as we ought
so often to forgive our Brethren, for as often as they say they repent of them: and
that this transaction or remission done betwixt two only, shall be the end of
all strife, is clearly held forth in these words. Again, I say unto you if, two
of you agree together, etc. Ver. 19. but a great offense which belongs to more,
or to the whole Church cannot be forgiven by one alone. By the way ye are to
take notice here, that the Adverb (...), again, does declare that he said the
same now just before, albeit he used other words. Fifthly, Christ speaks of
such sins, whereof they are not ashamed that have committed them: or which they
will not deny before any man, if he speak of other grievous sins, and of such
as belong to the Church; and many other witnesses should have no place. For no
man would confess that before witnesses, that he remitted such an act if it
were done privately. But in all those things of which is spoken here, there is
degrees set down by Christ to be kept, wherefore he speaks of private
injuries, belonging not at all to others. Sixthly, He speaks of such, which
the Church, of which Christ speaks here, does not punish, but sends away
the Offender chastis'd only with words. For in vain should he say, if he will
not hear the Church; for indeed it could punish sins with public punishment.
Seaventhly, The Parable that immediately follows, does prove the same clearly;
which does teach, that God would not forgive them their sins, that would not
forgive from their heart their penitent Brothers, without pain or punishment,
but the Church should not so, as they say, forgive the Offenders: but should
keep them at least for a time from the Sacraments: until they should approve
their penitence to Presbyters chosen for this purpose. Therefore he would have
them forgiven seven times a day, that say they repent, but would see Arguments
of their Repentance, of which Christ speaks not one word here: for he will
have no other Argument, then a confession of their fault; which he that does
not dissemble it, will not return seven times a day. It is then clearly
demonstrate by these reasons, that Christ does not discourse here of these sins
that are to be punished by Excommunication, but of light and private injuries,
and of the means to compose them: therefore it does not belong to the business
of Excommunication. If the conclusion only used by Christ in the end of the
Chapter be looked unto all cause of doubting will be removed.

XLIII.
Those that are of oppinion, that Christ in this place and Chapter did
institute Excommunication, must be compelled to show in what words this command
is comprehended. If they cannot demonstrate it to be contained there; and it is
in vain for them to say it is commanded here. Therefore its either in these
words, tell the Church; or in these, let him be to thee as a Publican; or in
these, whatsomever you shall bind, etc. But that not any of these contain any
such thing, I will prove what solid Arguments: therefore seeing it cannot be
sought in any other words, it is in vain sought after in this Chapter.

XLIV.
The words of Christ, tell the Church, prove only this; that he that is injured
by his Brother, and has endeavored in vain to be reconciled to him, may
complain of the injury to the Church, or to the moderator of the Church.
Moreover that the Church has right and power to reprove and admonish an
injurious man, that he may cease to be sick. There is no more power here given
to the Church, then was given before to the witnesses: if they only except this
that the case was not to be brought before the Church without witnesses. Would
not this then be a foolish way of reasoning, the Church has power to reprove
him that does injury to others, therefore it has power to Excommunicate him,
and keep him back from the Sacraments? But indeed some will say, the Church
has no power to punish Offenders with corporal punishments, or with the
Sword; therefore it is compelled to punish them by forbidding them the
Sacraments. I answer, That this connection does not follow, albeit the
Antecedent were true; (but that it is false, being taken of the visible Church
is clearly demonstrate to our eyes and senses, by all the Old Testament, and
the History of all ages,) neither can it ever be proved, that these should
rightly cohere togegether: it cannot punish by the Sword, therefore it must
debar from the common Sacraments, them that profess the same Religion.

XLV.
If he, that is of another judgment, shall answer that it is contained in those
words, let him be unto thee as a Publican and a Heathen: I answer, it is false,
for by no speech, by no persuasion, by no Arguments; can it ever be
demonstrate, that this speech of Christ, let him be to thee as an Heathen and a
Publican, is the same with this, let them excommunicate, let them be shut out
from the Sacraments. For in Christ's time circumcss'd Publicans, whither they
were Jews or Gentiles, were not kept back from the Sacrafices, Temple,
Ceremonies, and Sacraments: Truly it seems that Christ therefore joined a
Publican with a Heretic, lest any should judge that the interdiction of the
Sacramehts were commanded here. How could he according to the Law be kept from
the Temple and divine worship, seeing it was not a sin to be a collector of the
public revenues? Neither is it in any place found to be forbidden by God; and
truly Christ has not forbid it. When the Publicans demand of John what was
needful for them to do that they might be saved, he does not bid them that
they should forsake their office: but he exhorts them that they should not
exact more then was imposed, Luke 3. Christ likewise does not bid Zacheus the
chief of the Publicans to forsake this Office; Neither does he reprehend him
for it, Luke 19. Neither do we read of him who went up to the Temple to pray
and returned home justified by Christ's sentence, that he left of to be a
Publican, Luke 18. neither these that praise God, Luke 7.15. and was most dear
to Christ and his Apostles, to change their condition, as we find. In brief I
will say it, that the holy Scriptures, that is, that God did at no time and in
no place condemn and dispraise the Publicans upon the account that they were
Publicans, that is, Collectors of the revenues; which all wise men will freely
confess with me. Which being laid down I argument thus, God does condemn no
Publican because as Publican in the holy Scriptures; but he that God does
condemn cannot be excommunicate by the Law of God; therefore no Publican could
by divine right be forbidden from the Temple and divine Worship: Now I go on
concluding this no Publican by the Law, could be condemned or Excommunicated,
but Christ commands him that will not hear that Church of which he speaks,
there to be esteemed as a Publican, therefore he commands him to be esteemed
such a one, as by the Law of God could not be esteemed acceptable, to wait
upon this account because he was a Publican. When the Excommunicators affirm
that these words let him be unto thee as a Publican, does signify also much as
if he had said, let him be to thee such an one, as a Publican is to a Pharisee,
they speak what is absurd, false, and impossible; for it is not credible that
Christ would in that place in which he resolved to institute (as our
adversaries affirm) a thing of so great moment, and therefore so profitable
and necessary in the Church, take his rule which afterward was to be kept by
all, from the impious facts of most wicked men: and moreover I proved before
that no man was ever excommunicate by the Jews, after that manner that now we
dispute of. To conclude, all the words of Christ do oppose their
interpretation, for Christ does not here speak of the Pharisees, or with them,
but he has to do with his Disciples, and centers of the way to avoid scandals,
he says this, if an injurious man will not hear the Church let him be unto
thee as a Publican, viz. to thee, not as he is to the Pharisees; but it is
known that Publicans were not hateful to Christ and his Disciples, and to all
other Religious: Truly they did not esteem them as persons worthy of
Excommunication, but they did eat and drink with them daily. But that he
joins a Heathenick and a Publican together, it compels us to confess that
Christ speaks of something which should be common to them both; but the
Publicans could enter the Temple, the Heathen could not. Wherefore Christ
speaks here nothing of Excommunication, therefore these words, let him be to
thee as a Publican, signifies for another thing then these, let him be to thee
as an Excommunicate person. Thesense then of this place is this. If he hear not
the Church, you may in this cease without the offense of any man so we with
him, as if he had bufiness to do with an Heathenick and a Publican, he that had
any controversy with such men, was compelled to dispute his cause before the
Roman Magistrate: This is clear concerning the Hethenicks; concerning the
Publican, it appeare^^ hence that they were Ministers sworn to the Romans
against their own Nation: and that they could res^ect no justice from the
Pharisee^, and the chief men of the Jews who esteemed them Knaves and forlorn
persons. This is not permitted by Christ to any person against his Brother Jew,
before he seek reconciliation after that manner, that he has proposed and was
prescribed before in the Law. To this belongs the excuse of Paul in the last of
the Acts, to wit, that he did not appeal to Caesar, but being compelled; neither
that he might accuse the Jews, but that he might defend himself from wrong and
violence. If a Christian had any thing against his Brother, the Apostle in the
Corinthians commands that he may try to transact with him, before some chosen
Arbitrators; and that he should not immediately go to Law before a Heathen
Magistrate, but if a Christian had to do with a Heathen, who doubts but that
he might pursue his right before a Heathen Magistrate? After the same manner,
if any should contemn the judgment and sentence of the Elders of the Church; he
that was wronged and injured, might pursue the other before the Heathen
Magistrate without any offense to his Neighbor.

XLVI.
The handling hereof will be more clear, if we shall consider which was, and
what an one that Church was, which he commanded us to tell it to: In the
declaring of which matter in the beginning I laid down this as a fundament,
which I am confident will be approved by all, and I know will not be denied by
any: viz, that Christ speaks of that Church, which was then. For how should
he command them to tell to the Church which was not to be found in any place?
of whose constitution at that time they had not heard any thing? If he would
lay the foundation of a new Church, or of a new form of Government, unknown to
the Apostles, he should have delivered the institution thereof very lame and
defective. For he neither taught who were that Church, neither of whom, nor how
it should be gathered, neither the way of judgment and punishing therein:
neither did he speak of all sins, as I have now proved, and they themselves,
which out of this place build up Excommunication, are compelled to confess the
same with us: while they affirm openly that here only hid errors are handled.
Where Christ institutes any new thing, he omits nothing of those things without
which that matter cannot consist, here only he commands us to tell it to the
Church: which if he hear not, he permits the accuser to esteem him as a
Publican: therefore he adds no punishment. Luke when he fell upon this place,
does not set down all these things particularly, which St Matthew relates: the
rest of the Evangelists make no mention thereof at all; they would not have
been silent in so great and necessary matter, if they had known it was then
first done by Christ: add, that the Apostles were certainly persuaded that
Christ would not die, nor change the Religion of the Jews: and that they did in
no token, no word, no sign declare that they understood not well enough the
Doctrine of Christ: or if as they had heard something unknown and unusual,
they neither did question, we admire thereat. Peter only did wonder at this,
that he was so often commanded to forgive his Brother, therefore they did not
understand these words of Christ of a new form of government unknown to them:
but they believed, and that rightly that they were taught when it should be
lawful for them without offense to accuse their Brother Jew, before a profane
Magistrate. And at this very day ye will not easily see a Jew going to Law with
a Jew, before the Christian Magistrate.

XLVII.
Therefore this command does not belong unto all men say ye, but to them that
live under an impious Magistrate. I answer, That the first part thereof to use
means to be reconciled before they come before a Judge, does belong to all
Christians: but the last part thereof has only power, when godly men live
under a Magistrate that is no Christian; therefore the Apostle Paul likewise
exhorts the Corinthians, that they would choose some amongst themselves, which
should deside their controversies, lest they should be compelled to go to suit
before a profane Magistrate: who doubts but that it was lawful for the
Corinthians, if there were any, who would not stand to the Sentence of these
Arbitrators, or of the injurious persons was nothing better for their Sentence,
at last to come to the Roman and Heathen Magistrates? indeed Paul when he saw
himself unjustly pressed with the Jews, did appeal to Caesar, Acts 25. which
fact he did declare, Acts the last, that he might excuse himself to the Jews
that lived at Rome: He shall understand and see all these things more clearly
and plainly, that will take the pains to confer diligently, Lev. 19. Eccles.
9. and 1 Cor. 6. with this Chapter of Matthew, and he shall observe how fittle
all things shall answer one another: chiefly he that shall intentively mark
the words of Paul and Christ concerning the last part, which because they had
not place under Moses and the Ecclesiastics, because the Jews then did not so
obey any former Prince as they did afterward the Romans, therefore these men
were deservedly omitted by both.

XLVIII.
And hitherto indeed as I believe it will easily be consented unto by all, that
Christ did speak of a Church which then was in being and extant in Judea: but
presently they fall together by the ears, when they inquire what Christ meant
by the word Church: for sometimes its put for the meeting and multitude of the
people: sometimes its put for the Senate and Elders that did govern the same.
After this manner we find the Hebrew words taken, which signify the Church and
the Meetings or Congregation, (which the Septuagint express by the words
((...),) Numb. 35. Josh. 20. Psalm 82. and elsewhere. But there are solid
Arguments to prove that Christ in this place by the word Church will not have
us to understand the multitude, and common meetings of the Jews, but the Jewish
Magistracy or Senate. ((...),) The first is, that it is clear that Christ did
not innovate the form of Judicatories, and government which were administered
according to the Laws: neither that he did any thing, or permit his Disciples
to do any thing against those things which Moses had rightly appointed Pointed
at the command of God. But Moses commanded such cases to be proposed to be
judged not by the multitude, but by the Senate of every place, or ((...),)
which used to sit at the beginning in the Porch of every Town. If Christ had
thought to have institute any thing against this apointment of Moses here, his
Disciples would not have been a little offended with the matter: which though
their whole life were most strict observers of the Law; let every one think
with themselves how much every one would have triumphed, if they could have
accused Christ of this crime: that to wit, he had incited the people against
the Magistrate, contrary to the Doctrine of Moses? what more illustrious
pretext could they have wished to accuse him as a seditious person, then if they
could prove that he against the appointment of God, did aslay to arm the
people against the Magistrate? to admit the examination of witnesses? to give
the power to them to call before them whom they would? to give them the power
of cognoscing and judging of causes? the other reason is, that Christ commands
us to tell it to that Church which has the power to call the accused person
before it, to hear the cause, examine the witness, (therefore he in the second
admonition he bids us join 2 Cor. 3. That the fact may be lawfully proved) and
to conclude of pronouncing and judging; but these things cannot be done from
the croude and multitude, except they chose some men which may moderate all
things as no man is ignorant of it, for (it behooves that that convention to be
very little, which without Senators, by it self is able to expect such matters
and causes; for this cause some men rightly judge it, that if this precept of
Christ were understood of the whole meeting, or company it could have no place,
but where the Church did consist of very few Members,) therefore seeing they
that proceed after this manner, are no other but the Senate or Synedrium; It
again appears, that Christ did not command us to tell it to the croude, but
to the Synedrium; but indeed in Christ's time the people had not power to choose
unto themselves a Magistracy and Princes; wherefore tt behooves us by the
Jewish Church to understand the Senate: as it is clear by what is said before,
that the Disciples did so. Therefore if by the Chureh we understand the
multitude it self, it behooves us to tell it to such a Church which has the
power, to chose to it self such a Senate as the Senate of the Jews were at that
time; but our Churches have not power to choose such a Senate as the Synedrium
of the Jews was: yea the people of the Jews themselves in Christ's time had not
that faculty, as is said a little before. To this let us add, That the
Scripture, when it speaks of the multitude, uses almost the words of people,
of multitude, of croude, of the Children of Israel, or some other words,
signifying the same thing. As when it is written that any thing is done or said
in the whole Synagogogue or the whole Congregation. I will pass in silence that
this form of speaking i^ at this day usual; for we say we have told any thing
to the Empire or Republic which we have proposed to the Emperor or other
governors of the Empire, or to the Senate of the Republic: we say they are
rewarded by the common wealth, who receive any gift from the Senate thereof,
their phrases are so usual, that it is a wonder that they have been obsereed
by so few in this place. The sum of all is, Christ did not change the custom
of his own time, neither did he change any thing in Judicatories, as likewise
the Disciples seem to suspect no change nor renovation. Wherefore he commanded
them to tell the Synedrium before they went to the Heathen Magistrate.

XLIX.
But it appears out of the holy Scriptures and Histories that that Synedrium
was a lawful Magistrate: and that in the time of Christ it did yet return and
exerce the power of this word. Those things that are read in the History of
Christ's Passion do first demonstrate this, and the next this other testimonies
also. This sends forth armed men to apprehend Jesus: it examineth witnesses
against him, as it would have it to seem, commands Christ to be brought be
brought before it, and delivers him bound to Pilate, having condemned him
first publicly: It condemns Stephen openly, and commands him to be killed:
It commands the Apostles to be shut up in public Prisons; it commands them
to be beaten, holding a public counsel concerning that matter: it gives to
Paul a commission and power to draw from other Towns the godly being bound to
Jerusalem, that they miuht be killed there, Acts 24. The Jews themselves and the
Judges or Synedrium, in plain terms affirm this by Tertullus the Orator, when
they accused Paul to Faelix, Tertellus says, According to our Law we would
have condemned him, except Lysias had by force taken him out of our hands, Acts
23. Paul says to the chief Priest, do thou sit to judge me here according to
the Law? and yet against the mind of the Law commands me to besmitten?
Afterward Acts 26. he confesses before Agrippa and Festus, that he put many
Saints at Jerusalem and other places in Prison, having received power for this
purpose from the chief Priests: and that he likewise killed them with the
sentence and voice, and that he compeld them with torments and punishments to
blaspheme through all the Synagogues: and he received power from the chief
Priests likewise, to handle the Saints in foreign Towns, and among these in
Damascus, I believe Agrippa and Festus knew whither it was lawful for the
Synedrium or not to do these things. Except it had had this power they would
not have absolved Paul by their votes as immediately they do. For Paul's sins
should have been no less against Caesar, then the Pharisees; for he offends no
less who does unlawful things by the permission and command of them, to whom
it does not belong to permit or command it; then he who does command such
things, but neither of them are accused: and Paul is clearly absolved as one
that has done nothing worthy of bonds. Neither would Pilate have said John 18.
take the him away, and according to your Law judge him: if they had not had thts
power, therefore when they say it is not lawful to kill any body, this is to
be understood of the feast day for fear of the people; as Augustine expounds
it: or of the sort of death to which they desired Christ to be put: as
Chrysostom interprets it; to this opinion the words of John fitly agrees
these things was done, says he, that it might be fulfilled which Christ had
spoken signifying what death he should die. Hither also it belongs, that in the
26. of Matthew Christ says, That he could not be taken at other times by them,
when he sat in the Temple and taught: because the Scriptures might have been
fulfilled, therefore then they took him, when for fear of the people and the
feast instant they could not kill him, Matthew 26. Mark 14.

Wherefore seeing they could endure him no longer, neither was it safe for them
to put him to death; it followed that he should be delivered up to the Romans:
that so all things might might come to pass as he had foretold should come to
pass unto his Disciples, Mat. 20. which are first insinuate by John's words, and
after by Augustins and Chrysostoms. To this likewise belongs that crying out of
the people, Cruci^e him, crucify him, Matthew 27. Mark 15. Luke 23. John 19.

L.
From these it appears that it is not true that is affirmed by some, that the
Synedrium had no power of the Sword, nor right to put to death: and that Steven
was stoned of it in atumultuary manner. That they had a power, I approved with
unanswerable Arguments: that Stephen was not killed in a tumult, appears from
that that he was accused before the Judgment seat: That witnesses were heard,
albeit false witnesses: that he was led out of the Town: that the same
witnesses did according to the command of the Law throw first stones at him: as
may clearly be known by laying down their clothes at the feet of Paul, the same
is proved also perspicuously from History. For the Romans permitted all
people but namely the Jews that living within and without Judea, to use their
own Laws in matters belonging to Religion, and so freely according to the Law
and rites and manners as Josephus witnesses. In the fourteenth Book of his
Jews antiquities in the 12.16, and 17. Chapters thereof according to the
distinction of the Greek Copies, and in the 12. Chapter, he sets Strabo as
his Author, writing of the Town of Cyrene, that they there had a chief Ruler,
who heard all their causes, and that did govern their common wealth no
otheswise then as if he had been a Prince of a perfect Republic. Hitherto
likewise belongs those things which are read Acts 18. concerning Gallio the
prefect of Corinth. The same Author the 16. Book and 4. and 5. Chapter, relates
how Herod obtained from Agrippa unto the Jews that live through Asia that it
should be lawful for them afterward to live according to the privileges that
were now already granted unto them by the Romans. I therefore mention these
thing, because some object that Herod did kill the Synedrium, and did bereave
it of all power. How could Herod take from them at Jerusalem the power of
judging and decerning of things belonging unto their Religion according to the
Law, who endeavored to preserve and procure the same to them, that dwelt in
Asia? Moreover Christ did not teach under Herod or Archelaus, but under Pilate.
Indeed the Jews made Pilate himself take his military Banners out of the Town
which he had caused secretly to be convoid in: Least they should against the
precepts of God suffer Images to be in their Town. They keep this power to
themselves, to the destruction of the Town, which is clearly understood by the
Oration which Joseph had to the besieged; The Romans, says he in the 5 Book
of his Jewish war do desire that tribute which our Ancestors were wont to pay
to their fathers, which if they obtain, they neither will plunder the Town, nor
at all touch our holy things; they grant to you your Families, Children, and
possessions, and suffer your holy Laws to remain safe. After the taking of the
Town, Titus himself speaks all most the same words to the Jews in the 6. Book
of Josephus. Therefore whither we consult the holy or Jewish History, it does
most certainly appear, that the Synedrium unto which Christ bid us complain,
had the power of the Sword, or of putting to death, but chiefly of those that
should act any thing against their Religion. But in politic matters, and in
cases of wrong, where the Law had constitute nothing of certainity, I do not
doubt but that the Romans had taken to themselves either all or most part, and
usurpt the same: as we may easily perceive by History: and may gather by a sure
conjecture from the 18. of the Acts.

LI.
Neither is it repugnant to what has been said, that some of the Jews said to
Albinus, that it was not lawful to the chief high Priest to convocate the
Synedrium, without his permission, as Josephus relates it in the 20. Book of
his Antiquities, for he only relates what some men did do: but does not praise
the deed. Moreover he ought not in the time of a inter-regnum, to wit, when
Festus was now dead, and Albinus was but yet on his journey, to gather together
a Judicatory, to do a business of so great moment, before the new president had
confirmed to him that power: for he procurd the Brother of our Lord James,
which was commonly called Just, to be put to death: which seeing he was dear to
many, did take it very hardly; for he was new recreated the high Priest, and
had not as yet been confirmd by the Romans. Eusebius's 2. Book and 23. Chapter
of his Ecclesiastic History shows, that he greedily gripped this occasion of
the inter-regnum; but what is that to our purpose? was therefore Archelaus
named King in his Father Herod's Testament, and that by permission of Caesar,
not King, because he would not admit the name of a King, and exerce the Kingly
power, before he was confirmed by Caesar? is the Magistracy of any Town which
has a Prince, as there are many such in Germane, therefore no true unlawful
Magistracy, because the Prince being dead, they are compeld to require a
confirmation of their privileges from his successor? Now that the high Priest
had power to convocate the Judges of the Synedrium, the confirmation he had
received formerly is clear from this, that they did not say to Albinus that
this was not simply lawful for him: but only that he ought not to do this
without Albinus's knowledge.

LII.
Now it is solidly demonstrate, that dic ecclesiae tell it to the Church, does
signify no other thing then tell it to the Magistrate of thy people, or that
is of that same Religion with thee, before thou go to Law with thy Brother,
before a profane Magistrate: as the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6. excellently
expounds it, where he commands them for this cause to chose men of their
own order to be Arbitrators. But who doubts that this can have no place where
God bestows on us a godly Magistrate? indeed Augustine in his second Book of
faith and works, clearly enough declared, that he believed that excommunication
should supply the place of the visible sword, at that time when the Church
wanted it. For the fact of Moses in punishing transgressors with the sword, and
as Phineas killing the adulterers, did prefigurate the punishing of the evil
by degradation and excommunication, to wit, at that time when the sword was to
cease in the visible Church. I remember that some of the late Writers do
affirm, that the Jews therefore did observe this custom of excommunication,
(which I have proved to be false with unanswerable Arguments and Testimonies,)
because the Sword was taken from them. But if this were true, it would follow
that it should have no place in the Christian Church, which keeps the power
of the Sword: Even as we are not necessitate now to appoint other Judges and
Arbitrators to our selves, beside the lawful Magistrate. Therefore it is most
certain, that the word Church in Matthew, signifies nothing less then an
Ecclesiastic Senate, which should have power to debar from the Sacraments.

LIII.
There are two things that might be objected to us: First, How one cannot hear
the Church if it be the Magistrate, and has the power of the Sword. Next, How
those things that are spoken of binding and loosing, can be fitted to this
cause. To the first we answered before: That the Jews had not power to judge of
all matters whatsoever: but that all controversies almost which did not
concern Religion, belong to the Roman Judicatory. If then in those things any
man would neglect the authority of the Synedrium, Christ gives him that is
hurt leave to pursue his right before the Gentiles: as if he were to dispute
with a Gentile or Publican. Add this, That many causes do occur, which the
Law inparticular does not punish, or does not forbidunder a certain punishment,
at which time it easily happens, that the guilty is sent only away with a
rebuke. But if yet he does not leave off to be injurious, he that is offended
by him may be instant with the Church or Magistrate, that he may be punished
for his Petulancy. Albeit this answer also is true, nevertheless the first
answer seems unto me to be most agreeable to the appointment of Christ, to
the times places and other circumstances.

LIVE.
The answer to the other reason is also easy; for seeing the same manner of
speaking here, and the same words almost hereafter repeated, which Christ used
in the 16. of Matthew: it is altogether necessary, that if they signify not
the same thing, yet that they should signify something like it: but to bind
and to loose, 16. Matthew. signifies no other thing then to preach the Evangel:
by which every one that does believe shall be freed from sin and death.
Wherefore it signifies no other thing here, then to entreat his Brother, that
he would desist from injuries, and rather follow godliness: therefore because
this is acceptable to God and he will punish those that do contrary to his
Commandments, he that after this manner does dehort his Brother from doing
injuries by showing to him both the will and wrath of God, he if he persuade
him has gaind him, that is, has loosed him: if he has not persuaded him, the
wrath of God remains on him: as it remains or not remains, upon him that
believes and not believes the Evangel, when he hears it Preached. But that we
may be ready and easy to forgive the penitent, Christ has gone about to
persuade us with what that elegant Parable by which the scope of his purpose in
this place is easily discerned.

LV.
I wonder above measure how in this present place some interpret to bind and to
loose by keeping back, and admitting men to the Sacraments: seeing in the whole
Bible there is not a place where those words are put for this matter: neither
did ever the Apostles show by any word or sign that they so understood the
words of Christ. Christ's command is extant, that they should go out from them
who would not receive the Gospel: But first should shake off the dust of their
feet, Matthew, and Luke 10. which we know to have been done, Acts 13. and 18.
but that they should deny the Sacraments to them who believe in the word, or
Baptized in Christ, and embrace his Religion and Doctrine, because their life
is not answerable to the Doctrine, we find it in no place either commanded unto
them, or done by them. But here it will suffice to admonish, that it will never
come to pass, that it can be shown in the holy Scriptures, that to bind is put
for that, which is to keep back believers from receiving of the Sacraments: and
to loose signifies the same that is again to admit him to the Sacraments, which
for his wickedness was debarred thereof, and by this means to be insert again
as it were into the Church.

LVI.
So then it is firmly and truly proved; that Christ in the 18. of Mat. did not
discourse of excluding men from the Sacraments, but of the private transaction
and composing of private injuries. Other men likewise have seen this, as
Angustin in his 16. Sermon upon the words of the Lord upon Matthew. And
Theophylact that compilator of Chrysostom, which no man doubts to have had
this opinion, as he has almost all other things from Chrysostom. Amongst the
late Divines Mr. John Brentius has written many things in his Exposition on
this Chapter, which are very agreeable to our purpose.

LVII.
Now the matter requires that we come to that fact of the Apostle Paul set
down in the 1 Cor. and 5. and that we demonstrate that it belongs not to this
Excommunication. First, It is known that the Apostle was a strict observer of
Moses's Law: And to have done nothing against the same, as he witnesses of
himself Acts 25. Yea it appears, Acts 18. and 21. that he together with the
rest of the Apostles did observe some Ceremonies also of the Law: and therefore
to have been evil reported of by the Jews, not that he had taught unto the
Gentiles, that observation of the Law was not necessary: but that he went about
to persuade this to the Jews: when all the faithful in Judea did observe the
Law nevertheless. But who knows not that Christ did not change the Law of
M^ses, concerning the celebration of the Passover, in that part in which it is
commanded, that all the circumcised should be present thereat? Therefore he
neither commanded this man that had committed incest, neither any other that
desire to be accounted amongst the Christians to be debarred from the Lords
Supper; Of the Jews it is certain, because they would not suffer any thing to
be done against the Law, or against their own inveterate custom: and who would
believe that the Gentiles in this business were in a worse condition?

LVIII.
If to deliver over to Satan, was no other thing then to interdict him the
Sacraments till he repented, why with such study and with such exquisite words,
did the Apostle Paul excuse himself to the Corinthians, and as it were
deprecate them in the 2. and 7. Chapter of the last Epistle? Then why should
the Corinthians be taken with so much sadness, seeing they now know that this
way of restraining the wicked, was to remain and ought to be exercised in the
Church? they ought rather to have rejoiced for the example that was given to
them which they afterward ought to follow. If it was no other thing then an
invitation to Repentance, and a wholesome remedy against damnation, why were
they made sad and did not rather rejoice? Christ says, that the Angels of
Heaven rejoice more at the conversion of one sinner, then for ninety nine just;
from whom it follows, that the Corinthians were not endued with the Spirit of
Christ, that they saw the Apostle do that one and sole thing which would recall
an erring Brother unto the way: and save him that was in danger, who does not
clearly see, that it was another thing that the Apostle was framing. Thirdly,
What needed the Apostle to write, (...), I repent not, though I did repent, or
how could he repent any way of this fact, if he would have the same observed
every where, and in all Churches? And if it was nothing else then a removing
from the Sacraments for a time, or only until his Repentance. Fourthly, What
need was there that the Corinthians should intercede with the Apostle with so
much diligence, for that miserable person, which they knew would be received
again immediately unto their society so soon as he had repented? now that they
entreated seriously for him, is evident by these words of the Apostle: to whom
ye forgive I forgive also: for if I forgive any thing, I forgave him for your
sakes in the sight of Christ. Fifthly. We read in the 2. Chapter, that he
excuses himself thus, that he would take a trial of their obedience, and the
7. Chapter, that so he would make manifest their good will toward him: how
could he have said these words, or written them, except he had commanded some
greater matter, then to keep back that wicked person from the Sacraments?
Sixthly, By what means will we show that these words agree to it, (...), For ye
sorrowed to God, so that in nothing ye were hurt, by us. He says, that they
received no loss by their sadness, because they obtained by their sorrow
forgiveness, to that unhappy and miserable person. If this had not been done,
they would have suffered loss: to wit, they would have left him, if he had only
been to have been kept from the Sacrament, till he had repented, what less pray
you could they have suffered? Seaventhly, Paul does not there speak of the
Supper, but of the whole Christian life. Therefore he will not have him
excluded from the Supper: but he will have him taken out of the middle of them,
least a little Leaven should Leaven the whole lump. This agrees with the
Apostles words, and with the figure of Leaven; Excommunication can neither be
easily fitted to the Apostles words, nor those of Moses. Eighthly, It is to be
marked, that he does not simply write that they being gathered together should
deliver him to Satan in the name of the Lord, or according to the Commandment
of Christ, or that they should keep him back from the Sacraments: but says he,
I absent in body, but present in spirit have decreed in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, you being gathered together in my spirit, and in the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver this man to Satan, etc. Manifestly declaring,
that the power of our Lord Jesus Christ was needful to this business: and
therefore that it was a greater matter then to be removed for a while from the
Sacraments. Add this, That he writes that he has decreed to do this, (albeit
he resolved not to do it without them: because perchance he was absent) but he
does not command it to the Church, that it alone should do this: as if this
power had not been the power of the Church, but of the Apostle. Lastly, We do
not read in any place that the Apostle gave command either to one or more, that
whither he was dead or alive, they should deliver any to Satan, for the
destruction of the flesh, because he knew this was proper to the Apostolic
power, and that it agreed in Noun else: for as they had the gift of healing, so
they had the gift of striking: as appears in the 5.13. of the Acts, for this
cause we do not read that the Apostle ordained any men who were commanded to
exercise this power. Wherefore the Apostle writes in diverse places that he
would come with authority: that he would become sharp and rigid: that he would
act according to the power given him of God: that he would come with a rod: he
commands that the sinners may be signified to him by an Epistle: But he
commands in no place this to the Presbyters: that is, no doubt that this
power was then given to the Apostles and to none other. Hitherto it belongs
that which he writes 1 Timothy 1. of Hymeneus and Alexander, that he (not the
Church, not the Presbytery, not any other) had delivered them to Satan.

LIX.
By circumstances and arguments I have evidently shown, that to deliver to
Satan was another thing, then to keep back from the Sacraments: which now I
shall more clearly demonstrate from the words themselves also, and from the
propriety and nature of the speech. First, The Apostle does not say, why have
ye not interdicted this wicked man the use of the Supper? but he says this,
why have ye not sorrowed, that is, why have ye not besought God by your sorrow
and Prayers, that he would take away by whatsomever means, this man from
amongst you? Augustine in his 3. Book against Parmen. so interprets this
place, but (says he) that he may be taken away with sorrow, that is, that the
sorrow of the lamenters might ascend unto God, and he might take away this work
from the midst of them as he thought fit; he expounds after the same manner
of way those words, which the same Apostle has in the 12. Chap. concerning
sorrow, they agree likewise with Augustine, and with the truth, who thinks the
Apostle alludes to the place, 1 King. 21. out of which place we conjecture,
that this custom was kept by the Ancient Jews, that they should search out
enormeous crimes, by Fasting, Praying, and public sorrow, and being found out,
they did not punish them according to the Law. Wherefore seeing the Church
wanted the Sword, he did exhort them that they should obtain from God, that
they should be taken out of the middle of them: which is far different from
that which we call to Excomunicate any man. Moreover by what fit Author will
they ever show unto us, (...), to be taken o^t from the middle of you, is the
same, that to be debard from the Sacrament is? he is only properly to be said
to be taken out of the middle, that is put to death. For albeit he that is
banished may be said to be cast out of the middle of others, nevertheless this
is neither usual nor a proper speech amongst the Grecians: or at least it is
not sound to be set down in the holy Scriptures? but if he commanded him to be
thrust out of the society of the faithful, what needed public sorrow, and
besides he should have been sent unto the Gentiles. But that which is added is
against this, that his soul may be safe, (...): which could not be safe out of
the Church. If you say that he was only removed from the Sacraments and private
commerce, he was not taken out of the middle of them, for I believe that no man
will ever demonstrate, that the Apostle commanded him only to be kept from the
use of the Sacraments, and from the private diet and society of the Christians.
Therefore this is stitched to the Apostles words, which can be shown he never
thought of; indeed I believe that there is not any that is acquainted with the
holy Scriptures, and their more ancient Interpreters, that would doubt but that
the Apostle borrowed this sentence, and therefore these words from Moses in
Deutronomy, for it is put by Moses for killing, and for no other thing in the
17, 19, 21, 22, 24, Chapters of that book; in all these places the same words
are found, when in the 13. Chap. for (...), he has put on the same sense and
meaning, (...); it is impossible then that to take out of the middle, should
signify in this place Excommunication, as now Excommunication is taken.
Thirdly, It seems by the Text, that that miserable man did not persevere in
that wickedness, for he says, has done this deed: And concerning him that
has so done this deed, which prove that he has done it, but does not show
that he does it still. So he seems to desire that he may be punished for the
crime that is already committed; as God has commanded to be done, and a good
Magistrate uses to do. Indeed when he says that his soul may be safe, he
seems to have known that he was penitent for the fact. For how could he have
written this else of him of whose mind concerning the crime he was not yet
informed of? Fourthly, He faith, that he has resolved to deliver such an one
unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of Jesus. Is it not yet known what the word (...), does signify, who
ever found this Verb put either in profane Writers, or in the holy Scriptures
as it is put here, and that it did not signify the same, that to concede, to
permit, to give over does signify? the person that gives does precede, the
person to whom it is given does follow? and that which is given is also a
person: and last this is added also, for which and for what end it was given:
the Speech is such as if I should say I would deliver my son to a Master for
instruction or correction, what man will doubt but he that hears a man speak
thus, does think but that he delivers his son to the power of the Master,
that he may instruct him, or chastise him? he that desires to see examples, let
him look to thee, 1 Timothy 1. Acts 27.28. Matthew. 5.18, 27. Mark 13. John 19. and
is most like to that that is contained Matthew. 24. they shall deliver you up to
be afflicted, and Mark 13. the Brother shall deliver up the Brother to death,
and 2 Pet. 2. delivered them unto chains of darkness to be reserved unto
judgment, and in the Book of Job. 2. God speaks to Satan in these words,
Behold I have delivered him up to thee, but only save thou his life. Does not
these places teach that they were delivered up to be afflicted, to be killed, to
be condemned? the sum is, not any shall ever be able to show that such a
phrase is put for that which is to be debarred from the Sacraments: except the
perishing of the flesh and the forbidding of the Sacraments be the same thing.
Fifthly, It is impossible that this Noun (...), can be shown to be put in the
New Testament, for the punishing of the lust of the flesh, for wheresomever it
is found it is found to be written either for the death of the body, or of the
soul, whither the name of flesh be added or not. I may likewise say that on
Greek Author is extant, that so has used it as I have been told some do
expound it: but our discourse is of holy things. The Apostle has used it, 1
These. 5. and 2 These. 1. and 1 Timothy the last. The verbal Noun (...), is found
written in the 1 of Crinth. 10. and the Participle (...), 11. of the Heb. even
the Compound (...), taken out of Deuteronomy is found in the 3. of the Acts,
and every where they all either signify perishing or death, (...), is
frequently used by the 70. Interpreters, and Pagnin every where translateth it
by the word exscindendi, of cutting off: this is certainly that they always
used to signify death. I know that in the Apostle the words (...), and Romans 8.
(...), and Colos. 13. To conclude, (...), and Gal. 5, and 6. that they are put
for the killing of the lusts of the flesh, but (...), or (...), are neither
found in holy, or profane Authors to be taken so. Yea I do not remember, that
I read in the New Testament this word (...), to be taken in this signification
in the new Testament, therefore it is frivolous when they say Paul
contradistinguishes here the lusts of the flesh, from the spirit: seeing the
death of the flesh or of the body is opposed to the safety of the soul, or of
the spirit: as the native signification of the words to the purpose of Paul,
the series and circumstances of the discourse, and the Verb (...), do prove
that the lovers of the truth can desire no more. Sixthly, These words that the
spirit may be safe in the day of Jesus, that is, in the day of judgment. For
they clearly demonstrate, that he speaks of that wretch as of one that was to
die. Seaventhly, and lastly, The word (...), proves that he was not rejected
from the Sacraments. For in his own native signification it seems to be put for
rebuke, correction, threatening, and upbraiding, as the Interpreters have turned
it, but not for a punishment or pain; and besides this there is a double reason
for it. The first is, That in holy writs you never find the interdiction of the
Sacraments to be put for a punishment: The other is, That the words of
themselves do teach well enough, that its put for an upbraiding; wherewith not
any one, but many did rebuke him; for Paul in this 2. Epistle writes
sufficient to such a man is this rebuke which is of many. He absolves him only
from that threatening, which had it proceeded from the Church, or from any that
it should come to pass, that he should be delivered over to Satan, to be
tormented, therefore he had only as yet endured this, for he does not only
absolve him in part, but altogether; therefore while he says that this rebuke
and threatening was sufficient; he together with it declares, that he had
suffered no more. We find the word (...), in the 16, 17, 19, 20. of Matthew,
and in the other Evangelists, and in the 2 of Paul to Tim. 4. in all which
places it is ever put for rebuke, but never for punishment.

I.X.
But here it may be demanded, if he did only suffer rebuke, by what means its
said that he was delivered over to Satan, to be tormented and killed? There is
a double answer to this; some of the Ancients say, that he was indeed delivered
over, that he might be tormented with sickness or some other way, and so he
should kill him by little and little, but that in the mean time he was
delivered by the Apostle before the matter was brought to that length. Which
Answer if it be true, then (...), might signify a punishment, albeit I do not
deny but this Answer may be tolerated notwithstanding, I will bring another
more agreeing to the words of the Apostle, the Apostle Paul did not resolve by
himself alone to deliver this man to Satan, but he would have this done, the
whole Church being gathered together for that matter. Now when the Church saw
this unhappy man afflicted with so great sorrow, that he was almost swelled up
with grief, it did defer the matter, till it tried the Apostles mind, whither
it could obtain forgiveness to him or not. In the mean time the Church did
threaten that it would do its duty, if it could obtain nothing. So that
miserable man was afflicted for many M^neths: till he knew that the Apostle had
forgiven his punishment, that the business was thus carried on, may be clearly
enough gathered, as it seems out of the latter Epistle.

LXI.
From all that has been now said, and from more that might be said, it is so
clearly and fully demonstrate, that this delivering up to Satan was far
another thing, from that which at this day we call Excommunication, or
thrusting from the Sacraments, that it cannot be denied by any that is a lover
or knower of the truth. I said above that some of the Ancients did so expound
this place. Amongst whom Augustine was one, whose Testimony I produced before;
besides there is another Testimony of this extant, in his 1. Book of the Lords
Sermon upon the Mount: Before him Athanasias did so interpret it: and after him
Chrysosteme: and at last his compilator Theophylact.

LXII.
Now let us take a view of these other places which they that dissent from us
produce for themselves, but nevertheless in brief. In the Apostle Paul's
sentence to Timothy, where the says, that Presbyters which labor in the Word
and Doctrine are worthy of double honor, they put some strength and firmness.
For they think, that from this place it is proved, that there was some
Presbyters that were not occupied in teaching: but they attribute to those
another Office: to wit, to censure manners, to observe sinners, to admonish the
obstinate, and to tell this to their fellow Presbyters, that is, to the Church,
and together with them, to excommunicate these that will not hear the Church.

LXIII.
But we think that out of the writings of the Apostles Peter and Paul, it is
clear that Minister, Bishop, and Presbyter, (if this name signify an Office
and not age) were the same in the Apostles times, and that therefore there was
then no Presbyter that did not also teach: except perchance any man will have
them also comprehended under this name, that in the 1 Cor. 6. are appointed to
be Judges and Arbitrators of controversies, and causes. But of these for the
present we are not to speak, seeing their Office was far another from this.
Our opinion that is known to be most true is confirmed by Hierome, on the first
Chapter to Titus, and by Ambrose, except that he writes that at the first the
Bishop was chosen out of the order of Presbyters. Therefore the meaning of the
Apostle Paul's words are such, as if I should say: I love all Ministers and
Pastors, but chiefly those that with undefatigable study and most intense care
do feed the sheep committed to their trust: I love all Students, but chiefly
those that study night and day. When I so speak, I do not say this, that there
are some Pastors that do not feed; or some Students that do not study: but I
affirm that there some that are more sedulous then others, but not more
diligent in their Office, that this is the genuine interpretation of the mind
and words of the Apostle, the words that immediately follow of a reward, do
first prove it, for it is not likely that the same reward was at any time
appointed in the Church to the Ministers and to Elders that did not teach. For
they discharge a double duty, but these discharge but one single one: yet
nevertheless the Apostle says that they are both worthy of double honor. Then
the Apostle produces the Testimony of the Ox that treads out the grain:
whereby in another place he shows, that maintenance belongs to the
Ministers of the word. Lastly, The Participle (...), which he uses confirmthis
for (...) or (...), does not only signify I work; but I am tired with working
and laboring: or I do something with great study care or labor. Hence the
Grecians call that (...). which the Latins name lassitude, and as (...), differ
so. Likewise (...) or (...) and (...), this word occurreth often in the New
Testament, and allwaies it signifies together diligence tiredness and
sedulity, as 11. Mat. Come unto me all ye that are wearied, and Luke 5. The
whole night, etc. John 4. But Jesus was. 1 Cor. 4. We are smitten with buffets,
and Ephesians. 4. He that steals, and 1 These. 5. But we beseech you Brethren to
know them which labor to tiredness amongst you. And this place does
excellently declare that other place in the 5. Tim. the exposition of which we
are now handling. Besides it is found 4. Timothy. 1 Corinthians 25. and in
other places.

LXIV.
Moreover they say that Christ forbid to throw Pearls before Swine: and to give
holy things to Dogs. I answer, That Christ speaks of those that contemn
Pearls and trample them under their feet: and turning back to tear us; that
is, of the enemies of the Gospel: of whom we do not at all speak. For we speak
of no others, then of Christians instructed rightly in Doctrine and approving
of it, and desiring to participate the same Sacraments with the rest, albeit
they have not so lived as become them. Moreover Christ speaks here not of the
Sacraments, but that the Doctrine of the Gospel should not be taught to Dogs
and Swine, that is, to them that will not, and will trample it. (Hither
likewise the Parable of the Pearl is not incommodiously to be referred, Matthew.
23. where Christ compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Merchant buying a
precious Pearl.) Wherefore it no ways belongs to our present purpose.

LXV.
The next which they object, that Paul commanded Timothy that he would rebuke
sinners before all, we do not deny it: But we say it belongs not to our
purpose, I will not now bring many other things which may prove this. But I
will say this one thing, that no man shall ever prove, that to reprove or
rebuke any man in the presence or sight of the Church, is the same that to
debarring from the Sacraments is. If ye do not demonstrate it to be the same in
vain do ye object it to us. Who can instruct us, that the Apostle in this place
did think the interdiction of the Sacraments? Moreover he does not here treat
of sins publicly committed? But he says, rebuke sinners, that is, them that
persevere in sinning in the sight of all men, that both he that has finned,
and together with him the rest, may fear and fly sinning. There is not a
difference put here betwixt light and heavy sins: And far less betwixt
public and hid sins, whither ye call them altogether, or in part public. This
Objection that I may once say it is more then leaden: and like unto Wax it
melts before the fire truth and evanisheth into smoke. Yea the words of the
Apostle oppugn Excommunication, while it commands a sinner to be rebuked
before others: but it does not command him to be Excommunicate, he adds, that
the rest may fear, as if he should say, if he will not repent, nevertheless
other shall be bettered thereby: in this place the word sinner signifies, not
him that has given over sinning: but that persevereth therein, and that does
not repent after admonition, I say he commands (...), this sinner to be
reproved, and be rebuked before others: but he does not command him to be
Excommunicate.

LXVI.
The Apostle say they commands us to avoid wicked men insomuch that he does
not permit us to take common meat with them: and far less would he have us to
celebrate the Lords Supper with them. I deny this connection; for the forbidding
of private familiarity, does altogether much differ from the denying of the
Sacraments: neither does he that forbids that: also deny this, for that is a
kind of politic punishment, but this a holy one that is commanded to us, but
this is not, both the end and cause of that is told by the Apostle Paul, but we
find neither the end nor the cause of this expressed: yea we do not find the
thing it self either commanded, or named in holy Scriptures. And that the one
was and may be without the other, the Pharisees have proved by their own fact
who as they would seem holier then other, so they had no commerce in their life
with Publicans, (I do not remember now that I have read whither all the rest
did so) but now shall ever show us that they were excluded from the Temple,
from the Sacrifices, from the Passover, and from the other Sacraments: for they
were circumcised and had not revolted from Judaisme. And at this day in many
places some evil men are kept back from private commerce, which nevertheless
no man keeps back from the use of the Sacrament. From which likewise this
follows, that this denial of private eating together, is rather a politic
then an ecclesiastic punishment: and that it cannot be esteemed for to deliver
up to Satan, which some men think Excommunication to be. The Apostle commands
good men to avoid the company of evil men, that they may be ashamed and
repent: but he does not forbid evil men the society of the good if any will
admit them unto their familiatity. At private Tables men discourse of any thing
whatsomever: neither is he not only corrected that has sineed, if he think
that he is also dear unto all after his sin as before; but likewise others are
more easily corrupted. But if he see himself to be avoided and fled, he cannot
but think for what that is done: and resolve to live a new life, lest he should
be desparaged by those who loved him before. Therefore as the denial of
private commerce does fright us from uncleanness and vices, so familiar living
together does cherish and nurse the same in us. But the receiving and denying
of the Sacraments is a thing of a far different nature from this, for the
frequent receiving of them does not at all so confirm and nurse vice as
private familiarity, for in the Temples where they are administered, there is no
conferences of private and vain things, but the Word of the Lord is Preached.
Therefore when men hear that Christ has died for them, and that he requires
for that benefit, public thanksgiving, and that he is not a worthy guest that
has not tried himself rightly, but that they all have judgment to themselves,
that unworthily eat thereof. Then he that has resolved with himself to come
unto the Lords Table, whatsomever a man he was before, will be compeld to
think with himself, what God would have done, and how afterward he may so
lead his life, that it may be acceptable unto God. He that is deprived of this
invitation, becomes always worse but never becomes better: for which cause
nevertheless it seems that God appointed and commanded so many Sacrifices,
Ceremonies, and Oblations. Truly the Apostle never commanded those men to be
debard of the Sacraments, with whom good men were not suffered to live
familiarly. And when in another place he desires that such men should be
signified to him by an Epistle, he does not lay this upon the Elders, that they
should Excommunicate them, or keep them back from the Sacraments, all which do
manifestly prove that they are in a gross mistake, that do think the Apostle
does either appoint or approve of Excommunication in this place.

LXVII.
But nevertheless say they, the Church ought not to be polluted with communion
of evil men, therefore it is needful that good men should be without
dissimulation separate from evil men. Ianswer this, That evil men cannot
defile good men in the use of these Ceremonies that are appointed by God: so
long as they do not follow their nature and manners. For neither the Prophets,
nor the holy Kings and Judges, nor John the Baptist, nor Christ himself, nor
his Apostles, afterward were defiled, when in the Temple they were present at
the same Sacrifices, with men of most wicked lives, and did receive with them
the same Sacraments. That generation of Vipers did not defile Christ, when
together with them he was Baptized with the same Baptism by John; and Judas
presence at the last Supper, did not defile either Christ or his Apostles,
albeit he was both a Thief, and thinking how to betray Christ, and had received
money therefore. The Apostle Paul does not command us that the celebration and
usurpation of the Sacraments, we should one examine another, and that we should
look about if there be any there present, that can defile us; but he commands
thus, that every man should examine himself and not others.

LXVIII.
Hitherto it has been proved by me effectually and truly, that no Circumcised
Person before Christ, were forbidden to come to the Ceremonies and Sacraments
instituted of God by Moses, for the offenses of the life and manners: and
together with this I show, that it was not lawful for any even to do the same.
Afterward it was demonstrate by reasons, and the evident Testimonies of the
holy Scriptures, that neither Christ nor his Apostles did teach or do any
otherwise. Moreover I thought this also, that what was brought by these of
another judgment, could not at all patronize their opinion; wherefore now I see
nothing that can further hinder me that I should not rightly and truly
conclude, that this Excommunication which debarreth Christians from the
Sacraments, only because of the uncleanness of their lives, was not commanded
by God, but was invented and feigned by men. For it is so far from truth, that
it can be shown that it is founded in the Holy Scriptures, that rather the
contrary of it can be proved.

LXIX.
Therefore some men will say, Will you then condemn so many holy Bishops, which
immediately after the Apostles times began to Excommunicate vile persons? I
answer, It is one thing to improve the Doctrine, and another thing to improve
the man. Many learned and godly men of our age have pondred and confuted the
Catholic errors as I may call them of the Ancients, as limbum patrum in Hell,
the fire of Purgatory, the intercession of Saints, Exorcisme and Baptism, the
single life of Priests, unction in Baptism and death, Prayers for the dead, and
in this present cause satisfactions: Notwithstanding I do not remember that any
of them have been accused, therefore because they condemn the Ancients. If they
would have had this Excommunication thrust upon the Churches as a Law published
by God, I do not praise it; Albeit I do much praise and approve of their study
and good will, in the mean while. For by this means they studied, seeing they
could meet with no other better means, hereby to bridle the wantonness of
wicked men. And most part also as we see to be done even this day did follow
that public custom received by all: neither came it ever in their mind to
inquire whither it was a thing agreeing to Scriptures or no.

LXX.
Concerning the original of this Excommunication I can bring nothing now that
is certain, except the 200. years after Christ, that I find some such thing
first to have been asseyed and done for more then 100 and 50. years. I find not
any to have been excluded from the Sacraments, for the uncleanness of their
life. These that are versed in reading of the Fathers, and in History,
perchance can affirm something more certain. He that will attentively read
those things which are left written by Socrates, in the 5. Book and 19. Chapter
of this Ecclesiastic History, will I believe suffer themselves easily to be
persuaded, that this custom of Excommunication was introduced into the Church
about Novatus time. Notwithstanding Sozomenus in his 7. Book and 16. Chap.
relates another cause of the institution hereof. But we also read that Victor
Bishop of Rome about the 200. year of our Lord, forbid them the use of the
Supper that would not forgive injuries. I have observed, that before this time
the communion was denied only to Heretics, and to such as was averse from
Religion, but however this be, yet that is certainly known, that
excommunication was therefore brought into the Church, that there might be in
it some bridle to; and punishment of vice. Afterward when the Church now had
gotten the Sword, that is, when the Magistrates were made Christians,
nevertheless this power remains still in the Bishops: Partly because it was
believed to be a divine ordination, and partly because they would hardly lay
down this spiritual Sword, for which they were feared by the greatest Princes.
For they easily persuaded others, which they more easily and willingly believed
themselves, to wit, that Christ was the Author of this business. Superstition
confirmed the opinion by ascribing safety to the Sacraments, for it was written
and believed, that some men could not die before they had been made pertakers
of the Sacraments. Therefore either by reason of this error, men did very much
fear Excommunication: or from Excommunication this error did spring among the
unlearneder People, that life was put in receiving of the Sacraments, and death
in denial of the same, when they saw wicked men punished with the denial of
them as with the last and greatest punishment.

LXXI.
But as far as we can know by conjecture it seems, that at the beginning
the Administrators thereof were those Elders of whom we read the 1 Cor. 6. who
carried the place of Magistrates in the Church, together with the Ministers.
Afterward this whole power remaind to the Bishops, who did cognosce in all
causes, compose all differences, gave judgment, and did Administer all such
things. As we clearly see out of Augustine, complaining of those labors, and
the History of that time. Ambrose indeed affirms, that those Elders, without
which nothing used to be done in the Church, had then place, whenas yet they
wanted Bishops. But by the Apostle it appears that they ought to have been
overseers of this Office, so long as the Church was pressed with an ungodly
Magistracy. By which that likewise is understood, that as under a godly
Magistracy their Office ceased; so likewise Excommunication should cease under
the same: Albeit they had exercised the same before; in the mean time it must
be noted, that these Elders were in the place of the Magistrate, and did meddle
with civil matters, and were not an Ecclesiastic Judicatory, which at this
day they distinguish from the politic: for it is clearly said that they ought
to meddle with debates and matters belonging to the sustentation and use of
man's life.

LXXII.
The fruits that it brought forth in the Church, would scarcely be explained in
many Books, truly they cannot be comprehended in a few Lines. First, They
brought this to pass, that men begun to ascribe safety to the Sacraments. For
thus they reasoned, The denial of the Sacraments brings destruction:
therefore the receiving of the same gives life; they could not doubt of that
which is the Antecedent, whilst they heard, that those were afflicted with
great punishments and believed, were delivered to Satan, unto whom the
Sacraments were denied. Hence it was believed that some could not die without
receiving of the Supper; as I said a little before, those many and great and
long satisfactions and Ceremonies did augment the errors, and likewise chiefly
that, that they permitted the use of the Supper, to men that were only a doing:
that they should not depart hence without food necessary for their souls. Which
if it did not happen, they esteemed him condemned to whom this befell, as if
God would not forgive them that were heartily penitent for their sins, and give
them life, except those Elders judge them worthy of the Lords Supper, what can
be thought more horrid then this error? then likewise it brought this to pass,
that every one almost believed it was in the power of a man to shut and open
Heaven, to whatsomever person he pleased. So the Emperor Theodosius the younger
would not dine, because he was Excommunicate by a Monk, unto whom he denied
something to him that he had demanded. Albeit the Bishop of Constantinople told
him, such exclusion was invalid, nevertheless he would not be quiet, till at
last he had absolved him who had bound him. So the Elder was compeld by Ambrose
for eight Months to abstain from the Church and Preachings. Indeed he had
sinned, but much lightlier then Ambrose: which may be known by any man that is
not void of judgment out of the History of Nicephorus, and Chronicle of Mr.
Philip Melancthon. To conclude: By this means it was brought to pass, that the
Bishop of Rome did bring the West under his obedience, and compeld the Kings,
Princes, Emperors, to serve his lusts, and by reason that some Emperors and
Kings were Excommunicate, some hundred thousands of men have been killed in the
Germane Empire. Moreover according to his own Arbitrament, he changed
uncorrupted Religion, whilst for fear of this Thunderbolt now durst hiss
against his Laws and Statutes; and truly he that will ponder the matter
rightly, shall find that that God of strength in Daniel signifies nothing but
Excommunication: or a prohibition of holy things, chiefly of the Lords Supper.
For this Excommunication truly was and at this day also is that God of
strength: whereby the Pope of Rome has subjected unto himself all things, and
whereby now others also go about to subject likewise unto themselves the
Empires of all men. But I hope that this false God shall be known, and shall
hereafter less hurt the Church. To conclude the whole matter, It brought
business to this pass, that all men for the most part believed that these men
who might judge it unworthy of eternal life, were out of the favor of God: and
on the other part, that all men whom it desired to be saved were altogether
saved: do we hope that men of our age will be better and more sober then the
Ancients? he is deceived that believes it, and neither has he examined well
the Scriptures, neither has he any experience in present affairs.

LXXIII.
I see not why the Christian Magistrate ought not to do the same at this time
in the Jewish Commonwealth, he was commanded by God to do. Do we think that
we can constitute a better form of Church and Commonwealth? In the 4. Chapter
of Deutronomy, we read that for the judgment and statutes which God had given
to the people of Israel, that all Nations should admire and praise their
wisdom and understanding, but they wanted this Excommunication: And the power
of restraining unclean and criminal persons was in the Magistrate, whose duty
it was not only to punish these men according to the Law of God, but likewise
to constitute all the external Religion, for not Aaron but Moses did this: God
so commanding. Which power afterward we know was translated to Joshua and not
to Eleazer: for God commands Joshua, not Eliazer, that he should have a care
that the Israelites the second time should be Circumcised, neither commanded he
to except any, albeit many amongst them were most wicked: and he commanded him
likewise to celebrate the Passover, so soon as they had passed Jordan: neither
do we read that he repulst any because they had not lived religiously and
honestly enough. At the command of this man the Ark of God was carried and
things belonging to religion were done, as is manifest by the whole Book of
Joshua, Samuel, and Eli, when they did discharge both the Offices; they did
offer as Priests; and as Judges, they put in order things belonging to the
Commonwealth together with Religion. And indeed it was lawful for the high
Priests in the Old Testament, to govern also civil business: because they were
Types of Christ as King and Priest: but to our Priests it is said, but you
shall not do so, 1 Pet. 5. which belongs likewise to this place.

LXXIV.
When ye come to the Kings of the Jews the matter is also clear of David, no
man doubts: who did dispose of all Offices and Ministers of the Church as is
manifest: Let any man read, who will, 1 Chronicles. 22, 27. Afterward Solomon the
King did not only build the Temple, but did also consecrate it, and not a
Priest. Hitherto belongs that famous History of Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 19.
which being diligently pondered, will clear this cause excellently: as does
likewise the History of most holy King Ezekias: and to conclude the whole Old
Testament. Wherefore if that Commonwealth and Church was most wisely founded,
ordered, and constitute; That Church cannot but be praised that comes as near
as the circumstances, and present matters will permit, to its form. Therefore
wheresomever the Magistrate is pious, and Christian, there, there is not read
in any person, who under another name of life should govern or punish: as if
the pious Magistrate differed nothing from the profane. It is really the worst
of all errors, (says Mr. Wolfgang Musculus in his common places of the
Magistrate: out of which I have written out what next proceeded) that most part
think no otherwise of the Christian Magistrates then of the dominion of the
profane, whose power is only to be acknowledged in civil matters: Therefore if
the godly Magistrate has not only received power to constitute religion
according to the precept of the holy Scriptures, and to dispose of its Offices
and Ministers, (for which cause Moses commands him. Which is chosen King,
with his own hand, to write out the Book of the Law, or Moses's own writings;
and to exercise himself therein continually) But likewise also to punish vices;
Then in vain do now some amongst us think of a new form of judgment: which
shall reduce the Magistrate himself orderly and under his own subjects. For
that Ecclesiastic Judgment Seat of manners, (for Doctrine the Magistrates
ought ever to consult them that are most acquainted therewith) it is not to be
found commanded in any place of the holy Scriptures.

LXXV.
But in these Churches that live under an ungodly Magistrate (to wit, under a
Popish or Turkish,) grave and godly men must be chosen, who must give judgment
betwixt men that are at strife: and must compose all differences: and do other
things of this kind. And the same men ought together with the Pastors to
admonish and rebuke unclean and defiled persons: And if they prevail nothing,
they must punish them; either by denying them private commerce; or by public
rebuke, or by taking some other such notice of them: But they cannot debar them
that desire to come to the Sacraments instituted by God. For who judges the
heart but God? It may come to pass, that a spark may be kindled by the public
Preaching; To norish which by any means that opposes not Piety, is not only
unprofitable, but altogether fruitful. And I pray you, how can it not be
absurd, and therefore ungodly, to debar one from the public and solemn
Thanksgiving, for the remembrance of the death of the Lord, which finds in
his heart that he is compeld to celebrate the same together with the Church,
and who is willing to declare himself to be a member thereof, and will
publicly declare that his bypast life i^d ispleasing to him.

Appendix.
PErchance it will not be besides the purpose, if in place of an addition or
corollary, I add, what was decreed by all the Orders of the Laics belonging
to the Empire, in their meeting at Nurenberge, Anno. 1523. concerning this
matter, and were offered to the Pope of Rome: For by this meanes-will appear,
that before about 46. years ago, the Divines begun to think of this Dispute:
neither are we the first that move the same. Indeed I believe there is not any
that is but in a mean measure acquainted with the Germane affairs, which
either thinks or believes, that any of these things were decreed or desired
from the Pope, without the knowledge of the Divines. But that the matter might
be more clear, it pleased me to confer the Dutch examples, which was writ in
the writing it self, with the Latin one; which was sent to the Pope, which
Illyricus Printed with this Book of the Sects and Schisms of Popery at Basil,
1565. and out of the colation of both is set down the whole Decree. Therefore
amongst the one hundred grievances, which were two years before done at Worms,
but were now set down more distinctly at Nurenberg; the Thirty fourth pronounce
thus.

Item. Many Christians at Rome, and in other places also are Excommunicated by
Archbishops Bishops and their Ecclesiastic Judges for profane causes, and
temporal goods: And many infirm consciences are afflicted therewith, and led
into despair. So for many and for transitory things, and very often for very
light causes: some besides, that they loose their honor and their fortunes,
are thrown into the danger both of soul and body. When notwithstanding no man
ought to be Excommunicate, or ought to be esteemed for an Excommunicate person,
as the holy Scriptures witnesses, except he that is convict of Heresy.
Wherefore the Laick orders of the holy Empire, beseeches the Popes holiness,
as becomes him, and appears in a Religious Father, that he would altogether
abrogate this burden of Excommunication at Rome, or in the Roman Court: and
that he would have a care, that it should be taken away every where in all
other places, from Archbishops, Bishops, and their Judges. And to conclude,
That he would command; that no man should be Excommunicate, or holden for an
Excommunicate Person, for any other cause, but for the manifest and convicted
sin of Heresy belonging to Religion. For men ought altogether otherwise,
either for temporal goods, or for any other humane offenses, be removed or
separate from God and his Church, except for Infidelity and Heresy.

Hitherto likewise belongs that which John Stiumfius in his Chronicle of
Helvetia, Book 2. of Germany, Chap. 29. That the Priests through Swablan, about
the year of our Lord, 1245. (when by the instigation of the Pope Hendric
Lantgrave of Turengia, and after his death, William Earl of Holland was chosen
against the Emperor, Frethrick the second and his Son Conrad,) did constantly
amongst other things teach, That it was not granted to any mortal man under
the Sun, to forbid Christians spiritual duties, and the worship of God. For
this cause they continually say a Mass, as he relates, albeit the Pope did
interdict them, and pronounce them Excommunicate Persons.

FINIS.
Courte^u^ Reader The^^ ^ooks following, are Printed, for, or, Sold by Simon
Miller, at the Star in St. Paul Churchyard.
S^all Folio.
DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be
reprinted with large Additions.

The civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of
Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are
paralleled in many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions and Tranfactions of Church and State, with
Political Observations, and reflections upon the same: by David Hume of
Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Mr Paul Baine on the Ephesians.

The Queen of Arragon, a Play: In fol.

In Quarto large.
Jo. Barklay his Argenis, T^anslated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command.

Quarto Small.
An Eperimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz.

Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true Faith of Gods Elect. By John Nicholson Minister
of the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortality: By George Stroad.

Three Treatises: 1. The Conversion of Ninevch, touching Prayer and Fasting. 2.
Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance. 3. Sovereign preservatives against
distrust full Thoughts and Cares: By Will. Attersoll Minister of Gods Word at
Isfield in Sussex.

Aynsworth on the Canticles.

Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial

Gr^lle against Appolonius.

A Treatise of Civil policy, being a clear Decision of 43. Queries, concerning
prerogative, right and privilege, in reference to the supreme Prince and
people: By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of Sr Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr Pinchin his Meritorious price of man's Redemption, cleared.

A strology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and
Planets have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Wells his Souls Progress.

Christ tempted, the Devils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the fourth
Chapter of Sr Mathews Gospel: By John Gumbledon, Minister of the Gospel.

The Saints Society.

Dr Stoughtous thirteen choice Sermons, with his Body of Divinity.

The Reasons of the diffenting Brethren concerning the Presbyterian Government,
together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines.

Camdens Remains.

The Harmonious Consent and Confession of Faith, of all the Protestant Reformed
Churches in Christendom.

The description of the Universal Quadrant, by which is performed with great
Expedition, the whole Doctrine of Triangles, both plain and Sphericall: Also
the Resolution of such Propositions as are most useful in stronomy,
Navigation, and Dialling: By which is performed the proportioning of Lines for
measuring of all manner of Land, Board, Glass, Timber, Stone, etc. by Tho.
Stirrup Mathemat.

Large Octavo.
Florus Anglicus, with the lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in Brass.

The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming Contradictions
are fully and plainly Reconciled.

Evidences for Heaven, containing infallible Signs and real Demonstrations for
assurance of Salvation: published by Edm. Calamy Minister of Aldermanbury, Land.

The Life and Reign of King Charles from his Birth to his Death, By Lambert
Wood.

The Night-Search, the second part: By H. Mill.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.

Useful Instructions for these Evil times; held forth in 22. Sermons, by
Nicholas Lockyer, Provost of Eaton College.

The Nullity of Church Censures, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution,
but a mere humane Invention: Written by the famous Tho. Erastus, and never
before Englished.

Small Octavo.
Ed Waterhouse Esquire His Discourse of Piety and Charity.

Panacca, or the Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admitable Nature
and Virtues of Tobacco: By Dr. Everard, and Others.

A view and Defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Daphnis and Chloe, A most sweet and pastoral Romance for young Ladies, by
Geo. Thornhill, Gent.

Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the Delusions of the ^riests and Jesuits who are now very busy
amongst us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
prayers useful upon all occasions,

Ovid de Ponto, in English.

The spiritual Seaman, or the Matriners Companion, being a Compendium of the
Principles of Religion by Jo. Durant, formerly in the Navy, now at
Christ-Church in Cant.

The Loves of Clerio and Lozio a Romance.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the
Conqueror to the death of the Late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a
serious Comedy.

Venus Cabinet unlockt, and her Secrets laid open.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in Physic and
Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases Incident to man's body: By R Williams.
To which is added the physical Mathematics: By Hermes, Tres. Magistus.

The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of Wat Tiler's Rebellion.

Historical Collections or Ecclesiastic affairs in Scotland, including the
murder of the Cardinal of St. Andrews, and the beheading of their Queen Mary
in England, by R. Watson.

The Christian Moderator, in 3 parts.

The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the clothing of England.

Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations.

Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes. Grotij Poemata.
Three Books of Mr. Mathews Minister at Swansey in Southwales.

1 The Messiah Magnified by the mouths of Babes in America; or Gaius and
Gamaliel, a helpful Father and his hopeful Son, discoursing of the three most
considerable points: 1. The great want of Christ. 2. The great worth that is in
Christ. 3. The good way that is chalkt out by Christ

2. The New Congregationall Church, proved to be the old Christian Church, by
Scripture, Reason, and History.

3. The Rending Churchmember Regularly called back to Christ and his Church.

A physical Dictionary, or an Interpretation of all the terms of Art, and
marks used in Physic, Anatomy, Surgery, and Chemistry.

Duodecim.
A Collection of Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish, all
Englished and Alphabetically Digested, by N. R. Gent.

Doctor Smith's practice of physic.

The Grammar War.

Possellius Apothegmes.

Fasciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

The Juniper Lecture.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three archenemies of mankind,
the world, the flesh, and the devil.

Hensius de Crepundiis.

The History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the
manner and fashions of the people of that Country.

Drexeliu's school of Patience.

Drexelius his right Intention of every ones Action.

Viginti Quat.
The New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

Sir Richard Baker's Med. and Prayers for every day of the Week.

Plays.
The Ball.

Chawbut.

Conspiracy.

Obstinate Lady.

The London Chanticlers; a Comedy full of various and delightful Mirth, never
before published.

BE pleased to take notice, that there is now in the Press Eighteen Books of
the Secrets of Art and Nature, Collected out of the choicest Authors, both
Ancient and Modern; first designed by John VVecker Dr of Physic, and now much
enlarged by Dr R. Read. The like never before in the English Tongue.


