The English Soldiers STANDARD To Repair to, FOR WISDOM AND UNDERSTANDING,
In these doleful backsliding Times.

To be read by every honest Officer to his Soldiers; and by the Soldiers, one
to another.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

The English Soldiers Standard to repair to, for Wisdom and Understanding in
these doleful backsliding times.
To be read by every honest Officer to his Soldiers, and by the Soldiers one
to another.
IT was most worthily, said of you in your Declaration of the 14 of June 1647,
page 6, That you were not a mere mercenary Army, hired to serve any arbitrary
power of a State; but were called forth, and conjured by the several
Declarations of Parliament, to the defense of your own and the peoples just
Rights and Liberties: and so you took up Arms in judgment and conscience, to
those ends.

Which expressions of yours, and the like, gave so great content and
satisfaction to all sorts of well-minded people, that the meanest private
Soldier amongst you was more honorable in their esteem, then the most
glorious outside man in the world: you had been their guard by day, and their
defense by night; you delivered them from the Bear, and from the Lion; and when
the Parliament began to turn Tyrants themselves, and would have broken you in
pieces by dividing of you, and sending a part of you for Ireland, that so they
might without obstacle have trampled upon the peoples Liberties, you resolved,
as became an Army whom the Lord had blessed, to deliver the people also from
those uncircumcised Philistims.

And when they would have terrified you from so doing, with urging, that you
resisted Authority; you spared not to tell them (and that truly) That it is no
resisting of Magistracy, to side with the just principles and Law of Nature and
Nations: And that the Soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of the General who
will turn his Canon (meaning his strength, power and authority) against: his
Army, on purpose to destroy (or enslave) them: And such (you say) were the
proceedings of our Ancestors of famous memory, to the purchasing of such
Rights and Liberties as they have enjoyed through the price of their blood; and
we both by that, and the later blood of our dear friends and fellow soldiers
(with the hazard of our own) do now lay claim to.

And truly friends, it will be necessary for you to look quickly about you, and
that to purpose, and to be like unto our Ancestors, or like unto your selves in
what you then declared: and to enquire, whether you and the rest of the people
of this Nation are yet restored to those their Rights and Liberties: and
accordingly to be satisfied in your Judgments and Consciences.

You have been many of you Countrymen, and know well what a miserable burden
Tithes and Free Quarter are: many of you have been Tradesmen and laborious
people, and can be sensible how intolerable the burden of Excise, and Customs,
and Monopolies in Trade are, Officers and Usurers running away with that which
should pay you, and the poor labor for; to the ruin of Trade. You cannot but
know what it is to live continually in prison, in penury and beggary, hearing
and seeing the misery of such poor people in all places.

You know, we live under unknown Laws, written in canting French, vexed and
molested with a whole drove of corrupt Judges, Lawyers, Jaylors, and the like
Caterpillars of the Commonwealth.

Your great Officers indeed have reduced the Supreme Authority into one
Jurisdi^tion: but what are we or you the better, when it is used to set up now
ways of trials for our Lives and Liberties, new Courts of Justice, denying both
you and us (when they please) the benefit of trials by twelve sworn men: when
already they have punished for matters of Religion, as other corrupt
Parliaments use to do: and when they have erected a Council of State that
already examines men upon Interrogatories against themselves in criminal
Cases: when they stop the Press, that no information shall be given to you or
the people, and employ worse beagles to hunt after books, then the
High Commission or Star Chamber ever did?

Nay Friends, where are you and our Liberties, when your General Council of
Officers make it so heinous a crime for Soldiers to petition Parliaments,
without license of their Officers. -- It is but few years since that in London
the Aldermen of the City endeavored that no Citizens should petition the
Parliament, but first they should pass the Common Council.

But it was when those great men intended to grasp into their hands all power
both of Parliament and people; as appeared soon after by their pernicious
Remonstrances, and desperate Engagements; which we believe had done much more
mischief, if honest and resolved Citizens had not made bold with their
Greatships, and frequently visited the House with Petitions, which would as
soon have past the sire, as the Common Council.

And you had best look unto your selves, and to your and our Liberties, when as
your Officers (many of them) begin to combine together, and punish men for
petitioning; assure your selves, if they go on, your Liberties and ours are not
long-lived; nay, are they not at last gasp, when they are grown so raging mad,
as to importune for a Law to have power in themselv^s, to hang and put to death
any person, though not of the Army, as shall hold any discourse with Soldiers
about their own and the peoples just Rights and Liberties? -- Pray friends,
were these men any part of the Army when you published to the world, that you
took up Arms in Judgment and Conscience, for the peoples just Rights and
Liberties? or have those your Officers forgot themselves, and utterly lost
their consciences, and all sense of their then promises, Declarations, and
Remonstrances? if so, you shall do well to remember them, as you did those
Officers of yours that made scruple to engage with you for your right of
petitioning, and for the peoples Liberties at New Market.

Or are these Officers usurpers, and not properly the Council that was then
chosen by the Army? pray look to it, for your Declarations and their works
differ exceedingly: the one tending to freedom, but the latter to such a
bondage as all true English Soldiers will abhor; and if you find that you have
not chosen them to deal with you in those affairs of the Commonwealth, which
concern every private Soldier, as the greatest Commander: What have you then
to do, but to choose out from amongst your selves, such faithful men, whether
Officers or Soldiers, as in those doubtful staggering times, have stood firm
to their first principles, and do evidence by their humility and resolution,
that they took up arms in judgment and Conscience, for their own and the
peoples just Rights, and Liberties: and such as rather then the Nation should
be deprived thereof, being purchasted with so vast expense of blood, durst hold
the hands of the General, and all the General Officers, if they shall persist
to turn their Cannons, their strength, power, and authority to the enslaving of
the Commonwealth.

For what else is become of that judgment and Conscience, in which you took up
arms? certainly your Consciences cannot be satisfied that your General, and
General Officers, no nor the new General Council of Officers, (which seldom
exceeds threescore persons) shall after all your tedious strivings, and
struglings for liberty, against all other parties, make both you and us, slaves
to themselves in a Counsel of State, or their own packt Parliament? certainly
Tyranny, Cruelty, and continuance of oppression, is not the less because your
Officers are now the Authors and continuers of it: but should rather be
esteemed the greater and more abominable, by how much their promises have
exceeded others. it cannot stand either with found judgment, or good
Conscience, that now you should be so far respecters of persons, as to bear
with that wickededness, and treachery in your pretended friends and Commanders,
which you have by many years war labored to destroy and root out, in two great
and powerful parties.

You are seriously to consider that you have an alseeing God to give an account
unto, and are not to please your Commanders in fulfilling their wills; but to be
sure that you give satisfaction to your Conscience in the well pleasing of
Almighty God.

And it will be no satisfaction at all to his justice, when he shall call you
to an account for the killing and slaying of men, for you to say you that did
it in obedience to the Commands of your General and Officers; for you must
note that it is those just ends, the rights and liberties of the people, that
only can acquit you from being murderers in all you have done, so that you may
at highly once please your commanders in killing and slaying of men, to make
way for their greatness, wealth, and domination; and more highly displease God
in being murderers in so doing* nor can you escape his heavy Judgments, except
you persevere and go on to those just ends, unto which you have made your way
as through a Sea of blood, and to be no respecters of persons, but to take
whomsoever for an enemy that shall oppose you therein.

It is observed that you are very strict aga^^^t your own fellow Soldiers, in
case they offend, though in small matters, inflicting very severe punishments
for particular offenses; and why then look you not after and consider the ways
of your Commanders, but let them pass with all their delusions of the Army,
abusing the faith and credit thereof, with all sorts of people, breaking your
Counsel of Agitators, corrupting and terrifying both Officers and Soldiers,
to mould them to their own vile and unworththy ends: and are now in a ready way
to make themselves, and their creatures in Parliament, and elsewhere absolute
Masters over the Commonwealth? Nay do you not help them in it for want of
consideration? for why else are you so ready to execute their cruel sentences
upon honest and faithful Soldiers, as your shooting the man to death at Ware,
and imprisoning of diverse about the agreement of the people? And now also of
late your forcing of five worthy Soldiers to ride the Horse, with their faces
to the Horse tails, and breaking their swords over their heads, for standing to
their and your Right in petitioning, and for presenting a letter to your cruel
Counsel in justification thereof?

It seems it is a very true proverb, that honors change manners, and is fully
verified in your great Commanders, whom the fore recited Declaration of the 14
of June 1647, earnestly desired that the right and freedom of the people to
present petitions to the Parliament might be cleared and vindicated, having
made it before heinous crime in Hollis, and Stapleton, to hinder the Soldiers
from petitioning; and yet now being in honor and power, judge, and sentence*
honest faithful Soldiers, to base unworthy punishments, for but resolving to
petition.

But truly friends, suffer this and suffer any thing; experience says, he
that takes one box on the ear invites another: and when Soldiers that should
be men in all things, stand still and suffer their fellow Soldiers to be thus
abused by a pack of Officers, no marvel if these officers turn Tyrants, and
presume to do any thing to any man:

What right has a General, General Officers, or a Counsel of Officers, to
petition more then the meanest private Soldier? surely, to be a General is
not to be above Law, except he make himself a Tyrant; is he or any Officer any
other but a person under authority and accomptable for discharge of their
trusts? nor is a private Soldier a slave because he is a private Soldier: but
to have as full benefit of the Law, as clear a use of his liberty in
petitioning, or otherwise as his General, of Officers; and there is no surer
mark to know a Tyrant by, or such as would be so, then for any to argue
otherwise: And it will be good to mark such with a black coal.

Pray consider it, and lay it to heart: Is it not a shame that your
fellow soldiers should undergo so slavish, so severe and painful punishment,
as to ride the wooden horse, or run the gauntlet, and be whipped for small
particular offenses, and that you should suffer in the mean time your Officers
and Commanders to ^urn Tyrants, and never punish them at all for it? Is this to
take up Arms in Judgment and Conscience, when one man, being your Commander,
may (as the proverb says steal a hor^e, and you will hang a private soldier
for but looking over the hedge? for what comparison is there between a private
soldiers offense, and an Officers turning a Bear, a Wolf, a Tyrant?

Believe it, if you look not to it speedily, your Officers are in a ready way
to make you and the Common-weal^h absolute slaves; for they mould and fashion
the Army even how they please; preferring none to commands but flatterers and
servile men, and catch at all advantages to turn all such out of command as are
anyway sensible of the rights of the people; and have taken so absolute a power
therein so long, that they have done very much of their work:

And do believe all is formed to their own bent, and that is the reason they
presume now to propose the sending of many of you for Ireland, pretending
extraordinary necessity, and that that Nation otherwise will be utterly lost:
-- but surely all parties are not so soon agreed; 'twill not be amiss to make
two words to such a bargain.

This you know is not the first fetch for Ireland; and you must note it is
neither Ireland, nor Scotland, nor any other forces they fear, but the sting of
their own consciences perpetually tells them they have dealt most perfideously,
and Tyrannously with the Army, and Commonwealth; and they perceive by the many
motions of Soldiers, and others, that the Army is likely to draw out
Adjutators once more, whose morning they know will be the evening of their
domination, and the next day they fear will prove their dooms day:

To avoid which, in all post haste they must be divided, and sent some one way,
and some another; but if you be wise, stay a little, or you may perhaps never
meet again. Certainly before you go, it will be good for you to see those
Rights and Liberties of the people, for which you took up Arms in judgment and
conscience, cleared and secured, by a full and clear Agreement of the people;
and not to leave them at the mere arbitrary mercy of a Council of State, or a
packed Parliament: for since they have dared to gull and cheat you to your
faces, and whilst you are hereabouts, and together; what inhumane cruelties
may they not do in your absence? especially, since they incline to raise more
forces of a mercenary and servile nature, that shall make no questions for
conscience sake about their Commands, as you have been used to do; and then
farewell the English Liberties for ever.

Whatever they may tell you, or however they may flatter you, there is no less
danger lies at the bottom of this business for Ireland, and therefore it
behooves every one of you to lay it to heart: and before you resolve upon a new
Engagement, first see a new Representative of the Army established, by the free
Election of every Regiment; and refer your selves to their Counsel and advice
in all things, to be disposed of as they shall see cause; and neither admit of
disbandings, nor of new listings, nor of any undertaking for Ireland, or any
other service, but as that Council shall advise.

For consider, as things now stand, to what end you should hazard your lives
against the Irish: have you not been fighting these seven years in England for
Rights and Liberties, that you are yet deluded of? and that too, when as none
can hinder you of them but your own Officers, under whom you have fought? and
will you go on still to kill, slay and murder men, to make them as absolute
Lords and Masters over Ireland as you have made them over England? or is it
your ambition to reduce the Irish to the happiness of Tithes upon trebble
damages, to Excise, Customs and Monopolies in Trades? or to fill their prisons
with poor disabled prisoners, to fill their Land with swarms of beggars; to
enrich their Parliament Men, and impoverish their people; to take down
Monarchical Tyranny, and set up an Aristocratical Tyranny; or to overspread
that Nation as this yet is, with such Wasps and Hornets as our Lawyers and
their Confederates? Or if you intend not this, or would be sorry to see no
better effects of your undertakings, it certainly concerns you in the first
place, and before you go, to see those evils reformed here; that when occasion
shall justly invite you thither, you may carry a good platform in your hands,
such a one as possibly they will never fight against: And it would be much more
to be wished, that you might overcome them by just and equal offers, then by
strength and force. And except you begin and proceed thus, how you will
satisfy your consciences, is not discernable.

Therefore look to it, and be not surprised neither with the suddenness nor the
plausibleness that may be put upon it by your General, or General Councels; the
killing and slaying of men, or the making of a War, being a thing that every
particular man of you must give a strict account to God for; in whose fight
your Commanders are of as small weight, when they come to be put into his just
balance, as the meanest of you; and at whose great day, these will be found
infallible truths, though now they will be called dividing doctrines.

But you must be steadfast to truths, and not be startled from your principles,
nor from your promises and engagements, by the revilings of men: these being
properly to be called Dividers, that forsake the society of honest men, because
they stick close to their principles: it being also certainly good and
justifiable to divide for good, rather then to unite for evil.

Labor by all means every man of you to preserve the love of the people toward
you, and upon all occasions make it evident that it is for their good you
continue in Arms, be courteous and gentle toward all you meet, whether in the
streets, or upon the Roads; give them kind language and civil respects, without
justling, or brushing, or bustling for the way; a thing which some proud
Officers have cherished too much in some rude persons: and at your Quarters
exercise your selves in harmless refreshments, without noise or lavish expense
and give the preeminence to the Master and Mistress of the Family, whether rich
or poor; and so you have food and raiment, be therewith content, without regard
of bravery or delicateness; eat not but for hunger, which makes all things
sweet; and cloth not but for health; and your happiness will not be far to
seek.

Beware of entertaining if thoughts of any man, or of any condition of men
without good proof; try and examine all things which shall be proposed unto you
to act upon; and act or not act as you find the things good or evil; and be not
diverted from your own understandings, by your respect to men's persons, nor
terrified by aspersions cast upon the proposers, which from our Saviors time
to this day has ever been the obstructer of all good endeavors: and if you
mind the present proceedings, you will find it was never more practiced then
now; and it will never go well with the Public, till you mark all aspersers as
men that labor to deceive; and know what they have to allege against the
matter proposed, without reflection upon the persons that propose it, or you
will never go on with any thing of worth.

Its come to a pretty pass with most of your great Officers: they would have
you to obey their commands, though to the killing and flaying of men, without
asking a reason: and as the Church of Rome holds the poor ignorant Papists in
blind obedience, who are taught to believe as the Church believes; so would
they have it with you, to be led this way, or that way (as men lead horses)
into Ireland, or Scotland, or any whither, and as horses shall be whipped, or
hanged as mutiniers, if you but dispute the cause, or but petition to have the
cause stated before you go, that your judgments and consciences may be fully
satisfied (as becomes honest men and Christians) in the lawfulness of
whatsoever you undertake. But as there is no Tyrants like those of Rome,
through the sottish ignorance of the Papists, so is there nothing will make
your Officers so perfect tyrants, as this kind of blind obedience in you: nor
will any thing demonstrate that you took up arms in judgment and conscience, but
that every one of you be satisfied in both, before you undertake or engage in
any service: and that by sound consideration you wipe off that scandal which
your great Officers have fixed upon you; that is, that if they but provide the
Troopers good pay, they make no question but to command them any whither, and
that they are then assured the Foot will follow the Horse whithersoever they
go. It Is a sad story, but it is frequent in their discourse, and no dout you
know it; and shows to what state they design to bring you. On the other side,
if any thing be proposed to you that is good in it self, and absolutely
necessary for the peace and freedom of the Commonwealth, how then do they
bestir themselves, and even sweat with labor to persuade, that you see not to
the bottom of it, that it is the most dangerous design that ever was, that
Jesuits at the least must be the authors of it, if not Levellers, who like Jack
Cade, and Wat Tiler, and the Anabaptists of Munster, would have all things
common, wives and all.

But if you rightly consider, this does but manifest unto you, that all Tyrants
are directed by one and the same means; this being but the very same measure
which was measured to the whole Army, a little before you past through the
City, by those your opposers that were then setting up other Tyranny.

Your General and Genesis Officers being then Jack Cade and Wat Tiler, that would
have all things common: who now setting up for themselves, have packt a
Parliament and a Council of State for their purpose, must bestow the same
language upon them that oppose those, as was bestowed upon themselves, and
whilst you live you may confidently build upon, that none but those that would
be Tyrants, will by aspersions go about to terrify men from relying upon their
own understandings.

You have had very much experience: and if you do but any thing consider and
resolve, you shall very hardly be deceived; but assure your selves the great
work in hand is how to deceive or corrupt you, it being impossible otherwise
for them to become Masters of the Commonwealth.

And if they can but get a considerable part of you for Ireland before you see
the Council of State abolished, and this Nation set upon such sure foundations
of Freedom, as shall not be in the power of future Parliaments to subvert,
their work's done: nay if they cannot get you for Ireland as themselves much
doubt thereof, and have cause enough considering the difficulties attending;
yet if they can but get a good part of you in to Scotland before you see those
Foundations of freedom settled firmly by an honest agreement of the people,
nothing can hinder them of their design.

Therefore be sure to see this Nation well settled first: keep together here
and you may be confident none dare meddle with you from abroad, and when all
things are to your mind at home, you may then safely cast your eyes abroad, but
not before, nor will it ever be good for you to meddle abroad but upon evident
cause, upon good grounds, that you may engage upon sound judgment and good
conscience; and not as most of the world does through ambition, covetousness,
and revenge, the fomenters of most of the wars that ever were; and tho
religion, freedom, peace and prosperity of the people, have been ever in the
tongue, yea though accompanied with fastings and prayings, and long preachings,
yet your experiences cannot but tell you, ambition, covetousness, and revenge
have ever been at the heart; and God is discovering it to the whole world.

And may every one of you, and your wel-minded Officers, be therein effectual
instruments to his glory, and in the accomplishment of the freedom, peace and
happiness of this miserably abused Nation: And that you may be so, and neither
be diverted nor terrified from settling your selves thereunto, and that with all
your might, cast your eyes frequenly on this your Standard, and be diligent in
searching into your own Consciences, and swerve not from what you find to be
your duty; prefer your Officers before others, if they inform your Judgments
aright, and lead you to nothing but what is evidently just, obey them exactly
after you are resolved of the Justness of the cause, but not before.

For he that runs to kill men merely upon Authority, or others Judgments, or
for money, is condemned of himself, in his Conscience, as a murderer, be the
cause what it will; and first or last shall not escape the Judgments of God.

FINIS.

