Jack Pudding: Or, A MINISTER Made A Black-Pudding. Presented To Mr. R. Farmer
Parson of Nicholas Church in Bristol:

By W. E. RBVRY

Ye have said, It Is a vain thing to serve God, and, What profit is it that we
have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully, or (as the Hebrew
reads) that we have walked in black?

Mal. 3.14. To serve God, is not in Forms of Worship, etc. but in waiting
continually on God, and following Christ, in the Cross, or fellowship of his
sufferings,

Ioh. 12.24, 25, 26, 27. March: ye: 17: Printed at LONDON. 1654. 1653

PROEME.
THere is nothing that the Prophets do more contemptuously speak of, then the
Priests and their Ordinances, (being also types of ours.) Both were once
honorable and holy in their season, in the Spirits presence; but when this was
withdrawn, and they departed from the primitive institution or from their
righteous walkings, those Worships (though ordained of God) were abhorred by
him. Amos 6.8.

There are two several times wherein the Priests or Ministers, and their
Ordinances, were contemned of God, and of men too at last. 1. When the Church
was under Apostacy (as ours is) see Isai. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer. 7.21, 22.
Mal. 2.1, 2. to verse. 9. where God does curse their blessings, corrupt their
seed, (or Tythecorn) spread dung on their faces, makes them contemptible and
base before the people, etc. 2. Not only the Apostacy, but the approaching
glory, or glorious appearance of the great God in his people, being at hand,
does cast contempt and a curse on the Church-Ministers, and their Ordinances;
as Isai. 43.19. to verse. 28. Isai. 66.2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10. etc. where God
profanes the princes of the sanctuary, ( or, as the Hebr. reads, the holy
Princes and Pastors) and gives Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches; all
their Ordinances being accounted as the cutting off a dogs neck, offering
swines blood, blessing an idol, yea butchering a man; as the abomination, and
the mouse, etc. verse. 17.

This I thought fit to premise unto the following Discourse, which might seem
ridiculous to some; though serious Truths, both Religion and Reason, may appear
therein to many. Farewell.

Thy W. E.

These that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in gardens behind one
tree in the midst, eating swines flesh, and the abomination and the mouse,
shall be consumed together, says the Lord. Isai. 66.17.
BEfore I come to my Text, I must begin with my Parson, a man at first but a
Clerk, not Clerk of a Parish, but to a pettifogging Lawyer, or Committee, as
they say; then a Maltster, now a Minister of the Gospel, or John of all trades,
that is Jack-Pudding: so he was pleased to call me in Public, at his
Parish-meeting, where he was merry at the Jest; but I shall prove him in
earnest to be that indeed, not only a Jack, but a Black-Pudding.

The occasion of his Scomma was this: Mr. Morgan Floyd of North- Wales, and my
self of the South, meeting together in Bristol, the mere hand of providence
having brought us thither, not any particular design, as some have imagined;
we had liberty from God, with the love of men, and the Magistrates leave, to
speak in public, though the Minister Parson Farmer stole away the Keys, and
kept the Church-doors fast, till by Authority they were opened for us, I mean
for Mr. Floyd though I spoke after he had ended.

The next day I departed the City, and the Sunday following Mr. Farmer like a
coward comes behind my back; and smites me in my absence, calling me Heretic
by name, or (which is worse) Jack-pudding, as Mr. Floyd Mountebank, though he
forbore to particularize my friend, who being in the City, sent a sober
Challenge to Mr. Farmer to meet him in public or in private to reason about
things controverted, and censured by the said Farmer. But the man was so
faint-hearted, he dared not appear, but refused the Gantlet, though he be as
bold as a Lion in his Pulpit, and roars upon all that cannot conform or crouch
to his Doctrine and Discipline.

Truly I had never tried his strength, nor troubled his patience, though his
preaching and teaching were never so Traditional and untrue: but because he
boasts himself as a Minister of the Gospel, and many good people are deceived
by him, and he not daring to talk with any out of his Tub, therefore I once
thought to question him in public at his Church; but for peace sake I forbore,
lest I might offend the worthy Governors and Citizens present.

For this cause, I publish it to the world, that not only the Parson might
repent of his bitterness, his folly and frowardness but that his people might
know, he is no Minister of Christ, nor a Christian man indeed.

This I prove, first, as a Scholar by Reason; then by Scripture, to all
rational and religious men* in this short Enthymem:

M. Farmer is a Jack-pudding, Therefore no Minister of Christ.

I prove he is a Jack pudding, because he is a Black-pudding: yea, a
Bag-pudding too I could make him because he bears the bag, as Judas did, and
divines for money M^c. 3.11.

The first only I now assert, in this Syllogism:

That which is made of fat, and blood, and a black coat or skin about it, is a
Black-pudding.

But Mr. Farmer is made of fat and blood, and a black coat or skin about him:

Therefore, he is a Black-pudding.

Every Tripe-woman or good houswife will prove the Major. The Minor is proved
in these particulars.

First, their heart is as fat as grease, Psalm. 119.70. so is Mr. Farmer full of
the same fat, that is the fullness or height of flesh, Isa. 17.4

Secondly, their feet are swift to shed blood; yea their hands are full of
blood, or bloods, (as the Hebrew reads) Isai. 1.15. So is Mr. Farmer's heart
and hands too full of bloods, that is a perse^uting spirit, covetousness,
cruelty, craft to destroy or deceive; yea, there is the blood of souls, Ezekiel.
13. (as slaves and souls of men are said to be sold by the Merchants or
Ministers, Rev. 18.13.) but blood especially is the life of the flesh, as we
call flesh and blood. Thus their hands are full of bloods, who are wholly in
bodily exercises, of fleshly Ordinances, as those Priests in the Prophet
complain, What profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance? Mark, the
Ministers are all for profit, else the people shall have no Ordinance: yet,
poor fools, they think it is an Ordinance, because given by a Black-coat:
therefore it is added, What profit is it that w^ have walked in black? for so
the Hebr. reads as I said, Mal. 3.14.

This proves the Minister to be but a Black-pudding, because, besides his fat
and blood, he has a black coat or skin about him. I do not mention Mr. Farmer's
face, or black countenance, because God made him so: but who made him a
Black-coat, or Minister, after he had done his Malting let men consider; only
I Will prove him to be not of Gods making, as a Minister, because he is a
Blackpudding; or as Baal's Priests are called Chemarim, that is, Blackcoats,
Zeph. 11.4.

That Is my second Argument: He who has no gift of the Spirit by the laying on
of hands, is no Minister of Christ. But Mr. Farmer has no gift of the Spirit:
Ergo, no Minister of Christ.


The Major is proved, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. Heb. 6.1. It Is not the doctrine
of Baptism, but of Baptisms, (that is of the Spirit as well as water) without
both, there is no Church Membership; as without laying on of hands (and a gift
thereby) no Minister of Christ.

The Minor is proved, 1 Cor. 12.8. Among all the gifts of the Spirit, the first
is a word of wisdom. That Minister who has not a gift of wisdom, has not the
gift of the Spirit. But Mr. Farmer has not a gift of wisdom: Ergo. Not a gift
of the Spirit.


That Mr. Farmer has not the gift of wisdom, is proved by this, Because he is a
fool.

That Mr. Farmer is a fool, or foolish shepherd, is thus asserted. He who has
the instruments of a foolish shepherd, is a fool, or foolish shepherd. But Mr.
Farmer has the instruments of a foolish shepherd: Ergo. Mr. Farmer is a fool.


The Major is proved, Zech. 11.15.

The Minor is plain because the instruments of a foolish shepherd are, 1. when
Ministers meddle with Civil matters, or intermix with State Affairs: there is
One, as 'twas well said in a Speech at Dunbar. 2. The Magistrates call: there is
Two. 3. A worldly maintenance: there is Three. 4. Formal Ordinances in the hands
of a fleshly Ministry: there is Four instruments of a foolish shepherd. If
these are not in Mr. Farmer's hands, then he is no fool, but a friend; for so
we shall be, when God shall make him, and me, and all the Ministers also fools:
for so all men must be, before they be wise, or can walk in the way of God,
where wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein, Isai. 35.8. 1 Cor.
3.18.

Having thus taken my Parson in hand, now I shall handle my Text, very short
and sweet; as Mr. Farmer said when he came first to the City, that his Sermon
should not be long, because his books were not come down. The foregoing verse
tells us, that by fire and his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and
the slain of the Lord shall be many. Isai. 66.16. Men have been long fighting
with men; now the sword of God is drawn against both: and man has been long
pleading with man; now God will plead with all, even all flesh; which because
the Word the sword of the Spirit cannot reach, therefore flesh shall have fire
kindled within, to consume and slay it. What Is the fire, but the Spirit of the
Lord, or the Lord himself, who is a consuming fire, who though dwelling in
flesh, has hitherto spared it, unless in some brokenhearted Saints, in whom
the everlasting burnings have broken forth, and made their flesh and the
goodliness of flesh to wither in them; their wisdom being turned to folly,
their spiritual strength to weakness, their gifts and graces wasted, their joy
and peace fled away. But this fire is not yet fallen on all; but it shall with
a vengeance, very shortly: for as every one shall be salted with fire, that is,
every one who is slain and sacrificed to God, (for every sacrifice shall be
salted with salt) so Salt being best to season flesh, and fire to slay it, the
slain of the Lord shall be many indeed, when he comes forth in them as fire.

For as by this he pleads with flesh; so his rebukes are said to be with flames
of fire, Isai. 66.15. Words are but wind, when man speaks or reproves: but
when God in man shall rebuke, 'twill soon be felt as fire in their bones, and
flames in their bosom, Psalm.

The fire comes forth first on the Church: for as the Church has not had the
baptism of fire but has been content with water; so another fire shall baptize,
yea burn them up, as the Prophet phraseth it, They shall go out from one fire,
and another fire shall devour them, Ezekiel. 15.5, 6. that is, the Church has gone
forth out of the fire of the Spirit, or Baptism of fire, into fleshly forms:
therefore another fire, the fire of his jealousy, shall devour them.

This is clear in all the Scriptures, that as judgment begins at the house of
God; so the Church must be judged before the world: yea all that wrath,
judgment, fire, and a hell upon earth, which the Church interprets to be for
the world, that is most true of the Church. For as the children of the kingdom
shall be cast into outer darkness, Mat. 8.12. so not strangers but servants are
called to account; not whores, but virgins come to judgment, Mat. 25. Yea those
carcases are the Churches, who as they shall appear as walking Ghosts, and to
be dead while they live; so they are damned above ground, and have a hell upon
earth, whose worm never dies, and their fire never quenched, Isai. 66.24. For
as the Lord is said to be a worm or moth unto Judah, and our God a consuming
fire, that shall never be quenched; so this Scripture of Isai. 66.24. speaks
not of hell hereafter, for there is no carcases there, nor can one go forth to
look upon them: (for Lazarus could not, because of the gulf; nor could he,
being in light, see Dives in darkness though Dives in the dark could see
Lazarus afar off.) Besides, these carcases are said to be an abhorring to all
flesh, which shows it to be a hell upon earth.

And that this fire is first for the Church is clear by my Text: They that
sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the gardens: that is plain of
particular Churches; for the world is the Common. Again, they sanctify and
purify themselves, which is not proper to the world. But 3. they sanctify
themselves; it is not sanctification of the Spirit through obedience to the
truth. Besides, they are not sanctified throughout their spirit, soul, and
body; for the world may see the walkings of Saints as carnal, and Churches to
be covetous and worldly as any: but they sanctify themselves with some forms
and Church-fellowships far from that of the Spirit, or Gospel-believers; and
though they are pure in their own eyes, yet God, who weighs the spirits,
knows they are not washed from their filthiness. Prove. 30.12. for the fire has
never touched their flesh, nor their flesh sacrificed to God; therefore as men
living in the world and subject to Ordinances, they sanctify themselves and
purify themselves in gardens behind one tree in the midst, etc.

What this one tree is, I know not, unless it be the forbidden tree, which the
Churches taste of; but the tree of life in the midst of the paradise or garden
of God is a mystery to them Rev. 2.7. Rev. 22.14. But there is no such word
here as tree in the Hebr. therefore it is read, They sanctify themselves and
purify themselves in the gardens behind one in the midst. This one to me is
not a tree but a man, even a Minister, he is that one in the midst of the
Parish Church; and the Church is blessed by him for all day, and week too after:
they are sanctified holy men, and Christians, because they have a Pastor or
Parson among them: but though in the Sacrament they think to eat the flesh (and
blood) of Christ, it is but swines flesh, the abomination, and the mouse, that is
the Ordinances they feed on People and Parson or Pastor together, while the
Spirit is absent.

The swines flesh puts me in mind of the Black Pudding before; for it is made
of the blood of that: yea, this very Prophet in the same Chapter tells us, that
he that offers an oblation, is as he that offers swines blood, Isa. 66.3.
He that offers is the Priest or Parson; and that he is the Pudding, is plain
by the words, as read in the Original, where those words [as if he offered] are
not; but thus it is in the Hebrew: He that offers an oblation, swines blood;
that is, he that offers is swines blood, or, a black Pudding.

FINIS.
Thou have given them blood to drink: for they are worthy. Rev. 16.6.

