An Olive-leaf: OR, Some Peaceable CONSIDERATIONS To the CHRISTIAN MEETING at
Christs-Church in London, Monday, Jan. 9. 1653. ALSO, The Reign of CHRIST, and
the SAINTS with him, On Earth, A Thousand years, One day, and the day at hand.

By William Erbery.

And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem; and
the battle-bow shall be cut off: and he will speak peace to the heathen; and
his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the river, even to the ends of
the earth. Zach. 9.10. Imprinted at London, by J. Cottrel. 1654.

For Mr. Rogers, Mr. Powel, and the rest of the good People of Christ-Church.
Christian Friends,
I Am forced in Spirit to speak, though in much affliction and fear to offend,
either to hurt the weak or harden the strong.

It Is a mercy to you, and a Mystery of Providence to bring you from
Blackfriars to Christs-Church, for as the face of blackness has lately
appeared on your fellowships: so some have looked (though I do not) on your
actings as Jesuitical, and a Fryerly-Spirit, in your public speakings against
the present Powers: for as Luther himself never declaimed against the Pope, as
a secular Prince, but as a spiritual Lord: so the people of God ever since have
been silent in their sufferings under Civil Governments, though
Church-Governors have fallen even by this, their meddling with State-matters and
muttering abroad things they know not.

For as the Prophet says, Your own breath as fire shall devour you, Isa.
33.11. So Church-rulers being fired by their approaching fall, fell by their
own breath: the Bishops or Prelates, (whom nothing could throw down, but their
own protesting against the House of Lords acting in their absence) were cast
and caught in a Praemunire against the King. Thus the Presbyters were judged for
complying with the Scots, and preaching against the English Parliament; This
some Independent Pastors also opposed in their public teachings before,
therefore their own Parliament was dissolved, and another Power is risen which
because they see not in the Lord, therefore they speak against it; and so their
own breath has devoured them.

God is my witness, I speak not to divide brethren, nor to disfavour any Saints
with the State, nor yet to fawn on the highest in Power: but that you and I may
retire into the inner World* and not dwell in the outward Court, which is given
to the Gentiles* nor to expect the reign of the Saints with Christ in outward
glory and Government. Rev. 11.2, 17, 18.

'Twas much upon my spirit then to reply to what I heard from you both at
Christs-Church, but I would not trouble your public meeting.

Mr. Rogers spoke from Jer. 42.20. Ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent
me unto the Lord your God, saying, Pray for us, etc.

This he interpreted as the dissembling of some in Power to ask the prayers of
the Prophets and people of God in their troubles, who now act contrary to their
own professed purposes of no personal rule, and contrary to their promises of
Remonstrated Liberty to all.

This seemed a smart reflection: but let me answer a word, not for Men, but for
the Lord in them; nor yet against Man, but for the Lord in you, my Brethren.

First, It was on my heart to ask you, Are you the Prophets of the Lord as
Jeremiah was, or are ye Ministers of the Gospel, as Paul, etc? Secondly, Do you
speak of the People of God as confined to your own gathered Churches, or the
People of God scattered in the Nation? Thirdly, Were your thoughts theirs; or
were they all taken up with you in the Parliament lately dissolved? Fourthly,
Did not the People of God in general pray, or wait for, not what was to be set
up as a Crown on the head of a particular party, or sect, but what might (with
God) arise for the good of the Saints, and Nation in common? Fifthly, Not to
make comparisons or parties again, is not the appearance of God as glorious in
the 7000 Saints scattered and secret in Israel, as those in gathered Churches,
though the Prophet knows not, nor ownes all the hidden ones of the Lord? 1
King. 19 18. Sixthly, Not to offend Mr. Rogers; did he speak by a Prophetic or
an Apostolic Spirit? were his last Proposals to the Parliament, or now to the
Lord Protector, suitable to a Gospel-State, which he professes? I am sure his
former Proposals for way of Government were merely legal, and far below that
glory the Saints are waiting for in themselves, and to the nation also. Zach.
12.7, 8. Seventhly, Let me ask, Is it according to the order of the Gospel,
for Ministers of Christ to meddle with Civil Government, seeing his Kingdom is
not of this World? Joh. 18.36. Luke 22. 25. Eighthly, Did ever the Ministers of
the Gospel speak against Principalities and Powers, though as bad as Nero? Romans
13.1, 2. etc. 1 Timothy 2.2. Titus 3.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Ninthly, Does Civil
Government concern the glory of the Gospel? is Monarchy in a King any more
against the reign of Christ, then Aristocracy in a Parliament? is not the
State of Holland, and Commonwealth of Venice, as much for Antichrist, as the
King of France or Spain? Isa, 19.11, 13* compared. Tenthly, Will not Christ
when he comes to reign put down all Authority, power and Rule? not only
Monarchical Authority, but Aristocratical Power, and Democratick Rule? not that
Rulers shall not be over Men, but God alone will appear to be King over All.
Psalm 72.11. Eleventhly, When God shall be all in all, there shall be but one
King in all the Earth, and his name one. Zach. 14.9. then the names of
Presbyter, Independent, and Anabaptist shall cease in the Church, yea, the
names of Cavaleer, Roundhead, and Romanist shall be no more heard in the
Commonwealth. Twelfthly, Is it not for peace, to satisfy all interests, and to
sement the divided Spirits of the Nation, that all Englishmen should become as
one, when none shall be received before other? You say that the worst of men
speak well of the present Government; and is it not well? and a fair way for
peace and love?
As for my deer Countryman Mr. Powels preaching, I could not but cleave to his
peaceable spirit at the end of his Sermon, persuading his brethren to meddle no
more with Civil matters, but to speak of spiritual glories, which he held forth
in the Reign of Christ, and the Saints with him on Earth.

But because (me thought) my Brothers conceits were too carnal and earthly of
this heavenly mystery, and besides he gave me leave to object, I shall in
meekness and fear, give a reason of the hope that is in me concerning this.

First, It Is plain that Christ is a mystery which he and I do not yet clearly
know, nor can manifest unto men, having not the manifestation of the Spirit,
given to the Apostles and primitive Churches. Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 1.27. Secondly,
Christ in us the hope of glory being that mystery of God not to be finished
till the seventh Trumpet blow, What can he or I say to this, unless we have
heard the sound thereof? Rev. 10.7. Thirdly, Though he speak with considence,
yet can I but in much confusion declare, that, as Christ in the flesh was none
other but the mighty God even the Father? glory manifest in flesh: so Christ in
the Spirit, or Christ in us, is God manifest in our flesh as in his. Isa. 9.6.
Joh. 14.9.10 20. ver. Fourthly, Christ in us the hope of glory is this to me,
that the Glory he had with God before the world (though veiled in his flesh
while living) (yet after that his pure flesh was sacrificed and slain unto God
by death) was fully revealed in the Resurrection; and he raised to glory was
this in truth, even God raised, and his glory fully revealed in him. Psalm.
68.1, 18. 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. Fifthly, Christ was raised a spiritual body and
though nothing but flesh appeared to his Disciples, (not able to behold his
glory) yet that he was a spiritual and glorious body indeed, appears by this,
that our bodies shall be spiritual also in the mystery of the Resurrection,
much more was his body spiritual when raised: 1 Cor. 15.44, 51. Sixthly,
Therefore Christ in us is called the Hope of Glory, because God being in our
flesh as in his, we have hereby hope, to be raised up in the same glory or
heavenly Image, and to attain to the Resurrection of the dead: that God even
the Father may fully appear in our flesh as in him raised from death; that God
may be all in all. Phil. 3.10, 11, 12, 14. Joh. 17.22, 24. Sevently, As the
Captain of our salvation was made perfect by suffering, and Christ through
suffering entered into Glory: so in the fellowship of his sufferings in our
flesh, we come to the power of his Resurrection, and appearance of that glory
in us, Heb. 2.10. Heb. 5.8.9. Eighthly, Therefore as the Apostle says, If the
Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up
Jesus from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies: so says he again,
Always bearing in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of
Jesus may be manifest in our mortal flesh. Romans 8.11. 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. Ninthly,
This shows that as the Spirit of Jesus or power of God in our flesh, is still
slaying and crucifying it that we dye daily: so the raising and quickening of
our mortal bodies is, when the life of Jesus appears, (not only after death)
but even in our mortal flesh, while we live, or while our flesh is mortal. Yet
as Christ's life (when raised) was only in the Father: so shall ours be in the
Resurrection, though we live in the flesh, our life shall be in the Father
alone, Joh. 14.20. Tenthly, As Christ when raised began to reign, God exalting
him at his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, and to give forth the
Spirit on the Saints: so the Saints reign with Christ must needs be in the
Spirit also. Acts 5.31. 2 Timothy 2.12. Eleventhly, It Is no earthly Government or
wordly glory is promised to the Saints, but as in the blood of the Lamb they
overcome, etc. so by that blood shed forth in them they are redeemed from among
men, and reign to God. Rev. 12.11. Twelfthly, Therefore it is said, Rev. 5.10.
He has made us to our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth:
that is, thou the Lamb slain in us. v. 6. and by thy blood v. 9.
For as we are made Kings to our God (not over men) so we must be Priests too,
sacrificing and slaying (not men) but all that is self in us, unto God, for the
good of men, and not our own. Therefore in the reign of the Saints with Christ
a thousand years, they are made Priests of God, and of Christ. Rev. 20.6.

Whether Christ shall come to reign personally in flesh, and how, I know not:
but that he shall come in flesh again (as you said) I question, if it be not
far from that spiritual appearance promised. Zech. 14.5.9.

1. For if it be now a Spiritual body, what is the fleshly one you speak shall
appear? 2. If he come again on earth in flesh, how can he appear to all the
Saints at once? for the coming of the Son of man shall be as lightning shining
from east to west. Matthew. 24.27. 3. A fleshly body can be but circumscriptively
in one place at once; therefore to meet with all the Saints then on earth,
Christ must move swifter then the sun, here and there; not only from East to
West, but everywhere, North and South. 4. What his spiritual body is, I may
show you (with God) another time; and how in all places and persons, though it
appear not as yet. 5. How Jesus came in like manner to the disciples, as they
saw him go into heaven, (Acts 1.11.) was told you in the Call to the Churches,
the Letter to Mr. Vavasor Powel. 6. For those men of Galilee (as is there said)
should see him; that is, they while living: for after death, when he comes the
last day (as they say) he will be come down before they can see him coming;
therefore they cannot see him coming down in the same manner as he was taken up
into heaven, he being come down (as I said) before, to raise them. 1 These.
4.16, 17. 7. Again, After a little while ye shall not see me (in flesh) and
after a little while ye shall see me (in spirit:) therefore the sight of him
was spiritual; for his fleshly appearance that men expect at the last day, was
not a little, but a long time to come. Joh. 16.19. 8. Lastly, I will not leave
you comfortless, (or Orphans) I will come unto you. Yet a little while, and the
world sees me no more; but ye see me. How? Because I live, ye shall live also.
That is, when that spirit or power of God in me, shall appear in you, ye
(though living in the flesh) shall see your life in the Father alone: for, in
that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you.
Joh. 14.18, 19, 20.
Sir, you had three distinctions of the Reign of Christ: I Will tell you a fourth
from your own. 1. Providential, over the Nations. 2. Spiritual, over the
Church. 3. Monarchical, over the Church and Nations together.
Zach. 14.8.9, 11. compared.

But this Monarchical Government of Christ, and the Saints of the most High
with him, will not be in Wordly Government and glory; but when God shall stain
the pride of all glory, and bring to contempt all the honorable of the Earth,
when God shall confound, or cloud all Worldly Government, and gross darkness
shall cover the people; then shall the Saints of the most high arise, or shine,
and reign in glory. Compare these Scriptures, Isa. 60.1, 2. and see what
confusion in Isa. 24.1 to 22. in that confusion of heavenly lights, and earthly
hoasts of the high ones, the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and
before his ancients gloriously. v. 23.

So Dan. 7. when the Lord comes, the Thrones are cast down, v. 9. for his
Throne is the fiery flame, and his Wheels as burning fire a fiery stream
issues and comes forth from before him. v. 10.

Oh this fiery appearance of God in the Saints, will frighten and cause to fall
all the proud ones or Powers of the earth, and that King especially who comes
after the ten Kings, who is diverse from the first, and who shall subdue three
Kings (or Kingdoms) even he who shall speak great words against the most High
(in his Saints) and shall wear out the Saints of the most High. v. 25.

The Saints of the most High are not those who are falsely accused, as living
above Ordinances, for they are far below them* but those who live above earthly
things in the Lord alone. These are said, not to be wasted and worried by the
last King, but he shall wear them out, wear out their Spirits, in waiting for
that righteousness which appears not, for that Truth and peace, pity,
tenderness, mercy, justice, and goodness waited for in good men when they come
to reign: but all this will be in the reign of Christ, when God alone shall
reign in Men. Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3 4 12, 13.

But these two things I observe from Daniel. First, that the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most high. v. 27. not that the Saints of the most high shall be in outward
Government, and regal Authority, as other Princes have been* but when the
greatest and most glorious Kingdoms and Commonwealths shall be so shaken, and
torn, and tattered, so divided and dashed in pieces that no man will take up a
Crown in the Streets; then judgment shall be given to the Saints, (they shall
have a spirit of judgment to discern aright of Rule and Government) and the
Saints shall possess the Kingdom. v. 22. that poor thing, a Kingdom, which no
man would take up or be troubled with, that the Saints shall take, v. 18. and
possess in peace living in God above all the powers of man above all confusions
and changes, and above all the trouble on earth. v. 25. for Daniels cogitations
were troubled, and his countenance changed, to think of those evils
approaching in the last times unto men, and mighty ones. v. 28.

The second thing I observe from Daniels words, is this, that the Kingdom there
spoken of, is an everlasting Kingdom. v. 25. and the Saints shall possess the
Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. v. 18.

Hence I gather, that the reign of Christ and the Saints, for a thousand
years, is a mystery, Rev. 20.6. for his Kingdom is for ever: and truly it is
marvailous to me, that so many Saints should interpret the thousand years so
carnally, when themselves confess, that all the Revelation besides, is a
mystery, or spiritual secret. Yet the thousand must needs be ten hundred years
just.

But if one day with God be a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day,
why may not the day of God (called that one day) be the thousand years? Zach.
14.7. 2 Pet. 3.8.

Again, as the dead in Christ rise first: so the souls (not of all the Saints,
but of some) and not the bodies, but the souls of those who are beheaded for
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which have not worshipped
the beast, neither his Image, neither had received his mark upon their
foreheads nor in their hands, (who conform not to any false Ministry, nor
Church, nor corrupt thing) These lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

What God has taught me herein, I may tell you another time: only now,
because the present Government is judged with so much dissembling and breach of
Vows, Let me end with this brief Apology, not for man, (as I said before) but
for the mighty God, who has appeared so gloriously in them, and in former
Parliaments, and in Army too, that he has stained the pride of all glory, and
the glory of all flesh, tumbling the earth upside down, and tossing to and fro
the Government thereof, that nothing but confusion has appeared; what
certainty then can be expected in such changes? what order in confusion? yea
what Truth, when God is making man a lie? Isa. 40.6, 7, 13, to 17. what Oaths
of Allegiance? what Covenants broken? yet in both, hands have been lifted up to
Heaven by honest hearts: what Protestations, Remonstrances, and Engagements are
gone and vanished? First we were all for the King, then for none, yet for King
and Parliament we fought, then for neither: once we professed for the house of
Lords, but these were pesently laid aside: then for the Commons only, and yet
not for that, but for a Parliament or Representative; this dis-appeares also:
and now for King and Parliament again, and yet for neither; for all is nothing,
because God is all in all. Isa. 40.17.

Oh cease ye from man, whose hreath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he
accounted of? and let the Lord alone be exalted, whose day being upon every
high Tower, and upon every high thing, to throw it down, let all the people of
God, even the highest, be humble, lie low as may be, lest they fall at last,
lower then any people or Princes. Isa. 2.6, to 22.

And if it be possible that the people of God can be quiet, and sit still in
peace, under their own Vine and Figtree, waiting for the glorious appearance of
the great God and Savior in themselves; that the Nations about may be brought
in and saved at last, and join to the Lord with them. Zach. 2.10 11 Rev. 21.24.

And seeing the Princes of Israel begin to appear, and the people of God are in
present power (as 'twas never before) I hope they will hear what has been said
by their brethren, though carried forth with much zeal, which (being according
to their knowledge, and that knowledge the light of God in them, and they led
forth with that boldness, and that forbearance appearing in the powers also,
and such peace and love still abiding in both) tells me, that these Wars and
wranglings will shortly cease in the Nation, in which God will so appear with
power and glory, that all the nations about shall be broken, or brought in with
us at last to the Government of Jesus.

That is, when God alone shall reign in Men, and Men reign in Righteousness
and Righteousness arise in Truth, then shall the Royal law, and rule of Christ
in love be followed: That Men and Magistrates shall do to all as they would be
done unto, or rather, do to Men as God would. That Is the Reign of Christ and
God in Men.

Till then, Remove the Diadem and take off the Crown; this shall not be the
same: exalt him that is low, abase him that is high. I will overturn,
overturne, overturne, and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is,
and I will give it him. Ezekiel. 21.26, 27.

He shall judge the Poor of the people, he shall save the Children of the
needy, and break in pieces the Oppressor. Psalm. 72.4.
FINIS.

