ERRORS Appearing in the PROCEEDINGS IN THE HOUSE Of PEERS IN PARLIAMENT In the
First and Second Years of the Reign of King CHARLES the First, In the Case
betwixt Robert De Vere Earl of Oxford, and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby,
Concerning the Office of Great Chamberlain of England.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

Errors appearing in the Proceedings in the House of PEERS in Parliament, in
the First and Second years of the Reign of King Charles the First, in the Case
betwixt Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby,
concerning the Office of Great Chamberlain of England.
THe Intention of the KINGS Reference, directing the Lords in Parliament to
take the Judges Assistance and advice in matter of Law, was not performed when
they took the opinion but of Five Judges, which were not half of the Judges of
England.

Did not certify the King according to his Reference that they found, but only
the majority of the Judges opi^^ons.

Did give their advice, when they were only to certify that they found, and
their opinions (there being a grand dif^^^ence betwixt an opinion of the Lords
in Parliament) declaring in which of the Competitors the Right resided, and an
advice of the Lords in Parliament how and in what manner his late Majesty
should declare and settle the Earldome upon One, and the Office upon the Other.

In the Report of the Judges of the 20th of March 1625, to the Peers in
Parliament, Recorded in the Journals of the House of Peers, there is a
manifest Error as concerning the said Office of Great Chamberlain, and the
Baronies of Bulbeck, Sandford, and Badlesmere, for that they do therein mention
that the Baronies of Bulbeck, Sandford, and Badlesmere descended to the general
Heirs

Of John the Fourth, Earl of Oxford, who had Issue John the Fifth, Earl of
Oxford, and three Daughters; one of them married to the Lord Latimer, another
to Wingfield, and another to Knightley.

Which John the Fifth, Earl of Oxford dying without Issue, those Baronies
descended upon his said Daughters and Heirs.

And being not divideable, are and do remain in the Crown.

Whereupon the House agreed upon the Question,

That the Baronies of Bulbeck, Sandford, and Badlesmere are in the Kings
disposition.

Whereas in truth

It was John the Fourth, Earl of Oxford of that Christian name, who dyed in 18.
H. 8. without Issue.

And the three Daughters mentioned were neither the Daughters of the said John
the Fourth, nor of the said John the Fifth,

But of Sir George Vere Knight, third Son of John the Second, Earl of Oxford,
who dyed in primo E. 4.

And the said John the Fifth, Earl of Oxford, was the Father of John the Sixth,
Earl of Oxford of that Christian name, (from whom descended Edward Earl of
Oxford, and Henry Earl of Oxford his Son, deceased without Issue) and Awbrey de
Vere his Second Son great Grandfather of Awbrey de Vere now Earl of Oxford.

And by the Judges not stating the whole Fact, and the Lords in Parliament not
certifying as the King required them, what they found, there happened also
other manifest Errors in that Certificate and opinion, viz. a making a Descent
and Title to the said Lord Willoughby of the Office of Great Chamberlain in
Fee, which could not be if John the Fifth, Earl of Oxford dyed without Issue,
leaving his three Daughters and Heirs who were as aforesaid severally married
to the Lord Latimer, and to Wingfield and Knightley.

For that there would then have been a descent to those three Daughters and
Heirs of the Office of Great Chamberlain, as well as they supposed of the
Baronies of Bulbeck, Sandford, and Badlesmere.

Whether they were the Sisters and Heirs (as in truth they were) of John the
Fourth, Earl of Oxford, who dyed without Issue, or the Daughters and Heirs (as
in truth they were not) of John the Fifth, Earl of Oxford, who dyed not without
Issue, but has Issue and Heir Male of his body, Awbrey Earl of Oxford now
living.

And if the Office be not dividable, or as they concluded the Baronies to be,
must by their own reasons and opinion be in the King.

Or if John the Sixth, Earl of Oxford (Father of Mary the Lord Willoughbies
Ancestress) was not seized of the said Office in 4. Eliz. when he made the Deed
of Uses or Intail; Or if he were, and did forfeit it by alienating that Office
without the Kings License or pardon of Alienation, which appears by the
Arguments of the Lord Chief Justice Crew and Justice Dodridge to be a more then
an ordinary point stirred in that case.

And if Tradition say truth, was the only cause of Baron Trevors casting Vote,
Error and Opinion, the Office of Great Chamberlain yet remains in the King.

And if the then Judges had rightly certified the Lords in Parliament in that
particular, and concerning that point,

It would have appeared to the Lords in Parliament, or to His late Majesty if
their Certificate and opinion had not been mis-guided, that the right of the
said Office of Great Chamberlain was in the Ear^s of Oxford according to the
ancient and constant usage and course of Baronies, Offices and Places of Honor
in England, which has (as may be proved by diverse precedents in other
Families) always taken care that such Honors and Dignities should remain to
the Heirs Males, on whom the Lands of the Baronies, though not the Baronies and
Honors themselves were entailed, and passed by the Heirs Female (though nearer
in blood) to the Ancestor which last enjoyed them, and settled them upon the
Males in a collateral line, where the Males of the right line dyed without
Issue Male; being most agreeable tot he intention and meaning of the Grant of
the said Office to Albericke de Vere, Ancestor of the now Earl of Oxford, by
King H. 1. the said Office being not to be executed by a Woman to wear a Staff,
or attend the King in his Bedchamber.

Or if the Office of Great Chamberlain of England had in strictness of Law
reverted to the Crown and come to the King, he might (where it was not
dividable amongst Heirs Females) have settled it, as was done in this
particular Office of Great Chamberlain upon an Earl of Oxford in 18. H. 8.

And when the five Judges nemine dissentiente had the 20th. day of March, 1625.
made their Report and certified their opinion to the House of Peers in
Parliament, that the Earldom of Oxford by virtue of an Intail by Act of
Parliament in 16. R. 2. was descended, and of right ought to come to the said
Robert, Earl of Oxford, and the Heirs Male of his body.

The Lords in Parliament did the 22d. day of that March, agree upon the
question, That the Earldom of Oxford was descended, and ought of right to come
to the Heir Male, nemine dissentiente.

And agreeing upon the question concerning the said Office of Great
Chamberlain, that the Judges should consider and report to the House whether
the Earl of Oxford, who made the Intail of the said Office, were at that time
seized of the said Office.

And admitting he were seized of the said Office, Then whether such an Office
may be conveyed by way of limitting uses.

The former of which Questions, viz:

Whether John, Earl of Oxford was seized of the said Office when he made the
said Intail, does not at all appear in the Report of the Judges to have been
considered, as the House directed. The Chief Justice Crew not at all mentioning
it in his Argument; And Justice Dodridge only leaving it as a matter of Fact
not proved, admitted it only by way of Supposition, which by evidence since
come to the Earl of Oxfords hands can be fully proved.

And the 20th. of that March, 1625. The Petition of William Earl of Derby, and
Elizabeth his Wife, eldest Daughter of Edward Earl of Oxford, to the King,
Praying His Majesty to give Order that the Lords in Parliament might upon the
hearing of the Judges Opinions, forbear to give their Voices for the Lord
Willoughby in any thing which ought to descend upon the Heir general, The
Petitioners conceiving that their Title in right of the said Lady Elizabeth,
eldest Daughter of the said Edward Earl of Oxford; Father of the said Henry
Earl of Oxford, ought to be preferred.

Being read in the House of Peers, and the Lord Keeper signifying that His
Majesty had referred that Petition unto their Lordships in such manner as He
did reser the other Petitions.

Before the Judges Report, of their Opinions concerning the Competitors, the
Earl of Oxford and the said Lord Willoughby, and their several Claims to the
Earldom of Oxford; and Office of Great Chamberlain of England.

And giving in their several Opinions and the Reasons of their differences in
opinion touching the said Office of Great Chamberlain of England, upon Tuesday
the 28th. of March 1626.

The House notwithstanding the Petition of the Earl of Derby and his Wife to be
first heard before they should give their Votes concerning the Title of the
said Lord Willoughby to the Office of Lord Great Chamberlain.

And their Order made the said 28th. day of March, 1626. That they would hear
the Council of the said Earl of Derby, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, and the
Lord Willoughby, at the Bar the next Thursday morning.

And then if the time would permit give their Resolutions touching the said
Office.

Did notwithstanding that the Council of the said Earl of Derby and his Lady,
and the Lord Willoughby, were not (as appears by the Journals of the House of
Peers in Parliament) heard the said Thursday, being the 30th. of March, nor
upon the next day, being Friday, the 31. of that Month of March, but respited
until the first of April, 1626. which was the next day after, put the said 31.
day of March, 1626. to the Question, Resolve, and Agree, that the said Office
of Lord great Chamberlain, was come and descended to the Heir General of the
last Earl of Oxford, not determining or mentioning whether the said Lord
Willoughby, or the Lady Elizabeth the Wife of the said Earl of Derby, or the
Lord Windsor not Petitioning were the Heirs general, or which of them were of
the half or the whole Blood to the last Earl of Oxford, or for what reason, or
upon what grounds the Heirs of the Lord Latimer, Wingfield and Knightley, or
the Lord Windsor and the Earl of Derby and his Wife were excluded, which in
that Case would have been necessary.

And the Duke of Buckingham thereupon signifying to the House, that the King
required that His Council might be heard touching his Title and Claim to the
Gift of the said Office.

It appears that, that Vote and Resolve, touching the descending of the said
Office to the Heir General of the last Earl of Oxford was made before the
Council of the said Lady Elizabeth and the Earl of Derby were at all heard and
before it could be discerned or determined by the House which of the
Competitors, viz. The said Lord Willoughby or the Earl of Derby's Lady were the
Heirs General.

And before the Kings Title was heard or inquired into.

And upon the hearing afterward of the Council of the Competitors, viz. The
said Earl of Derby and his Wife, and the Lord Willoughby, it does not appear by
the Journals of the House, that the Judges were at all consulted, or any Report
made by them touching the Earl of Derbey's Petition.

Though in the Certificate of the House to His Majesty, there is mention made
that they had consulted the Judges, which is to be understood in relation only
to the Case betwixt the Earl of Oxford and the Lord Willoughby, wherein they
were consulted, but not of the Earl of Derby wherein they were not consulted.

And the house did certify the Judges opinions, That the Office of great
Chamberlain did belong to the said Lord Willoughby.

When in their Vote and Resolves of the 31 th. of March 1626. they did only
agree that it belonged to the Heir General, not naming or mentioning which of
the Competitors, viz. the said Earl of Derby, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife,
or the Lord Willoughby was that Heir General.

And Justice Dodridge one of the three Judges, who is supposed to have made the
Majority of Voices, That the Office of Great Chamberlain of England did belong
to the said Lord Willoughby, as Heir General of Henry the last Earl of Oxford
deceased, did not resolve or declare that the said Office of Great Chamberlain
did (as Justice Yelverton and Baron Trevor had declared it) appertain to the
said Lord Willoughby, as Heir General to Henry the last Earl of Oxon, but to
the Heir General of Henry the last Earl of Oxford, without naming the said Lord
Willoughby, or determining who was that Heir General.

So as it may well be concluded, that there was but two Judges that declared
the Lord Willoughby to be that Heir General.

And then not three Judges of the five, nor the majority of those five Judges
did, as the Certificate of the House bearing date the fifth day of that April
alleges, resolve that the said Office of Lord great Chamberlain did belong to
the said Lord Willoughby.

For that if the Lord Windsors, Lord Willoughbyes, and the Countess of Derbeys
Ancestors were of the half blood to Edward and Henry Earls of Oxford, the said
Robert Earl of Oxford was of the whole blood and collateral line, (the linea
recta being expired) to John Earl of Oxford, who in 4. Eliz. entailed upon him
in Remainder the Office of Lord Great Chamberlain, and all the Lands belonging
to the Earldom of Oxford; some of which, viz. The Castle of Hedingham being the
Caput Baroniae and parcel of the Earldome were held in Grand Serjeanty by the
Service of being great Chamberlain.

And the Lord Willoughby could not, as the house certified the King, and as
some of the Judges resolved, be heir general to Henry Earl of Oxford, to whom
his mother was but of the half blood, but if heir general to any, must have
been heir general to the said Edward Earl of Oxford.

And upon the Resolves of the Peers in Parliament before the Kings Counsel were
heard in it, that the Office did descend to the Heir General of the last Earl
of Oxford, and their Resolves after hearing of the Kings Counsel that there
should be a Salvo Jure Regis, if the matter of Fact had been as it ought to
have been truly stated to the King.

His Majesty might, as in such Cases was usual, have advised with his Council
learned in the Law, how and in what manner to have given his Judgment therein.

Which advice with the Kings Council learned in the Law appears not to have
been taken:

Nor any Report made to the House of Peers of the Kings acceptance, or liking
of their Opinion and Certificate, as it was of Queen Elizabeth in the 29th.
year of her Reign, in the Case betwixt the Lord La Ware and the Lord Berkly for
precedence.

The delivery of the Staff shortly after to the Lord Willoughby, and his taking
his p^ace in the House of Peers, according to the Statute of H. 8. makes not a
legal Judgment either of the King or the House of Peers in Parliament.

For that does not signify any more then an Office during the Kings pleasure,
and a Temporary estate therein, as when Sir Thomas Erpingham and others
heretofore had and enjoyed that Office, whilst it was wrongfully detained from
the Earls of Oxford.

And if the King had given any Judgment in this Case, it would have been in
the form or manner usual of Judgments given and entered in Parliament.

As in that memorable Case betwixt John Earl of Arundel, and John Duke of
Norff. touching the Earldome of Arundel, which the Duke of Norff. claimed as
Heir General; and the Earl of Arundel by reason of the possession of the Castle
and Lordship of Arundel, to which the Earldome of Arundel was united and
appurtenant, both the Competitors having Petitioned King H. 6. in Parliament in
An. 11. of his Reign, the Judgment was so emnly in this form and manner, viz.

Audita and intellecta Petitione habitaque super materiis in eadem contentis,
and aliis praemissis cum Justiciariis and aliis Legis peritis ac caeteris de
Consilio Domini Regis in dicto Parliamento existentibus, deliberatione,
communicatione, and avisamento auditis etiam hinc inde nonnullis profundis et
maturis rationibus, allegationibus, et motivis de Avisamento and Assensu
Praelatorum, Ducum, Comitum, and Baronum in instanti Parliamento existentium,
Dominus Rex hiis and aliis ductus considerationibus and motivis, Decrevit,
Instituit and Declaravit, etc. Salvo Jure ipsius Ducis Norfolciae, vel alterius
cujuslibet in hac part, etc.

And the like or in the form of a Judgment entered upon the Parliament Roll,
where the Questions for precedence betwixt Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, and
Henry Duke of Warwick, in 23. H. 6. And in 26. H. 6. for precedence betwixt
Thomas Earl of Devonshire, and William Earl of Arundell,


