AN ESSAY ON HYPOCRISY AND Pharisaism.

As it was set forth in a SERMON By a Curate of SOULS.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, for Charles Yeo Bookseller in
Exon. 1683.

To the Worshipful WILLIAM LACY Sen. Esquire One of His Majesty's Deputy
Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace for the County of SOMERSET.
Honored Sir,
THe Author of this ensuing Discourse has been importuned by diverse Friends to
make it public long since. If he had done it himself, you might have expected
a more formal Epistle. But it seems other Considerations or Persons have been
more prevalent with him. He has notwithstanding, upon a Friends request, been
so courteous as to impart a Copy of it for my own satisfaction. And truly,
whatever his reasons may be against it, I am confident they cannot outweigh
the significancy of its Publication. I have therefore adventured upon his
Candor, to do that Service to the World, which his Modesty, or I know not
what, would not permit him: And also to Dedicate his Endeavors to Your self,
not only because you are a great friend to the Author (as of whom he often
speaks with the most grateful resentments) but also because you are a known
Patron of his Subject, of that Truth and Simplicity, that Ingenuity and
Sincerity which he contends for.

If I have herein made too bold with you or him, I leave my good intention to
plead for me, and beg pardon.

J. W.

LUKE 12.1. -- First of all, beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy.


AS for the Occasion of these words, it arose upon an invitation of our Savior
to a Dinner by one of the Pharisees. Now it was a custom with the Pharisees to
wash just before they sat down to meat: which they strictly observed as a
matter of Religion. And because our Savior did not make so superstitious an
account of it, therefore the Pharisee marvelled that he had not washed before
dinner. Whereupon our Lord took occasion to speak his mind freely to the
Pharisees.

He told them, that while they took so much care to make clean the outside,
their inward parts were full of ravening and wickedness. And therefore he
denounced several woes against the Pharisees for being so over-nice and zealous
about their external rites, that so they might appear righteous unto men,
whilst in the mean time they neglected the weightier matters of the Law, and
were inwardly full of most dangerous refervs, most wicked and abominable
designs.

Upon this the proud Pharisees were sorely netled, and presently they were for
revenge upon our Savior, cap. 11. v. 53, 54. As he said these things unto
them, the Scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to
provoke him to speak of many things, laying wait for him, and seeking to catch
something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him. And while they were hot
in discourse, in the mean time there were gathered together an innumerable
company of people, insomuch that they trod one upon another; and he began to
say to his Disciples, (they were nearest to him, but so as all the people
heard) and what did he say? why, First of all, beware of the Leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

These Pharisees it seems were a dangerous and ensnaring sort of folk: they
were men of the deepest dissimulation and disguise; they were right skilled in
the crafty tricks of insinuation and surprizal, and had always treacherous
designs upon such as were not of their Sect and Persuasion. Oh they were a
viperous generation! They devised all the ways they could to catch and entangle
our blessed Savior: but he knowing their hearts, could the better prevent and
avoid them. Yet their guile being not so discernible to others, to the intent
therefore that the harmless world might not any longer be so much abused and
imposed on by their frauds; He made it his business ever and anon to discover
the wiles and arts of the Pharisees, and the danger of them; and to stir up his
Auditors with all earnestness and importunity to have the mightiest care of
them that they could. As first of all, (or chiefly and above all things) to
beware of this Leaven, the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy.

To give this Text its due, I conceiv these three things should be done.

1. Should be set forth the nature of Hypocrisy in general; that we do not
proceed upon a mistaken Ground. 2. The special and eminent Hypocrisy mentiond
in the Text, the Leaven of the Pharisees; that we may have a distinct
understanding of it. 3. The danger of this Hypocrisy; that we may be the more
cautious of it. I shall endeavor accordingly,
First, To state unto you the nature of Hypocrisy in general. And indeed much
of the nature of things is many times discovered in their names. The word
Hypocrite does properly signify a Stageplayer, one that undertakes to personate
others in their speech or habit, their action or demeanor, and when it is used
in religious and moral concerns (as it is always in the Scriptures) it denotes a
naughty person in the shape and guise of one that is a religious and good man.

The Heb. word (...) signifyes both a wicked man and a deceiver, q. d. one that
is really wicked, but deceives men by seeming otherwise. And our Savior sets
forth the Hypocrites, Mat. 6. by their giving alms, and praying and fasting: by
performing their religious exercises in the most eminent and conspicuous ways;
that they may be seen of men, and deemed to be very holy persons, when
meanwhile their hearts are full of all abominations.

As to the rank and station of Hypocrisy among the vices, it stands in
opposition to the christian virtue of simplicity and sincerity whereof the
Aposte speaks, 2. Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
we have had our conversation here in this world, and more abundantly toward
you. Sincerity is that virtue whereby we do honestly and fairly make known our
minds, when it is proper to discover ourselvs, to one another: and the Apostle
had conversed so ingenuously in this respect, that he had great comfort in
himself about it, and he did even rejoice to think on it. But his conversation
could have bin no such Cordial to him, if he had had it in fleshly wisdom; i.
e. if he had craftily imposed on the world by representing things or persons
otherwise than indeed they were, with an evil purpose. Fleshly wisdom is a
general term (I take it) whereby the Scripture intends all manner of craft and
guile for the promotion of naughty ends: but when Religion or virtue is
counterfeited for such purposes, the Holy Ghost calls it by the more proper and
special name of Hypocrisy.

From what has bin said of Hypocrisy in general, we may adventure these two
Conclusions. 1. That the subject matter of all Hypocrisy is an endeavoring to
beguile the world into an erroneous opinion of oneself. 2. That the form and
fashion of it, wherein it differs from other sorts of fraud, is the form of
Godliness, the shape and color of Virtue and Religion. Accordingly we may
define it: Hypocrisy is an endeavoring to deceive the world into an erroneous
opinion of oneself by sacred pretenses. This is the account of Hypocrisy in
general.

The Scripture mentions two sorts of it. One is a deceiving men with pretenses
of love and friendship. Friendship and brotherly kindness, they are sacred
things; and when men make show of these, and have none in their hearts, the
Scripture calls it Hypocrisy. So we understand Solomon, Prove. 11.9.
when he says, an Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his neighbor. Such was
the Hypocrisy of Joab to Abner: and of Judas in betraying his Master: and S.
Paul's love without dissimulation, Romans 12.9.1. Pet. 1, 22.
and S. Peter's love unfeigned, it is in the Greek (...), love without
Hypocrisy.

But this cannot be the eminent Hypocrisy, the Leaven of the Pharisees,
forasmuch as this is common to all sorts of men. Any base treacherous man, of
whatsoever Profession, Sect, or Persuasion, might then in our Savior's time,
and may and do still, use this Hypocrisy. It is indeed the design of all
Hypocrisy, to be seen and approved of men, to insinuate into and captivate the
affections of the spectators. But this any other might do as well as the
Pharisees; so that this is not enough to set forth the distinct and peculiar
Hypocrisy of the Pharisees.

There is therefore yet another sort of Hypocrisy set forth in the holy
Scripture; and that is, an endeavoring to deceive others into an erroneous
opinion of oneself, by pious and religious pretenses to Godward. The form of
the other was in show of friendship and kindness for man: This consists of like
pretenses of respect for God. They may both be distinguished into Ordinary and
extraordinary. Friendly Hypocrisy in Ordinary, is when we receive all common
Civility and usual respects from men that have no kindness at all for us in
their hearts, but do bear evil will at us. It is Extraordinary, when we meet
with a multitude of fair words and endearing protestations, with high and
mighty compliments from persons no better disposed toward us, and perhaps
worse than ordinary.

So for Religious Hypocrisy. The Ordinary sort of it is an outward compliance
with such Forms and Modes of Religion as the Law requires, and are generally in
use among the people, when all the while the heart goes another way. This was
their Hypocrisy of whom the Lord complains, Ezec. 33.31, 32. They come unto
thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear
thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much Love,
but their heart goes after their Covetousness. And lo thou art unto them as a
very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not, q. d. they would
resort to the places of the public worship of God, and therein demean
themselves according to the venerable Sanctions of the times, when their hearts
were quite estranged from it.

But neither could this be all the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, forasmuch as
the Sadduces or any other sort of men might be equally guilty of this
Hypocrisy. Besides, there is no such danger of this Hypocrisy to others, as
our Savior implies of the Leaven of the Pharisees by his earnest caution in
the Text. There is indeed a great deal of danger in this Hypocrisy, to those
persons that are guilty of it; and they will one day be convinced of it to
their utmost peril, if they do not keep their hearts with all diligence, and
endeavor to suit them to their pretenses in things of this nature. But there
is no danger of seducing others into any inconvenience by it: Because this is
that which is required and expected from them, viz. an outward conformity in
Religion. What danger is it to me to receiv common Civility from a man, and due
respect according to the usual custom of the world, although perhaps his heart
does contradict it? But if he treat me with extraordinary endearment, with a
burden of flattery and colloguing, which I can assign to no reasonable cause,
nor derive from any other fountain than a design upon me; why, every one knows
this to be very suspicious and dangerous. But the ordinary show of respect and
kindness is no more than what every one expects, and therefore no way
dangerous. Now such is the danger of Religious Hypocrisy. The outward
compliance with the common rules and practice is every ones duty: and if any
man's heart does not consent, Jam. 1, 22.
let him see to it. S. James determines it not so much a deceiving others, as
deceiving his own self. For how should it move others, if a man act as they do,
and as they require? If he does not mean as he pretends, who can tell that? The
humane Laws can exact only outward compliance, they cannot search the heart.
Because therefore there is no such danger of this Hypocrisy, and what ever the
danger be, because we cannot discern the hearts of men, and know how to avoid
it; I conceiv this common sort, this religious Hypocrisy in Ordinary (as I
call it) is not the Leaven of the Pharisees which our Savior does so earnestly
caution us to beware of.

But then there is religious Hypocrisy in Extraordinary, i. e. when men will
not be content with those forms and measures of Public Devotion which the Laws
and practice of the Church do direct, but must have New Modes of their own
devising; and take larger measures than are commonly used, that so they may be
much observed, and thereby gain to themselves some secular advantage, or do
mischief to others. This is religious Hypocrisy in Extraordinary, viz. an
endeavoring to deceiv others into an erroneous opinion of oneself, by
pretending more Religion and Piety toward God in the sight of men, than is
required or usually practiced among the major part of the Neighborhood.

When men will be clearer than the Light, wiser than the Law, more regular than
the Rule, over-critical and pragmatical in Religious exercises; when they
affect a singularity, pretending to transcendent and unusual measures of
Devotion, and all this for the better effecting worldly ends and purposes, it
is the grossest Hypocrisy, it is religious Hypocrisy in Extraordinary. This
was the Hypocrisy of young Absolon, when he pretended a religious Vow to the
Lord in Hebron, that he might steal away and engage the hearts of the people
from his aged and indulgent father. This was the Hypocrisy of Jeroboam the son
of Nebat, in setting up separate places of public worship at Dan and Bethel,
upon pretense of easing the people; when the design of it was, for fear if they
should go up to do sacrifice at Jerusalem, their hearts should return to their
Lord, even to Rehoboam King of Judah: and this was the Hypocrisy of Judas,
when he grudged the expense of the precious ointment on his Masters head,
saying, To what purpose is this wast? for this ointment might have bin sold for
much, and given to the poor. This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but
because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare that which was put therein.
And that this was also the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, will appear, upon
enquiry into three things concerning them. They are these.

1. The Being and Original of their Sect. 2. A few of their most remarkable
Opinions. 3. Their practical Excesses in matters of Religion.
1. For the being and original of their Sect, what they were, and whence they
did derive. And touching this, you shall understand how that anciently, before
the time of the Maccabees, there were but two professed differences in Religion
amongst the Jews: one of these Sects was called the Karraim; they were such as
adhered wholly to the written Law, and allowed only of the Scripture for the
Canon of Religion. The other was called the Assidim, i. e. greater zealots in
Religion than Ordinary; they admitted sundry additions to the Law, and had also
the Traditions and Glosses of their Fathers in equal esteem with the written
Law. Bishop Hall calls them supererogatory and Popish Jews, men that professed
a stricter holiness than the Law required. Out of these sprang the Sect of the
Pharisees, as you shall hear by and by.

Concerning these Assideans, Scaliger informs us that they did sequester
themselves from worldly business, Jos. Scal. elench. Trihaer. Nic. Serrar. cap.
22.
and of their own free accord devoted themselves in an extraordinary manner to
matters of Religion; that they were a sort of Guild or Religious Corporation,
concluded under certain Rules of Order and Fraternity. He supposes them to
derive from the house of the Rechabites in this manner. The Rechabites (ye
know) of whom the Prophet Jeremiah speaks, they instituted an austere Order
of Religion and Devotion amongst themselves: but the Captivity coming upon them
shortly after its institution, the Order was dissolved; and again upon their
return, the sons of Jonadab renewed their former observations, and without
restriction of them to their own family, admitted whomsoever would, into their
Order; and then they went under the Denomination of Assideans, i. e. holy men
continually attending the service of Religion. So Scaliger interprets Jeremiahs
prophecy that Jonadab should not want a man to stand before the Lord, i. e. to
minister and attend holy duties, like as did Anna the Prophetess. By the time
of the Maccabees they were grown very considerable. Thus we read, 1 Maccab.
2.42. there resorted to Mattathias a great company of the Assideans, even all
such as were voluntarily devoted to the Law.

As for the particular Rites and Characters of this Order, beside their
continual attendance on holy duties, the Prophet mentions only abstinence from
wine, at their first institution. But in process of time, the number of their
Proselytes increasing, they multiplied also their Religious observations.

And so it was, that while this their way of living and their Austerities were
looked upon as voluntary services, and more than men were antecedently obliged
to in point of salvation; whiles it was so esteemed, there happened no Schism or
Religious faction among the people; they all lived in love and peace together;
they that would be of this Order might, and they that would not might choose,
and be never a whit the less respected in their place; counted still as
brethrenss, and partakers of the same hope, tho these of the holy society were
peculiarly reverenced for their self-denial and Austerity.

But after that they collected their Observations into a body, and Canons and
Injunctions were made and engrossed in writing, there arose among these
Assideans certain Dogmatists, persons that subdivided themselves under a zealous
persuasion for the necessity of their observations. They were such as preached
up the severe rules of their Order as necessary in themselves, and obliging all
men in point of salvation; which others accounted only as extraordinary
Devotion, and voluntary performances. They were men it seems that were
strangely captivated with the rules and practices of their Society, and
mightily employed themselves in the study of the books and Canons of their
Order: But not considering the ground and design of their first institution,
and belike interpreting the Scripture according to them, they came at length to
conceiv and teach them as the Oracles of God, and cried them up for the
unwritten law of Moses received down by Tradition from their Fathers, and
therefore obliging all men to observe them. Hereupon they separated themselves
from the body of the Assideans, and from the vulgar; and they called themselves
Pherushim, or Pharisees, i. e. holy Separatists. So much for the Original and
Derivation of this Sect of the Pharisees; namely, that they sprang out of the
Society of the Assideans, and separated themselves upon a mistake of the
Will Worship or voluntary services of that Order, for necessary Observations
obliging all their Nation on terms of Salvation.

2. Let us enquire a little into one or two of the most eminent and peculiar
Opinions of these Pharisees. 1. The first and fundamental opinions of the
Religion of this Sect was concerning their Traditions. These Traditions they
equalled with the written law, and derived from Moses himself, pretending that
as he gave them a written Law, so also he delivered many things to the Fathers
in the wilderness only by word of mouth, to the intent that they should convey
them down to posterity from generation to generation; and those Traditions
which were in request with the Pharisees, they asserted to be the very same
received from Moses, and taught them with like Authority as the Scriptures; upon
which account our Savior said they taught for doctrines the Commandments of
men. Now this opinion of the Divine Authority of their Traditions was requisite
for them, in the first place, to warrant their Separation, and then to maintain
and propagate their Sect. No persons being able to justify such a case, or
willing to embrace such a persuasion, unless upon pretense of Divine Authority.

Another Opinion was, that none but such as were of their Sect and Persuasion
could be saved. And this opinion, tho it be a very bold and uncharitable
doctrine, is yet very convenient for upholding any religious Sect, because it
is apt to startle the weaker sort of any other Persuasion, and scare them into
a compliance; besides that it fetters their own Proselytes: when they are upon
enquiry after a better way, this thought pulls them back, and holds them to a
stricter Devotion. They had other remarkable Opinions which signified much zeal
for God, or an extraordinary interest in him; but really in effect had a
greater awe upon the people.

3. Let us now enquire how suitable to their principles their practical
excesses in Religion were, whereby our Savior does describe them as beguiling
the people into an opinion of their extraordinary sanctity, when all the while
it was to hide and color their wickedness and villainy, to bring about worldly
ends and purposes. These are frequently here and there intersperst in the
history of our Savior, according as he had occasion to expose and censure
them. But more especially we have a large Catalogue of them, Mat. 23. Where our
Savior observes, that they did bind heavy burdens and grievous to be born, i.
e. they did tyrannize over the consciences of their simple Proselytes, by
imposing on them most rigorous and needless observations. It is also observed
by our Savior, that they made their prayers longer than other men, and would
compass sea and land to make a Proselyte; i. e. they would leave no stone
unturned, but put forth all their Art and Power to bring over a person to their
Persuasion.

Again, they used nice and subtle distinctions about Oaths, saying, Whosoever
should swear by the Temple, it were nothing; but whosoever should swear by the
gold of the Temple, it would oblige him: and whosoever should swear by the
Altar, it were nothing; but swearing by the gift that was upon it, he would
become bound. Moreover, they would pay tithe of Mint, Annise and Cummin, i. e.
they would be very precise and exact about the minutest things relating to the
service of Religion; and they would build the tombs of the Prophets, and
garnish the sepulchers of the righteous. They did pay a mighty respect and
veneration to the memory of those holy men whom their forefathers had martyred,
thereby to bear the world in hand themselves were far from approving such bloody
Tragedyes. They were also superstitiously zealous about the Observation of the
Sabbath; and concerning this they had I cannot tell how many nicetyes;
particularly they objected it to our Savior, as a sin in his hungry Disciples,
for plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath Day. And they were exceeding shy of
their company, for at another time they threw it out to the Disciples as a sin
in our Savior for being familiar with Publicans and sinners.

Moreover, they made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of
their garments. The Phylacteries were narrow scrolls of parchment, whereon they
wore inscribed as many of the Commandments as they would contain, and bound
them about their wrists, and fastened them to their heads, to hang down over
their foreheads between their eyes. This custom arose from a mean and vulgar
understanding of that passage, Deuteronomy. 6.8. where upon recital of the
Commandments, that God might insinuate into their hearts, and rivet them in
their affections, that he might set forth how near and dear he would have the
Observation of his Laws be unto them; he expresses himself by Moses in these
words: Thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes. Which the Jews interpreted in the nearest sense
to the letter, as if they were to find out an expedient to wear them in the
very manner. By the Borders of their garments, we understand those blew
ribbands which they wore upon the fringes of their garments, as enjoined, Number.
15.39. for a remembrance of all the Commandments of the Lord, and to do them.
Now both of these badges were worn by all the Jews in general: but that which
our Savior observes and censures in the Pharisces, was their excess in making
their Phylacteries broader, and their borders larger than the common size, that
so they might seem more religious than their neighbors. Besides, they would
have it known, and did boast, that they had frequenter fasts amongst themselves
than the rest of the Jews had. And they were observed for the most part to be
of a jejune aspect, sad and dismal of countenance; and likewise that they were
ever of a querulous disposition, almost continually complaining of the Evils,
the Vices, and Adversities of their present times, in comparison with the
preceding ages; and how far more happy and Halcyon days there were in the world
heretofore, God knows how long ago.

One trick more of the Pharisees ought not to be forgotten; how that besides
these direct ways of advancing themselves in the repute of the credulous people,
they had a notable oblique course, at which they were very dextrous, viz. by
traducing and depretiating other men that should any way oppose or rival them.
And they were so very right at it, that Innocence itself could not escape them.
Even the most holy and harmless Jesus, notwithstanding all the great good which
he did amongst them, and the meekness and gentleness of his Carriage, was
continually vilifyed and reproached by them. Sometimes they upbraided him with
the meanness of his birth. Sometimes, for the freedom of his conversation, they
traduced him as a Winebibber and a gluttou. For his divine power of healing and
casting out Devils, they reviled him as a Magician. For his most useful and
obliging demeanor toward all persons, they accused him of ambitious and
seditious designs, as if he went to make himself a King. Nothing was great,
nothing was excellent in him, but these folk found out some way or other to
slurr it, and run him down among the ignorant and captious multitude.

By these their arts of raillery the Pharisees much incensed the people against
our Savior, and not a little advanced themselves in their esteem. For this
success with the Credulous sort is common to all Railers: Fortiter calumniare,
aliquid haerebit. Throw dirt stoutly at a man, and some of it will stick upon
him. He that is first in his own cause, seems right, whatever it be: and in
the case of raillery, the most are apt to think a man free from those faults
which he finds and runs out upon in others: it being unlikely that any one
should dictate a Satyr against himself. So that the reputations of the railer
and the railed are like a pair of weights in the hand of an harmless person:
look how much one loses, the other seems to gain it. Such advantage did the
Pharisees make by their Arts of traducing and depretiating other men.

From what has bin said therefore concerning the Original, the Principles and
Practices of the Religion of the Pharisees, it does plainly appear, that these
Pharisees were a Sect of men who pretended to more piety and sanctity than the
rest of their brethren the Jews; and that they took the most effectual courses
to make the people believ they were rather better than what they Seemed to be.
But that they did not herein deal bona fide with the world; that they were the
grossest Hypocrites, the vilest men under holy disguise, wolves in sheeps
closthing, will sufficiently appear, upon comparison of their Moral actions
with these Religious pretenses, of the Substantials of their Religion with
these Rituals of it; and upon some consideration of what uses they made of
their doctrines, and how they improved the Advantages which by these means they
had obtained over the minds of the people.

And for the most part this is already done to our hands by our blessed Savior
in the Gospel; so that I have but little more to do than to rehearse it to you.
As first, what was their meaning by binding heavy burdens on the Consciences of
those weak people that were their Proselytes, but to busy them at a distance,
and to awe them from inspecting those that were the teaching and the ruling
Elders of them? for they themselves, did not trouble themselves with those
burdens; they did not touch them so much as with one of their fingers. Why did
they take so much pains in making Proselytes, but that when they were made,
they might manage them as they pleased, to the most vile and pernicious
purposes? For they made them twofold more the children of Hell than themselves.
Why did they so gravely and demurely distinguish about Oaths, but to gain the
esteem of mighty learned and critical Doctors, and ablest dispensers of the
mysteries of Religion, and to render Oaths useless as they saw occasion? Even
about the most sacred and venerable things that ever were in the whole world,
to oblige mankind one to another, these men could quibble and equivocate, to
make them insignificant. So that when they had a mind to it, nothing should be
able, not the most solemn Oaths imaginable, to hold them to their duty.

Why did they make their prayers so long, and choose such places for uttering
them, where they might be seen or heard of men, but that amusing people with
the noise of their Devotion, they might the more solemnly and safely do what
unrighteousness they pleased, even devour widows houses? Why did they pretend
so much respect and veneration for the Martyrs which their Fathers had made,
but that they might amuse the world until an Opportunity should serve them to
do the like and greater Villanyes? Indeed the Pharisees did talk much to this
purpose: If we had lived in those desperate times wherein our Fathers
persecuted and destroyed so many good men, we would never have consented to
their inhumane and barbarous usages, we would never have bin partakers with
them in the blood of the Prophets. Far be it from us to have any such cruel and
unsociable designs: can you think any such thing of us? The Lord forbid we
should ever intend any thing but in order to the glory of God, and the
salvation of men's precious souls! But what did our Savior reply to this grave
pretense? Mat. 23.31. Ye be witnesses against yourselvs, for that ye are the
Children of those very men that killed the Prophets: i. e. ye espouse the same
interest and principles upon which your Fathers dealt so wickedly: Fill ye up
then the measure of your Fathers. Why were they so exact in the minutest
matters of Tithe, and so nice about the Sabbath, and so shy of their company,
but that by straining at gnats before folks, they might the better swallow
Camels in secret? that by being so demure and critical upon the Stage, they
might with less suspicion speak and act what they pleased behind the Curtain?
as if all their Religion consisted in abstaining not from the evil it self, but
only from the scandal and appearance of it. So much our Savior testifyes
against them; for that while they were so over-nice and formal about their
little things, they omitted the weighty matters of the Law, viz. mercy,
judgment, and faith. They were unmerciful, unjust, and so unfaitful, one could
not trust them. In a word, our Savior tells us, what they did, they did all to
be seen of men, for the sake of some secular advantage. Upon this account they
made their Prayers longer, and their Phylacteries broader, and their Borders
larger, and their Fastings oftener, and their exclamations upon the evils of
their times louder than other men. So that although the Pharisees seemed to be the
most religious sort of men, yet was it altogether upon worldly design, for the
sake of filthy lucre, and to make gain of Godliness; they were the grossest
Hypocrites all the while. Upon the whole therefore I may fairly conclude, that
their Hypocrisy lay in this; namely, in beguiling the people into an erroneous
opinion of their extraordinary sanctity, by pretending to be more religious
than the Law required, or was usual among other men. This is that special
Hypocrisy of the Pharisees against which our Savior does so earnestly caution
us in the Text, as first of all (or above all things) to beware of it: thereby
intimating that it is exceeding dangerous; which is the

3. And last thing propounded to be spoken of, viz. to represent the danger of
this Hypocrisy of Pharisaism, that we may be the more cautious of it. Now,
beloved, every Caution does imply a twofold danger; viz. a danger in the thing,
and a danger of the thing. There is danger in the thing if it should prevail,
and there is danger of the thing but it may and will prevail, if we take not
the greater care. Such a twofold danger attends Pharisaism, which way soever it
does affect us and prevail upon us. Now it may prevail two ways; either upon
our Corruption, or our Weakness. It may work so upon our Corruption, as to
tempt our hearts to the same Hypocrisy, and make Pharisees of us also: or else
it may prevail so much upon our weakness, as to captivate our affections, and
subjugate our minds to the imposture and empire of it.

1. First, it may so work upon our Corruption, as to infect us with the same
Leaven, and tempt us to use the same guile; to hide ourselvs behind the
Venerable curtain, and become deceivers of men under the grave disguise of
extraordinary Sanctity and Devotion: and then the danger that is in it, is the
danger of Hellfire. Nay, our Savior does instance the Hypocrites as a sort of
sinners that shall have the sharpest and fiercest damnation; when he would set
forth the great severity of the Lord toward the naughty servant, he expresses
it thus, Mat. 24.51. He shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion
with Hypocrites: so that the punishment of Hypocrites seems to be made the
measure and standard of the exactest punishment. And if there be any degrees in
the Vengeance of God; if there be a severer torture in Hell than other; if
there be a lower place in that pit, a greater Damnation: all this, even the
worst that may be, is to be the portion of Hypocrites, the most wicked
dissemblers with God, and the basest deceivers of mankind. This is the danger
that is in it, if we should let go our Integrity, and turn Hypocrites of the
Pharisaical strain; which God forbid.

2. There is also great danger of it, but it may have this effect upon some
men: and the danger of this malignant influence of Pharisaism is, when it rules
in conjunction with temptations and advantages of this present world; then
indeed meeting with a corrupt heart, with an heart exercised in Covetous
designs, what will not such a heart undertake, to gain the world? But
especially those arts and methods whereby men may make themselves most
effectually, and with least suspicion; whereby they may use the world as they
will themselves almost, and still seem as if they used it not, they are like to
be most acceptable to, and prevalent with the subtle genius of Ambition and
Covetousness, because they are safest.

The violent, open, and scandalous ways of gaining the world, make a great deal
of noise, and awaken all men into Consideration and wariness, and provoke them
to stand upon their guard against us. Nay, even the honestest way of gain, if
eminently prosperous, creates much envy and Opposition. But the more private
and reserved, the more sly and silent the trade is, the more apt is it to lay
asleep the Caution and Animosity and Adversity of the world, and does the
business with greater security and success. But especially the counterfeiting
of Religion will do the feat above all other Arts. Religion is that which all
mankind do revere, and bear an aweful distance to, and deeeply confide in: and
they cannot tell but the pretenders of it are sincere; they cannot look into
their hearts. Therefore under this disguise there is the least danger of
espyal. They may pursue the world as eagerly as may be, and still be thought to
seek Heaven altogether. Who dares to pry into such formal Saints? Upon which
account S. Peter forewarns the Christians of false teachers that should come
among them, and privily bring in damnable Heresies, and many should follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth should be evil spoken
of, and through covetousness should they with feigned words make merchandise of
them. This is the danger of Pharisaism, to make men turn Hypocrites, and at
some times more than others, according as the wind and tide of the world shall
favor it. Religion, at least the Formal part of it, being capable of so much
abuse, as to be made a stalking-horse, to approach and surprise, and make sure
of the game of the world unto themselves.

If Pharisaism does not so prevail, as it is unlikely it ever should at the
first onset so possess the hearts of those that are ^^^^ured in the habits of
grace, and in the fear of God; yet it may prevail upon their weakness: it may
captivate their affections, and steal away their hearts into an admiration of,
and a submission to the doctrines and impostures of it. This easiness and
Levity S. Paul charge upon two excellent men S. Peter and S. Barnabas, Gal.
2.12, 13. Peter withdrew and separated himself, being awed by them that were of
the Circumcision; and the other Jews dissembled with him likewise insomuch that
Barnabas also was carried away with a their Hypocrisy. And where Pharisaism
does so prevail, the danger that is in it is an entangling the souls of its
Proselytes in the snare of the Devil, as our Savior testifyes against the
Pharisees: Ye compass sea and land to make a Proselyte, and when he is made, ye
make him twofold more the child of Hell than yourselvs. And that there is this
danger in Pharisaism, appears by two notable effects whereunto it seems to bend
all its force: namely, to distract the Proselytes minds, and to render them of
a furious and fanatical sprit.

First, Pharisaism is apt to distract the minds of the poor Proselytes over
whose affections it has once set up its Empire. A multitude of niceties must
needs perplex the finite heads of mortal men to observe, in any business
whatsoever: But especially in matters of the highest concernment, wherein every
the least deviation or omission shall be looked upon as sin, and that sin under
the hazard of salvation. Add hereunto the mysteriousness of such formalities;
when nothing can be done in Religion but it must have a spiritual meaning in
it; somewhat beyond the common understanding and intention of it, which no man
is able to fathom, or give any account of; and methinks, it should be very
perplexing even to men of strong minds and sound spirits. Besides, Pharisaism
is also boundless in measure. Tho a man had a vast number of little nice and
mysterious things upon his head, yet if the use and observation of them had
certain stages and fixed periods, there were some comfort; the man might know
were to find himself. But when matters of duty, the practical matters of
Religion, besides the great number and nicety of the things, are not only made
very mysterious and intricate in their nature, but also indefinite and
unlimited in measure, that a man can have no certainty of his condition, nor
know where or how he is, nor whither he must, nor the end of his labor; why
this must needs be very amazing, and the ready rode to distraction and
desperation.

Now such was the Religion of the Pharisees; They had their formalities without
number, and very mysterious they were; every thing had a further sublime
meaning; and unbounded also in the practice. And tho the great ones knew well
enough how to excuse themselves, yet still they imposed them on their weak
Proselytes on pain of Hellfire. They would ever and anon be calling upon them
and stirring them up to the strict Observation of their things. They could
often object to them that they were not so frequent, or not so fervent, or not
so long in their prayers as they might be; that their Phylacteries were not so
broad, but they might carry more Commandments written about them if they would:
that their fastings were not so often nor so humbling, with such like negative
and indefinite censures and intimations. And if they should any of them commit
a fault, or omit some punctilio, or not beso demure and zealous as they
prescribed, they could mightily exclaim upon the sin of it, and tell them they
could never enough expiate their negligence and backwardness in Gods Covenant;
and they would never have done with it. Such delinquencies they would keep upon
record, to throw them in the teeth with upon all occasions; that so they might
amuse and damp their spirits, and shackle their minds, and hold them in durance
to the most intense observance of their superstitions.

And this is always the course of Religious Hypocrisy in Extraordinary. It is
no more than what men must expect from it, where it does domineer, as the
genuine operation of it. For that they may do it, that they may be thus
imperious and tyrannical over the Consciences of their weak Proselytes, both as
to the quantum of their Impositions, to enjoin as much; and also to their
quality, to make them as mysterious and unintelligible as they please, is plain
from the very nature and constitution of such a Religion; because it has no
certain rules or measures, but is purely an arbitrary Religion, according to
the Art and humor of those that manage it. For when men shall take it upon
them to transcend the degrees of public Devotion and religious exercise which
the Law and practice of the Church does direct and determine, and shall
accordingly teach others already prepared and wisely resolved to be led by
them, they may advance as high as they please, and where they will stop who can
divine? There are no fixed limits beyond these lines, no bounds to such pious
extravagancies.

And that they will go as high as they can, is not to be doubted. For the grand
design of such men being to maintain themselves in the public faith and esteem
for the greatest zealots and Devoto's to Religion, it is their interest to hold
up their profession to the strongest bent they are able; to blind and burden
their Proselytes as much as may be, and to screw up their minds as high as they
are capable. Because these are they that communicate their formal sanctity;
they are the Trumpeters of their fame, and cry up their extraordinary holiness
and devotion to the world. Accordingly this sort of men have ever bin cautious
of explaining themselves, but have chosen for the most part to deliver their
minds in dark sayings, in obscure and mystical, negative and indefinite
Expressions; as if they studied more how to allure and confound, rather than
inform the understandings of men; whereby they might keep their Proselytes
always in the clouds, and upon the highest flight of contemplation. And that
this is the directest rode to distraction, needs little more to demonstrate.
For when the mind of man is held up to the straitest bent, invited onwards with
a conceit of Heaven before him, and pushed with the fears of Hell behind him,
he knows not whither, nor how far, but is continually puzzled with a fearful
suspense concerning the Issues of his own Eternity; this must needs very much
perplex and weaken, if not quite distract the man, and break his spirit, and
plunge him into despair. And because the Pharisees of old did thus keep their
Proselytes continually under the Hatches of a blind Devotion and melancholy,
therefore there abounded among them so may sullen, and peevish, and lunatic
persons; so many proud, and furious, and fanatical spirits.

2. This is that other effect whereby does appear the danger that is in
Pharisaism, as to entangling men's souls in the snare of the Devil; viz. because
it does directly tend to render them of a furious and fanatical spirit. And
accordingly the Assembly of Divines, with M. Diodate, do interpret the
forementioned Scripture, which says that the Pharisees made a Proselyte
twofold more the Child of hell than themselves, viz. that they made him more
fiery and bitter against the Preachers, and the preaching of the Gospel, than
themselves were. And this is a very likely effect of Pharisaism: For when men
are possessed with a passionate admiration and ungovernable affection for any
profession of Religion whatsoever, as they think they can never do enough nor
better than to promote it, so they are also commonly persuaded, it is most
conducible to this great purpose, to vilify and mischief whatsoever stands in
competition with it. Every one would do something in behalf of his Religion, to
defend and propagate his faith; and those that can do nothing by force of
argument, will therefore exert their zeal in noise and clamor, endeavoring to
make up in spite and mischief to their Adversaries, what they want in wisdom.
Such is the influence which a false Religion, or a misunderstanding of the true
Religion, has upon the spirits of weak men that are passionately devoted to it.

But especially Pharisaism drives this way. Such a Religion as appropriates all
divine favors to its own professors, and reprobates all others with the utmost
wrath and Vengeance, and thereby swells and inflames the hearts of its zealous
Proselytes with pride and conceit of themselves, with hatred and contempt of
others; that whets up the angry powers of their minds, and sets a continual
edge upon them. Such a Religion also as tends to perplex and distract the
understandings of its Proselytes with the mysterious and boundless opinions and
practices which it does hold forth and impose, seems to take the nearest course
to fanaticism; because it does (so much as in it lies, to) disquiet their
judgments, and imbitter their spirits. It labors to drive out the good spirit,
and to infuse an evil Spirit. So that if men were not naturally before of a
peevish and melancholy constitution, the imbibing such a Religion were a likely
Alterative for the purpose, and to render them unsociable with any but such as
are of the same humor and persuasion.

Being thus disposed, it cannot be expected but that they should treat such as
any way oppose them, in the most fiery and invective manner; and rather than
want, make occasion to fall out with them, if it be for nothing else but to
give vent to their swelling passions and bewildred understandings. And the more
furious yet will they be, if their Religion does any way countenance the
undertaking. And this Pharisaism does in an especial manner. For it holds forth
such a necessity of its extraordinary Devotion, that none can be saved without
their best observance of it, and then by consequence teaches it to be the duty
of all its professors to endeavor by all means the proselyting other men to
their Religion, rather than let them perish: Yet takes no care to determine a
certain method for the work, but leaves the execution of so pious a pretense to
the construction of the zealous undertaker, according to his uncertain genius,
and favorable occasions. So that whatsoever mischief they do in their religious
fits, there is a salvo for all in the sacred design of converting a sinner, and
saving his soul in the day of the Lord.

And where there is such a conjunction of peevish, angry, and zealous spirits,
with the pretense of Religious necessity, it has the most malevolent aspect of
all; there being none more mischievous, more furious and unaccountable in their
carriage and proceedings, than such creatures informed and actuated by a
pretended spirit of Religion: and if they be in a powerful sphere, there is no
standing before them. Accordingly S. Paul does characterize himself while he
was a Pharisee, and lived after the strictest Sect of the Jewish Religion, a
Pharisee, that he persecuted the way of Christ even to the death; that out of a
zeal for God he became a blasphemer, a persecutour, and injurious. Whereby he
plainly shows the spirit of Pharisaism to be a furious and fanatical spirit:
that the Proselytes, the weaker sort of the Pharisees, being hurried on with
blind zeal, were more fierce and eager against the sincerity and preaching of
the Gospel, than the teaching and ruling part of them were, tho they set them
on. No, these were taken up in consulting and projecting matters of scandal
against our Savior and his proceedings: But the rude, and most odious, and
barbarous part, they committed mostly to the rash multitude to act, whom by
their devices they had so incensed, that it is not to be expressed how fiery
and fanatical they behaved themselves against him. This is the danger that is in
Pharisaism when it prevails upon the weakness of many zealous men, and
captivates their affections into an admiration of, and a submission to the
doctrines and impostures of it, viz. that it is apt to entangle their souls in
the snare of the Devil, by tending to distract their minds, and render them of
a furious and fanatical spirit. And in all likelihood, if they escape being
thus ensnared, Pharisaism may corrupt them, and tempt them to turn Factours of
the same Hypocrisy, upon worldly Considerations. If their constitutions be too
averse to comply with the strictest intention of the mind upon the sad and
melancholy observations of such a Religion, and their understandings by degrees
do open in the communion of it, that they discern the Arts and wiles of it, and
how to improve them to their worldly Advantage; why then many of them may be
tempted to turn Hypocrites, and after a while they have lived in the trade,
rather than accuse themselves of having bin sometime in so gross an error by
deserting, they will choose to adhere to so worldly advantageous a Profession.
And it is great odds but their outward carriage will in some measure intimate
which way Pharisaism has prevailed with them, and entangled their souls in the
snare of the Devil; i. e. whether by worldly considerations it has made
Pharisees, Hypocrites of them; or else only captivated their affections into
perfect subjection and Vassalage to the impostures of it. But yet,

2. I am to set forth the danger of Pharisaism in this respect, viz. of
Captivating the affections. And truly there is a great deal of danger of it
this way, as may be seen in two eminent properties of Pharisaism. Viz. Its
rarity and novelty, and the seeming usefulness and pretended benefit of it to
mankind.

1. We may discern the danger of its prevailing this way, by its Rarity and
Novelty. Sirs, it was not only once the famous disposition of the Athenians,
that they loved to hear or to tell some new thing, but it is indeed in some
measure the common disease of mankind, to admire and flock about any thing that
is new and rare, that is beside the common course of nature, or the usual
practice of the world. Any thing that is extraordinary and unusal, is generally
much observed. A Comet or blazing star is more gazed on than the Sun, though
this be the far more glorious and beneficial Creature. A Mountebank shall have
far more resort than the ablest Physician: Even so it fares about the most
sacred and venerable things that be. He that makes most show, shall be most
taken notice and talked of. He that will eminently exceed what the Laws do
direct in the external exercises of Religion, and pretend more than the rest of
his Neigbours usually do, why He is the man. Novelty and rarity are attractive
of observance and admiration.

2. By the seeming usefulness and benefit of it. If Novelty be in conjunction
with a seeming benefit, then it never fails of a considerable effect. It is not
enough to gain the popular vogue, that a thing be rare. The people do equally
admire things for their extraordinary deformity, as for their beauty and
comeliness. But then they love, and embrace, and honor, and extol only those
things that seem to them to be excellent, and promise great use and benefit.
Touching public exercise of Religion; let a man keep even with the common rule
of the Law, and there are no remarques upon him at all; because he does no more
than what is expected of him, and is usual with the rest of his Neighbors: but
let him fall down to his prayers in the street or marketplace, or any way
eminently exceed the general practice, and he shall be mightily admired and
extolled for a great Devoto, for a most Religious and Godly man, and many will
run after him. For people think they can never enough admire and praise and
imitate those things that are rare, and seem to be excellent, and of great use
and benefit. Now these excesses plainly pretend to excellence, because they
outdo the common practice in the best matter, in the highest affair; and they
promise likewise the greatest benefit to mankind, even their eternal
concernment, the good and welfare of souls: and therefore this Hypocrisy is
very apt to steal away the hearts of the people, to subjugate their affections
to the impostures of it: I mean those many people that have not the sagacity to
smell out the leaven of it. Our Savior does very aptly liken it to Leaven. For
as Leaven is of a very spreading and infectious nature, (a little Leaven
leaveneth the whole lump) so it is a great deal of mischief which this
Hypocrisy works upon the body of the people; a little of it will go a great
way, and incredibly prevail upon the affections of mankind.

The Pharisees of old did herewith prevail so far upon the hearts of the common
people of the Jews, that they drew the whole multitude after them, and in
process of time could make use of them to bring about the greatest villanyes
that ever were acted under the Sun. Witness the great cry that was made against
our Savior to take away his life, notwithstanding all that Pilate himself
could say in his behalf.

And to instance the prevalence of their Hypocrisy a little higher yet; it is
to be noted, that our Savior made it his business, and took a great deal of
pains in his time to discover the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees unto the people,
and to set it forth plainly and convincingly before them: yet such was their
Credulity and fondness of their mysterious rarities, that at the last he had
small thank of them for it. They were carried away so much with this Religious
dissimulation, that for all the good he did amongst them, they abated nothing
in their clamor against him at his trial. Upon which account I am also apt to
think, that our Savior denounced so many bitter woes against the Pharisees
rather than the Sadduces; namely, because although the Sadduces denied Angels
and Spirits, and all future being, which the Pharisees confessed; yet they were
not so ensnaring and dangerous to the people, as the Pharisees were.

And now that I have endeavored to clear up the nature of Hypocrisy in
general, as also to settle a right and distinct notion of the great Hypocrisy
of the Pharisees, and in some measure to represent the danger of this
Hypocrisy; I shall endeavor some improvement of what has bin said. Several
useful things might be gathered from it. I shall conclude what I have to say,
under three common Heads. Viz. Instruction, Direction, and Exhortation.

1. Hence we may gather matter of Instruction. We may learn if there be any
such thing as Pharisaism now amongst us; if there be any Christians guilty of
it. It is but to know this. If, for the sake of worldly advantage there be any
endeavoring to deceive the world, by men that profess Christianity, into an
opinion of their extraordinary sanctity, by pretending to more Religion than is
required or usually practiced. I know indeed that those Pharisees by name are
dead and gone, and scarce any of that family do survive among the Jews
themselves; But I am afraid you will find the thing, the Leaven of the
Pharisees yet remaining in the world; doctrines and practices of the same
nature and design taken up by men that pass under other Denominations.
Wheresoever you meet with such extraordinary pretenses of zeal to Godward, on
purpose to draw people after the Professors of it, and to hide their base
worldly designs, it is Pharisaism: and they are such persons, as like as may
be, of whom our Savior prescribes so strict caution.

In all likelikood this might be improved against the pious frauds of some
religious Orders among the Papists. But I say in general, whatsoever persons we
find of such extraordinary form of Godliness, and void of the power of it;
wherever we meet with men who in the sight and notice of the world make
exceeding pretenses for the honor of God and the service of Religion, and yet
carry on wicked designs, and strengthen them thereby, we may conclude their
religious zeal to be Pharisaism, and the pretenders great impostors.

But then it may be a pertinent Question; That in regard we cannot discern the
hearts of men, in case therefore we should meet with such men as are religious
above measure, and in all appearance as godly and venerable persons as any in
the whole world again; and yet all this should be but a show, and they remain
the most treacherous and deceitful men alive, as the Pharisees of old; in such
case how shall we avoid the snares of their Hypocrisy? Why truly, Sirs, it
were a hard case, if after all that our Savior has said of this Hypocrisy,
and so much as he has enjoined us to beware of, and to shun the wiles of it,
there were no certain rule for avoiding it. Our Savior was never wont to
charge men with Impossibilities. There must therefore needs be a way whereby
(although we cannot discern men's hearts and conclude them Hypocrites, yet) to
escape their snares if they should prove such. And that is a

2. Use of the foregoing discourse, viz. to direct us how to avoid the wiles
and danger of Pharisaism; and that is by giving no heed to such extravagant
pretenses for the honor of God and Religion. For if this Hypocrisy does
consist of pretenses to more Religion than the known laws and practices of the
Church do direct; why then the properest, most ready and natural course to
avoid the danger of it, must be to take no notice of such pretenses. The great
danger of this Hypocrisy lies in its aptness to betray and carry away our
affections with its dissimulation: therefore the only way that I know for men
(considered in their private capacity) to frustrate the design of it, is to
neglect it, and not to be all concerned at it.

But then it is very likely we may be importuned with this Objection: What? can
you be too Religious? can you serve God too much? This Objection the Pharisees
of old might make great use of as they saw occasion. If any one should gainsay
them, or not readily comply with their rigorous and demure Impostures, they
could presently hit him in the teeth with this objection, and stop his mouth,
What? can you serve God too much? This is enough to astonish a plain humble
soul, and confound him so, that the poor man shall not have a word to say for
himself: and indeed this is the main weapon of such Hypocrisy. But yet it is
nothing so formidable as it glitters.

It is easily evaded, by distinguishing the subject matter of Gods service, and
explaining the meaning of it. The service of God is an ambiguous term, and may
be understood in two respects: as

First, we may worthily be said to serve God by all manner of good living, and
to glorify the Father by good works. And if by serving God they understand the
internal and substantial matters of Religion, abounding in all the habits of
grace and virtue; if they understand the loving God and righteousness entirely,
and hating iniquity and all the extermes of sin and Vanity: In this respect we
cannot be too religious. So far should we be from thinking ourselvs capable of
serving God too much in this real and substantial way, that our holy Master
has taught us the modesty after all we have done to conclude ourselvs but
unprofitable servants.

But if they take the service of God in the most vulgar sense and acceptance
of it, viz. as signifying the external exercises of Religious Worship and
Veneration; I humbly conceiv we may do too much. If by the length and fashion,
and frequency of Prayer and praise, of hearing and reading of the Word, of
Religious speech and gesture and demeanor toward God; if by these and such
like expressions of Devotion, they mean the service of God; a man may do so
much, as to make all stark naught. One cannot love his Prince, his friend and
benefactor too well in his heart: but yet he may address himself with so much
flattery, and fawning, and complement, and Impertinence, in such a fond and
fulsom manner, as to render himself vain and ridiculous to all those that shall
prudently observe him, and nauseous to that particular person with whom he would
so fain endear himself. Even so I doubt not but a man may be childish and vain,
and grossly excessive in Applications to his God; and if it be not from his
heart, will render his sacrifice the more odious.

Otherwise why does our Savior take such particular care about the outward
show and expression of our Devotion? why does he charge us to be observed of
men, as little as may be in our almsgiving, praying and fasting and in
particular, why does he forbid us to use many vain repetitions in our prayers,
if the affections of nature were not prone to absurdities in these religious
exercises? Besides, why does God himself so often upbraid his own people the
Jews with the multitude of their sacrifices, and tell them these were not the
things he so much looked after; and seldom or never complains for the want of
them? Nay, observe it when you will, you shall find that God is cautious of
cherishing every plausible pretense of this nature; and his holy Spirit in the
Scriptures is more careful to fence in, than to minister fuel to these flames,
although they be sacred. So that it seems to be a great mistake, to think
that we cannot over-do these duties, that we cannot do too much in this kind of
serving God. It were good for us to be convinced of this, that so we may never
be cozened into any great inconvenience by such pretenses. For Pharisaical
Hypocrisy does subsist altogether by them; and the world is full enough of
dear-bought experience from all sorts of Religions, how that the chief
pretenders to serve God in this kind and degree, have bin found to serve
themselves most, and to the extreme disadvantage of those that confided in them.
Witness the Munster-Anabaptists amongst the Christians; Barchochebas and others
amongst the Jews; and even among the Mahometans, Burgluzes and Bedredin in the
reign of Mahomet the first, and the rife of the present house of Morocco to the
Empire.

But then it may be questioned, Are all they Hypocrites who in their religious
demeanor before men shall thus exceed the common rules and practice of the
Church? God forbid any man should say or think so. Doubtless a multitude of
such persons mean as well as it is possible, and think they do their best in so
doing. There must be a great many weak and credulous people, or there could not
be so many deceivers. Wherefore I cannot persuade myself that all the Pharisees
of old were Hypocrites, tho the chief among them were egregious ones; nor that
all those that profess Christianity now adays in such excesses are so. All that
I say is this: Wherever we meet with men that profess more Religion than is
suitable with humane frailty, with our State and constitution in the world;
though it be not good to despise such a profession because it may be true, yet
it cannot be safe to trust it, for fear it prove false. Such extravagant
pretenses always proceed either from weakness or design; they are the product of
fondness and Superstition, or else they are managed by craft and worldly
wisdom. If no guile appear, it will be proper for Christians to interpret them
in the most favorable sense; to impute them to weakness of mind, and undue fear
of God: But the safest way to avoid the danger of them, if they should derive
from the other fountain, is to neglect them, and take no notice of them.

If I see a man praying in the street or marketplace as the Pharisees did, or
be any way eminently singular in his Religion, and behave himself with more
seeming Devotion than is usual; Why, I cannot read the man's heart, he may be as
honest a soul as any breathing. But I must in charity impute the irregularity
of his zeal to his weakness; and if any thing be fit to be said to him in such
a taking, I hold nothing better than the Advice of our Savior, Mat. 6.5, 6.
When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites, for they love to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be
seen of men. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut thy
door, and pray to thy Father which is in secret. Alas poor man! thou meanest
very well belike; but such a way is improper for the business of Devotion: thou
do exert thyself amiss. Just so, man, the Hypocrites, the Pharisees do.
Therefore prithee good man away into thy chamber, retire out of the sight and
hearing of men, and Cloister thyself up, that thou may not disturb the world
by seducing people from their own business to attend and gaze after thee.

In plain, Sirs, we must have some rule for every public action, and what we
ought to do before men; especially for our Devotion, else we shall be at a
great loss: and there can be no other certain and adequate rule for it, but the
Laws of spiritual communion. If men will not be concluded by such Rules, they
go the way to set up an arbitrary and uncertain Religion. You have heard of an
Arbitrary Government; what a grievance it would be for a people to be governed
altogether by the fickle humors of men, without settled and known Laws; so that
that which to day is right, to morrrow may be wrong, and they cannot know when
they are safe in any action. Such a doubtful thing were Religion, if managed
only according to the variable genius of frail men, without fixed and known
Rules. It cannot be very comfortable to any wise and considering men, to be of
such a Religion, to the Community whereof they cannot tell how to approve
themselves, and escape the dangerous censures of it. Wherefore there is mighty
reason we should beware of this Hypocrisy: and the surest way to avoid the
snares of it, is firmly to adhere unto, and judge these matters of outward and
visible religion by the common rule of the Law.

3. And lastly, here is matter of Exhortation. The foregoing discourse does
mind all of us to be real and sincere in all our Religious exercises and
pretenses. This Hypocrisy is the worst habit a Christian can appear in at his
final doom, before the Tribunal of the great and terrible God. There is no
excuse, no mercy for it. You may have read how the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
a sort of violence, and the violent take it by force; but you never heard that
ever it is to be taken by craft. Deceit and guile may do a great deal here in
this world; but in the world to come, and at the great and universal Bar of all
mankind, every thing will then be unveiled and laid open. Whatsoever we think,
or speak, or do, especially in matters of Religion, we should always remember
that God has a particular eye upon us, and that the day of Revelation is
coming, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; when all disguises
shall be laid aside, and every ones mask shall be taken off, and all our
actions shall be brought upon the public stage, and exposed to the view of men
Angels.

And how will the Pharisee and all his kindred then look, when the vizor of
their counterfeit sanctity shall be taken off? What confusion of face will then
rife up in their countenance, yea what an horrible dread must there needs then
overwhelm their spirits, when they shall find themselves so discovered and
exposed, when they shall be surrounded with an infinite company of such
glorious spectators, and no way lest to shift or hide themselves any longer? If
judgment begin at the house of God, where then shall these
ungodly-Godly-sinners appear? They are left to the detestation of God, and
Angels, and Saints, to be a terror to themselves, and to be insulted on by the
Devils to all eternity. Oh it will be a sad time indeed for them, when they
shall come in their last extremity, and supplicate from the very bottom of
their souls, and cry, Lord, Lord, and then the Lord will not know them, but
dismiss them with that deadful and cutting sentence; Go ye cursed into the lake
of fire and brimstone prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Wherefore, above
all things, my brethren, let us hold the faith of Christ, and let us have our
Conversation here in this world in simplicity and godly sincerity.

And that we may avoid all suspicion of Pharisaism, and the danger of excess in
Religious pretenses both to ourselvs and others, our safe rule is to keep even
with the known Laws and practice of the Church in public. In our Closets and in
private we are a Law unto ourselvs; our own reason is our Law. We may be as
devout, and pour out ourselvs by ourselvs, as much as, and in what manner we
think good. But when we are to be seen of men, we should by no means affect a
singularity in things of this nature: For whatever some men may esteem it, it
is a disparagement to Religion. It seems not only inconsistent with the
fundamental graces of the holy Spirit, such as humility, meekness, modesty, and
the like; but it does directly oppose the express will of our Savior, the
blessed Author of our Religion, who with the greatest care imaginable forbids
us to resemble the Pharisees in these concerns, or to give the least
countenance to the dangerous cheat of their Hypocrisy.

To this purpose, we shall do well to remember how earnest our Savior was to
banish all ostentation from Religion, all vanity and levity from the Altar: How
gravely and sharply he rebuked Pharisaism; what pains he has taken to discover
the whiles and the cheats of it; and how much he made it his business (if it
were possible) to put it quite out of countenance and all the world out of
conceit with it; but especially to prevent his own Scholars of being infected
or ensnared by it.

Now it was a most obliging design of our Savior in laboring thus to secure
Religion from imposture, to rescue truth from the vulgar errors and the vain
Traditions of men, and to fix such legible and lasting characters upon these
things, as if we will but follow his directions, we may choose whether ever we
will cozen or be cozened by Pharisaism. Indeed he has taken every man's part in
it; and it is a kindness done the whole world, to consult their security from
Religious imposture.

It must needs therefore also in Conscience highly concern us that are
Ministers of his Word to follow these steps, to pursue these candid endeavors
of our most wise and holy Master, being of so great consequence to the souls of
men. We may easily see what it is he accounts most pernicious to the true
Religion, namely the dark and mysterious representation of things that are
pretended necessary to salvation. This is the way of all sorts of Juglers in
the world, and the very life of all imposture. We know also how apt people are
to admire what they do not understand, and how fondly to be inflamed toward
those things that are represented only at half lights, and how that by these
means the Deceivers raise in them almost whatsoever erroneous opinions they
please. If ever therefore we will cure the distempers which these Mountebanks
have wrought in the minds of weak men, and dissipate and purge out the ill
humors, and rectify the misunderstandings which they have contracted in the
world, or prevent the imposture of these spiritual juglers for the future; it
should seem that the way of our great Physician, the universal Savior, is the
way; viz. by rendering the matters of Religion as plain and accountable as we
can, to the understandings of those with whom we have to do. It matters not if
plainness of address in spiritual things be not so glorious and taking in the
eyes of weak and vain men, since it is so highly esteemed in the fight of God
and our Savior Jesus Christ. That which was a prime part of our Saviors
Prophetic undertaking, must needs be ours also, whose most business is teaching
and exhortation; to assert and vindicate truth according to the naked
simplicity of the Gospel; to disperse those clouds and mists which Pharisaism
has raised about it; to illustrate it, and do our utmost to disabuse the
harmless world; to explain the dark things of Religion that are necessary for
men to know, and render them as obvious to the meanest capacities as may be; to
make the way of salvation an highway, that wayfaring men though fools should
nor err therein: To represent all such things in Religion as gravely plain as
is possible, is the way which our blessed Lord and Master has chalked out unto
us, for countermining and defeating Pharisaism. And let us all remember, it was
not for nothing that our Savior has so strictly charged us, as first of all,
(or above all things) to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is
Hypocrisy.

Keep, we beseecht thee, O Lord thy Church with thy perpetual mercy; and
because the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy
help from all things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable to our
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

