THE English Devil: OR, CROMWELL AND HIS Monstrous Witch Discovered at
White Hall: With the strange and damnable Speech of this Hellish Monster, by
way of Revelation, touching King and Kingdom; And a Narrative of the Infernal
Plots, Inhumane Actings, and Barbarous Conspiracies of this grand Impostor, and
most audacious Rebel, that durst aspire from a Brew House to the Throne,
washing his accursed Hands in the Blood of his Royal Sovereign; and trampling
over the Heads of the most Loyal Subjects, making a Football of a Crown, and
endeavoring utterly to extirpate the ROYAL PROGENY, Root and Kind, Stem and
Stock.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood, for George Horton; and are to be sold at the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1660.

The English Devil; Or, The Bloody Traitor, etc.
AS for that Hellish Monster, and damnable Machiavilian, that first gave rise
to our newfangled Models of Government, we shall only demonstrate him to be
the Devil of later Times, who Butcher-like made cruelty his profession, and was
never better then when he had his Sword sheathed in his Countrey-mens bowels;
such an andacious Reble was this Oliver Cromwell, that durst aspire from the
mean condition of a private person, to the Throne, though he first washed his
hands in the blood of his Sovereign: He represented the real Tragedy of a King
and no King; whose mouth watered after that Title, but that he durst not assume
it, having fought so long against it, and was sworn to the deposition of all
Kingship for the fature. He, to raise himself on the top of the Pyramid of
honor, trampled over the heads of the most Loyal Subjects of the Realm; made a
football of a Crown, and endeavored utterly to extirpate the Royal Progeny,
Root and Kind, Stem and Stock: Nay, I may be bold to say, if that an innocent
Babe had been born with Vive le Roy in his mouth, he must have been food for
his Sword, as well as the firstborn were for Horods. It is credibly reported,
that Hugh Peter's, that spiritual Dragooner, and Nol, hatch;d this Government as
they were walking together in a field: A brace of (...) Devils! The whole
Nation was enchained in a more than Egyptian Bondage; who were compelled to
submit to this Tyrant Nol, or be cut off by him; nothing but a word and a blow,
his Will was his Law; tell him of Magna Charta, he would lay his hand on his
sword, and cry Magna Farta. No Liberty was granted to the Subject, unless it
were that of the Conscience; and that too was denied the more Orthodox and
Loyal Party. The People were robbed of all Laws, Rights, and Privileges, and
sometimes of their lives; whilst he, like a Tyrant, insulted with a Quis
contradicet? The Citizens were so fleeced and pilled, that had this inhumane
barbarous Wretch continued much longer, he had sent London into the Country a
begging. To say God save the King, was a crime as black as any forbidden in the
Decalogue: but so long as that was prohibited publicly and privately, it was
in vain to cry out, God speed the Plough, or expect any blessing from the
Superior Power. His infernal Plots and Machinations had wrought the utter
ruin and desolation of the Country, had not Providence divine cut him off, to
the general benefit and rejoicing of the Nation. English ground groaned with
the burden of this inhumane Tyrant. It was not enough that the English should
be scourged, but the whip must lie before them; it is not sufficient that he
should be the Author of all their Woes while living, but they must live subject
to his Tyranny and Oppression, and like so many Mutes, condescend unto all his
Actions by silence, not daring to mention the least dislike, though it thwarted
their disposition never so much: He was a Rod of their own making, and they
were content to Vntruss whilst he Whipped them. In vain it was for the most
accurate Wit to Plead Reason or Law against the Sword; the Tongue is too weak a
Weapon for the Dagger. During the Usurpation of this same Hellish Tyrant, what
a Chaos of confusion bespread the whole Nation? How was all the Land Benegro'd
with more than the Egiptian darkness of Persecution? The whole Country was
inveloped in Clouds, and Ruin hung over the Heads of the People, by as slender
a Third, as the Sword did over the Head of Damocles at the Banquet. The whole
Land was Entombed in despair, and little or no hope of a Resurrection, till a
Divine Hand wrought it by his long-expected Death: And it is the Cordial wish
and Hearty desire of the Loyal Penman, that all his Majesty's and the Kingdoms
Enemies were as stately interred as he was. Had he deserved an Epitaph, We
would have stretched hard but our Brain should have furnished him with one; but
since he was so unworthy, We hold it as great a disparagement to our Quill to
bestow a Copy of Verses on him, as he was a grief and trouble to the Loyal
party of the Nation And indeed, how can any Son of Phoebus employ his time so
ill, as to salute his dead Corpse with an Epitaph, that was so great an Enemy to
them whilst living; Who had a real design to extirpiate all literature, and
implunge us into as deep a Gulf of ignorance and profaneness as the Turk is
cast into? He hated all Learning, and the Learned, because his Crimes were so
black and horrid, that they went far beyond the mercy of the Book. He granted a
tolleration for all Religions, because his own was to choose; and that he might
not offend the Tender Consciences of his pretended Zealots and Favorites, who
were true Vassels to the Lust and Villainy of such an Imperious Usurper.
Honesty was so much out of fashion, that he that was Virtuous was a Malefactor,
and deserved Death; for Knavery was a la mode; and you know the old saying, It
is as good to be out of the World, as out of the Fashion. An honest loyal
Subject was as much hooted and pointed at, and judged as ridiculous an Object,
as a Spanish Don in his Country Garb at Paris. An honest man was as strange a
fight in England, as a Horse in Venice, or a Beggar in Holland, and he was as
like to be preferred to his favor, as a Spur^ier was to Queen Elizabeth. But
since he is in his Grave, We will not rake up his Ashes any further: if he can
find any rest there now dead, who living I am sure had little or none in his
Conscience (for he ever carried a Civil War in his Breast, of Fears,
Suspicions, and Jealousies) he shall lie secure, for we intend to disturb him
no farther.

After the death of this British Idol, Richard the 4th. his Son peeped out;
who had no fault so great as that he had him to his Father, for it was
generally believed, he would be but Tenant to the Right Landlord, or the
Stuarts Steward, to set all things in Order till he was restored. But, alas! he
proved but a fortnights wonder; no sooner up, but down; his disposition. (if
we may credit report) was the Womanish plot of Weeping Fleetwoods Lady; who
stomached it that his preferment should be greater then her Husbands, though it
proved to little purpose: And Indeed, it is seldom known that Females council
ever arrives to any better success; nor is there any reason that the Distaff
should be a companion for the Scepter. A Kitchen was a great deal more fit for
her than a Throne, though she had Ambition enough to persuade her self that she
deserved the name of a Princess. Yet had Richard (...) Heir of his Fathers
parts ( though it was well he was not) he would have soon frustrated their
designs, and came to as much height and greatness: But he had not enough of the
Rogue in his Composition, to make up a Damned Politician. He was fitter to bear
a Hawk on his Fist, than to hold a Scepter in his Hand. A sedentary, retired,
Country-life, was far more suitable to his Temper and Disposition, than a
Tumultuous City-life. He was altogether ignorant in that so much practiced
profession of peircing the (...) with the Foxes Tail; which no doubt he might
have done, had he been as well read in Machiavil as his Sire was. He was not
much read in Politics, as appears by the small term of time that was allotted
him to play the Protector. But no matter, it was well it fell out so, he is
like to fare the better for it, in the judgment of the most censorious:
Besides, it was what suited with his fancy (according to relation) better
then all the Usurped Power and Authority of his Predecessor. Exit Protector,
he was but like a Pageant, a King in a Play; he only appears upon the Stage,
makes a Leg, and takes his leave of you.

But what comes next? A Resolve here intervenes! No less then the Bloody
Tragedy of OLIVER the Traitor, who to Unite firmly the Council of War to him,
which consisted of a few able Head-pieces, to whom he laid himself open so far,
as to show them their profit and preferment in the design, which United them
fast to him, the other, who were soft Heads, and had a good meaning to do no
evil, but to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and throw down Antichrist, and
then according to their duty, [as they were taught] to take possession of, and
[as Saints] Reign over the Kingdom; Cromwell provided fit food to feed such
fantasies, for he had provided a Monstrous Witch full of all deceitful craft,
who being put into brave clothes, pretended she was a Lady come from a far
Country, being sent by God to the Army with a Revelation, which she must make
known to the Army, for necessity was laid upon her: This Witch had a fair
Lodging prepared for her in White Hall. Now having had her Lesson taught her
before by Cromwell and Ireton, by whose order she was entertained, desired to
have audience at the Council of War, for to them (she said) she was sent.

Cromwell and Ireton to beget the more attention and belief in the Officers of
the Council of War, began to extol the excellency of Revelation, and conceived
that this Prophetess being a precious Saint, and having much of God in her,
ought for to be heard, and that with all intention; because (said they) in such
glorious days as these God does manifest himself extraordinarily; and
especially to his Saints, in chalking out their way before them, when they came
into straights and difficulties; such as they were in at that time.

By this time the Witch was come to the door, and forthwith had admittance;
where all the Officers beheld her strange postures, expressing high Devotion:
Cromwell and Ireton fixing their Eyes upon her in most solemn manner (to beget
in the rest of the Officers (who were ready to laugh) an apprehension of some
serious thing) fell both of them to weeping; the Witch looking in their Faces,
and seeing them weep, fell to weeping likewise; and began to tell them what
acquaintance she had with God by Revelation, and how such a Day, such an Hour,
after such a manner she had a Revelation, which she was to reveal only to them;
and that was, That the glorious time of setting up Christ's Kingdom was near at
hand, and that Antichrist must be speedily thrown down, and that they were the
Instruments that were by God ordained to throw him down, and how they were
about that great work, and that if they would prosper in it, they must first
remove the KING out of the way, which they must do first by proceeding to Try
him, and then to Condemn him, and then to Depose him, but not to put him to
Death: This Relation I had from one that was strongly of the Armies party, but
related this shameful story with much indignation.

A Lillonian was taught at this time with Bribes to Print his opinion, which
was much according to the opinion of his Sister Witch.

Some of the Soberer and more Religious of the Officers being much startled at
these Revelations, but not at all satisfied, repaired to some of the most
Religious and able Independents to know their opinion of these things, and to
defire advice what to do; they replied (I am informed Thomas Goodwin in
particular) that since they had gone so far, they must now carry it on, though
with the Blood of those that stood in their way, for if they now made a stop,
farewell their Cause for ever: This was good in Politics, but bad in Divinity:
It was a true Politic Aphorism of Machiavells, but false Doctrine in the
Divinity Schools; however they made use of this Doctrine to proceed in their
designs, for the promoting of the Independent Cause.

By this time John Lilburn and his party, who sat at White Hall to draw up
their desires, had brought their business to some maturity, which was, as I
conceive, inserted in the Paper called, The Agreement of the People, the sum
whereof, was no other then this, to Throw down KING, Lords, and Commons, as
then established, to Throw down the Laws, Inns of Court, Courts of Judicature,
Church Government, as also the Universities, and Function of the Clergy.

This Agreement being debated at the General Council, Cromwell (whose design was
to set up another Government, and was then about it) opposed this Agreement,
because it opposed his design; for though he sat in Council with the General
Officers, yet he consulted altogether with the Popish Faction, to set up a
Government according to the Government of Spain, (viz.) by a Council of State,
and a High Court of Justice.

The General Council of War was hereby divided about this Agreement of the
people, and so equally divided, that only one Voice carried it, or two at the
most in the Negative, which gave ocaasion to Col. H^wson to say, How can we
call this the Agreement of the People, when we our selves are divided about it?
Cromwell being now to shoot the greatest Gulf, having now the Work to do, which
he had been all this while by force and policy making way unto; he saw but two
main rubs in the way, which he durst not meddle with in a boisterous way, and
those were the Presbyterian Ministers of the Kingdom, who preached vehemently
against the Treasonable practices of the Army. The other whom he durst not at
this time meddle with, were those downright dealers called Levellers: What he
could not do by Flattery, he did by Threats; but could not in the least
terrify the Presbyterians, who declared against his wicked and open
Rebellion, detesting those illegal proceedings of the Army, in offering
violence to the Parliament, and going about to overthrow the King.

FINIS.

