The English Banner of Truth displayed: OR, The State of this present
ENGAGEMENT Against SCOTLAND.

Wherein is to be discussed The Lawfulness and Necessity of the Engagement. The
high Aggravations of it, as to the Scots. The groundlesness of those of the
Presbyteries con^unction with the Scots and Malignants, Either from Religion,
their former State-principles, or the demeanor of those those in Authority
toward them.


ALSO, A brief Series of Transactions, whereby it appears that those of the
Presbytery have continually endeavored the disturbing of the Peace of the
Nation, and have been the occasion and encouragement of two Wars since the late
King's party were first subdued, and are the Ground of this Third War now with
the Scots and Malignants.

Together with some Occasional Assertions; That the laying aside of some
Members of Parliament, The proceedings against the late King, The changing of
the Government, is suitable unto the end of all our Engagements, and the supreme
Law, The Safety of the People, and not contrary to the COVENANT.

Published for the undeceiving of Many, and the encouragement of all honest men
to assist this Engagement. By a Friend to the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the
Black Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1650.

TO demo^strate the lawfulness and necessity of this presen Engagement against
the Scots by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, would be but the
holding of a Candle to the Sun: were not the eyes of men very much blinded and
their Reason prosticuted to the dictates of Selfishness and Prejudice; it being
a thing hardly to be imagined, that any English man should be so far cheated,
as to betray the Interest of his Country to the Scottish Nation; (...) that
those whose Principles have led them to assist the Parliament against the late
King and whose prayers and swords h^ve strenuously endeavored his removal,
should, after the apparent and acknow^edged hand of God; subduing that Faction,
fall into it, and endeavor the re-inforcing thereof upon the blood and ruin
of Religion, themselves, and this Commonwealth. But seeing it has pleased God
to permit such a spirit of delusion and madness to seize on men* and that under
the disguise of Religion, and the misguiding of Discontent, which may prove of
dangerous concernment to themselves and this Nation, I thought it my duty,
according to my little time and talent to unveil this Mystery, which I lay
before the World to serve those ends for which God has appointed it.

In the management of which I shall only endeavor, with what brevity I can to
manifest, 1. The lawfulness and necessity of this present Engagement against
the Scots. 2. The groundless conjunction of those of the Presbytery of this
Nation with the Scots and Malignants either from Religion State-principles, or
the demeanor of this Commonwealth toward them.


In the close whereof something may appear whereby every honest heart may have
matter of encouragement effectually to assist this work, and to expect the
presence of the Lord to accompany them therein.

The Justness of this Engagement against the Scots will be evident when it is
considered.

First, that the Cause is the very same with that which was formerly in
England, viz. against the tyranny of the King; which, after the solemn Appeals
of both parties to God has eminently been from heaven determined not only
once but a second and a third ^i^e; and this not in England only but in
Scotland and I^eland; upon which ground we may expect his wonted presence. This
will appear no Riddle if it be minded.

1. That* without giving any satisfaction for the innocent blood that has been
shed by him or his father in these Wars in these three Nations, or bringing him
as a Delinquent to condign punishment they have treated with Charles Stuart
eldest son to the late King, who has actually levied Arms against the
Parliament of England and ^ave taken and proclaimed him King not only of
Scotland but of England and Ireland.

2. They have engaged to assist him with Forces and are in Arms against: the
Commonwealth of England, whereby they highly own not only the guilt of the
former Wars, but gird unto their loins the blood that may be shed in this
Quarrel, wherein they protect him from the Justice of England and assist hi^
with A^ms further to pursue his tyr^nuical principles.

3. They have joined with all the old enemies of England Papists and
Malignants; with the Rebels in Ireland whom they entertain in their Armies as
Officers and Soldiers, and are employed in the Plots and Contrivances in this
Nation, the more to facilitate the intended issue of their monstrous
Conjunction.

Secondly, it is not only the same Cause that was formerly managed by the late
King and his party but has in it, as to them, these Aggravations.

1. In that the Quarrel they now take upon them was first designed and acted
upon Themselves in the year 1639 by the late King, whom we then so greatly
tendered, that we rather put the most probable hopes of our relief. viz. our
Parliament, to a dissolution then to assist him against them.

2. That when the Q^arrel was afterward on foot in England. they seemed to
retain so much sense of the former cou tesie, that they levied Forces and came
in to our assistance, declaring them to be not only ours, but their Common
enemies, and so for a time they pursued them; which Quarrel they now espouse to
themselves.

3. After we had rolled through the blood of seven years War, into a little
Peace and were beg^nning to sit under our Vines; in stead of rejoicing that we
that took the War out of theirs into our own bowels were returned to rest they
cruelly designed our Invasion, and with a full consent of Parliament entered our
borders with a great Army committing unspeakable mischiefs and villainies in the
English Nation; and all to set up the late King on the blood of the honest
people of this Nation, and the destruction of Religion and Liberty: To which
though some of the Leading men now amongst them seemed to dissent, yet we very
well know who first designed the Invasion, and that the Invasion was was not
the scruple, but what hand should manage it, whether Duke Hamilton, or the Kirk.

4. That when through the Providence of God this weapon turned into their own
bowels so that the flames of war designed and blown upon us, were like to
consume themselves, upon the request of those men, which before and now breath
forth nothing but our destruction, we came to their assistance, not with
Recompenses but with love; not with the wounds of enemies but the embraces of
friends; not with the powering forth of their blood but the laying of our own
on the ground for their sakes, and (through the blessings of God) ended that
war and returned with such humble expressions of our thankfulness as is too
long to be related.

5. When our enemies were subdued on all parts, and were upon the work before
us in altering of the Government of the Nation, for the best security of the
honest party, and the true administration of Justice amongst us; of which not
they, but our selves are the proper Judges, we took not the advantage of their
breach of the Amity between us, nor the opportunit^es that lay before us, to
put Laws upon them, or to claim any of their Privileges, but left them to the
policy of their own constitution; Notwithstanding all which Indeerments, they
seek now bloodily to put the son of the late King over us to mould our
Constitutions according to their pleasures, and to put us into War again after
all our sufferings. But though like Amalek they come to cut us off when they
think we are weak and feeble instead of bringing forth Bread and Water to us,
yet let them take heed least God remember it against them, as he did against
Amalek; and let them beware that the Grecian Horse for whose entertainment they
break down the Walls of their League and Principles, do not disgorge such a
number of Armed men amongst them, as may by woeful experience let them find*
it was not a present from heaven, but a neat design to possess their Dominion.

The disguise under which these things are covered, is Religion and the
Covenant, thinking thereby the better to deceive; which being truly weighed as
will appear in the ensuing Discourse, are ashamed to cover such rotten
Sepulchers; but in their proper Colou^s, you will find these contrivances to
be, 1. The Riches and Lordliness of the Nobility. 2. The Domination of the
Kirk, over Conscience and Authority. 3. Their Unsatiable lust to possess the
sweetness and Dominion of England; which to effect they take in any persons or
Interests (except some the more cunningly to deceive) and fear not to appeal to
God to judge between us, and to put the name of the Lord and Religion upon all
their endeavors, which no doubt God will answer to their shame and sorrow.


By what has been said concerning the cause of this Engagement and the
Aggravations of it (to say nothing of former Actions) together with their
continued refusal to Treat with us, or to own the Authority of this
Commonwealth, and the great designs they have laid in England not only to draw
away the hearts of many of this Nation upon the pretense of Religion, from the
Interest thereof by designing an universal rising of Malignants and Presbyters
over all this Commonwealth to destroy us; as by the Commissions, confession,
and other Papers taken on Colonel Robert Leuen^ under his own hand, and Charles
Stuarts hand and Seal, with his confession before his Execution, does very much
appear: I say upon the consideration of these and many other particulars which
might be n^^ed, there will appear to any unblessed man, a great necessity
enforcing this State to expedite their Armies for the prevention of the
mischiefs designed on them, and there to Engage the Enemy where it may be of
most advantage to their affairs and least detriment to their own borders: and
if the making of Scotland the seat of that War they have designed upon us
(whose borders by the last Invasion, and these late practices lie open to us)
may be a prevention of those miseries which their last Invasions exercised on
the Cor^et^y, and thereby making the enemy to feel the smart of their own War;
Justice and Prudence leads them to such undertakings, which as it is sufficient
ground for entering that Nation with our Army, so it is answer enough to any
that shall question such an Engagement.

2. As to the Groundlesseness of the Conjunction of any of the Presbytery of
this Nation with the Scots and the Malignants, although the Interest of England
against Scotland the Principles of Freedom against Tyranny, the prevention of
War* and blood in England should be matter enough for every Englishman* that
has been faithful to the Parliament, and loves the peace of his country to be
so far from joyn^ng with, etc. encouraging this enemy as to unite themselves
and live and dye together against them* and in these particulars the
groundlesseness of it is sufficiently manifested yet give me leave to
demonstrate that the Presbytery especially, who appear to be the leading men
in this Engagement against us, have neither from Religion, their former
State-principles, nor the deportment of those in Authority toward them, any
ground of conjunction which the Scots and Malignants in this War; which (if God
prevent not) may suddenly make England and Scotland and Aceldema.

1. As to Religion, 2 Cor 10.^. Heb 4.12. Ioh. 18 36 M^^^h. 26.52, 53.
The Apostle tells us that the weapons thereof are not carnal* but spiritual;
not in Garments rolled in blood, but in the two-edged sword of the Spirit: My
kingdom (says Christ) is not of this world otherwise I could pray my father
and he should send me Legions of Angels, and my servants would fight for me
therefore Peter put up thy sword: for they that draw the sword in this sense
shall perish by the sword. To raise Arms to put Nations into blood to make war
against authority, was neither the Doctrine of Christ, nor his Apostles;
therefore (says Christ) give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; pay them
Tribute least we should offend them, though as free men we think our selves
exempted: When you enter into a house or City* Matthew. 21.20.
and they receive you not what then? Raise Arms move sedition shedd blood? No,
shake the dust off your seet against them: and pray (says the Apostles) for
those that are in Authority over you, Matthew. 10.14. Act. 12 51. R m 13 4. R m 4
17 2 I'^^ 3.16. Tat 17.
that under them you may live a godly life etc. Even to such higher powers let
every o^e be subject. The office of a Minister consists in things that concern
the Kingdom of God which is Righteousness, peace joy in the Holy Ghost; and as
to that their work is to be in Doctrine, Exhortation Reproof etc. and he must
be one that is blameless, not given to wine filthy lucre no str^ker etc. not in
sitting on the Thrones of Earthly power, mo^nting over Terren Glories,
controwling affairs of State and putting Nations into war, where they are
denied this Lordliness; no the Son of man (says Christ) came not to destroy
b^t to save; Luk 4 56. M ^.23.8. M tth. 20.25. 2 Cor. ^0.^.
and be you not called R^bbies for after t^ee t^ings do the Gentiles seek. The
Kingdom of God consists in the spirit through which it is mighty in casting
down the strong holds within: the work of the Gospel must be carried on in the
way of the Gospel not by the Powers of the World, but by the Word and Spirit;
those that proceed ot^erwise go without their Commission, and consequently
without any promise of Protection. In a word there is not Precept, or Example of
Christ or his Apostles that they ever took the Authorities of the world to
enforce Religion, nor called for fire from Heaven upon such as refused, except
those to whom Christ said You known not of what Spirit you are; nor that they
intermeddled in setting Nations on fire, if they were not received, Luke
9.54.55.
or that mixed themselves in these hum^ne affairs.

Therefore for the Presbyter in England to Design and Leavy war, to plot and
conspire to betray and give up their own Nation into the hands of strangers and
men of desperate Spirits whose mercies are cruelties, and which may end in the
des^owring and ra^shment of Matrons and Virgins, the ripping up of women with
child the dashing of little ones against the Walls, the blood and ruin of a
Nation, their own Nation, and all that is dear in it, because every thing is
not enforced as Doctrine which they lay down; because what they propose as the
external part of a Kirk, is not coercively enjoined upon all men; themselves
not being Apostles or able to demonstrate the truth of their assertions from
the Scriptures or Apostolical infall^bility, has no ground at all from Christ
o^ his Apostles, but the very contrary is judged by the Scriptures. It is
evident that such mind their own L^sts, and not the Lord Jesus, to whom they
pretend; and therefore when they suffer it will be as evil doers, not for the
Gospel

2. Then for their State-principle I mean the cause of their first Engagement
against the King, Was it not because it was contrary to the Law of Nature (the
safety of the People) that one man should be above the Law, and dispose of the
lives and estates of the Nation as he pleased; and when the Parliament desired
redress in many grievances, to raise Arms against them and tear the very bowels
of the Nations and put all upon the hazard, rather then to be limited in his
unsatiable Will? And were not those Gentlemen some of the first, the most
zealous in Parliament Pulpits and Armies against him and his party and rejoiced
that they had a life or estate to lose or engage against him? Or could any
thing be imagined to express their detestation of him and his party, more then
came from their Pulpits P^ns, and Swords? or are any to this day so severe
against his party in Sequestrations etc.? And is not the Cause still the same
the same cruel bloody, tyrannical principles, and parties to be opposed whom if
God should permit to have the day, would execute such horrid villainies murders
massacres that the Sun never saw; and would not rest whilst the face of honesty
were remaining in the Nation or indeed this any longer a People? Are they
converted, nay are they not rather heightened in all malicious bloodiness
imaginable, and will let these men taste of the Cup as deep as others, and
herein be more miserable to see their friends destroyed before them? Why then
or upon what ground do the Presbyters after that God has delivered that King
and his party into our hands a first a second a third time, in England Scotland
and Ireland has brandished his sword* and given it a charge against them to
their overthrow, and made them the destruction of those that joined to them, as
well as witnessed from heaven against them in the most signal manner that ever
was in the world? Why then do they now strike in with that Interest and join
with those and foreign people, to put their Country, their Religion their
Wives and Children* their Lives and Liberties and all that is dear in the world
after all our preservations, into utter destructions? Oh consider this, and lay
it to heart lest you become ^uilty of the blood of your friends your selves and
that which has been committed by this party; lest you fall with transgressors,
and God tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Has any thing
been done that is not according to our first Principle, and that unavoidable
Necessity enforced us? Could it be safe after all, to leave such a dangerous
President on Record as a King unpunished that had endeavored to bring his Will
through the Blood of a Nation, and the Liberties thereof, and had appealed to
God to determine the Quarrel by the sword? Or were it just to do so, to destroy
the Servant, and excuse the Master that gave the ^mmand and to leave the honest
party unsecured after all their sufferings? Did not you fight against him in
the Field, and was not this as much as cutting off his head at White Hall;
only you mist your Execution, but that took? And when some of us being
unsatisfied whether we should kill the King if we met him in a Charge, and went
to many of you to be resolved; Viz. Mr. Calamy, Mr Case, Mr. Love. Mr. Ash. etc.
did not you tell us that we might lawfully kill him? How comes now your
Judgment to be altered? Can the power of Godliness be safe amongst these men?
Can you love their company and join with their actions? If you say 'twas but a
party of men did this, and that it was not according to the Covenant; Did not
those that you look upon, betray their trusts, and fall into compliance with
him contrary to their duty, and to the hazard of the Nation? Must all be lost
because some are unfaithful? And should not they do justice whose hearts God
has kept upright and called to perform it, because others neglected it, and
would not do it? Was there not a necessity in these things? And for the
Covenant, were you to protect him otherwise then it consists with Religion, and
the safety of the People? Was it not according to Religion that he that
sheddeth man's blood by man should his blood be shed? And could his coming in
with a Negative voice, and his opportunities thereby to obtain in a short time
all his ends, be safe for the Liberties of the People, especially there being
no conviction upon him, or any remorse for his former Actions? And was it not a
part of the Covenant to bring Delinquents to punishment? Was not he one, the
Chief, the Principal? Or are Covenants of that nature any otherwise then
External, serving only whilst the end (viz.) the safety and good of the
People is clear and perspicuous? are they any longer binding then the Equity
of them remanies, and the Powers that made them so understand it? Besides, are
Constitutions to be perpetual? Has not, and does not God make many changes in
the world, and as the good of the people is more brought to light, should not
Constitutions bear that in their foreheads? The safety of the People ought to
form Constitutions, and not old Constitutions to determine the safety of the
people; nor ought every defect to cause an alteration, but where necessity
enforces, especially where the former proves destructive; are not the Laws
changed upon this account? To what end serves all the discoveries of good in
the world if Governments should not be thereunto conformable? And to this end
the Providence of God has and does work up the policy of Nations according to
their opportunities to form their constitutions. Truly if things be sifted to
the bottom, i^ will appear that if the Government had been charged the late
King execu^ed by you, or those hands you like, it had been the good, and in
that the justice of it determined: but because it is by others hands, you
having laid your selves aside in being unfaithful to your Principles, and
sacrifising to the Gods that afflicted you; and now you will try whether you
can undo his work again, and give the lie to his Appearances, though in it
you hazard your bodies and souls, and the being of England. I beseech you
sadly to consider this, and give Glory to the Lord of Hosts, before he cause
your feet to stumble farther and fall in the dark Mountains: These things
have no ground from you former principle.

3. As to the Deportment of this State toward them, let it be considered what
their Provocations have been, and what they have received in recompense, and
then it will be evident that they have Ground to fight for the Commonwealth,
and not against it.

Before I proceed to that, I shall only premise their Maxim, which is true
both in Religion and Reason; That the miscariages of persons should never cause
a man to throw away the Principles of Equity: What though these men have had
discouragements, and many now in Authority abounding with Infirmities; Shall we
therefore turn into a contrary Cause, and thereby disturb and betray the
Peace of our Country?

For the provocations given to the Rulers of this Nation, let it be considered:
Were they not the first beginners of Schism and Division amongst the
Parliaments friends? Did not they as soon as God smiled a little on our
proceedings, whilst with one heart and hand we were pursuing a Common Enemy,
begin a separation with their Presbytery? which being as a bone cast amongst
us, they denied any other Religion that was not of that fashion? Did they not
take off several deserving Officers and Soldiers from their Union with their
faithful Brethren, to be in opposition to them, whereby those who were little
enough to look the Enemy in the face, looked upon one another as Enemies? Did
they not Importune the Parliament, even with breaches of their Privileges, to
make Shibboleths to turn out of the Armies and places of trust those that
could not subscribe to the Jure Divino of Presbytery, though they never yet did
nor ever will from Scripture be able to manifest it? And though the persons
that scrupled it might upon as good, nay on firmer grounds have moved for
another f^^me having more of Scripture, and as much faithfulness Gallantrie
and sufferings for the Parliament to commend them as the other if not more;
their silence being, because they thought it and do still esteem it
Antichristian to enforce people to that worship of God which they do not
understand; the Laws of Christ being like his Kingdom, not Carnal but
Spiritual. How many an opportunity had the Enemy by this? How much blood was
lest, till the Providence of God brought forth another Army of those men whom
they had laid aside and provided Engines to destroy their Consciences or their
persons? When necessity brought them into the field what endeavors* what
lorging^ were there to destroy them though the neck of England lay upon their
proceedings! It would be endless to reckon up all things? With what
outstretched necks they gaped for their rout at Nasby! and when the Lord
marveilously turned it into a day of Victory (which England will have cause
always to remember with thankfullness to God) how sad were their hearts and at
all the other unparalled mercies with which God had blessed them, The like of
Marston-Moor.
insomuch that some of them judged it Judgments rather then mercies!

When through that Army the Enemy was subdued and Ireland stood in need of
relief what endeavors were there to break this Army in pieces, to bring up the
Scots to this end, to put in a new General! etc. When none of chese things
would put us together by the ears, then upon a design pretended for Ireland,
but intending another end they endeavor the breaking it in pieces and to bring
the pretended forces for Ireland to balance the Army; when part of the Army
would have gone if led by by their own Officers; that was refused being
thought no less than damnation and so p^est by the Presbytery to send such
thither. Mr. Nich^^^ acknowledge me^t at Kingston.
Then they endeavor to disb^nd them noting them Traitors upon the report of a
Pe ition intended from the Army to them though they had not seen the Petition,
or l^e^rd any deposition on for what was suggested; and this as a gratuity for
rede^ming them from their enemies.

When none of those would effect their end nor put us into blood then (so
tender were they of this poor Lands sufferings and blood, and of Ireland) they
des^gre another war and to that end got a rude multitude some of the Ra^^^es
c^^pping them on the b^ok) who with an unparalled impudence put Force on the
House, Note, the first Force was ^y themselves.
necessitated the Speaker and other faithful per on to flee to the Army the
rest to revoke former Orders* and to ord^^n another Army, General Officers
raising of London g^^isoning it against the Army, and designed other parts
also, and the Scots marching to our borders which was the first war by them
raised.

When God was pleased to blast this also that much blood was not shed, (no
thanks to them) then they must design a compliance with the late King and the
Scots must be sent for their preparations not voted against, private Agreements
must pass between the King and them: to accom^l^sh this the Militia must lie
unsettled, the N^vie must be broken (which great loss is not yet recovered) a
Personal Treaty must be driven on with fu^^, though no men more against it
formerly then them; and the rising of the people made a pretense thereunto when
it is known who stirred up the people to force a Treaty, although Treaties were
known to be designs for mischief; and the very treating with him put an
acknowledgement of guilt upon themselves. Then the Scots came in with a great
Army; Insurrections were everywhere to the great hozard of England; five
thousand of which under the Earl of Holland being followed with five hundred of
ours and news thereof brought into the Assembly Oh said a R^bby, M. Hodges.
but there is five* thousand with my Lord to engage them; and the best of their
actions were then to look on whilst we were eng^ging in blood; be ng those
(...) of whose hand the King took the Nav^e Duke Hamilton the Scots Army and
the Insurrections the Militia of the Country; and so they helped on a second war
upon their account, being the sole encouragement of Scots and Malign^n^s.

The goodness of God having delivered us from these straits, and made us
instruments to save Scotland themselves and us, when we had opportunity, and
were altring the Constitution of the Nation for the best advantage of Justice
and Safety and the King called to account; then they rail against the
Alteration, the Kings Execution; and in stead of lying down before the presence
of the Lord and blessing his Name for the good he had done* in preserving them
against their own wills they again encourage the Malignants and Scots vilify
and contemn the Government refuse to own or obey them; every Pulpit
excommunicating the State out of the Divinity of Truth the R^ght of Authority,
and the Hearts of the People; and have proceeded to assist and join with that
Nation of Scotland Charles Stuart son to the late King and all the Malignants
and Rebels of Ireland who manage the same Cause of the King, whom they pray
for, yet could there not be a Prayer for* or Thanksgiving to God be had from
them for what he has wonderfully done by the Army in Ireland; but to lay
designs for an universal Rising amongst our selves, and so upon their own
account have laid the foundation of a third war* which they call The Cause of
the King and the Ki^k; the First being God and the King, the Second The King
and Parliament: The first was Bellum Episcopal^; and in this the Bishops and
the King fell together; the second, the King fell from and by the Parliament:
the third, Bellum Presbyteriale, and in this let them take heed lest the King
and the Kirk fall together. Thus they prefer their own unrighteous discontents
before the Peace of this Nation; valuing more the venting of their p^ssi^ns
then the Lives Liberties, and Territories of England; which they had rather,
and therefore give life unto and assist the Scots and Malignants to the ruin
of this Nation, then that those whom God has prospered, and put in Authority
should govern, Little do thou think, o England, Few for^ain Nations are now
plotting the ravishing of the wives of thy bosom, and to destroy thee utterly.
and themselves be out of the Chair over men's Consciences and the State; though
their own blood may prove the second Scene of the Tragedy.

Before I pass this* let me entreat thee, O England to consider who has put
thee into Two wars already since thy First was ended; and the Malignants and
Scots are encouraged to this Third war (likely to be more bloody then all that
has yet been) through these men; and that the blood that shall be shed is from
them, as the cause, upon what grounds thou see; that thou may indeed
perceive who makes thee miserable; the interest of the Priest having all along
set fire in this Nation; the Bishops were first these follow; to whom the Lord
give repentance, lest they find it a hard thing to kick against the pricks.

But now what has the carriage of the State been toward them? Have they not
notwithstanding all the^e high provocations contrary to the Law of God and Man
Have they not, I say permitted them and always will the liberty of their
Conference as to Religion? (though they denied it to us and do still deny it.)
Have they not the propriety of their Est^tes, the security of the Laws and all
other advantages, only they require them to be true and not consp^e against
this Commonwealth* which they refuse? Have they not been treated with all
civilities, and commended their way of Worship to the Nation? And for all the
despe^a^e D^visions in the Nation, and three several Wars, which have cost much
blood* and how much more well now not; Has any man of them suffered? (the more
I fear the State has to answer for:) only when their rage had proceeded so
far as to lay the ground of this War, and the closing with the Scots and
Malignants, and would not forbear their rebellious against the State, some few
of them have been suspended from their P^lp^s* that they might be hindered from
pouring more oil into the flame of this Nation; ^he meddling with State Affairs
being that for which they are suspended; such an implacable spirit having
scized upon them that nothing but the ruin of this Power and overthrowing all
that God has done for us will satisfy them, and this under the disguse of
Religion, when as it is their own Lusts that is the rife of these Wars, and
which will cost dear in the end. I do even tremble to think how they will be
able to appear before the Lord, whose Name they put upon their unrighteous
actions; comm^t iniqu^ty rail and revile, put Nations into blood, and yet cry
The Temple of the Lord. The righteous God of heaven and earth will one day make
the^e things naked before the Sun and bring forth the righteousness of his
People.

By all that has been said will strongly appear not only this Justice and
necessity of this Engagement against Scotland b^t that all those Presbyters
that shall Engage against the P^rliament of England have no ground either from
Religion; their former Stat-Principle or the demeanor of those in Authority
toward them to do so, but the contrary.

And from all that has been said there is g^e^t matter of encour^gement (if
the Lord so please) to every faithful soul to proceed in this cause of God, and
his people, without fearing any d^fficulties, and qu^etly to expect his
blessing on their endeavors and because ^our enemies may seem many, let me
reckon up a few* which may be as a Mo^ntain full of Chariots of fire for your
assistance; let your enem^es have all the blood and mischief shedd in the late
wars upon their shoulders; their cause and gui^t cannot be separated.

2. They are joined to Idolaters, and that accursed thing which God has so
much declared against, and which hitherto has ruined all that have joined to
it; having snatched away a King an^ Monarchy in his displeasure in a s^gnall
manner to which workings of Heaven they dare bid defiance and g^ve the lie to
all that has been said of God concerning it.

3. We have given no just occasion to the Scots or P^esbyters but have
protected them in the Enjoyment of their Consciences, Est^tes and in other
advantages so far as the Public safety would adm^t; whom if a Spirit of
delusion did not possess, they would see how imposs^ble it is that the spirit
of profaneness should set up the power of godliness, the Principles of Tyranny
the freedom of the People the Interest of Scotland, the English D^m^nion, or
themselves safe in the hands of such men as will m^ke no diff^rence.

So was Christ ^e counted a Blasph^me^, and upon that crucified.
4. That the Interest of Jesus Christ in the Spirit and Power of Religion is on
this side and is indeed that which they malign, and therefore brand with the
name of Sect^ris^e.

5. That the time is now drawing nigh wherein God will cut short his work in
Righteousness. Mountains must m^l^ down before him; he draws things into a more
high and narrow dispute, not so much between Profaneness and Religion (which
profaneness and Idolatry they take in to their ass^stance) but we the form and
power of Godliness: and now the powers of that Nation in the form are drawing
into Armageddon, against the power of Religion, and have encompassed the
beloved City, but fire will come down from Heaven to destroy them.

6. A great spirit of Prayer and Confidence is risen up in the Saints for his
presence in this work; wherein not the arm of flesh, but his Glory shall be
seen and acknowledged; and they are drawn forth in their expectation to behold
some eminent appearance.

7. To add no more the Scipture tells us, that the nearer Babylon is to her
destruction, the more she is in her confidence. And let us not be discouraged,
that many that pretend to godliness are with them: Many Jews staid and perished
in old Babylon: if they join to Babylon, they shall fall with her. Come out of
her, my people, lest ye be partakers of her sins and of her plagues. If they
will uphold what God will destroy, we must do our work, and leave it to God,
who knows how to deliver the Righteous, to save their persons and open their
eyes; which is our prayer to God for them, though they prepare war in their
hearts against us.

Thus have I, according to what I have received, and my little time,
endeavored to unvail the mystery of Iniquity which is now working in Scotland
and England, and what indeed lies at the bottom of all Parties in these
transactions: more might be said, but this is not intended for a Volume. I
bless the Lord I have no other end in it then to discharge my duty in this hour
of Temptation to my poor Country, which seems to be betrayed and beset on all
hands; whose welfare I value above my life, and out of my tender affections to
many of the Presbytery whom I love and respect, and desire that they may be
delivered out of the snare of the Devil in which they are taken Captive: indeed
its no bad Couns^l to them to weigh these things seriously, least they be
farther found fighters against God, betrayers, and rippers up of the bowels of
their Country destroyers of the Saints in their just proceedings, under the
pretense of the Honor of God Christ and the Gospel; and that other honest
people who I believe truly fear God, may not be deluded by the guiles of men
who lie in wait to deceive. I have no personal prejudice against any one, nor
write I any thing out of prejudiced spirit but have dealt plainly according to
the truth of things, and necessity that lies upon me to pluck some (if it may
be) out of the fire; for it is now no jesting; the Scots and Malignants have
through discontent cheated those men in their assistance, which is likely to
prove either their destruction, or our ruin and all the truly faithful people
in the world. Many of these things have been longer observed by me but was
loath to put them on the Stage, hoping that God would have let these men see
the Error of their ways: but when they proceed so high as that they occasion
this war that is now on foot, which is likely, to have more black attendance
then any yet; and their passions must fall, or we with the faithful in the
Land, and the Nation, must be ruined; I could not but thus discharge my
conscience, to let this Nation know, that these men have been and are now the
ground of the miseries that have been since the first Conquest of this Enemy
and shall proceed on this Engagement. I have faithfully done it, as in his
presence, and let the effect be as it pleases him; only let every faithful
soul whom God has preserved from being led away with the error of the wicked,
lift up his heart, and in all humility and considence proceed in this work
against all these generations that lift up their hand against Heaven and their
Country, as that wherein the preservation of Religion Civility and Liberty the
Being of England, the support of other people who lie under tyrannical
Governors, the honor of God and Christ is concerned; and let them believe
that the Lord, who has hitherto, to the amazement of the world, brought along
this Cause, and blessed his people in it, will not, after all this, give us up
as a proy to our blood-thirsty enemies; and for his great Names sake, and the
praise of his Workings, he will not let the Enemy say that Profaness is better
then Religion, Tyranny then Justice, Hypocrisy then Vprightness, the Form of
godliness then the Power: No surely, his work shall go on, and he will cut it
short in righteousness. In confidence of which assistance of God, and the
endearments of this Engagement, let us rather leave our bodies in the ground as
a testimony to the truth of these things, then by any base despondence of
spirit neglect and betray this Cause, wherein his glory is so much concerned,
and the welfare of these Nations.

FINIS.

