ENGLANDS SETTLEMENT, UPON THE Two solid foundations OF The Peoples Civil and
Religious LIBERTIES.

COLLECTED Out of diverse Petitions, Declarations, and Remonstrances; wherein is
discovered the General Genius of the NATION.

By a Well-wisher of the Peace and Happiness of the Three Nations.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLIX.

ENGLANDS SETTLEMENT.
OUr great Miseries and Distractions are known with amazement all the world
over, but they are only sadly felt by the poor people of these Nations; to whom
these miseries are the more grievous, that they have fought themselves into
them, and have reaped no other fruits of their Victories, after long
expectation of greater happiness, but increase of their afflictions. For they
experience, that their so much talked of, and so often promised liberty, has
proved nothing but Real and almost intolerable Slavery: their plenty has been
turned into Miserable poverty; and their Peace into endless Troubles.

They find also that there has been a Curse upon the Government these 10 years;
for it has been all that time a rolling, like Sisiphus stone, and inconstant as
the Moon. Insomuch, that there be few persons of any prudence or piety, who do
not see the hand of God (who is much known in his works) to lie heay upon these
Nations. For his chastisments or judgments have been very terrible and
Universal, both over Church and State, and have gone round over all sorts of
persons as well of high, as of low degree. For the late English Church has been
quite overturned, the King himself the Head thereof Tragically beheaded, and
his Posterity rigorously excluded: The Nobility is in a manner degraded, the
house of Peers abolished, the ancient Gentry, slighted, the Merchants and
Commons by decay of Trade, and by the unhappy conjuncture of extraordinary
Taxes, impoverished and exhausted. Yea the Parliaments themselves (which are
neither Infallible nor Impeccable,) have not gone without some chastisment. For
their own hired Servants have oftener then once lifted their heels against them,
and without any lawful Authority, but according to their pleasures or
interests, have dissolved, called, annihilated, and revived them. Only the
Soldiers, whom God has used as instruments to punish others, may seem to have
gone hitherto unpunished.

But every thing must have its time to come to maturity; and God Almighty has
already begun to manifest his judgments upon some of their principal Heads and
first Movers. For though their late General Oliver was by Gods permission very
fortunate during this Life, in his own Person; yet soon after his death he
became very Miserable both in his Posterity, and in his Memory: and besides,
some other Visitations and crosses have fallen upon some of his chief officers
and instruments, which may serve as a warning for all the rest, to prevent Gods
judgments, least they fall heavily upon them, either here, or hereafter.

As these judgments and Visitations of God over those Nations, which make us a
spectacle to the World, are very evident, so it is certain some very heinous sin
or sins have provoked them. But what these sins are in particular, is not so
easy to determine, especially to every man's satisfaction. Yet it may be
probably affirmed, if not averred for a certain Truth, that soul Tyranny or
Coercive power over Men's Consciences, is the principal sin that has drawn down
these judgments from Heaven. For 1. it is a most heinous sin in it self (as we
shall see shortly) and especially if it be exercised against the true Religion.
2 This Nation has been deeply guilty of it, above a hundred year. And 3. every
party objects it to another, as the chief cause of all their Miseries, and it
was indeed the principal ground of the late wars between King and Parliament.
For the Papists do alleadg, that the before said judgments have fallen upon
these Nations for their schism from the Roman Church, and for persecuting
those of their profession, merely for their Consciences, as may be seen in
Monsieur de la Militiers Remonstrance. Again, it is known how the Presbyterians
do, or at least did impute all the Miseries of these Nations to the sins of the
Kings house, and particularly for impowering the Bishops, to strain their
tender Consciences, and for opposing, as they call it, the blessed Work of
Reformation: Upon the other part, the Royalists and old Protestants lay all the
blame upon the Presbyterians restless spirits, which will not suffer their own
Consciences to be touched, and yet will tear other men's Consciences in pieces,
by fearful Oaths and Combinations. Then Lastly, the Independents do accuse
both Royalists, and Presbyterians, as well of Temporal as of Spiritual
Tyranny; and upon this pretense they have outed and mastered them both. But yet
the judgments do not cease, which shows clearly enough, that the cause is not
removed. For indeed it is very strange to consider, how each of these parties
has practiced what they blamed in others. They saw the Mote in their brethrens
eyes, but could not see the beam in their own. When any party was under the
lash, then they cried for compassion on tender Consciences, and inveighed
against all Coercive power as a most heinous sin, and cruel Tyranny: but they
no sooner snatched the whip into their own hands, then they presently laid about
them without any compassion of their brethren, or any memory of their own
former Condition, so much does prosperity blind men, making a vast distance
between their Words and Actions.

But whatsoever the chief sin be that has drawn down the foresaid judgments
upon these Nations, it is certain with almost all prudent and unbyassed men,
that this State, especially as matters now stand in such a variety of
Religions, shall never be firmly settled under any form of Government, either
Monarchical, Democratical, etc. unless it be built upon such a solid
Foundation, as may assert and secure the Peoples Liberties, both Religious and
Civil. This the Parliament wisely foresaw, and graciously promised in their
Declaration 7 May 1659. The principal Reasons whereof are here briefly
collected, for the most part out of diverse Petitions, Declarations and
Remonstrances, and now as it were in one view humbly presented to the
Parliaments grave and serious Consideration: Whereon also the Officers of the
Army may be pleased to vouchsase an impartial look; and it cannot be much
doubted, but that they as good Patriots and Christians will yield to Reason and
Justice; and prefer their Countries good, to their own private Interests and
Passions.

The two chief Pillars then whereon this State must be founded, are the
Spiritual and Civil Liberties of the People, that is in the Parliaments
Language, their Liberties both as Men, and as Christians. Of the peoples Civil
Liberty we shall speak but a little, in regard there can be no question, but
that it is requisite for the settling of any State or Government: For all
Governments were at first ordained to make the people live happily under just
Laws, and free from Slavery in their persons, and Oppression in their goods.
Now when these good ends of Government are not pursued, but inverted, the
people cannot but rest discontented, and they ordinarily watch their
opportunity to subvert that perverse Government, that they may so free their
necks from the yoke of Slavery and Misery. And consequently that Government can
never be well settled, which is not founded upon, and does not constantly secure
the peoples Civil liberty, as they are Men. Experience shows this to be true
in the late Troubles, for Arbitrary Government and Encroaching upon the peoples
Civil liberty, was one of the alleged grounds of the war between the late
King and Parliament; whereby the former Government came to be subverted.
Wherefore to settle this state and Government well, the evils of Slavery and
oppression must be removed; and the good of just Civil Liberty must be secured.

Now it is well known to all unbyassed, and uninterested men, and to the whole
people, that their Civil Liberties both in their persons and estates, have been
much more violated since the Kings Death, then they were before in the Kings
time.

For first, The peoples Civil Liberty has been generally and highly violated in
their Representatives: when the major part of the Parliament Members were
violently thrust out of the House, and diverse of them imprisoned: and much more
when whole Parliaments were dissolved, without any lawful Authority, but by
mere force and the power of the sword, which the peoples servants turned
against themselves.

Again the peoples Liberty was generally infringed by the change of Government,
and by election of a new Supreme Magistrate, without the suffrages of the
people, to whom only that Right and privilege does belong, even in their
principles who made all those alterations. And besides the people was generally
abused, when they were kept in great subjection and slavery under that new
Magistrate by the power of the Sword.

But the peoples Liberties were more particularly violated, when diverse
freeborn persons among them were imprisoned by arbitrary power, without any
known Law, and unchristianly and inhumanely used in prison. And when some very
simple and innocent persons were drawn into Traps by Trepanning Plots; and then
were cruelly executed, as Traitors, under the color of Justice. The
Instruments of which mischiefs did imitate their Father the Devil, who first
tempts man to sin, then accuses him of it, and punishes him for it.

Lactly, the people suffered extremely in their goods, by exorbitant and
continual Taxes, and that under pretense of necessity to maintain an Army:
whereas the Army Officers in that fatal Remonstrance from St. Albans, anno
1648. did pretend that the Removal of the King was necessary for disbanding of
the Army, and casing the people of their heavy burdens and taxes; but we see
neither the one nor the other has followed on it, but that rather our miseries
have increased. Now if we shall join to those intolerable taxes, the great
decay of Trade, occasioned principally by making an unnecessary war with Spain,
upon the score of private interest, against the general good, and to the great
damage of the three Nations, as may be seen at large in that excellent
Remonstrance of the Merchants, presented to the late Protector and Parliament,
it may be clearly seen, that nothing has been wanting to make the people of
these Nations perfectly miserable, both in their persons and estates. If the
farthing Tax of Ship Money was thought so heavy and intolerable a burden in
the Kings time, when Gold was almost as plentiful as Silver is now, and when
our Trading admirably flourished all the world over; What may be justly thought
of all the Taxes, that have been raised since the beginning of these Troubles,
or particularly since the Kings death? May it not be justly concluded, that
these Taxes being compared with the ship money, etc. To which they have so Vast
a disproportion, have been and are a burden to the people more then
Intolerable? And therefore its no wonder that the people rests so much
unsatisfyed, and the State unsettled.

These are the great evils that must be removed, before the Government can be
settled, upon the solid basis of the peoples just and civil liberty. Ex malis
moribus bonae leges oriuntur. Wherefore to attain this good end of settlement,
it is necessary,

1. That some solid course be taken to make the power of the sword subordinate
to the Civil and supreme power of the Nations: and that the Soldiers be not
suffered any more to domineer over their Masters: otherwise our Miseries and
Confusions will never end, but still increase; as may be known by the practices
of the Pretorian bands among the Romans, and of the Janisaries among the Turks.

2ly. That no person be imprisoned nor his goods touched, without the breach of
a known law.

3ly. That now at length the people may be freed from their long and exorbitant
Taxes, and eased of their other heavy burdens, which they may justly expect as
a reward of their long Patience, if they cannot reap it as a fruit of their
Victories. And for this end, it will be necessary to reduce the Army to as
small a competent number as can be conveniently; which in reason ought not to
breed any great difficulty. For the Officers, who have got good estates, maybe
well contented to enjoy them, and live upon them: and the Soldiers being paid
their Arrears and some of the best deserving among them rewarded according to
their merits, may be easily encouraged to return to their former Trades; and
not remain any longer a burden and scourge to their distressed Country, which
may be sufficiently secured without them by settling a good Country Militia.

Lastly, all possible means must be used to quicken and advance Trade and
Commerce, which are the Golden Mines of England, and are now so much decayed.
By all which means the peoples just and Civil liberty will be secured, and
the State in a part settled; but with out them this Commonwealth will be
quickly transformed into Common-poverty.

Hence it may appear by the way, that though all the aforesaid evils be
remedied, yet the people of these Nations shall hardly be in so good a
condition, in reference to their Civil Liberty and property, as they enjoyed
under the King, against which they did so much repine: which comes far short
of the great happiness and freedom they proposed to themselves, and that were
held out to them in many Declarations.

The other main Basis or pillar, that must uphold the great fabric of this
State, to make it stand firm and sure, is the spiritual liberty of the people
as they are Christians; which consists in this, that no person professing faith
in Christ be molested or oppressed in his Conscience for his judgment in
matters of religion, or in things merely relating to the worship and service of
God. This appears to be the sense of the Parliament it self, this is the desire
of the most peaceable and Godly people of the Nation, and this is the common
judgment of almost all men, who have a grain of Solid prudence. The Parliament
has shown sufficiently their sense of the business, in two Declarations, in the
first whereof. 17. March 1648. Bringing their reasons for changing the
Government from Monarchy into a Commonwealth, they say Art. 4. That it is to
procure a just liberty for the Consciences, Persons and Estates of all Men
conformable to Gods glory and their own peace. And in their last Declaration of
the 7th. May 1659. They promise, by the assistance of Almighty God to endeavor
the settlement of this Commonwealth, upon such a Foundation, as may Assert,
establish, and secure the property and liberties of the people, both as Men and
Christians. The peaceable and Godly people have manifested their desires, by
many petitions, Remonstrances and printed books to this purpose. And all men,
whose inconsiderate Zeal does not weigh down their wits, do see with the
Parliament wherein ought to be centred the wisdom of the whole Nation, that
the Government of these Nations, as the case now stands, cannot be firmly
settled without taking away of all restraint over men's Consciences, and granting
an innocent Toleration, which may be evinced by these following Reasons.

1. All men of Conscience do know that freedom of Conscience in matters of
Religion, is the last and highest interest of man, Valued by him above all
earthly things; and therefore nothing can be more earnestly desired by him. And
upon the contrary, nothing is more repugnant to man then a restraint or
Coercive power over his Conscience, as being against his last and highest
interest: and therefore it cannot but raise a deep discontent in him, with an
earnest desire to be free of that soul-Tyranny; and not only to wish, but also
if it be in their power, even to work and make a change of that Government, by
which men's souls are so racked. Whence it clearly follows that that State which
puts a restraint upon men's Consciences, especially when variety of Religions
has got a footing in it, can never be well and solidly settled, but is exposed
to unavoydable Troubles and jealousies, and to manifest danger of ruin and
subversion.

Experience the Mistrisse of fools may teach them this truth, who will not
suffer themselves to be convinced by reason. For is it not well known, not only
what an Ocean of blood did overflow France, during the Civil wars for
Religion, but also how that great Monarchy by keeping a restraint upon the
protestants, was exposed at the rising about Amboys, and diverse other times,
to the manifest danger of ruin and subversion? and how their State never
settled, not their evils ended, till all restraint was taken away, after which
time that State wonderfully flourished. Lid not the same restraint of
Conscience, cause the long and bloody wars of the Low Countries, yea and make
such a Rent in that famous State, with a change of Government, that it cannot
be pieced up to this day? What fearful Tragedies and Revolutions did the same
quarrel of Religion produce in Scotland, in the reign of Queen Mary Stuart.
Was not also this State of England for the same reason, twice exposed to
manifest danger of ruin and subversion. 1. by a mighty foreign invasion in the
year 88, and again by a detestable Gunpowder-plot, of some few desperate
Papists, whom others of that profession, do alleadg to have been stirred up,
The Politicians Catechism.
and Trepanned, by old Cecil the great State Machivilian of his time, to render
them all odious and incapable of some intended favors. And though by Gods
mercy, this State was preserved from both those dangers, yet did it not still
continue in fears and jealousies of the Papists? And has it not lately in our
own time been strangely overturned without the Papists, by those who were
little suspected or much slighted, to wit by some more precise sort of
Protestants, who past all before under the name of Puritans, and that upon the
same score of Religion, to be free of all restraint of their Consciences, and
enjoy a greater freedom.

Hence it may appear to all sober peaceable and judicious men that this State
(especially as the case now stands) cannot be peaceably and solidly settled,
unless all restraint over men's Consciences be removed, and an innocent
Toleration granted, and the former Reason alone joined with such sad and fresh
experiences is sufficient to evince it. For the Safety of the people and the
perservation of the State (in which is also included the Con^ervation of the
Magistrate) ought to be the supreme Law. All which we have seen by many
experiences of Protestants against Papists, and of Papists against Protestants,
and of Protestants against one another, to be in manifest danger by keeping a
Restraint over Men's Consciences. Whereas upon the contrary an innocent
in-offensive Toleration in matters of Religion, secures all, and cements the
peoples greatest interest to preserve and defend the Commonwealth whereof we
see a near and clear example in the Commonwealth of Holland,

But let us hear some other Reasons against this Coercive power over men's
Consciences. Mr. Colier a Minister proves learnedly in his new book presented
to the Parliament, entitled The Decision of the great point now in
Controversy, about the Interest of Christ, and the Civil Magistrate, in the
Rule of Government in this World that it is unlawful for the Civil Magistrate
to pretend any right of Coercive power over (...) Consciences; and that it is a
most heinous sin in the Magistrate to exercise any such power: for which Mr.
Colier brings diverse grounds, whereof we shall touch some few. 1. The Civil
Magistrate has received no such power from Christ, for no place of the New
Testament presents us with the Lords giving up of Authority to worldly
Magistrates in matters Ecclesiastical, i.e. in things relating to Faith and
Worship. From which he inferrs that Christ has reserved the power over the
Conscience to himself, as being the only Lord of the Conscience. 2. Christ has
left in Scripture clear and absolute Rules for his people to walk by in point
of Faith and Worship; in which they are obliged to obey him. Therefore he has
not committed that Authority to the Magistrate. For the Magistrate may, and that
probably too, (as it is too frequently seen) contradict Christ's commands. 3. If
Authority in Divine things were committed to the Civil Magistrate, it must be
necessary to know, to what Magistrate, whither to all Magistrates alike, or
only to some, to wit to Christian Magistrates. If to all: then two impieties
will follow. 1. That the Lord has subjected his Word and Will to the judgment
of Heathen and profane Magistrates: Or 2ly. Has subjected his people to their
Wills in point of Worship. If only to Christian Magistrates, then the doubt
will be to whom of them it is, there being many of them supposing themselves to
be Christian Magistrates, though they be of very different or contrary beliefs:
and yet all think themselves to be in the truth, and most of them think
themselves concerned to make provision in worship, and to exercise their power
in these things. And so upon this ground which is common to all, every one that
has the power will persecute another, the Papists may persecute the
Protestants, the Protestants the Papists, and the Protestants one another. And
consequently (...) principle throws the whole world into confusion, which
shows that it does not proceed from Heaven. 4ly. We find clearly in Scripture
that Christ has committed his Authority in matters relating to worship to his
Church, and not to the Civil Magistrate. Hence he promises his presence with
the Church unto the end of the world, Math. 28. v. 20. And therefore in case of
offense directs his to tell it to the Church, Math, 18.17. there being no
higher Appeall on earth for believers in divine things. And as the Church, so
is its Government distinct, from the world and the worldly Government: and the
Government Christ has left in his Church is spiritually to be exercised; all
Church censures reaching in the highest extent to reject and cast out to the
world and Satan, not to inflict bodily punishments, but to endeavor in all the
saving of the Soul. Hence Mr. Colier inferrs that the Civil Magistrate who
usurps to himself Authority in Divine things, robs the Church of that Authority
the Lord has given her; and who exercises Coercivo power over men's
Consciences, treacherously invades the Dominion and Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
the only Lord of the Conscience, and so becomes guilty of highest Treason
against the King of Kings and Lord of Heaven. Thus Mr. Colier.

Here we may observe that as the first Reason proves Coercive power over the
Conscience to be against the security of the state, and temporal peace both of
the Magistrates and People; so this second Reason evinceth that it is against
the spiritual good of the Magistrate, making him guilty of the most heinous
sin of high Treason against the Lord Jesus. Now the third Reason, which we draw
out of that prudent and moderate book, entitled The Vindication of Sir Henry
Vane, against the lies and calumnies of Mr. Baxter, Minister, etc. shall show,
that coercive power is against the spiritual good of the people.

3. Nothing can be more against the spiritual good of the people then to make
them Hypocrites, that is Dissemblers in matters of Religion, professing to
believe what they do not believe, and so consequently damning their own souls,
But coercive power over the Conscience in matters of Religion does make men the
greater Hypocrites, and seven times more the Children of the Devil, then they
were before, as the aforesaid book affirms, and experience shows. Therefore
coercive power, or persecution for Religion is against the spiritual good of
the people, and consequently ought not to be exercised, since it is certain with
all Rational men, that all power is ordained by God and Nature, for the good
of the people, and not for their prejudice. But this Reason will be more
illustrated by the fourth, which we collect out of the book entitled, the
Maxims and Principles of the Levellers, who are not such men, as their Enemies
give them out to be.

4. Coercive power, etc. Is against the nature of Faith and true Religion. For
all true Religion in men is founded upon the inward consent of their
Understandings to the truths revealed; and Faith it self is an Assent of the
Understanding to the said Truths: which Assent must proceed from inward
illumination of God, and external instruction of men, according to those
Scriptures, No man, says our Savior, can come unto me unless my Father draw
him, John. 6.44. and S. Paul says, Faith comes by hearing. Now what can be
more against an inward consent or Assent of the Understanding, proceeding from
divine illumination and humane instruction; then a violent constraint and rape
on the soul, to extort an Assent of the Understanding, by mere force and
compulsion. And therefore nothing can be more against the nature of faith and
true Religion, and against the means ordained by Christ for propagation of
them, then coercive power or persecution for Religion. Hence the Levellers do
wisely infer, that Christ has ordained the preaching of the Gospel to be the
outward means for converting souls, and appointed spiritual Ordinances for the
instruction and punishment of erroneous and heretical persons, the Scripture
commanding the erroneous to be instructed with the spirit of meekness, and
Christ never mentioned any penalty to be inflicted on the Bodies or Purses of
Misbeleevers, because of their misbeleef.

5. Coercive power, etc. is against our Saviors express command in the
parable of the Tares, as the Author of Sir Henry Vanes Vindication does
observe, where our Savior commands that both the Tares and the wheat should
remain together in the World, Aug. lib. quest evang. in Math. c. 13. number. 4.
and not be plucked up till the day of harvest, which is the end of the World,
Math. 13. Now by wheat, is understood the true believers, and by Tares the
erroneous believers, or heretics, as S. Augustine on this place shows.
Therefore they who by persecution would pluck up all Misbeleevers, go directly
against our Saviors command, and may pluck up the wheat with the tares,
whereof our Savior forewarneth them. They go also against the Apostle, who
would not have the Servant of God to strive, but to be gentle toward all men,
in meekness, instructing those that are contrary minded, if peradventure God
will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. 2 Timoth. 2.24.25.

6. Coercive is against the judgment of many of the Ancients, Lactant.
and against the practice of the primitive Christians. Lanctantius says, no
man is forced by the Christians against his Will, seeing he that wants faith
and devotion is unserviceable to God; and God not being contentious would not
be worshipped of the unwilling. Tertullian says, Tertull. ad Scapulam.
It Is of humane right and natural liberty that every man worship God
uncompelled, and believe what he will; nor does it beseem any Religion to
compel another to be of their Religion, which willingly and freely should be
embraced and not by constraint, forasmuch as God requires a free will offering.
See more Testimonies cited in the Vindication of Sir Henry Vane. Vindicat. of
S. H. V. p. 16. 17.
And that it was the practice of the ancient Christians, when they became
Masters, to persecute none for their Religion, is acknowledged in a little book
lately printed, entitled The Commonwealth of Israel, where it is said in the
Anatomy of Mr. Prins good old cause, Primitive Christianity under Christian
Emperors allowed and avowed an Universal Toleration with a capacity for each
not differing in opinions, but Religions, to be preferred to the highest
dignities. Ergo, this is the Good old cause. The same practice of the ancient
Christians is acknowledged also in that New book, entitled, Light shining out
of darkness, and it is certain in it self by the History of the Church, that the
Christians becoming Masters, under Christian Emperors, did not persecute the
Heathens, by whom themselves had been so cruelly persecuted, but gave them a
Toleration. And this was very consonant to Reason, laying aside all Divinity,
in regard the Heathen Religion, was the Religion that had been before publicly
professed for many Ages, and had taken deep roots in the peoples hearts; and
therefore it required a Toleration, till by the force of Truth, (which ever at
length prevails) it should be rooted out. Yea this principle is so reasonable,
that the Turks themselves though mighty Zealous in their own superstition, do
grant permission and liberty to Christians, whose Countries they conquer, of
the Religion they find there professed, though they will not grant the same
liberty to new Sects that may arise. Whence may appear the unreasonablenesse of
King Harry the 8, who quitting the Popish Religion though upon no religious
pretense (as is well known) and usurping to himself that fatal Title of Supreme
Head of the Church of England, did persecute most fiercely that Religion on
which he himself had professed from his Infancy, and which had been the public
Religion of the Nation for many Ages; intending presently and unseasonably to
extirpate it by force and violence, and putting many brave men to death, who
would not take the oath of his Supremacy against their Consciences. Hence also
may be seen the unseasonable designs of some new fiery Zelots, who would have
Toleration granted to all Religions, though never so new and ridiculous, but
would have a restraint put upon Popery and Prelacy; which being the two
Religions formerly and publicly professed in the Nation, ought above all new
Religions, to enjoy some Toleration. Neither can that exception of Popery and
Prelacy proceed from any other root, but from cruelty and desire of revenge, or
from Diffidence of their own cause: for if these Zelots were sure of the truth
on their side, as the ancient Christians were, they would be also confident of
the victory in a calm and Christian way, without any force or compulsion.
Wherefore it may be well concluded against them, that these new Christians are
not only irrational, but show much less charity and compassion to Christians,
then the ancient Christians show to the Pagans: yea that they are more inhumane
and cruel to their Countrymen, and Brethren, professing the name of Christ;
then the Turks, professed enemies of the name of Christ, are to Christians their
conquered enemies and strangers. And the Turks may rise up as witnesses against
them in the day of judgment, manifesting to the World, that though these Zelots
pretended to be Saints, yet they were nothing but masked Furies, coming short
of them in Moral Virtue, and exceeding them in cruelty.

7. Coercive power, etc. is against that golden Rule of righteousness known by
the light of Nature, That we should do unto others, as we would have them do to
us; and do nothing to them, which we would not wish to be done to our selves.
Now who amongst us would be content that others should persecute us for our
Religion and Conscience? If then we persecute others for their Religion and
Conscience; do we not oppose that great light, that God has implanted in our
hearts, and violate that law of Righteousness which our Savior recommended to
us in his Heavenly Sermon on the Mount, as the sum of the law and the
Prophets? And will we not come fart short of the perfection of the Saints, who
according to our Saviors precept ought to pray for their persecutors, when on
the contrary, we persecute our Brethren, who would do us no harm, but would
live peaceably, and serve God according to their Consciences.

8. Coercive power, etc. Is against our own principles and pretenses, and
therefore it is a greater sin (as being more irrational) in us then in others,
who do not hold the same principles. For first we profess our selves to be
fallible in judging and determining Universally in matters of Religion, and
object as a heinous crime to the Papal Church, that she pretends to
infallibility, which the Reformed Churches esteem only proper to Jesus Christ.
But by persecuting others for their Consciences, we proclaim our selves in
effect to be infallible, as Mr. Colier wisely observes, and so we become guilty
of the same crime in deeds, which we deny in words, and which we lay to the
charge of others. And consequently according to our other principles we usurp
upon the Prerogative of Jesus Christ. We show I say our selves in effect to be
infallible for persecuting others for their Religion. For we cannot rationally
persecute any man for his conscience, unless we do not only know that he is in
an error, but also be infallibly sure that we are bringing him to an undoubted
truth: Otherwise as it would be a less sin in a man to follow an error
according to his Conscience, then to be driven into an error against his
Conscience, so it would be better for us, to let him alone in his error, then
to force him to ours which we falsely ecteem Truth. And therefore if we force
men to be of our Religion, we ought to be infallibly sure of the truth of it,
and so in effect we proclaim our selves to be infallible; whereas God knows we
may be oftentim^s in actual errors, and by our persecution force others into
them. As it cannot be denied by us but that the late Bishops, forced both the
Papists and many Protestants into errors, when they persecuted them according
to the strict Laws made by Harry the 8. Queen Elizabeth, and their Successors,
to take the Oath of supremacy, and to hear the book of Common Prayer, both
which we our selves have abolished and condemned as errors. And thereby we
justify before the world, that the Recusants were unjustly persecuted, seeing
they were principally or rather only persecuted for not embraceing these
errors. But withal we leave a great blemish on our selves, when we having
renounced those errors, which were the grounds of the laws made thereupon, and
having laid aside the Kings, by whom and for whom those laws were made, which
indeed is to abolish those laws; yet we still keep up the penalties of the same
laws in vigor against the Recusants; which seems to be a very irrational act.
Yea we are more faulty in another respect then the late Bishops. For they at
least proposed some positive points (though they were errors,) to be believed
by the Recusants, that these being put from their own, might not be without all
Religion: whereas we by our new oath of Abjuration, strive only to spoil the
Recusants of their own Religion, and as we have not one particular positve
Religion, settled for undoubted truth among us, so we propose not any one
Religion to the Recusants to be followed by them, but at the most, we hold them
out a medley of all the Religions and new Sects professed among us, that they may
put out their hands and blindly choose or draw out any of them. Which is indeed
to spoil the Recusants of all Religion and make them flat Atheists.

2. We have always pretended a general Toleration for all tender Consciences,
But how are we sure there are no tender Consciences of the Popish and
Prelaticall party among us? Or rather is it not most certain that there be
tender Consciences among them. For what can be more ridiculous then to judge
that a poor sueeking foolish fellow, who can scarce speak sense, and has
hardly a groat to lose for his Conscience, has forsooth a Tender Conscience;
and that Men of Honor, Prudence, and Estates, who have suffered in their
persons, and Estates, merely for their Consciences, have no Tender Consciences:
And what more ridiculous then to grant, upon the score of Tender Consciences,
Toleration to the first and not to the last? Therefore if we persecute these
for their Consciences, we do very irrationally and go against our own pretenses.

3. We allow people to have the Bible in their vulgar language, and press them
to search the Scriptures to find out the mind of God, etc. And when all is
done, we will have them by our Coercive power, to believe as the Church
believes, i.e. as the Minister and Magistrate shall conclude, which is, as Mr.
Colier says, to invite to search and see with their own eyes, and yet compel
to believe what another sees; doubtless it is not only an irreligious but an
irrational thing to allow people to search and know, and yet will put out
their eyes, and compel them to see with others. This Mr. Colier.

9. Coercive power, etc. is against the judgment of King James, and some of the
most learned and famous Princes of Christendom, and is disavowed by all the
more Godly and peaceable people of these times. King James in his speech to the
Parliament says that it is a most sure Rule in Divinity, that God never loves
to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed. And in his Apology, p. 4. and
60. he professes that he never intended any persecution against the Papists,
for Conscience sake, but only desired to be secured for civil Obedience, which
in Conscience they cannot deny. See in the Vindication of S. H. V. p. 18. the
Testimonies of Steven that wise King of Poland, and of the King of Bohemia to
the same purpose with the concurrence of judgments in this matter of that
famous Emperor Charles the fifth, and of Henry the third, and Henry the fourth
Kings of France. Whence we may observe by the way, that if coercive power over
the Conscience be still kept up, our new Magistrates will be greater
Persecutors then the old were. For the old Magistrates did not persecute for
Conscience sake, at least as themselves alleged, but merely to be secured for
civil Obedience. But our New Governors if they persecute at all, must
persecute merely for Conscience, by reason that cloak and pretense of the old
Protestants is now taken away, and can serve the turn no longer. For it cannot
be pretended now with the least color of Truth, that the Papists for example,
(and the like may be said of all other Christians demeaning themselves
peaceably and obediently, to the Government, as they do and have done for many
years in Holland) must suffer now as Traitors, and not as Christians, or which
is all one, for Treason and not for Religion. Or else it must be said that the
Papists suffered as Traitors under Monarchy, when Kings were in, because it was
alleged, the Papists would have turned Kings out: and now again they must
suffer as Traitors under Commonwealths when Kings are out, as though they
would bring Kings in: that they suffered before as being Enemies to Kings, and
now they must suffer as friends to Kings: which is so clear a contradiction and
so perfect a cheat to rob some men of their lives, and others of their goods,
that it would be manifest to all men. And as this pretense, if it were now used
by us would be very ridiculous, if not impious, (supposing the Papists did live
peaceably and obediently under the Government) so that cloak of the old
Protestants against the Papists was more ridiculous, as being more irrational,
and against their own principles. For the Bishops and Divines to prove the
lawfulness of their vocation against the Puritanes whom they branded with want
of lawful vocation, derived their Vocation and orders from the Roman Church;
and yet they concurred with the State to make a law, declaring all their
Countrymen who received any orders from the Roman Church, to be Traitors, and
put diverse to cruel deaths upon the same score. Now what could be more
irrational and ridiculous then that the late Bishops and Divines would have
themselves esteemed lawful Pastors, for deriving their Vocation and orders
from the Roman Church; and yet the same man would have others for receiving
orders from the same Church, to be esteemed and condemned as Traitors and
punished accordingly. This shows that the late Bishops and Divines and others
who concurred with them in this business, have not been so innocent and
rational, in the time of their prosperity, as they are reputed by many to have
been.

Yea I add further that if our present Governors keep up Coercive power over
any sort of Christians, that they will not only be greater Persecutours, then
the late Bishops, but also greater then the Spanish Inquisition it self, which
we esteem so odious. For the English Merchants who resided and traded many
years in Spain writ thus in their above mentioned Remonstrance to the late
Protector and Parliament. The Inquisition of Spain does concern properly the
King of Spaines own subjects and such as reside in his Kingdom and profess
the Romish Religion, for both Mores and Jews that are of Barbary, and profess
themselves to be such, are not at all questioned, much less any Protestant,
that has never professed himself to be of their religion. And if any English or
Protestant has been molested or troubled by the Inquisition, it has been for
his misbehaviour, and for the public scandal he gave, and not for being a
Protestant, But if we keep up Coercive power, etc. As we have done, we must
persecute Papists, who never were Protestants; and persecute Protestants, who
never were Puritans, And that more then the Inquisition does to any. For it
questions no Protestant for being a Protestant, but only such Protestants as
misbehave themselves, and give public scandal against the laws and custom of
the Nation: and so consequently the Inquisition does not trouble any for their
Conscience, but for their misbehaviour. Whereas we do persecute men merely for
their Conscience, though they carry themselves never so inoffensively or
without scandal. For we propose the oath of Abjuration (in place of the Oath
of supremacy that was proposed in the Kings times) to diverse though they live
never so peaceably and shut up within their own doors, giving scandal nor
offense to no body: and so we drive them into that strait that they must
either take that oath, against their Conscience, and so damn their own souls;
or refuse it, and so lose their estates. Moreover the same Remonstrance
shows, that the Justice of Spain punishes the Natives who affront
Protestants carrying themselves in offensively, for thus it speaks. As the
Inquisition bounds us; so the Common Justice punishes the Natives that affront
us; whereof many examples may be produced. For many Spanjards have been
banished for calling an Englishman heretic, others fined, whipped, etc. But it
may be much doubted, if a Merchant of the Spanish Nation and Religion, had been
affronted by any Protestant here in England, and called an heretic, idolater,
or the like, if he had got such justice in England against a Protestant; as the
Protestants found in Spain against the Papists. And hence may be seen that both
the former persecution under the Bishops, and that which has been since under
others, which some fiery Zelots would still keep up, or augment, do exceed the
Spanish Inquisition in diverss respects, even by the Confession of Protestants.

Having now shown the judgment of King Jamos and of other famous and learned
Princes against all perfecution for Religion; let us now see how the good people
of this Nation does concur with them in the same judgment. For to speak no
more of the Inclination of the Parliament (the peoples great Representative)
expressed above in their two Declarations; the good peoples Genius may be known
more particularly, by their many Petitions presented to the Parliament, where
ever that is one of their main desires, that all who profess faith in Christ
Jesus, and live peaceably in Godliness and honesty, may be equally protected
and encouraged: as may be seen in the Petition of many inhabitants in and about
the City of London, presented to the Parliament by Mr. Samuel Major and others
12. May. 1659 for which they received the thanks of the House: as also in the
Petition of many Thousand Gentlemen, Freeholders, etc. Of the County of Kent
and City of Canterbury, and in innumerable others. The same Genius also of the
people is much seen by the many Remonstrances and Declarations lately printed
and particularly by Mr. Coliers book entitled the Decision, Sic. So often above
cited and praised: by the book entitled The Vindication of Sr. H. Vane, out of
which we have drawn some arguments: By the Proclamation or Declaration of the
Army of God, where the first article proposed for the settling the State is,
That there may be liberty of Constience, but not of sin, By the Principles and
Maxims of the Levellers, etc. Where is showed that Persecution sor Religion is
against the Nature of Faith and true Religion, and destructive to humane
Society. By the book entitled, The Commonwealth of Israel, where is showed
that the ancient Christians under Christian Emperors, gave toleration to
pagans, and did not persecute them for their Religion: And that such Toleration
is the Good old Cause, and not Persecution for Religion, which is a Bad new
Cause. By the book entitled, No Return to Monarchy, where the first
fundamental laid down to settle this Commonwealth, is that no man be oppressed
or troubled for his Conscience, and judgment in matters of Faith and worship.
Englands safety p. 11.
And lastly to pass by many oothers, by that excellent book entitled,
Englands safety in the Laws supremacy, where these remarkable words may be
seen. It is a short and low Consideration to think to satisfy the people with
giving them only liberty of Conscience; the whole (to wit, both Civil and
Religions liberty) is their Right, and freedom in matters of Religion is but a
branch thereof: which is therefore not to be avowed or accepted as a favor or
indulgence to some persons, but the due right of all; not granted as a policy
to oblige a party, but published as a particular; not subject to trust no man
in Religion being a capable Judge for another, etc. with much more to this
purpose. And hence may be clearly seen how much coercive power over the
Conscience is against the judgment and desire of the good people of the Nation,
and how satisfactory an innocent in-offensive Toleration would be to them:
which could not displease any but some very dangerous persons, who cannot be
content, to enjoy all the possible liberty they can defire of their own
Consciences, unless they have power also to domineer and Tyrannize over other
men's Consciences: and therefore these men's judgments and desires are not to be
much heeded and regarded, but themselves rather are to be closely looked to,
least they set all on fire again.

Lastly Coercive power is against our own interest at home, and against the
Common interest of the Protestant cause abroad. 1. It Is against our own
interest: For as Mr. Colier wisely observes, by Coercive power, the Magistrates
and others lay a foundation of persecution to themselves and their Posterity.
For if it be lawful for them to exercise a Coercive power in Religious things
toward others; then by the same Rule of Reason, it is lawsul for another
power, if it should arise, whose apprehensions may be different from theirs, to
compel them and theirs contrary to their Conscience, to that Religion be what
it will, so they suppose it to be Truth. Thus Mr. Colier. And so it will be
just with God to suffer us to be punished, in what we have sinned, and to make
us receive that same measure of Rigor and Tyranny, that we have met out unto
others. Whereas if we carried our selves with Christian Moderation, and
Compassion on tender Consciences, other powers arising, if they had any reason
or Conscience, would be moved to have compassion on us. 2ly. Coercive power is
against the good of the Protestant cause abroad. For Princes and States of
another profession, (under whom many Protestants live and enjoy the liberty of
their Consciences and Religion) seeing we carry our selves so Tyrannically over
other men's Consciences, and particularly over those of their belief, will
strive according to the Maxims both of Policy and Prudence, to keep their
Protestant subjects in great subjection, and it may be, use them as rigorously
as we use others. And other Princes and States, which have not as yet granted
Protestants that full permission and freedom in their Dominions will be
deterred from doing them that favor, for just fear, least they coming to power
and strength would by open force and Tumults take away all liberty from
themselves and their subjects, and so Tyrannize over their Consciences; of
which insolency there past a sad President in Scotland. For the Lords of the
Congregation (so are the chief heads of the Protestants termed in Knoxes
Chronicle) having obtained liberty of Conscience for themselves and for all
those of their profession, were not contented therewith; but finding their
power increase, by the instigation of the Ministers who had come well
disciplined from Geneva, they fell immediately to pulling down of all Abbeys,
Monasteries, Nunries, yea and of Churches too, plundered all the plate, money,
hangings, and other furniture belonging to them, and then began not only to
take away all liberty of Conscience from their fellow subjects, diverse whereof
were the chief nobility of the Nation, but also from their Sovereign Queen,
Mary Stuart, to whom after she came from France they would not grant so much as
the private exercise of her Religion, till at length by intercession of some
more moderate Protestant Lords it was not without difficulty extorted from the
rest: against which notwithstanding the Ministers and other Zelots did not
cease to cry: till by such means that Noble Lady was cast into great misery,
and brought to a Tragical end. Whence all Princes and States have reason to
beware of such Violent Reformations, which indeed tend to the prejudice of
Protestants rendering their cause odious: whereas if we would be more moderate
and compassionate, foreign Princes and States might be moved to show
compassion and moderation to our brethren abroad.

Thus have we briefly shown not only the principal evils that have so long
obstructed the settling of this State, but also proposed the Remedies against
them; which have been seen not to be private fancies, but the joint judgments
of the most prudent and peaceable persons of these times, not averred upon weak
and idle conjectures, but asserted and proved by Solid Reasons, both of
Divinity and sound policy, collected out of their writings, and confirmed by
many fresh and undeniable experiences. And therefore as they are with all
humility proposed to the Parliaments grave and serious consideration; so it is
confidently expected that their grave wisdoms will be confirmed and encouraged
thereby to prosecute speedily their pious intentions, and now at length fulfill
their gracious promises held out in their above mentioned Declarations; that so
an end may be put to our long miseries and distractions and the State settled
upon the two Solid foundations of the peoples civil and Religious Liberties.
And because Mr. Clark of Threed-needle Street and some other hotspur Zelots his
accomplices do strive by all means to oppose the peoples spiritual liberty, and
would still keep up Coercive power over men's Consciences, which they do not so
much out of Reason, as out of passion, and out of an itching thing desire to
domineer over the souls of their brethren, the Parliament and others may be
pleased to mind the former Reasons as Antidotes against their poisons. For it
has been demonstrated that Coercice power over men's Consciences, especially in
these Countries, where there is such variety of Religions, is against the
security of the State and Temporal peace of the people which ought to be the
Supreme law. It Is also against the spiritual good of the Magistrate, who never
receiving any such power neither from the people, who never had it, nor from
Christ, who as only Lord of the Conscience, has received all power over it to
himself, by exercising it, renders himself guilty of high Treason against the
Lord Jesus. It Is against the spiritual good of the people, who are thereby not
made better Christians, but greater Hypocrites. It Is against the Nature of
Faith and true Religion, which are voluntary consent or Assents of the souls
raised in it by divine illumination and humane instruction, and not forced
Constraints on the soul by humane Violence and compulsion. It Is against the
command of our Savior, who ordered the Tares should not be plucked up till the
harvest, least the wheat should be plucked up with them. But our fiery Zelots
will have them plucked up, though the world should be thereby brought into
Confusion. It Is against the judgment of many Ancient Divines, and against the
practice of the primitive, Christians under Christian Emperors, to the very
Pagans, and of the Turks to Christians their conquered enemies, who receive
more favor and freedom of Conscience under the Turks, then Christians
Contrymen and Brethren can enjoy under our new Saints. It Is against the Rule
of Righteousness known by the light of nature and recommended to us by our
Savior. That we should do unto others, what we would have them do to us. It Is
against our own principles, and therefore most irrational. As first when we
profess our selves to be Fallible and yet will force people against their
Consciences to be of our judgment as though we were infallible, and so we may
drive men into actual errors, in stead of Truths, as the old Protestants did
to the Papists and the Presbyterians did not only to the Papists but also to
protestants, Independents, etc. It Is against our pretense of Toleration for
Tender Consciences, many of which may be found in all professions, It Is against
our principle of exhorting the people to search the Scriptures to find out the
mind of God, and yet we will force them to believe what they cannot find. It Is
against the judgment of many famous Princes and particularly of King James, who
professed it was unlawful to persecute any man for his Conscience. And therefore
if our new Magistrates keep up coercive power, they will be greater
persecutours then the old, yea they will be more irrational then the Spanish
inquisition, which we have seen, questions no man but for their misbehaviour
and scandal, and nor for their conscience or Religion. And lastly, it is
against our own interest at home; for thereby we lay a foundation of
persecution to our selves, whereof the Bishops and their adherents found some
experience, when the Presbyterians arose: and it is against the good of the
Protestant cause abroad, which by our severity and cruelty is rendered more
odious and suspected to foreign Princes and States.

These Reasons, we hope, will counterballance with all judicious and sober men,
all Mr. Clarks threadbare Arguments, which he heaps together by wresting the
Scriptures and by perverting Reason. And as it cannot be doubted but there be
many, more moderate Presbyterians, who abhor such violent courses, which
produce so many bad effects both on the souls and bodies of men, and are so
prejudicial both to their Temporal and spiritual peace, as we have seen: So
it were just, that those boutefeus, who are so much for persecuting of others,
did only suffer the brunt of persecution in themselves, till they came to their
right wits, as being enemies not only to true Divinity and right Reason, but
also to humane Society, of which nothing is more destructive, as the Levellers
do well remark, then Persecution for Religion. However, it is expedient or
rather necessary, that all Christians in these Nations, whatever persuasion
they be of, should join their heads, and bend their forces, to keep under those
enemies of their Christian liberty, and of humane Society, that they may never
rise to such power as may ennable them to exercise their Tyranny: for if they
once get up again, and graspe the supreme Authority; All Christians of other
professions, may expect to be forced to pin their Religion to those men's
sleeves, and to swear all their fancies against their Consciences.

If the Founders of the Commonwealth of Holland had suffered themselves to be
directed by such wile Counsel, as Mr. Clark suggests to the State here, that
Republic had never been fetled, nor arrived to that prosperity and plenty it
now enjoys: but upon the contrary their United provinces had been distracted
provinces, and their Commonwealth, had been Common-poverty: for by their own
intestive divisions and persecutions for Religion they had ruined one another;
as may be known by the great danger of subversion they incurred, through the
factions and tumults that arose among them between the Arminians and the
Gomarists. Whereas by putting no Restraint upon men's Consciences, and by
granting an innocent Toleration, they settled their State firmly, and ever since
upheld it constantly: for thereby all the peoples interest were cemented and
United to concur for defense of that Commonwealth, under which they enjoyed
so great soul-freedom and happiness. Yea the Papists themselves, who, though
equal in number to any one Religion in the United provinces, yet do not enjoy
the public exercise of their Religion, (which is granted to diverse other
professions,) but rather a connivance of private exercise, then a Toleration,
though without any restraint upon their Consciences, have been so tied by that
favor to the State, that they have been most faithful to it, contributed and
concurred for the defense of it, and that against a Prince, who both by Nature
and Religion might seem to have a great interest in them, and an influence on
them. Which shows sufficiently that the Papists, if they be not pressed in their
Consciences, (and what Protestant does not kick, if he be pricked there) are not
such Enemies to Government, and depend not so much upon any external power in
Temporal matters as we have been made believe a long while.

Wherefore to Conclude, it is no small shame for this Noble Nation, wherein
there are so many refined wits, to be overwitted by the Hollanders, whom yet we
esteem inferior to us. For they by a prudent moderation in matters of Religion
have settled and maintained their Republic, raising it almost from nothing to a
great height and perfection: Whereas we by our imprudent, if not un-Christian
persecuting one another for Religion can settle nothing, but put the State
always a rolling. The only means then to settle this State besides the
security of the peoples civil liberty, which we have laid above as the first
foundation of this Fabric, is to grant the people, the just and spiritual
liberty of their souls, that they may be free of all restraint upon their
Consciences, by Oaths, Abjurations, imprisonments, Sequestrations, and the like
old paltrie courses, unfit for Christians. And as this freedom from all
restraint of conscience, ought to be common to all Christians of these Nations,
so the liberty of exercising their respective Religions, may be diversely
dispensed according to the Rules of prudence, and convenience of the State: for
to some Religions public exercise may be granted, and to others only private.
But to prevent all Disorders that may arise, it will be necessary to prescribe
strict laws against all those who shall presume to disturb others in the
peaceable and warrantable exercise of their Religion; or who by violent courses
shall endeavor to spoil others of the just liberty of their Consciences; and
to execute those laws severely and exemplarly upon all such offenders: as also
it will be just to punish rigoronsly all others, who shall be found to act any
thing against the State, under which they enjoy so great happiness. Provided
always, that the innocent persons of any profession may not suffer with or for
the guilty, but every one may only carry his own burden. And so by this
moderate and just procedure, which is chiefly necessary in a Commonwealth,
it is humbly conceived that our long distractions and Miseries would soon cease;
our former rancours would be quickly buried in oblivion, Christian Charity and
Moderation would spring up among us, Peace and plenty would reflourish, the
desires of the peoples hearts would be satisfied. Gods judgments might be
removed, and the State firmly settled. The performance of all which goods, would
bring no less Honor to the Parliament then it would create joy and comfort in
the hearts of all the Godly and peaceable people of these so long afflicted
Nations.

FINIS.

