An Epistle to the Reader.
THe end of this Print is to present to thy view a most wise and pious Speech,
spoken to King JAMES the Fifth of Scotland, by a Councellor of his; the which
having occasioned what is premised to it, I thought fit to let them come hand
in hand to thee; If any be offended at Tolleration, I assure thee I am as much
offended at an imposing Spirit. Whosoever abuses Liberty, turning it into
licentiousness, shall bear his own shame, as he that sins because Grace
abounds: True Liberty nor Grace are the less so because thus abused, nor the
more to be stumbled at. The Lord give us all that profess the Name of Christ,
more Love and Patience.

IT is a Principle very incident to the natural desire of men, That whatsoever
judgment they are of in things of Religion, to wish that all were of the same
mind with themselves; which Principle is in it self commendable, provided that
the means by which the same is to be brought about be such, as the Word of God
warrants and directs, and not such as the frowardness and impatience of the
dark mind of man suggests, that is, that the way used to bring this to pass,
be by informing of the understanding, and so persuading the will, and not by
compulsion, imposition and coertion, which is a practice fitter to be applied
to irrational creatures than to men, who have ingenuity and reason, and are
able to distinguish between Liberty and Constraint, Freedom and Bondage. What
the indirect Practices in all Ages have bin under this pretense, and to
accomplish this end, the Papal, Prelatical and Presbyterial Churches are clear
examples; witness the Bloody Wars that have been raised by the first of these
three, the Massacres, the Persecuting of Christians with Fire and Faggot, the
Assassinations of Kings and other persons, the Cruelties exercised upon the
poor Indians in America and such like; all which are the Sins of that Romish
Synagogue, foretold and forejudged by the Spirit of God, to have Blood to drink
in revenge of the same. As for the two latter, though their Principle has bin
the very same, yet by the Providence of God, and his restraint of their wrath,
they have not come to the same height of Execution; yet how natural it has
been to them to Coerce, to Impose, to Imprison, to Banish, to deny men their
Natural and Civil Rights, for the exercise of such a Worship as their Light and
Consciences lead them unto, is also most manifest. The Bishops in queen Marys
time, many of them groaning under Roman persecution, waited to be delivered
from it, and the Lord vouchsafed them this Mercy; which when they had obtained,
they could not afford to the Non conformists and other Ministers, although
Presbyters with themselves, and dissenting only in a few Ceremonies, neither
significant nor of use, but they refusing to conform were expelled their
Livings, many of them driven to live amongst the Heathens, and to seek for
bread in other places, rather then be indulged (though of the same Faith with
them.) The Presbyterian and Nonconformist Ministers laboring under this,
though a lesser degree of Persecution then that of Rome, (yet arising from the
same Root) were in due time delivered from this yoke of Bondage; which Mercy
they were no sooner arrived at, but having, as they thought by the Magistrates
power (not only pulled down, but shut the door against that Hierarchy from
returning any more into this Nation) they also, before they had reigned many
months (after the Example of their Brethren in Scotland) set themselves to the
same course and practice, engaging the Civil Magistrate to impose upon the
Consciences of many Godly men of the same Faith also with themselves in all the
great Foundations of Faith, perfecuting them with bitter reproaches and
imputations of odious Names, not being willing they should live in the Nation,
nor enjoy their public Worship, not liberty to exercise the same privately
according to their consciences, but that they should be compelled to come to
the place of the public Worship in their several Parishes, as the same was
stated by the Civil Magistrate, and framed by their General Assembly; so that
they who a few months before grievously complained of persecution under the
Prelacy, immediately practiced the same things with more sharpness and
bitterness then their Predecessors did, breaking that royal Rule, Doing that to
others, that they would not should have been done to themselves; And how active
they were during the short time of the Power being in their hands, in putting
on the Civil Magistrate to make Chains and Fetters to hamper dissenting
Christians, and deprive them of their Civil and Spiritual Liberties, is very
fresh in the knowledge and memory of all; and how near this Nation was to be
subjected in all its honor to Scotland, without striking one stroke for it,
through the Power and Influence these men had upon the Parliament, the City of
London, the then Armies, and the united Power the then Armies, and the united
Power the then Commissioners of Scotland had with the persons and places
aforesaid; and all this in observance to, and compliance with the Elder Brother
of Scotland, who had chalked out the way, and laid down the Pattern to which an
English Presbytery might conform, is also as generally and well known: it were
to be wished, that the other Forms now remaining amongst us, would thoroughly
search and try their hearts, whether they would not do in like manner if they
were in the saddle; I think there has been ground enough given, yea too much
(without breach of charity) to judge (at least of some of them) that they
would; what means else the contempt of that liberty the Lord has given to all
Protestant Sects now amongst us? which indeed is so great, that no man can say
a Christian is in danger of suffering in the least for that which is truly
matter of Opinion and Conscience, when Liberty to worship after the several
Forms men's Consciences lead them to, is a free as to go to the Market; What do
men mean by the word Antichristian, so liberally bestowed, and so frequently
imputed to all, save to persons of their own judgment? Are not these men too
like the Israelites eating of quails, whilst the meat came out of their
nostrils? Are not these Arguments and Evidences of Pride and Wantonness, and
tokens beforehand what men would do if it were in their power? Is it not
enough for all Forms of Protestant Profession, and for those that are true and
real Christians, that they may serve God in holiness and righteousness without
fear? Were it not most noble for every Sect to swallow up all contention in
this, of striving who should most grace their Christian Profession and their
Form, by out-doing others in a holy, blameless, peaceable walking, void of
censuring, judging, railing, contriving Disturbances (all which are the fruits
of the flesh, and are of the devil) and bringing forth the fruits of
righteousness which are sown in peace of them that make peace? surely it were:
if this were so, how would then the Gospel in the several Forms of it, where
Christ has his Lambs and his Sheep, which he will and does look after,
flourish? and in stead of being a Burden, and too justly an Offense to the
World, (through the wrathful and unpeaceable spirit of too many of the
Professors thereof) be desirable, and (as it deserves in it self) become the
glory of all Nations; which although we look for and hope, and know in due time
will be so, when the more abundant pouring forth of the Spirit shall be, yet we
also know when that time does come, the effect of it will be a glorious union
of the People of God, made to be of one spirit, by that Spirit that teaches to
hold forth the Christian Profession before all, in Faith and Love. To this end,
and as a help thereunto, and as some reproof to our most shameful and most
unchristian carriage in these Lands, is this Preamble written to a Paper
herewith printed; which was Counsel long ago given in those dawnings of Light,
to King James the 5th of Scotland, by a person who was of his Council, at such
time as the Protestants were mightily increased by the Lord in Scotland, and it
being under consideration what was to be done with them, this wholesome counsel
was given; which the King refusing, immediately by the Prelates and his Popish
Council, was persuaded to raise a Bloody Inquisition, and put the same in
execution, after which he never prospered; but receiving that most miraculous
Defeat of his Forces in his Invasion of England at Sallaway-Moss, wherein they
threw down their arms, and were voluntarily taken, every English Soldier
gaining three or four prisoners (as the Historian records) the News whereof
no sooner came to the Kings ears, but that he went home, and after long
watchings, continual cares and passions, abstinence from food and recreation,
had so extenuated his Body, that pierced with grief, anguish, impatience and
despair, he remained fixed to his Bed, and refusing to give access to his
Nobility and Domestique Servants, he so miserably dyed.

That most excellent Speech (worthy to be written with the claw of an Adamant)
taken out of the Scottish History, Entitled, The History of SCOTLAND, from the
Year 1423. until the Year 1542. By William Drummond of Hauthorden, page 210. is
as follows:

SIR,
Amongst the many blessings your Subjects enjoy under this your Government,
this is not the least, that for the weal of your Majesty, and the public good
of the Kingdom, the meanest of your Subjects may freely open his mind, and
declare his opinion unto you his Sovereign.

And if ever there was a time, in which grave, good and sound counsel should be
delivered to your Majesty, it is this, and the difficulties of the
Commonwealth do now require it. Nor ever, in matters of Advice and
Consultation, can we embrace and follow what is most reasonable, and what,
according to Laws, Justice, and Equity, should be, but what necessity drives
us unto, and what is most convenient for the present time to be, and what we
may well and fairly accomplish and bring to pass.

The Estate of your Kingdom is troubled w^ih diversity of opinions concerning
Religion; It is to be wished, that the one only true Religion were in the
hearts of all your Subjects, (since diversity of opinions of Religion, and
Heresies, are the very punishment of God Almighty upon men, for their horrible
Vices and roaring sins. And when men forsake his fear and true obedience, God
abandoneth them to their own opinions and fantasies in Religion; out if which
arise, Partialities, Factions, Divisions, Strife, Intestine Discords, which
burst forth into Civil War, and in short time bring Kingdoms and
Commonwealths to their last periods) But matters arising to such a beight and
disorder, as by all appearance, they are like to advance in this Kingdom, the
number of the Sectaries daily increasing, without dissembling my thoughts to
your Majesty, the preservation of the People being the Supreme and Principal
Law which God Almighty has enjoined to all Princes,

I hold it more expedient to give place to the exercise of both Religions, than
under pretense and shadow of them to suffer the Common Peace of your Subjects
to be torn in pieces. What can wisdom (Sir) advise you to do with these
Separatists? Either they must be tolerated for a time, or they must altogether
be removed, and that by Death or Banishment.

So soon as a Prince begins to Spoil, Banish, Kill, Burn his People, for
matters abstract from sense, and altogether spiritual, he becomes, as it
were, a plague unto them.

It is an Error of State in a Prince, for an opinion of Piety, to condemn to
Death the Adherers to new Doctrine: For, the constancy and patience of those
who voluntarily suffer all temporal Miseries, and Death it self, for matters of
Faith, stir up and invite numbers, who at first, and before they had suffered,
were ignorant of their Faith and Doctrine, not only to favor their Cause, but
to embrace their opinions, Pity and Commiseration opening the gates. Thus
their Belief spreads it self abroad, and their number daily increases.

It is no less Error of State to banish them. Banished men are so many Enemies
abroad, ready upon all occasions to invade their Native Country, to trouble
the Peace and Tranquillity of your Kingdom.

To take Arms against Sectaries and Separatists will be a great Enterprise, a
matter hard, and of many dangers; Religion cannot be preached by arms; the
first Christians detested that form of proceedings; Force and Compulsion may
bring forth Hypocrites, not true Christians. If there be any Heresy amongst
your People, this wound is in the Soul; our Souls being spiritual Substances,
upon which fire and Iron cannot work, They must be overcome by spiritual Arms;
Love the men, and pity their Errors.

Who can lay upon a man a necessity to believe that which he will not believe,
or what he will believe, or does believe, not to believe? No Prince has such
powwer over the Souls and thoughts of men, as he has over their bodies. Now to
ruin and extirpate all those Sectaries, what will it prove else than to cut
off one of your arms, to the great prejudice of your Kingdom, and weakening of
the State, they daily increasing in number, and no man being so miserable and
mean but he is a member of the State?

The more easy manner, and nobler way, were to tolerate both Religions, and
grant a Place to two Churches in the Kingdom, till it shall please Almighty God
to return the minds of your Subjects, and turn them all of one will and
opinion. Be content to keep that which ye may, Sir, since ye cannot that which
ye would.

It is a false and erroneus opinion, That a Kingdom cannot subsist, which
tolerateth two Religions. Diversity of Religion shuts not up Society, nor
barreth civil conversation among men; a little time will make persons of
different Religions contract such acquaintance, custom, familiarity together,
that they will be intermixed in one City, Family, yea, Marriage Bed, State and
Religion, having nothing common.

Why (I pray) may not two Religions be suffered in a State (till by some sweet
and easy means they may be reduced to a right Government) since in the Church
(which should be union it self, and of which the Roman Church much vaunteth)
almost infinite Sects, and kinds of Moncks are suffered, differing in their
Laws, Rules of Government, fashions of living, diet, apparel, maintenance, and
opinions of perfection, and who sequester themselves from our public union?
The Roman Empire had its extension, not by similitude and likeness of Religion.
Different Religions, providing they enterprise nor practice nothing against the
Politic Laws of the Kingdom, may be tolerated in a State.

The Murders, Massacres, Battles which arise and are be like daily to increase
amongst Christians, all which are undertaken for Religion, are a thousand times
more execrable, and be more open, plain, flat impiety, than this Liberty of
diversity of Religions, with a quiet peace, can be unjust.

Forasmuch as the greatest part of those who flesh themselves in blood and
slaughter, and overturn by arms the peace of their neighbors (whom they should
love as themselves) spoiling and ravaging like famished Lions, sacrifice their
Souls to the infernal powers, without further hopes or means of their ever
recovering and coming back, when those others are in some way of repentance.

In seeking Liberty of Religion, these men seek not to believe any thing that
may come in their Brains; but to use Religion according to the first Christian
Institutions, serving God, and obeying the Laws under which they were born.

That Maxim so often repeated amongst the Churchmen at Rome, That the Chase
and following of Heretics is more necessary than that of Infidels, is well
applied for the enlarging and increasing the Dominions, soveraignity and Power
of the Pope, but not for the amplifying and extending of the Christian
Religion, and the weal and benefit of the Christian Commonwealth.

Kingdoms and Soveraignities should not be governed by the Laws and Interests
of Priests and Churchmen, but according to the exigency, need, and as the Case
requires, of the Public weal, which often is necessitated to pass and
tolerate some defects and faults. It is the duty of all Christian Princes to
endeavor, and take pains, that their Subjects embrace the true faith, as that
semblably and in even parts they observe all Gods Commandments, and not more
one Commandment than another.

Notwithstanding, when a Vice cannot be extirpate and taken away, without the
ruin of the State, it would appear to humane Judgments, that it should be
suffered. Neither is there a greater obligation, bond, necessity of Law, to
punish Heretics more than Fornicators, which yet for the peace and
tranquillity of the State are tolerated and past over. Neither can a greater
inconvenience and harm follow, if we should suffer men to live in our
Commonwealth, who believe not, nor embrace not all our Opinions. In an Estate
many things are for the time tolerated, because they cannot, without the total
ruin of the State, be suddenly amended and reformed.

These men are of that same nature and condition of which we are; they worship,
as we do, one God; they believe those very same holy Records; we both aim at
Salvation; We both fear to offend God; we both set before us our happiness: The
difference between them and us hangs upon this one point, that they, having
found abuses in our Church, require a Reformation. Now shall it be said, for
that we run diverse ways to one end, understand not rightly others Language, we
shall pursue others with Fire and Sword, and extirpate others from the Face of
the Earth? God is not in the bitter division and alienation of affections, nor
the raging flames of sedition, nor in the tempests of the turbulent whirlwinds
of contradictions and disputations, but in the calm and gentle breathings of
peace and concord. If any wander out of the Highway, we bring him to it again;
If any be in darkness, we show him light, and kill him not. In Musical
Instruments, if a string jar and be out of tune, we do not frettingly break it,
but leasurely veer it about to a Concord: and shall we be so churlish, cruel,
uncharitable, so wedded to our own Superstitious opinions, that we will
barbarously banish, kill, burn, those whom by Love and Sweetness we might
readily win and recall again?

Let us win and merit of these men by reason, let them be cited to a free
Council; it may be they shall not be proved Heretics, neither that they
maintain opinions condemned by the ancient Councils, let their Religion be
compared and paralelled with the Religion of the first age of the Church.

Shall we hold this People worse than the Jews, which yet have their Synagogues
at Rome it self? let them receive instructions from a free and lawful Council,
and forsake their errors when they shall be clearly and fairly demonstrated
unto them. Heresy is an error in the fundamental grounds of Religion, Schism
intends a resolution in separation: Let a good Council be convocated, and see
if they be ready or not to reunite themselves to us.

That which they believe is not evil, but to some it will appear they believe
not enough, and that there is in them rather a defect of good, than any habit
of evil. Other points when they shall be considered shall be found to consist
in external Ceremonies of the Church, rather than in substance of doctrine, or
what is essential to Christianity. These men should be judged before condemned,
and they should be heard before they be judged, which being holily and
uprightly done, we shall find it is not our Religions, but our private
interests and passions, which trouble us and our State.

FINIS.
London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness.
MDCLIV.


