An Epitomie of TYRANNY IN The Island of Guernzey.

Sent in a LETTER TO A Person of Quality in London, Concerning The late
Irregular Transactions there, in relation to a certain Deputation and Address
made to Richard late Protector; With the said Address it self, Lately
presented to him by Peter and William de Beauvoir the pretended Deputy;
discovering their evil and dangerous Designs against the Government of a
Commonwealth.

Now Seasonably published by a Lover of this Commonwealth, and of his Native
Country, for a warning to the faithful now in Authority, and at the Helm of
the Government of this Commonwealth, to the end to prevent, That in future the
said Deputies may not be entrusted of any Office or Place in the said Island.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A Letter sent from the Island of Guernzey, to a Person of quality in London,
concerning the late Irregular Transactions there, etc.
SIR,
SInce my arrival in this Island, I could not, till this present time, have an
opportunity to answer your desires and expectations in reference to the
transactions of Affairs here, which now I have effected by way of some small
Vessels, which will be ready within few hours to set sail for England; by whom
I would not omit the opportunity to give you a short Narrative thereof, which
is briefly, as follows. As Soon as the well-affected and honest People of this
Isle had notice that a Parliament was called, they resolved to use what
diligence they could, that the Assembly called Estates of this Islle might be
summoned to meet in Order, to make choice of honest and faithful Deputyes to go
for England to the said Parliament, there to represent the several grievances
of the People, and endeavor to obtain redress therein; as likewise the
Confirmation, Corroboration, and Augmentation of their ancient Charters and
Privileges. But the People were circumvented by the surreptitious practices of
their present pretended Bailiff or Judge, Mr. Peter de Beauvoirs alias de
Granges, who could not but expect that his fall would be near at hand, unless
he could hinder and prevent the good and honest intentions of the People, from
taking effect in their intended choice of Deputies; especially knowing what a
firebrand he had been amongst them for diverse years past, and what fuel of
discord and divisions he had kindled amongst them, and how, during the famous
long-Parliament in the year 1649. he was for the same, and for several
misdemeanors and malversations in the Execution of the said place of Bailiff or
Judge there, complained against by several Articles exhibited; whereupon the
said Parliament in the said year, appointed (by a certain Act) several Comers
to go to the said Isle to examine the Complaints and grievances of the People:
Two of which Comers ( viz. Moses Wall and Roger Frith Gen.) being returned,
made their Repo^t of the State and Condition of Affairs there, which report
together with the said Articles of Charge being (upon the 3d of November 1650.
by order of the then Council of State) heard and considered by a select
Committee appointed by them for that purpose, before whom the said Bailiff
appeared, and was heard what he could say or produce in his own defense; after
which, the said Committee made their report to the Council, certifying that
after a full hearing of the whole business of Guernzey they found the said
Bailiff to be a person not fit to execute the said Office and Place, and that
for the better Government and future peace of the said Isle, the said Mr. Peter
de Beauvoir should be no more Bailiff, and that a new one should be chosen in
his room, to be continued only for three years at the most; which Report was
the same day confirmed by the Council, who ordered Cornelius Holland Esquire to
present it to the Parliament: But the many other weighty affairs of the
Commonwealth hindered the said Report from being presented to the said
Parliament before their interruption; nothing being done therein till the 29th
of August 1653. that then it was ordered by the little Parliament, that the
Jurates of Guernzey should execute the said place and office of Bailiff of that
Island by turns, each of them a Month; which order was very well resented by
the People, and very much to their satisfaction, peace, and tranquillity; it
having been observed, that during above two years time that the said Order was
executed, all former fuel of discord and divisions in that Island were
quenched, during which time, the said Bailiff was observed to set all his
Engines at work, by vilifying the way practiced by virtue of the said Order,
leaving no way unassaied to watch his opportunity to overthrow the same, and
bring the old form again; which afterward he easily effected, making use of
the change of Government, came to England, and surreptitiously represented to
the late Protector, how that the said Order and Monthly way of officiating the
said place of Bailiff in that Isle was not consistent with his Government: and
thereupon he played his game so cunningly, by indirect and surreptitious
practices, as by bribing of Clerks with very considerable sums of money, and
also by his Hypocritical carriage, as if he had been a very pious and religious
man, when as he was then, and is still known to be a very great Persecutor of
God's People, having banished several godly Ministers, and others, out of the
said Isle, for only differing in Judgment from him; and likewise a very
covetous, ambitious, envious, factious, and turbulent person, who was, by the
long Parliament, to have been outed for the same: Notwithstanding all which,
he, the said Peter de Beauvoir, got the said Order of Parliament to be vacated,
and obtained of the said late Protector, a Patent under the great Seal, to have
and execute the said Office and place of Bailiff during his life, to the great
grief and dislike of the People. The said Peter de Beauvoir, to prevent such
assembly and choice, and that those foul and enormous Actions of his should not
be made manifest, not come to light, and be again complained of, and charged
against him, before those in authority in England; made use in Court of a fair
pretense, (viz.) That one William Beauvoir alias du Hommet his near Kinsman,
(and whom very lately he had caused to be chosen and put in the Seat of
Judicature) was going for England, and to spare the Peoples purses, he the said
William Beauvoir would at his proper costs and charges, undertake the care of
getting the ancient Charters and Privileges of this Island confirmed, and
moreover would get an augmentation of Licenses for Wool, and that thenceforward
the People should farm their several Tithes; and, to the end the said Bailiff
might the better carry on his design in hand, he made an additional
proposition to the Court, (viz.) That in Imitation of several places in
England, he thought it very fit and requisite, that an Address of the
Magistrates and others of this Island should be made and sent unto the
Protector, to condole the death of his late Father, and congratulate him in his
present Government: to which several propositions, the Court being demanded
their Opinion, the major part of them knowing as well whereto the ends of the
said Bailiff did tend, as of what ill consequence such a deputation would
prove, especially considering the person proposed to be entrusted as Deputy,
(viz.) the said William de Beauvoir alias du Hommet, who is known to be a
profane, ambitious, and debauched man; and one who, during the late War, was a
notorious enemy against the Parliament of England, having been in Arms against
them at Oxford, with his Master the Lord Downs, who raised a Troop of Horse
there for the late King, for which afterward he compounded, and then went for
Italy, and the said William Beauvoir with him, who at this very instant receivs
an Annuity of the said Lord Downs, his said Master: Upon this and other weighty
considerations the major part of the said Court answered, That seeing the
things proposed by the said Bailiff were of general concernment to the whole
Island, that therefore in their opinions it was fit and requisite that the
State of this Island should be summoned to assemble, advise, and deliberate
concerning the said proposition (as time out mind had been practiced in cases
of the like nature). But the said Bailiff opposed the same, by desiring and
sending to the Deputy Governor not to acquiesce that the said Assembly should
be summoned, for several weighty reasons that he would impart unto him; And in
the interim the said Bailiff got a kind of begging Address to be drawn, and
privately sent (with a Deputation for himself and the said William Beauvoir) to
the several Parishes of this Island to get hands, which some of the People did
not refuse by reason of the fair pretenses therein contained; and afterward
he, the said Bailiff, caused the said Deputation, contrary to Law, to be passed
under the public Seal of the Island, which he keeps in his Custody. All which
illegal actings of the said Bailiff were effected by him against the express
Order of the Deputy Governor, or knowledge of the States of the said Island;
which Irregular proceedings were like to have caused a tumult in the said
Island. And now he is going for Jersey and so for England in the Frigate that
went thither to fetch Major General Overton: and his Colleague William de
Beauvoir alias du hommet is now going in these Vessels after him. I do not
doubt but you have seen them: they are resolved to make use of all their
Engines and Hypocrisies in seeming pious and Religious rather then miss of
compassing their ends; and if that fails, then they are resolved to make use
of money, which they have plenty to bribe and corrupt those that will serve
them in answering their base ends. They have boasted here openly of their
friends at Court, and what they will do for them, and for those that join with
them; and that when all other things and means fail, that money is the only
way to do business; which I do not wonder at, seeing they are so well versed in
receiving and giving: Cost what it will, they must effect something, or
otherwise, their return hither will be Odious to those to whom they have made
such large promises. I send you here enclosed a Copy of their flattering,
profane, and begging Address. I wish that those in Authority may not be
enchanted and deluded by them either by their feigned piety, Religious
Language, not their pretended affection to the Commonwealth, to which they are
great Adversaries: no government pleasing them but absolute Monarchy, (as they
themselves exercise over the Poor and honest People of this Island, whom they
can crush at pleasure, by great alliance they have in the seat of Judicature.)
Pray communicate these lines to some of those of your friends, that yet remain
faithful to the Interest of Gods People, and to the Commonwealth, that so they
may not be surprised by them; and you will do a work of merit to this poor spot
of ground consisting of above Twenty thousand souls, and engage all the
well-affected and honest amongst them to pray for you; and my self, who am,

Honorable Sir, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant.
Guernzey Island 2^. Martii 1658.
To his most Serene Highness, Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto appertaining.
The humble Request of the Bailiff, Jurates, and Common Council, and other
well-affected Inhabitants of the Island of Guernzey.
SHOWS,
THat having had a deep feeling in the general Consternation, which all
well-affected persons have received by the death of his late most renowned
Highness, They have also great share in the great Exultation, which does
possess the Hearts of all such who make profession of Piety, and who do see
your Highness Act for God and his People in his Government; and as your most
humble Suppliants have nothing more precious then their fidelity toward your
Highness, being that which does embolden them to prostrate themselves in all
Humility before your Highness, Humbly supplicating, That you will please to
confirm the Privileges, Franchises, and Immunities, which they do enjoy by
their Ancient Charters; and seeing the Inhabitants of the said Isle are become
very Numerous, and of above 6000 persons who get their living by knitting of
Stockings, and other Manufactures of Wool, and that One Thousand Todds of it
is the least quantity which is necessary for them to keep them at work; which
quantity being equally distributed amongst the said persons, will not amount to
more than four pounds and an half for each for one whole year: We do with all
Humility supplicate your Highness, That it may please your Grace to grant to
the Poor Inhabitants of the said Isle the same favor and grace, (having
already been granted to the Inhabitants of Jersey, by your Highness most
renowned Father of happy memory) and according to the cordial affection which
they bear to your Highness, and their duty to address themselves with fervor
to the Throne of Grace,

They pray God, that he may be pleased to continue his blessing upon your
Highness Person, Posterity, and Government, etc.

Signed in the Original.

FINIS.

