THE VOICE OF THE Iron ROD, To his Highness The Lord PROTECTOR: BEING A
seasonable Admonition presented to him, and to all Judicious men:

By Arise Evans.

Mica. 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see my Name. Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it. London, Printed for
the Author. 1655.

To the most discreet and valourous people of Englan^, both Soldiers and
others: ARISE EVANS wishes you grace, peace, truth and glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
BEleved, the good effects that my Books which I wrote from tim^ to time had
taken upon his Highness the Lord Protector, and upon his party, has always
been crossed by such Plotters as have sought the life of his Highness, and to
involve the Kingdom in blood again: the Plotters foolishly thinking, that God
is well pleased with blood, and that it is impossible for the King and his
Highness to agree and come to be in mutual love and peace again. And this I
speak, because I find the too too sad consequence of the late Plot, that has
altered the good affection of his Highness, and of others that are about him,
that was wrought on them by Gods blessing on my book called The Voice of
Michael the Archangel, and those motions for peace which besides I propounded
then to them by word of mouth, tending to union between the King and his
Highness. And these motives about three months agone, when I was there, were
well resented. Upon which reception, I wrote something accordingly, to show
that I found those motives good effect. Which conception of mine, (to the
honor of the true, peaceable, loyal affections of his Highness and of his
party, shall be discovered hereafter, if God permit. But now having a further
discovery to show his Highness, even that which he should speedily do, to
prevent an ensuing evil, I wrote and went to the Court, not doubting but that
my way to his Highness was as passable as before: yet coming there, I found no
passage, by reason the unsavouriness of the late Plot was so heinous among
them, that all we now which mention their peace with Charles the second, are
counted their adversaries; though happily his Highness is of anether mind. Nor
because I was not admitted, am I persuaded that his Highness is unwilling to
hear me in a matter of so great concernment; but I look upon it as the fancy
of the others that kept me from him. Therefore blame me not (being debarred from
him) for printing it, that it may come to his hand. And though you do blame me,
I had rather suffer, then that his Highness should be ignorant of Gods mind
showed in the foresaid Writing; which is as follows.

To his Highness OLIVER CROMWELL, Lord Protector of Great Britain and Ireland:
The humble Service of Arise Evans presented to your most serious consideration,
in these lines following.
My Lord,
A Month agone I should have come to your Highness, but I was loath to be
troublesome: for then I had a Vision to charge you not to seek the welfare of
these Sectaries, whose spirits are fired to do evil, and to bring evil upon
themselves and you. And now after that, I had a Vision which showed that the
King was come in to you upon an agreement, and that all the haters of the Lord
were to be destroyed. I had also a kind of a Vision in the Chapel on the
Lords day, Feb. 18. 1654. when the man preached upon 2 Chronicles. 15.2. who at
length, as he mentioned the Rod of iron, I held up my Cane; and I believe you
took notice of me: for you removed upon it, and sat back, so that I could not
see you. And there stood before me a young man with his sword g^ded upon his
thigh, much resembling the King, Charles Stuart, to my thinking; who then asked
me what is the text. And I answered, putting my hand upon the hilt of his
sword, saying, The Lord is with you, while you be with him. And upon that, a
portly ancient man which was next to him, fell down flat as a dead man: and he
took him up in his arms, and the man was revived again: and most in the Chapel
saw the man fall, and taken up again, but few saw me hold forth my cane: nor
could any that saw it, gather any thing from it, except your self, it was so
softly and civilly done: and I had not thought much of it, had not God
providentially completed the Vision, by those actions in them two strange men;
what they were, I know not.

Now all that I thought by holding out my Cane toward you, upon the Preacher's
mentioning the Rod of Iron, was to put you in m^nde of what I had formerly
delivered unto you touching the bringing in of King Charles, and settling the
Church Government: but God gave you a further testimony of his will, by his
providential actions in those two men, as a sign to confirm what I had said.
For the man that had the sword, and resembled the King, signifies that the
King will come in. And the man which fell, signifies your now tottering
falling condition, and that the King is he that shall raise you up again. Let
none despise these signs* for that sign of Abraham's servant, by some would
now be rejected as an accident, or as a fancy, Genesis 24.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. Neither would they count the sign on Gedeon's fleece but an
accident, though Gedeon grounded so high a design upon it, that he went out
against the Midianites upon that score, Judge. 6.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. And
wherefore are these things written, but that sometimes we should use the like
means, as occasion serves? For Gedeon then had the Scripture to direct him, and
an Angel was sent to him, Judge. 6.11, 12. yet notwithstanding the sign
confirms him at last, and then he goes on his way. My Lord, mistake me not: I
do not say that this was a sign as Gedeons sign was, of man's choosing, to
resolve his doubts; but I say, This sign or vision was given of God alone, to
show the things to come. And the Church desires to see such signs of
deliverance, Psalm. 74.7, 8, 9, 10. Of such signs our Savior speaks; Luke
21.25, 26. Acts 2.19, 20. Gedeons sign was a plain thing; but this sign or
vision is matter of judgment, much like that of Belshazzar, Dan. 5 7. which
needed an Interpreter: therefore, my Lord, lay it the more seriously to heart.

And, my Lord, know also, that Church Government is the foundation of all
Governments; so that neither the Civil nor the Military Government can possibly
stand without it: for by Church Government men are brought to be of one mind,
and of one spirit, to unity and peace. So that it, and none else, is the
Government of Christ; and he that wants it, (except he keep the Scripture from
them) shall not be able to rule his people. You may as well think to make a
rope of the driest sand, which when you take a handful of it, do what you can,
it will slip through your fingers, as think to rule this Nation without a strait
Church Government, even such a Government as your Army has; and that duly and
diligently it be executed upon offenders.

But you will say, There was no such Government in the Apostles time: I answer,
No; for they were but as men that beat for Volunteers, and that list men to go
into a strange Island; which cannot prescribe absolute Laws for them whilst
they remain in their own native Land: but when they are come to the intended
Island, then they have Laws given them, which if they transgress, they must
suffer accordingly, though it be to the death.

Or, to speak more plainly, in your own Military language, the Apostles were as
men when at first they are raising an Army, who put their Soldiers immediately
in Companies under some inferior Officers, and there they let them rest a
while; yet it is then intended, that the Soldiers shall not remain so always,
but the intent is, that there shall be a General in chief over them, besides
Colonels and Majors, and a complete Government among them. So likewise when the
Church at first by the Apostles were in gathering, and put under such
Government as then (being persecuted) they best could do, they doubtless then
intended for it a Government that should be complete, even such a Government as
we had, not long since, here in England. Therefore stand for Church government,
and for Charles Stuart, or else you cannot stand: proclaim him speedily, lest
some Parliament Men do it before you, and then you be undone: for that party
which proclaims the King now, shall increase like a snow-ball; and, I tear, all
that you can do, shall not be able to dissolve it.

My Lord, the people generally look upon you now, as one that can show no
color for your Authority to rule them: for since the last Parliament disowned
you, (whom we looked upon as honest men) all do disown you; and the most
judicious say, that nothing will bring you into favor with them again, but
your speedy restoring of the Church and King.

Oh do not let your adversaries prevail against you through your neglect. You
know Samson slept so long upon Dalilah's knees, until his locks were cut off,
that when he, poor man, awaked, and thought to go out and prevail as at other
times, alas, he was soon overcome, and had his eyes put out, and was put to
grind in a mill, like as if he had been a foundered blind horse, Judge. 16.
19, 20, 21. So these Colonels dally with you, but in the mean time they cut off
your locks in the Army; and they know already, that they have more of the Army
on their side, then you have, besides their furious party abroad; else would
they not be so bold with you as they are. They say, Treason never prospers; and
why? because if it prosper, none dare call it Treason: Therefore, what is Law
to day, may be Treason to morrow. I know there is no truth among the Sectaries,
but that of the Anabaptist, which did all: for rebaptizing is a truth, as I
shall make it appear by Scripture, by Reason, by ancient Records, and by Saint
Augustine's own confession: but their denial of Infants baptism by their
Sureties, is an error, as I have and shall make it appear with as full proof,
at large. Therefore the Cause (as we call it) is a controversy which God had
with his people for their sins, Mic. 6.2. and though he gave them into your
hands for a time, do not you go, as the Heathen did go beyond their Commission
in afflicting Gods people. Zech. 1.15, 16.

My Lord, to deal plainly with you; do you think that the people are so abased
now through the fear of you, that they will maintain your 30000 men, besides
the great Navy, and a great Court for you, at their own cost and charges?
whereas they know, that by their exchanging you for King Charles, they shall be
freed from all that cost and charge; (judge with reason; is it wisdom for you
to think so?) for then the Kings Revenues and Church-Revenues running in their
own chanel again, will make the people as free from Taxes as they were before
these Troubles began. And many that have bought of the King and Bishops Lands,
to my knowledge, are so honest, wishing it were come to that pass, though they
should lose their money by it.

My Lord, I have been told by discreet men of all parts in England, which are
no enemies to you, and therefore they bid me tell you, that they perceive there
will be a sudden general Rasing against you, at one day and hour, in all the
Counties of England: and by Visions also and Scripture it is confirmed to me,
that it will be so, if you do not prevent it, by the speedy proclaiming of
Charles Stuart. It is true, Jeremiah was favorably used by Zedekiah, (and so
was I by you) therefore Jeremiah showed him the way how to save himself, his
City and family; and he seemed to be well pleased with it: but notwithstanding,
Zedekiah went in his own way to do it, and you see what became of him, and of
his City and Family, Jer. 38. and Jer. 39. and I beseech you consider, that if
the Country will not pay the Assesments, as I hear many say they will not,
because you had no power, say they, from the last Parliament to raise money: I
say, If they will not rate it, how can you raise it in equity? And if you want
money, what will become of you? The late King lost all upon that score, going
to raise Ship Money without consent of Parliament. Take heed what you do: for I
believe your Soldiers consider all these things, as well as others, and that
though for the present they obey you, to see what you will do; yet they will
not serve you to keep their native Country in such bondage. Therefore trust not
to them upon such an account; but do righteous things, and then they will
gladly follow you.

My Lord, you are designed for higher things, then to live so dishonorably at
White Hall, as to, be counted a Tyrant, and the very enemy of your native
Country. My Lord, you are to look higher then on such a low contemptible way
of living: you are to do the work of God, for which you were designed and
called; and you are to have the dominion (though not for your self) over the
chiefest City in the world, before it be long, as I told you in my former books.
And wherefore was Darius his age ^et down, Dan 5. 31. but that you might know
when it shall be? your own age will tell you that; keep it secret. Come not
short in these virtues of a Heathen Captain, Alexander the Great, who did
excellent things for his own vainglory; but do you the like to the glory of
God* therefore you must exceed him in such godly virtues, which he by nature
did the things contained in the Law, as Saint Paul says, Romans 2. 13, 41, 15,
16. Three things which I have heard of Alexander, are most excellent and
remarkable Christian virtues, in which you ought to follow him.

First, Alexander going out against a mighty King who fought stoutly, yet being
overcome at last, he was brought before Alexander, who asked the King what he
would have him do to him. Said he, I would have you use me like o King.
Whereupon, Alexander being taken with the valor and worthiness of the person,
he gives him his own Kingdom again, and two other great Kingdoms besides. My
Lord, here is a fair president for you, that have seen at Worcester the valor
and gallantry of King Charles. Do you also the like unto him: and if ye do it,
be sure you will have Kingdoms enough ere long be, at your pleasure, as
Alexander had: for God loves such noble actions, and gives riches to such as
can part with them freely, and are valorous.

Secondly, Alexander being in his glory, a poor man, named Puplius, who had
been an old acquaintance of his, came to see him: and he being glad to see him,
that he might do something for him, he gives him a great City. Alas, said the
poor man, this is too great a gift for Puplius to receive. Alexander replied,
Though it be too great for Puplius to receive, it is not too great for
Alexander to give. Here is a gallant mind, my Lord; imitate him therein: for
this is according to the rules of Christianity in the highest degree, Luke 6.
30, 38. And who is more worthy of the world then he that is liberal? As the
Prophet says, The liberal devises liberal things; and by liberal things shall
he stand, and be established, Isai. 32.8.

Thirdly, Alexander, when he had conquered the world, sat down and wept. His
friends asked him wherefore he wept. Said he, Because I have conquered the
world, and now there is no more worlds for me to conquer. Here is a gallant
heroic mind! What and if this man had been a true Christian? surely he would
not have rested, until he had brought all the world under the Scepter of Jesus
Christ. And will you now leave the work of God, for to enjoy vanities and
unrighteous mammon for a moment? Jonah 2.8. Luke 16.9. Your Sword has been
ever victorious; not that there was much need for you here, but that here you
might have experience of Gods presence with you, and that ye might know that he
has raised you up to conquer the world, and to bring it under his Scepter.

My Lord, it is appointed unto men once to die, and after this the judgment.
Heb. 9. 27. Death comes upon all; we are mortal; and our lives now (though
Sectaries think not so) are bound up in yours. Therefore I beseech you,
consider, if God should take you away, what confusion and cutting of throats
would be among parties in this Nation, who then will not acknowledge what your
Council do. And therefore, I beseech you again, make your peace speedily with
the King; and to end all controversy, proclaim him, and so secure your self
and all peaceable men. Which if you do, you will please God by it, and gain the
highest repute as can be in the world, who cannot but look upon it as the
highest act of Godliness and Nobility in you, as can be in man.

If you think I can do you any service, I am ready for you. However, I shall do
what I can for you: and the Lord give a blessing to it. Amen.

Arise Evans.
Blackfriers in Long-Alley, Feb. 22. 1654. The Postscript.
Beloved,
IT is not easy for a tenderhearted man, to hear the voice of innocent blood
continually sounding in his Ears, and to see the Poor oppr^ssed by the Mighty.
Therefore being troubled with these things, and having abundance of revelations
and visions of late, by which God showed me that now he was arising in all the
Counties of England, to execute judgment for the Oppressed: I could not rest
till I had wrote them as above said, that his Highness might see them; who, the
last time that I was with him, when I gave him thanks for the liberty that I
had to ease my troubled spirit, that foresaw these things, bade me write again,
and let nothing trouble me. Wheresore I had reason, for that cause, to let him
see them in the first place. And again, I had reason to let him see them, in
regard he is most concerned in them. But with all that I could do, by waiting a
whole week at Court, I had no admittance to him, neither could I have a perfect
answer from one of his chief Gentlemen that attends him, which received my
Writings, what was become of them; so that I by no means could have them again.
Now if these Writings be gone forth, and divulged abroad, it is not only a
wrong to his Highness, but also to me; though the Gentleman that received them
of me, might be ignorant of the consequence following; for a man's enemies many
times are of his own house. So that if he showed them to some private enemy to
his Highness, he did not well. And intentively to prevent the mischief that may
ensue, I do print them now: That again, while there is hope, his Highness may
know how to save the blood of this Nation. which if not, I am free from their
blood, and from the blood of all men. Let it fall upon the heads of them that
will not ohey the truth manifested.

Arise Evans.



FINIS.

