An Exact and True RELATION OF The DANGEROUS and BLOODY FIGHT, Between His
Majesty's Army, and the Parliaments Forces, near Kyneton in the County of
Warwick, the 23 of this instant OCTOBER.

Sent in a Letter to JOHN PYM Esquire, a Member of the House of COMMONS.

Which Letter was Signed by Denzell Hollis: Ph: Stapleton: Tho: Ballard:
William Balfore: Io: Meldrum: Charles Pym:
Who were then present.

ORdered that this Relation be forthwith Printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl: D: Com:



LONDON: Printed by John Field, for Edward Husbands and John Franck and are to
be sold at their shops, in the Middle Temple, and next door to the King's Head
in Fleetstreet. October 28. 1642.

SIR,
WE should do our Army a great deal of wrong, and not discharge our duty of
thankfulness toward God, if we took not the first occasion to declare his
goodness, in giving so great a blessing as he has now done to the resolute
and unwearyed endeavors of our Soldiers, fighting for him in the maintenance
of his truth, and for themselves and their Country, in defense of their
Liberties, and the Privileges of PARLIAMENT. This makes us give you now a
Narration of a blessed Victory which God has given us upon the Army of the
Cavaliers, and of those evil persons, who upon Sunday the 23 of this instant,
engaged His Majesty in a dangerous and bloody fight against His faithful
Subjects, in the Army raised by Authority of Parliament, for the preservation
of His Crown and Kingdom; We marched from Worster, Wednesday the 19, upon
Intelligence that their Army was moved from Shrewsbury, and Bridgenorth, and
bending Southward; our Train of Artillery was so unready, through want of
Draught horses, and through other omissions of Monsier du Boys, that we were
forced to leave it behind to follow us, and with it the Regiments of Colonel
Hambden, and Colonel Grantham; and staying for it, we could advance no further
then to a little Market Town called Kyneton in Warwickshire, six miles from
Warwick, whether we came the Saturday night with 11 Regiments of Foot, 42
Troops of Horse, and about 700 Dragoons, in all about Ten thousand men; there
we intended to rest the Sabbath day, and the rather, that our Arrillery, and
the Forces left with it, might come up to us. In the morning when we were going
to Church, we had News brought us, That the Enemy was two miles from us, upon a
high Hill, called Edgehill: Whereupon we presently marched forth into a great
broad field under that Hill, called the vale of the red horse, and made a stand
some half a mile from the foot of the Hill, and there drew into Battalio, where
we saw their ^orces come down the Hill, and draw likewise into Battle in the
bottom, a great broad company: Their Forces appeared to by much greater then
we could possibly have conceived them to b^ by the confession of the prisoners
we have taken, they that say least day, Fourteen thousand, which is the Earl of
Lin^ Relation, who was their General; but others say, Eighteen thousand, and
above 4000 horse and Dragoons: The wind was much for their advantage, and they
endeavored to get it more, which to prevent, we were enforced to draw out our
left Wing t^ a great breadth, and by that means, before the Battle was done,
gained it wholly from them: In our right Wing were three Regiments of horse,
(...) Sir John Meldrum, and were of his Brigado.
the Lo^^ General's commanded by Sir Philip Stapl^ton, Sir William Balfores, and
the Lord Fieldings, Sir John Mel^rums Brigado had the Van, Colonel Essex was
in the middle, and Colonel Ballards with the Lord Generals Regiment, his own,
the Lord Brooks, and Colonel Hollis in the Rear: In the left Wing were 24
Troops of Horse, commanded by Sir James Ramsey, their Commissary General. In
this posture we stood, when the other Army advanced toward us, the strength of
their horse were on their right Wing opposite to our left; In their left Wing
they had but ten Troops, but their Foot which appear^d to us, divided into nine
great Bodies, came up all in front, and after some playing with the Canon on
both sides, that part of it which was on their left, and toward our right
Wing, came on very gallantly to the Charge, and were as gallantly received, and
charged by Sir Phillip Stapletons and Sir William Balfore's Regiments of horse,
assisted with the Lord Roberts and Sir William Constables Regiments of Foot,
who did it so home thrice together, that they forced all the Musketeers of two
of their best Regiments to run in and shroud themselves within their Pikes, not
daring to shoot a shot, and so stood: When our Rear came up, and then charging
all together, especially that part of our Rear which was placed upon the right
hand, and so next unto them, which was the Lord Generall's Regiment, and the
Lord Brooks, led on by Colonel Ballard who commanded that Brigado, forced that
stand of Pikes, and wholly broke those two Regiments, and slew and took almost
every man of them: The Earl of Linsey, his Son the Lord Willoughby, and some
other persons of note are prisoners, Sir Edmund Varney, who carried the Kings
Standard, was slain by a Gentleman of the Lord Generals Troop of horse, who
did much other good service that day, and the Standard taken, which was
afterward by the Lord General himself delivered unto his Secretary Mr.
Chambers, with an intention to send it back the next day unto His Majesty; but
the Secretary after he had carried it long in his hand, suffered it to be taken
away by some of our Troopers, and as yet we cannot learn where it is: The other
two Regiments of our Rear; Colonel Hollis, and Colonel Ballard charged those
which were before them, and then the whole Body of the Kings Foot, except two
other Regiments ran away: by this time it grew so late and dark, and to say the
truth, our Ammunition at this present was all spent, that we contented our
selves to make good the Field, and gave them leave to retire up the Hill in the
night: But before we come to this, we will give you an account of what passed
in the other parts of our Army, before our Rear came up to charge. Our Battle
at the very first wholly disbanded and ran away, without ever striking stroke,
or so much as being charged by the Enemy, though Colonel Essex himself, and
others that commanded those Regiments, in chief did as much as men could do to
stay them; but Colonel Essex being forsaken by his whole Brigado, went himself
into the Van, where both by his direction and his own execution he did most
gallant service, till he received a shot in the thigh, of which he is since
dead: Now for our Rear, thus it was; before it, toward the outside of it stood
our left Wing of Horse, advanced a little forward to the top of a Hill, where
they stood in a Battalio lined with commanded Musketeers, 400 out of Colonel
Hollis Regiment, and 200 out of Colonel Ballards; but upon the first charge of
the Enemy they wheeled about, abandoned their Musketeers, and came running
down with the Enemies horse at their heels, and amongst them pell mell, just
upon Colonel Hollis his Regiment, and brake through it, though Colonel Hollis
himself, when he saw them come running toward him; went and planted himself
just in the way, and did what possibly he could do to make themstand, and at
last prevailed with three Troops to wheel a little about and rally; but the
rest of our horse of that Wing, and the Enemies Horse with them, brake through,
and ran to Kineton, where most of the Enemy left pursuing them, and fell to
plundering of our Wagons, by which many of us have received very great loss,
and by name, your Servants that now write to you: Notwithstanding their
breaking through Colonel Hollis his Regiment, it was not dismayed, but together
with the other Regiments of that Brigado marched up the Hill; and so made all
the haste they could to come up to fight, and got the wind of the Enemy, and
came on (if we may say it our selves, but we must do the Soldiers right) most
gallantly, and charged the Enemy, who were then in fight with our Van, and the
right Wing of our Horse, and as was said before, helped to defeat the two
Regiments forementioned, and made all the rest run, but two other Regiments
which retired orderly, and at last made a stand, and having the assistance of
Canon, and a ditch before them, held us play very handsomely: And by this time
it grew so dark, and our Powder and Bullet so spent, that it was not held sit
we should advance upon them; but there we stood in very good order; drew up all
our Forces both Horse and Foot, and so stood all the night upon that place
where the Enemy before the fight had drawn into Battalio, till toward morning
that the Enemy was gone, and retired up the Hill: And then we returned also to
a warmer place near Kineton, where we had quartered the night before, for we
were almost starved with cold in that bitter night, our Army being in extreme
want of Victuals: And about nine or ten of the clock drew out again into
Battalio, and so stood three or four hours, till the Enemy was clean gone from
the Hill, and then we drew again into our quarter, and there have lain this
night, and purpose this day, God willing, after we have buried our dead, to
march to Warwick to ref^e^^ Army, which is exceedingly wearved with so many
n^g^ts watching, and so long a fight which held from noon till dark night: Two
particulars must not be omitted, one of Sir William Balfore, who in the
beginning of the day broke a Regiment of Foot which had green Colors, beat
them to their Canon, where they threw down their Arms and ran away, he laid his
hand upon the Canon, and called for nails to nail them up, especially the two
biggest which were Demy-canon, but finding none, he cut the Ropes belonging to
them, and his Troopers killed the Canoneers: Then he pursued the flyers half a
mile upon execution, and after returned to Sir Philip Stapleton, who in the
mean time was charging of the red Regiment, where the Kings Standard was, and
had charged it home to push of Pike with his single Troop; and they then,
together with the help of some of the Foot of our Rear, utterly broke it, as
you had it before: The other particular was of Sir Phillip Stapleton, who, when
five Troops of the Enemies horse returned from pursuit of our left Wing, and
from plundering some of our wagons and passed by the outside of our Rear upon
the left hand, went and charged them with his Troop and made them run; but they
finding a gap in the hedge, got away, and returned to the rest of their broken
Troops, where they rallyed and made up a kind of Body again: If we had time we
could relate unto you many more observable passages, but what you have here
shall serve you till we meet: This only will we say, some of both sides did
extremely well, and others did as ill, and deserve to be hanged for deserting
and betraying as much as lay in them their party, but God alone is to be
praised who fought with us, and for us, and made it his own work, to give the
victory unto his Servants: We have lost of note, only Colonel Essex, and we
fear the Lord Saint-John who was dangerously wounded; We here send you a
George, found in the field by a common Soldier, and bought of him for twenty
shillings by one Captain Skinner; We have promised him he shall have it again;
we only send it you as one of our Trophies that you may see it: we believe you
will hear of very many of great quallity slain on the other side; The Kings
foot are either slain, or most of them run away, and are now very weak, and
should have been pursued by us, but that we must of pure necessity refresh our
men for three or four days, and then we shall, God willing, address our
selves to finish the work. In the mean time it is very requisite, Letters from
the Committee should be writ into the Countries, which are Southern, to stir
them up that they may rise and cut them off, or assist us at least against
them; which hoping you will forth with do; We rest

Your faithful and humble Servants, Denzell Hollis: Ph: Stapleton: Tho:
Ballard: William Balfore: Io: Meldrum: Charles Pym.

Our Lord General went last night to Warwick, and is there very well, and had
he been with us, we should not have presumed to have given you the first
Advertisement. His Excellence did gallantly adventure himself that day in the
Front against the Enemy, exposing himself to more danger then we could have
wished.



FINIS.

