An Exact ACCOUNT of the manner of the EXECUTION OF Algernoon Sidney Esquire On
Tower Hill, For High Treason, with his Behavior on the SCAFFOLD.
Algernoon Sidney Esquire having been Araigned this Term past, for High Treason the
particulars of his Charge being for Conspiring the Death of his most Sacred
Majesty his Royal Highness etc. And Contriving to make a miserable slaughter of
his Majesty's most Loyal and Faithful Subjects through the Kingdom of England
etc. And an alteration of the Govement, both of Church and State, whereby the
present happy flourishing Monarchy and Hirarchie were wholly to be Exterpated,
and in their stead a Democratical, Popular, Rabular, and most Arbitrary
Government were to have been established.

On the 21st. Of November last past, Mr. Sidney, was brought under a strong
guard by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to the Kings-Bench-Bar: The right
Honorable Sr. George Jefferis, Lord Chief Justice, Sr. Francis Withens, Mr.
Justice Holloway, and Mr. Justice Walcot, being present. After a full and fair
hearing of all that could be said, for and against the said Prisoner. about 7 a
clock the same Evening, the Jury found him guilty of the high Treason,
aforesaid On the 26th of the same month, Mr. Sidney, was brought in manner
aforesaid to the Kings Bench-Bar, where being asked by the Cleark of the Crown,
what he had to say for himself, that Sentence of Death might not be awarded
against him, according to Law. Said nothing to any such purpose, upon which,
the Court Proceeded to give Judgment, which was, That he should be conveyed to
the place from whence he came, and thence to the place of Execution there to be
hanged by the Neck, and Cut down alive, his Privy Members to be cut of and
burnt before his Face, his Bowels to be burnt, his head to be Severed from his
Body, his body to be divided into four Quarters, and to be disposed of at his
Majesty's plea^ure. But such was the Grace and Favor of his Majesty (in
respect to the many Noble and Illustrous Families the said Criminal was allied
to) to remit all the Sentence except Severing his head from his body, and
accordingly on the 4th. of this present December, the Sheriff of Middlesex
having received a Warrant to execute the said Algernoon Sidney, on the 7th. day
of this present December, at the usual place on Tower hill, between the hours
of ten and two in the afternoon of the same day, Issued his Sumons to the
Bailiff of the hundred of Oswalston, and his Deputies: to appear completely
armed with halberds and to attend at the place of Execution till further order,
and accordingly this Morning, Mr. Sheriff being assembled with a very strong
Guard as aforesaid, in pursuance of his Warrant attended before the Palizadoes
of the Tower, to receive the said Prisoner.

At which time the Right Honorable the Leiutenant of the Tower, attended by a
very strong Guard of Warders and in their habit, brought the Prisoner and
delivered him to the Sheriff, who immediately conveyed him to the place of
Execution, on the Hill before the Tower, being the same Scaffold of the late
Lord Viscount Stafford was Executed upon, about this time three years past. The
Hills, the Houses and the Walls, of the Tower, were crowded with a Numerous
Company of Spectator^ of all Ranks and Qualities. Mr. Sidney having ascended
the Scaffold, the Spectators begun to keep silence, expecting what Mr. Sidney
would say, relateing to himself, and others concerned in the Horrid Conspiracy,
for which he now was justly to suffer Death. The Executioner and all things
being ready prepared for that purpose. But such is the witchc^raft of the sin,
of Rebellion and Treason, that it is almost if not impossible, for any of them
that have thoroughly dyed themselves in it, ever to change their color, or be
any ways penitent for the wickedness of their time past, as daily experience
tells us: scarce an Old Rebel, Colonel, Major, Captain, Leiutenant or
Corporal, that is now surviveing amongst us, but upon all occasions of
discourse of the late Bloody Treasonable and Horrid Rebellion, but values
himself for that part he was concerned in that Fatal Tradigie, so far as he
dare, without coming under the Lash of our Established Laws, and if by chance
they meet with a check for their Seditious Insolences, they presently fl^e to
the Inexhaustible Treasure of his Majesty's mercies, and reply that the King
has been pleased to pardon them, and what is that to any man what they have done
without the lest Token of Grace or Repentance in 'em as this present
Conspiracy shows, and particularly, the present Object that they are still
ready to do the same thing over again, wanting nothing more than a convenient
opportunity, for if his Majesty's mercy in time past, could have made an
Infallible Cure, Mr. Sidney had not been here at this time, to suffer for
Treason. He said very little, but gave Mr. Sheriff a paper, and prepared
himself for the Stroke. and after a short prayer the Executioner did his
Office, Exposing the Head of a Traitor to the people on every side of the
Scaffold.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1683.


