THE ESSEX VVatchmen's VVatchword To the Inhabitants of the said County
respectively, dwelling under their several CHARGES, By way of Apologetical
Account, OF The true Grounds of their first Engagement with them in The Cause
of God, King and Parliament, for their Vindication from unjust Aspersions. Also
by way of faithful Premonition of the dangerous evil latent in a printed Paper,
entitled, The Agreement of the People, Intended to be Tendered to them for
Subscription.

Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel:
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.

Ezekiel. 33.6. But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the Trumpet,
and the people be not warned: if the sword come and take any person from among
them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the
watchmans hand.

2 Timothy 4.5. But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of
an Evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.

London, Printed for RALPH SMITH, at the sign of the Bible near the Royal
Exchange. 1649.

To the Religious and Well-affected, The Nobility, Knights, Gentry, Yeomanry
and others, dwelling within our several and respective Congregations, The
Spirit of Wisdom and Discerning, with love to Truth and Peace.
THe success of the Ministry of the Gospel of Christ, depending much upon that
esteem which the persons by whom it is dispensed have in the hearts of those to
whom they are sent: It has ever been one Masterpiece of the Devils Policy, to
cast out against them the sharpest Arrows of Slanders and Reproaches, that so
he might through their sides wound the Gospel it self, and render it, if not
contemptible and odious, yet fruitless, and without success. This design was
never more furiously driven on by Satan, and his Instruments, then at this
time, and in this Nation; wherein the Ministers of the Gospel are generally
charged, by rigid Malignants on the one hand, as the men that have been the
Authors of all the kingdoms Troubles, Fomentors of these unnatural Divisions
and Bloody Wars; yea, as men who have had a strong influence into the
contriving and effecting of the Death of our late Sovereign: and by severe
Sectaries and Seducers on the other hand, as men who for their own mere
Interest of Power and Gain, would embroil the kingdom in a new War, oppose and
disturb the present Settling of Peace and Government in this almost ruined
Nation.

Therefore we whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ in the County of Essex, do hold our selves necessitated, according to
the Example of the Apostles, and others the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ
in their generations, to clear our selves from these unjust Accusations, by
declaring to you of our respective Charges, whom we have been Instruments to
engage with, and for the Parliament, what were the grounds of our first
appearing for, and adhering to them, and what are our apprehensions of the
present State of things, and of the intended and endeavored Settlement, by some
misled with Ignorance and false Zeal.

We call the God of Heaven and Earth to Witness upon our souls, That it was not
hatred to any Party or Person, much less to the person of our KING, that first
drew us into this action: But clearly this, Some years before the assembling of
this Parliament, we evidently saw the Affairs of Church and State in imminent
and apparent hazard, Many and great Alterations made in Doctrine, Innovations
in Worship, The Power of Godliness disgraced, True Religion undermined, The
faithful and conscientious Professors of it persecuted, even to Bonds, Flight
and Imprisonments, Popery Connived at, Countenanced, Courted: Besides many
grievous Oppressions of the Subjects in their Liberties and Properties. These
things we saw, and sighed for, but had no thoughts of inciting any to make
resistance (though against the abused Name and Power of a misguided King, whom
we much pityed in his Miscarriages) until it pleased God to bless us with a
Parliament, the ordinary means which he has appointed in this Nation, for the
red ressing of such growing evils.

The Parliament meets a first and second time, Declare their apprehensions of
the danger of Church and State, the same which before had been upon our hearts,
Apply themselves to all humble and submiss ways, by Petitions, Remonstrances,
etc. See the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, Dec. 15. 1641.
Speak nothing but honorably of the King, Lay the blame of all Miscarriages
upon evil Counselors, Require them to Trial: But God, for our sins and his,
shuts up his Majesty's heart against these Addresses. In stead of yielding up
those whom the Parliament demands, he demands some of their Members, seconds
his demands with a face of Violence: And here began that most unhappy Breach,
The Parliament upon this desire a Guard, their Guard is the Kings apprehended
or pretended Terror, He leaves his Parliament upon it, and under shadow of a
Guard for his Person, raises an Army, sets up his Standard, etc. The Story is
too long and sad for us to relate: But hence arose that Fire which since has
burnt almost to the very Foundations, and who knows when it will be quenched?

The Parliament seeing which way the Counsels of the King steered, apprehend a
Necessity of raising Arms for the Defense of themselves and the kingdom; for
the effecting whereof, they send out Propositions, Certain Propositions of both
Houses of Parliament* concerning the raising of horse horsemen and arms for the
Defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament, page 8.
in particular manner call upon Ministers to encourage and incite their people
to be forward and ready for their own and the Public good; Declaring (in
those Propositions) their intendments in raising Arms to be no other, then To
maintain the Protestant Religion, The Kings Authority and his Person, in his
Royal Dignity, The free Course of Justice, The Laws of the Land, The Peace of
the Kingdom, and The Privilege of Parliament, against any force which shall
oppose them, and this by the direction of BOTH Houses of Parliament: Yea, when
the War was first commenced between the King and them, their Army carried a
Petition in the one hand, as well as a Sword in the other; in which the Lords
and Commons do, in the presence of Almighty God, profess, that If His Majesty
will forthwith return unto his Parliament, etc. they will receive him with all
Honor, The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
sent by his Excellency Rob: E. of Essex, to be by him presented to His Majesty,
printed September 27. 1642. See also a Declaration of the Lords and Commons, in
Answer to a Preclamation by the King, for suppressing the Rebels under the Earl
of Essex, wherein the Lords and Commons, to witness their unshaken Loyalty and
Affection to his Majesty, do solemnly Declare, That if his Majesty shall
immediately disband all his Forces, and return, etc. they will really endeavor
to make both his Majesty and his Posterity as much beloved at home, and feared
abroad, as any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter, which is their firm and
constant Resolution. Declar. printed Aug. 16. 1642.
yield him all due Subjection and Obedience, and faithfully endeavor to secure
his Person and Estate from all danger, and do the utmost of their Power to
procure and establish to himself and his People, all the Blessings of a
glorious and happy Reign: We did then verily believe, and yet do, That these
were the Sincere and Cordial Intentions of the Lords and Commons then assembled
in Parliament: And although the King was so unhappy as to reject that Petition,
yet they persisted still in the same Loyalty of Intentions and Affections
toward him, as appears in their many Messages to himself, and Declarations to
the kingdom, and especially by their Solemn League and Covenant: The War having
all along gone under the Name and Title of A War for the Defense of Religion,
King and Parliament.

Upon these grounds we engaged in this Ccause, being called to it by a lawful
Authority, The Two Houses of Parliament being the Ordinance of God unto this
Nation, for the preventing of Tyranny, and the regulating of the Exorbitancies
of Regal Power; and being convinced in our judgments, both of the Equity and
Necessity of the Parliaments Defensive Arms, and persuaded of the Loyalty of
their Intentions toward his Majesty's Person, Posterity and Crown; and being
fully assured of our own, having this witness in Heaven, and in our own hearts,
That that Calamity which has now befaln the King, and threatens his Posterity,
was exceeding far from our desires or designs: And this our Tears and Prayers
poured forth for him in the days of our Humiliation, will, we doubt not,
testify for us.

We Appeal to God, The Searcher of all Hearts, to whom we must give account of
all our ways, That these were the grounds of our first Engagement, these our
Intentions in it. But O how amazed are we, to behold the sad issue the War is
now driven unto! To see a War begun for The Defense of Religion, likely to end
in The Ruin of Religion; a War begun for The Defense of the King, even ending
in The Death of the King; a War begun for The Defense of the Parliament, ending
in The Violation of the present, and Mutulation of future Parliaments, both in
point of Election and Constitution. This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a
Lamentation, Ezekiel. 19.14.

And that we may not seem to speak these things more out of Affection, then
Judgment, We do for our fears about Religion and the Parliament (as for the
matter of the King, our Fears are turned into Sorrows, but for the other) refer
unto that Model or Draught, published in print under the Title of The Agreement
of the People; See Petition, etc. concerning Agreement of the People. Title
Page.
which had it been only offered to the Consideration of Parliament, we would
not have taken the boldness to pass our judgments upon it suddenly, but have
expected theirs with due patience: But being Tendered to the Consideration of
the People, and that as we suppose, in order to a further Tender hereafter to
be made unto you for Subscription, if the Authors may have their desires; and
we in our Souls and Consciences looking upon sundry passages therein, as a
Draught of Poison tendered to you in a gilded Cup, We cannot but hold our selves
obliged in Conscience of that duty we owe to God, and that tender Love and Care
which (...) to you the People of our re-spective Flocks, to Testify and
Declare,

That as we our selves cannot, so it does not appear unto us, how any else
should without sin Sign this Agreement, so manifestly, directly, necessarily
tending to the Alteration of the Ancient and well founded Government of the
Kingdom, and which our hearts tremble to think of, the Subversion of the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, which are two of the richest Blessings that the
God of Heaven did ever bestow upon any People, and which have made us, even us,
the Glory of Nations, and the Envy of our Enemies; But the deprivation or
depravation of these, what will it render us!

The whole first Part, branched out into eight Articles, tends too far to a
rearing up of our ancient Parliamentary Government: for the Power of Parliament
here in England is without question Supreme, Absolute, Unlimited, extending to
things of Religion, as well as to Civil things. But this Agreement takes away
more then the half of their Power wholly denying them Power in matters of
Religion, and lays several Restraints upon their Power in Civil things. We will
not now say how safely or wisely in matter of State Policy, this may be either
done or endeavored: But our desire is, That all to whom this Agreement shall be
tendered, would seriously, and in the fear of God consider, Whether a People
that are under so many Oaths, Vows, Protestations, Covenants, for the
upholding of the Established Form of Government, as we in England are, can
agree to the Subversion of it, without incurring such guilt and wrath, as may
with the very thoughts thereof overwhelm us with horror and astonishment.

And for Religion, against which we conceive the main intendment of this
Agreement lies, and that all these Contrivances of Alteration in our Civil
Government, are but in tendency unto a greater and more destructive Alteration
in Religion.

For although this Agreement says (in the first Branch of the Ninth Article,
It is intended, That Christian Religion be held forth as the public Profession
in this Nation, and^ (...) it does not say by whom it is intended, nor does it
tell us what is that Christian Religion, which is thus intended to be held
forth; Whereas they know little, that do not know, That all the Errors and
Sects that are or have been in the Church of Christ, since the Apostles days,
do all lay claim to the Title of Christian Religion, and may all by this
Agreement plead, at least, stand as Probationers for, the Privilege of public
Profession, except Popery and Prelacy; which how far they are excepted, shall
in due place be considered.

We confess indeed, That which is added of desire to have Religion Reformed to
the greatest purity in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to the Word
of God; and also care for Instructing of People in a public way, and for the
Confutation of Heresy and Error, etc. is necessary and good, and the Lord
increase that care in us, and those desires in all: But we conceive the
particulars which are annexed and added in this Agreement, are so inconsistent
with this desire and care, as it is in vain to pretend either the one or the
other, if those may obtain.

For first, even in this Branch, which is the only Passage in the whole Paper
that bears the least shadow of any Care for Religion; all the rest are plainly
for Liberty: Yet even in this, there is one little Parenthesis, that like the
fly in the Box of ointment, may make it an abhorring in the nostrils of every
one who is knowingly judicious and plous. And that is, where the instructing of
People in a public way so it be not compulsive is allowed, etc. which words SO
IT BE NOT COMPVLSIVE, do certainly undermine not only the power of the Civil
Magistrate, but even of Family-Governours, in the things of God or of his
worship. For upon this Agreement, no Governor of any Family may use any
Compulsion to his Child or Servant, to cause him to attend upon the Public
Means of Instruction; but must leave him free: Which, what an advantage it
would be to unbridled Youth; what an inlet to looseness and profaneness in
men's families; how contradictory it is to the IV. Commandment, that makes the
Governor of the family accountable for the Sabbaths of all that are under his
roof; and how much worse then that once so much lamented and detested
Declaration of the King's for the Toleration of Sports upon the LORDS Day, let
Conscience speak.

And secondly, It is in the next Branch expressly cautioned, That to the Public
Profession so held forth, none may be compelled by Penalties or otherwise, but
only may be endeavored to be won by sound Doctrine; and the example of a
good Conversation.

Were England now in the state of Paganism, there might be some question of
the lawfulnes of Compelling men to the profession of the Christian faith: And
yet even then, it were without all question, lawful for the Christian
Magistrate to compel them to attend upon the Ministry of the Word, the
ordinary means of working faith, if voluntarily they will not do it; for other
wise, what possibility of their being won by sound Doctrine? But the People of
England at least the Generality of them having given the hand to Jesus Christ
already, and taken upon them already the Profession of faith in Him: To desire,
or engage now, that none may be compelled to the Profession of the Christian
Faith; is indeed to desire that men may have liberty to apostatize, and cast
off the profession of it, do despite to the Spirit of grace, Trample under foot
the Blood of the Covenant, Crucify the Son of God afresh, put him to an open
shame; turn Turks, or Jews, or Arrians, or Atheists, even after they have been
baptized and have professed the Christian Religion. Which, how pleasing it
would be to God, what a Blessing it would be unto the Nation, and how much it
is to be desired and endeavored by such as fear the Lord, and wish the
prosperity of England, We leave to themselves to judge.

The following Branch speaks little less, then that such a Liberty as this is
aimed at; and in some respect it faith more; for it requires, That such as
profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, however differing in Judgment from the
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline publicly held forth, as aforesaid, shall not
be restrained from, but protected in the Profession of their Faith, and
exercise of their Religion according to their Conscience in any place, (except
such as shall be set apart for public Worship, where we provide not for them,
unless they have leave) So as they abuse not this Liberty to the Civil
injury of others, or to actual disturbance of the public Peace on their
parts. Nevertheless it is not intended to be hereby provided, that this
Liberty shall necessarily extend to Popery or Prelacy.

We verily think there is so much Zeal for God and for his truth, yet living
in the Breasts of his People here in England, as if it were but fully
understood what the Persons are, for whom Liberty is here endeavored, and what
this Liberty is that is here attempted for them; they would be so far from
subscribing their hands to this Agreement, as at the very hearing of it, they
would rend their clothes and cast dust upon their heads, yea rather give their
right hand to the fire, as holy Crammer did after his subscription, then ever
subscribe at all; for who are the Persons for whom the Liberty is provided?
Such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ. And who almost is there that will
not profes faith in God by Jesus Christ not only Anabaptists, Antinomians,
Arminians, but Arrians, Sociniaus, Photinians, those that hold the most*
blasphemous errors about the Godhead of Christ, and of the holy spirit, yea
the Papists themselves who all will profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, will
come in for their share in this liberty, especially considering that it is
added, however differing in judgment from the Doctrine, Discipline or Worship
established, etc. That let the difference be of never so great a latitude, let
them differ as much as light and darkness, yet professing faith in God by
Jesus Christ, they shall not be restrained from the Profession of their faith,
and exercise of Religion, It is to be observed that in the close of this
Agreement, where they show what particulars in it they resolve to maintain to
the utmost, and what they only commend as useful and good for the Public; the
second and third Branch about Toleration are cast in among the first, sort and
the first about the Profession of the Christian faith is ranked n amongst the
second.
though their faith be blasphemous, and the exercise of their Religion gross
idolatry, yet they shall not be restrained from it: ray, that's too little, they
shall be protected in it; which is more then this Paper speaks of: the
Christian faith to be held forth in public, that is intended to only be
recommended and instruction thereunto allowed to be provided for. But these
shall be protected in the exercise of theirs, in any place except places
appointed for public worship; where say they we provide not for them unless
they have leave. But whether this be the leave of the supreme Magistrate or the
leave of the inferior Magistrate, or the leave of the Minister, or of the
People assembled in such place of public worship, or any part of them; who can
tell? To be sure here is a door wide enough for the mass with all its equipage
to come in at, though not altogether so publicly; so as this Liberty be not
abused to the Civilli jury of others, and the ACTUAL disturbance of the public
peace ON THEIR parts. That let them vent never so much blasphemy against God,
Treason against the State, let them sow the seeds of never so much sedition,
and lay the foundations of never so much disturbance, yet they forfeit not
their Liberty, except there be an actual distu bance, nor then neither except
it be on their parts, and they strike the first blow. Is then the civil injury
of others a greater since, then the injury of the eternal Majesty of God, then
blasphemy against Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, then infamy to the Gospel,
then scandal to the Churches? But to clear themselves, they tell us it is not
intended to be hereby provided, that this Liberty shall necessarily extend to
Popery and Prelacy. The Penners or Promoters of this Agreement, would feign
beget an opinion of themselves, that they are great enemies to Popery and
Prelacy. But wherein? they had provided before that Popery or Prelacy, he not
held forth as the public Way or Profession in this Nation; This denies not but
that both may be tolerated in the Nation; and this third branch makes provision
that they may; for both Prelacy and Popery make Profession of faith in God by
Jesus Christ, Compare the first part of the Agreement with the last.
and however they say here that it is not intended that this Liberty should
NECESSARILY extend to Popery and Prelacy, that does not deny but that
Arbitrarily it may; and though they tell us it is not intended that it should,
yet those very words show it was never intended that it should not.

But if this were not, yet for whom is that intended in the fourth Branch? That
all Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, and Clauses in any Law, Statute or Ordinance
to the contrary, of the Liberty herein provided for, in the two particulars
next preceding concerning Religion, be and are hereby repealed and made void;
where not to insist upon the power of repealing Laws and Statutes, of which
the Parliament seems here divested, these Subscribers investing themselves with
it, we offer it to serious consideration how more then probable it is, that the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy being taken away, which was the usual
Shibboleth, whereby discovery was made of Romish Priests and Jesuits, (and
taken away they are by this Agreement, that takes away the Crown it self) and
all other Laws and Statutes for convicting and punishing of popish Recusants
being repealed, we desire again it may be considered, how more then probable
it is that all the English Seminaries in the world, will empty their forces of
Priests and Jesuits into this miserable Kingdom: for they whose zeal did so
transport them heretofore, as they would be among us, though with the hazard of
their lives; what can stay them, now the way is thus cleared and smoothed for
them? And being among us, they will be as forward as any in Signing this
Agreement, as likely most of the Papists in England will and so are ipso facto
made equally capable of Civil and Military Offices with the best of
Protestants, yea more capable then any that do not subscribe this Agreement.
And how easy is it for those active spirited men, in a little time, to work
all places of Trust and Power into their own hands, and the hands of their
party; and in the space of one fourteen years, pack a Representative fully to
their minds? and what a Settlement they may make of things, Let him that does
not know, look back to Q. Marus days, and read in the Blood or our Ancestors.

These things we have written, God is our Record, not out of any desire we have
to hinder the Peace and Settlement of this poor Nation, for our own Interest of
Power and Advantage; The Lord judge between us and them who lay these things to
our charge: Much less have we written them with any intention of inciting you
our People or others to make a forcible opposition without or against Lawful
Authority; But only to clear our selves, if not from prejudice, yet at least
from guilt; and to discharge the duty of our place, by giving you this public
and joint Warning of those snares we see prepared for you, to take you off from
all those Oaths, Vows, Covenants, wherein you stand engaged to maintain the
true Reformed Protestant Religion, and the Ancient Government of the Kingdom.
We leave the whole to your Consideration; and do once for all appeal to your
Consciences, and the Consciences of all to whom this premonition shall come: Is
this provision which this Agreement would make in the things of God and of
Religion; is this we say the fruit of an hundred years enjoyment of the Gospel?
Is this the Reformation of Religion according to the Word of God, and the
pattern of the best Reformed Churches? Is this the Extirpation of Popery,
Prelacie, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, which we have
Covenanted and sworn with our hands lifted up to the most high God? Is this it
which we have prayed for, waited for, engaged for, suffered, endured so many
and great things for? That Popery, Prelacie, and all manner of Errors and
Heresies, provided they profess faith in God by Jesus Christ should be
tolerated and protected among us by a Law? If in your Consciences you think it
be, Go on, Subscribe this Agreement. Nevertheless we have delivered our own
souls. But if this Agreement be contrary to your Covenant, (as without all
perad venture it is) so contrary, as what our Savior said of God and Mammon,
may be said of these. You cannot love and cleave to the one, but you must hate
and forsake the other; Then let us in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ
beseech you, as you tender your present and eternal good, and the good of your
dear posterities, yea, in His Name we require and charge you, as you would not
be found guilty of all the Errors, Idolatry, Blasphemy, wickedness,
Irreligion, that by this floodgate, if once opened, will break in upon this
Nation, have nothing to do with this sinful ensnaring Agreement, avoid it, fly
from it, as from the surest, if not only engine Satan has now left him for
the demolishing of the Beauty, yea Being of Religion; and the advancing of
Popery, Error, Blasphemy, and whatever may make us an abhorring to God, a
hissing to men, and an execration to all the Churches of Jesus Christ.

SOme of us whose names are here subscribed, have not such perfect memories, as
to testify punctually all that is related concerning the beginnings and
proceedings of our late Wars: Some others of us were not then in the
Ministry: And some, very few of us, we confess were not so apprehensive of the
then present, and now ensuing evils, till God, and better information
enlightened our minds. But all of us do freely and solemnly underwrite the
substance of what is here published concerning the Honor of GOD, the Advice to
our Congregations, and the Vindication of our Names traduced by unreasonable
Malignants and Sectaries.

Daniel Rogers Minister and Lecturer at Wethersfield. Sam Collins Minister of
Brayntre. Nicolas Beard Pastor of Rochford. Matthew. Newcomen Minister of the
Gospel in Dedham. George Smith Minister of the Gospel in Dedham. Israel Hewet
Minister in Malden. Alexander Pigot Pastor of the Hithe-Parish in Colchester.
John Edes Pastor of Lawford. Nathaniel Bugg Pastor of Horkslie mag, John
Hubbert Minister of the Gospel at Boxtad. Robert Cole Minister of Great-Okely.
Nath. Carr Minister of Ardley. James Moore Minister of Laynden. Edmund Brewer
Minister of Castle-Heveningham. Robert Chadsley Minister of Yeldham parva. John
Overed Minister of Toppesfield. Jo. Tharby Minister of Gestlingthorp. Zachariah
Fitch Minister of Twinsted. Tho. Dearsley Minister of Wickham-Paul. Ralph Hills
Minister of Ridgwell. Daniel Weld Minister at Wethersfield. Nathaniel Ranew
Minister of the Word at Felsted. Sam. Aynsworth Minister of the Word at
Stebbing. William Smethies Minister of Rain parva. Edward Ford Minister of
great Warley. Daniel Lathum Minister of Stifford. Richard Cardinal Minister of
West-Horndon. Tho. Goodwin Minister of the Word. Thomas Rotheram Minister at
Boreham. John Wilson Pastor at little-Baddow. John Bowyer Minister of Dagenham.
Marmaduke James Minister of Vpminster. Walter Tailor Minister of Hutton. Samuel
Bridge Pastor of Great-Bursted. Henry Esday Pastor of Gingrave, William How
Minister of the Word at Dunton. Edward Clarke Minister of Bowers. Thomas Clerk
Minister of Stysted. Abiel Rathband Minister of the Gospel at Writtle. John
Parkhurst Minister of South-Showberie. Tho. Oresby Pastor of Hackwell. Tho.
Peck Pastor of Prittlewell. John Gibson Pastor of Assindon. Abraham Caley
Pastor of Rayleigh. John Man Pastor of Rawreth. John Argor Minister of Leigh.
Josiah Church Minister in Seachurch. Christopher Scot Pastor of Wakering magna.
James Norris Minister of Canwedon. Thomas Horrocks Minister of
Stapleford-Tawny. George Bownd Minister of the Gospel at Kelvedon. Philip
Sanders Minister of Magdalon-Laver. Neh. Dodde Minister of Dodinhurst. Nath.
Lacy Minister of Greensted. John Ferriby Minister of Thoydon-Garnon. John
Lavender Minister of High-Ongar. Hen. Havers Minister of the Gospel at Fifield.
Edward Whiston Pastor of Norton-Mandevile. William Guthrie Minister of
Asheldham. Nathaniel Hewitson Minister of Woodham-Mortimer. Nebemiah Holmes
Minister of South-Minster. Daniel Duckfield Minister of Childerdish. Nathaniel
Ward Minister of the Gospel at Shenfield. FINIS.

Febr. 15. 1648.
Imprimatur.

JA. CRANFORD.


