THE FALLING STARS, OR THE DRAGONS Bringing down, and trampling upon, HEAVENLY
GLORY.

BY JOHN ESTON, sometime Fellow of Oriel Coll. Oxon.

1 John 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out that
they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach, 1653.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, in Martines Vintry.
THis little Piece was never intended for public view, only to discharge my
duty at the late erected Exercise at Thomas Apostles, where I not long since,
by the providence of God, in the desires of my fellow laborers in the Vineyard,
was called to work. I did not in my preparatory meditations consult with flesh
and blood, what might gain me esteem with that Auditory; what doctrine might
probably be most taking, and suit best with the dispositions of the people: but
laying aside all by-respects, which to the praise of grace be it spoken, I was
resolved to deliver what my own spirit was convinced of for a truth, and was
most agreeable to this tottering and declining age. It pleased God to fix my
unsettled thoughts amongst the varieties of Texts, upon that place of Scripture
Rev. 1 2.4. I was not disobedient to this heavenly suggestion, however I was
not then ignorant, how some, whose tempers I very well understand, would
disgust and disrellish that matter, the words offered to be spoken to; yet this
I can say, but one I ever heard of was dissatisfied in, and dissented from,
what was laid down, either as contrary to the Analogy of Faith, or the true
sense and meaning of Christ in the Vision I shall leave it to the spiritual
man, who judges all things, to examine this little Treatise; I refuse to put
my self upon the trial of those, who whilst they boult out their own opinions
with such confidence, as Authentic all, they are guilty of that which
themselves cry down, a Papal infallibility. To wave what I could say for my
self, concerning the releasing of this poor Prisoner at the Bar, and giving
him liberty to wander at large, (though I know the modesty of some, with the
dissimulations and flatteries of others, have brought Apologies into fashion,)
I shall address my self to you, with whom, according to the weak gifts in me, I
have for a Twelve month laid open the unsearchable riches of Christ, and I
must needs say, both my Person and Ministry has been entertained with the love
and respect of diverse, more than could be expected by one coming in upon such
disadvantage as my self; it will add much to my engagements, if you will but
give shelter to this poor Pilgrim of mine, now upon travel; I cannot tell, but
that by reason of storms it may be necessitated to house somewhere, I beseech
you think never the worse of it, because it visits you in a homely dress, like
that plain mind from whence it went out, void of all ornaments and
accommodations which may set it out and commend it. My confidence is, however
some in these curious times may censure and judge of me, yet you will accept of
my Endeavors, as a standing pledge and token of that love and service I now
do, and hope ever shall bear unto you in the Gospel. Out of inward bowels, I
pray that may never happen to you, which did to these Stars (being indeed
nothing but transitory impressions in the Air) For this Cause I bow my knees to
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that your light may always shine before
men, that no wiles of the Dragon may so far prevail as to cast you down from
your good beginnings. I know not what better to wish you (which is my hearts
desire) that you may be saved; and because holiness is the way to happiness,
I pray God keep you pure and unspotted, that so when Christ, who is your life,
shall appear, you may then appear with him in Glory. Now to him who is able to
strengthen and establish you, I commend you, and rest,

Yours, in the common Savior, John Eston.

THE FALLING STARS.
REVEL. 12. the former part of the 4th verse. And his tail drew down the third
part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth.


THis book was the last breath, wherewith the Penmen of holy Writ were
inspired, and the last love-token of a kind Husband to his Spouse; Christ
handed it to us by John the beloved Disciple, he was a special favorite, one
that did lean upon Christ's breast; therefore he above the rest was honored
with special secrets, and bosom counsels; He was made one of heavens
Privy-counsell, having the futurition of things presented to him; The matter
here treated of is altogether prophetical, (viz.) concerning the Church, her
persecutions by enemies. The mutations of the visible state thereof, defections
of Apostates, and fearful cloudings and darknings of the light of the Gospel:
In brief, we have here a general view and project of all the conditions of
Gods people, until the second coming of Christ. Some have thought this
Chapter to be the whole Apocalypse in a lesser volume. In it we have the
preparations and skirmishes between the old Serpent and Michael, the two
Generals of the Armies, and the mutual success of both Parties; this was
brought to John in two Visions, both which he gives an exact account of; the
first vision he describes, 1. From the quantity, it was a great wonder, 2. From
the place, in heaven, 3. From the form, a Woman, (i. e.) the Church militant,
because she is chased and put to flight, which cannot be said of the estate
triumphant, then the Saints are at rest; She is called a woman because of
self-impotency and insufficiency, not being able to do any thing without
Christ, no more than the woman without her husband. This woman has three
External adjuncts, 1. Clothed with the Sun, that is Christ, so called in
Scripture, Mal. 4.2. Secondly, the Moon under her feet, etc. that is, in her
Affections, which are the feet to carry the soul, she tramples upon terrene
things as inconstant as the Moon. Thirdly, a starry crown; and three Internal,
ver. 2. She was with child she traveled in birth, and in pain to be delivered;
not of Christ, as some think, for he is not the seed, but the father of the
Church; but of some Magistrate or Ruler, who was to be instrumental for her
preservation and deliverance. The second Vision is described, 1. From the
place, in heaven, 2. From the quantity, great, 3. From the form, a Dragon, 4.
From the color, red, 5. From his monstrous shape and figure, having seven
heads and ten horns, and seven crowns on his heads, all which note the
subtilty, cruelty, strength, and dominion of the Dragon, being the Prince of
the power of the air, 6. From a double cruelty, the first in Execution, the
words of my text, And his tail drew, etc. the second in Intention, he had
purposes of further mischief, the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready
to be delivered, etc. Here we have news from the Camp, how this weak combatant
the Woman comes off at the first onset, with loss, she has a seeming rout, we
have here,

1. The party prevailing, expressed in [his] shape before mentioned with seven
heads and ten horns.

2. Against whom he prevails, the Stars.

3. How, with his Tail.

4. In what he prevails, to draw them from heaven, and cast them to the earth.
The words thus divided, afford this observation.

Obs. The Dragons tail causes the downfall of many heavenly lights, Or thus, A
multitude of the Stars of heaven are by the Dragons tail drawn to the Earth.

I shall clear the Proposition, by answering the following Quaeries.

Q. What we are to understand by the Stars of heaven.
A. First neg: not the lapsed Angels, as some fondly imagine: of whom Jude
speaks, that they kept not their estate, that glorious condition in which they
were first made, but did of themselves revolt from God and the truth. The
reasons which move me against this opinion, are these.

1. Because this book is not a History rerum gerundaru^, of things don, it
relates not passages which were then accomplished, but it is a draught and
representation of things to be acted, and hereafter to be performed, as John
himself tells us Rev. 1.1. the Visions contained in this book were given him by
God, to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass, now the
Angels fell some thousands of years before John writ.

2. These Stars here spoken of fell upon the Dragons encounter with the Woman,
they were the spoil he took from her: but the wicked spirits apostatized from
the beginning, before ever God had a Church or people in being, the time his
decree should bring forth was not yet come.

Secondly, not the promiscuous number of those who consent and join together in
Apostolical doctrine, setting it up as a guide and rule of faith and manners;
or the company of those who make an outward profession (i.e.) visible Saints,
be they Pastors or People, not having reference at all to any orders
constituted and appointed by Christ in the Church, for though the Godly, if we
may speak at large, those that are really or seemingly so, taking a view of
them in the lump, are Stars of Heaven, every one in their several orbs and
stations shining in the rays of Gospel glory, yet these are not the Stars
here spoken of, but some who in gifts and place were more eminent and advanced.

Aff. By Stars therefore in this Prophetical naration, I conceive the Spirit
chiefly intends, (yet not excluding others,) those who exercise ministerial
office, the Pastors and Teachers of the Church of Christ. I take this to be the
sense.

1. Because the Stars in this verse are the same with them in the first, which
the Woman is crowned with, notwitstanding there is a definite number expressed
twelve; in this we have the consent of the best Expositors, that by them are
meant the doctrine by the Apostles themselves published, which they had from
Christ's own mouth, yet not to be looked upon with a personal restriction or
limitation to them, for then the Church ever since they were bydeath silenced,
has lost her ornament; wherefore it must necessarily be verified in all those
who were their undoubted successors, preaching the same Christ with them, and
administering the same Sacraments; in this number of universality and
perfection, all that purely hold forth the rich grace of the Gospel are
included and comprehended.

2 Because in most, if not all, places of this mysterious book, ministers are
called Stars, as Rev. 1.20. The mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw in
my right hand, the seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, [are,] do
signify, as the bread is Christ's body in the Sacrament.

By Angels in this Epistle, we are not to understand incorporeall substances
with Origin, but Ministers, and the reason is obvious, because God in his
ordinary dispensation does not teach the Church by Angels, but by men; the
Scripture elsewhere gives Ministers this honorable appellation, Hag. 1.13. and
Malachy speaking of the Priests, Chap. 2.7. For he is the Angel of the Lord of
hosts. They are called Angels, First, Propter vocatione^ and missionem, They
are ministering spirits sent forth, Heb. 1.14. They act by divine Commission and
Authority, so all Gospel Ministers can show the broad seal of heaven. They are
employed by the great God to carry on his design of gathering the Elect; I
look not upon him as a lawful Pastor that has not a lawful call, or is not
sent. Romans 10.15. of such God complains, as who run without any mission, Jer.
14.13. Secondly, Propter munus and officium quo funguntur, as the Angels are
messengers to publish the mind of God, so are also Ministers, as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 4.1. To them are committed choice treasure for the enriching of
souls. Thirdly, Propter eximiam scientiam qua excellu^t. They whose lips are to
preserve knowledge must have more then an ordinary competency.

2. Q Wherein does the resemblance hold, between Stars and Ministers?
1 Stars are the clearest and brightest part of Heaven: such are Pastors in the
firmament of the Church, they should outshine others in their knowledge of
divine mysteries, and have a clearer insight in the hidden things of the
Gospel; they should have a double portion of the Spirit, as was upon Elijah:
and as they are to be more eminent in spiritual endowments and inward
qualifications, so also in a close walking with God, and a Gospel conversation,
they are to benefit others, both by soundnes of doctrine, and integrity of
life; it is their duty to teach, both by precept, and example.

2. Stars shine not in their own, but a mutatitious light, all their Iustre and
resplendency is borrowed from the Sun: so what ever gifts of wisdom and
discerning, of utterance and opening the mind of Christ, are in dispensors of
the word, it flows from Jesus Christ, all the beauty, glory, and shining of
Christ's Ambassadors is from him. In the 5 Mat. ver. 14. we read, that the
Disciples are the lights of the world, but it is to be understood by way of
participation, not originally, for Christ is called the true light, Joh. 1.8.9.
he only properly deserves the name of light, being so by nature, not by
dimanation from another, as the creatures have it; Christ is that eternal
uncreated ray, which darts upon every one that is born, both natural and
heavenly light; he is the Sun of righteousness, the great fountain of light, who
sends forth and displays his beams for the illumination of all the elect; it
is not the studying of Arts and Sciences, it is not skill in tongues and
original languages of Scripture, which can bring us to the knowledge of God;
if Christ and his Spirit be abstracted and separated, our apprehensions will be
but historical, and notionall such as the Devil may have; when they are
sanctified, and Jesus Christ has shined in, they prove good helps and
furtherances; therefore Ministers must look to Christ, from whose fullness all
is imparted and communicated, not their own parts and industry, without Christ
and the Spirit they can do nothing see 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. what Gospel preachers
declare is nothing else but that which Christ brought from the bosom of the
Father, 1 Ioh. 1.3.

3. Stars are wonderfully communicative they affect these inferior bodies with
influence, motion, and light, they keep not their light to themselves, but
carry and transmit it to the world: so Ministers convey spiritual light to men
on Earth, living in the dark night of ignorance, error and superstition; how
should they pity poor souls, who sit in the very shadow of death, whose eyes
are so fast close, that they never saw Sun, Moon, or Stars, who never had any
light risen upon them, as is upon us in the Preaching of the word? We are
blessed that hear the joyful sound, the Gospel trumpet blowing, proclaming
liberty to the Captives, etc. But it is sad to think, the lights of diverse
places in this Nation are very darkness, many thousands of People are under a
dark ministry, who are communicative of nothing but their corrupt opinions,
and misunderstandings of the grace of God to sinners, of a loose Gospel
unbecoming life. Blessed be God, the Churches hereabouts are better provided,
having Ministers like fixed stars, who by the sweet distillation of their lips
teach, by the orderly and regular motion of their lives confirm, and by both
enlighten many, with such orient heavenly pearls, the Churches, in some places,
like a bright sky in a clear evening, sparkle, and are bespangled.

3. Q. What Pastors are these here signified by the Stars of Heaven, who are
plucked from their orbs and stations, and drawn to the Earth?
A. Neg. Not fixed Stars. The Dragon cannot move any one faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ, he may as soon bring Heaven and Earth together, and turn all
things into a confusion, as pluck them from Christ in whom they are imbodyed;
the reason is, because Christ holds all those who aim at the glory and
advancement of himself, in the nothingness of themselves, in his right hand,
Rev. 2.1. Christ holds them, First, ratione operationis and efficaciae, in
regard of efficacy and operation, it is he that works effectually by the
outward administration of ordinances upon the hearts of men, which are
naturally shut and baracadoed against God and Christ, Act. 16.14. and 1 Cor.
2.5. Secondly, ratione protectionis and custodiae, in regard of keeping and
defense. The right hand in Scripture signifies the virtue and power of God,
this streched-out arm is engaged in mantaining the Ministers of his Church; he
is indeed a powerful keeper, and a faithful upholder of all the Saints, yet
sometimes he does make his glory more evidently appear and shine forth in
protecting the Ministers. This may bear up the spirits of them that are
industrious in their callings, let them meet with never so many discouragements
and reproaches; what though you are scorned by the headlong multitude? what
though discountenanced by rulers, men in place and Authority? what though the
great ones of the world frown upon you? yet let not your hearts fail, only be
of a good courage, you are in the right hand of Jesus Christ, and what honor
is this to poor Creatures, that he should have such a care of them and love to
them? Princes either cannot, or will not vindicate those they employ, from
injuries and affronts, but the Lord Christ keeps his safe, and is a revenger of
the wrongs of those he intrusts, he rebukes even Kings for their sakes, saying,
Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm.

A. Aff. Those Stars which consist of earthly matter, called up by the heat of
the Sun, and enlightened by the same, (which are more properly called Meteors,
than Stars,) they may, and do fall: so those Pastors and Teachers, which are
earthly and sensual, flourisht or glided over only with the light of an
outward profession, being exhaled or drawn up by common illuminations, tastes of
the good word of God, and powers of the world to come, may be cast down, and
drawn from all that luster and glory, with which they did shine in the Churches
of Christ. Now we are not to understand these Stars any otherwise tha^ in
appearance and opinions of men, which may be discerned by their shooting from
Earth to Heaven, and going out in obscurity and darkness when that matter which
should feed them is spent, or when shaken with the boisterous winds of
temptations and persecutions, as the Comets do, which by no means can be said
of the heavenly bodies, therefore to be drawn from Heaven to Earth is not to be
understood literally, but mystically; it is to fall from a heavenly hope and
comfort, from an imaginary enjoyment of, and living in God, to carnal and
earthly practices, to hugging and tasting wordly pleasures, it is of
inhabitants of Heaven to become inhabitants of the Earth, Rev. 13.6.8. we find
the distinction of these 2 sorts of men; such are all those Pastors who forsake
God and the Gospel, and busy themselves only about secular employments.

4. Q. How may Ministers be said to fall?
An. They, with all visible Saints may fall, First in their own judgments, when
the fire of heavenly truth, which did seemingly shine and burn in them, is
quite extinquished, and covered over with the Ashes and Embers of Errors, Lies
Men's Fancies, Licentious Doctrins, which they hold forth as enjoined by God,
fathering their fond and gross conceits upon him; such men are never constant
and settled, but like wandering stars, as Jude speaks, ver. 13. moving from one
opinion to another; like blasing exhalations, however they may carry it out
gloriously for a time, yet they soon vanish and faulter in their motions,
whereby the People come to have false directions: such men are, in their
doctrine, as unstable as reeds, because they follow the guidance of carnal and
degenerated reason, which hurrieth them into destructive paths, and are not led
by the Spirit into the ways of truth. Secondly, in their affections and
practices, when the seeming ravishings in the Spirit, and Soule-extasies are
metamorphosed, and turned into a worldly greediness, when leaving the desires
of Gods countenance, they gape only after such dignities, advancements and
preferments, as the creatures storehouse will afford; when the getting of
riches, and applause to themselves, is preferred before gaining of Souls to
Jesus Christ; instead of having their conversation in Heaven, by meditations
and earnest longings, and breathings of heart, they altogether mind Earthly
things, they set the Moon in the wrong place, above their heads, when it should
be under their feet, so, as I may speak, glorying in their shame; such men are
far from Moses temper and disposition, elevated and lifted up above the
quintessence of Creature-glories, he undervalued and slighted the best of the
world, in comparison of Christ, Heb. 11.24. by faith he refused to be called
the Son of Pharaohs Daughter; he was adopted a Kings Son, he lived in all the
delights and pomps of the Court, exempted from all trouble, he might have some
hope in time to sway the Scepter, and succeed Pharaoh in the throne; yet
despising all this dignity, he went to visit his brethren, and chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God; he set more by the reproach of
Christ, than the treasures of Egypt.

5. Q. How does the Dragon obtain such a victory over these glorious lights,
which once sparkled in the eradiations of sound doctrine and holy conversation?
Ans. By his tail; that was the means he used to give the defeat by, which we
are to understand,

1. By his strength and tyrannical opposition. Writers say, that the Dragons
main power lies in his tail: we may credit it because the Scripture says as
much, Rev. 9.19. Their power is in their tayls, for they were like unto
Serpents, a Dragon is a grown Serpent. Thus by persecution, slaughters, and all
the cruelties which wicked men could act or invent, as who are the Dragons
Agents, and carry on his designs, many Pastors and Teachers wanting that
boldness and Courage which becomes the Soldiers of Christ, have fell from
their brightness of doctrine, and exemplary walking, to loose tenets, and
corrupt lives; for fear of fire and sword, they have fashioned their
conversations according to their lusts in their ignorance, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air.

Secondly, By daubing insinuations. Some creatures fawn with their tayls, so
does the Dragon; Yet intends nevertheless mischief. Thus he comes with the
promises of outward peace and quietness, with the enticing baits of pomp and
greatness, and so in all ages he has met with, and prevailed upon the
ambitious and covetous humors of diverse, who, like Judas, to fill the Bag,
have turned against their Master, or Esau, to satisfy their hungry appetites,
have chosen the Pottage before the blessing.

Thirdly, By venom and poison. The Dragons tail is full of infection, and with
it he destroys and kills the souls of multitudes, I mean by false doctrines,
and intoxicating opinions; to broach and vent these, he daily stirs up persons
whom he furnishes with the subtle guiles and sophistry of hell; by this means
in all ages he has corrupted and tainted diverse, who have fallen from sound
Principles, turned their backs, and stopped their ears to the charmings of
heavenly truth, and wholly given themselves up to wicked tenets, contrary to
Scripture: He is now gone out as a lying spirit in the mouths of some, and
has prevailed; that which Christ predicted before his death, that many false
Christ's, and false Prophets should arise and deceive many, we see fulfilld in
our days; We have many who take upon them a form of Godliness, and in their
words and deportment are transformed into Angels of light, whereby they gain
and win much upon men, who are led by these flourishings and varnishings to
follow their pernicious ways.

6. Q. What was there in the Stars, which hastened their fall, or furthered the
Dragon in casting them down?
Ans. It Is a truth, that Man's own corruption is his advantage: was it not for
that enemy which every one harbors within himself, the enemies without him
could have but little encouragement to make an Attempt; the best of us have
Traitors in our bosom, which if God give us not grace to watch over, they will
betray us into the hands of our Adversaries; such had these Stars, which did
them more mischief than the Dragon: Three things especially did bring them down
from the top and pinnacle of their glory.

1. Lingering desires after Creature-vanities, they choke and stifle the most
refined if common gifts of the Spirit; however men may seem to burn with zeal
for Gods glory, and to be set on fire with ardent desires of fellowship with
him, yet if they halt between two opinions, having their hearts distracted and
divided, they will never be able to hold out, when profits and preferments are
offered; the World is a subtle Enemy, most pleasing to the dispositions of all,
and by reason of her vicinity and neighborhood easily and unawares steals upon
us, and hinders us from the seeking and pressing after better and more enduring
Comfort, and contentments; how many of those that call themselves Ministers of
Jesus Christ, who like Stars of the first magnitude had high places in the
Churches, and affections of Gods People, preferring the sweetness of outward
pomp and greatness, before the true honor of being Christ's Ambassadors, have
with the Serpent crept upon their bellies, and eaten dust, given themselves
wholly to heap up wealth, applause among men, and not to exhortation,
instruction, exemplary walking? Christ saw cause to warn his Disciples, and in
them all Christians of the cares of this life, Take heed lest your hearts be
overcharged, etc. God and the World cannot dwell together, they are as contrary
as light and darkness, which expel one another from the same subject. God
will have have all the room in our souls to himself, he must be loved with all
the heart, and all the strength: Earthly things must have none o^ our
affections; for where they are entertained, they shut out God and Christ. Intus
existens ^rohibet alienum, is true in nature, When a Vessel is filled with one
solid body, it cannot receive another; so also here. Well does John caution
believers, Love not the world, for if any love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. And David a Prophet prays, Incline mine heart to thy
testimonies, and not to covetousness. The Dragon did not leave Christ himself
unassailed, when he showed him all the Excellencies of terrene things, he knew
it a most prevailing argument, and when this would not do, he fleeeth away, as
despairing of Victory. The want of sobriety in pursuit and use of outward
blessings, stains and spots the glory of those who take upon them the Office of
Stars, to shine in the darkness of the world. The Apostle Paul very well
compares them to weights, Heb. 12.1. Earthly things keep men down from aspiring
Heavenward, and Godward, from heaving their souls upward, and pluck from
heaven when the feet of their souls carry them thither. Men may get as it were
into heaven by contemplations and longings, and obtain a place amongst the
Stars in the view of others, yet, if they do not sit loose from the World, and
are not gathered up above the Moon, they will soon descend, like a heavy body,
which so soon as the violence forcing it cease, afterward of its own accord
tends to the Center. Ministers, above all, should have their hearts weaned, as
David's was, Psalm. 13.1, 3. Hannah had devoted Samuel to God, to spend all his
days in and about the Tabernacle in Shilo, however she brings him not thither
as soon as he was born, but first Weans him, 1 Samuel 1.22.24. he could not have
abode in the Tabernacle, had he not been Weaned; though a man be drawn up to
Heaven, and numbered among the Celestial bodies, yet if he be not Weaned from
the Earth, he will not long continue there, he will be hankering after the
worlds breasts, he will speedily come down to suck that Milk.

Secondly, Not placing their chief hapiness in things above; they did not make
heavenly things their treasures, they hoarded not up there, how can they be in
Heaven and stay there, when their affections are not there? and the only way to
get their hearts into Heaven, is to get their treasures into Heaven. So says
Christ, Mat. 6.20, 21. The heart and the treasure are indivisible, not to be
separated; where the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together:
Christ's Eagles mount aloft, and sit with him in heavenly places. Christ among
other beauties of the Church takes notice of this, as a special one, Cant.
7.4. her Nose is like the Tower of Lebanon, one would have looked upon this, as
a deformity and discommendation, but by it, is set forth, that spiritual
sagacity and quicknes of smell, whereby the Saints resent and savor things
above, being carried after Christ, the true Carcass, with unspeakable pleasure
and delight: but some have their Senses and Noses in the earth, with the Swine,
as themselves are of the earth; pofessions, inheritances, are the things alone
sweet to them, therefore they cannot be long absent. Would we therefore like
true Stars be immovable and unshaken, let us make Christ our treasure, let our
cry be, None but Christ, none but Christ, let him be precious to us as to all
believers, the welbeloved of our Souls, the pearl of great price, let all
things else be counted as lose and dung in comparison of him. The Sun extracts
vapors, so does the Son of righteousness the affections of his people. When
Christ is lifted up in the desires and esteem of men, he draws to and keeps
them with him. Where the loadstone is, that way it draws Iron, if beneath it
brings it down, if above it brings it up: many descend, because their loadstone
is in the Earth, but those that pitch their loadstone in heaven, make Christ
their loadstone, need not fear their continuance in Heaven.

3dly, The want of an intrinsicall principle of grace. I grant they had an
Extrinsicall flourish, but they were far from inward dispositions, else the
Dragons tail had never prevailed. Hence is it that they could not make any long
stay above. Stars which fall and go out are taken up by an outward agent as the
Sun: so those Pastors which appear to converse and live in Heaven, and afterward
are precipitated to the earth, were never drawn up by their own proper
inclinations, which did proceed from something within themselves, but by the
outward workings of the Spirit. Heavy things we know go downward, because
natural propensity inclines them to descend; so light things go aloft, because
they have an in not principle carrying the^ that way: so those teachers which
continue in their orbs, and the Dragons tail cannot hurt^, have such a frame of
spirit, that is still lifting their hearts on high, such are in a sure and safe
condition, the gates of hell cannot prevail against them. I deny not, but the
best may have some diversions and clogs upon them, which may hinder and take
them off for a time, from God and Christ, and heavenly things; however, they
will never be at rest, until they are set that way again. The needle of the
Compass if once touched with the Loadstone, may by some violent motion be
shaken from its rest, yet if it be let alone, it will not cease till it comes
to the North point: so when a man's spirit is touched with Christ, he may
notwithstanding be acquainted with distractions and worldy encumbrances, yet
his heart will never give over working and moving till it is again centered in
him. There is a fire coming down from God of an active aspiring nature, that
falls upon all faithful Pastors of Christ, and burns and consumes all
Earthlinesse and carnality, and causes them to ascend to God, it makes heavenly
thoughts go up like pillars of smoke; Fire does not more naturally arise, than
grace in a sanctified heart causes that soul to make ascensions into heaven.

Use. Let me tell you, who are glittering Lamps of heaven, moving in the sphere
of Christ's right hand, that you are exposed to the rage of the Dragon, you are
not freed from his tail, he will endeavor the casting of you down from your
shining in the Church of Christ, he covets the Crown of Stars on the Woman's
head, which makes her so glorious to beholders, he knows very well that God
has appointed you to rule the night, that by you he disperses and scatters the
light of heavenly truth to the dark erroneous World, he understands how
destructive and prejudicial your influences are to his designs and purposes,
who holds men and women in subjection to himself by ignorance, blindness and
superstition; he is not ignorant wherefore God set up your function, to batter
and weaken his Kingdom, and to advance the Scepter of his Son: We find
therefore in all Ecclesiastical Histories he has most set himself against,
and opposed the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, and by Clouds and tempests
endeavored the eclipsing of their glory, and depriving the Churches of the
Stars luster: so he dealt with those by whom the Gospel was first noysed and
founded abroad, Rev. 8.7. By Angels there I do not understand those, who are
so ex natura, by nature, the immateriall beings, but ex officio, by office, an
Angelical spirit in men concionally proclayming the glad tidings of peace, by
the trumpets, I conceive there is an illusion to those spoken of Numb. 10.1, 2.
etc. which God appointed the Israelites to use for gathering of Assemblies, and
which were blown at the year of Iubilee, a type of a more joyful sound, which
David calls them happy who hear, even that sung by the heavenly quire, On Earth
peace, good will toward men, The meaning is, when the Apostles and Primitive
Preachers first began to divulge the grace of God, the Dragon by slaughters,
and massacres, did endeavor to hinder the Echo of it to the world, and by
these storms the third part of the trees, a great many excellent lights,
faithful messengers of Christ, compared here to Trees, for their fruitfulness
and shadow, were consumed, and others professing Christ, by the heat of those
flames were scorcht and burnt to ashes, called grass for their imbecility,
and subjection to casualities, and green, propter fidei and charitatis vigorem,
this is an allusion to the 7th Egyptian Plague, Exodus 9.24. And I think it to
be understood rather of the calamities that fell upon the godly, than the
wicked, because they are compared to Trees in Scripture, Psalm. 1.3. When the
second Angel blew, [A great Mountain] Empires, Kings, and Tyrants, who swell,
and are big with pride and power, are so called, that expostulation we read of
Zach. 4.7. Who art thou great Mountain? etc. is true in the Letter of the
Persian Monarchy; by it therefore is meant some mighty Kingdom, whether Roman,
or any other I shall not determine [burning with fire] that is, Anger and rage,
against all those that had not the mark of the Beast; the fumes and vapors
issuing out of it, were threatenings and revenge [cast into the Sea] the
gatherng together of the waters God called Sea: such, such are men being
unstable and violent, therefore compared to the breaking in of a Flood; the Sea
here is the universality and multitude of Nations, People and Languages: This
Mountain with fury and madness rusheth into the world, what then? the third
part of the Sea became blood. The horse on which Christ rides, his Church,
which bears his name, changes color from white to red, being all besmeared
with the blood of Martyrs, diverse were crushed with the weight of this
Mountain, the third part of creatures died, that is those did profess Christ,
and the third part of ships were destroyed, the Churches whose Pastors are
their Pilots. Now if ever it concerns you, look to your selves, for the Dragon
is come down in great wrath, though not in hail and blood mingled with fire,
yet we may perceive the sad effects of his tail in the putting out of some,
owned for great lights. The third Angel is now sounding, Rev. 8.10. And there
fell a great Star from heaven. I shall not so far impair the large extent of
this Prophecy, to think Pelagius the Star here spoken of, or any other
Haeresiarch, as many do, who was a stout champion of Free will, and an opposer
of Original sin; he fell from heaven by his defection, from the Church of
Christ on earth, great in regard of learning, not without a show of religion,
by which he deceived many; thus he burned like a lamp the name is called
Wormwood, v. 11. he taught that which was contrary to the sweetness of the
grace of Christ, (viz.) Man by pure naturals might convert and save himself, by
this, and such like pestilent and bitter doctrines, Magnam partem Episcoporum
amaricavit and perdidit, however this is a truth, though not with respect to
the person of any, yet to the succession, and things themselves, our age bears
sufficient witness, not only a Star, but Stars are fallen from heaven, called
Wormwood, that is, some Pastors are fallen from purity of doctrine, which
formerly they did maintain, and have taken up the bitter morsels of humane
inventions, errors, ambition, covetousness, and this is cast into the rivers
and fountains of water, that is, the same infection has tainted and embittered
others, even a third part of those who pretend to be Ministers of Christ, by
whom, as by fountains, the wholesome and sweet streams of sound and incorrupted
doctrine should have flowed, for the refreshing of the People of God. However
these floods of errors and false doctrines rush in and threaten an inundation
and overwhelming, yet the faithful Ministers of the Gospel need not fear, for
it shall not reach them: let the waters roar and make a noise, they are kept
safe, as Noah in the Ark, from perishing, let times and places be never so bad
in which they live these considerations may comfort and support them.

1. Com.con. God will not suffer the Dragon to break asunder his order, whereby
he has appointed to teach and call men, the Ministry is Gods Ordinance, of his
own establishing, and being of God it will stand, a number will be left, though
the gates of Hell oppose, sufficient to serve his providence in the conversion
of souls. Do but meditate a little on the stability of Gods decrees, the
Council of the Lord shall stand. We vary in our opinions and apprehensions,
not the same yesterday as to day, but Christ is the same, yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever; Nothing can subject him to a mutation; no power or
policy can prevent his purposes, he has committed the word of reconciliation
to men: Therefore there must be a succession of men, to hold forth this word in
several ages to the worlds end. Its confessed, the Lord, with whom is wisdom and
strength can without and against means, immediately by himself save his people,
but for his own greater glory he will rather do it by weak instruments,
carried on, and assisted with his own outstretched arm, which all the Dragons
cannot prevail against.

2. Com.con. The blessing of the Church belongs to Jesus Christ, who has
undertaken to furnish it with Pastors, till his appearing in glory, Ephesians. 4.11.
Christ after his ascension and complete inauguration, as the Fathers
Plenipotentiary, or as it is the manner of Kings at their Coronations, gave
gifts to men, some for Apostles, and some Teachers, for the edifying of his own
body: the manifestation of the Spirit, is not bestowed for self-admiration, or
to get esteem with men, but for the benefit and profit of Christ's members. The
office of the high Priest under the Law, did notably represent and typifie the
Office of Christ in the Gospel, he had the care of the lights of the Sanctuary,
and was to keep them from going out, therefore he did see to the supplying of
them with oil; the Dragon may strive to blow out all the lights God has set up
in the Church, but Christ who wakes in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, has an eye always over them, and takes care that they never want
the unction of the Spirit.

3. Com.con. Christ is always present with the Prophets of the New Testament;
when he sent out his Disciples and charged them to teach all Nations, it is
like their carnal hearts, which did dote much upon Christ's fleshly presence,
scrupled the success of their preaching; what we poor Fishermen set upon the
world, and preach a Christ, every where spoken against, and hated? Its
expedient indeed, says Christ, that I go away, and take this body from the
Earth, yet you shall be no losers, I will be with you by my Spirit and gracious
assistance to the end of the World. Sometime indeed Christ may seem to absent
himself, and retire from his conflicting servants, he may pour out upon them
hayl, and fire minggled with hail, and smite them; he may cast down fiery
mountains and bruise them, yet Christ is in the fire, and in the hayl, although
his people cannot see him; however the Dragon may so far prevail, as to
overcome some in respect of their Person, yet he cannot in respect of their
Faith; by this they overcome the world and hell.

4. Com.con. The remuneration or reward which through the merits of Christ
shall be given those, whom God honors with gaining of People to Christ, and
makes instrumental in opening their eyes, he will crown with an exceeding weight
of glory, such, as they are now hoasts of heaven or Saints of high places, so
hereafter they shall shine like the Sun in the Firmament, or Stars for evermore.

FINIS.

