A Proclamation to prevent Plundering:
BY ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, etc. Captain General of the Army raised and employed
for the defense of the Protestant Religion, King, Parliament and Kingdom.
WHereas I am informed, That several Insolences and Outrages have been of
late committed by some Troopers, and other Soldiers belonging to this Army,
without the approbation or allowance of my self, or the Officers of the Army,
to the great prejudice of many the Inhabitants of this County of Berks, and
Counties adjacent; I do hereby publish and declare, That if any Officer or
Soldier, horse or foot belonging to this Army, shall (after Proclamation
hereof made by the Provost Marshall General of the Army) upon any pretense
whatsoever, seize, take, imbezell or purloin any the Horses, Mares, Oxen, Cows,
Calves, Sheep, or any other the Goods of any the Inhabitants of this County, or
other the adjacent Counties, either Papist or Malignant, or other ill-affected
person whatsoever, without special and particular Warrant from my self; That
every such person so offending, shall undergo and suffer such punishment by
death or otherwise, as the nature of the offense shall require: But in case any
the Officers or Soldiers shall seize or take any the Horses or Goods of any
person or persons whatsoever, coming or sending supply of necessaries for the
Army, that such person or persons so offending, shall suffer death without
mercy. And if any Officer or Soldier of this Army shall by virtue of any
Warrant, seize or take away the Horses or Goods of any person or persons
whatsoever, and shall not within Two days next after the seizing of them
repair unto my Quarter, to certify unto me in writing whose Horses and Goods
have been so seized, and by whose Warrant, that they may be brought hither to
be disposed of by me, such person or persons so offending, shall be deemed and
accounted guilty of the breach of this Proclamation, and shall be proceeded
against accordingly. And I do hereby further Declare, that if any the horses or
goods of any person or persons inhabiting within this County, or any other
adjacent Counties have bin unjustly seized or taken from them or any of them,
upon his or their just complaint made unto me, I shall give present Order for
the restitution of them according to justice. And lastly, I do will and require
all and every the high Constables of the several Divisions within the counties
of Berks, Southampton, and Oxon, that they do forthwith upon, and after
Proclamation hereof made, make out several Warrants to the petty Constables,
for the assessing and taxing of the several Parrishes with such Quantities of
provision of all sorts as they are stored with, and to make, and return a
Certificate within three days of such assessements, what several quantities
are assessed upon the said Parrishes, with the Names of such persons as shall
refuse to provide and send provisions to the Army as aforesaid, which
Certificate is to be delivered into the hands of two or more of the
Commissioners appointed to receive the same, that such further order may be
taken with the persons so refusing as shall be thought fit. And I do hereby
Declare, that I expect that the several Inhabitants of the said several
Counties should readily contribute their assistance herein, which I doubt not
but they will do with the more cheerfulness, it being for the supply of this
Army which is raised for the defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, the
preservation of Gods true Religion, and the just Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects from violence and oppression. And I do hereby will and require all the
Officers and soldiers of this Army, and all others whom it may concern to be
obedient hereunto, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their
uttermost peril:

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms, this twenty fourth day of April. 1643.
ESSEX.

It is his Excellencies pleasure that this Proclamation be forthwith printed.

Rob: Chambers, Secr.

London, Printed for Edw: Husbands. 1643.


