THE Evil Spirit Conjured, AND Cast out of the PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for R. F. and are to be sold by St. Dunstans Church, and in
the upper I Will of the New-Exchange, 1653.

THE Evil Spirit Conjured, And cast out of the PARLIAMENT.
A Melancholy mischievous spirit having crept of late into the Parliament,
under I know not what pretext of Godliness (as the Devil is never more Devil
than when he transforms himself into an angel of light) in the persons of some
who craftily had counterfeited themselves good Patriots, and zealous for the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Land, until finding themselves in
authority, they presently cast off their mask, and declared the spirit which
was in them, playing such reaks there, as never did any pernicious spirit in
house which was hanted and possessed before. The Lord General and others
prudently perceiving it (always carefully vigilant for the Common good) and
finding how much they had abused their trust and suffrages in Electing them,
timely provided to cast this spirit forth, before its exorbitancy should
proceed so far, and arrive to such a height, as to disturb the peace of the
Commonwealth, and quite subvert the intended settlement, and establishment
thereof; yet this not without first proceeding with such maturity in doing it
(to disabuse such, who ignorantly else perhaps might have imagined, that in
lieu of a bad spirit, they had cast out a good) as they expected with much
longanimity, until it sufficiently had declared it self in diverse Actions,
tending to the subversion of the Religion, and Laws, and Liberties of the
freeborn people of England, which they were constituted there to establish and
maintain, as by the seditious Preachings of those of their faction in
Blackfriars etc. sufficiciently appeared, they uttering more scandalous and
scurrillous things in the Pulpit there, than ever did the Playhouse, against
which they preached so much.

Which action of his Excellency and others was received with so general
applause and satisfaction of all, as the Bells were rung for joy, and the smiles
outwardly appearing on every face, did sufficiently declare the inward Iubilee
of their hearts; The twelfth of December being rendered as Celebrous by it, and
worthy to be ever celebrated with Bells, Bonfires, and Thanksgiving, as was the
fifth of November for the happy deliverance of the Parliament before. For what
true born Englishman would not rejoice, who loved his Country, and the honor
of his Nation, to see that spirit cast out of the Parliament, that had been so
pernicious to the Commonwealth (had it been longer tolerated) it would not have
left the least footsteps or memorials of its Ancient Religion, Laws and
Liberties? and had done actions so manifestly shameful and injurious (to the
Grief of the other Members of the House who more prudent and conscientious,
were joined with them, and forcibly hurryed away by the impetuous torrent of
those who were agitated by this spirit) as would have called an Infamy upon our
Nation, not only from the remotest parts of the World, but even from the
Barbarians themselves, who for all their barbarism were never so unjust as they.

Who would not rejoice to have that spirit disauthorized, which was so unworthy
its authority, as whilst the grave Reasonings, and prudent Discourses of other
Parliaments were the admimiration of all neighboring Nations, this spirit, as
if it were besotted with its place, (which ordinarily renders others wiser,) to
the indignation of all the wiser sort, would rise up with its Hat at its
fingers ends, (like a Schoolboy saying Grace) and instead of all other Reason
and Discourse say forsooth, That notwithstanding all that could be said, his
spirit told him it was so, and so. And if this was not declining to the spirit
of Tyranny, let any one be Judge, when Stat proratione voluntas, my Reason is
my Will, is the highest point of Tyranny as can be imagined?

Who finally would not rejoice to have that spirit cast out, and silenced, who
would have silenced all but it self? and shortly Enacted, that it should be a
crime for any one to laugh, or be merry, under the pretense of Godliness
(forsooth) only to render Religion irksome, odious, and burthensom unto all,
which being of it self a cheerful thing, as the holy Scripture testifies,
Hilarem datorem diligit Deus, etc. that God loves the cheerful Giver, they on
the contrary would make it so sullen and melancholy a thing, as our Nation,
always of a gay and jovial disposition, would never brook nor endure it.
Religion being not to be given and administered unto us, as a Medicin, with
loathing and bitterness, but as our meat, and daily food, savoury and pleasant
to the taste, to delight the palate, and provoke the appetite.

For the farther discovery of this spirits mischievous disposition, and
pernicious machinations and designs, I remit the Reader to these following
Animadversions, written some months before its casting out of the Parliament,
as a presage of what should afterward ensue; where, though then I struck at
them thorough others sides, I being always most cautious not to offend those
in authority, being also premonished that furor est scribere contraeos, qui
praescribere possunt, yet now I dare confidently draw the Curtain which
shadowed it before, and invite them to the reading it themselves, with this
avow, de te Fabula narratur, that it was meant by them, whose custom it was,
for the deceiving of the people, to suborn some of their own Faction to
Petition them to do that, which they were resolved to do before.

Mean time let us congratulate with his Excellency and the rest, and sing
Panegyriques in his praise for this great Action, and (if I may say it) greater
than all his other Victories; the other being only over men, but this over the
infernal spirit; the other not being without bloodshed, and making of Widows
and Fatherless, but this preserving us from it, and the Calamities of a new
War, which this fiery spirit would have driven us unto, might he have been
let go on.

And if any demand, what we should do with him, now he is cast out of the
Parliament? by my Advice, as those Devils who were cast out by our Savior,
together with the Swine which they possessed afterward, were all precipitated
into the Sea, so I could wish they might be all shipped, and sent away by Sea
from the Old, to New England, as a just punishment for their attempting to have
made a New England of the Old.

However since such spirits as these are not only cast out by Prayer and
Fasting, but sometimes by force and violence (as Cor. Agripp. testifies) let us
not only pray, but use our utmost endeavors, as we have done for the expelling
him, that this spirit serve us not, as that wicked one did in the Gospel, who
being cast out, and the house clean swept of him, did but wander about a while,
and afterward returned seven times more wicked then he was before; but of this
we need take no care, things are in good hands, and we may no ways doubt, but
those who have so well begun, will not be wanting to the perfectioning of them.

FINIS.
To the Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth of England, The Honorable Court
of Parliament now sitting,
The humble Petition of several of the Godly party in the County of Salop,
Shows.
THat we cannot omit the acknowledgment of all those various Providence God
has made his people in this Nation partakers of, in owning our Armies, and
making them both formidable to, and victorious over, our Enemies at Sea and
Land; in staining the glory of the proud, dedegrading unprofitable men from
their stations, and planting you in their room, whose beginnings begin to
revive our hopes, That our Lord Jesus Christ will yet have in England men
executing judgment, and speaking the truth. Certainly if you go on, we doubt
not but the children that are to be born will have cause to call you blessed,
as the repairers of our Breaches, the restorers of paths to dwell in, and you
will render your selves of more worth and value than thousands, so that your
precedence of Honor and Grace, will transcend your predecessors; and in all
probability, God will establish you as so many Luminaries in your stations, to
shine more and more unto the day of our deliverance. In hopes whereof, as also
of your real inclinations to hearken to the desires of the meanest Saint, and
of those that wish well to Truth and Peace, amongst the other large endeavors
of others, we have taken the liberty of presenting the small mite of our
Proposals (which we hope will be looked at) amongst the thousand of Israel.

1. That as God has trusted you in a special manner with the guarding of the
Truth and Gospel, you will have a special eye to the propagation thereof. And
because there are many idle, ignorant, scandalous, and malignant Ministers
permitted, that endeavor the subversion thereof, as apears to many of the dear
Saints of Christ, to the great grief of their spirits; We humbly desire that
some speedy course may be taken for the ejection of such men, and the settling
of those that are fit and faithful for so great a work; and that those may not
be suffered as Preachers thereof, who hate to see it prosper, and stand like
the Red Dragon ready to devour the child Grace as soon as born.

2. That notwithstanding the sufferings of many of the People, and the great
deliverances vouchsafed them, yet they scarcely know them, as by the effects of
them, in any encouragement they have yet received, more than the most notorious
and bitterest of your Enemies: It is proposed, that you will have a special
regard to your friends above your enemies. Had the late King prevailed, his
friends had received large rewards, as appears by his own Engagements, you and
yours threatened with total destruction: Oh then why should you not countenance
your friends as well as your enemies theirs? we hope you will not tread in the
paths of your predecessors to reward evil for good; but will give the right
child to the right mother, and suffer those now to rejoice with you, who have
formerly mourned with you, and will still (while you are for God) live and die
with you.

3 Because we hear many Soldiers complain, who have ventured their lives from
the beginning, and want employment since their willing submission to former
commands of Disbanding; we humbly propose, That a deep inspection may be made
in your Army, for the ejection of those that would not be listed for you so
long as they could find an Army with which to fight against you, and the number
may be made up again by those who have been your constant friends.

4. That whereas many men by their fawning flatteries lie at your doors out of
sinister ends, to beg for places, we desire that none may be admitted to any
place of trust, either in the Army or Commonwealth, but such as are known to
you for men of fidelity and integrity, or else commended to you by the
Certificate of five or six of your Friends, that so things may be carried on
more by the public spirit of the Saints, than the private spirit of any
whatsoever.

5. That whereas we hear many of our Nation saying to you, as the children of
Israel to Rehoboam, take away our burdens, take away our taxations; we further
propose, That the burden of Contribution may be laid upon those who have been
the grand Incendiaries and Contrivers of the War (we mean the Cavaliers) it
being unjust (as we humbly conceive that they should cut out the work, and we
bear the burden, they double the tale of Brick, and we do the Task: O let the
right child have the right Mother, it will make them more willing to sit still,

6. That whereas many take liberty of keeping Wakes, setting up Morice Dances,
and other profane Sports, against which there is no particular Law; we humbly
desire some positive Rules may be framed for suppressing thereof.

7. In regard it it generally observed, that the foul Sins of Adultery and
Fornication are too frequently unpunished, more than before the day of our
deliverance, for which our Enemies reproach us, sich the Act only limits the
punishment to the testimony of two Witnesses; that a mock may not be made of
such foul sins, We desire a way may be found, and some special Law instituted
for the punishment thereof.

8. That in regard of the freedom given to Saints in their several Churches and
meetings on the Lords day, is abused, so that Papists and other profane
persons take liberty of contemning the Sabbath, and public Ordinances, and
spend the day vainly and idly in their houses, or else walking in the Fields;
we propose, That some special course may be taken of restraint, that the
freedom of the Saints may not be turned to the profanation of the Lords Day.

9. That the Excize may be taken away in the oppressive manner of farming it,
that poor people may not be bought and sold in this Nation, as too frequently
they are, and some raise vast estates by the bargain.

10. That the poor which daily swarm in England, both in City and Country,
begging in the Highways, and at our houses, to the great dishonor and
prejudice of the Nation, may in some due way be provided for, and not suffered
to wander as Vagabonds upon the face of the earth.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
Animadversions ON THE PETITION.
THere is nothing more specious than the name of Reformation, and nothing less,
than the thing it self (I mean that which the vulgar magnify, and cry up so
much) the disease of men's minds, rather than of the Times, until their
Imagination fools them into a real malady, and never lets them recover
afterward; the Itch of Good Times, and the Ulcer of Ill; most pernicious to
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as always Enemy to present Government: Every one
who would trouble the State, taking it for their pretext, till getting into
highest place, and looking on things at nearer distance, they see the
Impossibility of Reforming them; when casting away all care and hope of it, the
next take up that pretext which they have quitted, and with as great private
heat, and as little for the public good, never leave putting for it, till
they have obtained the others place; whence it consequently follows, that but
open this Gate once of Reformation (which their shoving and justling never
suffers to close again) and you Introduce by it, nothing but disorder and
confusion. I grant you yet, it has done great things in the World, but undone
greater; and some good, but far more harm and mischief; these busy Reformers
seeing somewhat or other which they would amend, but not a hundred others which
they mar in mending it; whence the Wise, when they see things amiss, measure
their Enterprises by the possibility, and utility of amending them, which when
they find wanting, they pity the Condition of poor Humanity, that has nothing
so absolutely good, as to be wholly exempt from fault and blame, rather than
vex and torment her for it, by tampering so long to mend it, till they mar it
quite. Of which over-busie so long to mend it, till they mar it quite. Of
which over-busie folly the English Nation in particular are Taxed; it having
past almost into Proverb, That your Englishman never knows when things are
well.

And such Reformers as these they were, who lately represented this Petition
unto the Honorable House of Parliament, under the name of the County of Salop,
though their restriction to several of the Godly party there, sufficiently
acquits the County, and declares them to he such as one pleasantly describes,

A sort of hotheaded, half-witted Fellows, who in the vehemence of their zeal
have more harmed and mischiev'd Christian Religion, than Turk, Jew, or Infidel
ever did, and have more texts of Scripture for it too, than the other out of
the Talmude, or Alcoran; who have found out a new way under the name of the
Lord, to abolish the memory of Jesus Christ, and of that of Godliness, all
Christianity; being the worst sort of Affectation, affecting nothing but what
is contrary and averse to all good manners, and education. Who are more
familiar with the Lord, than to stand upon Ceremonies with him, and approach
him with far less Reverence than a Serving-man does his Master, or a Clown his
Landlord: so hating the name of Gentleman, as they cannot endure God should be
served like one, and so abhorring the name of Church as they wage war with the
very stones of it ( like cowardly Currs, who bite the stones, when they cannot
harm the persons) confounding by it all things, sacred, and profane: Mean time,
any place serves them to Preach in, as any place, indeed, is good enough for
their Preaching, who teach nothing bu Sedition, and Infatuation: so as whilst
others people Heaven with their Preaching, these people Bed-I am. Mean while
they wave the Evangelists, and fly to the explication of the Prophets, the
better to hide their Ignorance, (since there all are almost Ignorant alike) like
him, who when he could not run, challenged an excellent Footman to fly with
him. Men indulgent only to their own Vices, but most rigid to those of other
men; who call themselves pure, like him, who being all over defiled, bragged,
He had never a spot on him; and thanking God, with the Pharisee, for not being
like other men: it being the truest word they ever said in their lives; for
they are worse than they.

And now let us see whether this Character fits not our Petitioners, as well as
if it had been made for them, by conferring their Petitions with these
Animadversions of ours.

And first, to say nothing of their Preface, nor their Goodly style, all
stuffed and interlarded with Scripture phrase, so senselesly alleged, as I will
not say their reading of the Scripture seems to make them mad, but certainly
this I dare affirm, that those who read it less, write far better, and more
sense than they, and would never have said the paths to dwell in, (as they do)
but rather the paths to walk in, according to the more proper metaphore; so
abusing every where the Scripture style, as Pistols phrase in the play, He
hears with ears, would no more seem to Sir Hugh superfluous, and absurd: But
they are those dear Saints of Jesus Christ (as they speak of) and therefore
have the liberty of profaning the Scripture on every occasion; but for their
sanctity, believe it who lists for me, for my part, I believe none to be less
Saints, than those who call themselves so the most; and give me the dead, and
take the living he that will: so it shall always be in my Letanie, to deliver
me from the Devil in an Angels shape, and I Will deliver my self from the Devil
in his own shape well enough.

But let us come to their Petitions, and in the first four we shall observe a
vehement desire they have, That none but they should be admitted to the charge
of the Ministry, of the Command of the Army, of the Government of the
Commonwealth, and finally, to the distribution of all other Preferments and
Rewards; they seeming much troubled that they are not conferred upon them: and
troubled still may they be, rather than we should ever be troubled with them.
By which, we may perceive them to be some discarded party, casheer'd from the
Army for their cowardice, and want of discipline; some rejected, and excluded
from the Government of the Commonwealth, for their want of Talent, and
non-sufficiency; and finally, some refuse stuff, and outcasts of the Ministry,
for their turbulency, and nonconformity; people of no parts, nor merit at all;
else 'twere to tax the State, and the wisdom, and prudent Conduct of the
General and Officers, for not admitting them to Charge and Employment. Such
rash and stupid fellows, and such Poltrons and Cowards withal, as, should I
give the right child to the right mother, which they urge more than once, I
could show how they never yet had the management of affairs, but that they
brought them to ruin and destruction; nor ever fought, but either they were
beaten, or ran-away; which being so, far be it from the Commonwealth to have
such to reform and govern it, who are hardly fit to govern a Cobblers, or a
Botchers shop; and far be the Omen from our evervictorious and conquering Army,
to have such as these men's Fortunes joined with theirs, or to be mixed with
those, who deserve not to be named the same day a brave spirit, and valiant man
is mentioned: No, live the Commonwealth, and flourish the Army still, and it
shall never shame nor repent us of our change of Government, so long as such as
these come not to govern it, Men of so narrow, and so Ignoble minds, as nothing
great and generous ever entered into their breasts; for so 'twould be a degree
below servitude, nothing making servitude more intolerable, than the Ignobility
of the Master; and those who can suffer such as these to command over them,
deserve worse. And for the Government of the Church, we had done nothing, (or
rather too much) to have shaken off the yoke of Rome, and Lambeth, to submit
our necks at last to the Kirk Government of a sort of Banbury-men, of John of
Leydens and Knipperdollings, who would govern us just as they did the Town of
Munster, till with their fine spirit, and Revelations, they had brought all to
confusion and destruction, as they did there, and tyrannize over us a hundred
times worse than the others did: who, since they urge their merit, (lest we
should seem to grant them nothing) let us accord them this, that they were the
first Authors of the change of Government, it is true, but not of this, nor that,
they being ever Enemies of the present Government, and as they were formerly of
the Kingdom, so will they be now of the Commonwealth, unless they may have the
Government of it themselves, as they sufficiently declare by that exception,
and clause of theirs, (in the end of their second petition) That whilst they
are for God, (that is, for them, according to their own Interpretation) they
will live and dye with them, (and not otherwise;) a rerestriction, which had it
issued from the pen of any Papist, or Protestant, they had been presently
exclaimed against, for Malignants, Seditious, and Traitors to the Commonwealth:
but these men are the dear Saints of Christ, and may say and do any thing.

To conclude then with them, before we pass to their other Petitions, we may
answer them in urging of their merits, as Philip of Macedon did a certain
treacherous Commander of a place, reproaching his beholdingness unto him for
delivering of it up, That if he had not betrayed it, he had not so soon been
master of it; it is true, but that made him rather fear, than reward him for his
Treachery.

To proceed then, after, in the end of their 4th Petition, they insinuate their
desire. That none should be advanced to any place of Trust, either in the Army,
or Commonwealth, but such as should be recommended by the Certificat of some
five or six of them, that so things (as they say) may be carried on more by the
public spirit of the Saints, than the private spirit of any whatsoever; (bold
words, and glancing at those in Authority, and in derogation of all besides but
themselves.)

This public spirit which they like so much in their Saints, they approve not so
much in their women (as it seems) when in their 7th they urge the Amendment of
the Act of Adultery; and whereas the former had gone as far as they could in
Law before, to hang them up, on the Testimony of two Witnesses, these would go
farther yet, and hang them up, without any Witness at all; and then what a
shower of Halters should we have raining down upon our heads, when our very
Sexes should be our crimes, which, but with our beings, we could not depart
withal?

And whither with this severity of theirs, would they drive this Vice at last,
but more and more inwards still? as Diogenes wittily said of that Young man,
who issuing from one of those lewd places, and seeing him, ran in again, not to
be seen by him, which he perceiving, called after him, and said, That the more
he sought to hide his lewdness, he but entered the further into it, and
ingulphed and plunged self into it the more. So we may say, these would enforce
men to do, by the severity of the Laws they would enact, etc. For (I speak it
not to patronage Vice, but to plead the cause of Virtue,) they have looked as
narrowly to this Vice already, as modestly they can, and to look nearer to
these secret sins, would but make them endeavor still to sin more secretly,
Restraint but more irritating Vice, as we see in those Countries where they
trust more to restraint and cautel, than to peoples honesties; it being more
the conscience than cautiousness, can keep them honest; and to take off the
bridle from men's consciences, and afterward expect to constrain them to be
virtuous, is just like him, who should take the bridle off his Horse, and
afterward by switching expect to manage him as he pleased.

Besides, the setting so high a rate on the forfeiture, but indears and renders
Vice more precious; and just as we see in Gaming, makes foul play lawful, by
setting a Tax and penalty on their not playing fair; they seeming by that
manner of proceeding, not so much to punish the Act, as the being taken in it;
whence consequently, men study more to avoid the being taken in it, than the
Act it self.

In the fifth, these lovers of Justice and Righteousness propose, to have all
the burden of Taxes and Contribution laid on the Cavaliers, against the
Public Faith given them in their several Articles and Agteements, which Faith
these seem to care as little for, as they do for Good works; whence we see,
that had these men the management of Affairs, they would soon throw their
Justice and Temperance after their Prudence and Fortitude, hating all Cardinal
virtues, ever since they understood they belonged unto the Pope; never
considering how dearly already they have paid for their new-styl'd offense, by
the Sequestration of their whole Estates, or being Mulcted in the greatest part
of them, of which they are not in present possession, but by dearly buying them
again; yet would these most equal Justicers have them more taxt than others who
enjoy their Estates entire.

And mark what a wise Reason they give you for it; For so (say they) It will
make them the more willing to sit stil'; to rise rather they should say, as
most commonly does any man of spirit, when he finds himself too much oppressed;
none besides being willing to do that, which he is forced unto. These men who
counsel and persuade this, (like those, who after a body has been once sick,
will never suffer it to recover health again) never considering, That a
Commonwealth founded on the injury and oppressions of others, is only built for
ruin and destruction; That sternness, cruelty, and severity, is for Slaves,
but for Freeborn men, gentleness and debonairity; That there the Government is
ever most assured, where men govern so, as it may be expedient for all Good men
the present State should continue, and those who govern otherwise, may be safe,
but never secure; and, That finally nothing better declares the wholesome
constitution of a Commonwealth, than a cheerful and smiling countenance, with
no discontent sadding its brow: a sad and groaning State being never
long-lived, since as the Poet says, Non vivers, sed been valere vita est, that
that which we call Life, consists not so much in living, as in living well.

For which consideration, those who formerly had the ordering of the
Commonwealth, after they had sufficiently Mulcted the Cavaliers for that, which
only the fottune of the side seems to have made a crime, and an offense, wisely
admitted them by diverse Treaties to Composition, and lastly, by the Act of
Oblivion, to the common Freedom and Liberty with the rest, which now to
infringe, were no less dishonorable than dangerous.

But in the 8th, their main Combat is against the Papist, who is always the
Giant these doughty Sir Lancelots and Don Quixots must overcome, and like old
Calianax (in the Play) beat over and over, when any else has offended them,
whom they dare not meddle with. The poor Papist by perpetual ill usage having
been so cowed and cowarded, as he lies quaking and trembling, and dares do
nothing, but pray that no body may molest him, he accounting it obligation to
those who but strike him only, when they have power to kill. He is the Dog
that is always beaten in the Lions presence: and be the fault whose it will, he
is sure to undergo the blame and punishment; so, as if Persecution be no the
nighest way to Heaven, certainly he goes the farthest way about; Their
Adversaries (such as these Petitioners) always crying out against them, like
cunning Thieves, who join with the Hub-bub, and follow True men with Hue and
Cry, the better to escape themselves. And truly I do not know why all your new
sale-made Religions (though differing among themselves) should join so
unanimously, and with so great Animosity, against the Papist, unless perhaps,
for fear they should mar their Market; just like that bungling Painter, who
having painted a Cock most monstrously ill, set his Boy to keep away all Cocks
from about his shop, for fear, lest in comparison with them, the deformity of
his work should more manifestly appear; they advantaging the Papist the whilst
by making people imagine, that there is somewhat extraordinary in their
Religion, rendering it incompatible with all other Sects; and make this dilemma,
that either all Religions professing Christ are true, or but only one; if all,
why not the Papist amongst the rest? if but one, why are not the rest as much
persecuted as he? And here I cannot omit a pleasant saying of K. James, That the
Papist was his honest Ass, on whom he might impose what burden and load he
pleased, and he would grunt and grunt, but patiently bear it still; whereas the
Puritan was like a skittish Jade, which kicks and winces at the least load laid
on him, crying out before he was hurt, to keep off danger still far enough from
him, which skittishnesse of his has rendered him so resty and pampered, as
none dare hazard the breaking and backing him, but only the Army, (to whom
nothing is difficult, and impossible) the enterprizing of taming which wild and
headstrong Bucephalus, to their perpetual fame and felicity, like another
Alexander, seeming only to be reserved to them. Mean while, whosoever out of
these unworthy timid respects, does tolerate them, shall find, as your Kings
have done, by dear Experiment at last, that they are in Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, just like your Hedge-hoggs brood, which when the Damn finds
prickly in her womb, she shrinks up, and dares not enforce her self to be
delivered of it, till deferring it from day to day, they become so grievous and
intolerable at last, as they cannot be delivered of them, but with their lives
and all. And here comes well to purpose (to the Army and the Commonwealth, into
whose number these would so fain insinuat themselves) the Fable of the Hare and
Hedge-hogg, who in a cold winters night came to the form or muset of the Hare,
desiring to shelter there against the rigor of the season, to whom the Hare at
first answered wisely, that her form was but strait and narrow, and he so
prickly, as without her much Incommodity she could not admit, nor harbor him;
when he craftily replied, That for his prickles, as he could bristle them up
against an Enemy, so for a Friend he could couch them so close unto his back,
as they should feel them no more, than as if they were down or feathers; which
the Hare simply believing, admitted him into her form, where he was no sooner
come, but he began to bristle, and so gored the poor Hare, as she cried out for
pain, when the Hedge-hogg gave it only this comfort and answer, for all its
hospitality, That those who found themselves agrieved, might quit the place;
and here I leave to each one the Application, to come to the examining what
grievous crime they charge the Papist with, as it is most commonly no less than
the Invasion of the Land, or the blowing up the Thames, etc. to the destruction
both of fish and flesh.

For that Papists, etc. (say they) take liberty of contemning the Sabbath, and
public Ordinances, and spend the day vainly and idly in their houses, or
else walking in the fields, we propose That some special course may be taken of
restraint, etc. And what unreasonable people are these, that will not permit
them to go to Church, nor tarry at home, to remain in their houses, nor to walk
abroad in the fields? what they would have of them else, I do not know, unless
they would enforce them to work on the Sabbath day; and more unreasonable would
they be yet, to seek to enforce them to go to other Churches besides their own.
If they think they be so idle at home, why do they search their houses so often
to find them at Mass? and what restraint they intend, I do not see, unless
they mean to pound them, when they catch them in the fields. In fine, their
condition is lamentable the whilst they will not permit them the liberty of
their own houses, nor so much as the benefit of common air: But of this enough.

The next whom they fall foul upon (in the 6th) are your Wakes and
Moris-dances, meaning quite to overthrow the Hobbyhorse, horse and man,
holding him little better than the beast, and maid Marian the whore of Babylon.
Mean time, what harm the poor Moris-dancers do unto them, I do not see, but
only that the melancholy Devil which possesses them is enemy of all mirth and
harmless Recreation, which makes the poor souls in sighing, wish for the merry
devil of Edmonton again, and the days of Puck, and Robin-goodfellow, as I doubt
not but their wisdoms who govern the Commonwealth will shortly grant them u'm,
and restore them their former sports again, which as they during the Time of
our late Calamities did prudently debar them of, (when, indeed, all mirth had
been unseasonable) so that time once over, they will suffer them, no doubt, to
return unto them again, and consider that as the Poet said, Pane and Circense,
give them but sports and bread enough, and you may rule them at pleasure:
whereas, take from them but those outward amusements of their minds, and you
but convert their thoughts inwards, to meditate on nothing but their
grievances, and discontent; for which Reason, perhaps these men would prohibit,
and abridge them of them, that so they might only study mischief, like
themselves. Mean time, such as these would make rare Governors of the
Commonwealth, who, whilst they should be making Acts, for the overcoming of our
Enemies abroad, and rendering us formidable to all the world, would be making
Acts against Moris-dancers, and Hobby-horses, to render us ridiculous unto
every one.

And thus much may suffice to show the malice and foppery of their Petition,
which I know will fret and vex them to the very hearts (and much good do it their
good hearts with it) to see the secrets of their Cabal discovered, and their
designs laid open, so pernicious to the present Government of the Commonwealth;
It being the Religion of the common fry, and such brown-bread spirits of the
same batch with them, they making the Rabble their only Rabbis, and inviting
them to liberty, which in effect is nothing else, but licentiousnes, and
Shrovetide-Ryot, such having nothing to lose, being sure to gain by each change
and mutation: The more deserving the Magistrates care and coertion, the more
numerous, and indigent they are. Mean time, 't shall never repent me to be an
Enemy of those are Enemies to my Country and Religion, and I Am sure the Army
and Republique will thank me for it, these men being the greatest Enemies they
have, as their many vain Attempts to change the Government of the one, and
fight against the other, sufficiently declare. To conclude, all men are to
admire the rare temper and wisdom of the State to admit of all Petitions, and
yet be moved with none but such as may be salutarie for the Commonwealth, and
rejoice in the Liberty the people of England enjoy, the while they can deliver
such Petitions as these, without being sent to Bedlam for their pains.

FINIS.

