AN APOLOGY FOR THE ROYAL PARTY: Written in a LETTER To a Person of the Late
COUNCIL of STATE.

By a Lover of Peace and of his Country.

WITH A TOUCH At the Pretended PLEA FOR THE ARMY.

Anno Dom. MDCLIX.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE ROYAL PARTY: Written in a LETTER to a Person of the late
COUNCEL of STATE, By a Lover of Peace and of his Country: With a Touch at the
pretended Plea for the Army.
SIR,
THe many Civilities which you are still pleased to continue to me, and my very
great desire to answer them in the worthiest testimonies of my zeal for your
service, must make my best Apology for this manner of Address; if out of an
extreme affection for your noblest Interest, I seem transported a little upon
your first reflections, and am made to despise the consequence of entertaining
you with such Truths, as are of the greatest danger to my Self; but of no less
import to your happiness, and, which carry with them the most indelible
Characters of my Friendship. For if as the Apostle affirms, For a good man,
some would even dare to die, why should my Charity be prejudged, if hoping to
convert you from the error of your way, I despair not of rendering you the
Person for whose preservation there will be nothing too dear for me to expose?

I might with reason believe that the first election of the Party wherein you
stood engaged, proceeded from inexperience and the mistake of your zeal; not to
say from your compliances to the passions of others; because I both knew your
education, and how obsequious you have always showed your self to those who
had then the direction of you: But, when after the example of their conversion,
upon discovery of the Impostures which perverted them; and the signal
indignation of God, upon the several Periods which your eyes have lately
beheld, of the bloudiest Tyranies, and most prodigious oppressors that ever any
age of the world produced, I see you still persist in your course, and that you
have turned about with every revolution which has happened: when I consider, what
contradictions you have swallowed, how deeply you have engaged, how servilely
you have flattered, and the base, and mean submissions by which you have
dishonored your self, and stained your noble Family; not to mention the least
refinement of your religion or morality (besides that you have still preserved
a civility for me, who am ready to acknowledge it, and never merited other from
you) I say, when I seriously reflect upon all this; I cannot but suspect the
integrity of your procedure, deplore the sadness of your condition, and resolve
to attempt the discovery of it to you, by all the instances, which an affection
perfectly touched with a zeal for your eternal interest can produce. And who
can tell, but it may please Almighty God, to affect you yet by a weak
instrument, who have resisted so many powerful indications of his displeasure
at your proceedings, by the event of things?

For, since you are apt to recriminate, and after you have boasted of the
prosperity of your cause, and the thriving of your Wickedness (an Argument far
better becoming a Mahumetan then a Christian) let us state the matter a little,
and compare particulars together; let us go back to the source, and search the
very principles; and then see, if ever any cause had like success indeed; and
whether it be a just reproach to your Enemies, that the judgments of God have
begun with them, whilst you know not yet, where they may determine.

First then, be pleased to look North-wards upon your Brethren the Scots,
Richlieu
who (being first instigated by that crafty Cardinal to disturb the groth of
the incomparable Church of England, and so consequently the tranquillity of a
Nation, whose expedition at the Isle of Re, gave terror to the French) made
Reformation their pretense, to gratify their own avarice, introduce
themselves, and a more then Babylonish Tyranie, imposing upon the Church and
state, beyond all impudence or example. I say, look upon what they have gotten,
by deceiving their Brethren, selling their King, betraying his son, and by all
their perfidie; but a slavery more then Egyptian, and an infamy as unparalled,
as their treason and ingratitude.

Look nerer home on those whom they had engaged amongst us here, and tell me if
there be a Person of them left, that can show me his prize, unless it be that
of his Sacriledg, which he, or his Nephews must certainly vomit up again: What
is become of this ignorant and furious zeal, this pretense of an universal
perfection in the Religious and the Secular, after all that blood and Treasure,
Rapine and Injustice, which has been exhausted, and perpetrated by these sons
of Thunder? Where is the King, whom they swear to make so glorious, but meant
it in his Martyrdom? Where is the Classis, and the Assembly, the Lay-elder;
all that gear of Scottish discipline, and the fine new Trinkets of Reformation?
Were not all these taken out of their hand, while now they were in the height
of their pride and triumph? And their dull General made to serve the execution
of their Sovereign, and then to be turned of himself as a property no more of
use to their designs? Their riches, and their strength in which they trusted,
and the Parliament which they even idolized, in sum, the prey they had
contended for at the expense of so much sin and damnation, seizd upon by those
very instruments, which they had raised to serve their insatiable avarice, and
prodigious disloyalty. For so it pleased God to chastise their implacable
persecution of an excellent Prince, with a slavery under such a Tyrant, as not
being contented to butcher even some upon the Scaffold, sold diverse of them for
slaves, and others he exild into cruel banishment, without pretense of Law, or
the least commiseration; that those who before had no mercy on others, might
find none themselves; till upon some hope of their repentance, and future
moderation, it pleased God to put his hook into the nostrills of that proud
Leviathan, and send him to his place, after he had thus mortified the fury of
the Presbyterians. For unless God himself should utter his voice from Heaven,
yea, and that a mighty voice, can there any thing in the world be more evident,
then his indignation at those wretches and bare fact Impostors, who, one after
another, usurped upon us, taking them off at the very point of aspiring, and
praecipitating the glory and ambition of these men, before those that where,
but now, their adoarers, and that had prostituted their consciences to serve
their lusts? To call him the Moses, the Man of God, the Joshua, the Savior of
Israel; and after all this, to treat the Thing his son with addresses no less
then blasphemous, whose Father (as themselves confess to be the most infamous
Hypocrite and proflegate Atheist of all the Usurpers that ever any age
produced) had made them his Vassalls, and would have intaild them so to his
posterity for ever?

But behold the scean is again changed, not by the Royal party, the Common
Enemy, or a foreign power; but by the despicable Rumpe of a Parliament, which
that Mountebanke had formerly served himself of, and had raised him to that
pitch, and investiture: But see withal, how soon these triflers and puppets of
policy are blown away, with all their pack of modells and childish Chimaeras,
nothing remaining of them but their Coffine, guarded by the Soldiers at
Westminster; but which is yet less empty then the heads of those Politicians,
which so lately seemed to fill it.

For the rest, I despise to blot paper with a recital of those wretched
Interludes, Farces and Fantasms, which appeared in the several intervalls;
because they were nothing but the effects of an extreme gyddiness, and
unparalled levity. Yet these are those various despensations and providencens
in your journey to that holy land of purchases and profits, to which you have
from time to time appealed for the justification of your proceedings, whilst
they were, indeed, no other then the manifest judgments of God upon your
rebellion and your ambition: I say nothing of your hypocritical fasts, and
pretended humiliations, previous to the succeeding plots, and suppositions
Revelations, that the godly might fall into the hands of your Captains, because
they were bugbears, and became ridiculous even to the common people.

And now Sr. if you please, let us begin to set down the product and survey the
success of your party; and after all these faces and vertigo^, tell me
ingenuously, if the single chastisment with is fallen up one afflicted man, and
his loyal subjects, distressed by the common event of wa^ want of treasure,
the seizure of his Fleet, forcing him from his City, an^ all the disadvantages
that a perfidious people could imagine; but in fin^ the crowning him with a
glorious Martyrdom for the Church of God, and the liberty of his people (for
which his blood does yet cry aloud for vengeance) be comparable to the
confusion which you (that have been the conquerours) have suffered, and the
slavery which you are like to leave to the posterities which will be born but
to curse you, and to groan under the pressures which you bequeath to your own
flesh and blood? For to what a condition you have already reduced this once
flourishing kingdom, since all has been your own, let the intolerable*
oppressions, taxes, Excises, sequestrations, confiscations, plunders, customs,
decimations, not to mention the plate, even to very thimbles and the bodkins
(for even to these did your avarice descend) and other booties, speak: All this
dissipated and squandred away, to gratify a few covetous and ambitious
wretches, whose appetites are as deep as hell, and as insatiable as the grave;
as if (as the Wiseman speaks) our time here were but a market for gain.

Look then into the Churches, and the manners of the people, even amongst your
own Saints, and tell me, if since Simon Magus was upon the earth, there were
ever heard of so many Schisms, and Heresies, of Jews and Socinians, Quakers,
Fifth-monarchy-men, Arians, Anabaptists, Independents, and a thousand several
sorts of Blasphemies and professed Atheists, all of them spawned under your
government; and then tell me what a Reformation of Religion you have effected?

Was there ever in the whole Earth (not to mention Christendom alone) a perjury
so prodigious, and yet so avowed as that by which you have taken away the
estate of my L. Craven, at which the very Infidels would blush, a Turk or
Sythian stand amazed?

Under the Sun was it never heard, that a man should be condemned for
transgressing no law, but that which was made after the fact, and abrogated
after execution; that the Posterities to come might not be witnesses of your
horrid injustice: Yet thus you proceeded against my L. Stafford. How many are
those gallant persons whom after articles of war, you have butchered in
cold-blood, violating your promises against the Laws of all Nations civil, or
barbarous; and yet thus you dealt in the case of my L. Capel, Sr. J. Stawell
and others.

Is not the whole nation become sullen and proud, ignorant and suspicious,
incharitable, cursed, and in fine, the most depraved and perfidious under
heaven? and whence does all this proceed, but from the effects of your own
examples, and the impunity of evil doers?

I need not tell you how long Justice has been sold by the Comittes, and the
Chair-men, the Sequestrators, and Simoniacall Tryers, not to mention the late
Courtiers, and a swarm of Publicans who have eaten up the people as if they
would eat bread.

Will you come now to the particular misfortunes, and the evident hand of God
upon you for these actions (for he has not altogether left us without some
express witnesses of his displeasure at your doings.) Behold then your Essex
and your Warwick, your Manchester, Brown, Ferfaix, and your Waler, (whom once
your Books stilled the Lord of Hosts) Casheered, Imprisoned, suspected and
disgraced after all their services. Hotham, and his Son came to the block:
Stapleton had the burial of an Ass; and was thrown into a town Ditch. Brooks
and Hamden signally slain in the very act of rebellion and Sacrilege; your
atheistical Dorislaw, Ascam, and the Sodomiticall Ariba, whom though they
escaped the hand of Justice, yet Vengeance would not suffer to live: What
become of Rainsburrow? Ireton perished of the Plague, and Hoyle hanged himself;
Staplie died mad, and Cromewell in a fit of rageing; and if there were any
others worthy the taking notice of, I should give you a list of their names and
of their destinies, but it was not known whence they came which succeeded them;
nor had they left any memory behind them, but for their signal wickednesses,
as he that set on fire the Ephesian Temple to be recorded a Villain to
posterity. Whereas those noble souls whom your inhumanity, (not your virtue)
betrayed, gave proof of their extraction, Innocence, Religion and Constancy
under all their Trials and Tormentors; and those that died by the sword, fell
in the bed of honor, and did worthily for their Country; their Loyalty and
their Religion, will be renowned in the History of Ages, and precious to their
memory, when your names will rot with your Carcasses, and your remembrance be
as dung upon the face of the earth. For there is already no place of Europe
where your infamy is not spread, whilst your persecuted Brethren rejoice in
their sufferings, can abound, and can want, blush not at their actions, nor are
ashamed at their addresses, because they have suffered for that which their
Faith and their Birth, their Laws, and their liberties have celebrated with
the most glorious Inscriptious, and everlasting Elogies,

And if fresher instances of all these particulars be required, cast but your
eye a little upon the Armies pretended plea, which came lately a birding to
beat the away before them, charm the ears of the vulgar, and captivate the
people; That after all its Pseudo-politicks and irreligious Principles, is at
last constrained to acknowledge your open and prodigious violations, strange and
illegal actions, (as in terms it confesses) of taking up arms, raising and
forming Armies against the King, fighting against his person, imprisoning,
impeaching, arraigning, trying, and executing him: banishing his Children,
abolishing Bishops, Deans and Chapters; taking away Kingly Government, and the
House of Lords, breaking the crowns, selling the Jewels, Plate, Goods, Houses
and Lands belonging unto the Kings of this Nation, erecting extraordinary
High-Courts of Justice and therein impeaching, araigning, condemning, and
executing many pretended notorious Enemies to the public peace; when the
laws in being, and the ordinary Courts of Justice could not reach them: by
strange and unknown practices in this Nation, and not at all justifiable by any
known laws and statutes, but by certain diabolical principles of late
distilled into some persons of the Army, and which he would entitle to the
whole, who (abating some of their Commanders, that have sucked the sweet of
this doctrine) had them never so much as entered into their thoughts, nor could
they be so depraved, though they were Masters only of the Light of nature to
direct them. For Common sense will tell them, that whoever are our lawful
superiors, and invested with the supreme Authority, either by their own
virtue, or the peoples due election, have then a just right to challeng
submission to their precepts, and that we acquiesce in their determinations;
since there is in nature no other expedient to preserve us from everlasting
confusion: But it is the height of all impertinency to conceive, that those
which are a part of themselves, and can in so great a body, have no other
interests, should fall into such exorbitabitant contradiction to their own
good, as a child of four years old would not be guilty of; and as this
Phamphleter wildly suggests in pp. 6. 11. 27. etc. did they steer their course
by the known laws of the Land, and as obedient Subjects should do, who without
the King and his Peers, are but the Carcass of a Parliament, as destitute of
the Soul which should inform and give it being. But if so small a handful of
men as appeared in the Palace-Yard without consent of a quarter of the English
Army, much less of the tenthousandth part of the free people that are not clad
in red, shall disturb and alter a Government when it thinks fit to set aside a
few imperious officers, who plainly seek themselves, and derive their
Commissions from a superior to whom they swear obedience, (I mean not here the
Rumpe) who shall ever hope, or live to see any government established in these
miserably abused Nations? For I dare report my self to the ingenuity of the
very Soldiers themselves, if they, who have effected all these changes by your
wretched instigations, and blind pretenses, imagine themselves the people of
this Nation, but as a very small portion of them, compared to the whole, and
who are maintained by them, to recover and protect the Civil Government,
according to the good old laws of the Land; not such as they themselves shall
invente from day to day, or as the interests of some few persons may engage
them.

But if the essential end of Rulers be the common peace, and their Laws
obliging as they become relative: restore us then to those under which we lived
with so much sweetness and tranquillity, as no age in the world, no government
under Heaven could ever pretend the like. And if the people (as you declare)
are to be the Judges of it, summon them together in a Free Parliament,
according to its legal Constitution; or make a universal Balott, and then let
it appear, if Colonel Lambert and half a dozen Officers, with all their
seduced Partisans, make so much as a single Cipher to the Sum Total. And this
shall be enough to answer those devious Principles set down in the Porch of
that specious Edifice; which being erected upon the Sand, will (like the rest
that has been daubed with untempered mortar) sink also at the next high wind
that blows upon it. But I am glad it is at last avowed, upon what pretexts
that late pretended Parliament have pleaded on the behalf of themselves and
party, their discharge from all the former Protestations, Engagements, solemn
Vows, Covenants, with hands (as you say) lift up to the most high God, as also
their Oaths and Allegiance, etc. because I shall not in this discourse be
charged with slandering of them, and that the whole World may detest the
Actions of such perfidious Infidels, with whom nothing sacred has remained
inviolable.

But there is yet a piece of Artifice behind, of no less consequence then the
former, and that is, a seeking to persuade the present Army, that They were
the men, who first engaged thus solemnly to destroy the Government under which
they were born, and reduce it to this miserable condition: whereas it is well
known by such as converse daily with them, that there is hardly one of ten
amongst them, who was then in Arms, and that it was the Zelots under Essex,
Manchester, Waller, and the succeeding Generals, who were the persons of whose
perfidiousness he makes so much use of, and that the present Army consist of a
far more ingenuous spirit, and might in one moment vindicate this aspersion,
make their conditions with all advantage, and these nations the most happy
people upon the Earth, as it cannot be despaired but they will one day do, when
by the goodness of Almighty God, they shall perfectly discern through the mist
which you have cast upon their eyes, lest they should discover the Imposture of
these Egyptian Sorcerers.

But now he comes next to glorify the late Northern Expedition, and because it
should look more dreadful, he reckons up a horrible Plot of the poor Cavaliers
conspiring with Sir Geo. Booth; whereas (God knows) 'twas a thing wholly
managed by some of their own party, whom the Rump had disobliged, and that
could have no other effect, then to show the judgments of God, upon so many as
it involved under a Calamity, which their former Actions had deserved; though,
under the pretense of it, and because there was want of prey, many innocent
persons were seized upon, and imprisoned with them.

And now, Sir, if after all this injustice, and impiety on your parts, you have
prosecuted that with the extremest madness, which you esteemed criminal in
your enemies, viz. To arrogate the supreme power to a single person, condemn
men without Law, execute, and proscribe them with as little: Impressed for your
Service, violate your Parliaments, dispense with your solemn Oaths; in sum,
to mingle Earth and Heaven by your unarbitrary proceedings: All which, not only
your printed books, this pretended plea; but your Actions have abundantly
declared; have you not justified the Royal party, and pronounced them the only
honest men which have appeared upon the stage, in Characters as plain, that he
which runs may read, whilst yet you persecute them to the death? Therefore,
thou art inexcusable, O man, that perpetratest these things; For wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self; seeing thou that judge do the
same things. But think thou this, O man, that thus judge them which do
such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the vengeance of God? I
tell ye nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

Truly, Sir, when I compare these things together, and compare them I do very
often, consider the purchases which you have made, and the damnation you have
certainly adventured; the despite you have done to the name of Christ, the Laws
of Common humanity which you have violated, the malice and the folly of your
proceedings; in fine, the confusion which you have brought upon the Church, the
State, and your selves; I adore the just and righteous judgment of God; and
(howsoever you may possibly emerge, and recover the present rout) had rather be
a sufferer amongst those whom you have thus afflicted, and thus censure, then
to enjoy the pleasures of your sins for that season you are likely to possess
them: For if an Angel from heaven should tell me you had done your duties, I
would no more believe him, then if he should preach another Gospel, then that
which has been delivered to us; because you have blasphemed that holy
Profession, and done violence to that Gracious Spirit, by whose sacred dictates
you are taught to live in obedience to your Superiors, and in Charity to one
another; covering yet all this Hydra of Impostures with a mask of Piety and
Reformation, whilst you breath nothing but oppression, and lie in wait to
deceive. But O God! how long shall the Adversary do this dishonor, how long
shall the Enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever? They gather them together against
the soul of the Righteous, and condemn the innocent blood. Lo these are the
ungodly, these prosper in the world, and these have riches in possession: And I
said, then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence.
Yea, and I had almost said as they; but lo, then I should have condemned the
generation of thy Children. Then thought I to understand this, but it was too
hard for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God; then understood I the end
of these men. Namely, how thou do set them in slippery places, castest them
down and destroyest them.

O how suddenly do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end!

We have seen it, indeed Sir, we have seen it, and we cannot but acknowledge it
the very finger of God, mirabile in oculis nostris; and is that, truly, which
even constrains me out of Charity to your Soul, as well as out of a deep sense
of your Honor, and the Friendship which I otherwise bear you, to beseech you
to re-enter into your self, to abandon those false Principles, to withdraw your
self from these Seducers, to repent of what you have done, and save your self
from this untoward generation: There is yet a door of Repentance open, do not
provoke the Majesty of the great God any longer, which yet tenders a
Reconciliation to you. Remember what was once said over the perishing
Jerusalem. How often would have gathered you together, as a hen does gather her
brood under her wing^ and ye would not? Behold, your House is left unto you
desolate. -- For (...) not think it impossible, that we should become the most
abandoned, a^^ barbarous of all the nations under heaven. You know who has said
i^, He turns a fruitful land into a Wilderness, for the iniquity of them
that i^ habit therein. And truly, he that shall seriously consider the sad
Carast^^^phe of the Eastern Empire, so flourishing in piety, policy, knowledge,
liter^ture, and all the excellencies of a happy and blessed people; would
almo^^ think it impossible, that in so few years, and a midst so glorious a
light learning and Religion, so sudden, and palpable a darkness, so stran^^
and horrid a barbarity should overspread them, as now we behold in (...) that
goodly tract of the Turkish dominions: And what was the cause of a this, but
the giddiness of a wanton people, the Schisms and the Heresi^ in the church,
and the prosperous successes of a rebellious Imposto^ whose steps we have
pursued in so many pregnant instances, giving courtenance to those unheard of
impieties, and delusions, as if God be not infinitely merciful, must needs
involve us under the same disasters? For, whi^^t there is no order in the
Church, no body of Religion agreed upon, no government established, and that
every man is abandoned to his own decei^full heart: whilst learning is decried,
and honesty discountenanced, rapit^ defended, and virtue finds no advocate;
what can we in reason expect^ but the most direful expressions of the wrath of
God, a universal desolation, when by the industry of Satan and his crafty
Emisaries, some desperate enthusiasme, compounded (like that of Mohomet,) of
Arian, Socinian, Jew Anabaptist, and the impurer Gnostick, something I say made
up of all these heresies, shall diffuse it self over the Nation, in a
universal contagion, and nothing less appear then the Christian which we have
ingratefully renounced?

For this plague is already beginning amongst us, and there is none to take the
Censer, and to stand between the living and the dead, that we be not consumed
as in a moment; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord. Let us then depart
from the tents of these wicked men (who have brought all this upon us) and
touch nothing of theirs, least we be consumed in all their sins.

But you will say, the King is not to be trusted: judge not of others by your
selves; did ever any man observe the least inclination of revenge in his
breast? has he not besides the innate propensity of his own nature to
gentleness, the strict injunctions of a dying Father and a Martyr, to forgive
even greater offenders then you are? Yes, I dare pronounce it with confidence,
and avouch it whith all assurance, that there is not an individual all amongst
you, whose crimes are the most crimson, whom he will not be most ready to
pardon, and graciously receive upon their repentance; nor any thing that can be
desired of him, to which he would not cheerfully accommode, for the stopping of
that torrent of blood, and extreme confusion, which has hitherto run, and is
yet imminent over us. Do but reason a little with your self, and consider
sadly, whether a young Prince, mortified by so many afflictions, disciplined by
much experience, and instructed by the miscarriages of others, be not the most
excellently qualified to govern and reduce a people, who have so successesly
tried so many governments, of old, impious and crafty Foxes, that have
exercised upon us the most intolerable Tyranies that were ever heard of?

But you object further, that he has lived amongst Papists, is vitiously
inclined, and has wicked men about him: What can be said more unjustly, what
more malicious? And can you have the foreheads to tell us he has lived amongst
Papists to his prejudice, who have proscribed him from Protestants, persecuted
him from place to place, as a Patridg on the Mountains? You may remember who
once went to Achich the King of Gath, and changed his behavior before them,
and feigned himself mad in their hands; had many great infirmities, and was yet
a man after Gods own heart; Whilst the Catholic King was your Allie, you had
nothing to do with Papists, it was then no crime: God is not mocked, away with
this respect of persons: But where is it you would have him to be? The
Hollander dares not afford him harbor, lest you refuse them yours: The French
may not give him bread for fear of offending you; and unless he should go to
the Indies, or the Turk (where yet your malice would undoubtedly reach him)
where can he be safe from your revenge? But suppose him in a Papist Country,
constrained thereto by your incharity to his Soul as well as body; would he
have condescended to half so much, as you have offered for a toleration of
Papists, he needed not now have made use of this Apology, or wanted the
assistance of the most puissant Princes of Christendom to restore him, of whom
he has refused such conditions as in prudence he might have yielded to, and the
people would have gladly received; whilst those who know with what persons you
have transacted, what truck you have made with the Jesuits, what secret
Papists there are amongst you, may easily divine why they have been no
forwarder to assist him, and how far distant he is from the least wavering in
his Faith. But since you have now declared that you will tolerate all
Religions, without exception; do not think it a sin in him, to gratify those
that shall most oblige him.

For his virtues and Morality, I provoak the most refined Family in this Nation
to produce me a Relation of more piety and moderation; show me a Fraternity
more spotless in their honor, and freer from the exorbitances of youth, then
these three Brothers, so conspicuous to all the world for their Temperance,
Magnanimity, Constancy, and Understanding; a friendship and humility
unparalled and rarely to be found amongst the severest p rsons, scarcely in a
private family. It is the malice of a very black Soul, and a virulent ^^^egado
(of whom to be commended were the utmost infamy) that has interpreted some
compliances, to which persons in distress are sometimes engaged, with those
whom they converse withal, to his Majesty's disadvantage: whilst these filthy
dreamers defile the flesh themselves, and thinking it no sin to despise
dominion, speak evil of dignities, and of the things which they know not. But
woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Kain, and run greedily after
the error of Balaam, for reward, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage.

For the rest, I suppose the same was said of Holy David, when in his extreme
calamity, he was constrained to fly from Saul. For every one that was in
distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented,
gathered themselves unto him, and he became Captain over them. And to this
retinue, has your malice and persecution reduced this excellent Prince; but he
that preserved him in the Wood, and delivered David out of all his troubles,
shall likewise in his appointed time, deliver him also out of these distresses.

I have now answered all your calumnies, and have but a word to add, that I may
yet incline you to accept of your best interest, and prevent that dreadful
ruin which your obstinacy does threaten. Is it not as perspicuous as the Sun,
that it lies in your power to reform his Counsel, introduce your selves, make
what composition you can desire, have all the security that mortal men can
imagine, and the greatest Princes of Europe to engage in the performance? This
were becoming worthy men, and honorable indeed; this ingenuous self-denial:
And it is no disgrace to reform a mistake, but to persist in it lies the
shame. The whole Nation require it of you, and the laws of God command it, you
cannot, you must not deferr it. For what can you pretend that will not then
drop into your bosoms? The humble man will have repose, the aspiring and
ambitious, honors: The Merchant will be secure, Trades immediately recover,
Aliances will be confirmed, the Laws reflourish, tender Consciences
considered, present purchasers satisfied; The Soldier paid, maintained and
provided for; and what is above all this, Christianity and Charity will revive
again amongst us, Mercy and Truth will meet together; righteousness and peace
shall kiss each other.

But let us now consider on the other side, the confusion, which must of
necessity light upon us if we persist in our rebellion and obstinacy; We are
already impoverisht, and consumed with war and the miseries that attend it; you
have wasted our treasure, and destroyed the Woods, spoiled the Trade, and
shaken our properties; a universal animosity is in the very bowels of the
Nation; the Parent against the Children, and the Children against the Parents,
betraying one another to the death; in sum, if that have any truth which our
B. Savior has himself pronounced, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand, it is
impossible we should subsist in the condition we are reduced to. Consider we
again, how ridiculous our late proceedings have made us to our neighbors round
about us. Their Ministers laugh at our extram giddiness, and we seem to mock
at their addresses: for no sooner do their Credentialls arrive, but behold the
scean is changed, and the Government is fled, he that now acted King, left a
fool in his place, and they stand amazed at our Buffoonery and madness.

What then may we imagine will be the product of all these disadvantages, when
the Nations that deride and hate us, shall be united for our destruction; and
that the harvest is ripe for the sickle of their fury? shall we not certainly
be a prey to an inevitable ruin, having thus weakened our selves by a brutish
civil war, and cut off those glorious Heroes, the wise and the valiant, whose
couragein such a calamity we shall in vain imploar, that would bravely have
sacrificed themselves for our delivery? Let us remember how often we have
served a foreign people, and that there is nothing so confident, but a
provoaked God can overthrow.

For my part, I tremble, but to consider what may be the issue of these things,
when our iniquities are full, and that God shall make inquisition for the blood
that has been spilt; unless we suddenly meet him by an unfeigned repentance,
and turn from all the abominations by which we have provoaked him; And then, it
is to be hoped, that he who would have compounded with the Father of the
faithful, had there been but ten Righteous men in Sodom; and that spared
Nineveh that populous and great City; will yet have mercy on us, hearken to the
prayers, and have regard to the tears, of so many Millions of people, who day
and night do interceed with him: The Priests and Ministers of the Lord weeping
between the porch and the Altar, and saying, Spare thy people O Lord, spare thy
People, and give not thine Inheritance to reproach.

And now I have said what was upon my Spirit for your sake, when, for the
satisfaction of such as (through its effect upon your soul) this Address of
mine may possibly come to, I have religiously declared, that the Person who
writ it, had no unworthy or sinister design of his own to gratify, much less
any other party whatever; as being neither Courtier, Soldier or Churchman,
but a plain Country Gentleman, engaged on neither side, who, has had leisure,
(through the goodness of God) heartily, and without passion to examine the
particulars which he has touched, and expects no other reward in the success
of it, then what Christ has promised in the Gospel; The Benediction of the
peace maker; and which he already feels in the discharge of his Conscience;
being for his own particular, long since resolved with himself, to persist in
his Religion, and his loyalty to the death, come what will; as being fully
persuaded, that all the persecutions, losses, and other accidents which may
arrive him for it here, are not worthy to be compared to that eternal weight
of glory which is to be revealed hereafter; and to the inexpressible
consolation, which it will afford on his Deathbed, when all these gilded
pleasures will disappear, this noise, and empty pomp; when God shall set all
our sins in order before us; and when, it is certain, that the humble, and the
peaceable, the charitable and the meek shall not loose their reward, nor change
their hopes, for all the Crowns and the Scepters, the Lawrells, and the
Trophies, which ambitious and self seeking men contend for, with so much
Tyranie and injustice.

Let them therefore no longer deceive you, dear Sr. and as the guise of these
vile men is, tell you they are the Godly-party, under which for the present
they would pass, and courage themselves in their wickedness, stoping their
ears, and shutting their eyes against all that has been taught and practiced by
the best of Christians, and holiest of Saints these sixteen hundred years: You
shall know them by their fruits, do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles? But so, being miserably galled with the remembrance of their
impieties, and the steps by which they have ascended to those fearful
precepices, they seek to allay the secret pangs of a gnawing worm, by adopting
the most prodigious of their crimes into a Religion fitted for the purpose, and
versatile as their giddy interest, till at last, encouraged by the number of
thriving Proselytes and successes, they grow seared and confident; swallowing
all with ease, and passing from one heresy to another; whilst yet they are
still pursued, and shall never be at repose: For Conscience will at last awake,
and then how frightful, how deplorable, yea, how inexpressably sad will that
day be unto them! For these things have they done, and I held my tongue (says
God) and they thought wickedly, that I am such a one as themselves; but I will
reprove them and set before them the things that they have done. O consider
this ye that forget God, least he pluck you away, and there be none to deliver
you!

And now Sir, you see the liberty which I have taken, and how far I have
adventured to testify a friendship which I have ever professed for you: I have
indeed been very bold; but it was greatly requisite; and you know that amongst
all men, there are none which more openly use the freedom of reprehension, then
those who love most: Advices are not rejected by any, but such as determine to
pursue their evil courses; and the language which I use, is not to offend, but
to beseech you to return. I conjure you therefore to re-enter into your self,
and not to suffer these mean and dishonorable respects, which are unworthy
your nobler spirit, to prompt you to a course so deformed, and altogether
unworthy your education and Family. Behold your friends all deploaring your
misfortunes, and your Enemies even pity you; whilst to gratify a few mean and
desperate persons, you cancel your duty to your prince, and disband your
Religion; dishonor your name, bring ruin and infamy on your posterity.

But when all this shall fail (as God forbid a title of it should) I have yet
this hope remaining; that when you have been sufficiently sated with this
wicked course, wandered from place to place, government to government, sect to
sect, in so universal a deluge, and find no repose for the sole of your foot,
(as it is certain you never shall) you will at last with the peaceful Dove,
return to the Arc from whence you fled, to your first principles, and to sober
counsels; or with the repenting Prodigal in the Gospel, to your Father which
is in heaven, and to the Father of your Country: For in so doing, you shall
not only rejoice your servant, and all good men, but the very Angels which are
in heaven, and who are never said to rejoice indeed, but at the Conversion of a
sinner.

This 27. October. 1659. Et tu conversus, converte Fratres.
PSALM. 37. 10. Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone, thou
shall look after his place, and he shall be away.

36. I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and flourishing like a
green Bay Tree.

37. I went by, and lo he was gone; I sought him, but his place could no where
be found.

38. Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right: For that shall
bring a Man peace at the last.


I request the Reader to take notice, that where, mentioning the Presbyterian,
I have let fall expressions, somewhat relishing of more then usual asperity; I
do by no means intend it to the prejudice of many of that Judgment, who were
either men of peaceable spirits from the beginning; or that have of late given
testimony of the sense of their error, whilst they were abused by those
specious pretenses I have reproved; but I do regard them with as much charity
and affection, as becomes a sincere Christian, and their Brother.

FINIS.

