Eve Revived, OR THE FAIR ONE STARK-NAKED. A Novell.

LONDON, Printed by William Downing, in St. Bartholomew-Close, 1684.

The Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE CHARMING Philina.
Madam,
ACcording to your Commands, I have taught the Fugitive Fair One to speak
English, and have given Her this Pasport, that She Her self may go and give you
an Account of Her Adventures. I hope they will afford you the Entertainment you
expect, and that they will divert some Hours of you Solitude in the Country.
There is something so Extraordinary in Her Story as cannot but render it
Agreeable, and which will keep you from Repenting the time you shall spend in
Her Company: At least, Madam, I have shown herein the Absolute Obedience I pay
to all your Orders, tho I shall ever be Ready to give much more Signal
Instances of my Entire Submission and Resignation to all you shall require.
This Offering in the mean while, I beg, may be an Earnest of my future
Performances, and if it obtains a Gracious Acceptance, I shall be the more
Animated to further Essaies to please you. Yes, Madam, if you grant but this
Fair One a favorable Audience, I shall have satisfied my Ambition, in having
been Her Usher, and the Zeal I had to find an Occasion of Declaring with what
profound Respect I am,

Madam, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant. G. R.

EVE Revived: OR, THE FAIR ONE STARK-NAKED.
ANGELICA was one of those Unhappy Beauties, whose Amorous Youth by the
Ridiculous Vanity of a Mother, who would needs seem Young at the Age of Fifty
years, was Sacrificed to the horrors of a Cloister, that she might only keep
with her a younger Daughter of Ten years Old, whom she Idolized, and made pass
for her Eldest. Lion one of the most Flourishing Cities in France, having seen
her Born about a League from it is Walls, had no sooner discovered in her
extraordinary Charms, than that it raised her Adorers. The Mother of this young
Lady had hardly been a month in Second-Mourning, the year since the Death of
her Husband being expired, when returning into the World, the great Riches
again attracted her the Eyes of several Pretenders. One of those who Courted
more her Estate than her Person, and whose Birth and Good-meen it became her to
respect, having Flattered her one day with being still young, she Fancied she
should become so in effect, if she put away from her a Daughter of Nineteen
years old, whose Age, belyed the Sentiments of that Interested Flatterer, and
whose blooming Charms defaced the remains of a dawbed Beauty. This Mother had
at first all the pain Imaginable to prevail with Angelica, to retire out of the
World; that Fair One frequented Companies, and Lived since her Mother had
chosen Lion for the usual place of her Residence, wherein many Persons of
Quality are brought up in France.

What advantageous promises soever this Lady could make her Daughter, she was
not able to Inspire her with a Love for a Solitary Life. Angelica received the
visits of a Cavaleir, with whom she had a very intimate acquaintance, who
Suggested to her quite other Sentiments, and knowing that her Inclinations were
bent toward Marriage, still Nourished her Flames, and repeated to her
perpetually that he well enough knew her Complexion to believe that if she was
so Mad as to comply with the desires of her Mother, she would become the Prey
of a Fatal Despair.

The more this passionate Mother found resistance in her Daughter, the more she
stickled to persuade her to turn Nun, so far* as to Employ for the bringing
about this design, all the unjust ways which she thought might facilitate the
Execution of it. She did not content her self one day with giving her a box of
the Ear in presence of her Lover, upon the occasion of a Catt that had thrown
down some Porcelain Dishes of Value from off a Cabinet, she treated her yet
after a more unworthy manner, on the Morrow that she diverted a whole
Illustrious Company, who Honored a Collation she Invited them to, even to the
making her rise from the Table with the highest Confusion; a hundred hardships
of this Nature not being capable of changing Angelica's Heart, that
unreasonable Mother bethought her self of a last means, which was to go try her
Confessor, whom she conspired to engage her Daughter to obey her, by going into
a Cloister.

Though the Jesuit to whom she addressed her self for this purpose, called
Father Stanislas, was one of those of that Society, whose Mo^als are very
Commodious; The fear he had of loosing so pretty a Devota, and an Ingenious
Lady, whose Youthfulness agreeably Solicited him from time to time, did so far
work with him, as that he did not at first Espouse that Widows designs: True
it is, that he did not absolutely deny her, and that he excused himself from
Employing the Credit he had over Angelica's mind, for the obtaining her
consent, but he represented to her that this affair was of the highest
consequence, that she could only receive from God alone the vocation to a
Religious Life, and that he should be the most Criminal of all Directors, if he
forced her to determine her self to a choice which ought to be ever free, that
never-theless he would do all that was possible to dispose her to Embrace that
sort of Life.

The first time that Angelica went to give an account of the State of her
Conscience to that prepossessed Director, he Insinuated to her the disposition
of her Mother, and let her know with so much Eloquence that the Religious Life
was the Calmest and surest way of going to God that he would have Staggered her
Resolution, if the Blood of this Young Lady had been less boiling, and if the
Age in Concert with Youth had not defaced out of her Mind the Pious Impressions
it had received. All that he could obtain from her was that she would come
every day to make him a Visit: And indeed she came every day to see that Good
Father, and it was by the powerful Exhortations of that able Man, pyned to the
ill Treatments she received from her Mother, that this Young Lady conceived an
aversion for the World, and resolved to yield to the Persecution. Thus did
Angelica Espouse a retired Life, and went into the Convent of the Vrsclines,
where she was received into the number of the Novices, and made profession as
soon as this year of her Noviceship was expired.

She had no sooner uttered those Vows which the necessity made her make, than
that she Repented 'em, so as she related to me her self in the Faithful account
she gave me of her adventures; She became the Prey of an amazing Mellancholy
Humor, which made her have in abhorrence all the Regular Execises, so as all
the practices of the Cloister became a punishment to her. Her Mother who had
Notice of the pittious Condition that a profound Mellancholly had reduced her
too, went and desired Father Stanislas to go give her all the necessary advice
for her repose; This Father Entertained her every day in the Parlor, Flattered
all her desires, and promised to Facilitate her change, upon that she seemed
bent upon going into another Monastry. And indeed he powerfully Solicited the
Archbishop to consent to her going out, but as it would have been Scandalous,
and would have been of ill consequence his Solicitations were without effect;
But he was so Irritated by this resusal, that he fell into Sentiments of
aversion for his Prelate, and of pity upon the deplorable effect of the new
professed Nun.

How upright soever his Intentions were at first, and with what Motives of
Charity he seemed then annimated, he was at length so melted by the fears of
Angelica, that he resolved to free her out of her Slavery; Nevertheless it was
no easy matter for her Father to second the Resolution which the young Lady
had taken to free her self out of Servitude, and break her Fetters, true it is,
that he had acquired to himself a Reputation of Sanctity: That the Parlors were
open to him at all hours; but as the Walls of the Garden were not only very
high it was daring very far and exposing his Life to Steal away a Young Lady,
on whose Actions they had so strict an Eye. After much Meditation that
Hypocrite found sure means to Execute his pernicious design, the Love he
conceived every day for that Lovely Religious, and which had took such fast
possession of his Breast, Suggested him with the expedient I am going to Relate.

Angelica who was devoured by her Mellancholly humor fell so Sick as to keep
her Bed. Our Jesuit was Introduced into her Chamber for to bring her all the
necessary Succors in the extremity her Feave^ had reduced her to. Then it was
when the Community was retired to give place to their Secret Entertainments
that Angelica had the Confidence to declare to her Director, that he would
answer before God, for the violence that had been done her, that she had never
any real Vocation, that he was obliged in Conscience to procure her primitive
Liberty. This discourse which she accompanied with some tears, and a certain
Languishment would have had Charms for our Jesuit, tho it had not been
annimated by the exposing of certain Nudities capable of kindling Flames in the
Heart of the most Insensible. I know not what he replied to this pressing and
downright Declaration: but certain it is that he Swore he was Sensibly moved by
it, and that if the assurance of recovering her Liberty, had virtue enough to
Recover her Health, that she ought to be assured, he would afford her all the
Succors he was capable off, provided she would protest she would be Faithful
to him, and follow him every where, where their good Fortune did Conduct them.
Sister Angelica had no sooner made her Protestations of an Inviolable Fidelity,
but that the Father Jesuit fell to Hugging and Embracing her, and proceeded to
some other Liberties, when that the Countenance of that Fair One, put on again
its usual Sincerity, and she became better. Nevertheless he thought convenient
for the having a private Commerce with her in the Future that she should
counterseit being Sick, which she performed with probability enough for the
surprising the Credulity of her Sister Nuns.

It is somewhat a difficult matter for a Person in a perfect Disposition to
feign lying Sick. As soon as Angelica seemed Recovering, they were deprived of
the satisfaction of Entertaining one another upon their mutual projects, she
pretended a Relapse, and Counterfeited a Melancholy temper, which gave more
than ever occasion to be in fear of her. The Director was recalled, and it was
after having conferred for some space, of time that they concluded that they
were to seek out a favorable opportunity for their escape.

During these occurrences the Archbishop having had notice by the means of some
false Jealous Brothers, that Father Stanislas was always at the Ears of a
Religious, who was not so near Death, but who on the contrary was in reasonable
good Health; let the Rector know that he disapproved of the frequent Visits of
the Father, which was the cause that the entrance of the Cloister was quite
forbidden him. The Passionate Jesuit who was wholly prepared for the
prohibitions which were made him, having prepossessed his Mistress, in that he
foresaw what would befall him, and had assured her that she should know his
true Disposition by a Letter from his Hand, which he would slip into a hollow
Stick, which St. Pancras used in his Travels, which is a Relic very
considerable among them, which they hold to have the Virtue of Freeing a Person
out of the Languishment which commonly follows a fit of Sickness: Angelica
complaining only of this Languishment, that miraculous Stick-was sent her upon
the Solicitation and by the hands of her Director, who put in this Letter,
whereof I have taken a Copy from the Original.

The Letter of Father Stanislas to Sister Angelica.
I Am, My Dear Child, in Continual Apprehensions for you; There is not an hour
all the day long, but that I am Contriving sure means to Free you, and not a
Night but that I Embrace you. If the Grandeur of your Love be answerable to the
Excess of mine, I do not doubt but that you enjoy some Delicious Moments: In a
short time our Pleasures will have their Consummation. Courage, My Dear Heart,
the hopes of a certain Good, has something very Delightful. A Flattering Idea
has agreeably wherewith to satisfy. This I find upon your occasion, and could
wish I could produce in you one Tickling enough that you might enjoy by
antisipation the Sweetness of the Divertisements which attend, and which a good
design are preparing for us. I do not doubt but that you Love me, and that
such Sincere Declarations will have more force for the Reestablishment of your
Health, that this Stick has Virtue for to Cure you. The Imagination often
performs more Miracles than Faith.

Dear Angel. Adieu.

This Learned Director had reason to assert that the Fancy has more force than
a Stick has virtue. It indeed performed Miracles; For Sister Angelica had no
sooner Read this Letter than that she Recovered of her weakness, tho she
feigned still a Languishment. She placed this Stick the worker of Prodigies, at
her Beds-head, and spent that very Evening she received it, two hours time in
Reading over, and over the Letter, to which She made the following Answer.

Sister Angelica's Letter to her Director.
I Know not, My Dear Father, if your Miraculous Stick has been a Bugbear to
fright away the rest of my Infirmities; But certain it is, that I had it no
sooner in my Hands, than that I found some Ease: Never did any Physicians
Receipt Opperate better then your Letter, it Fills, Comforts, and Flatters me
with the most Solid hopes I was ever Fed with. Be mindful to perform your
promises; I am ready to attempt all, and disposed to grant you all. There comes
into my Head a design which without doubt you will not disapprove off. As in
what part soever fate Conducts us, we shall Enjoy imperfect Pleasures, without
Money, I should think it very convenient that we endeavor to heap up a good
Sum; Continue so to do on your side. I have all ready fixed my Eyes upon
something of great Value, which cannot Escape me. I aspire to that Happy Moment
which you assure ought to render you Happy with the same Impatience wherewith
you desire to Enjoy the Faithful Angelica.


Our Voluntary Sick Nun kept two days the Staff, which she put her self into
the Hand of her Director, who received it with the highest respect, and took
out of it the foregoing Letter, which made him cast his Eyes upon all that was
in the Convent of good and easy prize. He was contriving for a fortnight
together the means of doing the Feat, during which he was deprived of the
conversation of his Ingenious Nun; She was no less Impatient than he to hear
tidings of him, and that made her take the Resolution of feigning again her
former Dejection of Mind and Body, and to cause Father Stanislas to be
Solicited to obtain for her again on the morrow, the use of the Holy Stick; He
found it no difficult matter to impetrate this Favor of the Director. He
caused to be put therein the note which serves for an Answer to her Letter, the
Tenor thereof being as follows.

Father Stanislas Letter.
I Know not what Spirit it is that Inspires you, but I own that your
Imaginations jump with mine. We can never Succeed well without the help of
Money. We have Jewels for a considerable Sum in pawns, which are wholly at my
disposition, and on which I shall lay hand, as I hope to do one day also upon
the thing in the World, the most precious. This shall be when you please,
Lovely Creature, let me only know the day and hour that you can make some
Fortune, and you may come without being perceived to the Corner of the
Little-Garden where a Ladder I shall bring shall Correspond with our Designs,
until that Happy Moment.

My Fair One Adieu.

This Letter of advice Transported poor Angelica with joy, who lay awake all
the Night contriving the means of conforming her self to the resolutions of her
Father, she cast her Eyes upon certain small Reliquaries of Gold, garnished
with Gems, and the Veil of a Callice Embroidered, beset with great Oriental
Pearls, which together would make the Sum of Two Thousand Crowns, as it was
easy for her to Seize, on these Rich Spoils she wrote by the way of the Stick
to Father Stanislas that it should depend on him to determine the day of their
Flight. The Stick was Garnished with this fine Note, a Lady of the highest
Quality, a near Relation of the Arch bishop being fallen Sick, and having a
great deal of Faith in the Stick, had it demanded. The Sacristain of the
College went to receive it in the Name of Father Stanislas and put it with
great respect into the hands of the afflicted Person, if it produced not any
effect perhaps the Letter to which it served for Covering, Robbed it of its
Virtue: that Lady kept it so long that our Jesuit had not that satisfaction to
Learn the Tenor of it, besides that he was in mortal apprehensions that his
Commerce would be discovered. However, nothing was revealed, and the Stick of
S. Pancrace does perhaps still serve at this day, for a Scabbard to this
pleasant Writing.

That Answer having escaped out of the hands of our Hypocrite, he ventured to
go ask in the Parlor of the Confessional for his Ingenious Daughter, who had
the Liberty granted her of going to Entertain him under the Veil of the
Sacrament as long as he pleased.

There it was they had the convenience of saying to one another a hundred
tender things, of speaking with open heart, and of concluding that after their
escape they were to retire to Geneva. But for fear that too frequent
Entertainments in the Confessional might create some susspicions, Angelica bid
the Father come and ask for her three days afterward in the Common-Parlor,
where in the presence of Sister Spy, she should make him a present of an Agnus
wherein the Letter should be contained, which should precisely show him the
hour that she should be ready to evade. He was not wanting to be at the Grate
at the day appointed, where he received it from the hands of his Daughter,
which he had no sooner taken, than that the Sister who accompanied Angelica
having taken it to view it had all the pain imaginable to restore it him, being
persuaded that it was full of Relics, which made him often change his Color.
The Father being returned to his Cell ripped open the Agnus, and knew by the
Letter that the design of his Daughter was to Scale the Walls, the very same
Night about nine of the Clock he settled his affairs in all diligence, seized
on the Box of Jewels, which he kept in pawn, and Stole out of the College
Gate, and went to find out a sharper whom he knew would help him in Stealing
away the Religious out of a desire of Money. He found that honest Malcontent
bent to do him Service; He put on one of his Suits of Clothes; They Drunk as
much as was necessary, not to be timorous, and went together at the hour
appointed toward the Corner of the Little-Garden of the Vrsclines where they
heard Sister Angelica Cough, who showed them by that Signal she was there.

Their hurry and precipitation not having given 'em time to think of a Ladder
of Ropes, the Chevaliers cunning Suggested to him to go to his House and fasten
two Dozen of great Nails along a great Plank by favor of which having mounted
upon the very Wall, he sat down, took over that Ladder of a New Invention, and
laid it on the other side, by which our Fair Fugitive Nun mounted and
descended, who was led to the House of that Man of good Will, where she stripped
her self of her Clothes, for to put on a modest Robe, and very propper to
favor her evasion, tho it be very difficult to explain the Transports of Joy
of them both, of her to see her self free, and of the other to see himself upon
the point of Enjoying the Embraces of this Lovely Person; Nevertheless there
passed nothing that Night contrary to Honesty, they lay in Separate Beds, being
resolved to depart very early on the Morrow.

All was hushed in Silence, when their Hosta, great Rogue by profession, went
to Angelica's Bed, sat down by her Pillow, and discoursed her in this manner.
I am not amazed Madam, at your Resolution, I know that the passion alone, of a
vain Mother has put you into Shackles, the whole Province will commend the
Generous Action, which you have now performed: But I am Surprised to the
highest Degree, to see that you seemed Inclined to deliver your self into the
Arms of a J^suite, of a Priest, of your Spiritual Father, of a Man in short,
who will every where be attended by ill Luck: I do not blame you for having
wrought out your Freedom: But not a Man how Libertine soever he may be, but
will blame you if you abandon your self to the Passion of a Person who bears a
Character he shows himself Unworthy off, and who without doubt will have no
sooner abused you, but that he will make Murder follow the Sacralegious Incest;
If I was capable of giving you any good advice, it should be to commit the Care
of your Person to some Cavalier capable of rendering you every where good
Offices, and if I was not afraid of Speaking out of a Motive of Interest, I
would make you the offer of my Arms, of my Fortune, and all my self. This
Discourse which the sharper accompanied and seasoned with the Sweetness of Eyes
and a Composition of an easy Look, made some Impression upon Angelica's Mind:
Never having Loved nor made any returns to the Passion of the Jesuit, but out
of reasons of Interest, and not being resolved to follow him any longer; She
Replied to that obliging Cavalier, That she was Infinitely Indebted to him for
the Civility of his offers, that she Relished his Reasons, and that if she
thought she could Merit his Esteem, she would Sacrifice her self wholly to him,
in a Country where she might be allowed to dispose of her Faith and of her
Liberty.

'Tho Angelica was not so cunning as this Cavalier was sharp, and that she had
no desire to lead him very far, she thought it was Policy, and that her design
would Suggest to her to make use of him, in the present Conjuncture of things,
and this persuaded her to give him her Hand, and protest to him that since she
saw him so Resolved to render her good Offices, she would share with him what
she might hope to obtain from the Liberalities of the Jesuit. These Lovers of
new-date, gave thus one another mutually their Hands and Kisses to Seal the
Bargain, and after this Privacy the hungry Cavalier told Sister Angelica, that
she might Husband things well, that the Father had undoubtedly Money, and that
she ought by dissembling so to Insinuate her self into his Breast, that he
might render her the Keeper of all his Booty, out of the apprehension he might
abandon her hereafter; which having promised to Execute, she told this new
Favorite, that he should offer himself to go and conduct 'em to Chamberry, and
that there they would contrive after what manner they should get rid of the
Father. All this being well concerted, the Cavalier Host retired, after having
given some Liberty his Hands, which Angelica allowed of, that she might not
digest a Person whom she stood in need of, and who had the power in hand to
Ruin her.

It was no sooner five a Clock, then that our Cavalier awaked his Guests; he
Hired Horses, they Break-fasted and departed before break of day, as fa^ as
Chamberry; Every thing Succeeded to the wish of all the Parties. Never good
humor was like to that of our Jesuit, who was wholly taken up with the
thought of the Pleasures, which hepromised himself, in the enjoyment of
Angelica; but alas, be not Love and Interest capable off! That very Evening
they Arrived, the Cavalier and our Fair One had a Secret conversation together,
wherein they vowed the Ruin of the Jesuit, that false Friend was of Opinion
that for the Punishment of his Crime he should be delivered to the Fathers of
the Society, and was very much disposed to play him that bad prank if Angelica
more compassionate, had not contradicted that design, and thought convenient to
strip him of what he had carried away with him: It was for the bringing about
privately this design, that lying in the same Chamber wherein there were three
Beds, She approached, as soon as the Candle was put out that of the Fathers,
kissed him, told him a hundred kind things, her head leaning upon his Pillow,
made him a thousand Protestations of Fidelity, and conjured him that he would
give her pawns and assurance of his. Our Jesuit not foreseeing whither this
tended, told her, all that tenderness Suggested to him in that Moment, and upon
her feigning to answer with Tears for fear that he one day should leave her
alone, a Prey to her despair; She asked him a kindness; he Swore by his God
that she could ask him nothing but what he would grant her forthwith; This
Counterfeit Mistress made some difficulty of unbosoming her Mind, but he
Solicited her with so much earnestness to open to him her Heart, that she owned
to him that she should not be in Repose, until that she was the keeper of
twenty thousand Franks in Jewels, which she knew he had about him, this Man
thinking she Acted with Sincerity, did not suffer himself to be Importuned; He
took out of a Pocket (which he had Sewed on purpose in his Breeches) the Box in
question and put it into her Hands as a pledge of his Love and Fidelity.

Angelica had no sooner got this precious pawn into her Hands, than that she
wished him a good Night, and went again to Bed. 'Tho she was none of the most
Cunning of all Women, yet she failed not to take out of that Pox what it had
most precious, she left only in it about two thousand Franks in Jewels, as a
Bone which she meant to throw for the Cavalier to pick, whom She gave an
account to, on the Morrow of what she had done.

Our Jesuit stripped of a Treasure on which he founded all his hopes, abandoned
the least that was possible for him, her who possessed his affections, the
Cavalier perceiving that he always kept her Faithful but troublesome Company,
thought it a very difficult matter to get time to Entertain Angelica in
private. They had already made three or four days Residence at Chamberry, when
going together to hear a Famous Preacher, they divided themselves in the Crowd,
so as that the Cavalier might easily get up to Angelica.

In the midst of that confusion it was that they Settled their affairs and
concluded to leave the Jesuit that very Moment in the Lurch. All Favored
their design. The Jesuit having been hindmost being obliged to go out first,
and thinking the others must come out of the same Door they went in at, was
Villanously deceived in his expectation. But our Cavalier and Sister Angelica
stole out at another, and in a little while whipped out of sight, and Pursuits of
the Cully of a Jesuit.

I will leave you to judge the amazement that miserable Man was in, who in vain
waited for his Companions at the Inn, where he had hardly wherewith to pay for
his Supper. How extreme soever they judged his Despair, they had not Charity
enough to comfort him in that extremity; they left him a Prey to Cruel
Repentances, and I believe that let a Man be never so much a Philosopher that
he yet looses something of his equality in so Mortifying a Rencounter. But let
us follow Angelica and our Treacherous Friend to the Gates of Geneva, where the
passage between them is something worthy of being Related.

This Cavalier during the rest of the way from Chambery to Geneva, only
Entertained Angelica of the excess of his Passion. He met with no Inn upon the
way or convenient place, but where they alighted; and where he desired her, she
would Second his Flames; She still resisting, giving him good words, and
promising to grant him all at Geneva, and at last making him comprehend that
she was resolved not to abandon her self to him, until after the Magistrate and
Church had Authorized their Union.

As his Wishes grew Irritated by Resistance the more Angelica avoided complying
with the Impurity of his desires, the more he Solicited her to grant him the
last Favor; Nay, he came to such a point of Insolence as to offer forcing of
her in passing through a little Wood, where they had alighted to take the Fresh
Air for a moment: Angelica imagining with some ground that he only disturbed
her in this manner for the pinching her out of some Money: Proposed to him that
in case he would take the pains to Conduct her as far as Geneva, he should have
half the Jewels she had stripped the Jesuit off; At that proposition our
sharper opened his Ears and accepted the offer; But as he was afraid he should
not be so absolute over this young Person, when she had cast her self into the
Arms of the Magistrates of that City; That he was her Master in the Field. They
were no sooner Arrived at the Borough called La Roche, two Leagues distant
from Geneva, than that he pretended he would part from her, for that his
affairs did not allow him to be absent any longer from his House. Angelica
received this Declaration with a seeming Sadness, and put into his Hand the Box
which still contained the Value of two Thousand Franks in Jewels, after having
taken out of it a Ring only of the Value of Thirty Pistols, which she said must
serve for the procuring her some Establishment. Our Cavalier thus provided, and
being persuaded that that young Lady had not cunning enough to hide from him
any thing of what she possessed, thanked her very Civilly and Conjured her she
would pass two or three days with him in that Village, because he was extremely
loath to part from her; This She consented to, as by force, still distrusting
the Offices of so perfidious a Friend. But, alas! this stay cost her many
Tears: That Man became more passionate than ever; He pressed her very briskly,
and gave her no rest, until She had granted him certain Liberties, which she
thought might have mollified his Flames. But that course was prejudicial to
her, his Ferment Increased, his Flames augmented, and therefore to seek out a
speedy Remedy to so impatient a Malady as was his, he proceeded to threaten her
with delivering her to the justice of the Secular Arm, as an Apostate, and as
having committed Sacrilegious. Thefts if she resisted any longer. If ever
Maiden was in Perplexity, Angelica was then in one; It lay in this Traitors
power to Ruin her. She would undoubtedly have yielded to his Lascivious
desires, if a Remain of Modesty (which was strong in a Maiden of her Age, and
newly come out of a School of Chastity) had not prevailed and opposed a Torrent
of Tears, against the wishes of that Madman.

Nevertheless it was the will of God that this Furious Man should give her some
Truce, and that his passion was less than his Compassion. He grew enamoured of
a young Country Wench, a Servant in the Inn where they lay, who according to
all appearances was no Novice in point of Love. This Maiden who was not Ugly,
and granted him all for Money, did not make him absolutely forget the Charms of
Angelica, she only as it were Lulled 'em asleep for some days. True it is that
he Solicited her in vain, and that she declared to him in a word that she
should prefer being delivered to the violence wherewith he threatened her. It
was after having attempted her in vain, by all the ways of Gentleness, and of
Rudeness that he bethought himself of, a pleasant course of satisfying his
passion upon Angelica, without obtaining the last Favor from her, the
particulars of the adventure being as follows.

Our Amourous Spark came to Angelica in the Evening, told her after a very
doleful manner, how Sorry he was to see himself obliged through the necessity
of his affairs which recalled him, to quit in her the Person of the World, for
whom he had the most Love and Esteem, he Drank with her, and no sooner saw her
in a good Humor, than that he asked her if she were not resolved to grant him
for the last time, all that concerned Amorous wantoning, provided he did not
proceed to the last thing.

The Custom they had of toying together, allowing her to hearken to a
proposition, which Engaged her at most to something more free than what had
passed, she Swore to him that she would grant him Quoniam Bonus, with a
Reservation of the use of all the rest. As soon as she had given the word, that
Voluptuous Man, called the Maid, put some Money into her Hand, flung her upon
the Bed, and made Angelica lie down by her, whom he obliged to open her Bosom,
he lift up the Petticoats and Smocks of both of 'em, and lying a little a cross
upon the Maid, having placed one of his Hands upon Angelica's Breasts, and the
other upon her Tuzzy-Muzzy, and applied his Mouth upon hers too, he enjoyed the
one and Embraced the other, with as much Pleasure and Delight, as if all the
Misterious Commerce had passed between Angelica and him.

This new way of enjoying the Amorous Sports seeming to him extremely Ticklish,
he returned more than once to the charge, and made in that Moment Angelica feel
Delights, so approaching to those he Enjoyed, that without doubt tho she would
never own it to me, she exhaled in that moment some tender Sighs. On the Morrow
they Renewed the same dallyances, and thus after having satisfied, and glutted
himself in such delicious Heats, our Cavalier having put Angelica into a
convenience, and having recommended himself to her good thoughts, he Returned
toward Lion through another way, than that he came, to avoid meeting with the
plumed Jesuit.

Angelica being Arrived at Geneva, was much dejected, and out of Humor to see
her self thus alone, and as lost in a Country, where she had no acquaintance,
Armed her self against the weakness of her Sex, and abandoned her self to her
good Destiny. The Golden-Eagle was the Inn where she alighted, she took there a
particular Chamber where she Dined alone for above eight days together, at the
end of which she took a Chambermaid, who served her for a Companion.

As this Inn is one of the most considerable of the City, it is the Resort of
most Persons of Quality. A kind of Pickled Rogue, an Italian by Nation, having
learnt that there had been of late a Foreign Lady in that House, who was
extremely Beautiful, and made a Fair Figure, pretending to be Arrived from
Malta, went and Lodged in the same place. As he went but rarely out, Angelica
must needs meet with him at one time or other, one day that they met going both
to the same place for some necessity, Angelica out of Countenance, would have
returned in have, but was stopped by this Italian, who Complemented her so to
the purpose, that from that Moment they Contracted a Bond of a Secret
Friendship, which cost this poor young Lady very dear; the Italian who passed
over all the Town for a Knight of Malta, who was come to Geneva to Embrace the
Reformed Religion, had Mademoiselle, Angelica asked, (who called her self the
Barroness of Fare) if she would allow of his Visit that Evening. Our Barroness
being Charmed with the seeming Civility of the Italian willingly admitted him
into her Chamber. After the usual Complements, he Entertained her with the
reasons of his abode at Geneva, she Instructed him with the Motives which had
brought her thither, which happened to be the same. Thus they Contracted
acquaintance together, and those same designs which had brought 'em thither
seemed to tend to joining 'em in an intimate Bond. The first Conversation they
had passed no further, but it disposed 'em to some more Familiar
Entertainments. This Italian who took the Quality of a Knight of Malta, was a
discarded Monk, newly escaped out of the Prisons of Millain, as she has been
since Informed, and had Signalized himself over all France, Germany, and Italy
by his Notorious Cheats, and the difference of the Qualities which he took
being young, perfectly well made of his person, and very Insinuating, he
Surprised the Inclinations of the Barroness, who began to make him demi
Confidences. Their frequent Communications Engendered a great Familiarity
between 'em, which degenerated at length into Privacy. True it is that it did
not proceed to yielding up an Enjoyment: But as it is a hard matter to hinder
two young Hearts from Inflaming one another, when Toying and Wantoning Concur
to the doing it, our Knight passed afterward to Freedoms, which deeply engaged
that of the Barroness. And indeed she had no sooner shown him part of her
Jewels with which she decked her self, as a Necklace of Pearl, Pendants, and
Rings, and knots of Diamonds; than that he made to her Proposals of Marriage.
This Blind Maiden who had no experience of the World, thinking to make a good
Fortune by entering into the alliance of this Cavalier, whom she thought must
needs be considered in all Courts for his Quality, his Gracefulness, and Wit,
listened to him very Favorably. But as it would have been unbecoming for them
to Marry before they had Embraced a Religion which renders the Union between
such Persons Legitimate, their Reciprocal Love Augmenting every day, they
Resolved upon being Instructed in the Principles of the Protestant Religion.

How little versed soever the Baroness was in the Doctrine of Geneva, she went
Sincerely to work, when she made her abjuration before the Ministers of the
Church of St. Peter; But the Italian was a Hypocrite and of the Temperament of
most Monks, who have cast off their Frocks, and whom Luxury, Worldly Vanity and
the Love of Women do draw out of the Cloister. He Renounced the Errors of the
Roman-Church rather with his Mouth than his Heart, Interest alone carrying him
to that Action, and the pernicious Designs he had upon the Baroness, gave Life
to his Resolutions.

They were both received in the presence of the whole Assembly of the faithful,
and acknowledged as Members of the Church, with the applause of the whole City.
This Action being Celebrated, they returned home, where they still lived some
time without speaking of Love otherwise than by their Eyes. The Italian, whose
purse began to empty every day, as well by the expenses he was at in the
Magnificent Clothes he made, as by the little presents wherewith he endeavored
to engage the Heart of the Baroness, he fancyed, seeing her one day in a good
humor, that then was the time to Unbosom to her his mind. He discovered to her
the disposition of it so Pathetically, that he persuaded her to all he desired.
She owned to him part of her Gems and Jewels, told him that it was all he was
to expect from her; that she had nothing to hope from her Relations, and added,
that if he was content with a Sum of Ten Thousand Franks, the value of her
Jewels, to the selling of which she consented, and that he might dispose of all
as he should think convenient.

This Booty pretty considerable for a sharper, made him open his Ears. He made
his Mistress a Thousand protestations of Love, told her that he only aspired to
her person, and assured her that with the Talents wherewith he thanked Heaven
for having gifted him, if she would live with him in good Intelligence, Ten
Thousand Franks well Husbanded, were capable of making 'em both a considerable
Fortune.

The unhappy Design which he Meditated, of Stealing away within some days, all
those precious Jewels, made him not speak to her then of disposing of her
Jewels. They consented to pass through the usual Ceremonies, and to have their
Banes Published for three Sundays together: Our Knight did not solicit the
Baroness, until the Second had been Read, for then he pressed her so Briskly
under the pretense that the consent alone was of the Essence of Marriage, and
that the rest was only Policy, that she abandoned her self to him that very day.

As they had now but one Bed, they kept but one Table, and the Baroness who
distrusted not in the least what happened to her, consented that her Spouse
should bring Jewelers to prize their Jewels. They made some offer, but as they
were not answerable to the pretensions of the interessed, they were Discharged.
The Italian to accustom the Baroness not to distrust him, carried with him when
he went out, some Jewels as to show 'em, which he restored into her Hands as
soon as he came back. He disposed her so well by his Insinuations to confide
all with him, that on the Saturday, foregoing the day of the last asking, he
took them all with him, under pretense of showing them to one of the
Magistrates of the City; the Baroness blinded with her passion and prepossessed
with the Candor and sincerity of the Knight let him do what he pleased, and did
not trouble her self with following him. In the mean while that Cheat departed
the City without taking leave of any Body, encharged with these Spoils, without
the Baronesses having ever heard any Tidings of him since. In vain waited she
for him until the Evening, and the Morrow made her judge she had been made a
Cully. All the City knew of her disaster, and a Thousand Persons whom he had
affronted, spoke of his Cheats.

Our Baroness was a long while void of Comfort, for the double loss she had
sustained. She stood in need of all her force of Mind, and of the Visits of
several Pious Ladies, to support her in her Calamity. The Truth is she had
still remaining above twelve Thousand Franks, as well of the remains of the
Jesuits Jewels as of the Gold and Jewels she had Stole out of her own
Cloister. But as she was not so little Judicious but that she did consider that
she must Live above one day, She reserved them for an occasion, wherein without
doubt she might stand in need of 'em.

Before she had tasted the delights of the Bed, tho she was not of an Age to be
an Enemy of Pleasures, she had not felt the provocations of those tickling
Motions which a boiling and sermenting Blood does Excite: But since she had
unhappily tasted its delights, she was become so Amorous that it was almost
Impossible for her to Live alone.

Some Virtuous Ladies apprehending that so Beautiful a Maiden in so tender an
Age, might abandon her self to something as should prejudice her Honor,
Interessed themselves for her, so far, as that one of the Principal of the
City, offered her her House to be nourished and maintained there, as her own
Daughter; She accepted this Condition and comported her self for some time with
a great deal of Prudence in this Ladies Family, But the great Familiarity She
contracted with the Daughter of the House, who was much of her Age, and had
very Libertine Inclinations had corrupted 'em both in a very short time. They
became two Confidents, and two inseparable Companions, and taught one another a
hundred little Games. Our Stranger seeming very Ingenious, very Reserved and
Sage, the Lady was never more satisfied than when the Daughter kept the House
with the Baroness.

However as in so tender an Age it is usual for Maidens to feel certain little
Motions, and to discover to one another what passes in themselves; they made
one another so well acquainted with their complexion, the Daughter called
Judith, explained so well to the Baroness her little Itchings, and her longing
to be tickled, that that Learned Mistress Suggested to her the Secret of the
Godemichi, so much in use in the Cloisters of the Female Sex, and Cousin German
of Seiginor Dildo, who was much in request some years since, with the English
Ladies; At the first Declaration she made her of this Term, Judith let her know
that she knew nothing of the Disposition nor use of that Instrument. The
Baroness rallyed her Innocence, and made this a Conscience of Informing her.
That curious and impatient Maiden desired her so earnestly that she would
declare to her the Mystery, that she could not deny satisfying her Requests.
The Godemichi, said she to her, is a certain Instrument, small or great, long
or short, according to the suitable proportions wherewith Persons of our Sex
ease and procure to themselves Pleasure, when that their -- Itches, and if you
long for the like relishing Bitt, there is nothing more easy than to show you
the use of it. Of what is it Composed, ernewed then the Amorous Judiths. Of a
piece of Velvet well Sewed and made very round, which is filled with Bran. What
is its use pursued She laughing? You shall try it if you please, replied the
Other. Let us only fall to making of it. It was easy for them to meet with
Velvet and in less than a quarter of an hour, she showed by a Sample, that she
was very expert in the Art of making 'em. It was no sooner Finished than that
they were both ready to burst 'emselves with Laughing. The Figure of that
Instrument Furnished 'em with tickling Ideas, and Judith became impatient to
see it put in practice. I shall pass over in Silence what they did with that
Instrument. I know not if it was capable of procuring 'em any pleasure: But
this I know for very certain that the Godemichi was found within 3 or 4 days
after in the Bed of those two Fair Ladies, who lay together by a Maid, whom it
put into a Terrible Fright, thinking it was the Devil. That Innocent Maid
having opened the Sheets and finding that business of Velvet, ran into the next
Chamber, where my Lady was, whom she acquainted with her Discovery. Away
trudged the Lady to see the Monster, but not daring to go near it, and thinking
confusedly that it was a Mole, she went below with the Maid, had the Tongs made
Red hot in the Fire, and called our young Ladies, quite undone at the Recital
of the thing, for to come assist at the taking and Massacre of the Animal. Our
two young Companions never suspected the business, the one imagining that the
other had taken care to lock up the Godemichi, and the one not doubting but
that the other carried it in some Secret Pocket.

That which amazed all was that this Animal what noise and motion soever they
made, had not changed its place. As this gave matter of reasoning to the Lady
and the Maid, the Baroness came near the Bed, took the pretended Animal in her
Hand, and told those to whom it had caused a Panick Fear, that they were afraid
of a very small matter, that their Alarm was false, and that it was only a
Relic filled with Blessed Bran, being the same which a certain Hermit was
used to make his Bread of, who Lived near Lions in a great Odor of Sanctity.
This subtle answer made with confidence, was taken for ready Money, and they all
went away Laughing, without more words being made of it, until the Morrow, when
the account of the adventure having been given at Table, to the Master of the
House, and he was curious to see this Relic, which occasioned so much fear,
tho the Baroness had it about her, the fear she had this kind of Instrument
might not be unknown to that Man, she kept it hid, and saying, that it being a
Dreg of Roman, Superstition, she had thrown it into the Fire, so vanished the
desire of seeing it.

But this adventure which sufficiently discovered the Commerce, and great
Familiarity of the Baroness with Judith, was followed with an other, much more
Pleasant, which will give no less Sensible Proofs of the Privacy, to which
their Gallantry and Privacy did mount. One day when they were in their Night
Gowns, about nine of the Clock in the Morning, that it was very fine Weather,
and that they thought 'emselves alone, they had a contest upon certain little
Questions which passed between 'em, if it was convenient to employ the Cizars
upon a certain Beard which grows in those parts, which Modesty knows not the
Name of. The Valet de Chamber, who had heard 'em confer together upon this
point, curious to know what the Result would be of so Pleasant a Proposition,
ventured to slip softly behind the Tapistry of the Chamber, from whence he
could see the Trial each of 'em made to maintain their Opinion, the one having
her Hair shaved off, or at least cut very close; the other having left it in
such manner as Nature had given it her; Hereupon they tucked up their Smocks
and showed one another the place in question. But not agreeing upon the point
because it was a hard matter for 'em to see it, as was necessary, what pleasant
postures soever they made, they bethought 'emselves of mounting upon Stools,
lift up their Smocks and expose one after the other my Ladies Honey-pot. Our
Valet de Chamber overjoyed to see such like Wonders contained himself the best
he was able, not to interrupt 'em; but as the Capriciousness of Fate always
traverses good Fortune, he was betrayed by an unhappy Cough, insomuch that he
would have been Swing'd to some purpose, so animated were those young Ladies,
if he had not Stole away with the soonest from their Fury. This happy Servant
went and shut himself up in his Chamber to Meditate and Repass over what he had
seen: But he was not there long in Repose; for our young Damsels, fearing he
should discover 'em, all out of Countenance, went to desire him that he would
keep their Secret, and not make a Jest of that little Dispute, which without
Scandal might arise between Maidens. This Valet de Chamber promised 'em
Secrecy, and indeed the thing went no further but stopped there.

Such like Actions engendered certain habits, which passed much farther: The
Blood of those young Ladies Fermenting more and more every day, their thoughts
were wholly bent upon getting Lovers. The Son of one of the Magistrates of the
City, saw 'em both with a willing Eye, which Created between 'em the most
Furious of all Jealousies, they endeavored to Supplant one another, and never
Man of Wit saw himself more perplexed than this Favorite of those two Beauties.
Judith passed for the most Beautiful in his Eyes, and the Baroness nevertheless
shared deepest in his Inclination. Love Suggested to him the Baroness, and
Policy required he should have great Regards for the Daughter of the House. In
the frequent Visits he made 'em, if he looked upon the one more wishfully than
on the other, this entered into Motions of Jealousy, so Prodigious, that their
Weakness came to Light in a short time. Judiths Mother apprehending these young
Women would become the Fable of the City, one day thanked that young Man, and
handsomely forbid him her House. But what does not Love do? He found the means
of Writing to each of 'em in particular, insomuch that the Letters he Addressed
to 'em, fell into their Hands. This is the Copy of that he Writ to
Maidemoiselle Judith.

I Know not the reasons which have moved your Lady Mother, to forbid me your
House. I do not believe to have been capable of doing any thing to Dishonor
The Forbiding me to see you is but a weak means to break our Reciprocal
Inclination, if her Persecution continues, and you desire to be Free, give me
but serious Notice thereof, and you shall find what Love can do over the most
Passionate of your Servants.


And the Letter he Wrote to the Baroness, was conceived in these Terms.

Maidemoiselle,
SHe who Snatches you from me, ought to deface your Charms and Banish out of my
Heart the profound Traces they have left, the more I avoid you, the more I
think you amiable. They are mistaken who believe that being deprived of seeing
you, I can forget you if you Love as much as I Love; Declare to me your Real
Sentiments, and be persuaded, that I am ready to Sacrifice to your Fortune, to
your Pleasures, and to your Liberty, which you are the Mistress of, that of the
most Faithful of all Lovers.


The Peaks of Women last commonly but a days, they could not conceal those Love
Letters from one another. They Imparted 'em to each other, and their
Inclination for Liberty or rather for Libertinage, joined to the offers which
that young Man made 'em, who was one of the Richest of the City, and who could
raise a considerable Sum of Money, made 'em forget their Quarrels, and conclude
upon a Resolution; wherein they Figured to themselves a thousand pleasures.
They did not trouble themselves to make as answer to their Mutual Servant, in
separated Letters, they concerted one together, which was delivered him, which
showed him the desire they had to Entertain him in Private, one Sunday in the
Evening at their Return from Church, he nicked his time so well that he joined
'em, and in that conversation they took the Resolution of running away with
this young Man, if he could carry along with him a considerable Sum of Money,
which he promised 'em to attempt.

The Baroness whom nothing wedded to Geneva, and who considered her self as an
Adventurer who was to follow her Destny, had so prepossessed the Mind of Judith
with the Delights of a Free Life, that that Innocent Creature consented to all
she had a Mind to, she gave her so much horror for the Captivity wherein she
was detained by her Mother, and such fine Idea's of the Libertine Life, to
which they were a going to abandon themselves, that she Surprised her
Resolution, to the Fear which she opposed to her of the Inconstancy of Men,
particulary when they were of so tender an Age, and that they had so little
experience of the World as had this Favorite, she Replied they would only make
use of this young Man, until that he had set 'em free, that they should find
the Secret of Stripping him of what he had; That they could Subsist for some
years on his Money, and that in the Sequel they should find opportunities
enough to Settle themselves in one Court or other, there to Live Happy.

This Cunning Person who had played the Jesuit the like pranck, might well
hope to deceive a young Novice, whom his passion alone Spurred on to the
committing the greatest of all Follies. In the mean while watched the time to
do his business, caused false Keys to be made, and gave Notice to our young
Damsels of the day they were to be ready. He charged himself with two Bags full
of Gold, of about eight Thousand Franks, waited for 'em at their coming out of
the Church in the Evening, paid them the Civility, and under the Color of
bringing 'em back to their House, he went out of the Town with 'em, and away
posted they all together for Basle.

All that passed Remarkable was, that they rid themselves of their Conductor,
after they had Stole away his Money; That the Baroness Dressed her self in Man's
Apparel the best she was able and that they both went down the Rhine together,
for to go to Strasburg, where they heard a Young Prince was forming his
Household. Wherever they Lodged they passed for Brother and Sister, and in that
Quality always took up two Beds. As soon as they were a little acquainted with
the City, they agreed after what manner they ought to give an account of their
Birth, of their Education, of the occasion of their Flight, and of the reasons
of their Arrival at Strasburg. They Resolved to say that being Nobly Born, they
had been deprived of their Father and Mother in their Infancy, and left to the
Conduct and under the dependence of a Tutor, a Man avaricious, Barbarous and
Insupportable, who still used 'em with so much Inhumanity, that they thought
fitting to prefer the Fatigues they expected, before the Misery of seeing
themselves any longer Miserable. And nothing more.

As they were alighted into the most Renowned Inn of the Town, and in that
where that young Prince Assembled his Train; the Gracefulness of their Persons
and Behavior Attracted his Eyes, and he enquired who those Strangers were, who
showed something above what is common. They were Invited on his part to a
supper, the Prince observed and was so taken with the sweetness of their many
charms, that he conceived an Inclination for 'em, and Informed himself of the
Subject of their abode at Strasbourg, they were so well prepared to make him an
Answer, that they did not hesitate to discover to him as in Secret, the Estate
the Barbarousness of their Tutour had reduced them to; The Prince thus Informed
offered them Places in his Court, and asked 'em if they would either of them be
Engaged in any Quality. It would be too much Honor in us, Replied the
Baroness, who now went by the Name of the Chevalier de Bragineour, a Name which
the Prince did not doubt but that it was supposed, and will consent to it with
all my Heart, provided that your Highness will Place my Sister in some Place
where I may have the satisfaction of seeing her every day, and upon condition
we may not be forced to decline our Real Name. Whereupon the Prince having
given them his word, he admitted the Chevalier into the number of his Pages,
and Destined his pretended Sister, who went under the Name of Lilia, to the
Service of a Princess, an Aunt of his, until that the Alliance he projected,
being made, she should pass into the Rank of the Maids of the Future Princess.

Princes of a Benign Nature, doing always more Friendship and kindness to
Strangers than to those of their own Nation, as soon as he was returned into
his States, he desired his Aunt, who kept one and the same Court, to accept of
Maidemoiselle Lilia, this Princess took her to her, and had an extreme care to
Teach her all that was suitable to so fine a young Lady, while that the Prince
her Nephew recommended above all his Favorite Page, to the Masters of the Pages.

That soft Air, Tender Look, and I know not what, which the disguise of the
Baroness could not deface out of her Countenance and her Manners, made the
Young Prince her Master Conceive for this Page a very extraordinary affection.
He became his Minion, the Companion of all his Walks, and the only Page of his
Closet. Bragineour, who had some little experience of the World, and who had
learnt the Art of Dissimulation apprehending that such Singular Favors which
he received from his Master, might expose him too much to the Eyes of others,
and that Jealousy might contrive him some mischief, he managed himself the
best he was able in the good Opinion of his Companions, so far as to declaim
against the hardness of the Service of a Prince, who seemed only to have
engaged him to Ravish from him his Liberty, and lock him in a Closet. But all
this was to no purpose, he could not deceive them in the thoughts wherewith
they were prepossessed, that he was the only Beloved. They saw but too well the
Regards which their Governor had for Bragineour because he was Cherished by
the Prince. And indeed tho this Favorite Page was found Inveloped in the Faults
which commonly that sort of Youth commit, he did not undergo the punishments
wherewith the Libertinage of others was Repressed.

That which animated them most against him was, that Bragineour who saw that he
was made the Author of all the noise and little disorders which that sort of
Youth commits in the Night, obtained a Chamber to himself, which was only
Separated by a Wall from that of the others, where he had his Bed and Chimney.
There was not a day but that they Assembled to contrive the means of laying him
a Snare, that he might grow weary of the Service. By much Meditating and
Conferring together, as there be always some one more Malicious than the
others, one amongst them bethought himself of an expedient, as of a pranck
which put the Life of the poor Bragineour into danger.

The Chimney of the Favorite-Page's Chamber, and that of his Companions being
back to back, and having but five or six Feet, from the height of the Mantle,
and but one Tunnel, insomuch that one mounting with the help of a little
Ladder, so far as that one might make a passage of Communication from the one
Chamber to the other, they Suborned, by means of Money, Merry Andrew dressed in
all his Jack-Puddings Clothes, Decked with all his Feathers and Covered with
all his Masks, into whose Hand they put a Switch, to beat the poor
Bragineour. They were used to Rise at Seven a Clock Winter and Summer, and some
of them curious to see what Bragineour did in his Chamber, had observed tho
very confusedly through the Keyhole, that as soon as he was up he made a Fire
and Rubbed himself, as they thought with a warm Napkin from top to Toe. Thus
one day that they waited his Rising and Lighting the Fire, they tied Merry-
Andrew with a Cord under his Arms, lifted him up to the Mouth of the Tunnel of
Communication, put a Stick in his Hand and let him slip down of a sudden into
the Pages Chamber, who was Rubbing himself after his usual manner stark Naked,
who was so Frighted at the aspect of so hideous an Object, which he took for
the Devil, that he fell Topsy Turvy, in a Swound for fear; without Merry
-Andrew whom the Pages drew back, stood in need to give him any blow.

Angelica Bragineour, I say, remained thus in a Swoon for above an hour. His
Companions going to the place of their usual Exercises and this Favorite Page
not being there with the others, their Governor went himself to knock at his
Door for fear some Indisposition should have befallen him, he knocked a long
time in vain, had him sought every where, returned to his Door, from whence he
heard him give a great Sigh: The Door of that Chamber being only of Firr Wood,
in two or three strokes with his Foot he burst it open, came near the Page,
lying all along, whom to his great astonishment he perceived to be a Woman.

So strange an adventure Surprised him, he used his efforts to get her up, but
seeing her opiniative through the Deviation of her Senses, which the fright had
caused in her, to lie upon the Floor, he shut the Door again the best he could,
called a Footman whom he set Sentry at the bottom of the Stairs, with
prohibition to let any one go up.

Then he ran directly toward the Prince his Master, who got up in his Night
Gown, to whom he related confusedly what he had seen; they mounted together
into the Pages Room,, who had not changed his Situation lying upon her Belly.
The Prince moved at the sight of so sad a Spectacle, and still uncertain of the
Truth of her Sex, lent his hand to the governor to help him to carry her upon
the Bed, where having laid her, he was convinced of the Truth, and saw a very
amiable Object. Never Physician did more to ease a Sick Person, than this
Prince, who was become that of Angelica's, did for this Page. He put her to
Bed, caused restoratives to be brought, which he applied himself, that he might
recover her Spirits, and from his Swoon, in short, one may say that he omitted
nothing of all that may restore his Favorite into his usual condition.

Neither did he Labor in vain. In a few hours Bragineour recovered out of that
Trance, and his Face became as Serene and as vermilion as before. The Prince
having recommended the Secret of the Discovery to the Governor of his Pages,
whom he ordered to Treat this still after the usual manner, caused Bragineour
to be dressed and commanded him to follow him, into his Chamber, where he shut
himself up with him, and gently persuaded him to declare to him what had
obliged him to disguise his Sex, and conceal his Birth. As to her Birth that
cunning Maiden remained in the same terms, except that she called her self the
Eldest Sister of Mademoiselle Lilia, and that her Name was Sarah. As to the
reason which had moved her to conceal her Sex, she told him she thought her
self obliged to take that course in the design she had of seeking her Fortune
with her Sister in Foreign Courts, two young Maidens Traveling being always in
danger, and a Man, who is thought so at least, obviates the Insults which might
be made by Impertinents and ill intentioned.

Ingenuity and Innocence seeming to speak by the Mouth of that Maid, the Prince
gave credit to all she told him. Love then seizing on his Heart, he assured her
that he would take an extreme care for her; That she was to dissemble and
counterfeit her self still for some time, that so her circumstances might not
be bruized at Court, and that in a short while he would put her in a condition
to appear elsewhere, what she was.

The mischeivous prank which the Pages played Bragineour remained Buried out of
Policy. The Merry- Andrew was known by the Favorite Page, demanding Alms at the
Kitchen Door, he was questioned and threatened so long until he confessed all,
and offered to show the Authors of the pranck, if the Pages were but brought
before him, the Prince thought not convenient to punish those Malicious
Persons, reserving to himself however the giving 'em a Juniper Lecture.

The accident which had happened to Bragineour in his Chamber had Created in
him such apprehensions that he went not in it without feeling himself Surprised
with Mortal Terrors. He declared his weakness to the Governor, who gave
notice thereof to the Prince, by whose order he had another Room given him. The
Prince having appointed him a Chamber at the end of a Gallery, wherein he might
enter on the side without being seen by his Guards; He made her Evening and
Morning a Visit, until that at length after some resistances which pleased him,
and rendered him perfectly enamoured, our Beautiful Travestry granted him all
he desired. His Secret pleasures and as Stolen, did so powerfully engage the
Prince, Wedded him so to his Page, that he spent half the Nights with him. The
Rumor of the considerations and tenderness which he had for Bragineour,
spreading about the Court, one day that he went to see his pretended Sister in
the Princesses apartment, she spoke to him thereof, and upon her telling him
that she was afraid he had declared to him the Truth of things, Angelica told
her all that had passed. Whereupon she advised her to behave her self so
wisely, that she might not give any suspicion, because that the Prince, tho of
that Age, was not so well proof against the Remonstrances of his Aunt, but that
she could prevail with him to rid himself of an Inclination capable of
prejudicing an alliance, which was destined him by all Germany.

She had reason to give him this advice; for in a few days after, the Prince
going to make a serious Visit to his Aunt, she asked him the Liberty of
Remonstrating to him how that the Courtiers made a Jest of the assiduities
which he rendered to one of his Pages, and the familiarity he had with him;
That the People made Raileries upon this Commerce below his Rank; so far as
that some Audacious Persons had said that they were very much amazed he did not
undertake a Journey into Italy, a Raillery he was told, the sharpest in the
World.

These Mortifying Remonstrances, and made to a Prince, who brag impatiently to
see himself Slave to his Pages Charms. He could not be a Moment from him, and
was never in good humor until he had been for some hours shut up with him, his
Aunt who was a Princess Judicious and of great Wit, seeing all these practices,
and not being able to conceive what there could be in this Page, that could
Reign so absolutely over the Inclinations of the Prince her Nephew, she thought
that for the Repose of the Court, it became her to endeavor the breaking this
Commerce, she conferred for that purpose with a Counselor a very discreet Man,
and very Wise, and desired him to prevail with that Page to consent to leave
the Court, she Conjured him to Employ all the means which Prudence should
Suggest to him, even to very Menaces, if his good advice had not the power to
make him resolve to take that course. This Prudent Personage promised her to do
his best; But it was so difficult for him to find a Favorable occasion to
discourse the Page, with whom he was not Familiar, that he was forced to render
himself more than ordinary assiduous to the Prince, to have an opportunity of
Speaking to Bragineour.

One day the Prince was a Hunting, the Page warming himself in the
Antichamber, and our Counselor meeting with him there, they discoursed for
some hours together, at first upon indifferent matters, and at length with a
Familiarity a^ disposed Bragineour to give Ear to some Enigmatical words which
were started by the Counselor. As he was grown sharp and Sagacious enough, and
that besides he imagined that this Man who had the Ear and Heart of the Prince,
might know something of his affairs, he asked him with so much earnestness the
explication of the obscure, and confused Discourses he had held him, that this
other having demanded his Secrecy, told him that there was something very
Fatal, Brewing against him at Court, and from which the Prince could not secure
him, how tender soever his Inclination might be for him; added that it would be
for his advantage to make use of the Gratifications of his Master; Counseled
him to to take powerful Recommendations from him, and go think of his
Establishment in some other Court. The Page having thanked him for such good
advice, promised him to make use of it, and joined the Train of the Prince who
was returned, who seemed to be Jealous, for having found the Counselor with
his beloved Page.

When that all the Company was withdrawn the Prince remaining alone with
Bragineour enquired of him what had been the matter of his Entertainments with
the Councellor. Upon which the Page seeming in disorder he grew suspicious,
which made him press him to give him an account of all the circumstances. The
Tears of that Beautiful Travestry Antidated her Narrative, but after she had
dried 'em up she Revealed all that had passed between the Counselor and her;
She told him that she saw plainly that Jealousy opposed her Happiness, that it
was dangerous for her to stay in that Court, and she desired him to consent to
the most cruel Separation on her part, that ever could be imagined. The Prince
listened to this History with a very uneasy patience, it seized him in such
manner that being agitated with two different motions, of Anger and of Love, he
cast himself about the Pages Neck, Swore to him that he had nothing to fear at
Court, and that he should know how to discover who those were, who would, who
durst Traverse the greatest pleasure of his Life. He fancyed these all to be an
effect of his Aunts Artifices. He quarrelled in his Heart with her, and if he
continued to make her Visits, it would be merely out of Duty.

Our Travested Baroness had still at that time above twelve Thousand Livers, in
Gems, and Jewels about her. The Prince who knew nothing of all this, made her a
Present of a Ring and of his portrait Enriched with Diamonds of great Value,
forbidding her to show 'em. When she saw her self Rich with these things, the
fear she was perpetually in, that the Prophecy of the Counselor would have
it is effect, made her declare her Mind to a Footman, capable of facilitating
the means of her Flight, who upon the hopes of a hundred Livers gave his
consent to all she desired. Whereupon the Page and Footman laid aside their
Livery, and went out of the Town in the Night, upon Horses, which carried 'em
to Heydelberg. In this City it was that our Baroness stole away her self with
her hundred Guinies from the wretched Footman. The truth is he searched for her
for above three days, but to no purpose, tho once he met her in the Street,
because she had put on Apparel Suitable to her Sex, which disguised her from
the Eyes of that Cully.

At the Arms of the Empire in that City she spent near a Month, which she
passed in seeing in the Company of the Daughter of the Family, all that was
there worthy of the Curiosity of a Stranger.

In the mean while the Flight of the Page and Footman, which had caused a
mortifying displeasure in the Prince, having made a great deal of noise at
Court, where the Mystery of the Baronesses design, who still at this day passes
for the Sister of Mademoiselle Lilia, had not been Revealed, and a considerable
Sum having been proposed to those who could discover the way they took, several
Persons set forth immediately to see if they could gain this prize; The Footman
was Arrested, Conducted and put into Irons, when that a Gentleman of the number
of those who are called Pretenders at the Court, having been as far as
Heydelberg, the Capital of the Elector Pallatine, met with and knew again there
the Favorite Page, tho Apparrelled in Women's Clothes. She failed not to Inquire
of the dispositions of the Prince as to her, and if it was not true that he
came thither on purpose to hear Tidings of her. He satisfied her upon that
point, gave her an account of the Inclination of his Master, whose tenderness
he exaggerated to her, and endeavored to prevail with her to return. But
seeing he could not prevail with her, his design was to go back to Court.

This Gentleman extremely well made of his Person, spoke of taking leave of
Her, impatient to go impart to the Prince his discovery, when Angelica, who had
taken on Her again her Quality of Baroness, and who had a great inclination for
that Cavalier, had the confidence to tell Him, as by way of Galantry: But Sir,
why do you Employ your Eloquence with so much Zeal and Ardour for a Prince to
whom you are not yet obliged? Why do not you speak for your self? At this
overture of Heart and such like advances, whether he thought the witty Baroness
meant to divert her self, or that she spoke in good Earnest, he replied, that
he did not esteem himself worthy of possessing a Person, who had so much merit,
and that if he durst pretend to that advantage, he would declare to her the
effect which her Charms had produced upon his Heart. You may dare it, replied
she, and I swear to you, that I had never any tender or real inclination for
any Body but you. These words which she insinuated, more out of sport than
uttered 'em in good Earnest, engaged so powerfully the Cavaliers Heart, that he
thought no more of returning. He owned Ingeniously to that Fair One the State
of his Purse, which was very infirm, and made her Protestations of an Eternal
fidelity. The Baroness grown thus weary of being a Vagabond and of leading a
licentious Life, thought it became her to confine her Inclinations. Whereupon
she declared to this Gentleman, that she carried about her, as well in Gold as
Jewels, a Sum considerable Enough and capable of helping him to seek his
Fortune. They did not bargain long, and lost no hours in impertinent
Discourses, they gave one another that very moment their Hand and Faith, and
preventing the time of the Nuptials, they dislodged that very Evening, to go
Lodge in a Place where they passed for Husband and Wife: Never did any new
Married Couple enjoy a Sweeter Night, than that which these Lovers passed
together. They wantoned all the Morning, and rose very well satisfied with one
another. But as a Calm presages a Tempest, and that the greatest sweets are
always mingled with bitterness; Our happy Cavalier going out about some
business, was no sooner at the Corner of a Street, than Justling unwillingly
against a kind of Bully, who charged him with Injurious Language, not being of
a Temperament to suffer all, and prudence dictating to Him to make answer, he
fancying that this Affront being made him in public, it became him to reply to
the insult. Whereupon he Nosed that uncivil Man, who drawing the fate of Arms,
would needs have it that our unfortunate Gentleman received a Thrust which
bereaved him of his Life, the Author of his Death had time to make his escape,
and the Rumor of the accident being spread abroad incontinently amongst the
Crowd who came about this Dead Man, and the Maid of the House knowing Him to be
the Husband of the young Lady, who was Lodged at Her Masters House, away flew
she to give the Baroness notice thereof: This Beautiful Widow by anticipation,
at the Relation of this Fatal adventure fell into a Swoon, from which she had
all the Pains Imaginable to recover. How vehement soever that her grief was,
she did not run to see that Tragical Spectacle. She was only heard to say, O
God shall I always be the Mark of a Fatal Destiny, which having said, lifting
up her Eyes to Heaven she gave Order that the Body of the Deceased should be
brought to the House.

No Body but did imagine to see that young Woman burst out into Sobs at the
sight of so pitious an Object. The curiosity to see what her despair would be
capable off, she had drawn after the Body a great Concourse of People, who
Crowded into the Room where the Corpse was laid. But this pretended Widow
exalting het self above her self, far from producing those Motions usual to the
weakness of her Sex, contented her self with Wiping the Wounds with an equality
of mind which surprised all the Bystanders.

As in so Fatal a Rancounter, there was now nothing more to be done, than to
carry the Body to the Grave, which only demanded Earth, she caused all to be
prepared that could suit with the Funerals of a Person of Quality. She spared
nothing of all that could render 'em pompous and Sacrificed for that purpose
the value of a Thousand Franks. The Funeral Ceremonies being over, she thought
not fit to stay any longer in a City which brought every Day to mind the sad
Object of her Lovers Disaster. She went on the Morrow for Francfort, from
whence passing to Mayence, she met with the young Man of Geneva, whom she had
so Villainously Deceived, tho she endeavored to avoid meeting with him, and
turned back as soon as she saw him, yet he knew her, and followed her with so
much diligence, that he observed the House she went in. It was to assure
himself the more of the truth of things, that he stood Sentinal five or six
hours pretty near her Inn, until he had the pleasure of Saluting her at the
moment she was going out. It would be a hard matter for me to express the
greatness of her surprise at her encountering of this Cully, she her self could
not describe it, that she urged for Justifying Reasons of her Treachery, the
Infidelity of her Companion, and the Opinion they had, he only followed 'em to
enjoy 'em, and then leave them in the lurch.

The reasons the least Specious are Truths in the Mouth of a beloved Person,
that young Man being more fond than ever of the Baroness, who pretended her
self poor, and he promised to help her with a hundred Pistols, which he said he
was to receive at Cologne. Whereupon away went they for Coblentzer, but were no
sooner there Arrived than that the Baroness meditated on the means of her
escape. The fear she had of this young Man in a Foreign Country, where she had
not any acquaintance, prevailed with her after some small Resistance to take
the same Bed with him. Three days after their Arrival, being gone out to
receive his Bill of Exchange, she nicked her time so well that she stole out of
the House to go take a Chamber elsewhere. She Sojourned at Cologne near a Month
without Budging out of the House; he enquired through all the City and Country
without getting any Tidings of her. Whereupon she departed at length to go to
the Court of the Prince of Parma, saw in the way the Cities of Rhimberg, Wesel,
Nimmeghen, Boilduc, Breda, and Antwerp, and Arrived at length at Bruxelles,
where she designed to spend the Winter.

In that City it was, where she displayed all her Jewels, except those she had
received by way of gratifications, from the Court, from which she Stole away,
which consisted in a Ring, a Watch, and a Portrait beset with Diamonds. Thus
had she got a Sum of about Twelve Thousand Franks, and she Dressed her self
after so Gallant a manner, that she seemed one of the finest and most
Monopolizing Ladies of the Court, Contenting her self with one Lacquay and a
Chambermaid. During all the Winter which she spent at Bruxelles, there were no
Assembly, nor Parties of divertisements at Court, but at which she was present.
An unknown Person extremely young and fair, who made so neat a Figure,
attracted the Eyes of all People, they became curious to know who she was, but
no Body could tell, so much cunning had she to disguise her Sentiments, her
Gallantry and good humor acquired her for her first Conquest, the Esteem and
Heart of a Prince, whose Name she commanded me to suppress, he made her
frequent Visits, all the Court talked thereof, and the Rumor came to the Ears
of the Princess his Wife, whom Jealousy was going to hurry to strange
extremity, when the Baroness having Notice thereof, absolutely broke off so
dangerous a Commerce.

The Palace of the Countess of -- being the General Randezvouze of all the
fine People, she frequented it, to the great prejudice of her Purse, which they
emtied in a little time. The Prince whom she had Charmed, perceiving she no
longer played so high, imagining that she wanted Money, thought to make her an
offer of that kind, would be the true way to bring about his Ends. One day that
she lost to the last Farthing, and that he was sitting by her, he slipped into
her Pocket, a Purse of four hundred Duccates, with the help of which she
recovered part of her loss. This was the right way to engage her* and as there
is no Heart proof against Gold, the Baroness on the Morrow, upon a real Letter
from the Prince, consented to take Coach to go a Journey with him for three
days. This Sally was known by the Princess, who abandoned her self to such
prodigious Motions of jealousy, that she Swore she would give no Bounds to her
resentment, until she had Rid her self of her who durst thus Sully her Bed. The
Baroness having Notice of the Danger she was in, and of the Fatal Designs that
were Brewing against her Life, meditated her Retreat from the Court, after she
had Read the following Letter which was given by an unknown Person to her
Servant.

If you are of Quality, you be-lie your Birth, by the Infamous Commence you
take a Pride in. We have studied all your ways, and have discovered your filthy
practices. Bridewel where you k^ow Women of your Fashion Expire their
Licentiousness, does expect you. Be gone if you are wise, within three days it
will be too late to depart. Consult your interest, and take this Charitable
advice from the Person in the World, who hates you the most, and who would
undoubtedly go insult you in the Fetters you deserve.

This Fair One thus Crossed in her pleasures, at the very Moment that Fortune
seemed to look upon her with a better Eye, was very much Mortified at the
Reading of this Letter: This Advice which only departed from a jealous Person,
and whom she presumed to be the Princess, her Lovers Wife, seemed to her
extreme Salutary; she knocked off the very same day. But having given her
Footman and Maid leave to go walk out of Town. She satisfied her Landlady, and
caused her Trunck to be carried to the Boat of Antwerp, where she took her
Place by a Merchant, whose Magnificent outside be-lied his profession.

This Man of about Thirty Years of Age, being perfectly Well-bred, and being
besides of a very Gallant humor, observed in the Baroness so easy an Air and
manners so agreeable in their Liberty, that he could not imagine ought else,
but that she was some high flying Miss. He discoursed some time seriously, and
the conversation still growing more Familiar as the Night advanced, he pushed
things on so far that the Merchant declared to her, that he had a tender
inclination at Antwerp, for the maintenance of whom he was at excessive
charges; that this Miss of his, was about Eighteen years of Age, and near her
Lying-In, and that as soon as she was Delivered, he would part from her, after
having given her something that was handsome; whereupon the Baroness owned to
him that she was seeking out a good Fortune, which was a hint sufficient. Then
this Merchant put a Diamond Ring upon her Finger, to the value of 600 Livers as
a Pawn of his Love, and made her such propositions, in Case she would accept of
his Company, and answer his Flames, that she consented to what he pleased, and
took no other Chamber than that he appointed her. Their Amorous Commerce lasted
some time without the Merchants former Mistress receiving any Visits from him.
She suspected he had changed his inclinations, and having had him spied,
discovered the place where he daily went. She once followed so close upon his
heels, that she entered immediately after him into the Room; that which
confirmed her in the opinion she had a Rival, was, to see that her Servant,
took her Concurrent immediately about the Neck, and held her Embraced a long
while. Hardly were they separated, than that this Miss being Transported with
Fury, gave the Baroness a Box of the Ear with all her strength, whom the
amazement of the Action rendered Mute as well as the Merchant, who had need of
all his strength of mind to appease the difference; he made her believe that
the Baroness was the Sister of one of his best Friends, who has been
Recommended to him, expecting a Bill of Exchange for the going suddenly into
France.

Tho this Wench gave no Credit to these Defenses, she calmed her Rage however,
and was brought to her own House by her Gallant. This Merchant being Returned,
asked a Thousand Pardons of the Baroness, and made her change her Lodgings,
gave her Money, and went no longer so often to see her as before for the Regards
he had to his former Amors. This abatement did something Cool the Baroness.
She looked upon what she received from this Lover, as too small a matter for
her to Subsist on, and be Maintained, and this made her resolve to share her
Favors. She contracted an acquaintance with the most qualified Bawd of the
Town, and few Evenings but were worth to her two Guineys. Our Merchant was not
long Ignorant of this petty Commerce, he thought fit to render himself certain
of things by himself, and it was for the discovering the truth of things, that
having been in the House of pleasure, which she frequented, spent there four or
five times together at a high Rate, he Conjured the Mistress to procure him the
Company of some handsome French Woman, if she had any acquaintance, the Bawd not
suspecting in the least what happened, promised to obtain him the satisfaction
he demanded on the Morrow, and she went to prepare the Baroness to come and
gain some considerable Matter.

The truth is, the Baroness did not appear in Company until she had first
informed her of the Quality and Figure of those with whom she was to have to
do, that so she might not fall into the snare; but the pourtrait that had been
made her of the Person which desired her, being that of a Person of High
Quality, and the Opinion she had, that her Merchant satisfied with two, did not
haunt suchlike Places, made her Dress her self with all she had most precious,
to go to the House where she was expected. Then was she introduced into a Room
where a stately Collation was prepared, and her Heart already Leapt for joy, in
the hopes of the pleasure she was going to receive, when that she saw her
Keeper enter into her Chamber, who would needs Embrace her without seeming to
know her again. At this surprising Spectacle she retired two or three Steps,
and had like to have fallen Backwards. The surprise of 'em both being equal,
they remained mute for some time. The Merchant opened his Mouth to declaime
without doubt against the Infidelity of his Mistress, when not allowing him time
to speak, she told him, giving a great Shigh, Are these Sir, the Protestations
you made me? Ah, there is no trusting of Men, how, cannot two satisfy you? tho
People swore to me you hardly ever stirred from hence, I had such good
Sentiments of you, that I did not think you capable of so Blameable an
inconstancy, but I am convinced that you are the most perfidious of all Lovers.
Our Merchant being amazed at this come off of his Mistrisses Wit, yet uncertain
of the truth of things, and not knowing what Sauce to Eat with this Fish,
excused himself upon that he thought himself in an honest House, where one of
his Friends would needs entertain him with a Collation. He Counterseited being
in a Rage, Grasped his Land-ladies Hand, and went out with his Mistress, whom he
Led to her House.

Our Baroness had not so little understanding, but that she Judged this
Encounter would Create some abatement in her Lovers affections. She redoubled
her Caresses, and did all that a cunning Miss and one grown expert in the Trade
can do, to squeezed as much Money from him as she could, paid her Landlady, and
broke up her Quarters one Morning Early without Trumpet, with a design to go to
Holland. She went for that purpose into a Ship Bound for Rotterdam, wherein she
mademore Vows than the Papists make in Ten years time to the Lady of Loretto,
never was she so good a Christian as she became, hard by William-Stadt, where
the ship was severely Tossed by a sudden Tempest, that it lay above two hours
upon one side, and in short underwent the ill Treatment of two Hurricanes,
which turned it Topsie Turvy, tho it recovered again immediately as by a
miracle, leaving only Fear and Water to the Passengers.

The Ship being come at length into safe Harbor, by the Clemency of the Winds,
Angelica disembarqued at Rotterdam, and went to Lodge at a certain French
Cook's House called la Fleur at the Buck, just opposite to the English Ships,
where the Landlord was as good Natured as the Hostess was Ugly. Tho she staid
there but three or four days, her Neatness and gracefulness attracting her the
Landlords Eyes, his Wife became so Jealous, that she desired the Baroness
unknown to her Husband, to take a Lodging elsewhere, which being told to la
Fleur, he went to his worthy Spouse, Cudgel'd her to some purpose, nay, Broke
her very Jaw Bone.

From Rotterdam, Angelica went in the Delft Boat, with design of going to the
Hague. There it was she saw a sample of the Wonders of the Life of Holland, in
all those of the Nation, who carry Bread, Beer, and Butter in Satchels, for
fear of Qualms, and to spare charges. The History of an Honest Woman upon this
Subject, does merit being related.

The Boat had hardly passed the first Bridge, is not far distant from the City,
than that a certain Old Woman, who had by her a Girl of about Twelve Years Old,
grew Hungry. She reached her Satchel from behind her, took out of it Bread as
brown as Earth, a Pot of Butter whereof she made, and She and her Daughter Eat
about Twelve Butterams. Which having swallowed, she then ferreted in the same
place for an Earthen Pot full of small Bear, but found nothing but the heads
and pieces of the Bottle, the Beer being all spilt, and lying at the bottom of
the Satchel, which was of Leather. She seemed at first vexed at so sad an
Accident, but she Comforted her self at length, seeing that her Satchel held
Tite, and that none of the Beer was run through. Wherefore to disperse and drown
her trouble, she made her Daughter hold up the Corner of the Satchel, drank,
made her Daughter drink, shut up the Satchel again, and regarded no Body, as if
the business had not been singular, and that no Body had seen her. But this
proves the Innocent manner of the Country, let us now see what was capable of
giving her a High Idea of the Character of the same Nation.

Angelica was busy with Reading a Romance which she held in her hand, when an
English Man of Quality, who sat opposite to to her and spoke Latin, burst out
in a fit of laughter, which made her enquire after the Reason and Occasion of
so much good humor. This pleasant Cavalier told her, that he had Reason to
Laugh at the answer he had newly received from a Hollander, which was as
follows. That English Gentleman having asked him in Latin, of what profession
he was, and the Dutchman having reported that he was a Counselor at Law, he
enquired of him if he had never been out of his Country, whereupon the
Hollander who seemed to be some Body, having replied to him with a disdainful
Air, that he had not, to which the Englishman added, But Sir, have you not the
Curiosity to see Rome, Paris, Vienna, Stockholme, Copenhagen, Madrid, and
London, No Sir, replied the Hollander, all those of the best Quality of my
Country, who have wandered over all Europe, nay, almost the whole Earth, have
told me, that they had seen many Countries, but that they had no where met with
this Holland, Nunquam reperimeam Bataviam. For Polieness and good Breeding, you
mean said the Englishman, Generally for all pursued the other.

Tho the Passage from Delft to the Hague is but an hours going. Angelica spent
her time very pleasantly in the Boat. A young Man of Vtrecht, of very good
mean, having cast his Eyes upon her, and Judging her the Handsomest of the
Company, would needs make Love to her. By ill Luck he did not understand French
no more than Angelica did Dutch; which made their conversation extremely
diverting to those who understood both Tongues. The Hollander having said a
Hundred kind things to this Fair Miss, and she having heard 'em without
understanding 'em, told him at length that she did not understand him. He
understood her as little, insomuch that he spoke in vain, since all the reply
he made to her words was, Ick kan niet Vestan. This Rancounter wherein the
conversation last some time in the Terms of the same Compliments, would
undoubtedly merit being Written; But as it is suddenly to be the Matter of a
Romance, which shall be Entitled, The Perplexed Lover. I shall here touch
nothing more of that Comedy. Angelica at her setting Foot on shore at the
Hague, met with one of those convenient Women, whose Houses are open to all the
Fair ones of the Trade; they forthwith made acquaintance, insomuch that Our
Wanderer went to take immediately a Lodging at her House, when that destiny
furnished her with an opportunity favorable to her Interests. A Jeweler that
was a Jew haunted this House: that Man who was Married at Amsterdam, spent at a
Rate which sufficiently spoke his Opulency. The Master of the House
Communicated to Angelica the design he had of having the Jew surprised in her
Company by the Schout, for the getting some Money out of him. Angelica consented
to all, promised to Play her Part well, and went to give the Provost notice of
the business.

The Collation was prepared, and the Jew Drank up to a good humor, during
their Amorous Wantonings, the Schout was Introduced with two of his Officers
into the House; the Jew threw Angelica upon the Bed, and in the very moment he
was going to do the Feat and Mount to the Attack, the Officers Entered, who
took him in the Fact, and disappointed the Jew in his performances for that
time, which made the poor Cully weep for vexation. Tho he could not deny it,
yet the business was contested for some time. A great deal of Bustle there was
upon the matter, and the End of the Farce was, that the Jew gave to the value
of a Thousand Crowns in Jewels, to avoid a severer punishment, the Case was
divided, and Angelica called by a certain Bawd of Rotterdam to fleece a certain
Cully who deserved to be so served.

A certain Seal-maker, a very able Workman new Arrived from France, being
Lodged at a certain Heridan's House, having Conjured her to procure him a
Handsome Whore to Marry, and who would renounce her former Commerce, she
Suggested to him Angelica, had her brought to him, and was Contracted to her.
Angelica Cunningly got out of his Hands to the value of Four Hundred Livers in
Rings, and a Hundred and Fifty Duccatoons in liquid Silver, which was his whole
Estate, pretended that she had Lovers, and some at Amsterdam whither she
Conducted him, she went to Lodge with him at the Famous Madam la Vunche's behind
the Old Church, whom she prepossessed with the thought, that this Amorous Cully
had a great deal of Money to spend, was Treated there for Eight days together,
with all she had a mind to, and left the Ninny there, to pay all the charges
she had put him to.

After so fine an exploit, Angelica being returned to the Hague, and now her
Ill Destiny having granted her too long a Truce, she went to her Misfortune,
and Lodged in a Semstrisses House, who also did often the Office of a Heridan.
The Jesuit whom this poor Wench had so villanously Cullied, having taught
French for some Months in the Hague, haunted this House. The Hostess whom he
favored, and to whom he procured Customers for both Trades, told him fine
things of the Beauty of her, who had taken her Chamber. He was Curious to see
her, for to offer her his Services, and found in her with the highest
Astonishment, her who had rendered him unhappy. One may Judge of the surprise:
If the Jesuit was struck Dumb at the Sight of her, Angelica fell into a Swoon,
out of which they had all the pain imaginable to bring her again. What matter
of Rage and Fury soever this Jesuit had against that Maiden, his Ancient
prudence Suggested to him a fixed equality, he told her the softest Words
imaginable, and insinuated himself so Cunningly into her good Opinion, that
Angelica whom I call Innocence, with respect to the Artifices of a Jesuit, gave
Credit to the Protestations he made her, of forgetting what was passed,
provided she would Vow to be Faithful to him for the Future. They did not part
that day. Our Jesuit who called himself Le Sieur Galois, and had a pretty good
Reputation, represented to her, that being able to gain honestly a Livelihood
for her and himself, it became her to Comport her self discreetly. She was
pleased with his Counsel; consented to go take a Chamber with him, in the
Quality of his Wife, newly Arrived from France.

They lived for the space of three Weeks in very good Intelligence, the Cunning
Jesuit having for her all the Deferences imaginable. But what did not this
Natural Offspring of Judas meditate? What did not he Brew against the poor
Angelica? All the Treachery which the perfidy of an insulted Jesuit is capable
off. The matter of Fact was as follows. He Studied for some time the
Inclinations of Angelica, furnished her with all the Diversions he could
imagine, until that one Day she had owned in her Drink, that she had still in a
secret Pocket for above Ten Thousand Livers in Jewels. Their Familiarity
Augmenting every day, Angelica not being willing to part with her Treasure, and
the Jesuit not thinking fit to Strip her of it by Force nor by Cunning, in a
place where it would have made too much Noise, he proposed to her, to go take
the Air at Scheveling, for they having the Convenience of Diverting 'em selves
with the more Liberty, Angelica not foreseeing that some hours of Merriment
would cost her whole Days of grief and vexation, accepted the offer. Whereupon
they Troaped thither accordingly, went into a Tavern, where they spent the
Night, until on the Morrow Morning, that the time and Sea-Calms seemed to
invite 'em a walking. They Breakfasted after a handsome manner, until that the
Wine getting into their Pates, they thought Convenient to go Dissipate the
Fumes of it upon the Strand, where they walked until they were quite out of
sight of all other Persons. Our Spark seeing himself in that Place Master of
Angelica, put his Hand into the Water, and found the Sea so warm, that he
Suggested to our Innocent Fair One, that they should find Bathing both
Delicious and Healthful. She at first rejected the proposition; but he
Solicited her so sweetly, that she Stripped he self for Company six Paces from
him. He was Stark-Naked, and had already Wantoned in the Water, when that
seeing Angelica come in with her Smock on, he lifted it up and took it from
her, with so sweet a violence, that she would then have been taken for our
first Mother in the Moment of the Creation. In went she into the Water, where
they Washed, Kissed, Whipped, and a Hundred other little Toyings, and then sat
down to be Caressed by the Waves. Our Jesuit advised her to Bath her self as
long as she could well suffer it, Leaped out of the Water, Dressed himself
again, hindered her after a Sporting manner from coming out, until that he being
completely Dressed, he took up in his Arms all the Clothes of Angelica, with
which he ran a Cross the Downs, without any News having since been heard of
him, leaving thus that Fair One Stark-Naked, who ran after him in vain, but she
quickly lost sight of him, and remained as a perfect Model of EVE Revived.

FINIS.

