An Exact Account of the most Remarkable Fires which have happened in LONDON
And other Places in England, from William the Conqueror, to the Reign of the
Best of KINGS, CHARLES the Second.
FIve Hundred and Eighty Years since, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand
Eighty Five, and the Twentieth of William the First, called the Conqueror,
there happened a dreadful, and very Great Fire in LONDON, which devoured not
only Houses, but Churches, all the way from Ludgate to Aldgate, not sparing
that Matchless Fabric, the Church of St. Paul. In the same Year ensued a great
Famine, with a Lamentable Mortality of Men and Cattle.

In the Year One Thousand Ninety Eight, Five Hundred Sixty Seven Years since,
and in the Eleventh Year of William the Second, called Rufus, for the space of
fifteen days, great Flames of Fire were in several Places, and at sundry times
seen, to the great Amazement of the Spectators.

In the Time of Henry the First, which was in the Year One Thousand One
Hundred, Five Hundred Sixty Two Years ago, the Earth on a sudden discharged
it self of horrid Flames, which by the Art of Man, could not be suppressed.
Soon after Chichester, with the Principal Monastry was Burnt to the Ground.
Immediately after that, from West-Cheap to Aldgate in London, a Long Tract of
Buildings was consumed by the merciless Element of Fire; and least it should
be charged with any partiality, Worcester, Rochester, Winchester, Gloucester,
Bathe, Lincoln, Peter-borough, with other Places, did share in the like
Calamity of their Metropolis.

In the Seventh Year of King Henry the Second, One Thousand One Hundred Sixty
One, about Four Hundred Seventy Eight Years since, at Osythes, in Essex, was
seen a very Great Fiery Dragon, which in its motion Burned several Houses, if
we dare credit Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle. In the same Year, almost the
whole City of Canterbury was Burnt down. On the Twenty Fourth of his Reign, the
City of YORK was Burnt. In his Eight and Twentieth Year, Barnwell near
Cambridge, with the Priory was Burnt: not long after Chichester was Totally
consumed by Fire. In the same Kings Reign, in the Year One Thousand One Hundred
Eighty Eight, the Town of Beverly was Burnt, with St. John's Church.

One Thousand One Hundred Eighty Nine, in the Time of Richard the First, Four
Hundred Sixty Eight Years since, Mawling in Kent, with the Nunnery, was
destroyed by Fire.

In the Reign of Henry the Third, One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixteen, Three
Hundred Ninety Five Years since, a great part of the City of Canterbury, with
the Church of St. Mildred was Burnt. Also the Town of New Castle upon Tine was
Burnt, with the Bridge.

In the One and Twentieth of Edward the First, and in the Year, One Thousand
Two Hundred Ninety and Three, Three Hundred and Sixty Years sinc^ a Great Part
of the Town of Cambridge, with the Church of our Lady was Buried in Ashes by an
irresistible Fire. In his Twenty Seventh Year, his Palace at Westminster, with
the Monastry adjoining, were consumed by Fire.

In the Seventh Year of Henry the Fourth, One Thousand Four Hundred and Six,
Two Hundred Fifty Four Years since, Reyston in Hartford-shire was Totally Burnt.

In the Fifth Year of Henry the Fifth, One Thousand Four Hundred and Eighteen,
Two Hundred Forty Five Years since, a great part of the City of Norwich was
Burnt.

In the Third Year of Edward the Fourth, One Thousand Four Hundred Fifty Three,
One Hundred Eighty Four Years since, York Minster, and the Steeple of Christ's
Church in Norwich was Burnt.

In the Year, One Thousand Four Hundred Eighty Five, a great Fire happened in
Bread-Street London, which consumed the Street, with three or four more
adjoining.

In the Fifteenth of Henry the Seventh, in the Year One Thousand Five Hundred,
One Hundred and Fifty Nine Years since, the Town of Babram in Norfolk was
utterly consumed by Fire.

One Thousand Five Hundred Forty Eight, in the Second Year of Edward the Sixth,
about One Hundred and Thirteen Years since, St. Ann's Chur^^ within Aldersgate
was Burnt.

One Thousand Five Hundred Sixty One, in the Third Year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, Sixty Five Years since, the Spire of the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, being sive Hundred and Twenty foot from the Ground, and Two Hundred and
Sixty from the square Steeple where it was placed, and was made of Wooden
Materials, but covered with Lead; was by Lightning Burnt down, together with
the Roofs of that Large Church, within the space of five hours, which Roofs
were soon after Re-edified, but not the Spire.

In the Sixth of King James, being in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and
Eight, a Malt-House in the Town of St. Edmonds-Bury, being by casualty set on
fire, continued burning till it had consumed One Hundred and Sixty Houses.

In the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Thirteen, on the Seventh of August,
the Town of Dorchester, was totally Ruined by fire; beginning in the House of a
Tallow Chandler, destroying all the Houses, except a few near the Church, and
all their Wares and Goods, to the value of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds, yet not
a Man or Woman Perished.

In the same Year, Two Play Houses, that of the Globe on the Bank-side, and the
Fortune Playhouse near Golden-Lane, were both burnt to the ground; The first,
by discharging a piece of Ordnance, and the latter, by a Candle.

In the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Fourteen, the Town of Stratford upon
Avon was burned.

In One Thousand Six Hundred Thirty and Three, and in the Eighth Year of King
Charles the First, that blessed Martyr; A Fire brake out on London Bridge, by
which most of the Houses that were built upon it (which when they were all
standing, made up a very Beautiful Street) were burnt down to the ground.

I shall omit to speak of Fires which have happened since; as the blowing up f
several Houses, and Persons by Gun-power in Tower-Street; The firing of everal
Houses in Thread-needle-Street, Fleet Street, and Fleet-Bridge: But if my Eyes
(deluged in tears, to think on this last Unparalleled Conflagration) will assist
me, I will give a brief Account thereof.

On Sunday Morning between one and two of the Clock, it being the Second of
September, One Thousand Six Hundred Sixty Six, this much talked of, and
Prodigious Year, a Fire brake out in a Bakers House in Pudding-Lane, which had
by Twelve at Noon, so strengthened its Force, by too too many unhappy
advantages; As drought of the Season, rotten Houses, Pitch, Tar, Oil, with
other Combustible Matter, that all Endeavors proved ineffectual in the
Obstruction of its irresistible Power. It ran with that impetuosity (dilating
it self) that soon New-Fish-Street, the Bridge, and a great part of Thames
Street were all in flames; The People all amazed, and despairing, to put a stop
to its fury, gave it leave to act its Tyranny, which it did almost Universally
through the Whole City. This Sacrilegious fire, as it had no mercy on Private
Houses, so it took no pity on Churches, Hospitalls, Halls, the Exchange; nay
St. Paul's must once more be made a burning Sacrifice to its fury. But I must
desist, since this sires true Description, will take up more room, then the
narrow limits of a Sheet, nay more.

This is the Reason, why I am so Brief,
I am unwilling to renew your Grief.

Licensed the 2 d. of February, 1667.

Roger L' Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Head, at the Sign of the Bible in Heart in
Little-Brittain, 1667.


