Mr. Evans and Mr. Penningtons PROPHECY: CONCERNING Seven Years of Plenty, and
seven Years of Famine and pestilence. Fore-Shewing, What strange events and
effects will fall in this present Year, 1655, now the seven years of Plenty are
past, and the seven years of Famine and Pestilence are now at hand. Declared in
the Vision of Visions out of the Prophet Daniel. Together with the coming of
the Fifth MONARCHY. Also, a great Conflict with that great and terrible Dragon
Satan. With diverse other notable Visions and Revelations necessary to be
published.

Printed in the year, 1655.

Upon the 2: of Jan, 1649, was dreamed that William Pennington had a Mattock in
his hands, ready to pave the streets of Paradise, with all sorts of precious
Stones, and a voice came at the same time, saying, behold, diligence and
patience overcome all things,

Upon May the 3. (...) Was revealed by Vision, that a multitude of men women
and children rose up against me, with Clubs, Canes, and Hobby-Horses, and at
that moment, when my Brains were ready to be beaten out, I was rescued by a
woman; saying these words the Secret of all Secrets, which I have always
observed: this Secret was the whitening of the Spiritual Pearl, foretelling
seven years of plenty, and seven of Famine, the seven years of Plenty are
past and now comes the Famine; so that I lived now by gathering in the,
plentious years past, which though it were but a grain of Mustardseed, yet it
shall so increase that the Birds of the Air shall lodge in it, from whence shall
fall feeding for the Hen and Chickins.

September 3. 1653. A Vision represented me to have fallen into a ditch as
white as snow, and my head was covered all over with salt, and a voice came
unto me, saying, go and cry against this Nation, for Sin come out of her, O my
people least you partake of her Sins: and I heard another voice saying, Babylon
is fallen, Babylon the great is fallen Amen. Halleliuah 2.

The Vision of William Pennington, -- Which was revealed unto him the 20. day
of June, 1654. As it pleased the Lord to cast his Servant into a deep fleepe,
where I saw a sight too glorious for sinful flesh to behold, and I heard a
voice saying, Pen my Son pen, arise and denounce Judgment against this nation,
and behold I saw a pair of Stairs, and an Angel of the top thereof, who
lifted me up from below unto the highest Staire, and blew into my care, and
suddenly I saw great London, or rather the Map of it, appearing upon a
Sign-post, and the Angel said, see thou all these glorious structures, these
excellent beauties, these pollitique brains, I say unto thee, there not one
stone be left on another, within these few years, and the Lord shall blast all
these beauties with the small Pox, and the Politicians shall fall into the pit
they have dug for others and suddenly I heard a huge clap of thunder, and a
Voice saying, these words are mighty and true, blessed are those that belive,
and another Angel took a handful of crumbs and scattered them on the earth, and
a young man with a Crown of Gold on his head gathered the crumbs, and under his
wing many thousand poor souls that have suffered for conscience sake; and
silence was then commanded, and behold I saw other Angels with sicles in their
hands saying, behold, harvest is now at hand, and I was ravished with joy and
awaked.

Upon the 6: of July last past 1654. as I stood awake in my own imagination
near Aldersgate I saw King James pictured over the gate riding on his daple
gray, and a voice said, wonderest thou not the slow riding of this Monark, for
me thought his horse stood still and he could not move him with his spurs, then
said the voice, look, a story higher, and I beheld from the Zeads two white
feet with a pair of wings, and they came down with such incredible swiftness
like the ropes of a Bell, and settled on my head, then I looked and saw a young
man, but could not feel any weight, and he said unto me stand sure for I will
not offend you, then the winds fell a blustering so strongly that the houses
were shaken, and many fell to the ground, then the young man gathered these
winds together and put them all into four bladders saying, I am your Master,
and I have power over you, then there was a great calm, and behold a multitude
of women and children came to jeere the winds, which brake out into worse
disorders and consumed all the people round about, but the young man said, it
is enough I come not to destroy more, for the Hitties and the Amorites are all
rooted out, then the yonng man dashed the Crown of his head in pieces and was
carried on my shoulder to Foster-Lane, where he had a Crown put on his head so
weighty that I was not able to support the burden, then he gave me a white
satin Cap bestuck with pearls saying, now your expectation was at an end, and
this is fitteer for you then a Crown of gold, then me thought I answered I am
satisfied, blessed be my eyes that have seen this day, and my ears that baue
heard these sounds and my mother that boar me, because I now see the will of
the Lord performed and suddenly I awaked.

A Conflict with the Dragon.
ON the 12 day of September, walking toward Lambs-Conduit, there ceme to me a
man Riding upon an Aso, and leading another in his hand, he alighted and took
me by the breeches and threw me upon the other Ass, and carried me away out of
my knowledge into a place where the ground was al covered with venomous Beasts,
which did leap up at me, and there was a sulferrons smell that had well nigh
choked me, and he carried me into a pit, where I was going down still, and yet
we came to no bottom; at length we came to a place that was as narrow as a
chimney, and at the bottom he brought me to a room of a very great vastness
wherein there were many souls tormented and tossed up and down with forks of
Iron. and endeavored to push me in, but I was too strong for him; whereupon he
opened a door hehind a Courtain, and bid medepart; I went two days and nights,
without meeting any one, at length I met an old man with a long beard, and he
gave me an Apple and bid me eat it, and it would bring me into my way; going
along eating my apple, there ran between my legs a great Boar and carried me
away with grret swiftness that I was bereaved of my sight, at length he threw
me down and cried. go thy ways with a vengeance, and do thy work; and presently
my sight came to me, and I was hard by Lams-Conduit, where I was thrown upon
the Ass.

Jn the dead of night I was, much troubled in my rest, and my Bed and Chamber
did rock like a Ship upon the vast Ocean, and the noise of guns greater and
smaller, I did perfectly hear with pitiful out-crys and groans of many
people, as though they were in my Chamber or in ship; this storm continuing,
and we wanting Sea room. we cast Anchor, but the violence of the storm
continuing, so violently, we were forc'e to quit our anchors and commit all to
provivence J was droven upon a Rock, where my vessel was beat to picees, and
upon a piece of the Mast I escaped to the shore, the rest being drowne^; I
traveling some two days and nights without eating or drinking; almost
dispairing of hope of life; the next morning early, I came into a place where
there were multitudes of Orchards, with fruit only on the top boughs but very
fair, and it was revealed unto me, go up and gather to preserve thy life, and
I did so, and ear long, thou shall be able to preserve both thy life and
others; immediately after I fell a sleep, and when I awaked! was in my own bed.

Another Vision of William Pennigton.
IT seemed to me that I was in a desert, where I heard the cries and howlings of
terrible wild Beasts, and I looked about and saw a multitude of people of al
sorts, I did approach them, and immediately there did rush out of a wood three
Rams, which ran amongst the people, and did overturn many of them, and
dispersed the rest; I was gotten upon the stump of an old decayed Tree,
expecting the event; the biggest of these Rams did approach to the Tree where
was, accompanied with the other two lesser Rams, and rubbed himself to and froe
against the Tree, and I heard a voice saying unto me, fear not thou that
fittest upon the Tree, thou have been faithful in a little, I will make the
ruler over much, and being surprised and effected with sudden joy I started and
awaked.

A Conflict with Satan in Moorfields, upon the tenth of December. 1654.
AS I walked in Moorfields, me thought there came to me a young man clothed in
white, I asked him the way into Canaan, and he directed me into a dark Forest,
where was nothing but Owls, Snakes and Bats, the trees being all covered with
glowworms; I ask him his name, and he told me, he was called Bunhil, and that
he was a Miller by his trade: He asked me to drink with him, and carried me into
a dark Cave, where the Hostess came to us and brought us Ale in an old Lamp,
which was full of Aquafortis. The young man drank to me, but when I tasted it,
it had like to have choakt me; then I turned to blow my nose, and I saw a
company of hoggs; these, said the young man, are the heard of Swine that came
from Gazaret, and desired me to slay and eat. With that, J mistrusting him,
trnued up his petticoat, which he had under a long robe he wore, and found his
feet to be cloven, and his cods were made after the fashion of milkpails, then
said a voice, this is the great dragon, bind him, and I took 2 yards of white
yncle, and bound him to the earth, and a voice answered, It Is enough. Hallelujah.

Another Vision of William Pennington.
IT happened that I fell into a dead sleep, and dreamed that J saw a man coming
toward me, in a long black robe, and he awakened me, and told me, I must go
along with him. J asked his name, and he told me his name was Trompington: He
told me likewise, that it was necessary for me to go with him. J arose and he
led me through a very narrow lane, where the boughs cratched me by the face; we
went along til we came to a thick wood, where the trees were hung with all
sorts of weapons fitting for war, he took one and bid me take another, and told
me I must defend my self, or I should not escape his fury. I sought with him,
and cut off one of his legs, and fell to the ground, and I cut off his head
immediately, and I heard a voice saying unto me, thou have fought a good fight.
then there arose one clothed in white, shining more glorious then the Sun,
singing Hosa^na in the highest, glory be to God on high, and peace on earth,
good will toward men, and immediately the body in white departed from Me.

The Vision of Visions declaring out of the Prophet Daniel the coming of the
fifth Monarchy, the renewing of all Musical instruments, as Organs, Cornets,
Tabor and Pipe, for to rejoice the hearts of all old Christians, and the fall
of Babylon the great,
ON the ^1. of Nov, between 2 and 3 in the morning, I saw a throng of Nobles
with trumpees blowing before them in S. James's Park, with a Table spread with
all sorts of variety, with an abundance of women clothed in white attending
the Tables and the ghost of K. James, descended from above, with great joy and
pleasure congratulated their jubilee, telling them that he beheld that which
had not been seen in 15. years before, and called their meeting the first
Monarchy. Then the Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Singing men and Choristers in
their Copes and white Surplices sung an Hallelujah, and from thence they led on
to Westminster, where barges were prepared, the Ordinances thrundring from
Southwark, and from the Tower, and from thence to Greenwich, where I Will.
Pennington had deliverd to me the keys of the Castle for the behalf of me and
my heirs for ever. Then I heard a voice telling me, this was the fruits of my
yiedling, for so we call Beggars in our country, and that this was the
interpretation of my emtying the Houses of offices, so that I beholding this
Vision, do gather that the 5. Monarchy is coming, nay, near at hand, which
must come in with masking, dancing, and revelling in Courts, and in country,
with all manner of wakes and feasts, in so much that the very Cattle, oxen, and
Horses for a time shall be eased of their labor and travel, then shall the Bells
ring, and Bonfiros shall blaze, and this shall cause strangers to call England
the burning land, because men's hearts shall burn with joy and gladness, then
shall gold come from Opher, and the streets stal be paved with precious stones,
and it shall be a Land slowing with Milk and Honey, then the Amorites and the
Brusites; and the lebusites shall be driven out, and this is the Construction
which I am able to draw out of this Vision, onlic in the mean while Diligence
and Patience must wait for the Trial of lews and Gentiles, those that have
faith shall be admitted into this Land, and those that have not, shall be turned
under my shop board.

Me thought on the 10. of December 1654: I saw three bushels of Wheat, and when
I came, to approach to touch them, they were deminished to a Peck, which struck
me into wonder, then I handled the Wheat and they swelled to an innumerable
Mess, enough to store a whole Kingdom: this Wheat signifies the spoil of a
Kingdom, and the restoring of it by my means; this wheat was then lifted up and
carried to the University of Oxford, to be as store for the whole Land, it was
all wrapped up in white Sheets, and they were all cut out into Surplices, which
the Bishops wore, and this wheat was strung in Ropes like Beads, which the
Bishops wore about their Necks, then said a voice, here is the true Catholic
Religion, and I awaked.

Upon the 6. of November about the dead of night, there appeared unto me a
great black Cloud on my left hand, which did often times issue forth great
flames of fire, and there appeared out of the Cloud, many Monsters of hideous
shapes, and about the upper end of the Cloud there appeared a great Monster
with a fyery face, more terrible than the rest, and there went many Companies
of fiens consulting together, but shortly after they were disturbed amongst
themselves, and there was a very great noise, and there came a voice unto me
saying, my Messenger arise and go and bring in the glorious white Cloud, and
let the black Cloud be dispersed, and after a little struggling, the black Cloud
was dispersed, and many of those hideous Monsters, with that syery Monster,
were destroyed, and there was a great shout, and incomparable music, with many
harmonious voices, singing, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good
will toward men, and being ravished with joy I awake.

Upon the 20 of December I beheld a woman coming out of the ground clothed in
Scarlet and gallant array, and the Stars decended and covered her, and put a
Grown of Gold upon her he ad, saying, al out power, and al our luster do we
bequeath unto thee; with that she hegan to be puffed up, grew insolent; making
wars with the Stars, and pulled them al from their spheres unto the very ground
on which they lay for dead for the space of half an year, upon which they
rose, and with much struggling brought her under them again, they spoiled her
rich arayment, and having exposed her our to the fowls of the air, they threw
oer down into the bottomless pit, and so lawaked.

Einis.

