A LETTER Sent from his Excellency, ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, etc. to the Lord
MADOR of London.
My LORD and Gentlemen,
I Received so great expressions of affections both to the Cause, and to my
self, from the City of London, at my departure from you, that I cannot
despair, but to obtain my suit from you, that shall be an advantage to the
Common wealth; upon a true judgment of the condition of our affairs, and of
that of the Enemy; I am confident that we may bring this business to a quick
and happy conclusion, God does bless us with so good success daily; and the
other part by their plundering and burning of Towns and Houses, grow so odious
that they grow weaker* we stronger everywhere; yet are we in one great
straight, and such a one, as if it be not speedily remedied, may quash all our
hopes, and endanger that peace and liberty which we so much labor for; our
treasure, which must maintain our Army* grows near an end; and you well know
our Army consists of such as cannot be kept one day together without pay: what
a ruin it would bring upon us all, if a disbanding should happen, I leave to
your judgments: My desire unto you is, that you would supply us with a speedy
loan of one hundred thousand pounds, which I am confident would (with Gods
blessing) bring these unhappy distractions to an end quickly: your City has
hitherto had the honor, next to God, to be the chiefest saftie of the Kingdom
and Parliament; this will render you to all posterity the finishers of this
great work. If any thing of particular love or respect to me may be any
argument herein, I shall take it for the greatest honor that has befalne me,
and will oblige my self to acknowledge it by the utmost and most faithful
endeavor of

From the Rendez-vouz at Northamton, 15. Septem. 1642. Your faithful friend
ESSEX.

September. 19* 1642. London, printed for William Gay.


