A Bermudas Preacher Proved A PERSECUTOR Being a JUST TRIAL OF Sampson Bond's
Book, ENTITLED, A Public Trial of the QUAKERS, etc.

Fraught with Fallacies, False Doctrine, Slanders, Railings, Aspersions,
Perversions, and other Abuses, herein Detected, Disproved and Wiped off.

And that the True Christ is Owned by the People called QUAKERS, plainly Made
Manifest.

By those that have been more particularly concerned, and Eye and Ear-Witnesses
in the Dispute at Bermudas; and those that have had the perusal of his Book,
which manifests it self.

The Wicked has dug a Pit for others, and is fallen into it himself. Psalm.
7.15.

A Lying Tongue is but for a Moment. Prove. 12.19.

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, 1683.

To the Inhabitants of these Islands BERMUDUS:
A Testimony for the Truth and People of God called Quakers, against the
Reproaches, Scandals, and Slanders of Sampson Bond: Who calls himself a
Minister, or Preacher, of the Everlasting Gospel, in the said Islands.
Friends and People all;
COnsider seriously your condition, for it is exceeding Dangerous at present;
for the Everlasting state of your Souls is herein nearly concerned; for he only
that believes shall be saved but he that believes not shall be damned,
according to the Scripture.

Therefore Friends and People, all be advised by him who is your Friend; and
take the Counsel of the Apostle, in the 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether
you be in the Faith, etc. For through Faith alone you come to have an Interest
in the Salvation purchased by Christ Jesus the Eternal Son of the Father; who
was in the Beginning with the Father, as it is in Prove. 8. from 22, to 31. read
them Verses, and consider, and weigh them well; for this is he in whom your
Faith must stand, and not in another; this is he whose delight is with the
Children of Men, and through whom the Wonderful love of God came to be made
manifest unto the Sons and Daughters of Men in the Restoration, after Man had
run into Rebellion against God, and lost that glorious Likeness or Image that
he had at the first, when God Breathed into him the Breath of Life, through
which he became a living Soul; and so long as he kept in faithfulness to the
Lord, he kept his Dominion over the Creatures, and his Habitation as in the
Garden of God, the Garden of his delight; where the Trees of God did flourish,
and the Tree of Life in the midst thereof: The Lamb was not slain then. But
when Man turned aside from following the Lord, and hearkened to the voice of
the Serpent; then Death was known, then was the Lamb slain; when this World of
Wickedness (the Foundation thereof) was laid by the Enemy, then was Man cast
out of the Paradise of God, into the Earth which was cursed for his sake, where
the Thorns and Thistles is brought forth, and the way to the Tree of Life
stopped up; for the Cherubim and the flaming-Sword was there, which turns
every way, that Man in the old Adams state, cannot come near to Eat or Taste of
the Tree of Life. Oh People! Behold, here is your state; every one in Old Adam,
all separate from God, from the Covenant of Life, without God in the World,
even in the World of Wickedness, in Death, in the Curse: this is your state and
condition whilst you remain here, until you come to know a coming forth, till
you come to witness the Seed of the Woman to Bruise the Head of the Serpent, to
overthrow his Power, who is the Prince of Darkness, and is the chief Ruler in
Man in the state of Disobedience.

So Friends, it is high time for you to return to the Lord, and consider, even
in this your Day, the things that belong to your Peace before they be hidden
from your Eyes; for such a time will assuredly come to pass, as ever it did
upon the Old World; they had a day when the Lord strove with them, but they
would not hearken, but turned aside into the Evil Imaginations; then their day
passed over, and the Spirit of the Lord ceast striving, and the Flood came and
destroyed them all, except eight Persons; so mind your time, lest it pass over
your Head ere you are aware; and the Flood of Gods Wrath come, and sweep you
all away, as it did them.

So all People come unto Christ Jesus the Gift of God, and believe in him, that
through him you may come to witness Salvation: For as the Servant of the Lord
did testify in Ages by past, so do we witness the same, there is no other Name
given under Heaven, whereby we may be saved, but by Jesus Christ alone, which
is not the bare Outward Visible Appearance or Body only, but as he was
testified of by Gods faithful Witnesses, even in that Age; who although they
did bear witness to the Outward Man or Body, yet they did not exclude the
Godhead, when they said, Act 2. Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God by
Miracles and Wonders, etc. The same Jesus which ye Crucified, has he made both
Lord and Christ.

Friends, consider well this matter, for this Scripture was brought by your own
Minister against us and the Truth which we profess, thereby to prove if he had
been able, that the Body without the Godhead, or Jesus of Nazareth (...) Humane
Nature (as he called it) without the Spirit, was the only Ma^^^ (...).

To which I answer, It was the chief work of that day or time, to bear witness
to him who had been set at naught by the Chief Priests and Rulers, and by the
generality of the People; whom they also put to Death, even to the shameful
Death of the Cross; as it was written by the Prophet long before, He was
numbered with Transgressors, etc. For notwithstanding all the Miracles which he
had wrought among them, they would not believe that this was he that should
come (no more then People now adays can believe in his Spiritual Appearance)
but they were looking out in the Carnality of their Minds, for another to
appear, according to their Imaginations, as People are in this Age and
Generation, and will not receive the true Christ within them; therefore the
Witnesses of God in that day were the more engaged to bear so strict a
testimony to his Bodily Appearance, that this was he that was to come, and they
were not to look for another: And so gives them plainly to understand, that the
Lord had exalted him into his Kingdom, for he had made him both Lord and
Christ; whose Kingdom was not Carnal but Spiritual; as he himself said, my
Kingdom is not of this World. But did this Testimony deny the Godhead? for
consider, by what Power were these Miracles done? was it as he was merely Man,
or by a higher Power? See John 14.10. The Father that dwells in me, he does
the works, says Jesus himself, he there bearing witness to the Eternal power
that dwelt in him: And verily People, if Man's Salvation had been wholly
perfected by the ^ody, without the Spirit of Christ; then our Faith and Hope
should have stood there; but the same Apostle says, Our Faith and Hope is to
stand in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. And the Apostle to the Hebrews says, The Hope that
anchors the Soul, enters within the Vail, Heb. 6.19.

And John did bear witness to the Word which was in the beginning, John 1.1.
which Word the World was made by, and says of it, that it was God, and in this
Word was Life, Verse. 4. and the Life was the Light of Men, and this was the
Light which that Faithful Witness of God, John, bore witness to; That is the
true Light that Enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World, Verse. 9. So
People, that which enlighteneth both you and us, and every Man that comes into
the World; is not a Natural Light, as some say, and the Priest sometimes; nor
yet the Light of the Devil, as the Priest says othertimes; but it is the Light
of him that made the World, as V. 10. and this is he that was made Flesh. V.
14. and the Word was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory
the glory as of the only begotten Son of God, full of Grace and Truth. So here
John bears a full Testimony to the Savior of the World, and so do we, who is
the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World; it is not said, he
takes away the Guilt o^ Condemnation of Sin only, but the Sin it self; thus do
we believe in him. So let People judge whether this be not the true Christ. So
here John did not bear Record to a Body only, but to the ^nal Power and
Godhead, so the Apostle, Heb. 10.5. bears witness to him, for whom the Body was
prepared, saying, a Body have thou prepared me, to do thy will, O God. So it is
clear that this Body was prepared for him that was before that Body was, this
was he who David in Spirit called Lord; saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
thou on my Right Hand till I have made thine Enemies thy Footstool. And in the
2 Cor. 5.19. the Apostle gives this Testimony, God was in Christ reconciling
the World to himself. And Jesus himself said, before Abraham was, I am: and in
another place, He that has seen me has seen the Father also. So let any one
judge that has a good Understanding, whether any of the Witnesses of Christ
did ever bear witness against the Spirit in the Salvation of Man; but does
truly and really bear a living Testimony to the Spirit, Romans 8.2. The Law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and
Death: now at that time when Paul cried out of the Body of Death, he was a
Believer, and was come so far as to a willing mind to serve the Lord, but yet
the Captivating Spirit was felt, the Law in the Members, in which state Paul
did not sit down in a belief of Christ at a distance only, as People now a days
do: but cries out for Deliverance, even from the Body of Death, and afterward
testifies to the Law of the Spirit, saying, The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, has set me free from the Law of Sin and Death. So here is
Salvation witnessed indeed, he did not say Sin must live in him while he had a
Body: but says, Christ lives in me. Gal 2.20. And it is through the Spirit
that Sin is mortified. Romans 8.13. and in Romans 10.8. The Apostle testifies to
Christ nigh, and not to Christ at a distance; saying, The Word is nigh thee, in
the Mouth, and in the Heart. and in the 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether
ye be in the Faith try your selves, know ye not your own selves that Jesus
Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates. and in Col. 1.27. Which is Christ in
you the hope of Glory. For it is no other then that Christ, the Saints did
believe in, in days by past. It is his Spiritual indwelling in us, through
which we come to be sanctified and clea^sed from Sin; and the Comforter, the
Spirit of Truth, which Christ promised to send to his Disciples; which they
were to wait for at Jerusalem; and accordingly they did receive it, and this
dwelt in them to direct them into all Truth; and so it was not a Spirit without
them, or a Christ without them only but within; according as Christ said, John
17.14. He dwells with you, and shall be in you. And the Apostle testified in
his day, Christ was in the Saints, who was their Hope of Glory, and this hope
purified their Hearts in whom it dwelt, and Anchored their Souls in that which
is sure and st^dfast, and in him is our hope and confidence, who we believe is
able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him. And so People it is
in the Name of Jesus we Witness Salvation which is his Power, to which comeing,
we Witness Salvation thereby; and so we know not another Name through which
Salvation is Witnessed, but through this Name and this is he whom we declare
of, who is not far from us; and the efficacy of his Blood we feel (as we abide
in him) to cleanse us from Sin. So I do not matter what your Teacher S. B.
says, viz. The Blood of Christ cleansith no Man from Sin: It being so contrary
unto the Apostles Doctrine (1 John 1.7.) which is, But if you walk in the Light
as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the BLOOD of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. And we witness it in its
Opperation, Cleansing and Washing the Soul from the Spiritual Defilements, of
which some amongst us are come to the experience of in our measure. So that we
are not as those that beat the Air, but we are come to experience in some
measure (as I said, although S. B. did mock at it) the Virtue and Power of that
Grace of God which has appeared to all Men, through which the Saints were
taught in days by past, and in Ages and Generations long since; to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in
this present World; now this Grace is the same t at ever it was, and its
teachings are the same, to all that are Obedient in this day as it was then, to
bring Salvation; indeed I do not know any Doctrine so plentiful in the
Scripture, as the Indwelling, or Inward, or Spiritual Appearance of his
Spiritual Kingdom; which whosoever does come to partake of, must be redeemed from
the Kingdom of the Devil. So having taken off that Reproach and Slander from
Christ whom we believe in and is our Savior, the first and the last, the Alpha
and Omega, the Beginning and the End of the Work of God: Who S. B. called the
Devil, and said, he would prove it by the Scripture, but has indeed fallen
short of his intended matter: So I leave that, and come a little to examine the
proof of the second false Assertion, viz.

That the main End of the Quakers Meetings in these Islands: is to make the
Lords Christ, his Holy Spirit, his Angels and Apostles, all Liars and false
Witnesses of God.

Now let any Reasonable Man judge, what ground or foundation he has to lay
down such a positive Assertion; for he never was at any of our Meetings in
these Islands, to know our practices in our Meetings, whereby he might discover
our ends; but either he must have it by Information, or Supposition, or
Consequence; Which either of these may prove true or false; and therefore
whether the one or the other, it is too slender a ground to build such an
Accusation upon, against an Innocent People: but whither will not Envy lead a
Man? Even to shame himself.

But let us see how he will prove his Work. Why Mark. First, he supposes, That
the main end of our Meeting is to declare to People, or to build up one another
in this Doctrine; that the Light within, or Spirit of Christ in us is the
Savior. This he supposes to be the main end of our Meeting, and this says
he, is against the Testimony of Christ to the Man whose Eyes he had opened,
John 9.35, 36, 37. As I remember this was the Scriptu e he brought when the
Blind Man enquired, who the Son of God was, that he might believe? Jesus
Answered, I that speak unto thee am he. This says he, was the Man or Body
only: from whence he does infer, that the Man Jesus considered merely as Man,
is the only Savior, and therefore says he, The Quakers main end of their
Meeting is to make the Lords Christ a Liar.

No^ see what Weight this Argument has in it; the Weight must lie in these
Words, [I that speak unto thee am he] Now here lies the Question, whether in
these Words he meant the Body only, or that which dwelt in the Body also? Which
was the Godhead joined with the Manhood, which thing was not at all proved at
that time from the Scripture according to his promise, and so did falsify his
Word: and is it not strange that the Priest should make Christ's Body to speak
without his Spirit. But now that People may not be left in the dark, with their
Understandings Clouded; consider and Weigh seriously, whether it was not the
same Jesus which spoke to the Jews in the foregoing Chapter 8 56. Abraham
rejoiced to see my Day, and he saw it and was glad. And Verse 58. Before
Abraham was I am. Now the Body was brought forth in time, according to Gal.
4.5. And so was not before Abraham in the Body: But S. B. said, That he is not
the Son of God, but as he was Man: Now consider how grievous dark this Man is;
read the Scripture diligently, and you shall see what a Testimony it gives
concerning the Son of God. Psalm. 2.7. The Lord has said unto me, thou art my
Son, this Day have I begotten thee. This was long before the Body was, and he
speaks here of the time present, This Day have I begotten thee. Heb. 1.2. Where
he says, that God Has in these last Days spoken to us by his Son, whom he
has appoined Heir of all things, (now mark) by whom also he made the Worlds.
So he that made the World, or that Word by which the World was made, was the
Son of God. John 1.10.3. Who being the brightness of his glory, (the Son of God
he is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
substance, and upholding all things by the Word of his Power, mark, this was
the Son of God that upholds all things by the word of his Power, when he had by
himself purged our Sins, sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High: So
see and consider well and weigh this matter, and let the wise in Heart Judge.

For God had promised before by his Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the seed of David, according to
the Flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the
Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead, by whom we have received
grace, etc. Romans 1, 2.3.4.5. And this is the true Christ we own in his Grace
and Truth, both as he was made of the seed of David according to the Flesh; and
as he is declared to be the Son of God with Power according to the Spirit of
Holiness, etc. according to God and his Son, and his Angels, and Prophets, and
Apostles; against all Opposers and Blasphemers; but espacially against SAMPSON
BOND, who was Priest at Bermudas. And we are sorry that the Sherriffe and
Justices of Peace in Bermudas, should believe or regard his Lies and Slanders.
But it is clear, Sampson Bond has put the Sheep of Christ in scorn called
Quakers, in his Bear-Skin, that such as he is might worry them.

Secondly. He says, We in our Meetings, or the main end of our Meetings; is to
make the Holy Spirit a Liar; and to prove this he names Luke 2.30. Lord now
let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes has seen thy
Salvation. (I hope (said he) you will not deny that Old Simeon spak^ by the
Spirit,) Now (said he) it was his Bodily Eyes which he spoke of, by which he
only beheld the Body of Jesus, and hence does infer that we witnessing to the
Spirit, do mak^th* Spirit of God a Liar.

Let us see what weight this Argument has in it; and for the better opening of
your Understandings, take S. B's own Words, (I hope you will not deny Old
Simeon to speak by the Spirit.) Indeed he was a Spiritual Man, and so was ab^e
to discern the things of God, and he was a Prophet, and spoke in the Spirit of
Prophecy, in which he spoke and declared of him as a Light, prepared before
the face of all People, not the Jews only but all People, A Light to lighten
the Gentiles, etc. And mark withal what it was that was revealed to him by the
Holy Ghost, that he should see: Was it not the Lords Christ? If the Body barely
considered without the Spirit had been the Lords Christ; then the Jews had seen
the Lords Christ; for they only saw the Body, and Crucified it: But the Lords
Christ, the Lord of Glory was veiled from their Eyes; For had they seen him,
they had seen the Father also, John 14.9. And had they known him they would not
have Crucified him: But now the unbelieving Jews had neither heard the Fathers
Voice at any time, nor seen his shape, John 5.37. And so it is clear, though
they saw the Body, yet saw not the Father; they saw not the Eternal Power and
Godhead, as they did whose Eyes where opened in and by the Spirit, as Old
Simeons was: who saw through the Vail, and beheld the endless Power of that
which made the World, and upholds it by the same Word of Power; who after he
had purged our sins, (said the Apostle) sat down on the Right Hand of the
Majesty on High. Ephesians. 4.6. And this is he who fills all things, and is above
all, and in us all. So all those that desire to know their Sin purged, must
know Christ, not at a distance only, but nigh, even dwelling in them, else they
are Reprobates: which all the obedient in Heart do Witness, according to his
promise, If a Man love me he will keep my Words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. So he that believes in
Christ at a distance only, never knows a fulfilling of Christ's Words in them,
who said, He and his Father would make their abode with them.

For it was revealed by the Holy Ghost to Old Simeon, before he had seen the
Lords Christ, and Simeon came by the Spirit into the Temple, etc. And the Angel
of the Lord told Joseph that which was conceived in Ma^y, is of the Holy Ghost:
Now Simeon by the Spirit and Holy Ghost did see the Lords Christ which was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, who was revealed to him by the Holy Ghost. So this
was a Spiritual Sight, not Natural; For the Natural Man receives not the things
of God, they are foolishness unto him neither can he know them because they are
Spiritually discerned, Mat. 1.20. Luke 2.26, 27. 1 Cor. 2.14. And the Angel
said to Mary, that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. And does not Christ say, That none knows the Father nor the Son
but by Revelation?

3. S. B. says farther, we make the Angels Liars, who (said he) bore witness
only to the Body or Man, Luke. 2.11.

To which I Answer, I deny that the Angels there do bear Witness merely to the
Body, for in their Testimony, they testify to this Savior as a King; For unto
you is Born (said they) in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord. Which Word Christ relates to his Kingly Power, which was Spiritual, (as
he says) My Kingdom is not of this World. And the Testimony or Message the
Angel brought to Mary as concerning the Son of God, who was now coming to be
made manifest in the Flesh, said, He should Reign forever, and his Kingdom
should have no End, Luke 1.33. For the Angel said, Behold a Virgin shall be
with Child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his Name Emanuel,
which being Interpreted, is God with us. So here you may see, that the Angels
bore Witness, more then only to the Body or Man; Mat. 1.23. as Sampson Bond
does assert, which he has not proved.

So Mary believed God; and did not ascribe the Work of Salvation to him merely
as Man, but to God; saying, My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. Verse.
47. I would not have any one to think because I plead so much for the Spirit,
that I deny the Body of Christ; but do own it in all points, as the Scripture
does declare of it, and so give the Honor due unto it: Though I cannot believe
the things declared by S. B. in his Nonscriptural expressions.

The last thing, which is the Apostles Testimony of Christ; I have sufficiently
spoke to already, and so shall wave it here: So People may see how far short of
his promise he came in proving his Three Accusations, with the greatest
clearness from the Holy Scripture, so has little cause to boast or glory of
his Victory: for the Truth stands over his Head, and will do for ever.

The Third and last Accusation is, That the prime Principles of a Quaker, is
the same that was held and professed by the Beasts which Paul fought with at
Ephesus.

And to prove this, he first does endeavor to prove, that those Beasts did
deny the Resurrection, and said, so do we.

I answer, The first was never truly proved, and the second is absolutely
false; his Scripture to prove the first, 1 Cor. 15.32. where the Apostle says,
If after the manner of Men, I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, what does it
avail if the Dead rise not? Does this at all argue that this was the Ephesians
professed Principles? or does it not rather argue, that the Saints loses their
reward for all their labor if the Dead rise not, as he says in the 19th Verse.
If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most Miserable.
So that he has fallen short of his proof, and so his Accusation is truly
overthrown: But inasmuch as he did go on to charge the thing upon us, (viz)
That we do deny the Resurrection, I do here testify, that it is none of our
Principles to deny the Resurrertion, for we own it as the Apostles owned it,
Not the same Body, not a Corruptible Body, not a Natural Body, (a Natural Body
has Flesh, Blood, and Bones) but a Spiritual Body: as the Apostle says, And a
Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, said Christ; which before he can prove he must
be fain to get new Scripture, for the Old will maintain no such Doctrines: So
though he did stop and hinder me that time by his Mocks and Scoffs, and
deriding Speeches, and clamorous Noise; altogether unlike a Preacher of the
Everlasting Gospel, (as he says in his Paper be is) yet now through mercy I
trust as the Truth will stand over your Heads, so I shall be clear of your
Blood, whether you will hear or forbear; I am a Friend to the Seed, and a Lover
of your Souls,

The 11th of the 3d Month, 1678. Francis Estlacke.

Some few Lines briefly Answering some Part of SAMPSON BOND's Book, Entitled,
The Quakers in BERMUDAS Tried, etc.
THat part in his Book which I find my self chiefly concerned to make Answer
to, is, where he makes mention of my Name, viz. William Wilkinson.

As for my part, I do not know that I should have set Pen to Paper, to have
made him any Answer, had he laid down the Matter concerning me every way Fairly
and truly, without Abusing me or the Truth; but I finding in several places of
his Book, Words printed that I cannot own to be Truth, besides his reviling
Speeches which he has cast at me; As Prater, a Baffling Quaker, and one that
never had the Spirit of God in me. All which things in the sense he brings
them, if true were a great Reproach. But I knowing it is too hard a thing for
him to prove, or plainly to make appear; do find my self justly concerned to
make some reply or answers, both to these and several other things, for the
vindicating of the Truth and my self also, from him whom I find in his Book
has very much strove to make his own case appear strong and ours weak, etc.

But according to that saying in Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause
seems just, but his Neighbor comes and searches him.

The first thing I find in his Book, where he takes occasion to mention me, is,
my calling of him Friend.

To which he answers himse^f, saying, I am none of thy Friend.

Answer, In so saying I have now cause to believe he spoke truth (though I had
Charity and Friendship toward him) as his following words in the same page
partly makes appear, by his reckoning up a Report of me, which was by me many
years before, in Word, Writing and Practice, condemned and declared against, as
also that very time, in the Presence of all the People there, which were many,
when the Dispute was, he himself being also present, who could not but hear, I
being so near where he was, all which a man would think might have been
sufficient to have satisfied any Christian-hearted Man: But it seems it would
not satisfy him: But according to that in Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses his
Sins and forsakes them shall have mercy, which was fulfilled, as we may read
both by and David and Peter, after they knew the Truth, and they both came
again do find acceptance both with God and Man; and that it was the practice of
the Christians in days past, to upbraid any with their Transgression or Sin
after truly repented of, I do not read: so that for his so doing it appears
Unnatural, and not like a Christian.

But to proceed to the next thing, where he says, the next Prater was William
Wilkinson in Page 61. where he says I repeated some of the Apostles words, in
Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory. Now it is worth the noting here,
how barely he has brought this Scripture, without laying here down the reason
why it was brought; which had but been fair and reasonable so to have done, but
as I before have said, so here it does appear, how he strives to make his own
cause strong and ours weak, but it is not like to pass so: For this I know and
heard him say, If you (said he) can prove that Christ was ever in any Man as a
Savior, I will lay down the Cudgels, or words to this very purpose; which
greatly occasioned me to bring them words of the Apostle, which were before
mentioned, saying, Christ in you the hope of Glory, which was pretty partenent
to that purpose, to prove that Christ was in Man as a Savior: seeing the
Apostle said, Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. But here methinks he
struggles greatly to have another meaning for the Apostles words, then what the
Apostle himself said, who spoke plainly.

But he says, This is an enforced sense, and destroys the true nature of the
word HOPE.

Now here I would have it well considered by the Reader, who is most fitting to
be believed, the Apostle or Sampson Bond: And the Apostle in Romans 8.24. says,
We are saved by Hope. And in Gal. 2.20. he says, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith
of the Son of God.

So that it is plain, that Christ is in his People, both their Hope and Faith
too, let this Man say what he will.

Again he says in Page 63. That I interrupted him, saying, We owned Gods
Presence in Heaven and in Hell.

Answ. This I disown to be either fairly or truly laid down, for I did not
bring them Words by way of interruption; but what I said tending to that
matter, was by way of Answer to one of his Questions, which was to me thus.

Quest. Is God in Heaven or in Hell?

Answ. To which I Answered him with some of the Words of the Psalms, Psalm.
139.7, 8. Whither shall we flee from thy Presence, if I ascend up into Heaven
thou art there, or go down to Hell thou art there.

To this my Answer, he said, I said well, for so said he, he is every where.

Quest. But speedily after he asked me again, whether God was in Hell saved or
damned?

To this Question he says, I Answered, I will not tell thee; these Words I
utterly disown as being then spoken by me: But it seems it is little to him to
cause such Words to be Printed as were not then spoken, and send about the
World for People to read as Truth.

But I hearing him ask this last Question, it appeared to me so rediculous as
amongst Men, and so improper to be asked concerning the Lord, who is God over
all Blessed for Ever, that I Answered (I leave it to thee) This Answer, he
says, was no other then a silly shift.

Now it is worth the Noting how he has shifted concerning his own Words.

Where he says, he asked him, meaning me, Whether his God whose presence he
owned to be in Hell, was there saved or damned? This Word his I disown to be
therein mentioned, and his own foregoing Words in answer to me, helps greatly
to make appear, as may be seen where I answered him to that Question, Whether
God was in Heaven or in Hell? with some of the words of the Psalms, he said, I
said well, for said he, he is every where.

Now here his Words did not relate to that sense he has shifted them: where he
says, (his God) but his words related to the same God the Psalmist spoke of,
else why did he say, I said well? But it is like he has considered, since he
asked that Unreverent Question, that it was too gross and Improper to go forth
so as it was at first stated; therefore he would see to help it a little.

But seeing that I did not Answer this Question according to his expectation; I
have looked that he should have answered it himself, for the satisfaction of
the People that heard him: But as to that I find him silent, and the People
left in as much Darkness about it as they were before, for what I see or know:
So that I may say, if it were by him accounted Inconsiderable to be answered;
it was much more Inconsiderable to have been asked.

But in that 63 Page, I find, because I did not answer to that foul impertinent
Question before mentioned, as he would have had me.

He says, I was one of their Baffling Prating Quakers.

Answ. Methinks it would more a becomed him before he had charged me so high,
to have had a more sufficient ground for his charge then that was: But it seems
it is little to him to give bad names, and cause to be Printed though upon too
slight a ground: for the reason why I did no other ways answer him, I have
before given, as may be seen in my answer to that unsavory Question of his.
The next thing I find he notes concerning me is.

That I repeated that place of Scripture in the 2 Cor. 5.16. where it is said,
Though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more.

Answ. This doing is like some of his former, as I have already mentioned, to
insert the place of Scripture, without laying down with it the reason or
occasion why it was brought; which might be enough to make a Sober Man admire,
what I or we did mean so to do.

But to be short, the reason why that Scripture was brought, was in answer to
him, who stood there to affirm, That Christ as Man was the only material
Savior, without joining the Godhead with the Manhood; which place of Scripture
I judge was very pertinent to that master; showing that though the Apostles had
known Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth (said he) k^ow we him no more,
2 Cor. 5.16. So that of necessity the true sensib^e knowledge that any Man
could have of Christ for the future time, must be in Spirit according to what
Christ himself had promised; wherein he said, He that is with you shall be in
you: and again he says in John 16.7. It is expedient for you that I go away,
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart* I
will send him unto you. And in the 13th Verse. When he the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth.

The next place of Scripture which he says I repeated, was the 1 Cor. 6.11.
where the Apostle says, But ye are washed, but ye are justified by the Spirit
of God; and farther he asserts that I Queri^d, Why they, meaning us, might not
be washed and justified by the Spirit now as well as others heretofore?

To which, part of his reply was, That I never had the Spirit of God in me; and
to prove it he lays down three Arguments, the which I here slight as not
worth the mentioning; only this I look upon as worth the noting, and I would
have them that reads his Book take notice of it, in Page 65, 66, 67. where his
Charge or Accusation concerning me, as abovesaid is mentioned.

His Charge runs thus, That I never had the Spirit of God in me, and his proof
is only a recharging me in different terms, That I have not the Spirit of God
in me, his Charge in both most uncharitably excludes me from the Spirit of God,
saying, thou never had it, it is not in thee: And in the other two ^f his
censorious judgings, his words are, have not, and have ^ot.

Now I say a Man would think, that he looking upon himself so wise and so
learned, as it appears by his Book he does, that he should not have repeated
such proofless and false Accusations, as that I never had the Spirit of God in
me, which I know through the mercy of God he cannot prove while he lives; yet
what satisfaction could this be to the People that heard? To the Question
Propounded, the Apostle speaks of some that were bad Sinners, as we may read in
the 1 Cor. 10.11. But they were Washed and Sanctified and Justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God. And the Question to this purpose
was, why we might not be Washed and Justified now as well as others heretofore?
This Qu^stion ought to have been answered directly to, because it is commonly
spoken of by many in the World, that there is no Revelation now adays, and no
freedom from in on this side the Grave; and if so, then indeed there were no
Spiritual Washing nor Cleansing from Sin in these days, as in days past: But
this I have to say, and through the mercy of God am a Witness of, that
Revelation is not ceased now adays; for God has showed by his Spirit or Light
in the Heart of Man in these days the things that belong unto his Peace; he
shows unto Man now as in days past, that he should do Justly, love Mercy, and
wal^ humb^y with the Lord; and this Revelation or Manifestation of God, by his
Spirit or Light in the Heart and Consciences of People, is very precious; and
by taking heed unto this Light within, or measure of the Spirit or Grace of
God, which is all one and the same thing, though called by several Names; and
by loving and obeying it, I believe many are come to depart from Sin and
Iniquity, and come by it to find and feel the true peace fo God: And so herein
the true Spiritual Washing and Cleansing from Sin is known and witnessed, ye
even by the powerful working of the Spirit of God in Man.

But for all his bad Words and hard Speeches, which he has cast not only at
me, but at the Light within also, which may be plainly seen in his Book: I can
leave him to the Lord to answer for it, to whom every Man must give an account
for the Deeds done in the Body, be they Good or Evil.

Now I having answered to his three false Accusations mentioned in the
beginning, which he in his Book has cast at me; I would have it considered by
the Reader, whether that which he has cast at me be not come upon himself;
Namely, where he has striven to baffle the Apostles meanings to his own Words,
and give another meaning to them then the Apostle himself there does, where he
says, Christ in you the Hope of Glory, this Man, (to wit) Sampson Bond, calls
this, an enforced sense, and says, It does destroy the true nature of the Word
HOPE.

Now I would have it well considered by the Reader, who has baffled he or I: I
that own the Apostles Words, or he that has so far disowned them, as his Words
above mentioned has made appear.

And where it is in all his Book, that I have either baffled or prated unsound
Words, that I have not given a sound reason for what I have said to him, ought
to have been made appear.

But this I have to say to all People that are not yet convinced of the Truth;
as my Testimony for it: That he or they that has not Christ in them, (to wit)
his Spirit in them, their hope of Glory, cannot come to know the true living
hope of true Glory in them; let them Profess what they will.

And for this many places of Scriptures may be brought to prove.

As First, The Apostles own Words before mentioned, Coll. 1.27. where he faith,
Christ in you the hope of Glory.

Secondly, Christ's own Words, John 15.5. For without me you can do nothing.

Thirdly, In Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in us, both to will and to
do of his own good Pleasure.

Fourthly, Where the Apostle says, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, and the life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith
of the Son of God. Gal. 4.6. And God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying Abba Father.

Fifthly, In Romans 8.24. We are saved by Hope.

Sixthly, Romans 8.9. He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his.

Seventhly, It is clear that they that are the Sons of God, are led by the
Spirit of God, as in Romans 8.14. where the Apostle says, As many as are led by
the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

Eighthly, The hope of the Wicked is to perish, but he that has the true
living hope in him, which the Apostle speaks of in John 2.3. purifieth himself
even as he is pure. And again, Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies.

Many other places of Scripture might be brought tending to the proof of what I
have before asserted; but these I judge might be sufficient.

The last thing I find my self concerned with him in his Book, is in Page 69.
Where he says, I called on him to make good the third part of the Charge,
(viz) That the prime Principles of a Quaker, are the same which were held and
professed by the Beasts that Paul fought with at Ephesus.

This I own indeed, that I did call upon him to make good or prove, as in his
paper sent to us he said, he would do with the greatest plainness and clearness
out of the Holy Scriptures, a copy of which paper I have still by me; these
words (to wit) with the greatest plainness and clearness) I find he has left
out, and says in his Book, from the Holy Scriptures.

I note it, because there is a great deal of difference between proving a
matter with the greatest plainness and clearnness out of Holy Scriptures, and
proving of it by his pretended Logical Arguments and Cousequences.

Because the one makes a thing perfectly appear as it is; but the other as ill
managed and misapplyed, darkens Peoples minds, as his Ergo's, it is so, or
consequently, it must be or may be so, in which manner of proving a matter, may
be gross erring, as I have already showed, where he said of me, That I never
had the Spirit of God in me.

His first Argument to prove that, was thus formed.

Using the Apostles Words, in the 1 John 5.8. where he says, There are three
that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood; and these
three agree in me, meaning himself: But the Spirit that is in thee, does not
agree with the Water of Baptism, nor Blood of the Supper, for thou have
renounced both the Sacraments, therefore the Spirit of God is not in thee.

Why should the Spirit that is in me agree with such a Popish Phrase, as Blood
of the Supper, any mo^e than with Sacrament of the Altar? will this prove that
I never had the Spirit of God in me, or that the Spirit of God is not in me?
The like I never read in all the Scriptures of Truth, that ever any of the true
Ministers of Christ used thus to censure others on such occasion and terms.

But this was the way that this Man used to prove several of his charges
against us.

But I minding this third Part of his Charge, which was as beforementioned.

That the prime Principles of a Q^ak r, are the same which were held and
professed by the Beasts Paul fought with at Ephesus.

And knowing it was too hard a thing for him to prove against all such as are
called Quakers, or any one as I know of, I urged him to prove it if he could by
plain Scripture; but no such place of Scripture did he bring that could prove
that charge; for that the Principles of the People of God called Quak^rs, and
them Men called Beasts at Ephesus, are far enough differing (if they were Men
the Apostle means) as in point of Worship is well known to the Nation. As in
this particular, that the People called Quakers do not Worship an Image, an
Idol God, the Workmanship of Man's Hands, which the Men at Ephesus called Beasts
did; as we may read in Acts 19.26. This Paul has persuaded and turned away
much People, saying, that they be not Gods which are made by Men's Hands: and in
Verse. 27. So that not only our Craft is in danger to be set at naught, but also
that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the World Worshippeth: and
in the 28 Verse. And when they heard these sayings, they where full of Wrath,
and cried out saying, great is Diana of the Ephesians: and in the 35 Verse. Ye
Men of Eph^sus, what Man is there that knows not how that the City of the
Ephesians is a Worshipper of the great Goddess Diana, and of tht Image which
fell from Jupiter.

But the Principles of the People called Quakers in point of Worship, is to
Worship the true God in Spirit and in Truth, and such Worshippers Christ
himself says the Father seeks. And their prime Principle is Christ Jesus the
Power of God, the Light that inlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

And what other erroneous Principles them Beasts at Eph^sus held, I know the
People called Quakers disown sufficiently: but what need have I to make that my
business to search for them now, this Man. (viz) Sampson Bond, having charged
us so grossly and falsely as he has, and saying, He would prove with the
great^st in pl^in^^ss and clearness out of the Holy Scriptures; it was his
place if he could have done it, to have brought forth the Scripture to have
proved both the Principles of the one and the other; and so have made them
appear to be as one and the same; as he in his Paper to us said he would.

But here I have answered that false Charge of his, and made it appear by plain
Scripture, that their Principles, or at least some of their P^incip^es, was to
Worship a visible Image: And no such thing can be proved against he People
called Quakers.

Now where does it appear, that the Principles of the Beasts at Ephesus, these
being some of theirs, and the P^inciples of the People called Quakers agree?

Surely the Principles of those called Beasts at Ephesus, and the Principles of
the People called Qua^ers, are far enough from agreeing as one and the same.

But I find in his Book that he alleadges their Principles were,

First, That the Body of Christ was not rais^d from the Dead.

Second^y, That no Man's Body shall be rais^d from the Dead.

No^ that these ^here the Princip^es of these Feasts that Paul fought with at
Ephesus; I do not find the Scripture plain for it: But that their P^inciples
were as I have bef^r^mentioned, the Scripture is very plain and clear for that,
if the Apostle speak figuratively.

But that it was part of the Apostles Testimony to preach unto People, Jesus
and the Resurrection. I own and truly believe, as may be plain^y seen both to
the A^henians and Corinthians, and it is like to many mo^e, both Jews and
Greeks: and that it was strange Doctrine, as we may read in Acts 17. It was to
the Ath^nians to whom Paul preached at Mars-hill. ^ut what is this to prove
that it was the Principles of the Beasts that Paul fought with at Eph^sus, or
of the Q^^k^rs either?

This Man having given from under his Hand, that he would prove his charge with
the gre^test plai^n ss and clearness from the Holy Scriptures: I looked for it*
but not finding it, I must needs judge his charges to be false.

And for his saying, That it was one of the Principles of the Beasts that Paul
fought with at Ephesus, to hold that the Body of Christ was not raised from the
Dead.

To this I answer, if it were one of their Principles to hold such a thing,
what is this to the People called Quakers? they do not hold it; for they as
confidently be ieve the Resurrection of Christ! ^ody, as Sampson Bond or any
other Man need do; according to the Testimony of severa faithful Witnesses
given o^ him in the Holy S^riptures of Truth. The second Principle that he
says them Beasts at Ephesians sus held, is

2dly, That no Man's Body shall be raised from the Dead.

First, This I want a plain Scripture to prove.

First, That it was one of those Men that Paul fought with.

Secondly, I want a place of Scripture to prove, that it is the Natural, Carnal
or Earthly Body of all Mankind, that shall rise again after Death.

To this I need say but little, because I do not find the thing proved that is
asserted.

But least any should think or say, I make that my excuse to save my answer.

I answer to it thus, that for many to say, hold and believe that the Natural
Bodies of all Mankind shall rise again after Death: this I esteem great
ignoracne, and does in no wise agree with the Apostles Words, as may be seen in
the 1 Cor. 15.35. Where the Apostle speaking concerning the Resurrection, put
forth a Question, and afterward answered it himself, saying, But some Man will
say, how are the Dead raised up, and with what Body do they come? his answer
was in the 36 Verse. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
dye. Verse. the 37. And that which thou sow^st, thou sowest not that Body that
shall be. and in the 38 Verse. But God gives it a Body as it has pleased him.
Verse the 42. So also is the Resurrection of the Dead, it is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption. and Verse the 44 of the same Chap.
says, It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body.

And this Testimony of the Apostles I own, and farther do believe a
Resurrection both of the just and the unjust; the one namely, the just, or they
that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life; and the other, namely, they
that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation, according to Christ's
own Words in John. 5.29.

Thus I having come through the thing which I at first intended, though I could
have here more enlarged concerning the Light within; which Sampson Bond has
spoken so much Evil against, it being that which our Lord Jesus Christ has
given a measure of to all Men, to lead them out of Darkness, and so into the
Marvelous Light and Kingdom of Peace.

Yet here I forbear, expecting that he will not miss the Hand Writing of some
other; to answer him both to that and several other things asserted in his Book.

Bermudas the 1st Month, 1683. William Wilkinson.

A BRIEF TOUCH OF THE DECEIT AND False Doctrine OF SAMPSON BOND
THe mighty strength (as he thinks) of this operative, blind, embondaged
Sampson Bond, lies in his 17th and 66th page (wherein he grindes and grins
against the Truth of the Gospel, and he says, wounds to Death) a mere Lie,
that which makes a Devil, the spirit that now works in the Children of
Disobedience, and in him, a Falsehood, a Nullity, nothing in his Text, an
Expletive of the Translaters (having nothing or it in the Greek) making an
Ambiguity, (...) bipen^^^.
which he makes use of as his Two edged Sword, his Ax, to wrest the Apostles
Words, (...)
which are, [Know] ye not that Christ dwells in you, etc. not How Christ
dwells, etc. which word [How] (which Justin Martyr, a most eminent Writer,
soon after the Apostles days, Ju^i M^r yr (...)
says, is an Argument of Unbelief, to say How God is in men) he makes his Text
the Handle of his Mill, the Hinge of his Work, that brings him his Grist; his
Christ only without, Word only without, nothing within, but his [How] a mere
Manner, Mode, without Substance, by his Popish Philosophy and Divinity, like
that of their Bread God. And it is no Wonder he lays such stress on the
Translaters [How] not the Apostle's [Know] for the New Doctrine they have got
up against us, contrary not only to the Primitive Fathers, but also to the
Protestant Reformers, is, That the Spirit of Christ is not Objective and
Perceptive, See G Keith's Quakeris^n no Popery, citing Aug. Luther, Zw^ngl us,
Melancton etc and h s B^ok of ^^mmedi^te Revelation, and his Answer to the Dr.
of Jena in Defense of Robert Barclay on that part.
but only Subjective and Effective, as their Terms are [his is Operative here]
that is, according to his Comparison, as the Sun's Effect is on Plants, etc.
they not perceiving it. So the Son's Effect is on Men, yet they not knowing,
but only believing the Doctrine, and that they have they have it. This he shows
is his by his Restraint in his Interpretation of John 1.1. and there is
grounded his Argument against W.W. and our Friends in page 66. which is Popish
(not Protestant) Doctrine, too large a Field to be entered on here, against such
an inconsiderable Adversary, who deserves but such answer as the Man made the
Popish Priest, that had taught him to believe Transubstantiated Christ to be
his, saying, Believe thou have him, and thou have him. But lest he should
conceit Silence to be as empty an Answer as his Text [How] wherein he would
place the emphasis, I shall offer him the other glass to p^ove it, that he is not
beside his Text, and that (seeing he says, the Hourglass knows as w^ll his
Terms as his Adversary) it proves not the Divisions and Terms of time, better
than he does those of that Scripture, that is, [Prove] and [Know] wherein the
Apostle's emphatical stress is laid, not S. B's How. For on the word Prove the
Apostle discants after his manner (as others have also observed) using the word
six times here; twice in this Verse, once before, and three times after it, as
in Verse. 3. A PROOF of Christ speaking in me; Verse. 5. PROVE your selves; KNOW
ye not that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be UNAPPROVED; Verse. 7. Not that
we should appear UNAPPROVED. We might be as UNAPPROVED. Now here this Great
Greek THRASONICAL SAMPSON, boasting over unlearned Men with his Metonymyes and
Syllogisms proves himself REPROBATE, UNAPPROVED in the Greek, in the words of
his Text, going beside it, and placing the weight of the sentence on that which
is not in it in the Greek, in which the Apostle wrote: and omitting that on
which the Apostle insists so much, viz; KNOW, by PROOF, which word signifies to
Try, Spy, Pry, etc. As I remember some derives the word from the manner of
Hunters spying for their hidden Game. Christians that had the Measure of Christ
working in them, knew it in themselves and others upon diligent Trial. Though
it follows not, that all that are not so approved, and have not such measure,
and know it not, have no measure at all, because they know it not. S. B saying
That Dogs and Cats have God essentially in them, he will not say, that they
know it, or because they know not, they have not.
The Apostles arguing there is of the proof and knowledge of Christ working and
speaking in himself, from the proof and knowledge of Christ working in
themselves; though in respect of speaking different from that in himself, and
in other Gifts, Operations, Workings too, at least in measure and degree. Now
S. B. granting that Christ personal is the Author of this operation and the
efficient cause, he begs that will not be granted that he is at a distance from
his Operation, and not there. For if Christ be in the Saints, he is there as he
is Godman, else he is not as Christ, according to S. B. himself; seeing he will
not have it (nor we neither) that he is Christ in respect of his Godhead only,
but as God-man; so that where he is as Christ, he must be there as God-man, and
so in his Saints. Though S. B. says, It is impossible he should be there as
Immanuel. So that he brings it to this Point, viz. Christ in the Saints is so
afar off; in others at hand, only as God: And they that believe not that his
Notion, have not the Spirit of God, but the Devil: cannot be saved. So laying
as great stress on his Notions and Terms, as on Atanassius s in his Creed by
some thought in the Liturgy. See J. H view
How many will these with the Papists exclude from Salvation, because they know
not, are not capable of, or believe not, the Notions and Terms of the heads of
their Churches, but only by an implicit Faith? which if we should pursue, would
lead into the deepest Questions of Philosophy and Divinity, where all are not
able to wade, and indeed into that where none is able; [How] Justin Martyrs
argument of unbelief. (...)
But avoiding curious Questions, against the asserting whereof the choicest
Men, both of the Ancient and Modern have testified; This suffices, that
however the Word be in Men, Helvet Confess. Cyril, Whit acre, Chytrsus, and
others.
Christ is, by the communication of Properties, as is acknowledged by all I
have met with. So S. B. granting the Word is in all Men, and the Word is made
Flesh, then the Word is Christ, by the Phrase of Scripture, the communication
of Properties, H lary, Theodores, Damascen, Keckerman, Danaeus, Zanchy, and
other. (...). Theodoret. dial 3.
very usual; where what is spoke of one nature is often spoke of both, as one
person, though not according to both natures; Jo. 1.1, 14 Gal. 4.4. Act. 20.28.
Romans 5, 10. 1 Cor. 2.8. Luke 1.35. Heb. 5.5. John 1.1.4. Col. 3.3, 4. Irenaeus,
Frederus, Hisst. Chapter Brit. p. 174.
and he has no were disproved it, nor proved the contrary, but begged it. And
so shown himself ignorant of Divinity and Scripture Language. And that his is
new Divinity or Religion, not ours, as he calls it. For it is
Scripture Language, The Word is Light, The Light our Life, Our Life Christ.

And he would untruly and unjustly fasten on us, using this Scripture Language
and Doctrine, that we make that Christ brought a Body from Heaven, as having
learned it from the Manichees many Hundred Years ago, (he might have gone
higher, and said from Valentinus, or lower, from the Anabaptists) And so would
make us horrible Heretics, not having the Spirit of Christ, as not owning the
true Christ, (because we say he is in us) and no Christians, but Worshippers of
the Devil. Yet was not Chytraeus so accounted, nor those I have cited, and
others; but in much esteem with pious learned Men, as in the Preface of
Frederus to the Bishop appears, as following the Doctrine, and inheriting the
fame of his Master Melancton, whose Works and Erasmus's our Reformers here in
England made use of for direction. Though he says, he truly believes the Man
Christ to be Omnipresent for the personal Union, and the Humane nature of
Christ in it self, and according to it self is perfect above all Angels, Isa.
11.

But S. B. will have the Devil, that Spirit that rules in the Children of
Disobedience to extend beyond it. Judge then whether he Worship not the Devil
(when all the Angels Worship Christ) in prefering his Master, (...)
that rules in him, his Father, the Liar, the false Accuser, the Enemy, Satan.

Such he also proves himself, in saying, The teaching Quakers make the Soul a
part of God. For in 30 Years time, having heard I think 100 of them, I think
1000 times, I remember not any ever declare it as their Principle. And if any
at any time have uttered any Expressions of like sort, anima animae.
I believe it was in Augustins sense, who I remember calls the Spirit of God,
The Soul of the Soul, or as D. Moor writes of Neshemah, etc. And Hug. Grotius
and John Seldom, de Rel. Chris. de Jure Not.
two most eminently learned Protestants, produce numerous Testimonys of that
sort; the later, That the Agent Understanding is Divine, held generally till
about the 13th Century, by all the Ancients; as he shows from the chief then in
the Universitys of Paris and Oxford. So that, (if so) in that sense it were no
new Doctrine or Religion, as he calls ours. But the contrary so, being not 400
Years Old. And for his Instances of Nailer, Lilburn and Tain, and if by the
last he mean John Tauny, he never was nor accounted of us, though the other
sometimes were, though not always, nor in all things owned.

He might as well say of James Nailer, that J. N. said, The Devil is part of
God, as what he does. For J. N. in all that p. 58. that he quotes of his,
mentions not the Soul. But says, Who have the Word in them, in which all
fullness is, need not study what to say, etc. Now the Word in them, in the
Priests sense, in his title Page and elsewhere, is the Devil; but he modestly
interprets it the Soul, as if he grew kind toward his end. But I doubt it was
his dotage and forgetfulness what he had said, rather then his charity, being
so pursuant with his Lies against us to the end.

And having found him a Liar in one J. N. (as in other things) I have no reason
to believe his citations of the other J. L. (having not his Book) without
trial. Nor his other slanders of our Friends, as to matter of fact, for that
they can answer for themselves. Only I have spent a little paper and time to
stop his boasting over them in some things wherein they are not versed.

Wherein he shows both his Arrogance and Deceit, pretending an Aristotelian
Schooll-form, before and against Men that are not skilled at that Weapon,
(forsaking the plain Spiritual Weapons enclosed in plain words and methods,
which the true Preachers used,)

Some of the Schooll-Men themselves say, Baconthorp prol. 4 sen q 8
Beware of Subtle Sophisters in the Doctrine of the Church -- The nature of
Sophisms is to bring in all errors and Heresies -- Wherein he shows himself
unskilful as well as deceitful; J. Bale.
as in saying, The Conclusion ought not to be denied. And in proving but one
part of the reason in all his four Arguments. Begging the former part in all
unproved, The Consequence is Ungranted, Ungrounded, and Unproved.
which is in question, the second part unquestioned by all, is all he proves.
For he proves Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, by the Scriptures he brings, but
no where p^oves by the Scriptures, that we own him not as Christ. Only as the
Professers then saying, He had an unclean Spirit, a Devil: So S. B. etc. now
saying, His Spirit is an Unclean Spirit, the Devil. Because they have said it,
it must be taken as an axiom, a Maxim, needing no proof, because they have said
it, their authority is sufficient, because they are Infallible, their Positions
are Principles, Authentic, Self-proof. And so great is his Authority, he
thinks, that he makes himself determinating Judge in the Schoolls,
Magisterially: For as I remember I have read in the Master of the Sentences,
upon occasion of a dispute between a Presbyterian and a Baptist, almost forty
Years ago, on that Question, that several of the Fathers held, That the Spirit
was in Men, not only efficiently or Vertually. So no new Doctrine. And they
being in all Men's esteem greater then we, how comes it that we in his esteem,
and not they, are then the greatest Antichrists?

But it happens to us, as Erasmus said it did to Luther, when the Priests
accounted that Heresy in him, which they accounted Orthodox in the Fathers: And
as it happened to Erasmus himself, Apolog.
when he said to the Popish Doctors of Paris, Why blame ye me, for denying
swearing to be lawful, blame the Fathers for denying it, whose Authority I
bring.

But S. B. seperates, as well as distinguishes, Personal, Mystical, Operative,
but no where proves it, but only by his mighty Greek Word Metonymy, which he
brags that F. E. understands not, which he could if he had not hid himself in
Greek, as their manner is, but called it in plain English, as the word
signifies, Misnaming, which he no ways proves, only says it. As if God were not
in us of a Truth, in whom we live, move and have our being, and not afar off,
as the Heathen acknowledged, but only operatively working, by a Metonymy a
misnaming improper speaking, (as the Sun is at a distance) and so fills not all
things; nor Christ where his Spirit is, nor the Father where the Son Works, and
both where the Spirit. (contrary to the Schools also, which say, that the works
of those three are indivisible ad extra.) Nor that Christ is not really, where
he is mystically, so not in his Body, Christ not in Christ, nor the Father in
the Son, nor he in him, Cyril on John, l. 10 c. 13.
nor they in the Saints, nor that they dwell in them, but only by a Metonymy,
not really and properly, only by works at a distance. I do not read that ever
the Lutherans, called Vbiquitarians, were by their adversarys called for that
the vilest Antichrist, (or other his vilest terms he bestows on us) but allowed
honorable Names, as Zanchy called the judicious, Zanchy of Chapter Relig. of true
disp. p. 6. 7. etc.
who said, The Humane nature of Christ might extend from Heaven to Earth, etc.
But to omit him and others, to avoid that Name Vbiquitarian, Chytraeus,
approved as aforesaid, handling those Controversies professedly, of the Son in
the Articles of the Creed, and opposing the prodigious Vbiquity as he calls it,
yet says in the close all. The Divinity of the Word, which only of it self is
Quickening, Omnipotent and Omniscient, yet shines in the whole Humane nature
assumed, and in it and by it is freely effectual, as hot Iron possesses heat,
and the force of shining and burning, truly and in very deed communicated in it
self, but not of it self. For we know that all Orthodox Antiquity unanimously
used this similitude. And as for Ubiquity, our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ
Immanuel, not only by his Divinity, but also according to his Humane Nature to
be truly present wheresoever he has promised by his Word, that he will be
present, we doubt not, nor take away the glory of his Truth and Omnipotency due
to Christ.

So he who would in these Controversies also have the plain words in Scriptures
kept to, as they sound simply and properly. p. 201.
But S. B. also Magesterially invents a lowing new term, viz. Humane (p. 50.)
as easily found in Authors, as Humane in Scriptures. Also he declares without
proof, that in Romans 1.19. is not meant Christ by whom the World was made, p.
25. 38.
though by Christ he understands God-man. And that [to them] is not [in them]
but without them. I would have him show how the Godhead can be shown to the
outward Eye the inward being blind, by the monstrous Syllogism, or reasonless
reason (to speak plain English) of this blind Sampson, (the Phiilstines having
put out his Eyes.)

The Psalm the Apostle grounds it on, shows the inward Preacher as well as the
outward, declaring God, as the fear of the Lord, and the Words and Expressions
of like signification, after the Hebrews manner of speech. And what Light can
the Scriptures (which he calls the Light) give to them that have no Light in
them? Even as much as the Sun can give to a blind Man.

They would have the course of the Word to begin from externals (says
Oecolampadius, Eze. 3.10.
a chief Protestant Reformer) but without ears it is in vain that the sound is
inculcated, so its begun in the Spirit -- Abraham believed God, not the Word
Preached; for where then were the Preachers, or the Law? Then it would follow
that justification we e by the Works of our Hands, Man should lay the first
Stone -- so he, and much more.

And now on mention of Justification, I shall bring another Protestant chief
Reformer to obviate his calling the ^uaker's Light within, but the Pope
without, viz. (to omit the rest I have largely cited elsewhere) Melancton.

They say not well (says he) that by justify understand to be made just and
obedient, apud Pez^l. de sign. justif A^g. 5.
and do not also therewith comprise the acceptance of the person. So he,
contrary to S. B. his justification only without, with others his like...

And the Fathers of the first; 300 Years after Christ were generally for it, as
may be read in their works, and account of them and their lives. J. H. his view
of Antiquity.
He seems also in all his Arguments to beg the Question of, only, solely, or
wholely of Christ without, as then manifest, Ascending, etc. And I find it an
usual fallacy with him, to have more in the Conclusion then in the Premises. In
his Third Argument, he seems to shut out Christ's Mediator and Intercessorship
in the Spirit, as in Romans 8. By his Word [only] making the Sacrifice all;
C^ytraeus p. 151. from psa. 45, and 72. Jer. 23. Isa. 11. Mag. sent. l. 3. d.
19.
excluding his Kingly and Prophetical Office, which is continually.

And seeing the said handler of that Controversy shows by plain Testimony of
Scriptures, that the Son of God from the beginning of the Church made
intercession for her, and that she was thereby saved and quickened, and both he
and the Schoolmen deny, that Christ did it according to his Divine Nature,
because none is an interceeder for himself, who was it then that interceeded in
them of Old, and spoke in the Prophets? Or whether he believes them held in
Limbo, Oecolamp. ibid.
till after Christ's ransom, by his reason? page 31. I would ask him again,
seeing Paul saw and heard Christ after his Ascension, whether he saw and heard
him in Heaven or on Earth? 1 Cor. 15.8. and 9.1. Act. 9.4. and 12.14.
Suiting his Question to F. E. and W. H. p. 22, 23. That so he may answer and
please himself, which he cannot do about his great stumbling-stone the Light,
which he is so greatly offended at, and mightily confounded about, that knows
not what to make it.

Though he would have it the Devil, and if any would freely grant it, sometimes
Antichrist the greatest Deceiver, and Idol, etc. Yet sometimes Reason,
sometimes by natutal Generation, sometimes as Men come into the World. p. 16.
Would any (to return him as due the Language he unduly gives) but an
unreasonable Ephesian Beast reason after this manner? Is the Devil by natural
Generation? Or is the Devil reason And if that be by natural Generation,
creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur.
it must be extraduce as they term it, by traduction. Holds he then, that the
reasonable part in Men is transferred by Generation, contrary to the received
opinion of the Schooll, whose terms he so much glorys in, which says it is
created and infused. And if the Light be reason, and by natural Generation or
Traduction, and that be the Devil, (and Christ be in Men but essentially, as in
Dogs and Cats, as he says,) what reason has he to glory so of, p. 64.
and not rather to be ashamed of the production of it, his Metonymical,
Sarcastical, Synecdochical, Metaphorical, Syllogistical, Samsonical Monsters he
produces to fight with, and and Heaven Inventions, to turn off the plain words
of Christ and his Apostles. And indeed there is reason enough (as to himself) to
make his reasoning one with the Devil, being a Lie, a Fallacy, Deceit. the
wisdom that's from below, Devilish. That which called Christ a Devil, was of
the Devil. And he that was his professed Disciple, and yet betrayed him to the
Priests, and so to the Magistrates, was a Devil.

And what means his bragging so much of the Magistrates, Sheriff, Justices,
etc. And prejudicing them against us, as proud Levellers, for not giving them
proud flattering titles, as [you] etc. Is it not to press them to execution in
their way, as he in his, by the press, the utmost he can. And how pitifully he
pleads for it, with silly shifts (his own phraise) showing himself neither
ingenuous nor ingenious in it; it appears so plainly, so designedly knavish,
and so absurdly foollish: do but read it. As for the Scriptures he brings, they
appear plain Hebraisms (which he urges elsewhere) as they, and ye. p. 41.
or else collectives, as the Language given to the Senate, was after given to
the Emperor, and by him usurped with their Power. And so came it first in use,
and after by slow paced degrees till now, comed to the most contemptible, even
to a Dog. For I have often heard Men say, you Vile Rascal you, you saucy Cur
you, etc. So he might have called this a brutish practice, p. 42. Where Is then
his distinction he pleads for in the use of it? De scrib^^d Epist. Vossatore^.
See Erasmus reasons with Indignation against the Youers of his time, writing a
whole Chapter against them, comparing them to triple Bodied Monsters, etc. And
compare them with this Man's ridiculous reasons, for his ridiculous words and
gestures, as if they were for distinction, when they are for confusion, not
knowing whether one or more are spoken to, to one only or to all, in company.

They that know Languages, know that in them all there is a distinction in
speaking to one or more. But the Hebrew manner in speaking sometimes to all
severally, sometimes to all as one in a collective Body, some times to one in
name of all, and so altering speaks no such confusion. As in the place, for
instance, Isa. 10.1, 3, 4. The Prophet speaks of them, and says, Woe to them
that decree Unrighteous Decrees and writers that write grieveousness
prescribed, etc. In Verse 3. he turns his speech to them, What will ye do in
the day of Visitation? where will ye leave your glory, etc. Verse 4 he again
says of them, Without me they shall bow down under the Prisoners, etc.

R. R.

Something further in ANSWER to Priest Bond's Lies, Ignorance and Blasphemy, In
his Book, Entitled, The Quakers in BERMUDAS Tried, Sentenced, Executed, etc.
SAMPSON BOND says, The Quakers are Tried, Sentenced and Executed.

This is much like his forefathers the Scribes and Pharisees, who were always
forward in Judging and Condemning the Innocent, who cried out against Christ
Jesus our Savior, and said, He was a Blasphemer and had a Devil; as thou do
against his Appearance in Spirit at this day, who begin'st thy Book with a Lie,
and Blaspheming in thy Mouth; but the Life in which the Quakers live is out of
thy Wrath, and he in whom we believe shall bruise thy Head (which is the
Serpent) though thou Blaspheme against his Name.

For S. Bond says in the beginning of his Book, That the Quakers Savior
within him, is not the true Christ, but the false Christ, the Devil.

Reply, He in whom we have believed for Salvation is the true Christ, whom the
Angel said, His Name should be called Jesus, and by the Prophet, Emanuel, which
being Interpreted is God with us, Mat. 1.21, 22, 23. Whose outgoings were from
of Old, who said, before Abraham was I am, who was with the Church in the
Wilderness, and they drank of the Spiritual Rock which followed them, which
Rock was Christ: 1 Cor. 10.4. And this is he in whom we have believed, who
comforted and preserved his People in all Ages, by his Spiritual Appearance in
the Inward Man; and there is none knows him truly to be their Savior, but who
knows him Spiritually in their Hearts, who works all their works in them and
for them.

But S. B. such as thou (Blasphemous Wretch) who call'st his Spiritual
Appearance the Devil, may get the words of the Scripture, and prate in thy
Imaginations, and deceive poor People with a Notion; who through envy and
malice (which the Devil works in thee) art Smiteing and Reproaching them who
live in the Life or Spirit, which gave forth the Scripture, which thou have
raked together in thy dark mind, to prove Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of
God among the People, to be the Savior; which is not denied by us, but
assuredly believed in and witnessed to be the true and only Savior, through
the work of his Eternal Power in the Inward Man, which is wrought through Faith
in his Name, who in the days of his Flesh went about doing good, and wrought
Miracles, and did many mighty Works; yet the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees
Envyed and Blasphemed against him; a thou do against his Spiritual Appearance
at this day.

And we also believe Christ Jesus suffered by that envyous Generation of
Professors, Scribes and Pharisees, and was Crucified under Pontus Pilate the
Roman Governor, and that he rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures, and appeared to his Disciples, and ascended into Heaven, where he
sits at the right hand of the Father in Majesty on High, who is the Mediator
between God and Man, who is ascended above all Heavens, and by whom all things
do consist; who said, I and my Father are one, and he that has seen me has
seen the Father, John 14.7, 9, 10. Who said, I am in the Father and the Father
in me, the words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father
that dwells in me, he does the work: and so Christ Jesus has taught us by
his blessed Spiritual Appearance in our Hearts, not to separate his Manhood
from the Godhead.

As thou S. B. have done in thy ignorant dark Spirit; who have heapt up many
Scriptures together in thy Book, to prove the Manhood only the Savior; which
is no more proved by thee, then if thou had said nothing, for these Scriptures
do severally prove and hold forth the power of the Godhead which dwelt in that
Holy Body, whereby it was carried forth and enabled in suffering and doing
good, healing the Sick, raising the Dead, as it is written, and through the
Eternal Spirit, offered up himself a Sacrifice for the Sin of the World.

So not the Manhood without the Godhead was the Savior; as thou Ignorantly,
Blasphemously seeks to prove against the work and power of the Godhead in the
Man Christ Jesus, and also against his Spiritual Appearance in his People
Pharaoh like, have given these wicked Epithetes (to wit) The Quakers Idol
Glowworm and the Devil; with much more Blasphemous stuff, for which God will
judge thee thou Hypocrite.

And S. B. in the 7th and 8th Page of his Book says, He does acknowledge with
Francis Estlacke that the Word took Flesh, and suffered without the Gates of
Jerusalem, howbeit says S. B. as it come from a teaching Quaker, it is
undoubtedly no other then a deceitful shift; but (says he) Alas, how many
Turks and Jews believe this? But the Quakers attribute no more Soul-saving
merit in the Body of Christ, then in the Body of a Turk or a Jew.

Reply, In this thou have falsely accused us, and seeks to make Lies thy
refuge, and to render us odious to the People; but the Lord is opening the
Understandings of Men, and many know us better then to believe thy Lies and
Slanders, which we turn back upon thy own Head, with thy story of Turks and
Jews believing Christ died by History, which is thy own state; who art scoffing
at the work of Salvation by Christ in the Hearts of his People, who know
little but by History, and therefore thou know not the virtue of the Body of
Christ Jesus; but art falsely accusing others, whose tongue is at liberty, and
thy Heart filled with malice, and thou throwest out Lies at random. Who that is
moderate and fears God will believe thee? but it may serve with the rest of thy
Lies and Blasphemous stuff, to make thee manifest to the People.

For since we have been turned from Darkness to Light, and believed therein, we
have known Salvation and Redemption by the precious Blood of Christ Jesus,
which cleanses our Hearts from Sin.

And so the Quakers do not make these effects within them, to be Christ their
only Savior (as thou falsely chargest them) but we know the Operation of his
Heavenly Arm and Power within us, to work these good effects for us; who has
opened a Spiritual Eye in us, which sees where thou art, and the true Light
shines (although thou in the dark Blasphemes) which will yet make thy Folly and
Darkness manifest to them that see it not.

Who art pleading in thy Notion and Historical belief of Christ without thee,
which Drunkards and Profane Persons have as well as thee, who art dividing and
scoffing at his Spiritual Appearance in Man, without which there is no
Salvation, (but all are in the curse) where thou art in thy Notion of Christ
only without thee, with the Drunkards, profane Turks, and Jews, to receive thy
person, except thou find a place of Repentance; for thy Faith can be no better
then a Notion, profess what thou will, who scoffs and derides at the blessed
Appearance of Christ Jesus in the Hearts of his People: for it is that which
gives life unto the Soul, as Christ Jesus said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. And he that
eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me and I in him, John 6.56.
But this is a Riddle to thee and such as thou art, who know little but what
thou know naturally like a Beast; wherein thou corrupts thy self, and such
as thou art in all Ages opposed the breaking forth of the blessed Invisible
Life and Power of Christ Jesus who redeems Man to God, out of Death and
Darkness, where thou art gnashing thy Teeth; but the redeemed of the Lord whom
thou scoffest at, they rejoice in Christ Jesus their Lord and only Savior,
over thee and thy Head which is the Devil, for he is a Liar from the beginning,
and is the Father of all Liars and Blasphemers, in whose work thou art found,
and do not say this is railing, for it is thy due, as Christ Jesus said to thy
forefathers of old, Ye Generation of Vipers, how can you escape the Damnation
of Hell?

And Samuel Bond says in the Six and Twentyeth Page of his Book, Though the
Spirit be the Dead Souls Quickner, yet it is not the Quickened Souls Savior.

Reply, Where have thou learnt this Doctrine thou Blind guide, who leads all
into the Ditch that follow thee? It is written, The Dead shall hear the Voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, John 5.25. So it is by Christ
Jesus the dead Soul is quickened and raised to Life, who is the Savior by the
powerful working and operation of his Spirit in the Inward Man; and so thy
blind assertion is seen to be words without knowledge; and in this and much
more thou art found a false witness, who would wholely exclude the Spirit in
the work of Salvation, for say thou, Though it be the dead Souls Quickner, it
is not the quickened Souls Savior, who is it (but the blind) but sees thy
confusion herein, for Christ Jesus and the Spirit are one in the work of Man's
Salvation.

And S. B. says in his 54 Page, That G. F. in his Book Great Mystery, Page 49,
50. has these words, ye scorn me the Light in you, and ye have said, that I
the Light am not able to save those that believe in me. and further, Page the
54. That if you will believe in me the Light, I will purge out all your
Iniquitys, etc.

Reply, Herein thou have spoken falsely of G. F. in thy scoffing Spirit, for
there is no such words in his Book; therefore who should mind what thou say,
who art publishing thy Lies and Blasphemy in print to the World, for we do not
say that every measure or operation in Man is the whole Light of Christ; But in
him is Life and the Life is the Light of Men, who lights every Man that is
come into the World, John 1.4, 9. And they that believe in the Light and obey
it, they come to be the Children of the Light and of the Day: and if the
Magistrates and all the People in Bermudas, did believe in the Light of Christ
Jesus; the would soon see what a blind Guide Priest Bond is, who blasphemes and
derides the Light of Christ, and makes Lies his refuge, and would through his
malice and envy stir up the Magistrates of Bermudas to Whip and Persecute a
People that lives peaceably amongst them, and are believers in Christ Jesus
their Savior, although falsely accused by thee, Sampson Bond, as in the 59, 60,
and 61. Page of thy Book, where thou say, Christ whipped out the abusers of the
Temple, and why might not the Magistrates whip W. H? But Christ Jesus did not
whip such as thou art, who said, He was a Blasphemer and had a Devil, (which
was worse then the Abusers of the Temple,) who were like thee, who call his
Spiritual Appearance the Devil: and what Christ Jesus did in that matter, it
was not only in respect of that outward Temple, but also Figurative of his
Spiritual cleansing of the Hearts of his People, in the Gospel Day.

But S. B. where do thou find the Ministers of Christ preach such Doctrine as
thou have done to the Magistrates in Bermudas, in these 3 Pages? more like a
proud Pharisee, then a Minister of the Gospel, as thou would be esteemed; who
have got the Sheeps clothing, but art seen to be Inwardly a Ravening Wolf: thy
work discovers thee.

And Sampson Bond says in his 58 Page, When Paul was Traveling in Birth for
the Galatians, Christ was not formed in them, therefore (says he) the Light
which is in every Man, is not the true Christ, but a Quakers rotten Principle.

Reply, Herein Sampson Bond has manifest himself to be one that speaks out of
thick Darkness, who knows nothing of the new Birth, nor travail for Christ to
be formed in him, but calls it, The Quakers rotten Principle and the Devil.

But in Gods Day it will grind him to Powder, except he can find a place of
Repentance before it be too late.

For thou dark Man, who know not what thou stumblest at; for although Christ
Jesus has enlightened every Man that comes into the World, yet many hates the
Light, as thou do; and so such know not the way thereof no more then thou
do, but are in Darkness as thou art; but it is they who love the Light,
believe in it and obey it, who come to know the new Birth, and Christ to be
formed in them, which thou knows nothing of; thy Speech which is in Darkness
and Blasphemy bewrays thee, and have lasht thy self, and feel'st it not, who
art Dead in Darkness.

And this is written that People may see where thou art, like a proud Pharisee,
whose Tongue is at liberty, and pratest like a Perrot in thy Book, which is
stuffed with Lies, Ignorance and Blasphemy, against God and Christ, his Holy
Angels, Prophets and Apostles; which thou most falsely chargest upon others, in
the 54 Page; but art really found guilty thy self.

And also against Gods People whom he has raised up, by the Light of his Son
Christ Jesus, our Lord in this Day.

Who art Scoffing and Deriding at them; and also, the Light and gracious
Appearance of Christ in their Hearts; whereby its manifest thou know nothing
hereof, but by Notion and History.

For it is by the Spiritual Appearance of Christ, that the Eye of Man's
Understanding is opened, to see, and through the work of Regeneration Man comes
to know the worth of that one Offering; which for ever makes perfect them that
are sanctified, through the belief of the truth, and in walking in obedience
thereunto, they come truly to know Christ to govern, rule and be head in them.

And they are Spiritual minded Men and Women, who are made sensible of that
great work of Man's Salvation, in Christ's offering up himself in the Body of his
Flesh upon the Cross; whereby he put an end to the first Covenant, which stood
in outward Sacrifices, Types and Shadows; and opened a Door, both for Jew and
Gentil to receive him, who is the Second and Everlasting Covenant; and they
that know this Spiritual work, and Christ to be formed in them as aforesaid;
they are made pertakers of that great benefit, of what Christ wrought by his
suffering without them, and are sat down in Heavenly places, in Christ Jesus,
our Lord and only Savior.

Whilst thou Sampson Bond, and such as thou art, are foaming out your own
shame; who say in the 69 Page of thy Book, The Quakers deny that Christ's Body
is risen: which is another of his Lies.

For we do know he is risen, and to our Justification, who believe in his Name;
and to the condemnation of such false Accusers, as thou art.

But S. B. in the 18 Page of his Book, says, Christ's gracious Operation in the
Heart in Scripture, is called Christ in you.

And we who thou in scorn call Quakers, do believe it is he, the Scriptures
bear Testimony to be within his People, who is their Savior: who in the
beginning of thy Book, calls him the Devil: and so Pharisee like, thou art
calling the Master of the House Beelzebub. And here thou have contradicted thy
self, who deridest at Christ's being in his People; and like a Blasphemer,
scoffingly, Queriest, Whether Christ be in our Arms, Legs and Guts, etc. But
this wicked heathenish work may make thee manifest to poor People, who have
been deceived by thee.

But it is no strange thing to us, whose Eyes God has opened; for we know the
wisdom of this World cannot perceive the things of God, for they are
Spiritually discerned, and by his Spiritual Appearance in this latter Age of
the World, God has raised contemptible Instruments to perfect his praise, and
to confound the Haughty Scoffer, who is glorying in his own shame.

As Priest Bound does, with his little Schollarship, who is tanting and huffing
in the Air, against an Innocent People; yet let him know, they are learned in
the School of Christ Jesus, and are his Disciples, though derided by him: and
the Lord has made them so wise, as to see over such blind guides as S. B. is:
though many of them never learnt Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, which you
Night-Watch-Men glory in, which Pilate set over the head of Christ Jesus our
Savior; and in this night of Darkness and Idolatry, you blind Watchmen have
been calling it your Original, and none have been counted fit by you to Preach
Christ, but such as have your Original (to wit) the Tongues. But God has
opened an Eye that sees you, and is redeeming his People from under your
Bondage; at which you are angry, and your sorrow and torment will yet increase.

And S. B. says in the 94 Page of his Book, That useful Instructions may be
drawn from Iudases words and the Devils.

Reply, With whom thou mighst have joined thy self, with thy wicked Book; for I
never read of such Lies and Blasphemys uttered by Judas, as thou have in thy
ungodly Book; from whence we may draw these useful conclusions, that it was
Gods great love and mercy to us, in gathering us to himself, from the Mouths of
such blind Hirelings as thou art.

Who in the same Page, says, The Scripture does not bear witness to the Light
within, for if the Scriptures of God should bear witness to that gross piece of
foollery called Light within, it would witness it self to be no word of God.

Reply, Here thou Blasphemest against God, and beliest the Scriptures; which
says, God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. And also he
has shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory
of God, in the Face of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.6.

And S. B. in the same Page of his Book, has published these lines against us,
(to wit) 1. That the Quakers say, the Light in every Man by natural Generation
is the true Christ and only Savior. 2. And that the Lord Jesus Christ is not
the Son of God, the Savior of the World. 3. That we say Christ is not in
Heaven. 4. And that it is Blasphemy to affirm he is there. 5. And that we say
the Light in Man is the Scriptures.


Reply. All these Lies we turn back upon thy own Head, (whose dwelling is in
Darkness,) and all thy Blasphemy and derision against the Light of Christ
Jesus, the Son of the living God, our only Savior, in these several places in
this one Page of thy filthy Book: which will be thy Burden in the Day of
Account.

And in Page 31. S. B. says, Francis Estlacke speaks of his being washed and
justified in measure, but (says S. B.) I demanded of him, whether it were from
Theft, Drunkenness, Oaths or Adultery? which it seems thou queri'st in
derision, For (says S. B.) I more seriously requested the Assembly to take
notice of his want of knowledge in the Scripture; inasmuch as that he makes
justification from Sin, not only a work within him, but to be daily wrought in
him by measure, which assertion, (says S. B.) is directly contrary to the
manifold Scriptures of Truth,) but brings not one to prove it, but in a few
lines after grossly contradicts himself, and says, Washing and Justification
from Sin, is to be received and wrought, not at once, but by degrees and in
measure by the working and operation of the Spirit of God in us, which the
Quakers do witness and bear testimony to, which thou Blasphemously calls the
Devil.

And again in the same Page. S. B. scoffingly says, This Doctors new Divinity,
(to wit) that he is washed and justified from his Sins in measure, is most
false and dangerous Doctrine.

Reply, So S. B. For all thy great Notion of Christ without thee, and this
pretense of the Scriptures being thy rule; yet thou want Light and Grace to
teach thee to speak truth, and not to belie the Scriptures, and to contradict
thy self as thou have done over and again, in this one Page of thy Book.

For notwithstanding, this great work of Christ offering up himself upon the
Cross a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World; yet Sanctification and
Justification is imputed to no Man, but through Faith in his Blood, which is
the gift of God, through the operation of his Spirit in the Heart of Man,
whereby this work of Sanctification and Justification comes gradually to be
wrought in Man, and no further is Man truly justified in the sight of God, then
he is truly Sanctified, which work is assuredly known in the Hearts of all that
are redeemed to God, through the precious Blood of Christ Jesus, the Lamb of
God, which takes away the Sins of the World. And so there is a dying to Sin,
and his Baptism is known, which is with Fire and the Holy Ghost; and such are
created anew in Christ Jesus.

And he is formed in them, and he is mighty and powerful in them, and they can
truly say, greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World, and so
Christ Jesus is precious to them, and they can speak of his works of
Salvation, which he has wrought in them, to the praise and glory of his great
and worthy Name. And not like S. B's Blasphemous, Confused, Unsavory talk; who
is not fit to take the Holy Name of Christ Jesus into his Mouth, until it be
washed, and his wicked Heart cleansed, and then he may know better how to speak
of the things of Gods Kingdom, which at present he is ignorant of, and and an
Enemy to.

And in the 90 Page Sampson Bond says, That the Holy Spirit in respect special
help and asistance is subsequent to the Scriptural Gospel Preached.

Reply, Where have thou learnt this Doctrine? The Scriptures speaks but of one
Gospel, and says, It is the Power of God: Romans 1.16. and thou that brings
another, art under the curse, who art preferring the Scripture before the
Spirit, for aid and assistance, like a blind guide; for the Scripture will
Witness against thee, and thy abuse thereof, for the Scripture says, There is
none knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. Nor do
we know how to pray as we ought, but by the Assistance of the Spirit of Christ,
Romans 8.26. And it is the Spirit must lead us into all Truth, and it is the
Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, through Holy Men, 2 Pet. 1.21, And it is
the Spirit that must open the mysterys in the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.12. Or else
all are blind like thee Sampson.

And S. B. does strongly plead for his Masters Kingdom of Sin and Darkness,
from the 77 to the 87 Page of his Book; and in these 10 Pages, he has made
such a Babel, building in confusion, and wresting the Scriptures, and giving
his meanings upon them, to prove what he says, and then concludes never to
come our of Sin, nor no Man else till they be Dead; and has charged all the
Holy Prophets, Fathers and Apostles, to live in Sin, he has thrown dirt in the
faces of them all, and with his cloud of Darkness (where under he dwells) would
he cover them all.

But God will judge thee, for thy Lies and reproach thou have cast upon his
Ministers, Servants and Prophets; who were redeemed from the Earth, and knew
the Kingdom to be come in Power, and sat together in Heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, who were Washed and Cleansed by his precious Blood, and their
Bodies were Temples for God to dwell in and walk in, and not receptacles for Sin
and Darkness, as S. B. is and cannot come out of it (as he says) till he be
dead, and so he will live, and have all Men to live ^in, and serve the Devil
till they be dead, and then they shall partake of the fullness of God in Heaven:
8, Page of his Book.

Oh! S. B. Thou have sound out easy way to please Hypocrites, to go to Heaven.

But if thou repent not of this thy wicked and confused work and believe in the
Light of Christ Jesus, that thy Heart may be cleansed: thou will perrish in
Darkness for ever.

But Job, and Paul, and John, with the rest of Gods Servants, whom thou have
falsely accused; who were humble Men fearing God, and did not justify
themselves, but saw they were weak without him, but as they stood in the Faith
they beheld his glory, and confessed to his power, which redeemed their Souls
from Death, and their Feet from falling. And David was washed from his Sin
through Repentance; and Job was accepted of God but not in Sin: S. B. do thou
look to that.

Neither did Paul sit down in that state, crying out, O Wretched Man! Who shall
deliver me from this Body of Death? But as a good Soldier in the Spiritual
Warfare, he followed Christ Jesus, the Captain of his Salvation, and sought a
good fight, and kept the Faith, and did not sit down in unbeleif; but bore
Te^timony to the Power of Christ Jesus, that had made him more then a
Conqueror, and then he came to know a better state, and a growth in Christ
Jesus, and then he could say, There is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, who walks not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: for the Law
of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin
and Death, Romans 8.1, 2.

And Christ Jesus said, The Strong Man keeps the House, till a stronger comes
and binds him, and spoils his Goods, and disposses him, And so they that are in
the Faith which purifies the Heart, (not a Notion only) they have experience of
this blessed work, and cannot plead for Sin term of Life; but are in him that
destroys the Devil and his works, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness.

And they that are born of God sins not, 1 John 3.9. We believe the Apostle
John spoke true, although thou S. B. would make him a Liar, as in thy 83 Page,
where thou chargest the Apostle with saying, We that are in the new Birth, if
we say we have no Sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But
John does not say so, but it is thou that art adding to his Words, for he does
not say, He that is born of God commits Sin, but, He that is born of God does
not commit Sin. and so thou art a false accuser of the beloved Disciple of
Christ Jesus.

Who says, 1 John 1.5. This is the Message we have heard and declare unto you,
that God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, if we say we have
fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we Lie and do not the Truth, but if
we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have from fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. But
if we say we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us,
but if we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and
to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness.

And here the Apostle speaks of states and conditions he had passed through,
that others who where Traveling after might be Encouraged to walk in the
Light, that they might know the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from their
Sins, And so he that has this Hope, purifies himself as he is pure, 1 John
3.3. And so we have Testimony unto the Power of Christ Jesus, who destroys the
Devil and his works, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness, and makes an end
of Sin; and so we cannot plead for the Devils Kingdom of Sin and Darkness, like
S. B. till he is Dead. But let Sampson Bond plead for Sin till his Tongue
cleave to the Roof of his Mouth, yet God will establish Righteousness in the
Earth.

And in thy 82 Page, thou falsely accuses Paul, That perfection from Sin was
not attainable in this Life, but at the Resurrection of the Dead, and bring
Phil. 3.12. But Paul says no such thing, but he says, He follows after that he
may Apprehend that for which he is Apprehended of Christ. And 14 Verse. I press
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, and
preached wisdom amon^st them that were perfect.

And if S. B. had experience of the work of Christ Jesus in his Heart; he would
have seen a possibility of being washed and cleansed from his Sin, and a
further growth and increase into the manifold Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit;
for to be cleansed from Sin is not the highest perfection attainable in this
Life.

But S. B. says in his 80 Page, The meanest Saint upon the Earth is like his
Father in Heaven, that he is like to God who begitteth all his Children in his
own Lik^ness.

How now S. B. what must we be like our Father which is in Heaven? who begets
his Children in his own likeness; what is not this perfection to be like God?
But if this be true, (as no doubt it is) then what will become of thy Kingdom
of Sin and Death, thou art pleading for term of Life in these 10 Pages of thy
Book, thou have overthrown it all at once.

But (says S. B.) No Man is like the Father or the Son in the degrees of these
perfect or pure Qualities.

No, who ever said they were? But what need was there of this assertion? But he
must fill up his Book with something, and I do suppose he readily spel'd what
comes upermost; but how he will reconcile this later part of this Page, with
the rest of his confused stuff, I know not, it is so plain a contradiction,
there needs not a Scholar to interpret it.

But S. B. speaks like himself, and many of the Priests his Brethren, who can
call Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light; and Evil, Good, and Good, Evil, with
their fore fathers of Old.

But, S. B. may twist and twine and wrest the Scriptures to cover himself in
this, as he has done in other things.

But I may say unto him, what have thou to do with perfection, whose dwelling
is in Darkness, and to prattel and prate of things thou knows nothing of? But
in the blindness and enmity of thy mind, thou art busying thy self to lay
Stumbling-Blockes in the way of the Blind, and to strengthen the wicked in
their way.

But all who have an Eye open, and loves the way that leads to Life, will see
thy snares of Hell and Death, who a^t cha^ging the new Birth with Sin, which is
Blasphemy against God, For he that is born of God cannot Sin, 1 John 3.9.

And S. B. says, 95, The Scriptures tells us diverse things before they were
written, (to wit) that the word of God was manifest to Adam and his Wife, and
that the Word of God came to Noah and Abraham and others.

And then (says he) Now, O ye teaching seducing Quakers, I would ask you this
one Question, Could your Light within, tell you ought of all this, if the
written Scriptures had not told it first?

Reply, Yes we do believe the Light could have told us this and much more, for
these things which were from the beginning, were by the Light revealed, unto
Moses; and all the Prophecy, Exhortations, Admonitions and what soever was
written for our learning, was from the blessed inshining of the Light made
known, for Holy Men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, which is the
Holy Spirit of Christ Jesus, by which he has enlightened every Man that is come
into the World, which thou in thy dark mind can not discern; For although
Light shines in Darkness, yet Darkness comprehends it not, 1 John 1.5. Who in
thy Ignorance and Darkness, art raising Mists and Foggs in thy Book, to blind
the Eye which God is opening, but thy work is as chaff, which will be burnt in
the Fire of Gods Jealousy, which waxes hot against such Babilonish-Builders
as thou art.

And Sampson Bond in his 96 Page, has raised another great Lie, (to wit) That
the Quakers say, the Soul of Man is God in part: And then in his dark envious
Spirit, is fighting against it, to the 99 Page of his Book.

Reply, But our Belief and Doctrine is, That God breathed into Man the Breath
of Life, and he became a living Soul, Genesis 2.7. And not that the Soul was God
in part, as S. B. falsely insinuates, and he has forged a Lie, and in these 4
Pages, makes a great bussel in Lies and Confusion to fight against it to no
purpose, but serves to manifest his Envy and Folly.

Who is bringing in J. Taynes belief as a proof against us, as a cover to
shelter his evil design, for J. Tayne was never amongst us, nor o^ned by us.

But any thing will serve thy turn, for it is manifest by thy Book thou
matterest not what thou say, like thy forefathers, who were forgers of Lies,
and said, Report, and we will Report. And so it is seen where thou art, and who
is thy leader not Christ Jesus of Nazareth, who is the Captain of our
Salvation, who by the Light of his blessed Spirit within us (which thou like a
Wicked Wretch calls the Devils,) has opened our Eyes, and we see where thou
art, and who is thy Leader.

And S. B. in his 4 next Pages, which he or his Printer has paged in
confusion, like his work in his Book, he says: The Quakers Infallible Spirit
within him, is grounded upon the Soul being God in part, and further (says he)
I have long thought their Infallible Light within, to be no other then the Pope
without, and (says S. B.) as the Pope says, so says the Quakers, and the
Pope robs Christ of all his Offices, and so does the Quakers, and (says he)
the Quakers deny the Trinity, which is 3 distinct Persons.

Reply, The Quakers do believe that the Spirit of Christ Jesus is Infallible:
But thou S. B. art so blind and envious, that thou can speak little of the
Quakers but a Lie is in thy Mouth, for our belief is not grounded upon the Soul
being God in part: It was never so spoken by us, but it is thy forged lie, in
charging it upon us.

But Faith herein has been raised and increased in us, through its powerful
working in our Hearts, (to wit) the Eternal Infallible Spirit, which the true
Believers in Christ Jesus were always led by, which thou in thy Wicked fallible
and dark Spirit, calls the Devil.

But by the Light and Power of Christ Jesus, our Mouths are opened to bear a
Testimony against the Idolatry and Blasphemy of the Pope, and all such as thou
art, who are his offspring; who are not yet come out of Babylon, for confusion
is your dwelling place: and although the Quakers do believe that the Light and
spirit of Christ Jesus is Infallible, and will lead all out of Sin, up to God,
who believe in Christ Jesus.

Yet this does not follow, that therefore the Quakers and the Pope are one,
because he (to wit) the Pope does say, That his Idolatrous Principles and
Traditions are Infallible. But this is thy shallow Head and dark Mind, which
makes thee publish thy Ignorance to the World.

And we know the Pope is an Intruder into things which he is ignorant of and
has nothing to do with; and is a Blasphemer, and so art thou, who ar,
comparing the Light and Spirit of Christ Jesus, with the Pope and his
Idolatrious Traditions, in this Comparison.

But we turn it back upon thy own Head, with thy Brethren the Priests of
New England; where thy lying Book as thou say was Printed, which is as
follows.

The People sprinkle Infants, and call it the Baptism of Christ, and so do the
Popish Priests preach for hire, and so do you Presbyterians, and have taken
Men's Goods from them for your gain, yea, and took their Childrens Clothes from
their Backs, and Imprisoned Men till Death, for your God, which is your Belly;
and from them you have done no Work, for what greedy Hirelings are you? Who is
Worst, you or the Pope? The Pope calls the Old Mass-House, the Church; and so
do you.

But the Lord is redeeming his People out of your Ignorance, and Idolatrous
Inventions, and from the Mouths of such Hirelings as thou art. And this may
satisfy all honest minded People of the Lord in Bermudas, that thou art not a
Man fit to take the Name of the Lord into thy Mouth, who has published in Print
so many Lies to the World* and Blasphemys against the Light and Spirit of
Christ Jesus, whereby thou have strengthened the Hands of the Wicked.

For thy work in thy Book, is to stir up poor Ignorant People, to Deride and
Blaspheme God, in the Appearance of his Spirit, Light and Grace, (which thou
thy self have done) which People should wait in Gods fear, and in Humility, for
the Appearance of to cleanse their Hearts, and preserve them out of Evil; For
it is by Grace ye are saved, through Faith in Christ Jesus, Ephe. 2.8. And so
all that comes to this Faith, which purifies the Heart, will deny such as thou
art, and their Eye will be opened to see that the Lo^d is come to teach his
People, as it is written, They shall all be taught of God, and such know that
they are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness, and we k^ow that the
Son of God is come and has given us an Understanding, that we know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Christ Jesus, this is the
true God and Eternal Life: Little Children keep your selves from Idols, Amen. 1
John 19, 20, 21.

And Sampson Bond says, in the last Page of his Book, O let us rather burn
then bow to the Idol Light within, which the Roman Nabuchadnezzer has set up,
in peaching Quakers. O let us dye rather for the Name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, then leave the mark of the Beast in us, or on us, etc.

Reply, Sampson, Thou begin'st thy Book with a Lie and Blasphemy, and endest
with it in thy Mouth, and can not dye for the Lord Jesus Christ; but the mark
of the Beast is on thy Forehead, and in thy Mouth, and the Persecuting
Idolatrous Spirit of the Church of Rome is in thy Heart, who would stir up
the Magistrates in Bermudas to Persecution, like thy Brethren in New England,
who have outdone the Pope that we read of in our day, in Persecution, in
Rifling Houses, in Spoiling of Goods, Whip^ing, cuting off ears, Banishing upon
Pain of Death, and Murdering and Drinking the Blood of the Servants and Martyrs
of Christ Jesus; whereby they are become a byword to the Nations; and if you
can clear your selves from the Blood of the Innocent, so may the Pope, whose
offspring you are in these things, and in much more, which is further spoken
to, by G. F in his ^ook, New-Englands Firebrand quenched: for Cruelty and
Persecution, I know none that exceeds you in this Age of the World.

But the Light never Persecuted any, but teaches the true believers in Christ
jesus to love their Enemies.

And S. B. says in his title Page, his Book was Printed at Boston in
New England.

Reply, It is very like such a Book might be acceptable in Boston in
New England, amongst his Brethren, the Priests and Professors in Boston, who
encouraged the Printing of Roger Williams Blasphemous Book, who said (to wit)
Roger Williams, That Christ was a Curruptible Man, and his Blood was
Corruptible. Fit Companions for Priest Bond, and Priest Intret Madder, who
said, He had nothing that was Good in him: But miserable Sheep are they who
have no better Shepherds then S. Bond and I. Madder: But we do not charge the
tender Hearted and moderate People in Boston, but such as have been Persecutors
and Enemies to the Appearance of God and his People, and have besmeared
themselves with the Blood of the Innocent, which will not be wiped of in
Generations to come, no more then Caines who slew his Brother, because his
works where Righteous, and his Evil.

But as it is Recorded concerning the Blood of Zacharias, which was shed
between the Temple and the Altar, that all the Blood that was shed from
Righteous Abel to that Day, should be required at their Hands: And you who are
become one with that Blood thi^sty Persecuting Generation, are Recorded with
them in the sight of the Lord, to be Persecuters and Shedders of Innocent
blood, which God has and will require at your Hands, except a place of
Repentance can by you be found.

And Sampson Bond, in the pride of his Heart, has cited, Hes. 5.2. Pro. 21.24.
In the title Page of his Book, in reflection upon others without a cause, which
I justly here turn it back upon his own Head, (to wit) The revolter is profound
to make Slaughter. Proud and Haughty Scorner is his Name. And further he calls
himself, late Preacher of the Gospel in Bermudas, but his work in his Book
makes him manifest to be no Preacher of the Gospel, but an Enemy to it; For the
Sacrifice of the Wicked is Abomination, how much more when he brings it with a
Wicked Mind, Prove. 21.27. But thou through a notion might P^each up thy self,
with fained Words and fair Speeches, whereby thou might deceive the Hearts of
the simple, for thy Dishonest Gain, and for thy ^elly, like the rest of thy
Brethren.

But the Lord is opening the Understandings of People, and will redeem them
from under that great Bondage and Captivity, wherein you as Instruments under
the Power of the ^east, has held them for your gain, to satisfy the Lust and
Pride of your Hearts, that you might still lord it over them.

But the Lord is breaking your Bonds, and scattering your clouds of Darkness
and Ignorance; wherein you have wrapped up your selves as with a Cloak, and by
your Sorceries and Divinations, you have kept the People under the same
Ignorance and Darkness with you, and as the Lord by his Spirit has begotten a
tenderness in People, and opened an Eye in them, in some measure to see where
you are, and can no longer put into your Mouths, then like your forefathers,
you prepare War against them, and your anger and malice does then appear, but
your Torment and Sorrow will it Increase.

For God has opened a Spiritual Eye in Thousands, which see you thoroughly,
and can buy your Merchandise no more, for the Light shines, and will shine more
and more unto the perfect day, and Thousands shall come to the brightness of
its rising, and we know why you are Angry, and Rage, and Blaspheme at the
Light; it is because it discovers your Kingdom of Darkness, and your holes
where you have hid your selves, but your Rage and Fury signifies no more then
the Dogs barking at the Moon; for the Light will shine, and the Day will
dawn, and your Darkness must fly away; although you may rove and make a noise
like the Sea, yet your Egyptian Tongue must be dried up, and away has God
prepared for his ransomed and redeemed to walk in; and the Wayfaring-Man,
though a fool to your earthly-wisdom, yet he shall not err therein, Glory to
the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb for ever, who sits upon the Throne, who is
and is to come from Everlasting to Everlasting, who is the ancient of Days,
who shall stand last upon the Earth, when all your Foggs and Mists of
Darkness shall be driven away into the Pit from whence it came; Blessed be
the Name of Christ Jesus who lives for Ever.

John Tysoe.

THE TRUTH OF Christ Jesus, With the PROFESSORS thereof in the Island of
BERMUDAS (Commonly called QUAKERS) Cleared from the Three Ungodly False Charges
charged upon them by Samp. Bond (Teacher in the said ISLAND) in a BOOK,
Entitled, The Quakers in BERMUDAS Tried, etc.

In which Book are found many Blasphemies, Slanders, false Accusations, false
Glosses and Interpretations, herein searched and noted in their particular
Pages, and examined and confuted with as much brevitie as the matter could well
bear.

By a Friend and lover of the Truth in the same Island, called, Francis
Estlacke.

Psalm. 57.4. My Soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on
fire, even the Sons of Men whose teeth are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue
a sharp Sword.

2 Timothy 3.13. But Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving
and being deceived.

TO THE Unprejudiced Reader.
FRIEND, The occasion of this following Discourse is this, I meeting with a
Book given forth by Sampson Bond, a Teacher in Pembrook-Tribe in Bermudas, in
which Book I see my self greatly concerned for the Truths sake, which was by
him exceedingly Reviled, Reproached and Blasphemed, the Scripture greatly
wronged, through false glosses or Interpretatious upon them, forceing the
Saints Testimony to speak another thing then was truly testified by them in
plainnes of Speech; besides the many Lies, Abuses and Slanders, cast upon
Friends by this malicious Priest, who (as it appears by his Book) cares not
greatly what he speaks or writes, not having respect so much as to his own
credit: For these causes a necessity came upon me for the Truths sake, to write
this following discourse. Therefore who ever thou art that reads this Book, I
advise thee to stand single to the Truth, removeing all prejudice out of thy
Heart against any, neither look at the weakness and meanness of the hand that
writ it, nor to the ruggedness of the expressions: all which tend directly to
darken the Truth, and thereby to bring thy Soul to join in affinity with the
Enemy of Gods Truth, and thy Souls Peace, and then being so far entangled in
the Snare, the next thing will be, thou will be engaged in the Dragons Quarrel,
to take up his Weapon, to defend the Dragons cause against the Lamb. And if so
what can thou expect but to receive thy Portion with the Dragon and his
Angels, under the Eternal dispeasure of the Almighty in the day of the Lambs
Victory, who shall certainly overcome, for he is mighty that has promised, to
whom be glory Everlasting.

Therefore Friend or Friends in Bermudas, chiefly the place where I drew my
first Breath, and amongst whom I now dwell; feeling the love of God springing
in my Soul toward you, you were and are chiefly in my Eye, that your precious
Souls may not be deceived, but that ye may be recovered out of the subtle
Fowlers Snare, who lays wait to catch your precious Souls.

To you therefore is mine advise, read with Soberness, and sink down in the
waightiness of your Spirits, that you may be Enlightened with the Light of
Christ Jesus in which you may be able to see and reach the thing by me
intended, even the Truth to stand clear, and Deceit to come under the Just
Judgment of God. And if this I obtain, then have I my desire, who am a Friend
to your Immortal Souls, and desire your Eternal Happiness.

Written in Bermudas, the 25th Day of the first Month, 1683. F. E.

The Truth of Christ Jesus cleared, etc.
BEfore I enter upon the discourse it self, I find it necessary to note a few
things in the Preface to the Reader: where first Sampson Bond seems to lay down
the moving cause, which first moved him to give forth his three Questions with
their Answers stated, which was he says, He was informed of a Paper, that the
Quakers had lef^ with a Gentleman in this Island, intimating a Challenge to the
Ministers, etc. which Paper although slighted by him, he durst not answer,
which Paper was (by way of Challenge) given forth by Stephen Bullock, to try
their God by fasting, which was the very thing upon which that word was spoken,
(viz) That S. B. durst as soon take a Bear by the Tooth as answer it, and not
upon the account of any dispute, and as for any other letter that was sent
afterward (as he says) (viz) between the time that this Paper was given forth
as a Challenge to their Ministers, and the time he sent his Questions to us, I
never heard of any Paper that was sent to him.

And whereas he says in the said Preface, That they i. e. the Quakers came the
first of May following, to the place assigned (Mark) without giving him any
special notice of it: As if we had come upon him unawares.

To which I answer, that this is absolutely false, for after I had received his
Paper, and showed the same to Friends, who considering of the same, and finding
his promise, that he desired a regular Dispute, Friends generally determined to
meet him at the place appointed; whereupon I writ a few lines to the said
Priest, to signify our Acceptance and our intents to meet him; and sent the
Paper by his next Neighbor, who brought me back an answer. Beside the matter
was made every way so public, that when the day came the House was greatly
filled, from all parts (almost) of the whole Island, which is not usual on
their Lecture-days.

But when we came, expecting to have a regular Disputation, (viz) that we
should have had liberty to have answered to the Charge along as he went, we
found it quite another thing, as does appear in his Preface.

For his intent was to bind us down in silence, until he had quite finished his
whole work intended, which I perceived by the time he spent in the answer to
his first Question, he would have wearied out the Peoples patience, so that
they would hardly wait to hear any return.

And Secondly, The Peoples Minds would have been so stuffed with his multitude
of Arguments, Slanders, Lies, and false Accusations; that there would not have
been room for Truth to get any entrance.

And lastly, it tended to prevent and stop us, so that we should not find where
to have an entrance to make any orderly reply to any thing that he spoke; for
which cause it was that I stopped him when he had ended his first answer, for
which he charges us with Unfaithfulness, who never made him no such promise, as
to give him such liberty as he required.

So having noted these things from his Preface, I proceed to consider his first
Proposition, as laid down in the first Page of his Book, which is as follows.

That a Quakers pretended Savior (within him) is not the true Christ, but the
false Christ, the Devil. Which (he says) was proved by 4 Apostolical Arguments,

First, Because Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among the
People, was and is the true Christ and our only Savior, for to prove which he
notes many Scriptures, Acts 2.21, 22, 23, 24. Acts 4.10, 11, 12. Acts 10.38,
39, 40, 42, 43. From these Scriptures mentioned, S. B. draws this Argument.

If Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a man approved of God among the People of Israel,
be the true Christ and only Savior, then a Quakers pretended Savior (within
him) is not the true Christ.

But Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among the People, was and
is the true Christ and our only Savior, therefore a Quakers pretended Savior
within him, is not the true, but the false Christ.

Reply, The Apostles Testimony we believe, that this Jesus of Nazareth, was he
that was to come, of whom Moses and the Prophets wrote, and of whom the
Apostles bore so strict a testimony, especially before the Jews, under the Name
of Jesus of Nazareth: Because they having read of the glory of this Savior,
did expect it to be outward and visible; and that he should have come with the
Pomp and Glory of this World, and that the Redemption which should have been
wrought by him, should have been outward, and that he should have sat upon the
Throne of David, as an outward and visible King, (and when contrary to this
their expectation) he was raised up of so mean a place as Galilee and Nazareth,
and of so mean Parentage; they slighted him, saying, Is not this the Carpenter,
the Son of Joseph? His Father we k^ow, and his Brethren are with us; we know
whence [he] is: But when Christ comes w^ know not whence he is: search and see
(say they) for out of Gallilee arises no Prophet. So they slighted and scorned
him, and put him to Death; therefore the Apostle did bear so strict a Testimony
to this Man; and we do believe that this was he that was to come, and we look
not for another.

But that the Apostle by this Testimony did deny the Godhead, or Invisible
Power that dwelt in Jesus of Nazareth, by which he became a Savior, we do not
believe: Neither do we believe, that the Man Jesus of Nazareth (only as Man)
was the Savior of the World, For in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
Bodily, Coll. ^.9. And Christ himself testifies, that he was in the Father, and
the Father in him, John, 14.10, 11. And in the same place he testifies, That
the Words he spoke, and the Works he did, were done by the Father that dwelt in
Him.

Now if the whole work of Man's Salvation, had been wrought by the Body or
visible Man only; then must our Faith and Hope have stood there, but the same
Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1.21. Our Faith and Hope must stand in God. By which
Scripture, with many more that might be named, it appears, that the Salvation
of Mankind was wrought by the whole entire Christ of God, who was truly God
and Man: And the Apostle says, That God was in Christ, reconciling the World
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. So that it was the Word, the invisible Power that
dwelt and wrought in the Body, that gave the value of the wor^ done in and by
the Man, by which the work of Man's Salvation was effectually wrought: So after
the work was performed in and by the Body in order to Man's Redemption, yet
there remains a large work to be performed in such as believe: For there is a
power of Darkness in Man to be overcome, the Antichristian Spirit ^s to be cast
out, the Body of Sin and Death is to be destroyed, the captivating Spirit that
captivates the Members, and keeps the Members in subjection to the Law of Sin
and Death to be redeemed from, yea the Regeneration is to be witnessed that
begets again unto God, and the newborn ^abe must be known, which is born of
God, that cannot Sin, which only is Heir to the Kingdom, which is brought forth
in the Image and Likeness of the Invisible God; which Image stands in Holiness
and Righteousness: And all this is formed in the Saints, through the powerful
working of Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the
World, and destroys the work of the Devil in us and for us, and so becomes a
perfect Savior, saving to the uttermost those that come unto God by him, and
all this is purchased through the one offering, even perfect Salvation for his
People, even for all those that do truly and effectually believe in him, who
through faith lay hold on the invisible Power, so that they thereby feel the
inward operation or the working of the Spirit within, to wash and cleanse the
Heart, not only from the Guilt or Condemnation, (as ye say) but also from the
defilement of Sin: So is Christ Jesus become the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all that through Faith are brought into obedience unto him. But these things (I
judge) are a mystery to S. B. who is ignorant of the work of Salvation, of the
Grace, Hope and Faith within by Christ; for if he had been acquainted with the
inward forming of Christ, he could never have formed such an Argument as this,
That because Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a Man approved of God among the People,
(in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead, which was the Creator of all
things) was the true Christ and only Savior, that therefore the Savior cannot
be within, although the Saints did witness, that Christ in them was their Hope
of glory. But to leave this, and to take a view of his 2d Argument, as laid
down in the second Page of his Book, which is grounded upon this.

Because the Saints of God (by the direction of his Spirit) have always
acknowledged the Man Jesus Christ, to be the true and only Savior.

Upon which ground he brings forth the same conclusion, (viz) That Christ
within Man, which he calls the Quakers pretended Savior within, is not the
true, but the false Christ.

Reply, This Argument is also false, being one with the other, grounded upon a
foundation (as to me it appears) hid in his own Breast, and not truly laid down
in express Words, yet truly intended by him; which is this, that Christ Jesus
(only) as Man, without the Godhead, was by the direction of the Spirit, always
acknowledged to be their true and only Savior; if this be not the ground of
his A^gument, then could he not have formed such an Argument as this; because
Christ as God is a Spirit, and so within as well as without.

Now for the proof of his Argument, he brings the words of Simeon, Luke 2. from
Verse 25, to Verse 31. by which words it does not at all appear, that the Man
or visible Body only of it self is the only Savior, for he declares of him as
a Light to go before the face of all People, a Light to lighten the Gentiles;
and John bore witness to him, and says, John 1.9. He is the true Light that
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, and Christ himself said, He
was the Light of the World. Which things are true, and his Light is truly felt
and known in the Hearts of his Saints. So our Testimony we are not ashamed to
bring forth to the inward manifestation of the Spirit of Jesus, by which we are
enlightened, and by which the Gentiles are enlightened, and is become the glory
of Spiritual Israel, the inward Jew, whose praise is not of Men, but of God.
And so Simeon's Words or Prophecy of him is fulfilled, he is become a Light to
the Gentiles and Isreal's glory.

He likewise names John 20, 27. Then said Jesus, reach hither thy finger, etc.
And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God: So this Scripture
brought by him to prove his Argument has quite overthrown it.

For by Thomas his confession, the same Jesus, who was the true and only
Savior of the World, was God as well as Man, and Christ did not at all reprove
him for his Confession: And if God, then a Spirit, and so is within as well as
without.

As to the fourth of John, 42. where he seems to say, The Men of Samaria
confessed to the Man Christ, [only] to this I answer, it was the same Christ to
whom Thomas confessed, and the same that was before Abraham was, even he that
whosoever saw truly to be the Christ, saw the Father also: So here having no
ground to prove his Argument, which the said S. B. calls Apostolical, it does
at once fall to the ground.

The third Argument that this Priest uses to prove his Charge, (viz) The
Quakers Savior within him to be the false Christ, is in page 3.

If the true Christ and our only Savior, did at once (without us) in and by
his own crucfied Body on the cross, finish and perfect the work and office of a
Savior? ithen a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not the true Christ.

But the true Christ and our only Savior, did at once (without us) in and by
his own crucified Body on the Cross, finish and perfect the whole work and
office of a Savior, therefore a Quakers pretended Savior within him, is not
the true but the false Christ.

All which he grounds upon these Scriptures following, Heb. 10.12, 14. Heb.
2.14. 1 Pet. 2.24. Ephesians. 2.15, 16. Heb. 9.26. Ephesians. 5.2. Col. 1.22.

Neither does any one of these Scriptures prove the (whole) office of a Savior
perfected in his crucified Body (at once) upon the Cross: Although I confess
that the whole work of a Savior, so far as was of him required, to be
performed in and by that Body, was perfectly performed, and nothing wanting as
pertaining to our Salvation.

But is this the whole office of a Savior? Is there nothing farther to be
done? Is the believing of this sufficient, without sanctification? Is it not
the office of Christ (as a Savior) to give rest and peace to such as he saves?
must he not redeem from under the power of Sin, and destroy Sin in our mortal
Bodies? Is this no part of the office of Christ as a Savior? The Apostle Paul,
Romans 8.2. testified to the work of the Spirit within, saying, The Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free frrom the Law of Sin and
Death. Now this faithful Servant of the Lo^d, after he came to believe and was
truly satisfied, as concerning the work done by Jesus of Nazareth, (without
him) yet if you read Romans 7. you shall see what a grievous complaint he makes
concerning the Body of Death, which still remained in him, and of the Law in
his Members, that still made war against the Law in his Mind, and captivated
his Members to the Law of Sin and Death: So that although the purchase was
made, the debt paid, and remission of Sins obtained, through the Death and
Sufferings of Christ Jesus, and also triumphantly manifested to the World by
his Resurrection, of which there were many Witnesses, as the Apostle does
declare, 1 Cor. 15. yet for all this the Enemy sought to keep his hold, and
Paul was so far sensible of the same, that it made him cry out, Oh Wretched Man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! which as he
waited, he came to know a farther work of Salvation, then that which was done
at once (without him) in the Crucified Body of Jesus on the Cross: for through
the power of the same Jesus (not another) he became crucified also to the
World, and the World unto him; and so being Crucified with Christ, by which he
felt himself Dead to Sin: he also did partake of his Resurrection, and so
received a new Life, through the quickenings of Christ Jesus, who lived in him,
and so was truly made alive unto God, Gal. 2.20. So this is the very thing,
that the faithful, whom S. B. does scornfully call Quakers, do testify of,
(viz) of the work of the Son of God within, and of his inward quicknings in our
Souls, by which we also are made alive unto God, though we do not deny the work
of Salvation, wrought by the Man Jesus Christ (without us) in his own Crucified
Body on the Cross: but believe it every whit, even as the Scripture does
decl^re o^ it.

And do resolve to wait in the inward manifestation of the Son of G^d, w^o is
[Light] whom S. B. so often reproaches in his scandalous Book ^ith wicked and
reproachful Names, yet we are not ashamed to own him in ^is inward
manifestation, through whose Power we do certainly believe, and truly expect to
feel, the Power of Darkness, Sin and Death truly vanquished in us, as well as
for us; as it is written. He does all our works in us and for us.

And so he becomes the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that do obey him; so
Christ saves not to halves, (as People imagine) as to pay the price of the
Redemption, for such as are taken Captive by the Enemy of their Souls, and yet
leave them under his Power and Jurisdiction, but to as many as believe, Love
and Obey him, he redeems also from under the Power of Sin and Death, and gives
them dominion over it, and so he becomes a perfect Savior; saving both within
and without, saving to the uttermost all that come unto God by him. So these
are they who are for ever perfected, through the one offering, even those that
(according to the will of God) are sanctified through the Blood and Spirit of
Jesus, which the Saints do inwardly feel, to cleanse them from the defilements
of Sin. So this (I Judge) to any rational and unbiassed Spirit^, is sufficient
to the Answer of S. B's 3d Argument, by which he seeks to prove his Charge,
(viz) That a Quakers pretended Savior (within him) as he is pleased to call
it) is not the true Christ, but the false.

Sam. Bonds 4th Argument, in page 4.

If the true Christ and our only Savior, be in Heaven above us, then a Quakers
Pretended Savior within him is not the true Christ.

But the true Christ and our only Savior is in Heaven above us, therefore a
Quakers (pretended) Savior within him, is not the true but the false Christ.

Reply, This Argument is founded upon the same Foundation as the other, (viz)
That Christ as Man without the Godhead, is the only material Savior: which if
he could prove, that Man's only Savior, were a mere Man, (as S. B. foollishly
and carnally seems to imagine; then it were easy to limit the Savior of the
World to one place, and then it were easy for him to make good his Charge
against us; but that is too hard for him to prove, for the Scripture says of
him that he is God, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. and in Hos. 13.4. the Lord
himself declares, there is no Savior beside him; and Mary of whom Christ was
Born, according to the Flesh, ascribes Salvation to God, Luke 1.47. My Spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior; and another Scripture says, That Christ was
the same Yesterday, to Day, and forever. What shall I say? the Scripture is
plain, as it is written, God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself.
And God was manifest in the Flesh. But this is a mystery above the
comprehending Wisdom, in and about which, the Wisemen of the World are
Confounded.

And those and only those that live in the Wisdom which is from above, can
behold and understand: the Jews that saw his Body, understood not, nor be ieved
in the Invisible Power, for they saw it not, and their Eyes were shot, that
they could not behold it, neither did Flesh and Blood reveal him (...)
Dis^^ples but the Father: So that as none can know the Father but the Son, and
he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him; so none can know the Son by reading
of Letter, or by Fleshly-wisdom; but as the Father reveals him in them, and is
only seen and known in the Light, though he be in Heaven, and such as believe
not in the Light, wherewith they are Enlightened, and which does Enlighten every
Man that comes into the World, have not known him nor seen him, although the
Jews saw the Body, yet they saw not him that dwelt in the Body, that was before
Abraham, who was the Savior of the World, and was one with the Father; So that
whosoever saw him, saw the Father also, John 14.9.

And whereas S. B. brings the Scripture to prove his Argument, or rather
Imagination, That the Savior of the World, the Christ of God, is only limited
to one place called Heaven above, at a distance from the Saints; its more then
any Scripture does say: for the Scripture says, He is God, as I noted before
as well as Man; and so cannot be limited to any one particular place, and the
Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Verses, speaks thus: The Righteousness which is of
Faith speaks on this wise: Say not in thy Heart who shall ascend into Heaven,
that is to bring Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the Deep?
that is to bring Christ again from the Dead. But what says it? The Word is
nigh, even in the Mouth and in the Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we
Preach. So this Holy Apostle did not Preach Christ at a distance only, but Nigh
in the Mouth and in the Heart, and such as did not so know (...) him, the same
Apostle deemed them as Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. This is no other Doctrine then
what Christ himself declared to his Disciples while he was with them in the
Body, John 14.20. and it was part of Christ's Prayer to his Father, (viz) that
he might be in them, John 17.23. So that you may see by plain Scripture, it is
no new thing to acknowledge Christ in Man, or the Savior within; for Christ is
the Savior, who is God, and cannot be limited to one place, so that he cannot
be elsewhere; for that were to limit the Holy One of Israel.

Thus having gone through his four Arguments, (which he calls Apostolical,) and
having tried them by the Scripture of Truth, and finding them falsely grounded,
they are by plain Scripture truly overthrown.

His next Argument in Page fourth, which S. B. brings to prove The false Christ
to be the Devil, is no whit material to his Work, since he cannot make good his
Charge against us.

Now this being the manner of his work on that Day Friends met him, expecting a
regular Dispute, he having gone through the four Arguments as laid down in his
Book, to prove the first part of his Charge, he sought to proceed to his next
Question, or second part of his Charge against us: But I stopped him, being
willing to answer each Question in its order, though the said Bond did appear
very unwilling, whereupon I did then Declare my Faith as concerning Christ
Jesus, the Savior of the World. Contrary to his many lies against us; and how
he is to be acknowledged and believed in, before he took the Body; Even as the
Scripture does declare of him, John 1.1.2, 3. and likewise as the Scripture
does declare of him, when he took the Body how he took flesh of the Virgin, and
was born, and had his Conversation among men, and how at length he was
Crucified, without the Gates of Jerusalem, performing the work of man's
Redemption, paying the prece. So obtaining Remission of Sins through his Blood,
and being dead and buried, how on the third day he rose again from the Dead,
aad also asended into Heaven: as also I did declare my Faith as concerning his
Spiritual appearanc afterward, according to his promise to his Disciples: I
will not leave you Cemfortless, I will come again John 14.17. Which promise he
did perform unto them; and also now to as many as do believe and truly wait
upon him, as Inward in the heart, according to his word; he dwells with you
and shall be in you. ver. 17.

This S. B. calls a Bare repetition of words, Impertinent to the matter and
says Page, 5 I made no mention of Christ's Resurrestion, (which I noat as a
Lie:) but before I had done he Interrupted me, (calling me Mr.) which title I
denied saying, that I was none of his Master, He said I was Master of an
Assembly, (not naming what Assembly:) here he takes upon him to judge me, and
says that I grew Impertinent (which I note again as false) all though I did
lay upon him something of Unfaithfulness, who had promised, that I should have
liberty to say what I had to say without Interruption.

Now in his Book he goes on so confusedly, that it is a hard matter to trace
him to and fro in his several windings, Therefore my intents are chiefly to
note the Lies, Slanders and Blasphemies, and things of the like nature, cast
upon the Truth and People of the Lord, and where I see occasion a little to
enlarge, that the Truth may be cleared, and stumbling Blocks may be taken out
of the way of such as desire to know the Truth.

In Page 6. I take notice how Deceitfully S. B. casts a slander upon us,
pretending, how he has filled off the Rust and Ruggedness of our Expressions;
yet charging us with disorder, and dismembring the Scripture, (which happily we
might not speak every Word) yet certain I am, (although many things were then
cast in) yet I did not violate or pervert the sense of any one Scripture: Again
he charge us with Dishonesty, in not Noting Chapter and Verse, in which he
did greatly boast. To which I then answered, the Words we speak were Scripture
Words, and he had no great cause to boast; For the Scripture was not given
forth in Chapter and Verse, neither did the Apostles ever so declare, but when
they speak Scripture Words, they said, as it is written, naming only the
Prophet or writer of the same; and here People may take notice of a manifest
Slander, (viz) That it is Friends usual manner to speak Scripture darkly and
confusedly, thereby the more easily to deceive those, with whom the Scripture
has any Credit, Page 6.

Page 7. He goes on with his Lies and Slanders, saying, My design was to make
the Hearers believe, that the Eternal Word as distinct from the Manhood of
Christ, is the true Christ and only Savior. As if I had gone about directly to
deny the Body, which is like many more of his Charges in his Book, which are
absolute Lies and Slanders, which I shall note hereafter as they fall in my way.

Neither did I ever use any such Expression, for if I had said, He were the
true and only Savior, (that is to say, according to S. B's sense) every way
sufficient to perform the whole Office of a Savior, as disti^guished from the
Manhood, then was that work in vain, (viz) Christ taking upon him a Body of
Flesh, and all his Sufferings, Death and Resurrection in vain, If Christ as God
(only) did perform and perfect the work of Man's Salvation without it. Presently
he contradicts himself, saying, Hereunto agrees his Words, (meaning mine) so
often repeated by him, God was manifest in the Flesh, which (he says) we mean
all Mankind Flesh, which he calls an Error.

Which although it is my belief, that God is manifest in his glorious Light, in
every Man according to his measure, according to John 1.9. He Enlightneth every
Man that comes into the World, yet my Words chiefly had Reference to that
prepared Body, in which the Invisible Power did so gloriously appear, to those
whose Eyes was open to behold it: but this his Lie and Slander I shall leave
upon his own Head.

Another Lie or Slander is in Page 8. where he says, A Teaching Quaker, (whom
he calls) a Seducing Quaker such a Quaker (says he) attributes no more
Soul-saving merit to the Body of Christ, then to the Body of a Turk or a Jew.

All that have heard or read the Declarations of Friends, concerning the
Manhood of Christ; can do no less then Judge him to be a Slanderer and a Liar.

Farther S. B. says, That I insisting upon John 1.9. concluded, the Light in
every Man to be Christ, and that Christ to be the only Savior. I confess I
have said, That that Light in every Man i^ given by Christ to believe in, that
he may be saved from Sin: But the word (only) was never used by me, so as to
deny the Body of Christ, in which he performed the will of God, upon the
account of Man's Salvation: yet he confesses its true, that Light in that
Scripture signifies Christ, and that Christ in a sense, (but it must be his
own sense) does Enlighten every Man that comes into the World, that is (said
he) with reason. So here he adds to the Scripture, whereby he does confound or
pervert the true sense of the same by his Addition: concluding that Christ the
true Light that Enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, does
Enlighten Man with no other Light then the Light of Reason, (according to the
sense of that Scripture,) but we believe that the Light with which Christ does
Enlighten Mankind, is that Light that shines in Darkness, and the Darkness
cannot comprehend, and also does detect, discover and make manifest the works
of Darkness, and does lead those that believe in it out of the same, and this
Light is manifested (in some measure) in every Man's Conscience, as they are
exercised in the affairs of this World, as they heed it.

But a little to go back to the 2d Confession in Page 82.

S. B. calls the work of the Spirit within, no other but the effects of the
thing done by the Man Christ without us, as if to be Sanctified. Washed and
Purged from Sin, could not possibly be wrought, except first the Man Christ
must have suffered without us, as the Anticedent cause of those effects.

Whereas it is certain, that many of the Prophets and Righteous Men that lived
before the Appearance of Christ in the Body, did Witness these things wrought
within them, through the effectual working of the Spirit of God in their Hearts.

So that it is plain, that Christ was manifest to them before he took the Body,
as well as when he took the Body, according to the Scripture, Christ the same
Yesterday, to Day, and forever. So having finished this digression, I go
forward again.

In the last line of the 8th Page, he says, I belie the Holy Man John, that
the Enlightening in every Man is Christ, (which I again testify, that it is a
measure of the Light of the true Christ, who is God blessed for ever) and to
prove this a^ Error, he says, That this Evangelist does evidently affirm, that
the Light he ^pake of in the 9th Verse. was the Man Jesus, which (he says)
never was nor ^an be in any Man, for this he brings the 29 and 30 verses of the
same Chapter.

I Answer, The Evangelist in them words cannot be so understood as a Man only;
for he testifies of him as a whole or perfect Savior; and if so, then God, for
if he were Man only, he could not sanctify and cleanse the Soul from Sin; and
how then is he the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World? or how
is the Sin taken away if it still remains ^n the Heart?

But peradventure he will say: He takes away the guilt of Sin through his
Sufferings, and to be Cleansed from the Defilement does follow as the effects.

I Answer, If it be so, then it appears that the whole work of Man's Salvation,
(and so not the whole office of a Savior) was not performed at once without
us, as Sampson Bond affirms in his 3d Argument; for there is something to be
effected within still; and if so, who as it that works those effects within, if
it be not the Spirit?

In Page Nine, He goes on to prove the Light within, not to be the true Christ,
by my Words, for he says, My Words Imply, That thy Light in every Man is
Christ, therefore the Light within a Quaker must be Born at Bethlehem.

Reply, I could say more (and yet speak truly) of the work of the Light, or
Spirit of God, or measure of Christ within, then S. B. c^n receive or
understand, but this I say, I never said the Light in every particular was the
entire Christ, for that were to make many Christ's: but I say, that it is only a
measure of that Christ, who appeared in the Body that was ^orn in Bethlehem.

Again this Priest Page 9. In his answer to that Text, 1 Timothy 3.16. said,
Nothing can be more Evident, then this Disputant would have had the Hearers to
believe, that the Godhead as distinct from Christ being a Man, is the true
Christ and only Savior.

In answer to this and all other of his Wicked and false Accusations, I say and
testify, that I do truly and really give (according to what I Understand, and
feel by the Inward Operation of the Spirit of Christ within, and according to
the Testimony of Saints without, as it is Recorded in the Scripture of Truth)
unto God his due, and also what the Scripture does declare of the Man or Body
of Christ, I also truly own. So let his Lies and false Accusations return upon
his own Head, who shall assuredly feel the weight of them in the Day of the
Lord.

In Page 10. He clearly manifests his Ignorance, and the Car^allity of his
Mind, for speaking there of the Apostle John's words, 1 John 1. Verse. 1, 2, 3.
where he says, That which was from the Beginning. (mark diligently) (Christ in
that Body was not from the Beginning) which we have heard, which we have seen,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life.

This he seems to affirm, That the blessed Apostle did testify, that they had
seen him, and looked upon him, and handled him, (viz) the Word of Life) by
being in his company) as dark a piece and as ignorant (almost) as I have heard
drop from any one, that has taken upon them to write in the defense of their
Religion: What! the outward Eye to behold the word of Life? Does not the
Scripture say, No Man has seen God at any time? Did not the Jews see the Body?
Yet they saw not God that dwelt in the Body, For he that saw Christ, saw the
Father also, according to Christ's own Words to Phillip; likewise Christ says,
The hour comes and now is, when the Dead should hear the Voice of the Son of
Man, and they that heard should live. But the Jews heard the outward Voice, yet
did abide in Death and Darkness, where this Priests place is, otherwise he
never durst adventure to open his Mouth, in Blasphemies against the clear
manifestation of the Spirit, in the Heart and Consciences of Men, calling it,
an Idol, even (the Light) of Christ, who himself bore witness and declared,
That he was the Light of the World.

But now having begun to revile the Appearance of Gods Spirit, What can put a
stop to him, but the Hand of Divine Justice? Which will assuredly overtake him,
and he shall have a Reward from the Hand of the Lord.

In Page Twelve, This Sampson Bond accuses us of Envy, comparing us to the
Jews, who Contradicted the things spoken by Paul, and Blasphemed.

To which I Answer, Therefore art thou inexcusable O Man; for wherein thou
Judge us, thou thy self art Condemned, even by thine own Judgment; for the
very thing thou have laid to this Peoples Charge, thou thy self art sound
guilty of; for thou at found contradicting the things spoken by Paul, and left
upon Record, (viz) Christ his being or Appearance within as witnessed 2 Cor.
13.5. Gal. 2.20. and Chap. 4.19. Col. 1.27. And have also Blasphemed his Inward
Appearance, calling it an Idol. So with the Wicked and Sloathful Servant thou
art justly Condemned out of thine own Mouth; and so the Judgment wherewith thou
have judged me, will redound upon thy self, defend thy self as well as thou
can.

And Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Which he keeps such a busle about, turning and winding,
(Serpent like) yet except he could race the Words out of the Book, it will
stand a Witness for Christ, the Eternal Word, which Faith takes hold of, and
brings the Soul into Union with him, who is nigh unto his, in the Mouth and in
the Heart: So that his People feeling his presence in their Hearts, are not
ashamed to Confess him with their Mouths.

In the Sixteenth Page, speaking of the 2 Cor. 13 5. Know ye not your own
selves, how that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

This Scripture (he says) Wounds their new Coined Religion to Death; and to
make it appear, he forms an Argument thus.

If the Light which is (by Natural Generation) in Reprobates coming into the
World, be not the true Christ; then the Light that is in every Man that comes
into the World, (by Natural Generation) is not the true Christ.

But the Light which (by Natural Generation) in Reprobates is not the true
Christ, as above. Ergo, the Light which is in every Man which comes into the
World, is not (according to your selves) the true Christ.

Reply: I shall never fear wounding by a Weapon that never comes near me, so
this Argument of thine is far enough off from wounding our Religion, that it
touches not, neither comes near, for I believe this, Bond would be hard put to
it, to find that Quaker out, that either writ or said, that the light which is
in every man, (by Natural Generation) is the true Christ; but he who is the
true Ligh^ that Lights every Man that comes into the World, is the true
Christ; but thy Natural Light we deny to be the Christ, as well as thou do,
knowing that whatsoever is Born of the Flesh, is Flesh, but that which is Born
of the Spirit, is Spirit, at which (I doubt) thy enmity is chiefly, although
thy Ignorance is not able to put a difference between the one and the other,
but here by the way take Notice, that the Apostle does not say, Christ is not
in Reprobates, but that Reprobates do not [know] Christ in them by his Light to
condemn them: in Page 18. (he says) that I said, I abhor Hour-Glasses.

Answer. This is also false, I said not I Abhor them, for they are serviceable
for their proper use, but I said, I deny them as they use them. His Words, viz.
His familiar, the Glow warm (Light within) what Scripture has he for this? is
not a Blasphemous Character put upon the Light within?

Farther in the same Page, I take Notice of another grand Lie, and false
accusation; Namely, that I doubted in my Discourse, whether the Word took Flesh
of the Virgin, and in that Flesh dyed for all Men. But I account it but a light
thing to be Belied, or Evil spoken of by him; who is not afraid to speak Evil
of the Divine and Elect Seed, Christ in the Saints, calling it the Idol Light
within, as it follows in the same Page, and now having had so many strokes at
this Heavenly and Glorious appearance of Christ in Man, and not yet sensible of
the stroke of Gods Divine Justice against him, he sets forward in his ungodly
course, and proceeds to call it (an accursed Gospel within) which (says he,)
The Lord has Cursed with a Reiterated Curse.

But I say unto thee, who art thou that Cursest that which the Lord has
Blessed. Yea, and it is, and shall be Blessed for evermore, in which thou have
no part nor portion, who art found Cursing, Shimei like, who Cursed David the
Lords Anointed; so art thou found Cursing Christ Jesus the Light and power of
God within, and his Gospel, which as Paul witnesses, is the power of God to
Salvation.

But tell me Sampson, how many have thou by thy Preaching turned from Satan to
God, although thou have sold it at a very dear Rate, taking for it after the
Rates of 250 l. a year, as thy self said, thou were put by a Benifice of 250 l.
a year upon the Kings coming in, and yet are not the People to whom thou
Preachest, and of whom thou take Wages, still in their sins, and is this
according to the Doctrine which Christ taught his Disciples, (freely you have
received, freely give,) but thou art Erred from that, having not received
freely, thou can not give freely, and so people pay dear for that, by which
they have no profit; and indeed they have little encouragement to give thee any
more Wages, who said in the Audience of many People in my hearing, that sin
must live in them as long as they live, and so have no encouragement to follow
thee, who have no other Gospel to Preach to them, then that which cannot save
them out of sin, and so do plainly appear to be none of Christ's Minister,
neither have thou received thy Gift from Christ; for the Gifts that he, (when
he Ascended up on High,) gave unto Men, it was for the perfection of the
Saints, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, till they were grown up to a
perfect Man, to the Measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, in whom
there was no sin found. But to proceed,

In the same Page 20. this false accuser undertakes to charge upon us the sin
against the Holy Ghost, from the 6th of the Hebrews, where he charges us with
falling away, or wilfully going back again from Faith and Repentance, and
further (he says,) that we (whom he calls Quakers) have Trodden under Foot the
Son of God, and have counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith we were
Sanctified, that is, (says he) Externally, or as to the opinion once of Men,)
an unholy thing.

Answer. Then it appears by thy words, that we were never truly or inwardly
Sanctified, but Men had only such an opinion of us.

If this be all, then it appears (by thy Judgment) that we cannot be accounted
among the Number of those spoken of in Heb. 6th for they were made pertakers of
the Holy Ghost, and had a Taste of the Power of the World to come: Now the
Apostle says, If such fall away, it is impossible to renew them again, etc.
besides it was such as were Sanctified, not such as were only so in Men's
opinions, and were not so indeed.

But I demand what the ground is of this exceeding great charge thou have laid
against us, for as I have said before, (in Effect) if not in plain Words, that
we (whom thou in scorn calls Quakers) do believe in no other Jesus then that
very Jesus, who was Born of the Virgin, who suffered without the Gates of
Jerusalem, whom God raised from the Dead by his Power, and showed him openly to
many who became witnesses of his Resurrection, of which Jesus we have received
a Measure, even of that fullness which in him dwelt, (i. e.) of his Spirit, by
which we are Sanctified and cleansed, even from the defilement of sin (in
measure) and do feel (as we are giving up to Obey the Spirit) (I say) we feel a
daily growth and Increase of the same.

And now S. B. what is become of the charge thou have laid against us, for
which thou have doomed us with no less then Eternal Judgment, is it for any
thing else then that thou have thus Judged us, but because we own the
appearance of Christ Jesus within us, by which he does perform many great and
mighty works in us, and for us, even to the overthrowing of the Man of sin, and
power of Darkness, and casting him out of our hearts, and also does set up his
Throne in our Consciences, and so is become our King, who has purchased us
through his Blood, to be a peculiar people unto himself. Therefore if thou have
any thing farther to accuse us of, whereby thou can prove against us such a
dreadful charge, as the Treading under our Feet the Blood of the Covenant, etc.
Bring it forth against us, or otherwise thou (by this) wilt be farther
manifested to be a false Accuser, and so shame will take hold of thee, who has
gone about this Island in diverse places, accusing us with Mallicious
accusations, viz. That we had committed the unpardonable sin, even the sin
against the Holy Ghost, and now have not been ashamed to bring it to the
Public view in Print, and yet had nothing Justly to lay to our charge of any
Evil, but a heap of lies and false Accusations.

And thou thy self in the 21st Page of thy Book, said, I did confess to the
same Jesus whom the Jews Slew, and God raised again from the Dead, where he
says, by this confession, I did openly declare my self a Christian, and no
Quaker. And yet this pleases him not, but immediately says, that by this
confusion, I had contradicted what I contended for before; who never denied the
Man Christ Jesus, no more then the Saints of old, who confess to his inward
manifestation, or Spiritual appearance within.

But still this false Accuser S. B. goes on with his false charges against me,
taking up a report from one Bethel, who said (in public) that I told his
Wife, that if she believed in any other Christ then that which was within Her,
she was Damned. This Accusation I denied, (as thus declared) which now in his
Book, he makes a large report of the same, and says, that I know they were
worthy to be believed before me.

Answer. What their Reputation is, I leave at present, only this I declare was
false as then declared, farther it was said, that I charged Her with Blasphemy.
The truth is, I do not remember I spoke one Word to Her at that time, as to
charge Her with Blasphemy: But I being discoursing with Her, and speaking
something about the inward appearance of Christ in Man, she was ready (I
perceived) to Judge (as this Her teacher does,) that I had denied the Body or
Man Jesus, and declared of another Christ, whereupon she immediately started up
clapping Her hands together expressing these words, (I pray God I may never be
saved by that Christ within) whereupon I said, then truly thou must be Damned,
for if Christ be not within the Apostles, says, they are Reprobates. These
were the very words I spoke, not at all denying the appearance of Christ in
Body.

So His and their Lies, and false Reports, I leave at their own door, knowing
that a day of Account will come, when the Lord will bring the Hidden things of
Darkness to Light, and will pass Judgment in Truth and Righteousness.

As for the rest of the matter in that Page contained, about questioning with
me about Heaven, I do not remember any thing of it as he has laid it down, only
this I remember, that upon some question demanded. I answered, that I did
believe Christ was in Heaven, to which, George Bas^ome or Laurance Dill,
answered, that I would deny it again to Morrow: So that answer arose from that
confession, rather then the foregoing, as mentioned by S. B.

Now in answer to the thing he said, I charge on him, viz. that he had not
mentioned Christ as God, in the work of Man's Salvation, Sampson's Bond in his
answer seems to affirm, that the Apostles, (although they knew that Christ was
God as well as Man, yet they Preached up the Man only to be believed in for the
Remission of sins, both to the Jews and Gentiles, and says farther, that the
Apostles do Jointly Testify of the (Man) Jesus Christ of Nazareth to be the
(only) Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World.

Reply. I answer to the former part, although the Apostles in their first going
out to preach Christ to the Jewish People, did mention the Manhood, yet this
did not at all Argue, that he must not believe in, as God, for the Remission of
Sin, for as I have said before (to the same purpose,) there was sufficient
cause for them so strongly to contend with that people, who had the Scripture,
and by the Scripture did understand that there was a mighty Prince to arise of
the stock of David, that should fit upon his Throne, and Reign over the House
of Israel.

The Apostles might therefore Judge in themselves, that it would be in vain for
them to Preach to the Jews of the Invisible Glory of Christ, till this Scruple
were removed, viz. whether Jesus of Nazareth were the promised Messiah, yea or
nay.

So I say this was their work, thus to Testify of him, and then it rightly
falls in, after they were brought to believe that this was really he that
should come, and that they were not to look for another, and that this King was
cut off by such an Ignominous Death, (I say,) it did then rightly fall in, to
Testify and declare, and to give them an understanding what manner of King he
should be, over what People he was to Rule, as also what manner of Kingdom it
should be, viz. a Spiritual King, a Spiritual Kingdom, and a Spiritual People,
even Spiritual Israel.

But when the Apostle wrote of Christ to the believing Romans, he declared him
as God Blessed for ever as well as Man, Romans 9.5. Also he declares him the Lord
from Heaven, the quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. He calls him the Second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, and whom Paul was first sent forth to Preach, Act 26. He was
sent to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God,
by all which it appears plainly that it was never the work of the Apostles, nor
of any of Christ's true Ministers, to Preach Christ to be believed in for the
Remission of Sins, as Man only without the Godhead, Therefore what God has
Joined together, let no Man put a sunder.

2. Whereas S. B. says, that the Apostles bore a Testimony jointly to the Man,
that he was the (only) Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. No
Quaker denis that.

And John speaking of Christ, says, He was prefered before him, for (says he)
He was before me. Now if he had spoke of Christ barely as Man, then John would
have been found a false witness of Christ, for as Man, John was six Months
before him as to his Age, as may appear in Luke 2. So he that but a little
before charged me, with belying the Holy Evangelist, John himself is fallen
under the condemnation, and I am clear of his charge.

Having thus Traced S. B. through his four Arguments, frained to prove his
first Charge, and given to each of them a particular answer, grounded upon
plain Scripture, Truth and right Reason agreeing thereto, and his many false
and Slanderous accusations brought fourth against me and the Light by me
believed in, with his Mallicious reproachful Lies and Blasphemies, against the
appearance of God in the Creature, and given answer thereto.

I intend now (God willing) to pass forward, to note his following
Irregularities, he having to do with other Friends as well as my self, viz. The
Lies, Slanders, Mockings, Blasphemies, and False Interpretations of the
Scripture; and to give Answer to the same, as I see occasion: not intending a
large discourse upon each particular: But as it were to note here and there; as
I see a necessity, to lay open his Deceit, thereby to clear the Truth, and
Friends falsely charged.

And now to begin with his first work following, in page 24. he says, William
Bullock (whose name by him is mistaken) his name is Stephen Bullock) was the
next Disputant, who mentioned the first of the Romans 19. which he says, does
not at all answer the present matter by way of proof, to prove the Savior
within to be the True Christ.

Now here mark how this Interpreter, in his Interpretation of this Scripture,
does make use of one word, viz. Showed it to them in the Text, which seemed
most fit for his turn, not only to confound, but quite to race out the other,
(Manifest in them) as if it had never been Inserted, that thereby it might not
prove that, for which (I judge) this Scripture was brought to prove the inward
Manifestation of Christ, as God who is Truth it self, even as Christ says, I
am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Now in the foregoing verse, the Apostle
says, The wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness: Mark! here is a
Generation that holds the Truth in Unrighteousness, (and thus he clears it up)
because (said he) that which may be known of God is manifest in them, viz. in
these unrighteous Men, but is it not hid in them, nay, it is manifest in them,
for he has showed it unto them. Now this word [unto] this Priest has mad use
of, to overthrow the true sense of the word [in] so that by this his
interpretation, having raised out the internal manifestation, or inward
Teaching of Gods Spirit in the Heart, he has only set up an External Teacher
without, i. e. the Visible Creation without, by which only, neither he, nor the
wisest Man in the World, by all their Craft, School-Learning and Fleshly
Wisdom, are able to attain to the knowledge of the Invisible God, as it is
written, 1 Cor. 1.21. The World by Wisdom knew not God, but this Apostle
witnesses that they, viz. that wicked Generation had known God, but did not
like to Retain him in their knowledge, verse. 28.

So then if the true knowledge of God cannot be Attained too by the Wisdom of
this World (which is not able to search into the Mysteries of the Visible
things,) as is plain by the Apostles words in the forenamed, 1 Cor. 1.17. The
World by Wisdom knew not God, then its clear, that they had another Teacher,
that Informed them in the knowledge of God besides the Visible Creation.

The next Scripture this said Priest undertakes to open, is in Page 25. John
6.63. The Flesh profits nothing, it is the Spirit that quickens: About the
Interpretation of which he seems to be greatly confounded, not knowing what
Flesh that is that profits nothing, and what Flesh that is, that is the Souls
Food, that came down from Heaven, of which if any Man cat he shall live for
ever: So having opposed the pure Heavenly Light, who is the Saints Teacher, he
himself is left in the Dark, with which his own deceived Heart is Darkened: So
though he said these Scriptures did not appear to Answer the matter in Hand,
yet they are of good service to make manifest the Darkness of the Man.

And whereas Christ says, It is the Spirit that quickens, after S. B. in his
ordinary manner of turning and winding of that word, at length brings forth
this conclusion, viz. though the Spirit be the Dead Souls quickner, yet it is
not the quickened Souls Savior.

Rep. To me this seems as strange, and as Dark, and as confused a Sentence, as
ever I heard expressed, by one that pretended himself a Wiseman: But herein is
the Scripture fulfilled: Job 5.13. He takes the Wise in their own Craftiness:
For it seems very strange to me, that any Man should be so Dark as to conclude,
that that Spirit that gives Life, does not save from Death.

Now Man naturally is Dead, according to the Word of God: In the Day thou
Eatest thereof thou shall surely Dye, and Death having got an Entrance into the
World, through Sin; it passed over all Men, because all have Sinned, now Death
got Entrance, through the First Man Adams offense; and Man now being under the
Power of Death; by what means does Man come to Witness Salvation, or
Deliverance from Death, but by Christ, who is a Quickening Spirit, which gives
Life to the Soul thus Captivated under the Power of Death, which is Christ
Jesus the Quickening Spirit, which makes the Dead to Live, and sets free from
the power thereof, as is Witnessed, Romans 8, 2.

So this is my Testimony for Christ Jesus, who is the Lord from Heaven, the
Quickening Spirit, who is the Resurrection and the Life, and raises such to Life
who are Dead and Buried in the pit of Death and Darkness, and makes them to sit
together in Heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, so I say it is he, and he alone
who is the Savior of Mankind; to S. B. might see if the God of this World had
not Blinded his Eye, that the True, Christ the Quickening Spirit, saves as well
within as without, so that this Scripture was not mentioned in vain, but
plainly proves the Spirit of Christ Jesus in the Saints, to be their Savior;
both by delivering them from the Captivity of Sin, and being delivered to
preserve them from the Power thereof.

The next Speaker (he says) was Patience Bullock, who he said, propounded a
question to him. Whether Christ could have saved us without his being God.

His answer, he grants it, and says the Godhead gave the Efficacy and
excellency to the Manhood, and in the 28th Page, he tells us, that the humane
Nature of Christ was the only matter of our Salvation, contradicting the latter
by granting the first.

Now S. B. what will the result of all this be unto thee, will not all thy
wicked Blasphemies against the Lord, and thy revilings of the pure Light, and
the Dirt and Mire cast upon the Throne of God in Man, now return upon thine own
Head, thy wickedness may be seen (in this particular,) in many Pages of thy
Book, sometimes calling the Light a Glowworm, sometimes a cursed Gospel
within, Page 20. and frequently, the Idol Light within, but especially in Page
15. there thou art found to join both, the Light (which we know and is sure, is
a Measure of Gods Spirit in Man,) and the Conscience made tender by it, which
is his Throne, in which he does chiefly manifest himself, (I say) thou have
Joined both together under a reproachful Term, (that Idol Light tender part
within) so casting Infamy and reproach at it.

So that which thou said of me in Page 5. viz. is truly come upon thy self, for
thy Throat is an open Sepulcher, casting out abominable Stinck, and Noisome
unsavory scents in the Nostrils of God and all Godly Men. So with most reviling
Speeches thou go on, charging the Light with Antichristianisme, and Villainy
beyond all the Antichrists that yet has appeared, which ungodly charge is
Recorded against thee in Eternal Record, which thou shall as surely feel the
weight of it upon thine own Head as ever thou spoke it, and so I leave thee to
the farther Judgment of the mighty God, whose Spirit thou have Villified.

But to proceed to thy Inferrences upon Patience Bullocks question, Page 29.
Let me ask you this question. Art not thou one of those Carnal Gospelers thou
speaks of, that rests in a bare Historical Assent, that the Man Christ Jesus of
Nazareth is the true and only Savior, while (say thou) they are in no
degree partaker of the Divine Nature, for certainly, if thou were in that
Nature, it would manifest it self otherwise then it has done, of Instance, thy
mocking Friends in thy House of worship in Devonshire Tribe, calling one of the
Friends Checker-work, and when I reproved thee for it, as a thing unbeseeming
thy profession, thou answeredst wantonly, saying, why, is not his Name White
and his Hatt Black, is not that Checkerwork. This is no Fruit of the Divine
Nature, which is that which is Heir to the Kingdom, but on the contrary, it is
a manifest Fruit of Ishmaels Nature, scoffing thee at Isaac's Son, and the Bond
Woman, which is to have no part of the Heavenly Inheritance: several other
things I might Allege, as truly gathered out of thy Book, which I forbear here
to mention, and only content my self with some of those particulars, Noted by
thine own self, as Signs, or Fruits of the Divine Nature, which are a Lively
Faith, and a Lively hope, which both these do Manifest themselves (wherever
they are, by Holiness and Purity, as we may Read in Acts 15.9. How that the
Gentiles who Lived in the Heathenish Nature, when they come to Receive the true
and Living Faith, it manifested it self by Purifying the Heart; and this is a
certain Truth, where the Heart is Purified, the Hands will not be Defiled.

And in 1 John 3.3. The Apostle gives a certain and undeniable Character of a
Lively hope, saying, Every Man that has this hope in him, Purifieth himself,
even as he is pure: And in the 9 ver. Speaking of this Nature, says, He that
is Born of God Sins not.

So now compare thy self with these Testimonies of the Saints in Ages past, and
see if Thou can bring forth such a Testimony of the true Divine Nature in thy
self: If Thou should say, Thou could, Thy Book would stand as a Testimony
against Thee, especially toward the latter end, where Thou art found to contend
with all thy Might, for Sin, (the Devils Kingdom) that Men cannot be free as
long as they are in the Body.

Now then tell me, where is thy living Faith, and lively Hope thou spoke of?
and art thou not then one of the Carnal Gospellers thou spoke of?

And whereas S. B. seeks to cast this upon the Quakers, he has fallen
exceedingly short of his purpose, for we are not the Men that ever said, the
Graces or the Effects, or opperations of the Spirit within, is the true Christ
and our only Savior, (as thou chargest us) but our true Savior is he, from
whom those Graces and Effects come, and by whom those Opperations are wrought
in us.

And seeing Thou were so exceedingly mistaken, that Thou did understand
indeed (as by Thine own Confession) that we did make the opperations of the
Spirit of God within us, (which thou call the effects or Graces of the
Spirit) to be our True and Only Savior. How dare Thou then, so Wickedly to
Villifie the Graces, Effects and Opperations of the Spirit of God and Man (if
we had been so mistaken) with such Ungodly, Blasphemous, Infamous Terms or
Expressions, as in many places in thy Book are found as Antichrist; Cursed
Gospel within Idol-Light, Glow worm, Familier, etc. How can Thou escape the
Judgment of the Righteous God; for the Lord has found Thee out, and Thine
Enmity against his Spirit is now discovered; thy covering is found to be too
short and too narrow, for thou art not covered with Gods Spirit; Thine own Pen
has discovered thine own Shame, and the Lord will make the People to see it,
even as many whose Eyes he shall open, and thy words shall be thy Burden in
the day of the Lord, for the time draws near that the Lord will Reckon with
thee, he does but wait till thy Cup is full, and then he will Smite and not
spare, except in the mean time thou do Repent.

But to Proceed.
The next Scripture (he says) mentioned by me, was 1 Cor. 6.11. We be to prove
Christ's Inward Manifestation in the Heart, to Sanctify and save Man from the
Power of Sin, but ye are washed, etc. where (he says) I Craftily omitted (in
the Name of the Lord Jesus) to abuse their Judgments, to make them believe
Justification in the Sight of God, is a work of the Spirit within us: which I
can see no other, but that he would have the work of Justification altogether
without, and nothing of it known within; But miserable is that Man's condition
who has no better Evidence of his Salvation then so, but must needs leave his
Assurance for another World.

In Page 31. Take notice of the confusion of this Priest, who after he has so
strongly argued for the work of Man's Salvation, viz. that the whole work was
perfectly Finished at once (without us) in Christ's own Crucified Body on the
Cross. Yet now he grants that it is to be wrought within us (not at once) but
by degrees, even by the Spirit of God: so the work which was so perfectly and
completely Finished before without us, yet now it must be wrought within us, by
the Spirit of God, before it can be effectual to us. This is confusion with a
Witness, is not thy whole work overthrown, let the Reader consider and judge?
is it not the same thing we have contended for, and is it not the same thing
against which thou have hardened thy Heart, and Stiffned thy Neck? Is not this
the Spirit of God that works thus Inwardly? that which thou call The Quakers
Pretended Savior, which thou so often call The False Christ, The Devil, with
many other Reviling, Ungodly, Blasphemous Speeches, or did the Quakers ever
pretend to any other Savior within, then the Spirit of Christ Jesus, who is
the Light, who is the worker of the things whereof thou Speaks: Well, all this
does Redound to thy own Shame, and will also make thy Judgment more then thou will be able to bear, except thou speedily Repent.

Again in page 31. S. B. says, that I said, that I was in some measure washed
from my sins, which he calls new Divinity, and a most false and dangerous
Doctrine, for (says he) he does clearly deny that the Messiah Jesus Christ of
Nazareth has at once, by his own Crucified Body (without us) on the Cross,
finished Transgression and Sin.

Answer. When will thy confusions come to an end? did thou not say but now,
that though the Work of Salvation were done at once (without us) yet it must be
wrought by degrees, by the opperation of the Spirit within, and now I come to
bear Reoord to the same thing, you cries out, false and dangerous Doctrine; who
is so Blind that cannot see thy confused Doctrines, who can but Judge thee even
Drunk with Enmity, as a Man overcome with Strong-Drink, Reeling this way and
that way, and but seldom in the Right way, one while confessing to the Spirits
working within, and by and by denying it again, besides he does not only say,
that it is false and dangerous Doctrine, but in Page 32. he tells wherein,
saying, it plainly denies the one Propitiatory Sacrifice of the one Crucified
Body of the Man Jesus Christ: Immediately (after his usual manner) breaking
forth in reviling expressions against the Light, calling it unbloody Redeemer,
Idol-Light, and the Pope, in all which his Enmity is greatly manifested against
the Graces, Effects, and opperations of the Spirit within, which (he says) in
page 29. the Quakers make their true and only Savior.

The next Scripture words mentioned by Friends was, as he said by Stephen
Bullock, Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me
free from the Law of Sin and Death; which was brought to prove that the Spirit
of Christ in Man did save from Sin, and although the Scripture was clear in it
self, yet it appears, he would have some Argument framed by the Friend, who not
answering immediately ( Ismael like, the Mocker, who Mocked at Isaac, the
Figure of the true seed) he broke forth in a Mock, saying, Long fasting parhaps
has made him so Empty. Note, this was the Friend that gave forth the Challenge
to try their God by Fasting.

By this Scripture, i. e. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death; he says, that the Apostle does not
mean, that the Spirit did so free him from Sin and Death, as that he was simply
delivered from either, but so that it should not Dominere over us, nor Damn us.

Suppose it were so that we could grant him this, yet still the Scripture
stands on the Spirits side, (and so consequently on our side against this
Priest, for if he does save but from the Dominion of sin, that is no small
degree of Salvation, so by Right and good Reason, the Spirit was in Paul as a
Savior, and made him free, which if this could be proved, that the Spirit of
Christ was ever in any Man as a Savior, thou said thou would give up the
Cudgels. But it is plain that Paul became Dead with Christ, Crucified to the
World, Dead to Sin, and Alive to Righteousness, and all this through the inward
working of the Spirit of Christ Jesus.

Farther he Ignorantly affirms, that the Death Paul was Delivered from, was
nothing else, but the Power of a Natural Death; here People may behold the
Ignorance of the Man, was it a Natural Death that Paul so much complained of?
Romans 7.24. Was it not the Body of Death, the Old corrupt Nature, which was not
yet quite overcome, yet the Law or Power of this Body of Death was strong in
his Members, and this was it, that he cried for deliverance from, and that was
it from which that Law of the Spirit of life set him free.

In Page 34. S. B. says, F. E. stepped again, and said, I in thee, and thou in
me.

I Answer. The end for which I made use of the Scripture, was to Testify to
the indwelling of Christ in the Saints against his wicked charge, that the
Quakers Savior within, was the false Christ, which perhaps the word might be
mistaken in uttering, yet it stands firm in the Record of the Scripture for
Truths advantage, in plain Scripture Words (I in them, and thou in me) and is
part of Christ Prayer to the Father who heard him always, although S. B. by his
Interpretation seeks to hide the true sense thereof, and to give a meaning that
may answer his own End.

In page 36. S. B. says, Mrs. Bullock asked him, whether he did make our Christ
within us to be the Devil, to whom he says, he made answer, viz. That he did
Solemnly, with much Reverence (in the presence of God, to whom I must shortly
be accountable for my Words) declare, that I do most assuredly know, that a
Quakers pretended Christ within him, (Mark) who Sam. Bond said that was, page
29. The Graces, effects and opperations of the Spirit within them; whom here he
calls the false Christ, the Devil, with whom (he says) We shall be Damned in
Hell, if we Repent not (Damnable Doctrine indeed) no wonder he put such a
Blasphemous question to Will. Wilkinson, viz. Whether our God were in Hell,
Saved or Damned, such abominacle vapors assends out of his Bottomless Pit many
times. But of this foregoing answer, his own Pen has accused him, for had not
he accused himself, I know not any that could; but as Christ said, Nothing is
Hid that shall not be uncovered. And for his Warrant to confirm this Sentence,
he urges, Joh. 8.24. I said therefore ye shall die in your Sins; which
Scripture, with the 21st verse, to which it relates, I turn back again upon
himself, as his own Portion, for it is the Doctrine that he Preaches to the
People, that they cannot be free from sin while they live, who can otherwise
Judge, if so, but that both he and all that Dies in the Faith of his Lies can
escape Damnation, except (with the Papist) thou can find a Purgatory, for
into the Holy City nothing must Enter that defiles or works abomination,
Rev. 21.27.

Farther this Bond, after his usual manner of wresting the Scripture, goes on
to comment upon another Scripture, alleged by one of the Friends, Ephesians. 5.13.
But all things that are Reproved, are made manifest by the Light, etc.

Which by Light (he says) we are to understand, a sin Reproving Light, which
he farther says, is the Light of the Scripture.

But where do thou find the Scripture called a sin reproving Light, we read
indeed in Timothy, that it is profitable for Reproof and Instruction, to make
the Man of God perfect, and to Furnish him thoroughly to every good work, but
though it be serviceable to reprove the Actual Sinner, what is this to the
manifestation of sin in the Heart, before it breaks forth into Action, which
only is made manifest by the Light or Spirit of Christ, as in Joh. 16.8. and
whereas he says, the Scripture is frequently described by Light, alleging for
proof, Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a Light unto my Steps.

To this I answer, that (Scripture) is not there mentioned. If he say it is the
Word, to this I farther give answer, that the Scripture in no place calls it
self the Word, though S. B. without any Scripture ground, calls it the Written
Word, but it says, God is the Word, and Christ is the Word, and Ezekiel says
often, The Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, so that it notes the Word,
and the sayings, which sayings are (many of them) Recorded in the Scriptures of
Truth, and are properly the true sayings of God, who is the Word, Joh. 1.1. He
farther to confirm the Scripture to be the Light, does Note, Joh. 3.16. Every
one that does Evil hates the Light: But experience tells us, that every Evil
Man does not hate the Scripture, but delight (many of them) to Read it, and
Teach it their Children, but their Enmity is against the Light, that makes
manifest sin and Iniquity in the Heart, which is the Righteous Principle of God
in the Heart, the sure Word of Prophecy, to which the Saints of Old did take
heed, which is preferred before the sound of Words without, for the Words
without may be falsely Translated, and the true sense of them may be changed,
and falsely Interpreted, or written in another Tongue, or the Scripture (being
made up of several Creaters) it is possible it may be destroyed, but the
Invisible Word, the Light (Christ Jesus) could no Man destroy, whom the Apostle
Paul says, speaks from Heaven, Gods beloved Son whom we are to hear, not
rejecting the Scripture as it is truly Read, for it bears witness to the Light
Christ Jesus.

Several more Lies, and false accusations I meet with in his Book, as page 38.
(he says) the Teaching Quakers says, Christ is manifest in their real Flesh,
but the Flesh of (Christ) was only in show and appearance. And in page 38. he
charges William Harriot for saying he denied their outside Christ, which words
I do not remember in the least, neither do any Friend or other People that I
have spoke withal, witness any such word spoken by him.

And in page 40. he Proceeds farther with his false charges, saying, The
Quakers deny that Christ was true Man, consisting of Body and Soul, (which is
another Lie) and in the same page, he says, A teaching Quaker does deny Jesus
to be the Christ, and therefore a Teaching Quaker is a Lier and an Antichrist.

O thou shameless Man! when will thou cease to cast Dirt at Gods Herritage?
when will thou cease to accuse the Innocent? whom do thou think to Harm, by
thy Slanders and Evil aspersions, for they return upon thine own Head, and that
most justly, for thy Nakedness is hereby uncovered to thy shame, yet can thou
not cease, but still go on to defame those Innocent People whom the Lord
loves and delights in, even those whom thou disdains, whom the Lord has
Begotten his own Image in, even those do thou accuse to be of the Dragon and
Beast, and to be contradicters and Blaspheamers. Well, The Lip of Truth shall
be Established for ever, but a Lying Tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12.19.

Another Grand accusation S. B. lays down in page 41. viz. The professed
perfection of a Quakers seeming Sanctity, consists in (thee and thou) thereby
denying all Reverential respects to any sort of Men, of what Rank or Quallity
soever.

Reply. Though it be certainly true, that the Faithful People called Quakers do
use the Words (thee and thou) to a Singular, yet it is most false to say, that
we do it for that End, to deny all Reverential Respects to all sorts of Men,
etc.

In denial of this his false Accusation, I do here Testify (in the presence of
God) that when I first took it up, it was in the true tenderness of Conscience,
and in obedience to the Inward requirings of Gods Spirit in my Heart, who
required obedience of me: And when I first used the word to my Superiors, it
being in the Infancy of Truth in this Island, and People had not been used to
such a manner of Speech, and my self having been accustomed to say you to a
particular Person, it became an exceeding great Trial, so that if I could have
had Peace where I stood, I believe I should not have Submitted, but it was
Manifest that it was the practice of the Saints in all Ages of the World, to
the end of the Primitive times, so that this manner of Speaking [you] to a
Singular Person, came up under the Reign of Antichrist, in the Dark Night of
Apostasy, in which State I stood as well as many more, but when the Lord was
pleased to begin to Rend the Vail that was over the Hearts of People, and the
Morning Star arose, and the day of Christ began to break forth most clearly,
then the Lord was pleased to begin to open mine Eyes, and I saw (among the many
things that then appeared to be parted with) that this was one that I must part
with, and I must come to the plain Language, which the Saints were in, in Ages
by past, every one Speaking Truth to his Neighbor; otherwise I must part with
Truth it self, so I was even constrained to take up the Cross in the self
denial, otherwise I saw I could not be Christ's Disciple.

So that this is another Slander against the Innocent, tending to the Filling
up of S. Bonds Cup, to make way for Gods wrath to be Executed upon him.

For this I know, the Saints Leader is one, and Leads in the Path of Humility,
all that do truly obey him; and in Humility I took up this Practice and not in
any Pride, (the Lord knows) but can as truly give Magistrates their due a^
ever, always having an Eye to Conscience, to keep that undefiled, that the Lord
may have first his due: So the Honor belonging to Men, (to Fathers and
Mothers) is in the Lord, and this is right, and according to the Gospel order.
Ephesians. 5.1.

Now S. B. in his mannageing of this assertion against us, he lays down his
Foundation thus, that (thee and you) (you and thou) are not always in
Scripture, of distinct signification, but are sometimes of the same
signification, and to prove this, he names, Lev. 19.12. Ye shall not Swear by
my Name Falsely; Neither shall thou profane the Name of thy God; and to this
adds, Jer. 3.12. Return thou Backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine
anger to burn forth against you. Reply, Take notice of the Subtilty of this
Crafty Priest (he not being willing to come to the true Language, neither being
able himself to bear it) he seeks to Blind the Eyes of People, that so he may
keep them in their Sins, by persuading them that God himself puts no difference
(sometimes) between the words, but makes them both of one signification.

And thus he seeks to Blind People (perverting or hideing the true sense of the
Scripture, and putting upon them a sense best pleasing to himself, for the
carrying on of his intended design.

But for all that thou have said, or all that thou have yet farther to say,
show me but one Scripture in all the Bible, where the Lord or any one
particular Saint ever made use of this word [you] to any one particular Person,
where there was no more (at least) included; otherwise thy Argument will fall
to the Ground, like an old Building whose Foundation is Rotten, and as in
reason to use the word (thee or thou) to many, is Ridiculous among Men, they
being evermore proper to the Singular number, and altogether improper to the
Plural; So on the other hand [you] being formed of [yea] the Second Person in
the Plural Number, is likewise Ridiculous to be put to the Singular. And as to
the Scriptures by thee mentioned, (according to the true Sense of them) the
plain Language is not at all confounded, neither is the words (thou or you) at
all used out of their proper place, but each bears its own proper distinction
and signification, for when the Lord speaks to the Multitude of the Sons of
Jacob, as to many (as it is written) I will Multiply thy Seed as the Stars of
Heaven) then he uses the word [you] but when he Speaks to his People in a
particular or singular Sense, as to one House, the House of Israel, or to one
particular Nation, he makes use of the word [thou, or thee] so the Scripture
stands clear from S. Bonds false Interpretation, and the plain Language among
Men unconfounded.

So this practice, it is agreeable both to Scripture, Precept, Example, and
Right Reason.

But whereas S. B. would make his Hearers believe that the Ancient Saints did
use it only as moved by the Spirit (it is true the Spirit always moves Men to
Speak Truth) but let him show me in any one particular, were they did use any
other manner of Communication then [thee and thou] to a particular in their
common Discourse: and yet it did no ways hinder them Saints from giving to
every one their due, Honor to whom Honor, Tribute to whom Tribute, etc.
Neither were those Saints exalted with Pride, as thou falsely chargest us, but
Pride does Manifestly appear in thee, who would have all to bow under thee, and
put off their Hats (a practice never used by the Christians in former Ages,
that ever we Read off) and to bow and scrape, and such like, (this its like
would please thee well) and for want of this (I judge) thou art so filled with
Envy against the Innocent, who cannot bow to thy proud Spirit, nor cannot
respect persons, knowing that it is contrary to the Faith of the Lord Jesus,
and contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostle James, who says, He that respects
persons commits sin, and is Judged of the Law as a Transgressor, Jam. 2.1.9.

And because we cannot thus stoop to the proud Spirit, and bow to the Exalted
will, who love to have the preminence; therefore it is that thou are so
filled with madness against us, calling us a proud People, a People of a surely
Dumb, Scurvy, Sneaking, Deportment, and Carriage, making us to appear to thy
hearers, (or at least to as to many of them as will believe thee) that we were
the worst of Men, but this is no new thing to be reviled, for the Christians in
the Primitive times were accounted by the World as the off-scowring of all
things, so we are contented to bear thy Reproaches, Railing and Reviling
Speeches, knowing we are not above our Lord, whom thou have Reproached with as
Reproachful Terms, as thou can find to cast upon us his Servants. So I leave
thee it this particular to the Lord to Judge thee, who will reward every one
according to their Works.

And Proceed to the Scripture mentioned by S. B. in page 46. where he says, I
brought in the behalf of my Clyant (the false Christ) thus Doubling and
redoubling his Blasphemies, to the filling up the measure of his iniquity, the
Scripture is, Joh 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all
unrighte^^sness, and because these Words seem to him too like a Quaker,
therefore after his usual manner, because he cannot alter the words, he will
make his interpretation thereof to serve his turn, and so turns all (only)
outward, Christ outward, and Blood outward, and Cleansing outward, viz. from
the Pain or punishment of Sin, as is clear, page 47. so persuading poor
Innocent People, that the Word of Life which made the World, and preserves all
things by the Word of his Power, is such a thing or Person that might be seen
with a visible Eye, and whose voice might be heard with the outward Ear,
contrary to the Words of Christ, to the Jews who did see the Body and heard the
outward voice, yet the same Jesus does Testify, they neither had heard the
voice of God nor seen his shape, and farther he says, that God was manifest to
three of the outward senses, and so Lodowick Mugleton's God is S. Bs. God, who
said, his God had Arms and Shoulders as he had, and this appears to be S. B's
Faith, that the God head was manifest Flesh, real Mankind Flesh, as in page 41.
so that he would have the Efficacy of the Blood, extend no farther (at the
utmost) then to take off the Punishment of Sin, which is contrary to the
Apostle, in Heb. 9.14. Where he says, The Blood of Christ purges the
Conscience from Dead works to serve the living God. And whereas S. B. would
make his interpretation seem good by the following Words, if we say we have no
sin, we are Liars, by this he would make People believe, that notwithstanding
all the cleansing there spoken of, yet sin remains, and they are Liars that
deny it, to which I give answer, I do not so understand the Words, but rather
if any shall deny that they have any sin, and so consequently that they have no
need of cleansing, they are Liars, and I have just reason so to Judge, after
the Apostle had farther Enlarged his Testimony concerning Cleansing, in the
last verse he speaks thus, (if we say) we have not sinned, speaking of the
time past, and not of any present being of sin. For indeed if there were no
sin, there were no need of a Savior, no need of a Sacrifice, but this we do
believe, by Nature all are Sinners, defiled with sin, and children of wrath,
having the Heart and Soul defiled with Works of unrighteousness, but now being
washed and Cleansed from (all) unrighteousness, what does, or can remain, when
(all) is taken away, then the Soul must needs confess to the Truth that he has
sinned, and this must needs be the meaning, otherwise the Apostle would be
found contradicting his own Doctrine, Chap. 3.9. He that is Born of God does
not commit sin, and says farther, He cannot sin, because born of God

In page 48. S. B. says, he asked me a question, viz. whether the Saints was
cleansed from all sin by the water of regeneration, or by the Blood of
Justification.

To the which (he says) I answered, by the Water, which he says, caused many
People to Laugh.

Answer. Of this Question, I remember not one Word, nor of the answer, thereto
annexed, only this I very well remember, that when I spoke of the opperation of
the Blood of Cleansing, he looking to the People said, it was never known, that
ever the Blood of Christ ever cleansed any Man from Sin, but he said, it was
the Water, (and said) we deny the Water.

But having here an opportunity, I do bear forth my Testimony according to the
Scripture, 1 John, 5.8. There are three that bear Record on Earth, the Spirit,
the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one, so that this I believe,
that the Spirit, Water, and Blood, do agree in one in their operation, in
Washing and cleansing the Soul from sin, and there is three that bear Record in
Heaven, the Father the Word and the Holy Ghost.

The next Scripture Alleged (he says) was Heb. 10.15. But a Body have thou
prepared me, to which Scripture several of us strictly urged an answer, viz.
who that (me) was for whom the Body was prepared, although (in his Book) he
said he answered, that it was the God head of the Son, yet I remember very well
how he was at that time greviously confounded about it, and no other answer
could we receive from him (at that time) so far as I remember, but this, viz.
by (me) was meant the Body, though urged over and over, though now, after
better consideration, he has brought forth a smoother answer in his Book.

And whereas in page 49. he says, that the Leading Quakers, has brought forth
(in Print) that this prepared Body was prepared in Heaven, and brought with him
into the Virgins Womb, which Body (he says) that they the Leading Quakers
calls a mistical, Invisible, Spiritual, Heavenly Body of Flesh and Blood, and
that the mistical Invisible Body, is the true and only Savior, whose Birth,
Death, Resurrection and Glorification is (only) Mistical and Invisible.

Reply. I am persuaded, if this Priest had known any Quaker that had so written
as concerning that prepared Body of the Son of God, he had not so little Enmity
in him, but he would have brought forth his Name or Book, whereby it might have
been made manifest, but in as much as he has done neither, I return it back
upon him again as an Imagination forced upon his own Heart.

And as for that of George Fox, concerning the Nature of Christ, that it was
not humane, but Divine, I have bore my Testimony agreeable thereto before, and
so leave S. B. to prove it by the Scripture, which lies upon him as a
necessity, in as much as he has laid it down as a necessary point of Faith.

One thing more, of which he charge the Faithful Servant of the Lord G. F.
is, that he has abused the Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.11. For we which live are
always delivered unto Death for Jesus sake, that the Life also of Jesus might
be made manifest in our Mortal Bodies.

Now the abuse charged on G. F. is, that he reads it thus, the Life of Jesus is
manifest in our Mortal Bodies, thereby making that present, which the Apostle
makes future at the Resurrection.

Answ. The words [might be] does not so much note the time as the end,
wherefore the Saints were always delivered up to Death (even) for that very
end, that the Life of Christ might be Manifest in their Mortal Bodies; all that
might Dye to the Flesh and to the World, and Sin might no longer Live in them,
but that the Life of Jesus might be Manifest in their Mortal Bodies; Now if G.
Fox witnessing the fulfilling of this, and did Testify to the same, how did he
abuse the Scripture, or belie the Apostles words, as thou have falsely charged
him, but it is plain thou have wrested the Scripture, in that thou say it is
only at the Resurrection, when Paul himself witnessed the same thing, before he
went out of the Body. Gal. 2.20.

And yet in contradiction Priest Bond says in page 72. that the Body shall be
raised Spiritual, as Christ's Body of Flesh and Bones, after the Resurrection
was Spiritual, our Bodies shall not be raised Natural corruptible Bodies, but
Spiritual Incorruptible Bodies, though the Body of Man be not Natural
corruptible or Mortal Flesh and Blood, and as says unfit for the Kingdom of
God, but in the Resurrection the Body will not be so, for it will then be
Spiritual incorruptable, immortal Flesh and Blood; Priest Bond in this has
contradicted himself, and is made to confess the Quakers Principles.

And for what thou have to charge Isaac Pennington withal, (I believe) he was a
Spiritual Man, and was better acquainted with Heavenly things then Sampson
Bond, and so could speak as he had known, felt, and received them in Spirit,
which is a Mystery to every Natural Man, for the Wisdom of this World (with all
the acquired parts that it can Furnish the Natural Man withal) cannot know or
Receive the things of God, because they are only known and received in the
Spirit.

But it had been a great point of Wisdom in this Priest to have been still and
quiet, and not to speak Evil of the things he knew not, neither understood, but
he that thus will rail against the Light of Christ which (the Saints believe
in) will not spare his Disciples.

Thus have I searched over the first part of his Book, which concerns his first
charge, wherein I have noted some of the abuses, Slanders, Blasphemies,
Confusions, and soft contradictions of S. B. and (according to the Measure of
Light I have Received) briefly answered the same.

I shall now pass on to the Second charge, viz. that the main end of the
Quakers Meeting in these Islands, is to make the Lords Christ his Holy Spirit;
his Angels and Apostles, all Liars and false Witnesses of God.

And to make good this his Ungodly false charge against us, he lays down this
for his Foundation, viz. That we are G. Fs. Disciples, and therefore that this
is our Principal, that the Light is in us, (which he calls pretended Light, is
our true Christ, Teacher Rule and Guide, to be heard, believed in, walked unto
and obeyed as the only Savior, to give Remission of Sins and Salvation with
God, to which he said we consented, from whence he draws down this conclusion,
viz. That we did thereby Grant, that the end of our Meetings, is to Teach a
denial of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Man approved of God to be our true and
only Savior which Teaching (said he) is to make the Lords Christ, his Holy
Spirit, his Angels and Apostles, all Liars and False Witnesses of God.

Reply, The Ground of this his charge, is of the same Nature, with the former,
because we confess to the Spirit within (which is Light) and therefore he
concludes that it must needs follow, that we do deny the true Christ, which he
concludes to be the Man Jesus without, without having any respect to any thing
that dwelt within, or (at least) without any Respect to the Spirit of Christ,
whose Office it is to cleanse the Soul from Sin, and so consequently does save
and Redeem from under the power of Death.

Reply. This his charge is absolutely false, for our Hearts, viz. The Hearts of
the Faithful amongst us, is truly set to serve the Lord, and our main end is
truly to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and if in the Endeavors of our
Hearts to bring this our end to pass, and for want of a true understanding in
the Scripture, we had mist of the thing, must it needs be charged on us, that
it was our main end so to do, (I believe) few that have any tenderness in them,
will believe thee.

But on the other Hand, it is Manifest that the Man Jesus did declare himself
the Light of the World. Joh. 8.12. and so to be believed in, Chap. 12, 46. now
as Man barely understood how could he be the Light of the World, which Light is
a Heart searching Light, Rev. 2.23. therefore it must be understood in the
Spirit, and he declares himself one with the Father, Joh 10.30. in whom dwelt
the fullness of the Godhead bodyly, who was before Abraham; John 8. and it was
the Godhead, the Invisible power, for which the Body was prepared, and this
power dwelling and acting in the Body, was that which unheld it in this great
work of Man's Salvation, and it was through the excellency, worth and power of
the Indwelling Spirit which was one with the Father, which the Invisible Eye
only could behold, by which the satisfaction was made, and the purchase of the
Heavenly Inheritance obtained, by whom Remission of Sins, Justification,
Sanctification and Everlasting Redemption is obtained, this is he in whom we
confess to be our true and only Savior, in whom we believe. And in as much as
he did direct his Disciples, that after his departure, they should wait for his
Spirit, which the World could not receive then, no more then they can do now:
which (says he) dwells with you and shall be in you; and this Spirit was to
be waited for, even by his Disciples that had been taught by him, and he was to
be their Guide, and their Instructor, and their Leader, and in the Spirit they
were to Worship the Father, and this is the word of Faith, even Christ, the
begetter of Faith in the Heart, and must be believed in and obeyed, and walked
up to, according to his Inward Moons and requirings, which always moves and
leads into the things that is good, and makes manifest the Evil, and
reproves for it: and this is not received by Natural Generation, but by the
Inspiration of the Almighty, which is Light, which shines in our Hearts, and
gives the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ, and this
Spirit, Life and Power dwelt in the Son of God without measure: but in the
Saints in measure; and this is he by which the Saints are Sanctified, and do
receive full assurance of the everlasting unchangeable Inheritance, and this is
wrought by degrees, by the same Spirit by which the Saints are continually
given up to Death, to dye to Sin, to dye to the Flesh, to dye to the World,
that the Life of Jesus may be made Manifest in their Mortal Bodies.

And the Manifestation of this Spirit being given to every Man to profit
withal, and we believing that every Man has Received a Measure of this pure
Light, according to Joh. 1.9. therefore do we direct People to turn in their
Minds to this Heavenly Principle, this Heart searching Light, that makes
Manifest Sin and Transgression, and leads the Soul out of Captivity, from under
the Power thereof, and these things we declare and Exhort People to submit unto
the same, for herein only is the true Spiritual Worship witnessed.

And now S. B. what will thou say? Will thou judge this is to deny Christ? or
to make him a Liar, who was truly God? or to make the Holy Spirit a Liar, to
whom we thus Testify? or to make the Angels Liars, who Testified to him as a
King whose Kingdom was not of this World? or to make the Apostles Liars, who
bare so large a Testimony to his Spiritual appearance, I know and am sure had
thou received thy Message from the Lord, or ever walked in the Path of the
Righteouss, thou would have had another Message to declare; then any yet I
can see come from thee.

Now all the Scriptures that S. B. brings to prove his charge, they are such as
proves the same Jesus to be the Savior, who was one with the Father; And
however these Testimonies of Christ, the Spirit, the Angels and Apostles, seems
to speak of the outward Man; yet thereby we cannot understand it any otherwise
then as he was the Christ and Savior of the World, who dwelt in the Father,
and the Father in him, and the words he Spoke they were not his, but the
Fathers that sent him.

But he goes on to Revile the Light, with his common term of Idol, which Idols
and Idolatrous practices was ever hateful unto God; But the more he Reproaches
it, the more he does heap up Vengeance upon his own Head; to be Executed upon
him in the day of the Lord.

The next thing to he considered, was a Sentence of Scripture, Spoken by Will
Harriot, in denial of the Priests false charge, concerning our M^etings;
saying, The Apostle Traveled in Bira^h for the Gallations, till Christ was
formed in them, which words he Spoke without naming Chap. and ver. for which he
derides him, and calls him Impertinent Simpleton, and with all he Glories that
he could readily point at the Chap. and ver. to which I answer, is this any
point of Religion? Is it any matter of Salvation? Is it nor rather a chief part
of thy Trade, which thou have been Exercised in more then twenty years: and
peradventure Received for thy Hire, several hundred pounds worth, (and this is
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and agreeable with the Practice of Balaam,
who Loved the wages of Unrighteousness) now it were a sha^e for thee Trading
with the Scripture so long, and not to have thy Trade perfect.

The Scripture was Gal. 4.19. The which Scripture this Reviling Priest makes
use off, to Reproach the (Light) thus. If when Paul writ to the Gallations,
Christ was to be formed in them, then the Light in every Man (the Quakers
Rotten Principle, which is in every Man by Natural Generation (he says) is not
the True Christ.

Rep. In defiance of this Heavenly Principle, I say thou art an Ignorant Man:
for this Light is of a more Noble Birth and Generation, for it is of Gods own
begetting, and so not of a Fl^shly Generation; for that which is Born of the
Flesh is Flesh? but that which is Born of the Spirit is Spirit.

And it is one thing to have this principle in them, and another thing to be in
Union with it, it is one thing to have it in a Man, and another thing to be
formed into its likeness, now none can Witness the formings of Christ in them,
but such as do receive Christ (the Light) they, and only they, receive Power to
become Children of the most High God, even they that believe in his Name, which
is the Power, by which Christ Jesus was raised up from the Dead, and such who
by Faith lay hold on the Power, the Word of Life, the quickening Spirit, by
which the Saints are begotten again into Christ's Nature, and Christ's own Nature
raised up in them, and so is Christ's Word fulfilled; you in me and I in you:
And thus to know Christ is, not to deny the Body which suffered and Rose again,
for the Saints which Testified of the Man, did also bear Witness to the Spirit
which was their Guide, and Leader, and Instructor, and Savior, and Saved them
from the Body of Death, and Power of Darkness, and Law of Sin, and Mortified
Sin in them, and their Vile affections which were upon the Earth, was Subdued
by the Spirit of Christ, and they came to know him to be the quickening Spirit,
quickening and Enlivening them, and raising them up, to sit in Heavenly places
in Christ Jesus, so Old things were Witnessed to pass away, and all things to
become new, new Nature, Will new, Assertions new, Desires new, all New.

The next thing to be considered, is his Ridged sencering of Will. Harriot,
with his Fellow Seducers, (as he calls them) Page 59, 60, 61. In which he shows
his Persecuting Spirit, in passing such a Sentance as Whipping, for no other
Transgression then to deny such a Doctrine as is not truly grounded upon the
Scripture, and not only so, but in diverse particulars contrary to the Scripture.

And for this, he takes the Scripture for his Rule, Joh. 2.13. And Jesus went
up to Jerusalem, and found in the Temple those that Sold Oxen, and when he had
made a Whip of small Cords, he drove them out of the Temple, and said unto
them, make not my Fathers House a House of Marchandice

Now Mark? what ground has he, or can he rightly gather from hence, to punish
a Man with Corporal punishment, for matter of Judgment and opinion, because he
cannot receive his Doctrine, was this, for which they were Whipped, (Judgment
or Opinion) was it not rather matter of Fact, and so justly deserving Corporal
punishment, for they were Buying and Se ling contrary to the Law of God.

And how c nst thou be justified S. B. who art found doing the same things, who
pretending to be a Minister of Christ's, and to have received a gift for the
Service of the Church, which is Christ's Spiritual Temple, and yet contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, (who Taught his Disc^ples to dispense their gift
freely) thou makes Sale of this thy pretended gif^, making Merchandice of the
Scriptures, and of thy Prayers, and of that which ye commonly call Sacraments,
and thus thou art making Traffic of thy pretended gifts. So now do thou
seriously consider, and tell me which way thou can clear thy self from this
Transgression, and so from just punishment, according to thy Transgression.

Secondly, thy Transgression is beyond the Transgression of William Harriot, if
thou cou^dest make him out to be a Transgressor; or if thou could make good
thy charge against him, he did not Curse, or Reproach, or Villifie Christ, as
thou have done against the inward manifestation of the Spirit in the Saints
whom we believe, and are su^e is that very Spirit in Measure, in each that
dwelt in Jesus Christ without Measure, whom thou have Reviled, Blasphemed, and
Repro^ched, whom the Lord will reward according to thy Works.

And thus thy persecuting Spirit does manifestly appear, so that we see
plainly, (had thou Power in thy Hands) what would become of all such as
Decented from thy Doctrine, Corporal punishments would soon attend them,
Whipping Posts, and Gibbets, and Halters, and suchlike, would soon be our
Portion from thee, whom I once heard to say, that we Lackt a Halter to Choke
our Errors, a manifest Token of a Persecutor, who art also found here pressing
the Magistrate, (as much as in thee lies) to Execute their Power against such
as D^scent (not from the Scripture) but from thy Judgment or opinion of the
Scripture, nor from the true Christ.

The next Prater, (he says) was William Wilkinson, who because himself has
answered the several particulars, wherein he was chiefly corcerned, I do not
find such a necessity so much to concern my self with the same.

In the 62 Page, this Priest reasoning strongly with William Wilkinson against
the inward appearance of Jesus Christ the Savior of the World, he says, that
Fran. Estlack shot his Boult, and said, the Deity was in him.

Answer. The word (Deity) was not mine but his own: Nevertheless I did bear my
Testimony to the Indwelling of the Spirit of Christ. And here (Mark) he
undertakes to know and declare my meaning, meaning (said he) that the Deity
(only) was my true and only Savior) which by adding this Word (only) seeks to
persuade People that I deny the Body of Christ, but to this I have said
sufficient before, but immediately in a kind of deriding manner, in answer to
my Words said, So he is in Catts and Dogs. Judge, is not that an Irreverent
Expression.

But here by the way, I cannot but take notice of his exposition of the words
of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.16. Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him so no more.

Here he says (Flesh) is not here taken for the mankind nature of Christ; but
Flesh is to be understood in this sense, (viz.) we must know him no more after
worldly greatness and honor, creature Pomp and Dignity: So this Priest says
the word (Flesh) is to be understood.

To which, I answer, although the Jews did expect the Messiah so to come, this
was but their blind imagination: But when was he ever known so to come? When
did either Jew or Gentile so know him? Therefore, I say plainly, (to me it does
appear that S. B. has greatly wronged this Scripture; for he (viz.) the
Apostle, does seem to confess that they had known Christ after the Flesh; but
sure I am, they never so knew him, as decked with the Glory of this world; for
he said, The Son of man has not where to lay his head: So by the Flesh could
not be meant of a fleshly glory. From whence I thus argue, If Christ must be
known no more after the Flesh, then he must now be known only after the Spirit;
or else the knowledge of Christ must cease, for that will truly follow: And if
so; then the Flesh of Christ as Man, and the Spirit which is God, is truly
distinguished; so God is not the Flesh of the outward Man, neither is the Flesh
of the outward man God, as this Priest does presumtuously seem to affirm,
without any true ground of Scripture to maintain his Doctrine.

But this by the way.
But to return again to the words or expression of this Priest, for which I did
before charge him with Blasphemy, he sought to gloss it over before the people,
as if he spoke of God in a more general way, (although by his own confession in
his Book, he spoke of him as a Savior) as the Being of all Beings, and gives
Life and Breath unto all living, and is the upholder of the Creation; without
whom nothing could consist.

Which he pretending this to the people, it was not at all out of the good
order, to press the inward presence or manifestation of Christ in his Saints:
Yet a little farther, I still making use of the former Scripture, which is,
Christ in you the hope of Glory: At which he said he was moved, and it was
manifest by his profane and ungodly expression; If Christ be in you, whether
is he in your Brains, Legs or Guts: But this expression as S. B. then spoke
it, he has not truly set it down in his Book: But it appears he has been
exercising his File, he spoke of in the b^ginning of his Book, having seen some
Ruggedness in his expression, which has (perhaps) caused him to mince it, and
also to change the word (Guts) into Bowels, to which he says; my answer was
ready (this is an Ishmael.)

Yea, and I say again, thou art an Ishmaelite, and I believe according to the
name (in one sense) thou art (heard of God) for the Lord has heard thy
revilings, and thy Scornings, and they are recorded and written as with the
point of a Diamond, which shall never be razed out except thou repent.

And by these thy mocking and s^offing expressions, that Nature does manifest
it self in thee more and more to be Ishmael's Nature, the Son of the
Bondwoman, who has no part in the Inheritance with the Son of the Free woman;
but must be cast out, because he was seen to mock at Isaac, the figure of the
blessed Seed: But thou art here sound mocking at the true Seed, as it is raised
up to reign in the hearts of Gods Elect.

The next thing I take notice of was the passage about old Henry Smith, who
was, as at that day, above Eighty years of Age, to whom he said positively, he
spoke them words (there inserted in his Book) which I believe the one half of
them were not expressed by him, though what he spoke was to that purpose: But
whether the Old Man heard his words, so as to understand them or not, I know
not; for that sense was greatly decayed i^ him, and he was likewise at a pretty
distance from him; but it is likely he perceived he spoke to him, which made
him come down from his standing: And had the old Man perfectly heard what he
said, it is probable he would hardly have answered, being a Man slow of speech,
and not free of utterance; and being aged he was constantly possessed with a
trembling in his Body; so that none can say truly that he trembled for any
thing the Priest had said: But for what end he went to this Priests House,
neither what he did there I know not; but this I say, from that day forward, I
never knew him any ways inclineable after any of that Generation, to the day of
his death; who is now deceased, and I believe is at peace with the Lord.

But to go forward, in Page 68. S. B. says of Jesus Christ, That he is in the
third Heaven (above) and that he has in the Heavens (above) true Flesh and
Blood, the nature and properties of a true mankind Body: And this he proves
chiefly by bringing in of Four Questions; so where Scripture fails, they seek
another way to prove their assertions.

Reply, That Christ had a Body we own, which was of the Seed of David according
to the Flesh, as it is said, he took upon him the form of a Servant; and as the
Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he himself also took part of the
same, and in that Body performed the Will of the Father in all things that was
given him to do, and dyed, and the Lord raised it up again, and he had showed
himself many days, and he ascended, and a Cloud received him out of sight; of
whom the Angels witnessed, that the same Jesus should in like manner come again
afterward. And John in his Revelation, when he saw him in the Heavenly Visions,
he describes him far exceeding the outward Son in glory: And as he is declared
in the Scriptures, we so believe, avoiding his unscriptural imaginations.

But to go back a little to speak a few words to the matter, or Argument of
Sampson Bonds, to prove that the Spirit of God was not in William Wilkinson, in
page 66. which Argument was this:

Because the Spirit that was in W. W. (and so consequently in every Quaker)
does not agree with the Water of Baptism, nor the Blood of the Supper; And thou
(said he) denies both the Sacraments.

To which (he said) William Wilkinson answered, he had both Baptism and the
Lord's Supper within him.

Reply, I say also with William Wilkinson, Baptism and the Supper is within;
but for the word Sacrament I deny, it being a non-Scriptural expression. But as
to your Water-Baptisme (as ye now use it) it is of your Father (the Pope)
(whose Children ye are, while ye observe his works and do them) for it neither
is, nor never was an Ordinance of God; neither is there any express Rule in
Scripture for it, neither Precept nor example.

And farther, I say, as to John's Baptismes, which was with Water, That was to
decrease, as John did affirm, saying, I must decrease, He must increase, I
indeed Baptize you with Water, but he that comes after me, he shall Baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

And as John testified, so it came to pass; for as the Baptism of the Spirit
increased, so that of Water decreased; and the Disciples and Christians (in
that day) did not lay such stress upon the Water then, as ye do now, saying.
That it is a matter absolute necessary to Salvation; and Children cannot be
saved without it, if it might be had: For Paul himself, who was not behind the
chief of the Apostles in Preaching of the Gospel, what he did in that
particular, it is probable he did in his own freedom, having no positive
command for it; for he said, he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. And the rest of the Disciples, when they were sent forth
to Teach and Baptize, in Matt. 28. there is not a word of Water mentioned.

And the Apostle Paul, in Ephesians. 4. says, there is one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism; which B^ptisme is spiritual, and Baptizeth or plungeth into the death
of Christ (all true Believers) by which they feel a daily dying to sin: And
their Consciences washed with pure Water, which Water agrees with the Spirit in
purging the Soul from Sin, and this Baptism is within, known and witnessed
there by the Spirit: But for your Baptism without, it agrees not with the
sanctifying Spirit, for it reaches no farther than to wash the Flesh. And
speak ingenuously now S. B. and tell me, (among the many Hundreds thou have
Baptized with the outward Water) can thou say, in the presence of God, that
there is one Soul that has thereby received any true spiritual profit? I
conclude, not one.

Now, as the Baptism is within, so the Supper is within also; for we do
witness Christ Jesus to be come nigh unto our Souls, who is the heavenly
Substance, the living Substance, of which the visibles were but shadows; and
now the thing signified, the true and heavenly substance, is possessed and
enjoyed inwardly, by which the Souls of the Faithful are nourished up unto
eternal Life; for the Church is in God a spiritual House, a spiritual Temple, a
spiritual people; being born a new of the Spirit, and witnessing a birth
brought forth in them, that cannot be sed nor nourished with shadows; but its
meat must be Meat indeed, and its drink must be Drink indeed, suitable to its
own Nature, which is Spiritual and Divine.

Neither do we (who witness the Day of the Lord appeared) feel the Spirit of
the Lord, to lead our minds back again into the signs and shadows, otherwise we
should be ready to follow, for he is the Saints gu^de, and leads them into all
Truth, and gathers the mind inward, to wait for the teachings of the Spirit,
who is their Prophet, Christ within, their Bishop, their Shepherd, their King,
their Lord and Lawgiver, on whom they wait, to receive the Law from his mouth.
Well, said Christ (when he was to depart in the outward) It is expedient for
you that I go away; for if I go not away the Comforter will not come; but if I
go away I will send him: For great is the profit indeed, that the Saints have,
and do possess in and by the Spirit.

Nevertheless, this heavenly treasure that we do possess and en^oy, it is in
the earthen Vessels, in which it does manifestly shine forth; so that we are
thereby led into a good and comely order, having our meetings also in the good
and wholesome order, where the presence of the Lord is felt in the midst of us;
as the true assembling and gathering in the name of Jesus, which is the power,
is truly witnessed, and his workings in the particular Vessels is sundry
sometimes, so that the creature being sensible of the working of the Power,
sometimes breaths unto the Lord, (while sitting silent together) sometimes
uttering it self in a sigh or groan, sometimes (feeling the raptures of the
heavenly joy) breaks forth into singing, which this mocking Priest which dwells
in Ishmaels Nature (deridingly) calls Humming and Canting; and wher^as some,
who with Eve, have hearkened to the Tempter, whereby their minds have been led
out into disorderly and unlawful actions, this he has cast upon the true
Baptism of the Spirit; but the reward of the Mocker is the Judgment of the
Eternal God, which shall be this Priests food for ever, except he repents.

And so much in Answer to his second Charge; by which it is manifest, that the
main end of our meeting in this Island, is not to make the Lords Christ, the
Holy Spirit, Angels and Apostles, all Liars and false-witnesses of God, as this
Priest has falsely charged us: But the main end of our meetings is to wait, to
feel his living motions, requirings and leadings, that by it we may be led to
glorify the Father, Word and Spirit, in the true guidance of the Spirit, into
the true and Spiritual worship, which is well-pleasing unto God.

I should now proceed to his third and last Charge; but because W. Wilkinson
has given some answer thereto already, I suppose I may sum up the Answer in
the fewer words.

The Charge is this.
That the prime Principles of a Quaker, are the same that were held and
professed by the Beasts that Paul fought with at Ephesus.

To thee, oh! thou false Man, I make this Reply, in Answer to this false Charge.

Art not thou ashamed thus to utter Lies, oh! thou false Tongue? Do not thou
know thou must give an account for these things to the Lord? For now, had their
Principles been our Principles, Paul would have had no need to have made War
against them; neither would the Apostle have had any such caus^ to leave them
under such an odium upon the record of Truth to all succeeding Generations,
calling them Beasts, for no other cause that we can here on (from thee) but for
denying the Resurrection, and yet I can s^e little but thy bare word for it
neither, though thou say it is manifest in 1 Cor. 15. Beside, there were many
that were found in this error, as the Sect of the Saduces, yet were not left
under that odium; which makes me judge that the Apostle had seen some other
brutish principle or practice, which caused him thus to contend with them: But
if thou could prove that, yet it would be too much for thee to undertake to
make good thy Charge; because we do not at all deny the Resurrection: And to
lay open the wickedness and falsity of this thy Charge, I shall here declare to
the World, what our prime, chief and leading Principle is:

Our prime, chief, o^ leading Principle is Christ, (the Light) whom God has
given for a Leader, who has enlightened every man that c^meth into the world,
which Light has shined in our dark Hearts, and manifested it self in our
Conscien^^s, by which we first came to see our m serable state and condition,
being by nature Children o^ Wrath, and under the power of Darkness, in which
state we were separated from God, from hit Spirit; and this Light which
discovered our woeful state under sin, and in transgression; we felt it also to
Judge us; and as we gave heed unto it, and regarded its reproofs, and hearkened
to its voice, which voice we often hea^d in the cool of the day: But (I say) as
we began to have regard unto it, and believed in it, and obeyed its voice, we
found it was the way of Life, and its leadings (we discerned) was always out
of every thing that was evil; and if at any time we turned aside to hearken
to the Enemy, we found it to rebuke us and Judge us, and then our peace would
be broken, and pain and anguish we should feel in our Souls, and some of us
sometimes would be afraid that it was the dictates of a natural Conscience;
and then we were afraid of being deceived; but coming into seriousness and
vveightiness, we found that all men by nature were dead; but this we
discerned was living, and as we obeyed we felt its life to spring up in us,
and we were quickened by it, and it lead us more and more out of death and
darkness, and living openings in the mysteries of Salvation we come to
receive, then we began to grow bold and confident; that this Light was truly
the Light and Spirit of Jesus: So he became our Leader; and as many as were
faithful to it received power, and waxed strong, and are brought (in some
measure) to the Word of Life; and through Christ alone has the Lord raised us
up to be a people, whom the World (deridingly) call Quakers; and for the sake
of this Righteous Principle, have many of this people deeply suffered; yet of
it we are not ashamed, but are resolved to follow it; although through the
Tribulation, through the Cross and Self-denial, believing that he will Crown
us with an Everlasting Crown of Glory: So this is our Faith, That the Lord
will raise us up at the last day; for if the Dead rise not, we were of all
creatures most miserable, being given up to suffer what Man shall be suffered
to do unto us: But this is our Faith, That the Lord will raise us up according
to his promise, and will change our vile Bodies, and will fashion them like
unto his glorious Body: So being satisfied as concerning the Love of God, That
there shall not be any thing vvanting to make our Inheritance perfect, to our
eternal content and satisfaction, we can leave that to the Lord, to prepare us
a Body as it pleases him: So this Light of Jesus Christ is our Principle,
which was not the prime principle of the Beasts which Paul fought with at
Ephesus; for this was the very thing that this Apostle was to turn people to,
Acts 26.18.

So I have done with this Charge (only noting one thing in Page 72. where he
said, I called to him for his Bible) I called not to him for his Bible;
therefore let that be added also to fill up his measure, who I perceive is so
hardened, he neither cares much, what he either says or writes, for it was
not in my heart to call to him for his Bible; but I said, if I had a Bible I
could prove it (viz.) That the dead shall not rise the same Body: Immediately
he profer d his, and I found the place, where the Apostle comparing the
Resurrection to a Grain of Wheat, says plainly, It comes not up the same
Body, but God gives it a Body as it pleases him.

Thus have I gone through S. B's Book Entitled, The Quakers in Burmondas
Tried, etc. In which Book, I have noted some of the many Lies, Slanders,
Blasphemies, etc. and have openly detected them, that Truth may be cleared from
the many Slanders cast upon it, and the Professors thereof; that such as are
not vvilfully blind may see: but the rest shall be hardened.

Fran. Eastlack.

A Postscript.
HAving gone through that part of Sampson Bonds Book, which concerned the
Dispute upon the first day of the third Month, 1678. and answered the matter
(chiefly) as I found his words laid down by himself, I shall now show how that
many things were spoken by him in his house of Worship (in the Audience of all
the People) in Devon-shire Tribe (so called) on the dry above mentioned, which
words I writ while they were fresh in memory, and diverse Friends signified
Truth of the same.

The first thing that I noted (which he spoke in plain Words) was this, That
Jesus of Nazareth, as man (barely considered) is the only material Savior,
grounded upon the Words of Simeon, Luke 2. and the Testimony of the Apostle,
Acts 2. etc.

Secondly, That the Spirit of Christ was never in any man as a Savior.

Thirdly, That Sin does live in all Men, while they are in the Body.

Fourthly, The Priest, after an ugodly manner demanded in what part of our Guts
Christ was? For (saiad he) If he be in you, he must be in your Legs, Brains or
Guts: and if he were in your Brains, he would teach you more wit.

Fifthly, That Christ was not the Son of God: but as he is Man, grounded upon
Christ his Words to the Blind Man; when he demanded of Christ who the Son of
God was? Jesus answered, I that speak unto thee am he; which this Priest said
was only the Man.

Sixthly, That in the Resurrection, we shall rise again the same Body for
substance, Flesh, Blood and Bones. But the Quallities shall be Changed, so that
he that dies a Fool shall rise a Wise Man, and he that dies Crooked shall be
raised Straight: This was an Imagination of his own Brain: For there is no
Scripture for it.

And Lastly, He Demanded, (after an ungodly manner) of Will. Wilkinson if God
were in Hell; whether he was their Saved or Damned.

These Wicked Erroneous, and Ungodly Expressions were uttered by him that day:
by which the Wise in Heart may Judge what Spirit this Priest is of, who is also
a Teacher of others in Burmudus.

Fran. Eastlack.

Appendix.
SAmpson Bond, thou say in Page 14. That if any Man seek to be Justified by
the righteousness of the Law, as most of the Quakers do, etc. This horrid Lie
and Forgery S. B. has not proved as in Page 14. for we being Justified freely
by his Grace through Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, who dyed for our Sins,
and is risen for our Justification, Romans 3. and we are Justified by Faith in
his Blood: And as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one (to wit Christ) the free gift
came upon all men to the justification of life, Romans 5.18. and a great rabble
of this he has packed together in three or four Pages, as though We should
deny Jesus Christ of Nazareth, his Death and Resurrection, because we are
Witnesses to the Apostles Doctrine, who says, That Christ is in you except ye
be reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. And again, the Apostle says, That Christ may dwell
in your hearts by Faith; and as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk in him, Col. 2.6. And again the Apostle says, Christ in you the hope of
glory whom we preach, etc. Col. 1.27. Now this is the true Christ Jesus which
we own, which the Apostle Preached IN people as well as WITHOUT, and Christ
Jesus who came according to the Promise and Prophets of God, and how he died
for our sins according to the Scripture, and that he was buried and rose again
the third day according to the Scripture, and is ascended at the right hand of
God, and manifest, and dwells in the hearts of his people, and he that has the
Son of God has Life, and he that has not the Son of God has not life, 1 John
5.12. And thus we and the Apostles do own Christ within, and we do abhor that
lying poisonous Tongue of S. B. who says, We deny Jesus of Nazareth who was
crucified, dead and buried, and rose again, and sits at the right hand of
God, and yet dwells in his people by Faith; and if Priest Bond do not know
Christ in him, then he is a reprobate, and then let him consider who dwells in
him, if it be not the Devil and Satan whom he has so often in his mouth: And
was not Saul persecuting Jesus of Nazareth in his Members, when he said, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? as in Acts 9.4. and Saul said, who art thou,
Lord? and he said, I am Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest, Acts 9.5. and
Acts 22.8. Priest Bond, could Saul get into Heaven to persecute Jesus of
Nazareth but in his Members? as thou do now in us, and call him a false
Christ and a Devil as he is in us. And Priest Bond, all those Scriptures that
thou have brought or perverted, and misapplied in thy 1, 2, 3, 4 Pages, which
we say he has brought to prove his false Charge against us, That Jesus Christ
of Nazareth, a Man approved of God, etc. who is the true Christ and Savior,
who died for our Sins, and is risen again for our Justification, who is at the
right hand of God, and is the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man
Christ Jesus; we say, this true Lord Jesus Christ, who is revealed in us, as he
was in the Apostles and Saints, he has not proved to be a false Christ, a
Deceiver, the Devil, and an Antichrist, as he wickedly and blaphemously says,
who has sold himself to work wickedness, and made lies his refuge to corrupt
and defile peoples minds withal, and all these Scriptures, Acts 2. and 4, and
10. Chap. Luke 2. John 4. Heb. 10.1.2. Chap. Col. 1. Ephesians. 2. 1 Pet. 2. Heb.
9. Luke 24. Mark 6. Acts 1.3.7. chap. and many other Scriptures may be brought
to witness against his false, slanderous Charge; and his second Charge, and all
the rest is as false, and stuffed full with a rabble of Lies, as the first: So
Priest Bond has brought all these Scriptures to prove Jesus Christ the true
Savior, which no Quaker does deny. But how does S.B. own the true Lord Jesus
Christ without, if he does not own the true Lord Jesus Christ revealed within,
who is the Savior? As the Apostles, and the true Christians, in scorn called
Quakers, do: For does not Antichrist and Deceivers confess Christ without as S.
Bond does, and call the true Christ within, Antichrist, a Deceiver, and a Devil
within his people, and so persecutes Christ in his Members like Saul? So Priest
Bond has proved himself to be in the Spirit of the Scribes and Pharisees who
professed Christ to come, and when he was come, they said, he had a Devil, and by
the Prince of Devils cast out Devils. And now the true Christ is come that
dyed, and rose again, and ascended at the right hand of God, and is revealed in
his people as he was in the Apostles, and now this true Lord Jesus Christ who
dwells in his people who are no Reprobates, Priest Bond in his false, wicked,
blasphemous Charge, to prove this true Lord Jesus Christ in his people, a false
Christ, an Antichrist, a Deceiver, a Devil, in this he has proved himself a
Deceiver, and a Reprobate, and no true Christian, but has manifested his folly
and madness to all that read his Book.

Sampson Bond who styles himself late Preacher of the Gospel in Burmoudas, who
says he had a Dispute with the Quakers in Burmoudas, and they did say, in Joh.
1.9. That that was the true light which enlightens ever man that comes into the
world, and this Scripture F. E. he more especially insisted on, S. B. says, to
prove Christ to be the true Light, and that Light to be the only Savior which
is in every Man that comes into the World, whence says S. B. F. E. Argued,
That the Quakers pretended Savior within is the true, and not the false Christ.

And S. B. answers and says, It is true, that by the Light in that place of
Scripture, the true Christ and only Savior is meant. Here S. B. makes a
public confession in Print, and says, It is true, that by Light in that place
of Scripture, Joh. 1. the true Christ and only Savior is meant. So then here
S. Bond does confess that it was the true Christ whose Name is called the Word
of God, by whom all things was made, and in him was Life, and this Life is the
Light of men, and this was the true Light which is the Life in Christ, the Word
that was made Flesh, who enlightens every man that comes into the World, John
1.9. as in Page 8. And in Page 10. thou say, As for your Idol (Light-Christ,
etc.) and scoffingly say, Did ever the Jews Crucify your feigned
God-head-Light within? Here thou have overthrown thy confession as before in
Page 8. who say, It Is true, that by Light in that place of Scripture, John
1.29. the true Christ and our only Savior is meant, etc. and now thou call
him our Idol Light-Christ, in Page 10. But we tell Priest Bond, That Christ did
not dye as he was God, or his Godhead, but he was Crucified in the Flesh, and
as he was Man, whom we believe and confess according to the Scripture, Jesus of
Nazareth was born of the Virgin, who dyed for our Sins, and is risen for our
Justification, who is ascended at the right hand of God, and is revealed in us
his people.

Priest Bond, thou say in Page 12. 13. These Scriptures, Romans 10. etc. the
Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and heart, that is, the Word of Faith
which we Preach: And further say, I do not apprehend how these Scriptures
answer the Arguments -- which proves a Quakers pretended Savior within him to
be the false Christ, the Devil: nor how they prove their pretended Savior
within to be the true Christ. In this, Priest Bond, thou have showed thy malice
and blasphemy against our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who dyed for our sins,
and is risen for our Justification, etc. and is revealed in us by his Spirit,
and rules in our hearts by Faith, yea, he whose Name is called the Word of God;
and we are not of them who say, Who shall ascend into Heaven to bring Christ
down from thence? or who shall descend into the deep to bring Christ again from
the dead; but the Word is nigh us, even in our hearts and mouths; according to
the Apostles Doctrine: And so we do believe in our hearts, and confess with our
mouths, the Lord Jesus Christ whom God has raised from the dead, by whom we
are justified and saved.

Here the Reader may see some of Priest Bond's filthy, lying, blasphemous
Language, that he has Printed against the people of God called Quakers, Your
Idol Light-Christ, Page 10. Quakers are filled with envy; and speak against
those things which were spoken by Paul, O seducing Quakers, twice over. In Page
12. has S. B. uttered these horrid Lies, Did ever Paul Preach Christ Jesus
till God had revealed his Son in him?

Again, S. B. says, A Quakers pretended Savior within to be the false Christ,
the Devil, Page 13.

S. B. We believe thou art nearer the Devil, than thou art the true Christ the
Savior, who rules in the hearts of his people by Faith, who through death,
destroys Death, the Devil, the Power of Death; and the false Christ also.

S. B. says, A Quakers, etc. Savior within is not the true, but false Christ.
Page 14.

These are Lies without proof, and this Lying Spirit that rules in S. B. may as
well falsely accuse the Apostles, as the Quakers; who said to the Church of
Corinth, Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
you be reprobates? And again the Apostle says, Christ in you the hope of
glory, whom we Preach, etc. 2 Cor. 13. 1. Col. 27.28. and yet S.B. says, If
thou confessest with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thy
heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: But, S. B. did
Paul confess Christ till he was revealed in him? And can Reprobates confess
Christ to their Salvation, in whom Christ is not? S. B. Thou say (in Page
15.) Where do you Quakers search for your Gospel, Word of Faith, surely not in
the Scriptures without, but at your Oracle, that Idol-Light, etc. O! thou
Idol-Light within, etc. But Priest Bond, Is not the W^rd of Faith in the heart
Gospel? Do not thou say it is true, in that place of Scripture, John 1: By
that Light which enlightens every man that comes into the World, the true
Christ and our only Savior is meant? and in Page 15. thou calls the Light of
Christ within, an Idol-Light, and say, O thou Idol-Light within. What mad
confusion art thou in? And then thou say, That Idol-Light, tender-part
within, which you falsely call the everlasting Gospel and Eternal Word, (as in
Page 15.) and yet thou confessest in Page 8. that every man that comes into the
world is enlightened by Christ the Son of God, as he is the Eternal Word: And is
not the Gospel the Power of God? And is not that Eternal or Everlasting? Romans
1. Rev. 14. Is not the Light called the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
who is the Image of God, etc? And God who commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. and it is false to say,
that we affirm, that the Word was never made Flesh; and here thou may see thy
contradictions, who confessest the Word Eternal in Page 8. and contradicts it,
and scoffest at it in Page 15. who say, Search for your Gospel Word of Faith,
surely not in the Scriptures, -- without, but at your Oracle that Idol Light
within, which you falsely call the Everlasting Gospel, and Eternal Word: Yet
thou contradicts thy self, and says, p. 8. Christ the Eternal Word enlightens
every man that comes into the World: And now thou call the Light within, O
thou Idol Light-within. Here thou may see, how thou do Blaspheme against
the true Light, and the Life in Christ, the Word, which enlightens every man
that comes into the world, Which will be thy Condemnation, who hate it, and
blaspheamest against it.

More of S. B.'s bad Words, Page 16. [The Light within does justify the vilest
Antichrists. No, it condemns thee and them.

Page 16. S. B. says, -- Metonymia, etc. F. E. understands no more than the
Hourglass that is before me. But S. B. has not proved, that the
Gospel Ministers Preached in a Pulpit, like Ezra; neither has he proved, that
Ezra had a Cushion, which he makes such a work about; nor his Word Metonymy, by
Scripture, which he says is his Rule. S. B. says, A Cushion is familiar (the
Gloe-worm Light within) the Idol Light within, Page 18. 19. Antichristian
Divinity (to wit) the Light in Man, etc. These are Priest Bonds soul words.

S. B. says, You blind Leaders of the blind, blush and tremble at your
accursed Gospel within, etc. page 20. Answer, We are not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, for it is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes, Romans 1.

S. B. -- The Eternal Word, which (as ye affirm) was never made Flesh, page 15.
and page 18. thou gives thy self the Lie, when thou say, F. E. the Quaker
said, That the Word took Flesh of the Virgin, and in that Flesh dyed for all
men: Thou say, that this motion pleased F. E. so well, to make a deliberate
repetition of it; and this thou scoffingly calledst F. E's New Divinity, the
Idol, Light within: But where did ever the Apostles call the Light of Christ,
which shines in the heart, an Idol, Light within, as thou blasphemously say?
But here it is clear, thou have manifested a Lying Spirit, who say, page 15.
that we affirm, the Eternal Word was never made Flesh. And then again, in page
18. thou art made to confess thus, viz. I shall here take up an expression
which I had almost forgotten, which this Disputant F. E. doubled in his
Discourse, namely, (That the Word took Flesh of the Virgin, and in that Flesh
died for all men) -- That God sent Christ to save all men from sin and death
(as he F. Eastlack said) whose Sufferings, Sacrifice, Mediation, Intercession
and Offices we do own and witness, as inwardly wrought and performed in us, and
for us: And this thou do confess, page 18. That the Quakers did confess
Christ was in their hearts, and scoffingly say still, the Idol Light within,
and call this a New Doctrine. Now here it is clear according to the
Scripture, we did confess the Word became Flesh, and Christ was put to death in
the Flesh, and so died for, our Sins, and is risen for our Justification, and
is revealed in our hearts by his Spirit, by which we know him to be our
Mediator and Intercessor, and without him we can do nothing; who exercises his
Prophetical, and his Priestly, and Kingly Office in his Church.

S B. And again thou say, We affirm, the Eternal Word, was never made Flesh:
and then in Page 21: thou confessest, that F. E. the Quaker said, that the Word
took Flesh, and in that Flesh Dyed for all Men: Here again thou give thy self
a Lie in thy own Book. In Page 20. S. B. says, You most certainly would do
your uttermost, to Crucify Him again (to wit Christ) These are some of thy
malicious Lies: for Christ is our Life and Savior, Heb. 6.7. S. B. may apply
to himself, and Heb. 10.29. And then S. B. is at it again, That a Quakers
pretended Savior within him was not the true Christ, but the false, Page 22. O
most Horrible Quakerisme, dug out of the Bottomless Pit -- thy Light Christ
-- Conscience -- seducing and Lying Quaker -- the false Christ within, Page 22.
See the venom of this Man: for F. E. the Quaker confesses, that Jesus Christ
of Nazareth was received up into Heaven, Page 23. And because the Quakers say,
this true Christ is revealed in them by his Spirit, and rules in their Hearts
by Faith, this S. B. with his evil Spirit calls him the Devil and the False
Christ. And the Quakers make a distinction betwixt the Conscience and Christ,
for the Conscience may be seared: and the Quakers do not say that every Man
that comes into the World has received Christ, because he enlightens every Man
that comes into the World: for them that believe in his Light are saved, and
them that do not, are Condemned.

S. B's. Wicked words, Page 24, and 25. As Blind as Bayard, the false Christ,
the Idol light within; a Syllogysme, a great Monster to him (to wit to the
Quaker) That is not the Quakers Monster, but S.B's. Thou say the Eternal
Power and Godhead was manifest in the unconverted Gentiles; yet in another
place thou say, Christ the Savior within is the false Christ. What confused
Babylon Stuff is this! and yet S. B. says, That this was the Gospel Word that
was Preached, which profited not neither Jews nor Gentiles, that did not by the
mouth of Faith eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of our only Savior. So then,
if they eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood by the mouth of Faith, it is within
them: But did they eat this outward Flesh or humane Flesh as thou call it?
and yet S. B. says, in Page 26. The Quakers Savior within is not the true
Christ, but of the Devil. And Page 15. thou say, Where do you teaching
Quakers seek for your Gospel Word of Faith? Surely not in the Scriptures? and
in Page 26. This was the Gospel Word, that was Preached, etc. Says S. B. in
contradiction to himself, who says, Surely not in the Scriptures without, but
at your Oracle, that Idol light within, that the Quakers have searched for: then
has not S. B. watched for the same at his Idol light within, though we do abhor
his blasphemous words against the Light of Christ.

S. B. says, that I do affirm Jesus Christ as man is our only material
Savior, and that the Manhood of the Son of God is the only material Cause of
our Salvation, and by necessary consequence, the Manhood or humane Nature of
Christ was and is our only material Savior: Page 28. But where does S. B.
prove the word Material and Humane Nature in Scripture, which he calls his
Rule? Is Christ's Humane Nature the only Savior? Was Christ sent without the
Father? Did he Rise from the dead without the Fathers Power for our
Justification? Does Christ only reconcile the World without God? But we do
confess, that Jesus Christ was an Offering for the Sins of the whole World; and
so he suffered in the Flesh, and was quickened by the Spirit, and is alive, and
lives for evermore: and so dyed for our Sins, and rose for our Justification.
[S. B. Blasphemous words] Idol-Light within, Page 29. Old Popish-trick,
Carnal-Prophetess, as Carnal-Gospellers, Anti-Gospellers: I charge S. B. to
prove these foul Words of his by Scripture.

S. B. Quakers Light within, is but the Pope without; If the Quakers Light of
Christ within had been the Pope without (as in Page 27.) then the Pope and the
Papists would never have imprisoned and persecuted the Quakers to Death, like
the New England Priests and Professors have done, and S. B. would not have
blasphemed so against the Light. And now all people consider, does not S. B.
keep all people in darkness, and in a reprobate State? for he says Christ
within is a Devil, and the Light of Christ is an Idol; seducing Quakers,
confounding Dogs and Swine, and a wretched desire to blot out of our Hearts the
Blessed Name (to wit Jesus,) all these are S. B's Lies. Again S. B. says, the
Idol-Light within, Obedience to the Light, that unbloody Redeemer, the Pope
without, is become the Quakers Light within, Page 32. But Reader, did thou
ever read such Lies and wicked Language against the Light within, and against
the Quakers, the Children of the Light, who are redeemed by the Blood of
Christ? And again: Frank's Seducers, Titular disputant, and Christ's Humane
Nature. What Scripture has S. B. to prove these words, which he says, is his
Rule? but shows none, (as Page 34, 35.) And again he says, That a Quakers
Savior within is not the true Christ: Surely thou can not be so Brutish ^s
to think so, but rather the contrary, that is, the false Christ, the Devil. S.
B. if thou had been in the days of the Apostles, who told the Saints, Christ
was in them, except they were Reprobates, thou would have said as much to
them. When W. B. said to S. B. That the Light makes manistest; which so
troubled S. B. that he said, He th ught that W. B. his loud lowing and
bellowing was to prevent him of asking where these Words might be sound in
Scripture, which he says he did forbear to ask. Was this a good answer for
Priest Bond? Instead of answering W. B. he gives him foul Words. (Page 37.) The
Light within thee is the true not the false Christ I hope. Says S. B. Thou art
not such a BULLOCK as to think it to be the true Christ. (Page 38. and 39.
[Deceivers, Antichrists, Smoak-Coale.] If Christ be not in his People by his
Light, Grace and Faith, etc. Then Priest Bond would not have spoken so many ill
words against Christ and his Light within, [Page 40. Bonds bad words, seducing
Quakers, seducing Quakers, Deceivers and Antichrists.] Then he says, They are
of the Dragon and Beast, making War against the Lamb -- do deny Jesus Christ of
Nazareth to be the Christ, etc. These are all horrid Lies from Priest Bonds
foul mouth. For Christ we own as is said before; and his Lies are sent home
again.

Pr. Bond. says THOU and YOU is Diabolical to Idolize (as the Quakers do) [THOU
and THEE] making it the daily fuel; for your levelling, inflamed Pride. -- This
Brutish kind of practice, -- see if Priest Bond be not full of Pride, who
cannot endure the word Thee and Thou, which is so frequently practiced in
Scripture, which he calls his Rule.

A Quaker, who denies the Trinity, etc. but he has not proved the Three
persons, nor the word Trinity in Scripture, which he calls his Rule, Page 43.
Pr. Bond, Page 44. A Shame to be of your Sneaking, Surly, Dum, and Scurvy
Carriage, Unwritten Scripture, (that Idol-Light) within, -- Page 44. -- Deceit,
Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness, of these four Links has Satan made your Chain
of darkness -- your Idolized Thou and Thee, (Spring of your Scurvy and Surly
deportment,) Thus poor. Ignorant ones are deluded by your equivocations -- the
Quakers is a Conscience of obeying his proud Lusts, and of disobeying Gods
inspired Laws, for a Quaker boldly to Blaspheme, Page 45. These are Priest
Bond's Slanderous Words and Lies. The Light within is written Scripture, (which
he says is unwritten Scripture) as you may see in 2 Cor. 4. which he
blasphemously calls your Idol Light; and did the Apostles Idolize Thee and
Thou, when they frequently used it?

Priest Bonds foul words, You are possessed with the infernal Spirit of
superlative Pride against Jesus. F. E. makes another motion on the behalf of
his Client, the false Christ, Savior within, etc. To wit, The Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses from all Sin, Page 46. Here you may see the false Language of
Priest Bond, For does not the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God Cleanse from
all sin? And if Christ be not in him, is he not a Reprobate? But Priest Bond
says, that F. E. left out some part of the Scripture, to wit, His Son, but
Priest Bond himself has left out more, but what will serve his own Turn. And
as for his Lies and filthy Language he may take it to himself.

S. B. says, Sundry persons laughed at Francis (to wit, when they were
disputing of the things of God.) Page 48, Page 49. he says, the Idol-Light,
Christ within: the Word Humane comprehends both Soul and Body, Page 49. But
Priest Bond has not proved with his Idol light within, Christ's Soul and Body
to be humane by the Scripture: is not the Soul Immortal? And is the Soul of
Christ humane? and is humane Immortal? And in Page 50. Priest Bond is at humane
nature again, and humane, and humane; but Priest Bond has not proved by
Scriptures any of these words, which he says is his Rule.

Priest Bond, The Manichees Doctrine, namely, That Christ brought from Heaven
an Invisible Body of Flesh and Blood, into the Womb of the Virgin. Undoubtedly
the Quakers have drunk in this Poison originally from them -- to advance the
Idol light within. This Poison comes out of Priest Bonds Bottle, and he may
take it home again, not the Quakers: For we own the true Jesus Christ, as both
the Angel and the Apostles have declared, his Conception, Birth, etc. as he was
of the Seed of David, etc.

Pr. Bond, This seducing Teacher does not confess Jesus Christ of Nazareth --
the Idol Light within Juggling, Cheat, etc. Page 52. These are Priest Bonds
horrid Lies and Blasphemy, Christ's flesh glorified in Heaven above; which
precious Truths are worth nothing in the account of a Quaker. These are Priest
Bonds Lies: And yet Priest Bond says, That the Quakers do believe in Christ's
Body of Flesh and Blood, and that he did dye for sin, and rose again, and that
he is man's only Savior. See Priest Bonds mad confusion and contradiction in
Page 53.

Priest Bonds bad words: Wickedly equivocate -- Idol Light within --
Leger-demain -- a Bratt hatched in their Addle-Brain, Page 53. Idol Light
within, p. 55. Teach a denial of Jesus of Nazareth -- Liars and
False-Witnesses, Page 54. Enemies, Liers, -- such Liers, -- Seducing Quakers,
Cursed Liers, Horrid Blasphemers, aim to make the Angels of Christ Liars.
Again, They do in their meetings and aims make the Apostles of Christ Liers and
False Witnesses of God, etc. the Idol-light within, Page 57. Here the Reader
may see Priest Bonds foul Language, and his ravenous blasphemous spirit and
lies against the Light within: And the Quakers own Christ Jesus within and
without, as the Prophets and the Angels, and the Apostles have declared him: We
do witness Christ, both his Birth, Death, and his Resurrection and Ascension.

Again, Priest Bond says, The Light that is in every man (the Quakers rotten
Principle) by natural generation, is not the true Christ, Page 58. And Page 8.
in contradiction to himself says, Its true, that by Light in that place of
Scripture (viz. John 1. That was the true Light, which enlightens every Man
that comes into the World, the true Christ and our only Savior is meant. And
yet see how often over he calls the Light of Christ an Idol Light within, and
now a Rotten Principle, and the False Christ the Devil. But how does Priest
Bond prove Christ the Light (which he confesses to be the only Savior, who
enlightens every one that comes into the World) to be a Rotten Principle, and
by natural generation? and that he is not the true Christ, who enlightens every
wan that comes into the world. And yet in Page 8. Priest Bond confesses, That
the true Light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, the true
Christ and our only Savior is meant, John 1. For the Quakers never said, that
this Light came by natural generation, which Light enlightens every man that
comes into the World, which is the Life in Christ our Savior.

More of Priest Bonds foul words; Lunatic, Crafty, Knave, Wedding-Cloaths
faced with a dissembling madness; Quakers have learned their ignorant Disciples
to glory in their own flesh: Blasphemous contempt upon the glorified manhood,
Page 59. These are Priest Bonds horrid Lies and madness. And yet S. B. says in
Page 21. That F. E. the Quaker, did believe, that Jesus of Nazareth, a man
approved of God among the people, whom the Jews slew, and God raised from the
dead, and raised up into Heaven, is the true Christ and only Savior: Yet in
Page 59. thou say, the bold and open wickedness of W. H. who did reflect
blasphemous contempt upon the glorious manhood, etc. in Heaven above. Here do
not thou abuse the Quaker, who said he did believe and confess that Christ
suffered in the Flesh, and was received up to Heaven as thou confessest? Page
21. And Page 23. S. B. says, W. H. called S. B's Christ an outside Christ;
which W. H. denies: But Priest Bond calls the true Christ which is revealed
from Heaven in his People, a Devil; and the Light of Christ in his People, an
Idol; therefore what Christ is it that S. B. owns, but Antichrist? Priest Bond
goes on in his foul words, Thou art blasphemous rude; ye make it your professed
Religion to derogate from the true humane substance of the Lord's Christ --
ignorant, seduced Quakers, Page 60. These are Priest Bond's Lies, and his own
Blasphemies. As for the word Humane he has not proved it by Scripture. Again,
Priest Bond's foul words; With a Brazen Forehead, and seared Conscience,
villifying the holy thing born of Mary, called the Son of God. And yet Bond
confesses a little before, That the Quakers own Christ Jesus born of that Mary,
both his death and resurrection, etc. And in Page 61. Open Deriders and
Blasphemers, contemners of him (Christ) false Glossers: These are Priest Bonds
foul words; which Lies he may apply to his self. Priest Bond says, Page 62.
F.E. shutes this Bolt, to wit, That the Deity was within him: and says, that
the Deity is in Cats and Dogs, as well as in F.E. which he has not proved by
Scripture.

P. Bond, The Legerdemain of seducing Quakers; baffling, prating Quakers, page
63. which foul words he had better applied to himself. S. B. F. Eastlacke said,
It Is Christ in you, etc. Priest Bond scoffingly asked him, Whether Christ was
in his Lie -- Legs, Brains or Bowels? An Idol light within, Blasphemer, the
Quakers who glory in their own flesh; bitter, mocking, sarcastical,
blasphemous, scorning, scoffing, quaffing Quakers; All this ungracious, filthy
Language, proceeds from Priest Bonds Lying, Poisonous Tongue, Page 64. 65.

S. B. Thou say, F. E. thou have renounced both the Sacraments: Still the
Idol Light within, Fanciful Principles, invisible Sacraments, Blasphemy, thy
dreadful cursed Apostasy, Page 66, 67. These are Priest Bonds Lies and foul
expressions. Page 68. They deny Jesus of Nazareth the only Savior. O thou poor
sinner, that art deluded -- Visible and Invisible hand-shaking of God.

Page 80. Stephen saw Christ's humane body in Heaven above: Priest Bond with all
his Lies, who says, that Scripture is his Rule, has not proved such a word as
Humane in Scripture. Neither does the Apostle say that Stephen mentioned a
Humane Body, in Acts 7. But Stephen saw the Heavens open, and Jesus standing at
the right hand of God, being full of the Holy Ghost: And the Quakers own Christ
more than Priest Bond. Here are more of Priest Bonds railing words; Brutish
Disputants, Brutish Principles, Lude Fellows of the more brutish sort,
Seducing Quakers; These are more of Priest Bonds lies and filthy Language. W.W.
desired Priest Bond to show him an express Scripture, which says, that the
Beasts which Paul fought with at Ephesus, denied the resurrection of the dead:
And Priest Bond makes a great rambling in three or four Pages, and when he has
been beating the Air, he brings no express Scripture. Priest Bond says. That
the Body shall be raised spiritual, as Christ's Body of flesh and bones, after
the resurrection were spiritual, Page 72. And S. Bond says, in Page 69.
Stephen saw Christ's humane Body in Heaven above: And does not Priest Bond
nickname the Lord's Body, and call it humane over and over in his Book? And is
humane spiritual? As in Page 50. [Humane Nature.] How does he prove Christ's
Body Humane Nature? And now confesses that Christ's Body of flesh and bones
after the resurrection was spiritual, and yet humane; and also confesses, with
W.B. the Quaker, who speaks concerning the Resurrection, It is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritua^ body. And S. B. does confess, in 1 Cor. 15. that
the body shall be raised s^iritual. So Priest Bond has granted the Apostles
and the Quakers Principles, and yet Priest Bond makes a great noise to no
purpose in three or four Pages, and at last grants the thing, as in Page 72,
73. Priest Bond brings John 5. Christ's saying, who says, I say unto you, the
hour is coming, and now is (Mark, now is) when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, etc. Marvel not at this, for the
hour is coming, (...) which all that are in the Grave shall hear his voice,
and shall come forth; th^^ which have done good, unto the resurrection of Life;
and they that have (...) evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. Here as
Christ in John 5. and the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. this Resurrection the Quakers
do believe and own as Christ and his Apostles have declared it; and yet S.B.
wickedly says, The Principles of a Quaker are the same, which are held and
professed by the Beasts that Paul fought with at Ephesus, that denied the
Resurrection, that the Body of Christ was not raised from the dead: These are
all Priest Bonds horrid Lies, and he has contradicted and confounded himself,
and says, That Christ's Body of flesh and bones after the Resurrection was
spiritual, and the Body (to wit, of the Saints, 1 Cor.) shall be raised
spiritual: and says, that F. E. the Quaker did confess, that the Word took
Flesh, and in that Flesh died for all men; and that Jesus of Nazareth was
received up into Heaven, Page 22, 23. And Priest Bond brings Caril's saying,
When the Body shall be raised again, it shall have many beautiful and glorious
additions: so the Body laid down in the Grave, is raised not the same in all
things (Page 73.) And Priest Bond says, If the same Body that dies be not
raised up, but another kind of Body, it cannot be Resurrection. Then he cries
out Blasphemy, and says, Flesh and Blood does signify not natural flesh and
blood, of which the Body is now composed and made up; as such it is
corruptible, and cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But what must we
understand from S. B? That natural flesh and blood enters into the Kingdom of
Heaven? Page 74. And does not Priest Bond contradict himself, and Priest Caril
also, Page 72. and 73. who says, The Body is raised a spiritual Body? And
Caril says, It is not the same in all things, Page 52. the visible, material
Body of Jesus Christ, and yet a spiritual Body, Page 72. And Page 75. In the
Resurrection, the Body, etc. it will be spiritual, incorruptible, immortal,
flesh and blood, fit to enter the Kingdom of God. Our Bodies from their natural
state were spiritual. Again, Our Bodies shall not be raised natural,
corruptible bodies, but spiritual, incorruptible bodies; and as such, they will
be fit for Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven, Page 17. Here Priest Bond is made to
confess at last fully the Quakers Principle concerning the Resurrection; and
yet he contradicts himself, and says, Stephen saw Christ's humane Body in
Heaven above, after he was risen, page 69. And Priest Bond says, If it be
another Body that was raised from the dead, then it is not the same Body that
died, page 71. Yea, Priest Bond confesses, in Page 72. It is raised a spiritual
Body: But S. B. is like one of those Fools spoken of, which Paul had to deal
withal, for that which thou sowest thou sowest not, that Body that shall be,
but God gives it a Body, etc. as it pleases him.

Priest Bond in Page 77. says, That he has been requested by some, etc. In
these Islands, to make some Replies to three or four Erroneous Principles held
and professed by most Quakers.

First, That there is a State of perfect freedom from Sin in this Life. Priest
Bond says, for any man to infer, that either Noah or Job were perfect from all
Sin in this Life, would be a miserable perverting of Scriptures, Page 78. But
God said, Job was a perfect and upright man, one that feared God and es^^ewed
Evil: And again, the Lord said, There is none like unto Job in the ^^^le Earth,
a Perfect and upright Man, one that feared God and eschewed Evil. And Job did
not sin with his Lips: Job the 2d. And did he not eschew Sin, if he eschewed
Evil? And in what Life was his perfect State? And the Lord said, Noah was a
just Man, and perfect in his Generation. Genesis 9. And Priest Bond tells of a
Legal Perfection, as Adam 's before the Fall, and a Comparative Perfection of
Job 's being only Perfect Comparatively in Comparison of all other Men, etc.
But he has not proved his Legal Perfection and his Comparitively Perfect, in
Scripture Words: So he adds to the Scriptures, and does not believe, what God,
and Christ, and the Apostles have said concerning Perfection. Or where did ever
the Prophets, or God or his Son Christ Jesus declare, that Men and Women should
not be perfect from Sin in this Life? Priest Bond should have brought the
Scripture, and Chapter, and Verse for it. God said, Job was a perfect and
upright Man: But Priest Bond says; Not from Sin in this Life. David says,
Mark the perfect and upright Man, Psalm 37. But Priest Bond says: There Is no
perfect and upright Man from Sin in this Life. But Priest Bond brings Job the
Five and Twentieth, Bildad the Shuhite, who said to Job, How can a Man be
justified with God? Or how can a Man be Clean, that is Born of a Woman? And
Priest Bond says, This Question carries a strong Denial; It cannot Possible be,
or it is Impossible (viz.) To be perfect from sin. etc. And Priest Bond says,
As if Job had said, do but acknowledge that any one is born ordinarily of a
Woman, and we may conclude him to be sinful and unclean, with (or in the Sight
of God;) so far Priest Bond, Page 78. But, Reader, did not God say Job was a
perfect and upright Man? And again, Reader, read the 25th. of Job, and thou will see, that it was Bildad the Shuhite, that contended with Job, who said,
How can a Man be justified with God? Or how can a Man be Clean that is born of
a Woman? So these were not Job's words, as Priest Bond basely would Father upon
Job; for they were Bildad's Words, who contended with Job: and it is like all
the rest of his Pleading against Perfection, and Pleading for Sin, and the
Devil his Father, the Author of it. And God bid Araham walk before him and be
Perfect. And Priest Bond says, though Job, Noah, Jacob, Abraham, are said to
be Perfect, yet it is not to be found in the Scripture, that God ever said of
all or any one of them, they were Perfect, without sin in the World. Now is not
this Doctrine of S. B's contrary to Scripture? For what Sin did God Charge Job
and Abraham withal? Or old Jacob, Abel or Enoch withal? And Christ said, Be you
Perfect as your Heavenly Father is Perfect. But Priest Bond says, It Is an
erroneous Principle, that there is an Estate of Perfection and freedom from sin
in this Life. And yet Priest Bond contradicts himself, and says, The me^^^st
Saint upon the Earth is like his Heavenly Father in Heaven. And the A^^^^le
says, in Romans 6. Being made free from sin, are become Servants to God; Ye have
your fruits unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life. Priest Bond tells the
Apostle, that it is an erroneous Principle to be Perfect and made free from Sin
in this Life; And when will Priest Bond be made free from his Sins, if not in
this Life? What, will he be made free in the Papist's Purgatory? Where did ever
the Apostles Preach such a Doctrine, that the Saints should not be made free
from Sin in this Life? And the Apostle tells him, He that is Dead is free from
Sin, Romans 6. And now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall Live
with him; yet as Priest Bond says, Deduction of freedom from sin, (in the
Saints in this Life) cannot from hence be drawn. Priest Bond says, Now the
State which accompanies the Resurrection of the Dead, excludes all Sin; The
Saints shall then be Legally Perfect. But S. Bond has not proved his Doctrine
by Scriptures: and what must we understand by S. Bonds Words? That the Saints
which are Sanctified and made Holy while they be upon the Earth, must have Sin:
which is of the Devil, and be Imperfect in this Life? Yet the Apostle says to
the Philippians 3. 1 Cor. Let as many as be Perfect, etc. Read 1 Cor. 2.6. Then
S. B. falls upon his foul Language; seducing Quakers, Heretical Catharishes;
and says, Solomon makes a Challenge to all the World, Pro. 20.9. Who can say I
have made my Heart Clean, I am pure from my Sin? But Solomon tells Bond in the
same Chapter, The just man that walks in his integrity, his Children are
blessed after him, and it is the Blood of Christ, that Cleanses us from all
Sin, without him we can do nothing. Again, John 1.1.8. This Proclamature is
beyond Solomon's, If we say that we have not sinned we make Christ a Liar. And
Priest Bond says, We that are of the new birth say: If we say we have not Sin,
we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. But this Priest Bond abuses
John's Words, and John says 1.3. Whosoever is Born of God, does not commit Sin,
for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot Sin because he is born of God: In
this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil. Now I
Querie of Priest Bond, Whether there are any born of God whilst they are upon
the Earth? and if so, whether they must believe John's Doctrine? And Priest
Bond falls a Railing; -- If the Quakers should be so stark mad, as to affirm
all the Saints to be free from Sin, which Priest Bond says, Cannot be meant a
freedom from Sin, but only of the Trade and Custom of Sinning. I charge Priest
Bond to bring forth the Chapter and Verse that says, For his Trade and Custom
of Sinning. But the Apostle says, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, etc. And if we Confess our Sin, he is faithful and just, to forgive us
our Sins, and to cleanse us from all (mark all) Unrighteousness. If we say we
have not Sinned, we make him a Liar, etc. So here is a time for people to see
they have Sinned, and to confess their Sins; and the Blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses from all Sin (mark from all Sin.) Joh. 1. Priest Bond makes a
great Pudder about Paul, who says, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of Death? Paul tells thee in Romans the 7th. and the 8th. He
thanks God through Jesus Christ, and says, there is no Condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit,
for the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
Law of Sin and Death: And he has not seen iniquity in Jacob. Now Priest Bond
Confounds himself, and grants, That believers may walk in the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, that is to say, Rebukeless, [in regard of
Men.] We speak Wisdom among them which are perfect, meaning however imperfect
Weaklings. Does not S. Bond abuse the Apostles words here, and add to the
Scripture, Page 85. And again, That you may be blameless and harmless, the Sons
of God, without Rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation amongst
whom they shine as Lights in the World, (mark that.) And Priest Bond says (and
Confounds himself) The Phrase Blameless, Simply in its own nature, will be so
far from proving perfection of Grace, that it will not prove any truth of
Grace; it will not therefore follow, that Elizabeth was Perfect without Sin:
though Priest Bond Confesses she was blameless, and has not charged her with
what Sin she committed. Do not thou confess she was Blameless and Righteous,
etc. And did not Elizabeth Believe? Did not she say to Mary, Blessed is he that
Believes? So Elizabeth was a Believer, as well as her walking blameless in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord. But Saul who was a Blasphemer and
Persecutor, was no Believer; therefore there is no Comparison with Saul and
Elizabeth.

But Priest Bond says, In the Day of Christ's coming in Glory, the Saints shall
be found of God in Peace, without Spot and Blameless: But not thus in this
Life, p. 85. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.8. Who shall also confirm you unto the
end, that you may be blameless in the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ; howbeit we
speak Wisdom among them that are Perfect; for I Brethren could not speak unto
you as unto Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ, 1 Cor.
3. Where has Priest Bond learned this Lesson, that the Saints shall not be
freed from Sin in this Life? Then how can they be kept blameless unto the Day
of Christ, and not to be kept free from Sin, which is of the Devil? But as Bond
says, page 86. There is not a just Man upon the Earth; Solomon says in the
same Chapter, Be not righteous overmuch, be not overmuch wicked. So in a Man's
own Righteousness and Justice he may Sin: But Christ Cleanses from all Sin, and
does that which the Law could not do; but Priest Bond says page 87. There is
in all true. Believers a cursed Root of bitterness, which God does mortify,
but not nullify in this World; it is subdued, but not removed; it is cast down,
but not cast out: though Grace makes the Combat, yet Death only makes the
Conquest over Sin.

We charge Priest Bond to prove this Doctrine by Scripture, his cursed Root of
Bitterness in all true Believers, and that they shall never Conquer it till
they Dye: and to prove that this was in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Abel and
Enoch, and in them that the Apostle said, We speak Wisdom among them that are
Perfect. And has not Priest Bond given John the Lie, who says, whosoever is
born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot
Sin; because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9. Now let Priest Bond prove, where
ever the Apostle Preached such a Doctrine, as in all true Believers there is a
cursed Root of Bitterness, mortified and not nullified in this World; Death
only makes the Conquest over Sin. So we must understand, we must have this
cursed Root of Bitterness, as long as the Believers live, according to Priest
Bond's Doctrine, though he has not proved it by Scripture; and then how can
they be kept blameless to the Day of the Lord, as in page 85? Priest Bond
says, it is an erroneous Principle for the Quakers to say that the Scriptures
are not the word of God, in page 77. and page 87. he brings many Scriptures,
and makes a great pudder, and abuses them, to prove it, but to no purpose, his
declarative word of God, but he has not proved such a word in Scripture: all
Scripture is given forth by Inspiration of God, etc. 1 Timothy 3. Therefore says
Priest Bond, the Scriptures is the word of God, but that Scripture does not say
so, 2 Timothy 3. And in page 88. Priest Bond falls a Railing against Quakers, and
says, Is there any word asserted to be the word of Christ, but the written
word of Truth? Does not the Apostle say, that the Word of Faith, is nigh in the
heart, let the word of Christ dwell in you, etc. Being born again not of
corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the word of God, the word of God
endures for ever; and are these Writings of the Letter? And Priest Bond says,
page 88. The Lord has no other will (as a Rule of Obedience, than his will
revealed in the written Scriptures) had the Lord no other will, or Rule of
Obedience before the Scripture was written? Prove that by Scripture. Priest
Bond runs into Lies, and foul words; the Quakers worship cannot be accepted of
God, Quakers are under the power of Satan, gross, blind, and ignorant, the
Cavil is idle and vain.) These Lies Priest Bond may apply to himself: but where
does the Scripture say of themselves in so many words as S. B. does, that the
Scripiures are the infallible standing Rule of his Faith and Life, and yet acts
contrary to them; for the Scripture says, The Holy Ghost shall lead you into
all Truth, and no Man knows the things of God, But the Spirit of God: and Holy
Men spoke forth Scripture as they were moved by the holy Ghost. And Priest Bond
falls a railing against Quakers Spirit, and calls it their Idol light within,
seducing Quakers -- is blind: These filthy ungodly words he had better apply to
himself. Priest Bond says, Because the Spirit is antecedent to the Scriptures,
therefore none can walk in the Scriptures till they walk in the Spirit. This
consequence is lame, says Bond, Page 90. Howbeit the Scriptures are before the
Spirit in respect of aid and assistance. The Apostle does not say so, in 1 Pet.
1. The Apostle tells you, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. So it is the Spirit of God that brings people both
to discern the Scriptures, and to walk according to them; which Spirit of God
or Holy Ghost was before they were written, which moved the holy men to give
them forth. And Bond says, To the Law and the Testimony (the Written Word) he
adds Written Word; and yet he says, Scripture is his Rule. And Bond says,
When the Spirit of Truth is come, it shall guide you into all truth of the
Scriptures: And yet he says, The Written Scriptures are the Infallible
standing Rule of Faith and Life, page 89. 91. And how can the Scriptures be the
Rule, and the Spirit of Truth must be the guide into all the truth of the
Scriptures? And again Priest Bond contradicts himself, and says, He affirms,
that the matter contained in the Scriptures is the only infallible standing
rule of Faith and Life, Page 91. So then the Scriptures are not the only rule,
but that which is contained in them: And what is that which is contained in
them which is thy Rule, seeing the Holy Ghost was in them, which moved them to
speak them forth, and in them, that leads them into all the truth of them? But
Priest Bond, is all the Scriptures from Genesis to Revelations thy Rule, and
all that is contained in them? For the Scripture speaks of the Devils words,
and bad men's words, as well as the good. Priest Bond says, The People of God
had no Word Written from Adam to Moses, and yet they had a Word given from God
to be the rule, else their worship would have been (like the Quakers)
Will Worship. If Priest Bond have not the same Word and Holy Ghost, as they
had, he cannot Worship God in Spirit and Truth, neither can he be born again of
the incorruptible seed, but by that Word which lives, and abides, and endures
for ever: And Will Worship is not the Quakers, who worship God in Spirit and
Truth, but his own. In Page 92. Priest Bond is full of railing against Quakers,
their Idol light within, -- craftily thrown down the Scriptures, this Plot
cannot be from the Spirit of Christ, -- blind, rotten and wicked spirit, --
your Light (that false Christ within). See how wickedly Bond torments himself,
and blasphemes against the true Christ, and the Light in his people. Priest
Bond says, Where is that place of Scripture to be found, which says, the
Scriptures are to be tried by the Spirit, -- the Spirits are to be tried by the
Scripture, and not the Scripture by the Spirit. Then Priest Bond, what
Scripture had they to try withal from Adam to Moses, before the Scripture was
written? And Priest Bond says, It is the Holy Ghost that leads into all truth
of the Scriptures. Then it must try the truth of them, whether they be rightly
translated or no: And the Spirit of God will not deny its own Words. And again
Priest Bond says, The Spirit witnesses in the Scripture. But where does the
Scripture say such words, That the Spirit witnesses in the Scripture? Priest
Bond says, The Spirit witnesses in the Scripture, that he is a righteous man
who walks in all the Commandments or Ordinances of the Lord, page 99. And page
87. Thou says (in contradiction) There is in all true Believe^^ a cursed root
of bitterness, and death makes only the conquest over sin. But we tell thee,
That Christ through death destroys Death, and the Devil, the Power of Death,
and makes an end of Sin. Then Priest Bond falls a railing, Quakers damnable
delusion, hellish Impostor, that Idol light; for if they might herein prevail,
and withal get into the Saddle, they would undoubtedly soon arreign, try, and
condemn the inspired Bible of God to the Fire and Faggot. These are horrid
malicious Lies, Blasphemed from Priest Bonds evil Tongue: For we have esteemed,
and do own the Scriptures more than he or any of the persecuting Priests in
New England, who make a Trade of them, and keep people always under Teaching,
that they may be always paying of them.

And Priest Bond says, The spirits are to be tried by the Scriptures, and not
the Scriptures by the Spirit, page 92. And in page 93. He contradicts himself,
and confounds all again, The Holy and Blessed Spirit of God is above all Trial.
Priest Bond says, We deny the written Scripture to be a witness-bearer to your
Light within. See how Ignorant he is of the Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. God who
commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give
us the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus:
Mark the Light that shines in the heart, that is, the Light within that the
Scriptures bear witness too. But I perceive the God of this World has blinded
Priest Bond's eye. And how can any man come to the knowledge of God and Christ,
without the Light of Christ within shining in their hearts?

And Priest Bond falls on railing, Idol light within, page 94. Seducing
Quakers, Idol light of your own addle brains, Soul-deceivers, ye would lay a
foundation of your own humane inventions: And yet Priest Bond calls Christ's
Body humane, which is his own Invention, and not Scripture: And unbloody Light
within, Idolized light, has no more real blood in it, than there is in the
Transubstantiated blood of your Popish Brethren. Here the Reader may see what a
rage and madness Priest Bond is in against the Light of Christ: And as for
Popish Brethren, Priest Bond's language bewrays him, he is nearer to them than
the Quakers. And S. B. confesses in page 95. That the Word of God was manifest
through Adam, and to Cain, and to Noah. Our Light within is the Light of
Christ, the Word by which all things were made and created; and in him was
Life, and that Life was the Light of men: And this the Scriptures witness. But
Priest Bond says, The whimsey, called Light within, is the new devised ground
of Faith. Christ who does inlighten every man that comes into the World says,
Believe in the Light, that you may become Children of the Light. And Christ is
the author and finisher of our Faith; and the Light of Christ that he bids us
believe in, is no Whimsey which Priest Bond blasphemes against. And in Page 96.
Priest Bond makes a great pudder about the Soul of Man, and he says, That the
Quakers say, the Soul of Man is God in part: which are not the Quakers words.
And then he says, the Soul cannot be God: No Quakers ever said so. S. B.
says, The Soul of Man was made after Gods Image, It is a true Image, it is a
very near and likely Image, which appears not only in the spiritual and
immortal nature, of it, etc. All pure and righteous, conformed to Gods will;
the Soul is a Spirit, etc. page 98. And when Priest Bond has rambled over a
great deal of Pages about the Soul, this he is made to confess, and the Quakers
say; God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and he became a living soul: And
so is not the Soul part of his Breath? And Priest Bond confesses, the Soul is a
Spirit; and then is it not part of Gods Spirit from him. And the Light in Man,
which is the Life of Christ the Word, by whom all things are made, Priest Bond
says, must be the Principle of true Religion in the Devils and damned: Oh
hellish Divinity and Doctrine! for even the Devils and damned live, and move,
etc. page 96. These are Priest Bond's false conclusions: The Light which is the
Life in Christ the Word, they that hate the Light their deeds are evil, and the
Light is their condemnation; for it condemns the Devil who abode not in the
Truth, in whom there is no Truth. S. Bond says, That the Quaker does conclude,
that the invisible and Infinite Godhead is divided into parts: Then he cries
thus, senseless are they of the gross absurdities. But we charge S. B. to quote
the Book or the Man that ever said, the Godhead is divided into parts. Then S.
B. falls a railing in page 99. The Idol light within. And in page 90. he makes
many Comparisons, with his railing words, betwixt the Quakers and the Papists;
Quakers light within, Quakers light within, infallible Light within, infallible
Spirit within, erroneous high blasphemy: Thus Priest Bond is in a rage and a
fury against the Light of Christ, and his Infallible Spirit within. But I ask
Priest Bond and all his fellow Priests, whether the Light of Christ, and his
Spirit within, and his Holy Ghost be infallible yea or nay? And whether he can
call Jesus Lord without the Holy Ghost? and whether he that has not the Spirit
of Christ, is Christ's, yea or nay? And what Brightman said of the Pope, Priest
Bond may take it home to himself. And in page 98. The Quakers Light within, his
Pope without. These are scornful expressions, and his Lies. In page 99, and an
100. Priest Bond says, the Quakers denying of the Trinity or Three persons in
one Deity, Three persons in one Godhead, Genesis 1. Let us make man, etc. But has
not Priest Bond made Four here, Three persons in one Deity, and one Godhead? S.
Bond says, No Man has seen ^od at any time. Then how can he tell he is a
Person then? and Christ says, He is a Spirit. He says The Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost are declared three Witnesses, etc. And why cannot Priest
Bond own them so, but give other names to them? Bu^ (...) all these Pages
Priest Bond has not proved his word Trinity, nor Three Pers^ns. The Scripture
mentions Christ's Person; but it does not say, a Trinity in Three Persons. Is
not Priest Bond ashamed to say, That Scripture is his Rules, and cannot prove
his word Trinity, or Three Persons by Scripture, or in the Scripture? But the
Quakers, according to the Scripture, do believe, that there is Three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one (mark) are one, which we own: And there are three that bear witness in the
earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one,
which we own, in 1 John 5.8. And Priest Bond goes on in his course of railing,
Atheistical and Idol light within, which the Romish Nebuchadnezzar set up in
teaching Quakers the Devil has inspired.

S. B. Thus to blaspheme against the Light of Christ in his people, and yet he
makes people believe that he would dye for the Name of Jesus, and dye like the
glorious Martirs of Jesus, whereas he is persecuting the true Lord Jesus of
Nazareth in his people like Saul, and blaspheming against the Light of Christ
within his people, which they believe in; which shines in their hearts, to give
them the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. And truly Priest Bonds Book is such a pack of Nonsense, and
Contradictions, and Tautologies, that it is loathsome, and noisome to the
Reader; and in it there is more malice than matter, as any rational man may see
by the foulness of his Spirit and Tongue; and his filthy Language, and
ungracious and filthy words that his ungodly Book is stuffed withal.

Priest Bond, I would have thee to prove, that the Holy Ghost is a Person which
proceeded from the Father and the Son, and leads into all Truth: And when the
Holy Ghost fell upon the Disciples in the time of Pentecost, did it fall upon
them as a Person? And when it fell upon Cornelius's Family, did it fall upon
them as a Person? And Christ tells the Disciples, that the Holy Ghost the
Comforter dwells with you, and shall be in you, John 14. And was this a Person?
Acts 11. Acts 19. The Holy Ghost fell upon, etc. So, where ever did Christ or
the Apostles call the Holy Ghost a Person? S. B. is to prove this Word by
Scripture, which he says is his Rule.

Now concerning the Scriptures which Priest Bond calls the Word of God, first,
does not the Scripture signify Writings? And do not you teach your Children so,
that Scripture signifies Writings in your Catichisme? and Matthew the Book of
the Generation of Jesus Christ, and Christ read in the Book of the Prophet
Isaiah, and in the Book of the Words of Isaiah the Prophet, Luke 3, and 4. and
Luke 4.17. Written in the Book of the Law, Gal. 3.10. and Written in the Book
of the Psalms, Acts 1.20. And does not Luke set forth a Declaration? Luke 1.
And so does he not call that a Declaration which he set forth? and so Daniel
calls them the Scriptures of Truth, Daniel 10.21. And Mark calls them the
Scriptures, Mark 12.10. and Luke 4.21. Christ calls them Scriptures, and John
2.22. and in Acts 1.16. The Apostle calls them Scriptures, Romans 10.11. and
11.2. The Apostle calls them Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.16. James 2.8. 2 Peter 1.20.
Acts 17.2.11. Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 15.3. Here in all these places, and many more,
Christ and the Apostles calls them Scriptures, which signifies Writings Now
Scriptures of truth, which signifies Writings, they are called the Words of
God; God spoke all these Words, Exodus 20. And Christ says, John 3.34. The
Words of God. And John 5.47. John 6.62. And John 8.20.47. John 10.121. John
12.47, 48. John 14.10.23.17.8. All these are concerning the Words. And Acts
2.14.5.20. 1 Timothy 4.6.6.3. The words in all these places, and many more,
Revelations 1.3. that hear the words of this prophecy; and until the Words of
God shall be fulfilled, Revel 17.17. These Words are true, Revel. 21.5.
Testify says John to every Man the words of the Prophecy of this Book, if any
Man shall take away from the words of the Prophecy of this Book, etc. So here
you may see the Scriptures are called Words, Books, Declarations, and the
Writings, and Scripture; and are called the Words of God, and the Words of
Christ; but Christ's Name is called the Word of God, John 1.8. And again Christ's
Name is called the Word of God, Revelations 19.13. So here the Quakers own the
Scriptures as they have been called by Christ and his Apostles, and the
Prophets. S. Bond says, The written Word of God, the Scriptures are an
infallible Rule of Faith and Life, Page 88. The matter contained in Scriptures
is the only Infallible Rule of Faith and Life, Page 91. See here how Priest
Bond contradicts himself, Let the Word of Christ dwell in your hearts in all
Wisdom, Coloss. 3. And what, Priest Bond, is this the Letter? Priest Bond
says, The Quakers worship cannot be acceptable to God, Page 89. These are
Priest Bonds Lies, for Quakers worship God in the Spirit and the Truth, as
Christ commanded, and has taught us, John 4. And Priest Bond says, The
Quakers reproach the Lord, when they deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
Page 88. And yet Priest Bond contradicts himself in Page 87. and says, We do
not affirm the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but as the written Scriptures
do declare the Mind of God to us. So here Priest Bond is made to confess the
Quakers principles; but presently after he confounds it again, and says, The
Scripture is the Word of God. And then contradicts himself again, and says,
The matter therein contained is the declaritive Word of God, Page 87. Priest
Bond says, the Quakers are apt to say there is no sin Charged upon Zachariahs
Wife, who was Righteous and blameless; but says Priest Bond, Death took hold,
as well of her as of him, which is the wages of sin, Romans 6. So what must we
understand from Priest Bonds words? Here they that put off the Earthen
Tabernacle, and dye in the Lord, that natural death is the Wages of Sin, Romans
6.23. But let the Reader see how he abuses the Scripture, for the Wages of sin
is death: But says the Apostle, Now being made free from sin, and become the
Servants of God. This is while they were upon the Earth alive, and is it not a
denying of Christ that dyed for Sin to say that Death took hold of Elizabeth as
well as Zachariah, and so upon all other People (to wit) a natural death, and
that natural death which is the wages of sin, as in Page 86. where he perverts
Romans 6. But the Saints and we tell Priest Bond, Christ dyed for our Sins, and
is risen for our Justification; and so whether we live or dye we are the Lords;
and if we dye we dye in the Lord; and Blessed are they that dye in the Lord.
Priest Bond, They have a Light of direction from the Law of the Creation, and
this Light is clear and full enough to make them Guilty, in Page 82. But Priest
Bond, do not thou call this Light within an Idol Light, Page 90? And where
does the Scripture call the Light of Christ, a Law of the Creation, or a
natural Light? And Priest Bond, thou say in Page 81. The Gentiles which have
not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law. There is naturally
in all Men as such a Light of direction or natural Light. And Priest Bond, do
not thou call this a Natural Light, or by Generation, this Law written in the
Gentiles hearts, as thou say in Page 81. But who writ the Law in the Gentiles
hearts? and how does this Light come by nature or generation? prove this by
express words in Scripture which thou call thy rule, Noah was a just and a
perfect man, etc. Job was a good and perfect man. And Priest Bond says, to
infer, and say, that Noah or Job were perfect from all Sin in this Life, would
be a miserable perverting of other places of Scripture, etc. Page 78. And in
Page 87. There is in all true believers a Cursed Root of bitterness not cast
out, Death only makes the Conquest over sin. God said only Noah was a just and
p^rfect man; Job was perfect and upright; and do not thou here pervert the
Scripture, who say contrary to the Lord? And yet thou say so, then the
perfect man is the upright and sincere hearted man, and how can he be upright
and sincere hearted, and have a Cursed Root of Bitterness in him? And we never
did affirm that Job, or any did own their own perfection, but the perfection
which is of God and Christ. Priest Bond says to prove Resurrection. F. E.
said, that the Scripture says, that which thou sowest is not that Body which
shall be. Priest Bond says, Wool died in Scarlet is the sa^e Wool for
substance as it was before, etc. Page 72, 73. And then in Page 75. Priest Bond
confounds all again, who says, in the Resurrection the B^dy will be Spiritual,
Incorruptable, Immortal Flesh and Blood. And in Page 69. Priest Bond says,
Stephen saw Christ's humane Body of Flesh and Blood, Priest Bond says, The
Quakers say that the Body of Christ was not raised from the Dead, and that no
man's Body should be raised from the Dead. These are horrid Lies, Page 69. And
Page 71. Priest Bond says, that Francis Eastlack says, We do deny the
Resurrection of the Dead. But his Lies are sufficiently said, though he basely
abuses the Quakers, in saying we deny the Resurrection of the Dead, or the
Resurrection of Christ; but we do not look upon Priest Bonds words to be any
slander, and therefore we do not matter what he says: And we say, the same
that did descend, did ascend, and is glorified in his glorious and Spiritual
Body, at the Right hand of God, who will change our vile Bodies, and make it
like unto his glorious Body. Priest Bond says, Had not Christ a real humane
mankind Body after he Rose? Page 68. And in Page 75. In the Resurrection the
Body will not be so, it will be spiritual, incorruptable, immortal flesh and
blood. But Priest Bond, how do thou make this hang together, Humane Mankind
Body, yet Spiritual body, Immortal flesh and blood, Page 56, and 67. Thou usest
many lying Arguments, that the Quakers should not believe the record that God
gives of his Son, namely, that Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God, etc.
The Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World, these are all horrid
Lies which Priest Bond makes his Refuge. But how does Priest Bond believe in
Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the World? Who says,
The Saints shall not b^ made free from all Sin in this Life, and there is in
all true Believers a Cursed Root of bitterness not cast out, Death only makes
the Conquest over Sin. Then how does Christ take away the Sins of the World,
and make an end of Sin. And Priest Bond has not proved in Page 66. his
Baptizing of Children with Water; and that outward Water is one of the three
Witnesses spoken of by John; and W. W. the Quaker said, both Baptism and the
Lord's Supper was within. Priest Bond says, It is supposed so hot with two
Wives; this is like Priest Bonds base Spirit; for is not Baptism with Fire and
the Holy Ghost within? and does not Christ say, I stand at the Door and knock,
and if any Man will hear my Voice and open the Door, I will come into him, and
sup with him, and he with me. Is not this Supper within? Revel. 3. Therefore
how dare he say, that the Quakers deny both the Sacraments? and has not proved
that outward Water and outward Wine to be a Sacrament; nor the Word Sacrament a
Scripture Word? Priest Bond says, That the Spirit, as such, never Justified
any Saint from Sin in the Sight of God, much less such as F. E. was, who never
had the Spirit of God. In this Priest Bond has showed his Rash Ignorance of
the Scripture; for God pours out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, Acts 2. and
Joel 2. And does not God Justify his People from Sin by the Spirit of Faith,
which Faith? is the Victory; in which Faith they please God and have access to
him.

And Priest Bond, thou say Paul infers, though we have known Christ after the
Flesh; yet henceforth know we him no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. Priest Bond says, in
Page 64. The Flesh (i. e.) after worldly greatness, and honor, Creature, Pomp
and Dignity; in which sense Flesh is understood in. Reader do thou think this
meaning of Priest Bond is right concerning Jesus of Nazareth, the Lamb of God,
who takes away the Sins of the World? for did Christ ever receive the Worldly
greatness and Honor, Creature, Pomp and Dignity? Does not Christ say, He was
not of this World? He testified against this World, that their Works were Evil.
Priest Bond says, All such as stand in a Covenant of Works, as the Quakers do.
And yet in Page 61. W.W. confesses to Christ, in them the hope of Glory, the
Quakers are in the Covenant of Grace, the Light and Life, which Light thou
Blasphemously calls an Idol, as in Page 64. Priest Bond brings Jeremiah, Chap.
25. God is at Hand, etc. And Psalm 139.7, 8. David says, Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit, etc. If I make my Bed in Hell, behold, thou art there, etc. So
Priest Bond says, The Deity fills all places, Creatures and things in
Heaven, Hell, the Sea, and the Earth. But Priest Bond, does the Deity fill the
Devils in Hell in whom there is no Truth, If he fills all things in Heaven and
Hell? Is not the Deity Truth, Page 63? Priest Bond says, Christ made a Scourge
of small Cords, and Whipped sundry persons that sold Doves in the Temple, in Page
59.61. Why should the Lawful Magistrate Scruple to follow Christ's example, to
whip W. H. the Quaker? We believe that Priest Bond would have the Magistrates
to be Whipping, like the New England Priests; but we hope the Magistrates of
Burmudas will be wiser. But S. Bond would be at whipping; Does not he deserve
to be Whipped, who calls Christ a Devil? and his Light within an Idol? Priest
Bond, thou say in Page 57. They do in their Meetings and Aims, make the
Angels, and the Apostles of Christ Liars. These are all horrid Lies; for we own
Christ Jesus, according as the Angels and Apostles have declared him, more than
Priest Bond. And Priest Bond says again, As if the Lord Christ had said, all
Men are Flesh and Blood, so dull sighted and blind, that they could never have
received his Truth by any Study or Observation, it comes only by Gift and
Revelation, John 6.62. Peter saying to Christ, Thou art the Son of the living
God. And yet in page 55. Priest Bond contradicts himself, and says, that
Christ was both seen and heard with the bodily eyes and ears of a Woman with
whom he conversed. What, Priest Bond, without the Gift and Revelation did she
know him to be the true Christ? and if she had not had something more than her
outward eyes and ears, she would not have left her Water Pots. And Priest Bond
goes often over in his Book, telling the Quakers of the spiritual heavenly man,
and of eternal flesh and blood, and their everlasting Gospel, and this thou
calls the Quakers Idol light within, page 57. And in page 56. Invisible flesh
and blood: And again, spiritual inside Christ. Here the Reader may see how
Priest Bond utters forth his own folly; for he confesses Christ to be the
heavenly spiritual man himself, and immortal flesh and bone, page 75. And the
Apostle says, Christ is in you except you be Reprobates. But it seems Priest
Bond's Gospel is not everlasting: The Apostle says it was everlasting, and so
do the Quakers: And Priest Bond, one while he says the Flesh is Humane, and
another while it is spiritual; but whether or no does Priest Bond eat and drink
Christ's Humane Flesh and Blood as he calls it? And Priest Bond says, to teach
a denial of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a man approved of God, to be the true
Christ and our only Savior. This the Quakers never did, nor never was in their
thoughts to deny, the Lord knows; and therefore Priest Bond cannot charge it
upon the Quakers, as in page 54. Priest Bond, thou say page 53. that Christ
is the true Jacobs Ladder, John 1.51. But let the Reader read John 1.51. there
is no such saying in that Verse: And thou say, the bottom of which (to wit)
the Ladder, there is his humanity or vail of flesh and blood; and the top
reaches to Heaven, and there is his Divinity: But where must we find these
words of Priest Bonds in Scripture, which he says is his Rule? And where does
the Scripture call the Blood of Christ, a Vail, which cleanses from all sin,
and sprinkles the Conscience from dead works, etc? Priest Bond says, The
visible material body of Jesus Christ is not the Savior, etc. page 52. This he
charges upon some of the Quakers; but he has not quoted the Page where we
shall find it: So we believe he has wronged their words. But is the visible
material Body of Christ the only Savior without God? And Priest Bond says in
page 72. Christ's Flesh and Bones, after the Resurrection, was spiritual and
immortal Flesh and Bones, page 75. And he says visible and material in page
52. And Priest Bond says in page 53. I have often heard some of them to
affirm, that the Quakers do believe in Christ's Body of Flesh and Blood; and
that he dyed for sin, and rose again, and that he is man's only Savior: Yes say
we, the Quakers never believed otherwise, and can praise God through Jesus
Christ, who is our Savior and way to God; for the Quakers always affirm, that
Christ as he was Man, dyed and tasted death for every Man once for all, and
rose again, and sat down at the right hand of God: And yet Priest Bond
confesses, That very offering of Jesus Christ could not save us, but by the
will and ordination of the Father. Here he is made to confess the Quakers
Principles according to the Scripture (Priest Bond says) this Blood of Christ
cleanses all right believers from all sin; and yet he says, None can be made
free from sin in this Life; and there is in all true Believers a cursed root of
bitterness not cast out, Death only makes conquest over Sin, page 87. And page
47. The Blood of Christ cleanses all right Believers from all sin: What
contradiction is this! And again he says, And Christ, etc. washed us from our
sin in his own Blood. And Priest Bond says again, The cleansing or washing
cannot be within, but without us: But this Priest Bond has not proved in so
many Scripture words; and though Christ was a Sacrifice, and his Flesh and
Blood suffered without upon the Cross, yet Christ tells Priest Bond, If he do
not eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, he has no life in him; and if Christ
be not in him he is a reprobate. And does Christ justify Reprobates? And is not
the Sin within a Man? And must not the Blood sprinkle the Conscience from dead
works, etc? And Priest Bond says, to be cleansed from all sin by the Blood of
Jesus Christ: So here Priest Bond he has left out his Son: And in page 47. and
46. he is finding falt with F. E. for leaving out his Son: But Priest Bond
says, is to be understood for a cleansing from all the guilt, etc. But has
Priest Bond no guilt when he commits sin? But where does the Scripture say,
that Christ cleanses from the guilt of sin only? and that we must have sin
while we be in the world? and in all true Believers there is a cursed root of
bitterness not cast out, Death only makes a conquest over Sin? And Priest Bond,
what, does this cursed root of bitterness bring no guilt of Sin? But we say,
Christ who has taken away the Curse, and redeemed us from under the Curse of
the Law, cleanses from all sin.

Priest Bond says, page 46. The Pharisees took Divine honor to themselves,
and thereby received honor one of another. Christ said, ye receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only, John 5. But thou
wrongs the Scriptures; for Christ does not say, the Pharisees received Divine
honor to themselves, thou adds that to the Scriptures. But what is the honor
thou would have from the Quakers, thou would have them to say you to thee, and
put off their Hats to thee, etc. would thou? And if so, prove such a practice
by Scripture which thou calls thy Rule. And S. Bond says, He that made Heaven
and Earth, Angels, Principalities and Powers, that has a name above every
name, that is named King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Prince and only
Savior that gives repentance and remission of sins, is in each of your vile
bodies (to wit) you Quakers. Then Priest Bond falls a railing, and says, Is it
not to be wondered at, that they are so possessed with the infernal sulfer of
pride against Jesus of Nazareth. These base words Priest Bond may apply to
himself: But we are not ashamed to confess Christ Jesus, who is our only
Savior, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who rules in our hearts by
Faith, who is ascended above all Principalities and Powers, by whom all things
were made, whom the Angels worships; I say, this Christ Jesus of Nazareth rules
in our hearts, and is revealed in us, and the Son of God is come, and we are in
him, as John witnessed; and therefore all Priest Bonds scoffing, lying words
are returned back again upon himself, and so we know that our Bodies are
Members of Christ, and Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. And the Apostle
said. Ye are the Temples of the living God, who says, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: And we
have the comfort of the Scripture, 2 Cor. 6. And if this Christ which we own be
not in Priest Bond, then he is a Reprobate. Priest Bond says, In all Places
and Countries, the generality of Quakers do purposely use these words, THEE and
THOU, and deny all reverential respect to all sorts of men; these things the
unmannerly Quakers will do: but the Scriptures do command all men to pray for
Rulers, and to submit unto them, and to give the honor that's due unto them:
And therefore says Priest Bond over and over, The Light of the Scriptures does
reprove them. Page 41. 42, 43, 44, 45. He makes a great pudder about THOU and
THEE, but to no purpose; Does THOU and THEE dishonor Magistrates? and to say
YOU to them, is that the true honor and reverence that belongs to them? If so,
let Priest Bond prove it by Scripture, which thou say is thy Rule. And thou
say, The Quakers seeming Sanctity consists in thee and thou, That is false;
for Christ is our Sanctification: and thee and thou is according to the
Scripture, etc. And three times over in the fortieth Page, Priest Bond says,
That we deny Jesus Christ of Nazereth, born of the Virgin Mary, which are all
horrid lies (in Page 40. and 41.) For we own Christ Jesus more than he. Priest
Bond says, that John Crook said, it was the Light within that was Crucified
without the Gates of Jerusalem: These are more Lies; for Christ suffered in the
Flesh without the Gates of Jerusalem, who enlightens every Man that comes into
the World, and was quickened by the Spirit. Bond runs into his wicked words, and
tells of an Inside Christ: but he has not proved such a word in Scripture,
Page 39. And Priest Bond says, The inspired Scriptures of God are against the
feigned Light of Christ within them, But Priest Bond has brought no Scripture
against the Light of Chirst shining in our Hearts, which gives us the knowledge
of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ our Savior: And so it was the
Apostles Doctrine, and reaching to bring People to the Light of Chirst, which
shined in their Hearts, which Light of Christ, thou call an Idol and a
feigned Light Christ within, Page 38. which thou have not proved by Scripture,
which thou call thy Rule; and by it thou art reproved. And Christ is
manifest in us by his Spirit. Priest Bond, But all things reproved are made
manifest by the Light of the Scripture, Scripture Light. Then how chanced it,
the Jews were not reporved by Scripture Light? And what reproved before
Scripture was written? or them that have not nor had not the Scripture? Had
people no Light to reprove before the Scripture was written? And Priest Bond
says, Every one that does evil, hates the Light, etc. By the Light Christ,
Understand the Doctrinal Light contained in the written Scripture of the
New Testament. But Priest Bond, prove that the New Testament was written when
Christ Preached that Doctrine, in John 3. And every one that does evil, hates
the Light, and will not come to it. Has every one the Scriptures, that does
evil in the World? Prove that Priest Bond, who say, that Scripture is the
Light; for do not the Scriptures declare, that Christ enlightens every one that
comes into the World? Priest Bond says, That the True Christ has stopped F.
E's Mouth, and yet F. E. and he disputes over and over in his Book afterward.
And then Priest Bond goes to his Lies and Blasphemous Language, False Christ,
the Devil, Christ within is the false Christ the Devil, Page 36. And yet Priest
Bond is made to confess in Page 21. 23. that F. E. the Quaker did confess the
word took Flesh, and in that Flesh dyed for all Men, and further, F. E. did
believe, that Jesus Christ of Nazareth, a Man approved of God amongst the
People, whom the Jews hanged and slew, and God raised from the dead, and also
received up into Heaven, was the true Christ and only Savior. And yet Priest
Bond says in the same 21. Page, That the Scriptures of Truth does plainly
charge the generality of Quakers with the guilt of the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, because they have sinned wilfully, after a Profession openly made
of Faith in the Lord Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, etc. See the Priests
contradictions here in F. E's confession, as Priest Bond prints them: But these
are all horrid Lies; for we are in the same Faith, which Christ Jesus is the
Author and Finisher of; and the Scripture charges us with no such thing which
he falsely perverts and misapplies; they are better applied to himself in
sinning against the Holy Ghost, who calls Christ within, a Devil, and an
Idol-Light, which will be his own Condemnation, Then he is making a pudder
about Christ's humane nature, and yet cannot give a Scripture to prove it, as in
Page 55. And yet he says, Christ's Body of flesh and bones, after the
Resurrection, was spiritual, Page 72. And in Page 69. He says, Stephen saw
Christ's Humane Body above. Are not these contradictions? And the Apostle says,
All things were made by Jesus Christ, and all things were made by the Word, and
Christ's Name is called the Word of God. Priest Bond says to F. E. It is
strange that thou will produce a Christ for Evidence in whom thou do not
believe, Page 34. And in Page 40. They deny that Jesus Christ was come into the
Flesh And in Page 21. 23. They confess Christ's coming into the Flesh. Thou
say, and here thou contradicts thy self, and says and unsaith, and belies
the Quakers.

Priest Bond, thou brings Christ's Words, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be perfect in me (to wit) Christ, (i. e.) that is in oneness of Affections;
but affections he has added, and what Affections them are he has not
declared, Page 34. Yet thou say, The Saints must have sin in them as long as
they live, and shall not be made free from Sin in this Life, and there is a
Cursed Root of Bitterness in all true Believers, and not Cast out, Death only
makes Conquest over Sin, Page 87. So it is not Christ that makes an end of Sin,
and his Blood that cleanses from Sin, and make their Garments white, and gives
Victory and Conquest; but it is death, according to Priest Bonds Doctrine, that
Conquers Sin. And thou say, If the Man Christ Jesus had not first given
himself a Ransom for our Sins, etc. Page 32. And then thou say, You must not
be free from Sin in this Life. What contradictions are here And how art thou
reconciled to God, and pleads thou shall not be made free from Sin in this
Life, which is of the Devil: And Christ enlightens every Man that comes into
the World, who is the Redeemer, which Light thou call an Idol Light within.
The Quakers say, thou that hates the Light of Christ, and calls it an Idol,
thou hates thy Redeemer, and Christ (from whence it comes) who Redeems,
Sanctifies, Washes and Justifies. Priest Bond says. Page 31. That F. E. says,
He was Washed and Justified from Sin in some measure; Is any man Justified, but
according to the measure of Faith? And thou finds fault with measure or
degrees, and yet thou usest the same word degrees, Page 31. And thou say,
That our Justification from Sin was once finished and perfected without us, on
the Cross, with the Offering of the Body of Christ Jesus once for all; and
Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, etc. This the Quakers believe; But did
Christ give himself a Ransom for all? And was he an Offering for all Men? And
how can Priest Bond say, Christ has Justified him from his Sin, or Washed him
from his Sin, when he says, He shall not be free from Sin, (which is of the
Devil) in this Life? And yet he finds fault with F. E. who said, He was Washed
and Justified from his Sin in some Measure; and calls it a dangerous Doctrine;
and says, Jesus Christ of Nazareth has once by his own Crucified Body without
us on the Cross, finished Transgression, and made an end of Sin. (Mark) made an
end of Sin. And Priest Bond says again, They shall not be made free from Sin
in this Life; and there is in all true Believers a Cursed Root of bitterness
not cast out, death only (mark only) makes the Conquest over Sin: and yet
Christ has made an end of Sin. Then how can Priest Bond say, Christ's Death
makes an end of Sin, as in Page 31. When they cannot be made free from it in
this Life, it must be Death that must end it? So you may see what conrtadiction
he makes, and what confusion he is in. Priest Bond grants, that we could not he
saved without the operation of his Spirit in us; and yet Christ within is a
Devil, and his Light is an Idol Light he says: And the Quakers own no other
Christ within, but what the Apostles Preached both without and within. Priest
Bond says, It is the Spirit that quickens, John 6.63. But Priest Bond has not
proved this. Is not Christ who is the Savior of the Soul a quickening Spirit?
as it is written, the first Adam was made a Living Soul; The second Adam was
made a quickening Spirit. 1 Cor. 15.47. But Priest Bond says, Though the Spirit
be a dead Souls quickner, yet it is not the quickened Souls Savior, Page 26. So
then Christ the second Adam, who is a quickening Spirit, is not the Souls
Savior, according to Priest Bonds Doctrine. And Priest Bond makes a great deal
of pudder in several Pages, concerning eating Christ's Flesh, and drinking his
Blood, who says, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you. Now we that eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink
his Blood by Faith, and have Life and Christ in us, this Christ Priest Bond
says is a Devil, and his Light is an Idol.

And Priest Bond falls a Railing against the Quakers, in Page 20. and says,
Crucifying of the Son of God: Crucifying of him again, etc. And have trod under
foot the Blood of the Son of God. But Priest Bond, is not this thy own
condition, and not the Quakers, who calls Christ and his Light within his
people an Idol, the Devil, And say, The Saints shall not he made free from
Sin in this Life? and the Apostle said, That the Blood of Christ Jesus the Son
of God cleanses from all Sin. And Priest Bond makes a great deal of Pudder in
three or four Pages concerning the Seed, in Page 19. Christ we say, is the Seed
of the Woman which bruises the Serpents Head; and Christ is the Seed of
Abraham, in which seed all Nations are blessed: and if ye be Christ's, then are
ye Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise, and are the Children of
God by Faith in Christ Jesus. And we tell Priest Bond, Christ is the Seedsman:
And he may read in the Scriptures, what Christ calls the Seed that he sows: and
the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom.

Priest Bond, thou say, Christ in you, the cause being put for the effect by
a Metonyma; but he has not proved the word Metonyma by Scripture, that he has
added; in Page 18. And Priest Bond makes a great stur, Page 17. Of Christ being
in his People; but why cannot he own the Apostles words, as they speak plainly,
which are better than his meanings, as in 2 Cor. 13. Coloss. 1.27. and Amos
2.13. Genesis 6.6. And there he is giving his meanings upon those Scriptures,
which are plain enough without his meanings and dark imaginations, who pretends
Scripture to be his Rule, and the people must take his meanings to be the Rule.
And Priest Bond says, The Light within does Justify the vilest Antichrists
that are this day in the World; The Light within, which is by natural
Generation in Reprobates, is not the true Christ, Page 16. says Priest Bond.
(Answer) These are Priest Bonds horrid Lies and Blasphemies. Christ who
enlightens every man that comes into the World, Condemns the Antichrists, and
the wicked, and the Reprobates, that hate it and do not believe in it: And this
Light does not come by natural Generation, as Priest Bond scoffingly says; but
the Light is called the Life in Christ the Word, by which all things were made,
John 1. Page 16. And yet Priest Bond confesses in contradiction to himself and
says; It is true, by Light (To wit) Christ which enlightens every man that
comes into the World is meant the true Christ and only Savior, Page 8. And
Priest Bond goes over and over, and scoffingly and Blasphemously says, Christ
within is a Devil; which he might as well have reflected on the Apostles, as on
the Quakers: for the Quakers own the true Savior manifest in them, as he was
in the Apostles and Saints in their days: And it is false to say, That we make
no distinction betwixt Christ's Godhead and Christ's Manhood, as in Page 12.
Priest Bond, thou say Page 10. But as for your Idol Light Christ, it was
never visible, but ever invisible. So here Priest Bond has set up an Invisible
Idol of his own making, in Page 10. And yet in Page 8. S. Bond says, It is
true that by Light in that place of Scripture, the true Christ and our only
Savior is meant, John 1. And in Page 10. An Invisible Idol. Priest Bond says
Page 8. A Quaker attributes no more Soul-saving Merit to the Body of Jesus,
than to the Body of a Turk or a Jew. These horrid Lies Priest Bond has Forged,
which Lies of his was never the Quakers thoughts; For God prepared Christ a
Body to do his Will, and to fulfill his Will, etc. who was a sacrifice for the
Sins of the whole World, and dyed, and rose again, and sits at the Right Hand
of God: and yet Priest Bond made to confess that the Quakers say, That the Word
took Flesh of the Virgin, and that he suffered without the Gates of Jerusalen,
etc. And therefore Priest Bond is to prove, who ever said, That the Body of
Christ attributes no more Soul saving Merit than to the Body of a Turk or a
Jew. And again Priest Bond says, I do acknowledge (with him (to wit) the
Quaker that the effects of Christ's death and sufferings are to be inwardly
Witnessed within us, Page 8. And yet Chirst within is a Devil, and his Light an
Idol within, How agrees the Blasphemy with the Confession? And who is it that
works? Does not Christ work inwardly in his People, by his Faith, Light and
Spirit? And Priest Bond has made a great stir in three or four Pages about the
False Christ; and he may apply all these Pages to himself, for they do not at
all concern the Quakers. And all his Lies, and Slanders, and filthy calumnies,
and his ungracious filthy Language in his Book; does manifest him to be no
Minister of the Gospel, but a Minister of soul Language and Lies, neither has
he proved the Quakers principles to be erroneous, but has manifested his own
erroneous Principles 75 times over.

Priest Bond says, The Quakers in Burmoudos Tried, found guilty, Sentenced and
Executed; But Priest Bond here is both False-witness, False Accusor, and Flase
Judge and Party: and yet accuses Francis Eastlack, and says, He that was the
Party, made himself the determinating Judge, Page 6. But the Quakers are clear
of all his Slanders, and he is found Guilty of all the false Charges, that he
would falsely Charge upon the Quakers in Burmoudas, and others that he has
mentioned and wronged in his wicked Lying Book; and therefore he may take them
home, for they are fittest for him, and his Condemnation with the Light of
Christ.

Priest Bond says, As I was about to read some of G. F 's Doctrine, they grew
impatient, and by no means would have it read; thereupon I did forbear: But I
have here inserted it, to wit, G. Fox in his Boook entitled the Mystery, Page
49. 50. Has these words, Ye scorn me the Light in you, they have disobeyed it,
and called it a natural Light, and ye have said, that I the Light am not able
to save these that believe in me. Furthermore Page 54. that if ye would
believe, and wait on me the Light, I will purge out all your iniquity, and
forgive all your Trespasses, and I shall change your natures if you hearken to
me, and obey the Light within. These are the words I would have read; but being
hindered, etc. (Answer) These are Priest Bonds horrid Lies; for there is not one
of these words in all the Pages of G. F's Book which Priest Bond brings. S.
Bond, thou brings G. F's query which any that reads G. F's Book may see, which
he queries of the Priest, F. Higinson, Where does the Scripture speak of
Humane, the word Humane where is it written? tell us, that we may search for
it? S. B. forger of these Lies. Now we do not deny that Christ, according to
the Flesh, was of Abraham, but not the word Humane; and Christ's Nature is not
Humane, which is Earthly, for that is the first Adam: And this is G. F's answer
to Higinson, who said, That Christ's Nature was Humane, etc. And S. Bond in Page
50. makes a great pudder about it; but instead of proving of it, (which he has
not by Scripture, but has made the matter worse (and says,) G. F. puts no
difference betwixt Humane and Humane, which S. Bond has proved neither of
these words by Scripture, which he calls his Rule. And when he has been
beating the Air, he confesses, We have not such a Word: And yet S. B. says,
Having the thing, who contradicts himself; but he has not proved it. And
again, S. Bond says, Christ is also said to be from Heaven, (Page 50.) and yet
Humane? And again (Page 69.) S. Bond says, Stephen saw Christ's humane Body in
Heaven, Acts 7. Here thou wrongest the Scripture and Stephen, for there is not
the word Humame in Acts 7. But Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God and Jesus standing on the
Right Hand of God, and said, behold, I saw the Heavens opened, and the Son of
Man standing at the Right Hand of G d; So he saw Christ being full of the
Holy Ghost: And yet Priest Bond says, Chirsts Flesh and Bones was Spiritual
after he was Risen, Page 72. And the Quakers say, The Word of God is nigh thee,
even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, which is the Word of Faith that we and the
Apostle preached. And S. Bond says, etc. I do not apprehend in Romans 10.6. etc.
How these verses do answer the argument of any one of them, which proves a
Quakers pretended Savior within to be a false Christ, the Devil, Page 13. Or
how they preve the pretended Savior within to be the true Christ; and yet
Priest Bond says, As the righteousness of Faith is the Redeemer against all
doubts of Salvation, etc. But Priest Bond, is not this Righteousness of Faith
within the Hearts of Gods people? And hi Page 15. S. Bond contradicts himself,
and says, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and
shall believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved, that is to say, the word of Faith Preached is nigh in our Mouths. We
have received Christ whom God has revealed in our hearts, and has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Aba Father, Gal. 4. this we
witness, 2. Cor. 13. Now S. Bond finds fault with G. F. for using the word
their for our, as in Page 51. and says, It is contrary to the Apostle. But in
page 15. Priest Bond uses the word is nigh in our Mouths, instead of saying,
The word is nigh thee even in thy Mouth; And so does not he himself abuse the
Apostles words, as in Romans 10. And I bring but this for him to see his own
folly, who is Straining at Gnats, and swallowing Camels, though G. F's word our
to us and their to the Apostles, is proper enough: and the word of Faith is
nigh us in our hearts and mouths as well as in thy, as the Apostle said: but
Priest Bond who cavils at Words, may see how he mistakes himself, and utters
forth his own Folly.

S. Bond brings Thomas Moors saying, in Page 51. That Christ was absent from
us. while we were in this Mortal Body. And G. F. answers contrary to the
Apostle, who said, The Life of Christ is manifest in their Mortal Flesh: yes,
and we say again, that the Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our
Mortal Flesh: and Christ is in us the hope of Glory. But Bond makes a great
pudder, that the Life of Christ Jesus might (not is, but) be made manifest in
(not their, but) our mortal Flesh.

But SB. How foolishly thou strains at Gnats and swallows Camels; for G. F.
when he says their, he means the Apostles and the Church: and thou say not
is; but do not thou contadict the Apostle who said, The Son of God was
reyealed in him etc. So we say, theirs (to wit) the Apostles and the Church in
their days; and we say ours in our days (to wit) for we which Live, are always
delivered unto Death for Jesus sake, that the Life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our mortal Bodies. And so here it is plain, in their mortal Flesh,
and in our mortal Flesh. And does S. B. say, that the Life of Jesus was not
manifest in the Apostles mortal Flesh, and the Churches, and them that hear it
too? and will not S. B. have the Life of Christ to be made manifest in our
mortal Flesh, because he makes such a pudder about our, etc. And because G. F.
says, the Life of Christ is manifest in their mortal Bodies: And does not S.
B. when he writes of others, say theirs? But the Apostles writes of themselves
and the Church, when they said ours. But S. B. Thou have wrong quoted the
Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.11. And there is no such saying in that Text of Scripture,
That the Life of Jesus might be made manifest in their mortal Flesh. I query of
S. Bond, whether this was not while they were upon the Earth, that thou mak^s
such a pudder about? And whether the Apostles were not made partakers of the
Glory, while they were upon the Earth? And is not the Light called the Life,
John 1. in Christ's Word? And does not the Light shine in our Hearts, 2 Cor.
4.6? And thou say, Page 51. That Fox endeavors as much as in him lies to
choke the Lamb of God. But Priest Bond, Can Christ the Lamb of God which has
all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, be Choked? Do not thou herein
show thy Foolishness and Silliness? And as for his railing against J.
Pennington, he has not Quoted the Page where to find what he says against
him, neither has he named John Chanlers Book, which he rails at against him.
And therefore it is like he has belied them as he has done G. F. and others.
And therefore Priest Bond had better Repent, if he can find a place of
Repentance for all his Lying Blasphemies, and studdy to be quiet; for he has
given forth his Book to his Shame.

And S. Bond (to bring in, with the rest of your cruelty and inhumane
Practices) I query of thee, Wast not thou the man who instigated and stur'd up
the Magistrates in Burmudus to take up John Tysoe with a Warrant, and carried
him from Constable to Constable through great part of the Island to your
Town-Prison, where he was kept till Banished off your Island? a Man, whom you
had nothing to lay to his charge, worthy of Bonds, but for coming upon your
Island to visit his Friends and people of the Lord, who were gathred from your
persecuting Spirit, and thy Idolatrous Worships, to wait upon the Lord in the
Spirit of Truth and Righteousness; at which ( Cain like) you were angry, and
thou in thy malice wast stirred up to cry out against this Inocent man; (like
thy Brethren of old, Help men of Israel, the turners of the World upside down
are come hither also) who; as aforesaid, came with the Love of God in his heart
to visit his Friends, and did desire the well-being of you all, which is
Sixteen years ago; and how thou have behaved thy self since it is known to
some; but now thou have made thy self manifest in a large measure, in thy
ungodly, Blasphemous Book, which I hope will be a means to open the Eyes of
some that yet see thee not.

And now, we understanding, that Sam. Bond's Book was Printed at Boston in
New England, by Sam. Green, upon the Assignment of S. Sewall; and we being
sensible, how forward the New England Priests and Professors are to tolerate
and Print such lying and slanderous Books against us the people of God, in
scorn called Quakers, to cover their Wickedness in their persecuting of us,
(who Hanged four of the said people called Quakers, Cut of the Ears of others,
Branded with an Hot-Iron, Banished many upon pain of Death, and Imprisoned,
Beat and Cruelly Whipped many; yea, one William Brend, till his body was like a
Gelly; and besides the spoiling of Friends Goods) who promoted the Printing,
and tolerated Roger Williams's silthy, slanderous Book of Lies against us; We
have brought forth, and added some of R. Williams's (one of their old Priests
in N. E.) false and Blasphemous Doctrines concerning Christ's Body and Blood,
which he asserted and maintained openly, at the dispute at Rhode Island in N.
England, to the shame of true Christianity, as follows:

These are four Pages, taken out of G. F's. and S. B's answer to Roger
Williams, Entitled, A New England Firebrand quenched, part 2. Page 508. and
seq. Printed in the year 1679.

And Roger Williams, thou and the people know, that thou brought G. F's
Fol. 56. at the dispute at Nuport, to prove, that G. F. said. The Blood of
Christ was corruptable, and that it was like the Blood of another Man, and from
thence thou did endeavor to prove, That our Christ was not the true Christ;
and G. F. a Blasphemer: But when the place was read in G. F's Book, it was
found to be the Priests sayings, and not G F's. to wit, That the Blood of
Christ was corruptible, and so like the Blood of another Man. (For G. F's
answer to the Priest is, That the Blood of Christ which cleanses from all Sin,
is Incorruptible; as the Reader may read, Fol. 56.) And so R. W. Seeing it were
the Priests words, and not G. F's, which he brought to Condemn G. F. and us
withal in the Face of the Country, and to prove that our Christ was not the
true Christ, he seeing it was proved to be the Priests words out of G. F's.
Book and not G. F's, he turned about to maintain the Priests words, to wit,
That Christ's Blood was Corruptible, and asserted as follows (which was taken
then in Characters; and we do not question but that the sober-minded,
unprejudiced people then there may remember the Words) Viz.

1st, R. W. said, I affirm that the Blood of Christ that he shed, was material,
as another Man's and was corruptible.

2d. R. W. said, I say, that the Blood, from hence he might as well argue, that
the Flesh of Christ being material was therefore Corruptible, which is contrary
to the Apostles Doctrine (Acts 2.31.) Neither did his Flesh see corruptiion.
Yet in another place in his Book. R. W. does affirm, That he is Redeemed by the
Blood of God: which blood; he says is Corruptible, of Christ, was Corruptible
and Corrupted; With many other unsavory words.

John Stubs answered, Take heed Roger, what t^ou say, we do not deny, but
Blood came out of his Side; but we say, That the Blood of Christ is
Incorruptible. And we say, that we were never able to pay or satisfy God; yet
Christ leads his people by his Spirit, and reconcileth them to his Father,
etc. And we dare not for all the World to assert that, which R. W. has
affirmed here; to wit, That the Flood of Christ is Corruptible, and did
Corrupt: For we know, that we are Redeemed not with corruptible things, etc.
but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and spot,
(1 Pet. 1.18, 19.)

3. R. W. affirmed, That Salvation was by a way that was corruptible, I do not
say corrupted: So far R. W.

J. B. answered and said to this purpose, I desire not to grate upon the
Ancient man; but am sorry, that he should so overshoot himself as he has done,
so far to deny Christ, and undervalue his appearance both inward and outward,
as to say, That Christ within was but a fancy, and a false Christ, (as he then
affirmed) and That Christ without was Corruptible, (contrary to the Apostle,
who said, His Flesh saw no Corruption) and also of his appearance without, who
then also said, That his Blood was Corruptible and corrupted, as I believe,
many of the people that was there may yet remember I showed then, how that he
had brought upon himself that charge, and proved himself guilty of that, for
which he endeavored to condemn us: And I spoke at that time, of our owning of
the true Lord Jesus Christ, in his appearing in that Body, and of his suffering
and resurrection, according to the Scriptures, and also of his spiritual
appearance in his Saints after his ascension, according to the promise of
Christ, and the testimony of his Apostles; as I then brought many testimonies
^ut of Scriptures to maintain and prove the same, and so signified fully to the
people, of our true owning of Christ; and there bore testimony against his
dangerous words, that he had then uttered before them, in speaking (contrary to
what is written) of Christ's being corruptible, and his Blood: And was (as I
then signified) truly sorry that he should so sin against God and Christ, and
wrong his own Soul.

(1.) And now, how could W. E. do any otherwise, but charge R. W. with
Blasphemy against Christ, his Body and Blood? for he affirms, That the Light of
Christ is an Id^l, a Fancy, a Frantick-light; and Christ within, an Imaginary
Christ, as you may see in many places of his Book.

(2.) He affirms, That Salvation was by a man that was corruptible; and that
his Blood was Corruptible and Corrupted.

Now we do charge R. W. and all the New England Priests (together with these
Baptists that took his part against us at Rhode Island, and Providence at the
Dispute) to make those his assertions good by Scripture if they can (which we
do affirm are Blasphemies) and show us Chapter and Ve^se, which he says, is
the Rule and Touchstone; and so, let his H^rrible Bl^^^hemies be touched and
tried with Scriptures. For David says. ( Psalm. ^6.) My Heart is glad, and my
Glory rejoices; my Flesh also rests in Hope: for thou will not leave my Soul
in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy one to see corruption. And again the
Apostle says, (who spoke of the Resu^^^ction of Christ, that his Soul was not
left in Hell, neither [mark] His Flesh did s^e Corruption. (Acts 2.27.31.) And
(Acts. 13.34.) Thou shall not ^uff^^^ (...) Holy one to see Corruption. David
saw corruption, but he whom God raised ^gai^, ^^ wit^ Christ, saw [Mark] no
corruption. Now if R. W. and the New England. Priests be Redeemed by
Corruptible Man, and a corruptible Blood, that did Corrupt, this is contrary to
what the Apostle says, His Flesh saw no corru^^^on; and they were not Redeemed
with Corruptible things, but with the Precu^us wood^t Christ. So it is clearly
proved, that Christ his Flesh and Blood is no^ ^^^^^^ptible, but Incoruptible;
and therefore R. W's. Corruptible Man (and Co^^uptible Blood,) ^^at did
Corrupt, (by which he pretends he is Saved) is a saite Christ, and not the
Christ the Apostles Preached, the true Lord Jesus, whose Flesh and Blood did
not Corrupt; and if the Flesh and Blood of Christ (as R. W. affirms) be
Corruptible; then how is he in Heaven with Corruptible Flesh and Blood, when
the Apostle says, Corruption does not inherrit Inc^rruption. (1 Cor. 15.50.)
Christ Sanctifies the people with his own Blood. (Heb. 13.) And (1 Pet. 1.2.)
The Saints were Sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus: And (1 John 1,) The Blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin. (And Revel. ^1.) He has washed us from
our Sins; and Christ has Redeemed us to God by his Blood. (Rev. 5.9.) And the
Saints Garmets were made white in the blood of the Lamb. (^ev. 7.) And the
Saints overcame by the Blood of the Lamb. (Rev. 12.11.) And Christ says,
Wh^^^teth my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, etc. And my Blood is Drink indeed.
Now was it Corruptile Blood, or Corruptible Flesh, that the ^^ints did eat? and
Corruptible Blood which cleanses from all Sins, and mad^ the Saints Garments
white, by which they overcome? O Horrid darkness! for will not Corruptible
stain? and not fetch out the Stain? and the Saints were to have Faith in
Christ's Blood. (Romans 25.) The Saints are made high to God by the Blo^d of
Christ, the Flock of God, which Christ has purchased with his own Blood. (
Acts 20.28.)

Now if this be the New England Priests prnciple, Profession and Judgment,
that they be Redeemed by a corruptible man, and the Blood of Christ Jesus was
corruptible and corrupted; then they, that have tolerated. R. W. his
Blasphemous Book to be Printed (that held forth those abominable things in his
Dispute, before a great assembly of people at Newport in Rhode Island, how can
we say otherwise, but they are Blasphemers, and own not the true Lord Christ
Jesus, Whose Flesh saw no corruption; neither was his Blood corruptible. And
therefore we do conclude with the Apostle, that R. W. and they that held forth
this Doctrine with him, are such as have trodden under Foot the Son of God, and
counted the Blood of the New Covenant, wherewith they were Sanctified, an
unholy thing: and have done despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and have
Crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame.

Now see if this man R. W. that has spoken those blaphemous Words against
Christ Jesus, his Body, and Blood, and Spirit, and Light, is fit to take the
Name of Christ in his mouth; and yet this man, he brought this saying of the
Priest, to be G. F's to prove, That our Christ was not the true Christ. Which
words proving to be the Priests, and not G. F's, he (R. W.) stood by them, and
maintained them against us, and so by his own Argument and Judgment by the
same rule and words, that he would have disproved ours, he has proved his own
Christ not to be the true Christ. But should we (the People of God, in scorn
called Quakers) have come and Preached in New England, and told you, That you
were saved by a Man, that was Corruptible, and that Christ's Blood was
Corruptible and Corrupted, and that you were washed and cleansed by such a
Blood, then ye might have said, what a Hellish Doctrine is this indeed? which
we abhor, and such Doctrines; as R. W. has Preached to us in the dispute. And
our desires are, that the Lord God of Heaven may deliver all people from such
Doctrines; of all the Doctrines that ever we read, we never heard the like.

THE END.
Books Printed and Sold by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in Grace
Church-street near Cornhill.
1. Counsel to the Christian Traveller: also Experiences made public. As a
Testimony to the right way of God; Revealed and made known in this the Day of
his Glorious Appearing in his People, That they may be encouraged to walk
therein to the end thereof. By William Shown, price 1 s.

2. A general Epistle given forth in Obedience to the God of Peace. For the
Preservation and Increase of Charity and Unity amongst the Professors of Christ
Jesus. And the Teachings of his Divine Light within. By Wil^iam Gibson. Price 1
s.

3. The Testimony of Truth exalted. By the Collected Labors of that worthy
Man, good Scribe, and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, By Samuel Fisher.
Price 10 s.

4. the Life of Christ magnified in his Minister: being Seventeen Friends
Testimonies concerning Gi^es Barnadiston. Price 3 d.

5. A way to prevent the Indignation and Judgments of the Lord from coming on
a Nation or Family. By G.F. Price 1 d.

6. The Devil was, and is the old Informer against the Righteous. By G. F.
Price 1. d.

7. Concerning Persecution in all Ages to this Day. By G. F. Price a Halfpenny.

8. To all Rulers and Magistrates, to be tender, and take heed of Persecuting
and Imprisoning, and spoiling the goods of Gods People, for obeying, serving,
and worshipping the Lord God that made them. By G. F. Price 1 d.

9. An Epistle to the Household of the Seed of Abraham, and By G. F. Price a
Ha^^-penny.

10. An Epistle to all Christians, Jews, and Gentiles. By G. F. Price a
Halfpenny.

11. Concerning the upright and good Conversation of the Saints in Christ, and
in Heaven. By G. F. Price a Halfpenny.

12. To all the faithful Flock of God in suffering, whether in Prison or at
Liberty, In scorn called Quakers. By Ambrose Rigge, Price a Halfpenny.

13. An Epistle to Friends, By Ed. Bourn. Price a Halfpenny.

14. Something concerning Agbarus Prince of the Aedesseans: also Paul's Epistle
to the Laodiceams. Price 1. d.

15. Primitive Christians bearing their Testimony, in time of Pers^e^tion.
Price a Halfpenny.


