An Exact and True RELATION In Relieving the resolute GARRISON Of LYME In
DORSET-SHIRE, By the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord High
Admiral of ENGLAND.

Besieged by Prince Maurice, the Lord Inchiquin, and his Irish Rogues, together
with the Lord Pawlet.

As also the particular passages in many gallant Sallyes and assaults betwixt
the Enemy and themselves, with the brave courage of many female Soldiers: As
also the taking two ships of great value, that were coming to relieve the
enemy: and the present condition in which the Town at this instant is, with
other remarkable news from Exceter.

As it was sent by a special and faithful hand, from His Majesty's Ship
called the James, riding now at Anchor before Lyme, Dated June the first.

June 10. Printed for Matthew Walbanke. 1644.

An exact and true RELATION IN Relieving the resolute garrison of LIME in
Dorcetshire.
Dear Sir,
I Have written one Letter to you since I came into this Bay. Yesterday I
received yours of the 24 of May, rejoicing much in that health which God
pleases yet to continue to you and my family at home. I thank God I am well,
only much sadness of spirit is contracted from the sad spectacle that
besieged Lime does continually offer to ou^ view; a Town that deserves
abundance of pity and love, they being still under the violence of a cruel
Enemy. Captain Pine, of whose wounding I writ to you in my last, is since
dead: God brought my Lord hither to a singular purpose, it tending to save that
distressed Town hitherto, having not in it at his Lordships coming, above two
days bread, and a small quantity of Ammunition. There are in the Town 4000
souls, whereof 1000 in G^rrison; who though they want Shoes, Stockings,
Clothes? and pay, and have not departed from Lime since the beginning of the
siedge; yet are all of them resolved to stand out to the last man: and when
they can do no more, to break through the Enemy with their swords.

At my Lords first coming, he sent on shore near 40 barrells of Powder and
some Match, which came along with his Lordship purposely for their relief. The
Ships under his Lordships commands did before his coming, spare what
Provisions they could, none coming to them from other parts, and the passages
by Sea being near blockt up, his Lordship contracted, for 350 pounds worth of
Come and other Provisions, being then bound for Plymouth to be sold there, and
took order to send it into the Town, himself undertaking the price.

The condition and courage of the besieged did so prevail with our Seamen,
that on Saturday last, out of their poor overplus, they sent them above 30
pair of Boots, 100 pair of Shoes, 160 pure of Stockings, some Linen and old
clothes, and some quantity of Fish and Bread, that they had formerly, saved
out of their Sea allowance. They did also unanimously give one fourth part of
their bread for the next four months, amounting to 9000 weight, which their
hard labor and constant cutie might advise them to have reserved rather for
their own bellies. On Monday lasts my Lord and the Ships with him, determined
to spare them 2000 weight of bread more, and some quantities of Beef, Porke,
Shot, Fish, and other necessaries. That day some of our Seamen were desired by
the Town to look to the Lyme, while 600 of the Garrison sallyed on the
Enemy, and 300 men were resolved to be sent; but the same day the Town
received a terrible for me from the Enemy, yet with little advantage to the
besiegers, they 100 sing about 60. and the Town but eight, only some of their
Comanders were then hurt, viz. Colonel Ware was shot in the belly, but not
dangerously, and Lieutenant Colonel Blake was slightly hurt in the foot. The
Townsmen of the three Captains that led up the forlorn hope, killed one
Captain Southern, who had on the Lord Paulets own Armor, and took prisoner
another, viz. Captain Aston, who was the next day brought aboard our Ship.
This Captain Aston is brother to a servant of Master Ketchmar in Fish street:
the Enemy refused to take off their dead, resolving to bury them, and to take
the Town altogether. But God afterward corrected their daring and
presumptuous Cruckie. The Garrison being in couraged by this success, resolved
to prosecute their former purpose of sallying, and in pursuance thereof, on
Tuesday night last, the 300 men were sent safely on shore, though to make good
their landing 3 or 4 of the Townsmen were shin, On the same Tuesday, his
Lordship determined to send two of his Sips, and all the ship-boats futed with
men toward Char^outh, ^ir^port, and other places about six miles from Line,
that the Enemies opinion of our landing men in those parts, might draw off the
horse, whereby the sallie would be more secure and advantageous. And on
Wednesday last the ships and boats were accordingly sent out, at a time
signified from the town by shooting off a Gun from Daves fort and giving an
alarm on the East shore, obtained what was in design. For all the day long,
four or five troops of horse, and some hundreds of foot, attended the moving
of the ships and boats, from whence diverse great shot and small shot played
into lands, which forced the enemy to cast up a brest-work by the sea side for
their own defense. The enemy mistook the intention, supposing that these
boats had in the night taken men out of the Town, with purpose to set them on
shore, for getting of provisions into the Town, or to fall on the rear; and
thereby thinking the Town to be weakened, they did on the same Wednesday near
the time appointed for sallying, assault the Town with great surie: from about
six at night to about eight at night, there was such a continual peale of
small shot and great shot, that the Town seemed to be all on a flame; twice
the enemy made an orderly retreat, appearing each time in a body of about a
thousand men. The third assault was most violent, the enemy advancing with
brave resolution, and being as gallantly received by the Townsmen. A little
after eight of the clock there was a remitting of the former fury; and about
nine, an almost general silence. There was slain of the enemy in this
assault, as some of the Town this day aboard computed, four hundred; and of
the garrison, but six or seven killed and wounded, whereof Major Townsend was
one, who was shot in the head, but is still alive. Amongst the stain, there
was found one Gentlemen that came that morning from Exeter with Letters for
Oxford, whither he would feign have carried the news of the taking of Lyme,
but God prevented him, and the Letters found in his pocket are sent to London;
the principal thing imparted by them being, that they heard the ways to
Oxford began to be obstructed; that the Queen was better then formerly, and
much comforted in Doctor Mirons coming on Sabbath day last.

On Thursday last there was a parley in the Town, the enemy desiring to bury
their dead, which before they scorned.

Yesterday some relief came for the Town by Sea, and in the afternoon part
of the Town was fired, yet but three houses burnt. This day another part of
the Town was fired, and at this instant the fire increases, and twenty new
houses are burnt.

You may now judge the state of poor Lyme, but if you saw it as it is
continually before us, your eyes would much affect your baste, considering that
such gallant spirits, worth a Nation indeed, should be the subjects on which
the rage and madness of a base and cruel enemy is from day to day exercised
and imprinted.

If London knew their merit and condition, I am confident they would not only
compassionate them, but relieve them: what is wanting in men, will be made up
I hope by the power and providence of heaven, whose salvation has him hither
to appointed by God, for their walls, and bulwarks somethings I may not omit,
that at the late storming, one woman shot off 16 Muskets upon the enemy, and
the women of the Town generally did fill the Soldiers Bandileres while they
sought: the continuance of their dangers having much blunted the sense of their
dangers, retaining in their spirits a constant cheerfulness, as knowing they
shall have deliverance, there from the affliction, or by it: and to all let me
add, that this mercy to them was the result. I doubt not of the prayers put up
at the instant on their behalf, from aboard as well as in other parts of the
Kingdom.

We have taken upon the seas since our setting from the Downs, 2 prizes, one a
Dartmouth vessel, laden with oil and salt for Holland, and the other was
brought into us on Saturday last which was a Dutch Galliot laden with
commodities for the enemy at Aptham, and Exceter, to the value of 8000 li. and
the Master of the Galliot him self confessed, that they had for her more safe
convoy of the company of two States men of War, who had aboard their ships 5
barrels of money amounting to 1000 Dollars, confined to some malignants in
Exceter: the factor under whose charge the money went committed, being aboard
the men of war, was loath to be discovered, but at length being apprehended,
and brought before his Loadship was for some peremptory speeches to my Lord put
in safe custody the goods will prove undeniable prize.

Erom aboard his Majesty's ship the James, at an^her before Lime, the first of
June. This is Licensed according to Order.



FINIS.

