THE EXAMINATION OF GEORGE LEDDOZE OF DORCHESTER MERCHANT, Taken before Master
Henry Maber Mayor, and Mr Richard Burce, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
the 27 of August. 1642.

Wherein is discovered the inveterate malice of the Lords and Cavaleers at
Sherborne, against the Parliament and all good men, falsely scandalizing them
under the nickname of Crop-eard-Round-Heads.

Sent from a Member of the House of Commons in that County, and read in the
House, and ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsynge Cl. Par. D. Com.



Whereunto is added a Letter from Coker, near Sherborne in Somersetshire, of
the Warlike preparations there intended.

LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. September. 1. 1642.

THE EXAMINATION OF GEORGE LEDDOZE OF DORCHESTER, MERCHANT, Taken before Master
Henry Maber Mayor, and Richard Burce, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace.
August 27. 1642.
WHo upon his Oath says that upon Thursday last, This Examinant being at the
Town of Sherborn, was taken for a spy, and was examined at the Lodge there by
the Lord Paulet, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Stowell, and Sir Henry Barkley; And
in his examination, being demanded, of which side he would be, whether for King
or Parliament; This Examinant answered, that he was for both. The Lord Paulet
answered, that all the Parliament that were for the Militia, were proclaimed
Traitors and were crop-eard Rogues, and that Earl, meaning Sir Walter Earl of
whom they had had conference before, was the wickedest Rogue of them all and
one of the Devils limbs, and so they were all: And the said Sir Ralph Hopton
spoke the same, and the said other Gentlemen spoke to the same effect: and that
they were come thither to keep a Parliament themselves, and that the King would
be there shortly to assist them with a great Army, and if it had not been for
Earl and such Rogues, these tumults and sturres had not been; and the said Sir
Ralph Hopton further says, that we may see the hand of God to be with them in
protecting them, being but a small number, and they great in number that were
against them, and that they being shot twice at with many shots and bullets
about their ears, yet were not touched by one of them, and that their company
shot but once and killed two men, and maimed or hurt fifteen more, and that
those that took up Arms for the Parliament; were blood sucking Rogues; and
these their words they confirmed with many oaths; Further, Sir Ralph Hopton
demanding what strength there was in Dorchester, this Examinant answered, there
were six great Gunnes, the said Ralph replied, that those Gunnes did belong
unto them, and they would have them, and would cut off all the Roundheads in
the Land.

George Leddoze.

A LETTER out of SOMERSETSHIRE, Concerning the Warlike Preparations AT
SHERBVRNE.
Loving Brother,
I Thought fit to let you understand in what posture Sherburne stands in: The
Lord Marquess of Hartford and his two sons, and his brother, the Lord
Seymor, the Lord Paulet, and his two eldest sons, and of Somerset Knights
Hopton, Stowell, and Rodney; and of the Gentry, John Coventry, and the rest,
who accompanied him at Wells, yet keep with him, and the two Lunsfords, and are
fortifying the Castle at Sherburne, their strength not exceeding six hundred
Horse and Foot; against whom are marching the Earl of Bedford with his six
hundred Horse, and about eighteen great pieces of Ordnance from Bristoll,
besides twenty thousand Horse and Foot at least out of Somersetshire, and great
Companies out of Dorsetshire, who promise to be at Sherburne at a days
warning; which causes the Lords and Cavaliers to droope, and to desire a free
passage; and it is thought they will endeavor it this day. Yesterday the
Marquess sent a Letter to my neighbor Master Harby, one of the Deputy
Lievtenants for the Militia, desiring his assistance and advice; he desired to
be conducted to Poole, and from thence by sea to his own house, as is
conceived. What will be the issue we know not yet: Our Country men are angry
they took him not at Wells, who then visited the Bishops palace, where they
did not hurt, but to his Wine, Pictures, Organs, etc. I purpose, God willing,
to stay here, and expect the Issue.

From Coker near Sherburne in Somersetshire Aug. 26. 1642.
FINIS.

