The Exact NARRATIVE and ORDER of the Nobility and Great Officers In His Late
MAJESTY'S Proceeding from Westminster Hall to His CORONATION In
Westminster-Abbey, on St. Georges day, April the 23th.
UPon the 23 th of April, being S. Georges day, about seven in the Morning, the
King took Water from the Privy Stairs at Whitehall, and landed at the
Parliament Stairs, from whence he went up to the Princes Lodgings; where, after
he had reposed himself, he was arrayed in Royal Robes of Crimson Velvet, furred
with Ermine, by which time the Nobility being come together, Robed themselves
in the Lords House and Painted Chamber.

The Judges also with those of the long Robe, the Knights of the Bath (then in
their Robes of Purple Satin lined with white Taffity) and Gentlemen of the
Privy Chamber, met in the Court of Requests, and being drawn down into
Westminster Hall, where this great solemnity (ordered by the Officers at Arms)
began. The Nobility, in their proper Robes, carrying their Coronets in their
Hands, proceeded according to their several dignities and degrees, before His
Majesty up to his Throne of State, which was raised at the West end of the
Hall, placing themselves upon each side thereof.

The King being set in a rich Chair under a Glorious Cloth of State, Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight Master of the Jewel House, presented the Sword of State,
as also the Sword called Curtana, and two other Swords, to the Lord high
Constable, who took and delivered them to the Lord high Chamberlain, and he
laid them upon the Table before the King, and in the like manner the Spurs.

Immediately after, the Dean and Prebends of Westminster, by whom the Regalia
had been brought in Procession from the Abbey to Westminster Hall, being vested
in rich Copes, came up from the lower end thereof.

Who passing through the Hall, and making their due Reverences in three places,
and toward the upper end, the Quires and Officers at Arms falling off on each
side, the Dean and Prebends ascended the Steps, at the top whereof, Garter
Principal, King of Arms standing, conducted them to the Table placed before the
Throne, where making their last Reverence, the Dean first presented the Crown,
which was by the Lord high Constable, and Lord Great Chamberlain, set upon the
Table, who likewise received from the Prebends the Regalia, which they carried,
and laid them also by the Crown.

Then the Lord Great Chamberlain presenting the Regalia severally to the Kings,
His Majesty disposed of them to the Noble Men which carried them in the
proceeding.

All things being thus prepared about ten a Clock the proceeding began, from
the Hall into the Palace Yard, through the Gate House, along the great
Sanctuary, to the West end of the Abbey, upon blew Cloth, which was spread upon
the ground from the Throne in Westminster Hall, to the great steps in the
Church.

The Drums. The Trumpets, four and four. The six Clerks in Chancery, two and
two. Ten of the Kings Chaplains having Dignities, two and two. The Aldermen of
London, two and two. The Kings Learned Counill at Law, two and two. The Kings
Solicitor, and the Kings Attorney. The Kings Eldest Sergeants at Law. The
Esquires of the Body, two and two. The Masters of the Requests, two and two.
The Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, two and two. The Knights of the Bath in
their Purple Robes, two and two. The Barons of the Exchequer, and Justices of
both Benches, two and two. The Lord Chief Baron, and the Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas. The Master of the Roles, and the Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench. The Sergeant Porter, and the Sergeant of the Vestry. The Children
and Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel. The Prebends of Westminster. The Master of
the Jewel House. The Knights of the Privy Council. Portcullis Pursuivant at
Arms. The Barons in their Robes, two and two, carrying their Caps of Crimson
Velvet, turned up with Minever in their Hands. The Bishops two and two,
according to their Dignities and Consecrations. Rouge Croix and Blew-Mantle,
Pursuivants at Arms. The Viscounts in their Robes, two and two, with their
Coronets in their Hands. Somerset and Chester, two Heralds. The Earls in their
Robes, two and two, with their Coronets in their Hands. Richmond and Windsor,
two Heralds. The Marquess of Dorchester, and the Marquess of Worcester, in
their Robes, with their Coronets in their Hands. Lancaster and York, Heralds,
with their Coronets in their Hands. Norroy and Clarencieux Provincial Kings,
with their Coronets in their Hands. The Lord High Treasurer. The Lord High
Chancellor. St. Edward's Staff, born by the Earl of Sandwich. The Spurrs born
by the Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery. St. Edwards Scepter born by the Earl of
Bedford. The third Sword born by the Earl of Derby -- drawn The Sword called
Cartana born by the Earl of Oxford -- drawn The pointed Sword born by the Earl
of Shrewsbury -- drawn The Lord Mayor of London. Garter Principal, King at
Arms. The Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod. Sergeants at Arms. Sergeants at
Arms. Sergeants at Arms. The Earl of Lindsey, Lord great Chamberlain of
England. The Earl of Suffolk, Earl Marshal for this present occasion. The Sword
of State born by the Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of the Household. The
Earl of Northumberland, Lord Constable of England for this present occasion.
His Royal Highness the DUKE of YORK. Sergeants at Arms. Sergeants at Arms.
Sergeants at Arms. The Scepter with the Dove, born by the Duke of Albemarle.
St. Edwards Crown born by the Duke of Ormond, Lord High Steward for this
occasion. The Orb born by the Duke of Buckingham. The Patena born by the Bishop
of Exeter in his Cope.

The Regale or Chalice, born by the Bishop of London in his Cope.

Sergeants at Arms. Sergeants at Arms. Sergeants at Arms. Barons of the
Cinque Ports, carrying the Canopy, Habited in Doublets of Crimson Satin,
Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson Satin, black Velvet Capps, and
black Velvet Shoes. The Gentlemen Pentioners with their Poleaxes. Supported by
the Bishop of Bath and Wells. THE KING. Supported by the Bishop of Duresme. His
Train born by the Lords, Mandevile, Cavendish, Ossory and Percy.Assisted byThe
Lord Mansfield, Master of the Robes. The Earl of Lauderdale, one of the
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. Mr. Seamor, and Mr. Ashburnham Grooms of the
Bedchamber. Barons of the Cinque Ports, carrying the Canopy, Habited in
Doublets of Crimson Satin, Scarlet Hose, Scarlet Gowns, lined with Crimson
Satin, black Velvet Capps, and black Velvet Shoes. The Gentlemen Pentioners
with their Pole-axes. The Captain of the Guard. The Captain of the Pentioners.
The Yeomen of the Guard in their Coats.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. and are to be sold by Walter Davis, in Amen Corner,
1685.


