AN EXACT RELATION OF THE TRIAL and EXAMINATION OF JOHN MORRIS, Governor of
Pontefract-Castle, At the Assizes held at York: Together with His Speeches,
Prayers, and other passages immediately before his death, the 23. of Aug. 1649.

Whereunto is added, The Speech of Cornet BLACKBURNE, Executed at the same time.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

An Account of the Passages concerning the Trial of Col: JOHN MORRIS, and
Cornet BLACKBURNE, at the Assizes at the Castle of York, before John Puleston
and Baron Thorpe, Justices of Assizes, the 16. of August, Anno Dom. 1649.
COlonel Morris being demanded to hold up his hand, refused, and the Indictment
was read against him for Treason for leavying War against the late King and the
Parliament upon Stat. Ed. 5. The Court desired him to plead Guilty or Not
Guilty.

Col. Morris Ans. My Lords, under correction I conceive this Court has not
power to try me in this case, I being a Martial man, I ought to be tried by a
Council of War.


Court. Sir, What do you say, Are you guilty or not guilty? This is the second
time you have been asked: Sir, if you will not answer the third time, we shall
know what to do, Are you guilty or Not guilty?


Col. Morris. My Lords, I still conceive I ought not to be tried here, if I
have done any thing worthy of death, I appeal to a Martial Court, to my Lo:
Fairfax, Major General, or a general Council of War: You have not any
president for it, either for you to try me in this way, or me to suffer by it.


Court. Are you guilty or not guilty? This is the third time.


Col. Morris. My Lords, if your Honors will force me to plead, I conceive I am
not guilty.


Court. How will you be tried?


Col. Morris. My Lords, I was never at any Bar before, I am ignorant herein.


Court. Tell him what to say. [ Upon that, some near him, tell him, By God and
the Country.]


Col. Mor. By God and the Country. After that challenge is made for Col: Morris
to except against any of the Jury. [ Master Brook, a great man for the Cause,
comes first returned, to be sworn as Foreman of the Jury]


Col: Mor. My Lords, I except against this Brook.


Court. Sir, he is sworn, and you speak too late.


Col: Mor. My Lord, I appeal to himself, whether he be sworn or no.


Mr. Brook. Sir, I am not to answer you, but the Court. My Lord, I did not
kiss the Book.


Court. Sir, that is no matter, it is but a Ceremony.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I beseech your Honors that I may except against him, I
know him, as well as I know my right hand, to be my Enemy.


Clark of assize. Sir, he is recorded sworn, there is do disputing against the
Record.

Col: Mor. My Lords, I must Submit to your Honors: after that Col: Morris
challenges 16 Men, and my Lord Puleston thinking Col: Morris tedious in
excepting against so many, Answers, Sir, keep within your compass, or I will
give you such a blow as will strike off your head.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I desire nothing but Justice, for by the Statute of 14
Hen. 7. fol. 19. I may lawfully challenge 35 men without showing any cause to
the contrary.


Court. It is granted, After a full Jury, the Indictment read, and Evidence for
the State very full, that Col: Morris was Governor of Pontefract, which Morris
being very Modest and Civil, did not contradict any thing, until his time of
answer.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I humbly desire a Copy of my Indictment, that I may know
what to answer, I conceive I may plead special as well as General.


Court. Sirs, you cannot by the Law.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I conceive there is point of Law in it, and I humbly
desire to have Council, for I conceive by the Law, being attainted for High
Treason, I ought to have Council by the Statute 1 Hell. 7. fol. 23.


Court. Sir, I tell you you cannot have it.


Col: Mor. Then my Lords I conceive I am not any way guilty to the Indictment,
for Treason, My Lords, It is said to be against the King, his Crown, and
against his Peace, whereby my Lords, I can make it appear I have acted only
for the King, and nothing against him, which may appear hereby by my
Commission. The Court looks upon it and Answers.


Court. Sirs, you are deceived, this is false, it is from the Prince.


Col: Mor. My Lords, It is very well known, my Lord Fairfax, has his
Commission, derived from the Parliament, and upon that he grants Commission to
his Officers, which is all one and the same. The Prince has his from his
Father, and I have mine from the Prince which is full. Power, he being Captain
General of his Majesty's Forces.


Court. Sir, have you nothing else to say?


Col: Mor. My Lords, under Correction I conceive it is sufficient, for by the
same power, all Judges, Justices of Peace, your Lordships your Predecessors,
and all other Officers, did act by the same power, and all process and writs
of Law, were acted, and Executed, in his name, and by his Authority.


Court. His power was not in him, but the Kingdom, for he was in trust for the
Kingdom, the Kings Highway, and the Kings Coin being so called, is not his
own, but his Subjects, and his Natural power, and Legal power, are different.


Col: Mor. My Lords, under Correction, I conceive his Legal and Personal
power, are undevisable, all one, and cannot be separated.


Court. Sirs, all is one if the King bid me, kill a man, Is this a sufficient
Warrant for me to plead? no Sir, it is unlawful; Sir, have you no more?


Col: Mor. Sirs I beseech your Honors give me leave, I am upon my Life.


Court. Speak what you will Sir, you shall be heard.


Col: Mor. Your servant my Lord, then my Lords I conceive I have acted nothing
against the Parliament, for that which I acted, It was for the King, and since
the abolishing of Regal power, I have not meddled with any thing, against the
Parliament, for that act was but inacted the 14 of July last, and before that
time and act of Abolishing Kingly-government, that Princely Palace which I kept
by his Commission was demollished, my Lords, I beseech your Honors, that my
Commission may be read, to give satisfaction to the Court.


My Lord Puleston. Sir, it will do you no good, you may as well show a
Commission from the Pope, all is one.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I desire your Lordships do me that Justice.


My Lord Thorpe. For my part I am willing, if my Brother be not against it.


My Lord Puleston. Sir, we held it for Law to be void, it is to no purpose.


Col: Mor. Then if your Lordships be not pleased to do me that justice that it
may be read, I desire it may be restored me again. [ Upon that, Col: Morris
received his Commission unread.] My Lords, it seems strange, that your
Honors should do that which was never done the like before, never any of your
Predecessors ever did the like, I wish it may not be to your own and your
friends wrong, that you make your selves presidents of your acting, and my
self of suffering. But my Lords, I do not speak for saving my own life, for
(I thank my God) I am prepared, and very willing to part with this lump of
clay. I have had a large time of repentance, it being 22. weeks since my
imprisonment; and I am sorry for those which are like to undergo the same
sufferings, if your Lordships take away my life. And though I do not speak any
way in glory, indeed at this present there is a cloud hanging over our heads, I
desire there may be a fair Sunshine to dispell it. And though there were a
world of plots in the Kingdom when I took the Castle, there is not wanting the
same now, only the time is not yet come; and as I was to be the firebrand to
Scarborough, so he (meaning Bointon) to Tinmouth, and that to others; and
though you take away my life, there will be others which will take up the
Lintstock to give fire, though I be gone.


Court. Sir, you have little hopes to talk of any fire to be given here,
having received such a total rout in Ireland.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I should have been unwilling to have contradicted your
late news concerning Ireland; but since you have given me a hint of it* you
must give me leave to let your Honors know, that I received Letters from the
Marquess of Ormond dated the 3. of August, and yours is but the 2. wherein he
pleases to let me understand of the great care he has of me, and that
whatsoever shall befall me here, the like shall be to those which he has:
Prisoners there, which (as he says) are good store. Therefore if your
Lordships did not at all value my Person, yet methinks you should have some
care of it for your own friends goods.


Court. Sir. have you no more to say?


Col: Mor: My Lords, still I appeal to my Commission, which I conceive is
sufficient to defend me withal in what I have done, notwithstanding your power
to the contrary.


Court. It is nothing at all, we have power to try you here.


Col: Mor. Then my Lords (under correction) Laymen may as well be tried at a
Martial Court: which if granted, those excellent Acts of Magna Charta and the
Petition of Right would be destroyed.


Court. But you are not looked upon here as a Soldier, we shall do what in
justice belongs us.


Col: Mor: My Lords, still (under correction) I have taken the Oath of
Allegiance, and I conceive in that I was bound to do as much as I did or have
done, though I had not had any Commission at all. And I beseech your Lordships
that you will do me justice, and not incline to the right hand of affection,
or the left of hatred, but to have an ear for the accused as well as for the
accuser: Neither have I acted any thing contrary to my Allegiance, which
Allegiance I was as willing to pay to the Son, as well as to the Father. Now
for my Allegiance I owe to any person or authority, but to these I know none.


My Lo: Thorpe. Sir, if you have any thing else to say, speak for your self,
for this is not much to the purpose.


Col: Mor: My Lo: it is true, since you have rejected that authority which I
acted by, I might as well have held my tongue at the first, and spoke nothing,
were it not for the satisfaction of the hearers; but if it must be so that you
will make me a president, you must do with me as you did with my dear and
honored Lord, [meaning my Lo: of Strafford] making an Act for the future, that
this my suffering shall not be a president to any Soldiers hereafter. Besides
my Lo: this same Statute which you allege against me is, if that any shall act
against the King, it is Treason, which I have not done; but contrary, for him,
and by his authority. And there is an Act of 11 Hen. 7. cap. 1. That whosoever
they are that shall aid or assist the King at home or abroad, shall not be
questioned at all.


My Lo: Thorpe. It Is true Sir, but Hen. 7. then stood in a fickle condition, and
being an Usurper, made that Act for his own safety; sometimes Duke of York,
ruling sometimes Duke of Lancaster, and others contending, therefore it was
enacted.


Col: Mor: My Lo: But this same Act of Hen. 7. was later then that of Ed: 3.
which you have laid against me, and as yet was never repealed, until this last
Act of 14 of July, before which time I had delivered up the place.


My Lo: Thorpe. Well Sir, it seems you have not any more. What have you to
say, Blackburne? After he had answered, the Court commands Irons to be laid on
them.


Col: Morris. My Lo: I humbly desire that we may not be mannacled; if you make
any doubt of us, that we may have a greater guard upon us.


My Lo: Puleston. Sir, you that have made such attempts through such guards as
were of purpose set to receive you, ought to be looked to now. Yet if Master
Sheriff please, I am content.


Col: Mor. Master Sheriff, I desire that this mannacling may be forborne: if
you please to clap a guard of 100 men upon us, I shall pay for it. This is not
only a disgrace to me, but in general to all Soldiers, which does more
trouble me then the loss of my life. Master Sheriff what do you say?


Master Shreiffe. Sir, Irons are the safest guards.


Col: Mor. My Lords, hitherto (I thank God) I have not done any unsouldiary or
base act, and to begin now I will not do it to save my life, and though you
look upon me Sampson-wise, I vow to God, I would not touch the pillars though
it lay in my power, to injure you, therefore I still beg pardon that I may not
be mannaccled.


Under Shreiffe. Come Sir, it cannot be helped, we are commanded.


Col: Mor. My Lords, I beseech you grant me this favor, it is not my life I
beg, but to forbear this manaccling, which shame, and dishonor, does more
trouble me, then the loss of my Life.


Under Shreiffe. It must be done, and upon that did it, and carried him away,
After dinner they were brought again, and the Jury brought in their verdict,
who found them both guilty of Treason.


Col: Mor. My Lord, I am here found guilty of Treason by that villain Brook,
whom I know to be mine enemy, and the first man that I did except against: in
which I conceive I have received hard measure, for none could have found me
guilty of Treason, had they gone according to the Letter of the Law, which they
did not.


My Lo: Puleston. Sir, you speak too late, you are not to dispute it now.


Col: Mor. Neither would I, my Lord, if this were a Court of Chancery, but
being a Court of Law, bound up in express words and Letter, I conceive I ought
to dispute it, and my business better weighed.


My Lo: Puleston. Well Sir, you are found guilty, therefore hold your peace.


Col: Mor. If I must suffer, I receive it with all alacrity and cheerfulness,
and I thank God I shall dye for a good cause, and the testimony of a good
Conscience, for which had I as many lives as there are Stars in the Firmament,
I would sacrifice them all for the same.


Court. Sheriff, Jailer take them away, or I Will take you away.


Col: Mor. Well I beseech God bless King CHARLES, and fight for all those that
fight for him, or have fought for him.


The Confession of Collonell John Morris and some passages betwixt the prison
and place of Execution.
When he was brought out of prison looking upon the Sledge that was there set
for him, lifting up his eyes to Heaven knocking upon his breast, he said, I am
as willing to go to my death, as to put off my doublet to go to bed, I despise
the shame as well as the Cross, I know I am going to a joyful place; with
many like expressions.

When the Post met him about St. James' Church, that was sent to the Parliament
to Emediate for a repreive; and told him he could not prevail in it, he said;
Sr I pray God reward you for your pains, I hope and am well assured to find a
better pardon then any they can give, my hope is not in man but in the living
God.

At the place of execution he made this profession of his faith, his breeding,
his cause he had fought in.

Gentlemen, first I was bred up in the true Protestant Religion: having my
education and breeding, from that honored house my Dear Lord and Master
Strafford, which place I dare boldly say, was as well governed and ruled as
ever any yet was before it, I much doubt, better then any will be after it;
unless it please God to put a period to these distracted times: this Faith and
Religion I say I have been bred in, and I thank God I have hitherto lived in,
without the least wavering, and now I am resolved by Gods assistance to dye in.

Those pains are nothing; if compared to those dolours and pains which Jesus
Christ our Savior have suffered for us: when in a bloody sweat he endured the
wrath of God the pains of hell and the cursed and shameful death which was due
to our sins; Therefore I praise the Lord that I am not plagued with far
m^re grievous punishment, that the like has befaln others, who undoubtedly are
most glorious and blessed Saints with Christ in heaven, It is the Lords
affliction, and who will not take any affliction in good part when it comes
from the hand of God, and what shall we receive good from the hands of God and
not receive evil, and though I desire as I am carnal that this cup may depart
from me, yet not my will but thy will be done: Death brings unto the godly an
end of sinning, and of all miseries due unto sin, so that after death there
shall be no more sorrow nor cry or pain, for God shall wipe away all tears
from our eyes, by death our souls shall be delivered from thraldom, and this
Corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality.

Therefore blessed are they that are delivered out of so vilde a world, and
freed from such a body of bondage and corruption, the soul shall enjoy
immediate Communion with God in everlasting bliss and glory, it takes us from
the miseries of this world, and society of sinners, to the city of the living
God, the Celestial Jerusalem.

I bless God I am thought worthy to suffer for his Name, and for so good a
cause, and if I had a thousand lives I would willingly lay them down for the
cause of my King the Lords Anointed; the Scripture commands us to fear God and
honor the King, to be subject to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake,
whether to the King as supreme or to those that are in Authority under him: I
have been always faithful to my Trust; and though I have been most basely
accused, for betraying Leverpool, yet I take God to witness it is a most false
aspersion, for I was then sick in my bed and knew not of the delivering of it,
till the Officers and Soldiers had done it without my consent, and then I was
carried prisoner to Sr John Meldrum, afterward I came down into the country,
and seeing I could not live quietly at home, I was persuaded by Collonell
Forbes, Collonell Overton, Lieutenant Collonell Fairfax whom I took for my
good friends, to march in their Troops, which I did, but with intention still
to do my King the best service when occasion was and so I did; and I pray God
to turn the hearts of all the soldiers unto their lawful Sovereign that
this land may enjoy Peace, which till then it will never do: and though thou
killest me yet will I put my trust in thee, wherefore I trust in God he will
not fail me nor forsake me, Then he took his Bible and read diverse Psalms fit
for his own occasion and consolation, and then put up diverse prayers, some
publicly and some privately, the public was this which follows;

A Prayer.
WElcome blessed hour, the period of my Pilgrimage, the term of my Bondage, the
end of my cares, the close of my sighs, the bound of my travels, the goal of my
race, and the heaven of my hopes; I have fought a long fight in much weakness,
I have finished my course though in great faintness, and the Crown of my joy
is, that through the strength of thy grace, I have both kept the true faith,
and have fought for my Kings, the Lords Annointeds cause without any wavering,
for which, and in which I die; I do willingly resign my flesh, I despise the
World, and I defy the Devil, who has no part nor share in me; and now what
is my hope, my hope Lord Jesu is even in thee, for I know that thou my Redeemer
liv^st, and that thou will immediately receive my Soul, and raise up my body
also at the last Day, and I shall see thee in my flesh with these eyes and none
other: And now O Lord, let thy Spirit of comfort help mine infirmities, and
make supplication for me with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed; I
submit my self wholly to thy will, I commit my Soul to thee as my faithful
Redeemer, who have bought it with thy most precious Blood, I conf^sse to all
the world, I know no name under heaven by which I may be saved, but thine my
Jesu, my Savior, I renounce all confidence in any merits save thine, I
thankfully acknowledge all thy blessings, I unfainedly bewail all my sins, I
steadfastly believe all thy promises, I heartily forgive all my Enemies, I
willingly leave all my Friends, I utterly loath all earthly comforts, and I
entirely long for thy coming, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit.

The Private were to himself his hat being before his eyes; after this he put
up diverse short Ejaculations: As, I know my Redeemer lives, Father unto thy
hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O God, thou God of truth,
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and many of the like, and so he yielded to Death.

The Speech of Cornet Michael Blackburn immediately before his Death, August
23. 1049.
It is expected I should say something, and indeed it is my desire to say
something and but a little,

I Am not a Gentleman by birth, but my Parents are of an honest quality and
condition, I was brought up in the Protestant Religion, and in that Religion I
have lived, and in that I now die; I have some five or six years since engaged
in this War, wherein I had no other end or Intention but to do my King true
and faithful service, according to my duty and the dictate of my Conscience, I
have not done so much service as I desired, but I have been always faithful
to him, and wish I could have done him more; and for his son the King that now
is, I wonder any man of this Kingdom should have the boldness or impudency to
lift up his hand against him, to keep him from his Crown whereof he is Heir
apparent, and has as good right and title to it by his Birthright, as any man
living has of his Inheritance or Possession: I pray God bless him, forgive
all my Enemies, and Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

FINIS.

