EXCEEDING GOOD NEWS FROM OXFORDSHIRE: Being a true Relation of the manner of
the apprehending of the Earl of Berkshire, Sir John Curson, Sir Robert Dormer,
and diverse other Cavaliers in Oxfordshire, by Colonel Hampden, and Col.
Goodwyn.

ALSO The valiant Resolution of the City of Chichester for the defense of the
King and Parliament, and the true Protestant Religion.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

Printed for Tho. Edwards. August 24. 1642.

GOOD NEWS FROM OXFORDSHIRE: Being a true Relation of the manner of the
taking of the Earl of Berkshire, Sir John Curson, Sir Robert Dormer, and
diverse other Cavaliers in Oxfordshire, by Colonel Hampden, and Colonel
Goodwyn.
ALSO The Resolution of the City of Chichester for the defense of the
Parliament.
THe great and manifold distractions and disturbances that at this present have
in a manner overspread and obscured the luster of this (not long since)
glorious Kingdom, have of late been very prevalent. Who so looks into the
North, may see a cloud arising which portends a storm, a storm of civil
war, growing black and disasterous. The actions of the Cavaliers in those
parts speak them bloody and tyrannical: the proceedings of the Malignant Party
continue hostile and inhumane, having made desperate attempts against diverse
brave and flourishing towns: but hitherto they have not been very prosperous,
but have been most courageously resisted by the inhabitants in most places they
have come at: you may see an example of it in this ensuing discourse, in the
attempt of the Earl of Berkshire to surprise the Magazine, and put in
execution the Commission of Array in Oxfordshire.

After the marching out of the forces under the command of Colonel Hampden and
Colonel Goodwyn into Oxfordshire, they had not been long there, but they took
the Earl of Berkshire, Sir John Curson, Sir Robert Dormer, and one more that
was a Gentleman of very good quality at Watlington in the County of Oxford,
which were come thither with an intent to seize upon the Magazine of that part
of the county, which was laid in the said town, and had a purpose to put in
execution the Commission of Array in those parts, having sent Warrants to
Reding and other places for that purpose. Whereupon report being made to the
House, that Colonel Goodwyn and Captain Turvill were bringing them up to the
Parliament, and would be there in the afternoon; whereupon the House rose
about twelve a clock, and appointed to meet again in the afternoon: and about
three of the clock the Lords House being complete, the Earl of Berkshire with
the rest of the Delinquents were brought to the House, and after some
examination they were sent prisoners to the Tower, with order that they should
attend the House again the next day, which he did accordingly, being brought
from the Tower to the Lords House, aed after he was examined concerning his
going about to put in execution the Commis^ion of Array which was found with
him, he was sent back again to the Tower, till the House should send for him.

The Parliament have received information by a Letter from Oxford, signifying
that Colonel Lunsford is sent for hither; and when it was noysed there that
Colonel Hampden had tanen the Earl of Berkshire, and some others: those of
the University and City that were ill-affected to the King and Parliament,
feared his coming thither, and caused many great pieces of timber to be said
cross the Bridge to keep out his horse. Whereby may easily be perceived how
well the Prelaticall faction, the incendiaries of the kingdom; stand affected
to peace. The knowledge of the Earl of Northamptons violent attempt against
the Lord Brook has been acquainted to all, how that by a wile more then valor
he took and carried away the greatest part of the Magazine from Banbury, and
by that power and strength he thought to possess himself of the castle of
Warwick. But God who does always assist the pious and faithful endeavors of
his servants, turned his counsel into folly, and all his strength and policy
into weakness and impotency. The said Earl had gathered together a great
number of men of such mercenary spirits, who were induced to serve him, not for
the honor of the cause, but for the advantage of the proffered wages, for they
were allowed two shillings a day during the whole time of the present service,
and (being men of desperate fortunes, and altogether destitute of present
subsistence) were ready to adventure upon any enterprise whereby something
might be gotten, knowing they had nothing to be lost. The Earl, I say, having
gotten the advantage both of strength and men, and the opportunity of time,
began to adventure his forces, to bring the whole Country into subjection. But
his intentions were soon frustrate, for when he was in the highest hopes of his
ambitious designs, expecting that victory should have crowned him the Hector
of the field, and the Minion of the day, then did the country unanimously,
with the assistance of diverse Volunteers out of Northamptonshire, and with a
joint consent in the vindication of so just a cause, hazard both lives and
fortunes, came and opposed the Earl in his rash and violent proceedings:
whereupon the Earl perceiving himself so strongly opposed, after a small
combat, he was willing to forsake his former enterprise, and was forced with
all speed to betake him to a place of strength where he might be secure from
their prosecution. Mary of his men fell in that skirmish, it is reported that
about forty men lost their lives, and paid nature the debt they owed her. He
lost in this skirmish the greatest part of the Militia which he had before
taken from Banbury, and had he not saved himself by flight, he hardly had
survived to have made any more attempts, to the disquiet of the whole kingdom,
and the subversion of the Christian and Protestant Religion.

The City of Chichester stands now in a good posture of defense, and have
declared their Resolution to the Parliament, being resolved to adventure both
their lives and fortunes for the defense and maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of
the Subject, against any that shall oppose it: yet some ill-affected persons
have plotted to betray the Town, and some Ministers have made seditious
Sermons to that purpose. For the prevention of these and other disorders, and
to prevent the danger that may arise by the malignity of the Popish party, The
Lords and Commons do declare, That it shall be lawful for any of his Majesty's
Subjects to disarme all Popish Recusants, and such as shall execute the
illegal Commission of Array, or shall be actors and assistants in any of the
aforementioned oppressions and violences, or shall furnish any Horse, Arm^s,
Money, or other aid or contribution for the maintenance of this unnatural
War raised by his Majesty against his Parliament: and to seize upon their
Horses, Arms, Money and other Provisions, whereby they might be enabled to
disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

Ordered to be forthwith printed and published,

Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliament.



FINIS.

