AN EXACT NARRATIVE AND RELATION OF HIS Most Sacred MAJESTY'S Escape from
WORCESTER on the third of September, 1651.

Till his Arrival at PARIS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

THE KINGS Escape from Worcester.
FOrtune had now twice Counterfeited and double-Gilt the Trophies of Rebellion,
and its Brazen Trumpet repeated Victory, betrayed or prostituted before at
Dunbar, andnow ravished at Worcester by numerous over-powring Force, on that
Black and White day September the 3d. 1651. in the Dusk of which Fatal
Evening, when the ashamed Sun had blush't in his setting, and plunged his
Affrighted Head into the depth of Lucklesse Severn, and the Night ready to
Stain and Spot her guilty Sables with loyal Blood, was attiring her self for
the Tragedy; The King whose first and conspicuous valorous Essay so exceeded
all comparison that it cannot but oblige Fate to preserve that Matchless
courage and never again to venture or expose it to any Hazard) compelled to
Abandon the City of Worcester, (whose Fidelity and Affection deserves Perpetual
Memory,) after he had quitted his Court and Lodgings to which he retired from
the Field, having rallied his most Faithful and Considerable Friends, diverse
English Lords and Gentlemen, who were resolved to accompany him in his ^^ght;
was presented by that renowned Earl of Deroy with one Charles Gifford Esquire,
(a person of note then of that Country and of much manifested Honor since to
the World) to be his Majestic Conductor in this Miraculous, blessed Escape: who
forthwith called for one Francis Yates, whom he had brought with him under the
Command of Colonel Carelusse in a party that met the KING in his Advance to
Worcester to be guide-assistant for the surer finding the by ways for his
Majesty's speed and safety.

In the mean time Colonel Carlesse (a Gentleman of very Gallant and Noble
Endowments) was commanded to sustain the Brunt of the pursuing Enemy, and to
keep them off while the KING might be somewhat in his way; which with excellent
Prudence and Valor he did to effect, and afterward fled to his old retract
and coverture, passing by Hartlebury Castle, then Garrisond by the Enemy, whom
he Courageously Fought with and broke through, and came safe to his Designed
shelter.

Toward three a Clock Thursday morning the 4 of September, the KING in company
with the said Earl of Derby, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Cleaveland, Duke of
Buckingham, my Lord Wilmot, and others to the number of Fourscor came to the
place called White-Ladies in the Parish of Tongue in the confines of Stafford and
Shropshire, being 25 miles distant or there abouts from Worcester, which space
of ground he had rid that night.

This White-Ladies was a house belonging to one Fitz Harbert, where one George
Pendril (the youngest Brother of the five who were all severally instrumental
in the conductment and preservation of his Majesty) hearing somebody knocking
at the Gate so early, opening the Window he espied there the aforesaid Francis
Yates, who was his brother in Law, with Mr. Gifford; to whom he presently
opened the door, and enquired of his brother Yates what News from Worcester,
who told him that the KING was Defeated and in Pursuit, and therefore bid him
to make have and put on his Clothes. But before he could make himself ready,
the King with most of his Lords had entered the house, and came into the Hall,
where after a short consultation held among them, the Earl of Derby called for
William Pendrill the Eldest brother, (you must know that my Lord of Derby had
taken this place for a subterfuge, after the defeat given him by Colonel
Lilburn near Wigan in Lanchashire, and was acquainted there, and by them
conveyed to Worcester to the King; as also several other Gentlemen before had
used this for their Sanctuary) who being come, George was sent to Tongue to one
Robert Beard an Honest Subject to enquire of him whether there were any
scattered parties of the Kings thereabouts, or any of the Enemies appearing;
who brought word that the Coast was yet clear and no parties at all to be seen.
In his return he met with his Brother Richard; for now those few Inhabitants
that Lived there, were awakned with the Noise, and their own ill boding
thoughts and fears of the success at Worcester.

Richard was no sooner come in, but Squire Gifford called for him, and bad him
make have, and bring with him his best Clothes, which were a Jump and Breeches
of Green course Cloth and a Do skin Leather Doublet, the Hat was borrowed of
Humphrey Pendrill the Miller being an old Gray one that turned up its Brims --
the Shirt (which in that Country Language they called an Hurden or Noggen
Shirt, of Cloth that is made of the coursest of the Hemp,) was had of one
Edward Martin, George Pendrills Bond, and William Creswells Shoos; which the
King having presently unstripped himself of his own Clothes, did nimbly d'on.
His Buffe Coat, and Linen Doublet, and a Gray pair of Breeches which he wore
before, he gave into these Brothers Hands, who forthwith buried them under
ground, where they lay five weeks, before they durst take them up again. The
Jewels off his Arm he gave to one of the Lords then departing.

Then Richard came with a pair of Shears and rounded the King's hair, which my
Lord Wilmot having cut before with a Knife, had untowardly notched; and the
King was pleased to take notice of Richards good barbing, so as to prefer his
work before my Lord Wilmots, and gave him the praise of it; and now his Majesty
was Alamode the Woodman.

Hereupon William Pendril was brought to the King by the Earl of Derby, and the
care and preservation of his most sacred Majesty committed to his charge and
the rest of the Brothers, (any Lord would have staid too but there was no
undertaking security for them both) and presently the Lords took their heavy
leave and departed, every one shifting for himself. Only my Lord Wilmot was
conveyed by John Pendrill to Mr. Thomas Whitgreaves, but he would have left him
at several other places which my Lord did in no wise approve of; first at one
John Shores of Hungerhill, thence to John Climpson, thence to one Reynolds of
the Hide, so to John Humspaiches, where passing by Coven, they had notice of
Troop of Horse in the Town, and seeing some men coming behind them, (which
proved to be Friends, though my Lord suspected the Country rise upon them) they
betook themselves into a dry pit, where they stayed till Evening, and then
arrived safely at Mr. Whitgreaves.

The Company being all departed, a Woodbill was brought, and put into the Kings
hand, and he went out with Richard into the adjoining Woods. William departed
home and Humphrey and George went out to scout, and lay hovering in the Woods
to hear or see if any one approached that way. But the King had not been an
hour in the Wood, before a Troop of Horse of the Enemies came to VVhit-ladies,
and enquired, if some of the Kings Horse and himself passed not that way, and
if they could give any Informatiou of him; to which the Townes-folks answered,
that about 3 hours ago there was a Party of Horse came thither, and they
supposed the King with them, but they made no stay in the Village, but
presently departed; they were hereupon so eager in the pursuit that after
enquiring which way they took, they followed the rout, and made no further
search there. The King straight heard this by the two aforesaid Scouts, who
stragled for Intelligence into the Town.

All this day, being Thursday, the King continued in the Wood upon the ground,
Richard Pendrill being constantly with him, and sometimes the other two
Brothers: It proved to be a very rainy day, and the King was wet with showers,
thereupon Francis Yates his wife came into the Wood and brought the King a
Blanket, which she threw over his shoulders, to keep him dry; she also brought
him his first meat he eat there, viz. a Mess of Milk, Eggs and Sugar in a
black earthen Cup, which the King guessed to be Milk and Apples, and said, he
loved it very well; after he had drank some of it and eaten part in a pewter
Spoon, he gave the rest to George and bid him eat; for it was very good. There
was nothing of moment passed this day in Court but only the King exchanged his
Wood bill for Francis Yates Broom ^ook, which was something lighter.

They had much ado all that day to teach and fashion his Majesty to their
Country guise, and to order his steps and straight body to a lobbing, jobsons
gate, and were forced every foot to mind him of it; for the Language, his
Majesty's most gracious converse with his People in his Journey to, and at
Worcester, had rendered it very easy and very tunable to him.

About 5. a clock that Evening, the King with the retinue of Richard, Humphrey,
George, and Francis Yates left the wood, and betook himself to Richards house,
where he went under the name of William Jones, a woodcutter newly come thither
for work; against his coming, the good wife for his entertainment at supper,
was preparing a Fricasse of Bacon and Eggs, and while that was doing, the King
held on his knee their daughter Nan: after he had eat a little, he asked
Richard to eat, who replied, yea Sir I will, whereto His Majesty answered, you
have a better stomach then I, for you have eaten five times to day already.
After supper ended, the King according to his resolution to pass into Wales,
prepared (when it should be dusky) to depart; before he went, Jane Pendryll the
Mother of the five brethren, came to see the King, before whom she blessed God
that had so honored her Children in making them the instruments (as she hoped)
of his Majesty's safeguard and deliverance. Here Francis Yates offered the King
thirty shillings in silver, the King accepted ten, and bad him put the other
up. Humphrey would have gone before to see and view about, but the King would
not let him; it being now near night, they took their leave of the King upon
their knees, beseeching God to guide and bless him.

So the King and Richard only, departed to go to one Mr. Francis Wolf of
Madeley, there to take passage into Wales. On the way they were to pass by a
Mill, at a place called Evelin, and going over ('it was about nine a clock at
night) the bridge of the said Mill, the Milner steps forth, and demanded, who
goes there? having a quarterstaffe or a good cudgel in his hand, to which
Richard being foremost thought it not safe to reply, but the water being
shallow, leapt of the bridge into it, and the King did the like, following
Richard by the noise and rattling of his leather breeches; the Milner being glad
he was so rid of them; for (as it afterward appeared) here was some of the
Kings scattered Soldiers in his Mill, and he supposed the other to be
Parliamentarians that were upon the scent for his distressed guests.

Being come to Madely to the said Master Francis Wolfes late that Night, they
understood there was no passage over the water into Wales, and that it was very
dangerous to abide there, the Country being every where about laid with
soldiers, nor durst he entertain them into his House, but showed them a Haymow
where they might lodge; and there the King and Richard continued all that
night, and the next day being Friday, and that night with the conveyance of a
Maid of this Master Wolfes, who brought the King two miles on his way, they
retreated back again to Richards House: Mr. Wolf lent the King some small sum
of money.

This design being crossed, Saturday morning without any stay at Richards, the
King and he went to a House of Mistress Giffards, called Boscabell, where
William Bendril and his wife dwelt as Housekeepers for the said Giffard, who
received him joyfully; but the Kings feet were so blistered with traveling in
such course and stiff accoutrements as he wore on his feet, and lying in them,
that he was scarce able to stand or go, which Williams wife perceiving, she
stripped off his stockins and cut the blisters, and washed his feet, and gave the
King some Ease.

The same time or near thereupon, that Noble Colonel Careless, who as is said
before made good the Kings Rear at Worcester, and had fought his way through,
after he had been two days at one David Jones living in the Heath in
Tong-Parish, and there by him secured, (for this Col. had lain 3 quarters of a
year before obscured in this Country, when he had been narrowly every where
searched after was brought by one Elizabeth Burgess to this same House of
Poscabell; and there His Majesty and he met, but the Col. was so overjoyed with
the sight of the King his Master in such sure and safe hands, that he could not
refrain weeping, and the king was himself something moved with the same passion.

After a short conference and but inchoated council of the Kings probablest
means of escape, it was resolved by them to betake themselves to the wood
again; and accordingly about nine of the clock that Saturday morning the 6. of
September they went into the wood, and Col. Careless brought and led the King
to that so much celebrated Oak, where before he had himself been lodged: (This
Tree is not hollow but of a sound firm Trunk, only about the middle of the
body of it there is a hole in it about the bigness of a man's head, from whence
it absurdly and abusively (in respect of its deserved perpetual growth to
outlast Time it self) is called Hollow; and by the help of William Pendrils
wood-ladder they got up into the boughs and branches of the Tree, which were
very thick and well spread, and full of leaves; so that it was impossible for
any one to discern through them.

When they were both up, William gave them up two pillows to ly upon between
the thickest of the branches, and the King being overwearied with his travel
and sore journey, began to be very sleepy; The Col. to accommodate him the best
he could, desired his Majesty to lay his head in his lap, and rest the other
parts of his body upon the pillow, which the King did; and after he had taken a
good nap, ( William, and his wife Joane still peaking up and down, and she
commonly near the place with a nutthook in her hand gathering of sticks) awaked
very hungry, and wished he had something to eat: whereupon the Col. plucked out
of his pocket a good lunchion of bread and chief, which Joane Pendrill had
given him for porvant for that day, and had wrapped it up in a clean linen
cloth, of which the King fed very heartily, and was well pleased with the
service, and commended highly his good cheer; and some other small relief he
had, which was put up into the Tree with a long hook-stick.

In the mean while Richard Pendrill (the first Esquire) was sent to
Woller-Hampton some three miles thence being a Market Town, to buy Wine and
Biscuit, and some other necessary refreshments for the King; and withal to speak
with one Mr. George Manwaring, a person of known Integrity and Loyalty from
Col. Careless, with some instructions about the Kings removal, though not
expressly the King, but one of that ruined Party: in effect it was to know of
him, whether he knew of any sure privacy for 2 such persons? to which he
answered he had not himself, but would enquire if a friend of his, one Master
Whitgreave of Moseley formerly and again to be spoken of here) could do it. (So
that we may see what a Loyal honest combination and secrecy there was between
all of these persons;) and then Richard returned with his Wine, etc. to the
King; who toward the Evening came down by the same ladder from the Tree, and
was brought into the Garden of Boscable House, where he sat in the Bower of
it, and drank part of the Wine till toward night.

Neither was Humphrey Pendrill the Miller un-employed all this while, but was
sent to get intelligence how things went. And the easilier to come by it, he
was sent to a Captain of the Rump one Broadways, formerly a Heelmaker, under
pretense of carrying him twenty shillings for the pay of a man in the new
raised Militia of their County for their Mistres. While he was there in came a
Colonel of the Rebels, and asked for Captain Broadway, on purpose to know what
further enquiry had been made at White-Ladies for the King, relating to
Broadway the Story of it; to which he replied he knew nothing of it further
then rumor, but that there was one of that place in the House that could give
him an account of it. So Humphrey was called, and several questions put to him,
which he evaded, but confessed that the King had been there as was supposed, but
there was no likelihood for him to stay there, for there was three Families in
the House, and all at difference with one another. The Col. told him there was
a thousand pound offered to any that would take or discover him, and that they
doubted not, but within a day or two to have him delivered into their hands.

These tidings Humphrey brought with him, and omitted not to tell his Majesty
of the price his Rebels had set on him; at the telling of which, the King
looked something dismayed, as having trusted his Life into the hands of such
poor Men, whom such a sum as that, (though both detestable, and of
inconsiderable value to the Purchase) might pervert from their Allegiance and
Fidelity: which made Humphrey to be exceedingly troubled for his rashness,
while Colonel Careless assured the King, if it were 100000 l. it were to no
more purpose, and that he would engage his Soul for their truth; which Humphrey
also with many urgent asseverations did second.

It was late, and the King was very hungry, and had a mind to a Loyn of
Mutton, and being come into the House, asked William if he could not get him
such a Joint, to which he replied, that he had it not of his own, but he would
make bold at that time, and for that occasion, with one of his Masters Sheep in
the Cote; which instantly he did, and brought it into the ground Cellar; where
the Colonel not having the patience to stay while he fetched a Knife, stabbed
it with his Dagger; and when William came down they hung it upon a door, and
fleyd it, and brought up a hind Quarter to the King, who presently fell a
chopping of the Line to pieces, or (as they called it then) into Scotch
Collops, which the Colonel clapped into the Pan while the King held it and fried
it.

This passage yielded the King a pleasant jocular discourse, after his Arrival
in France, when it amounted to a Question, (a very difficult case) who was
Cook, and who was Scullion? and for solution of the doubt, when it could not be
decided by the Lords then present, was referred to the judgment of his
Majesty's Master Cook, who affirmed that the king was hic and nunc, both of
them.

When this nimble Collation was ended, it was time for the King to betake
himself to his rest, and his Chamberlain William brought him to his
appartiment. It was a place made between two Walls, on purpose for secrecy,
contrived at the building of the House; thither they let the King down, where
be slept very incommodiously with little or no rest, for that the place was not
long enough for him, and therefore the next night they laid him a sorry Bed
upon the Staircase, as they used to do for strange Woodcutters, that the
meannesse of his lodging might secure him from suspicion.

My Lord Wilmot as is said before, was all this while safe at Master
Whitgreaves, only his care of the King made him full of trouble. His hiding
place was so sure a one, that at his first coming to it, he wished so he gave
20000 l. that the King were either as secure, or there with him; he therefore
dispatched away John Pendrill (who had attended him all along) to the White
Ladies, to enquire for the King, and to give him notice of the convenience that
was at Master Whitegreaves; but when he came thither, which was on Friday, the
King was then gone to Madeley, to Master Wolfes. The next day he was sent
again, and by Richards Wife directed to Boscabel, where he delivered the King
the Message, which the King assented unto, and resolved to remove thither.

Monday night, September 8. at eleven at night, was the time appointed for the
Kings progress to Moseley, but a Horse was hard to be found. John was ordered
to borrow one of one Stanton of Hatton, but he had lent his out before; when
the Colonel remembered that Humphrey the Miller had one, and he thereupon was
called and desired to lend him for the Kings Service; it was a kind of
War-horse, that had carried many a load of provision, Meal and such like, but
now he put upon him a Bridle and Saddle, that had out-worn its Tree and Irons,
and at the time prefixed brought him to the Gate.

As soon as the King had notice of it, out he came, and would have had none but
Colonel Careless, and John to have gone along with him, but they told him, it
was very dangerous to venture himself with so few, they therefore entreated
his Majesty that he would give them leave to go with him, which at their
importunity he granted.

Having mounted the King, Colonel Careless and the six brethren guarding him,
two before, and two behind, and one of each side, armed with Clubs and Bills (
Humphrey, leading his Horse by the Bridle) they began their journey. It was
five miles from Boscabel to Mosely Master Whitgreaves, and the way in some
places miry, where the Horse blundering, caused the King to suspect falling,
and bid Humphrey have a care, to which he answered, that that now fortunate
Horse had carried many a heavier weight his time, six strike of Corn (which
measure the King understood not) but now had a better price on his back, the
price of three Kingdoms, and therefore would not now shame his Master.

Their travel was soon and safe ended, and the King brought the back way to a
style that led to the House, Humphries led the Horse into a Ditch, and the King
alighted off upon the style; but forgetting that most of his Guard were to
return home, was gone five or six steps onward, without taking leave of them,
but recalling himself returned back and said, I am troubled that I forget to
take my leave of my friends; but if ever I come into England by fair or foul
means, I will remember you, and let me see you when ever it shall so please
God; so they all kissed his Hand and departed, but the Colonel, John, and
Francis Yates, who guided the King to the House.

There Master Thomas Whitgreave received the King dutifully and affectionately,
and brought him in to my Lord Wilmot, who with infinite gladness, kneeled down
and embraced his knees. After a little conference, his Majesty was had to his
lodging, and the intriques of it shown him; where after the King had rested
himself that night, they entered into consultation about the escape, which had
been projected by my Lord Wilmot before.

Francis Yates departed, but John staid two or three days longer with the
King, while he went away. On Wednesday noon a Troop of the Rebels horse passed
through the Town and made no stay, which John told not the King of till after
noon, because (as he then said) he would not spoil his Majesty's Dinner.

Now the King prepared and fitted himself for his journey, and one Mr.
Huddlestone and Master VVhitgreave accommodated him with Boots, Cloak, Money,
etc. and John Pendril was sent to Mistress Lane about it, who sent him back
again with a parcel of leaves of Walnuts, boiled in Spring Water, to color his
Majesty's hands, and alter the hue and whiteness of his Skin in those places
that were most obvious to the eye, and by him gave notice to the King, what
time she should be ready.

On Thursday night the eleventh of September, Colonel Lane came with his
Sister to a field adjoining, and there they put the King before her. John
having the honor to hold the Kings Stirrup while he mounted, and presently
they two set forward, (having taken directions to know the Country) and my
Lady Lane having several recommendations to the allies, friends and
acquaintance of her family, that lay in their intended road, if any untoward
occasion should put them to the trial.

The several adventures which that Heroical Lady passed and overcame, in the
management of that grand affair of his Majesty's life, will become and befit a
worthier Paper, and a Nobler Pen, and therefore let the blessed and thrice
happy event of that her fortunate Loyalty, restrain a curious enquiry of the
means, which probably may be some arcana imperii, secrecy of State now, as well
as then of the King, not yet fit to be divulged. Miracles indeed of this
benign and propitious influence are very rare (God has not dealt so with the
Nations round about us) Especially where Humane Coadjument, and that so
signally (in the tacitenesse of so many persons concerned) has been
instrumental; and therefore why may we not (as we fearfully behold Comets) with
delight look upon the serene smiles of Heaven (in His Majesty's preservation)
and the Rays of its Goodness diffused into the Breasts of those Loyal Persons
his Guardians, (for whose Honor more especially this Paper officiously
obtrudes it self) with such weak eyes as we now see with, before we can have
the benefit of a prospective (the full Relation)

Let it therefore suffice and content us, that it pleased the Divine Wisdom
and Goodness to protect and defend our most gracious Sovereign in all dangers
and places and conditions whatsoever, in that his encumbered passage through his
own rightful Dominions, and without the least umbrage of suspicion, to conveigh
him out of the hands of his blood-thirsty Traiterous Enemies, who thought
themselves sure of Him, That so killing the Heir, the Inheritance might be
theirs.

He remained or rather Pilgrimaged from one Sanctuary to another in England
near the space of five weeks, and like other Princes, though not on the same
Account was present incognito while such time as a Convenience of Passage could
be found for him in Sussex, where after he had Embarked Himself in a Bark out
of a Creek, He was put back a-again by contrary weather into the same place,
being disguised in a Saylors clothes; but the wind veering about more
favorably about the end of October, 1651. Landed at Deep in Normandy, from
whence an Express was sent to her Majesty of England, to acquaint her of His
safe Arrival, which was presently communicated to the French Court, who
appearingly with great Manifestation of Joy welcomed the News: But His
Majesty's most Affectionate Uncle, the late Duke of Orleans did with entire
joy, As also sundry of the most eminent French Nobility, Congratulate His
Deliverance, which they testified by a most Splendid and Honorable Cavalcade
at His Reception and Entry into PARIS.

FINIS.

