EXPEDIENTS FOR Public Peace.

Showing the Necessity of a NATIONAL UNION And the way to it in this time of
Danger.

-- En, que discordia Cives
Perduxit miseros. --
Printed, In the Year, 1660.

EXPEDIENTS FOR Public Peace.
THough the Providence of God has wonderfully begun our conduct toward
Settlement, not through a Red Sea of blood, (which both our sins deserved, and
our late condition threatened) but a Crystal stream of calm waters; and though
his goodness has, beyond our hopes, appeared in confounding even confusion it
self, in dissipating the proudest Faction that ever was, since the fall of
Angels, and building of Babel. And (to speak their own language) in bearing
witness against them, not by the Event of Battle (the Appeal of Turks and
Pirates) but by a mighty influence upon our spirits, first opening our eyes, in
some measure, to see the things that belong to our Peace, and then moving our
hearts to pursue, as mediums thereunto, wholesome and sound Principles; yet our
restless enemies are no whit discouraged, but rather their malice increases, in
measure, as their hopes diminish. Had they Charity, Modesty, Prudence, or
common sense, which (one would think) the universal triumphs expressed, upon the
account of very doubtful hopes, and general suffrage of such, as speak without
interest or design, might prompt unto them, it would either daunt their
Presumption, or, at least, oblige them, seriously to consider, Whether any
thing in this transitory world, collateral to our eternal, and by experience,
not necessary to our present happiness, is worth the purchasing with so much
hazard to themselves, and ruin to others; but it seems, that having passed the
Rubicon of honesty and discretion, they resolve either to perish themselves, or
sack Rome.

And now, perceiving, they can do no good their own way, they will do what
mischief they are able, being thereto incited, by the two common enemies,
(viz.) the Devil and the Jesuit, They see it is too vain for them to contend
for the major Vote in Parliament, since they can scarce prevail in any, even
the least Corporation; For the sober and moderate Party, excluding both
extremes, (whether Fanatique Common-wealths-men, or Royal Hectors) does now
carry with it the sense of the people. Wherefore like Good Pilots, (if free
booters may deserve that style) they have learned to tack about to the wind, to
refine their gross pretenses, and appear no more in their own diabolical
shape, but disguised habit of true Parliamenteers as if they had never
prevaricated from their principles in the first War.

They find, (no question) their own weakness, in not having any color of
reason, or shadow of Authority, No, not so much, as the Rump of a Paliament, to
countenance their Usurpations, The legal and solemn dissolution of that, which
could only give them a basis (though a very false and as they made, it rotten
one,) having disappointed all their projects by turning the stream into the
channel of free, and triennial elections; so as, now, they must begin the World
anew. And are forced like broken Citizens in Cheapside, to set up an Alehouse,
or Chandlers shop in the suburbs to seek out some new probability of shifting,
and subsisting.

The escape of Lambert will not now avail them, He is in il condition to head a
Faction that dares not see a Constable on English ground; The case is fairly
altered, Law and possession, the City, Country and better part of the Army now
stand right, Scotland and Ireland are good seconds, our Government being in the
hands of a Vigilant Counsel, our Forces both by Land and Sea under the Command
of an invincible Captain, The Nation concerned not only for its Liberty but its
being; We are therefore I trust reasonably safe, from their batteries and
assaults, but let us not think our selves secure from their undermining. A
Rogue by profession ought always to be suspected, For, if he cannot command
your Purse, he will do the best he can to pick it.

The moderate Presbyterian, and sober Royal Principle do manifestly divide
almost the whole Nation between them: This has the greater part of the
Nobility and Gentry, that the Principal Corporations: The sincere uniting, and
incorporating of these two Parties, I look upon as a matter of such importance,
that alone, it seeures and dissipates all our fears, and renders us invincible
not only to the Phanaticks, but probably (with Gods blessing) to any Invader.
On the other side, their mutual discord (nay though it were but Jealousy) will
be a brack, (and perhaps the only brack) in our Foundation: This indeed, may
once more dash us in pieces; however, it will certainly dispose us to all those
Dangers and Vicissitudes, which commonly attend those Governments, where the
Factions are mighty, and equally poysed; the billows swelling so high, that
scarce any Pilot can steer the Vessel to its Port, or come safely to an Anchor:
In fine, this is like to give courage and opportunity to the Phanaticks; who,
though I am confident, they can never settle themselves, may nevertheless long
disquiet, and greatly torment us.

Of this our Enemies (a subtle Generation) cannot but be highly sensible, it
being so obvious to every capacity; And therefore their whole business now is,
as we Proverbially speak, to drive that nail that will go: Herein consists the
sum of all our fears, and their hopes; hitherto all their Jesuited Councels
tend: And they presume they shall neither want excellent Tools to work with,
nor fitting matter to work upon: the Fuel, they suppose is not like Greenwood,
which will not kindle to any purpose, without long and industrious blowing the
Coals; but rather like Charcoal, which being already half burned, is obnoxious
almost to every spark: The memory of things past revived, and aggravated, the
censure of things present, and evil presage of future, is the work they have to
do. Their Instruments are the Extravagants on both sides, and none more then
Cavaliers, whom they cunningly Cajole, by telling them, how much they prefer
Episcopacy before Presbytery; how much they esteem them a Nobler Enemy, and had
rather (if one they must choose) receive Laws from them; that stately Elms are
better then stinking Elders; that Charles Stuart (as they call him) is a goodly
Cedar in respect of our late Shrubs: With many other the like Insinuations,
tending only to heighten the pretenses of that Party, (naturally apt to be too
vain) and so to fatten them for the slaughter: To the Rigid Presbyterians, they
speak in a different strain, (for the Saints, I must tell you, have learned of
their great Master, to appear in diverse shapes, like a fair Lady to Gallants,
and a Capuchin to Bigotts,) I shall not here repeat their Malicious surmises
and suggestions: Their late Venomous News from Bruxelles, The Alarm to the
Army, Plain English, and other Pamphlets of the same tincture, will soon teach
you their Language, if you be not too honest to learn it.

The great Concernments, and indefatigable Endeavors of this (now, God be
thanked) Common Enemy, to sow the seeds of Discord amongst Brethren, and
thereby make way for our Ruin and their own Ends, (otherwise impossible to be
compassed) should certainly convince us, that we ought, at least wise not our
selves, to serve and further their Designs, but rather to trace the Serpent in
his crooked motions, to countermine him in his underground workings; and at
once wisely and generously resolve (however we may differ in Trifles and
Circumstances, (which variance, doubtless, amongst men of Charity and Temper
must needs either be easily reconciled, or innocently continued,) yet) always
to unite closely in the Main, that our strife prove but an Emulation, which of
us for the future shall be the better Englishmen, (viz.) more modest in our
Pretenses, moderate in our Assertions, peaceable in our Consultations,
charitable in our Censures, and fervent only in real Duties. To the
furtherance of which blessed Union, or, (as it may well be styled) benign
Constellation, there are many motives, (I think) as considerable, as the End
propounded, (viz.) our Peace and Happiness can render them.

The example of your Adversaries summons you to do that for prudence and
self-preservation, which they do for Malice and Faction: They who have scarce
any Doctrines wherein they agree, otherwise then as Foxes tayls, to burn our
Corn, little Sobriety or Temper, but what their crafty Nature, shrewd Maxims,
and Wordly experience gives them, no means of Reconciliation, in case of
disagreement, every one being his own Authority, his own Church, (as the name
of Independency it self imports,) They who could never comply with any
Establishment, but the very name offends them; and when both the Peoples
necessities, and their own, called aloud for somewhat of Settlement, chose
rather to rot and perish, then to have their Ulcers any way dressed; yet now
all these consent, or rather combine, (and that very unanimously) against our
Peace. Sir Henry Vane, and Sir Arthur Hazlerigge, Lambert and Scott, Rump, and
Committee of safety, all on the sudden united in their hopes and endeavors,
to ruin their Country: Nay, most observable it is, that in the midst of their
greatest Dissentions, (and Chaos it self (I think) had not greater) they were
so tender of destroying, or but branding each other, (knowing, it seems, their
Disease to be such, that Bleeding or Scarrifying would prove mortal to them)
as if they had only played a Match at Football or Cudgells for the Dominion.
Our Government was frequently altered without a broken Pate, or bloody Nose:
And those who should have been condemned as Notorious Usurpers, and Traitors,
escaped either under the notion of dissenting Brethren, or with the soft censure
of Backsliders; so sensible they were of the necessity to connive at each
others guilt: What a happiness and security were it to the Nation, if Persons,
in their Fundamentals sound and Orthodox, in their Professions I hope, sincere,
could arrive but at half so much Candor and Prudence, or that the men of this
world were not much wiser in their generation, then Children of light.

Matter of common principle directs and persuades you, as sober Assertors of
the same Law, and Religion, to stand and fall together. It is the observation
of your enemies (and a very true one) that you differ only gradu, not re, you
both subscribe, That the Majesty of Princes is inviolable, their Rights Divine,
their Persons Sacred; The necessity of outward Mission, Decency, and Uniformity
(if it may be) in Gods service: The Rights of the Ministry to their Tithes, by
known Law and Statute, grounded upon ancient Piety and great Morality, are on
both sides equally confessed and maintained. These are the substance, methinks
your Contentions about mere Rights and Circumstances should neither be great,
nor long, especially, being so destructive to mutual happiness; methinks,
matters might be compounded, by friendly Conference or Reference, both sides
receding and meeting each other in the way to Peace, for such is the Rule of
fair arbitrations; Methinks you should reflect, how little either of you has
advanced toward his desired ends, by long and ruinous Discord; you should see,
and foresee, how little ground has or will probably be gained, by pertinacy or
animosity; You should examine, Whether it be not better now to secure your
Consciences, Lives, and Laws, by a seasonable compliance with each other in
matters not Essential, then seven, perhaps twenty years hence, after much
innocent blood vainly spilt, your Estares diminished, your Country wasted,
perhaps be subdued, and forced to buckle in all your Pretensions, but at best,
to purchase a most Un-christian triumph, and a dear repentance even in Victory.
You Cavaliers should remember, That could you oppress or destroy the
Presbyterians (which you must never hope to effect) you would but weaken your
own hands, pluck down your best fences, and even by your Conquest expose your
selves, at least your Posterity, to mere Arbitrary Power, and Martial Law; a
condition, which few of you, I trust, would impose, none of you, I am sure,
would embrace. You Presbyterians should consider, That could you extirpate the
Royal party (which is yet more impossible) you would let in the Phanaticks as
a Torrent, to whom you lie very open and obnoxious, (viz.) to be beaten with
all your own weapons, and confuted with the same Arguments (both in Civils and
Spirituals) which your selves invented against the Royallists.

Common Exigence, and Charity to your Country conjures you, to redress, if
possible, her Grievances, ease her Burdens and Oppressions, redeem her
Captivity, regulate her Confusions in Church and State, restore her lost Trade,
and in some measure, relieve an incredible number of deserving Gentlemen, and
Noble Famelies, now perishing, of honest Citizens, now daily breaking; of
hopeful Scholars, now desparing of a bare livelihood. This cannot possibly be
effected by the continuance of our Distractions, since Reason, and Experience
in abundance may teach us, That Civil discord is most destructive to Piety,
Virtue, Learning, and Commerce; But, could we once more settle upon our true
English bottom, we should then be young and lusty as the Eagle, our rust would
soon look bright, our age renew, our blood spring, our spirits revive; And as
if there were a return of our Golden age, every one might, once more, sit
securely under his own Vine; There might then again be Peace within our Walls,
and Plenty in our Palaces; No leading into Captivity; No complaining in our
streets; The blessed condition of that City which is at unity in it self, of
that People, which has the Lord for their God.

Common Interest invites you Magistrates to be very strict and industrious;
Subjects, in their several Capacities, active to promote, however discreetly
passive, and cordially willing to embrace such wholesome Laws, as are
likeliest to establish Justice, and secure Property. To delight in broils, is
proper only for such, as either may hope to gain, but cannot fear to loose; or
such as have enriched themselves by Fraud, or Rapine, and being now possessed of
Naboths Vineyard, imagine (perhaps not without cause) that our unsettlement is
their best Protection: But you, whom I suppose in effect, to divide the legal
Interest of your Country, the Lands justly descending, or fairly purchased,
the Goods duly gotten, betwixt you, are certainly obliged to avoid Faction, as
you would do Plunder or Sequestration; to endeavor a sober accommodation of
differences (if any should happen) as the title Paramount, by which you must
hold your Estates.

Common danger, and necessity at once threatens, and admonishes you to join
your Counsels and Forces for mutual preservation, as good mariners and honest
passengers effectually do, when the Vessel wherein they are altogether
embarked, is either distressed with a Storm, or assaulted by Pirates. I have no
design to aggravate your just fears and real dangers, which doubtless are
many and great, and to most of you (I presume) visible, only let me beg of you
to use your talent of Reason; to consult with the pillow of your Experience, to
recollect your fragments of History: which will all show you your Condition, as
in a faithful Mirror. And may I hope convince you; That God has now set
plenty and famine, Liberty and Thraldom, Life and Death before you, those the
guerdons of your Moderation, and Obedience, these the inevitable Consequences
of froward and peremptory dissension: That as on your right hand, you have a
Land of promise, the throne of David, the pomp and greatness of Solomon, Or,
(to go no further for instance, then our own stage,) the blessings which from
the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth, to the late unhappy War, this Nation,
(unthankfuly I fear) enjoyed. whilst all her Neighbors envied, so on your left
stands a vast Wilderness, The defection of Jeroboam, The Usurpations of
Samaria, the seditions of the Gracchi, the Conspiracy of Catiline, the
Proscriptions of Scilla, the Oligarchy of Athens, and perhaps at last, Monarchy
with a vengeance, in the person of Caligula, or Nero; Rump and Barebones,
Levellers and Saints rampant, Jack straw, and Watt Tylar, Knipperdoling and
John of Leyden are at your elbowes, make your election at your peril.

The difficulty, or rather (I hope) impossibillity for any single party (as a
Party) to gain, much more to hold the power of dictating to the Nation, should
dispose you to the study of Universal interests, (our present Elyxir) to an
enquiry for such Expedients and temperaments in Policy as in themselves, are
only safe, or durable, and surely after long hostility most seasonable. The
baits of faction are now God be thanked all grown stale, The net is now vainly
spread in the sight of the Bird; Rooks and Daws have both learned to smell
Gunpowder at a reasonable distance, The Fox of sanctyfied imposture has been
hunted out of all his retreats. And the fury of usurpation pursued, as it were
from bogge to bogge; The fiend has appeared in all his guises and has not a
Vizour left which we are not acquainted with. Neither is there (one would
think) fuel for a new flame, either in our Spirirs or Purses; Those being with
long sickness, and much weariness composed and framed I trust to Sobriety and
Caution, These so exhausted, that we are scarce able to pay our present Taxes;
We have, (God knows) little plate left to carry to Guild Hall, we cannot spare
another fifth and twentieth part, Vast loans, or Benevolencies, And fifty
Subsidyes at once; Public Faith will furnish a Faction but with slender
sums, its credit being much disparaged, by what is past and more suspected for
the future, so as there is little danger unless mere wantonness should again
make us to swagger, or our Moneys burning (as we speak proverbially) in our
pockets, for want of other vent, send us to buy saddles, Buff-Coats, and gaudy
Feathers, etc. who, I take it, have, by this time, discovered, that there is
more use of bread, then Ammunition, of clothing, then harness. Fears and
jealousies must be real ones, if they much alarm us; It must appear to be
indeed Gods own cause, before we shall again stir to propagate, or perhaps
defend it, The Oath of a Tribune or word of a Vicar will not be taken in matters
of the highest Concernment, either spiritual or civil, If the Preacher summon
us to our Tents we shall be apt to enquire Quo warranto; How he came by his
Trumpet, whether he found his Doctrine in his text, or coined it in his fancy;
Whether Scripture and Antiquity: Or some very inodern Father, (I will not say,
Pamphleteere) furnished him with his Arguments and proofs; Let it, I pray be
added, that even our Confusion may in this particnlar turn to our Advantage:
For being distracted as we are with such a Variety of Judgments and Interests
which can never agree, but in the Negative, and will certainly all join
against any engrosser of Dominion, that party which shall so usurp, will stand
as a Butt, to empty the Quiver, A mere Ishmaell defying, and defied by all men.

The easiness of obtaining quiet, should encourage you to seek a little for
that Jewel, which (methinks) you cannot choose bnt find, it lies so plainly in
your view, God I know theauthor of al peace, is chiefly to be consulted and
invoked by Prayer, that he would open our eyes, incline our hearts, and bless
ourendevours, but then we must come with sincere minds and not as St. Augustine
most ingeniously confesses of himself that he prayed indeed devoutly against
his Lusts, but withal, secretly wished that God would not hear him; The truth
is, our peace is not far off, if we do not thrust it from us, it is nigh at
hand, nay it is within us Self denial, Integrity without a worldly Byasse, the
Christian duties of forgiving, and bearing with, each others infirmity,
Wariness in affirming, Charity in judging, Modesty in demanding, Meekness in
receding, these are our sure and certain guides in the way to Settlement; Every
faction would have Peace its own way, All profess to welcome it. But few that
I hear, will meet it; For whatsoever they find to be most profitable or
honorable or secure for themselves, that they are apt to propound, as
effectual, and Fundamental to our Peace; Not to instance too particularly,
sure I am, that the being of the Church, and well being of the Nation does not
consist in all those appurtenances, which some would obtrude, as necessary;
Many of them, perhaps, are very commendable and expedient, if they may be
procured without evident hazard of incurring mischiefs, far more considerable
for the present, then their convenience; For gold may be dear bought, And that
Uniformity will cost too much, which is purchased with loss or danger of
Unity: When a sure foundation is first laid, It will then be time to build
magnificently, and to contrive not only for mere use, but Ornament and
Accommodation. Till then all sides should learn to content themselves, with
that which may, or rather, must be, and not vainly expect that which never can
be or at least cannot now; Wherein much experience and some descretion would
advise them, not to hunt too eagerly, or quest too loud upon every scent, since
yielding may prevail where stubbornness never shall: Were this Principle and
Spirit infused into our Patriots, it were already a fair and hopeful progress
in their great work, for the differences which for the most part appear to be
more in the skirts then hody of our Religion or Government, would most of them
be soon accorded, and the rest vanish of themselves; Or if any should yet
remain, the Authority of a Parliament duly constituted, is a Judicature in
this Nation, without exception or appeal worthy to command, if not our Active,
yet at least our Passive Obedience; A Guardian, in whose custody, I am sure our
Liberties, and I hope, our Consciences are very safe.

The zeal of your Religion should provoke you to bestir your selves, in a time
of great need, and quitting your punctilo's, to intend the main; You all alike
profess to be sincere Protestants, and some of you Zealots to a kind of
transportation, so as to scorn Peace, where you think truth is, unless both
consist, concerned more especially, tender you have always been in your
bowels, large in your bounty, sedulous in your Correspondence, forward in your
Assistance toward the Evangelicall Churches in foraign parts, when oppressed,
or but threatened with any persecution; Upon this account, our late Princes
have, at the requests of their Parliaments and people freely and frequently
engaged themselves both in Wars, and Treaties, sometimes espousing their
Quarrel, sometimes compromising it for them, especially the French
Protestants, on whose behalf our Kings have long stood both as Champions of
their Liberty, and sureties for their good behavior; And indeed without our
interposing, they must needs have been long since swallowed up by their mighty
Foes; Their adversary, besides the inequality of Forces, having this great
advantage, that he was their undoubted Sovereign; You cannot but hear what
Monstrous Counsels are now hatching at Rome, what ominous beginnings there are
in France, all grounded upon this presumption, That England has other fish to
fry; And that the work may be dispatched before we are at leisure to look
abroad; Our Phanaticks, they, I think, are, a gagge in our mouths, a Remora,
to our Carreere, (I wish we find no other Obstructions,) were we once settled,
Rome would soon desist, and France perhaps be made repent; But whilst our
divisions continue, we must not hope to maintain our outworks, nor I fear,
defend our Walls, against enemies so powerful, and lately so united by their
General peace which, in all probability, may soon ferment into a Catholic
League.

Lastly, Your common duty, above all, obliges you, (And that, not for Wrath,
but Conscience, sake) if you must contend, That it be not for Dominion, but
Loyalty, not with strife, but honest emalation You of the Cavalier Party (who
pretend to a kind of Primogeniture) show now, that you are true, not only to
the Person and Authority, but to the Interest of your Master, for which you are
ready (if need be) to sacrifice your own: That you are Royallists not for
Faction, but pure Allegiance, and could be content to follow those Ensigns,
without such considerations, as sway only with Mercenaries: That your bleeding
Country has some interest in you, as well as your banished Prince, and that
your Loyalty has not devoured your Charity; Confute, in Gods name, their
Calumnies, who daily represent you, as Persons, whom nothing can please, but
mere Tyranny, to have a Grand-Seignour for your Prince, you his Janissaries;
The Nation, at his mercy, and your feet; Men so contracted in your principles,
and fettered with Jure Divino's, that no Jus humanum may be admitted, or once
mentioned. You Presbyterians, who (by the voice of the people, in most Counties
declining you) may perceive, That virtue is gone out of you; and that you
suffer not a little in your Reputation, upon former accounts; If your own
Consciences shall (as perhaps they may) second herein the votes of your
Contrymen; Now that it is in your power not only to make amends, but merit,
Pay all your arrears of Virtue and Loyalty, together with those vows of Truth,
Justice, and Modesty which I am confident you have often made in your late
Extremities; Wipe of all those stains at once, that for the present may seem
to blemish those virtues, which in many of you are very Eminent, and would
shine bright, if these Clouds were once dispelled; Your aftergame is very
good. The Law is now in your hands, and to you must be acknowledged the chief
honor of relieving your Country in its great distress, when alas, a Royallist
could not hold up his hand, except it were at the Bar; Proceed, therefore
generously and undauntedly in the performance of your own Duties, and
maintenance of our Liberties, Be still good Subjects, and good Citizens,
Christians, and Englishmen, let your stoutnesse marry your Allegiance, and your
Interest be subordinate to them both; Above all, let your moderation appear to
all men, and be confident, that in so doing, your Country will bail you, and
the Nation will be concerned not only in Gratitude but real Sympathy, that not
any of those dangers which the Phanaticks suggest, shall befall you, nor a hair
of your head perish.

THE END.

