Exceeding Happy and Joyful News from the Kings Majesty, and the Prince his
Highness at Shrewesbury.

Together with His Majesty's Demands of the Knights, Gentry and Commonalty of
Shropshire, pro^ounded to the Mayor of Shrewesbury, Septem. 24.

Brought from Shrewesbury by the last Post, Sept. 24.

Whereunto is annexed, Stafford and Wellington, the 19. of Septem. After the
reading of His Orders.

LONDON, Printed for H. Blund: Sept. 27.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
Exceeding Joyful News from the Kings most Excellent Majesty at Shrewesbury.
THe Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex having information and intelligence
by diverse Letters from Mr. Fines, now resident near the City of Worcester,
with about the number of 600. Dragooneers, that Prince Robert was come thither
with many Troops of Horse, and that his Majesty were also coming theither
with most of his forces, desiring him that he would be pleased to advance his
fooces from warwick and those parts toward the said City of worcester for the
safeguard and securyty of the same: Relating also the inhumane acts and
barbarus cruelties of the cavaleers which they daily committed and excuted upon
the Kings Majesty's true Subjects, saying that they were all Roundheads that
would not use the good word of God Dam-me.

It was also set down, that His Majesty does daily amongst his own Forces and
the Inhabitants where they reside, make Speeches unfolding his mind to them
concerning these warlike affairs, and certifying to them that he will live and
dye in his said Resolution, and will maintain the True Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, and the property of the Subject.

He also certified the said Earl, that Prince Robert begins to fire and burn
down many houses; and that he is now planting of diverse Ordnance upon the
walls of the City of Worcester and that he is now making and raising of great
Bulwarks and Fortifications near to the said City, giving out many threatening
speeches against those that will not subscribe nor condescend to his desires
and strict demands.

The said Letters also signified, that most of the Cavaliers in diverse Counties
were resolved and determined to assemble together and to march toward the said
City of Worcester, because it is supposed, that the Earl of Essex and His
Royal Majesty has appointed to have a general meeting near the said City
with all their Forces, and then to confer upon the Affairs of this Kingdom
and both houses of Parliament which are now in debate between the great
Coutcell of this Kingdom, And His Royal and sacred Majesty, but the Cavaleers
have already given out, that before there shall be any agreement, or happy
conclutions these present distractions, betwixt his Majesty and his Excelencie
the Earl of Fssex, that they will each man loss their lives, and adventure
their persons in opposition of the same, but let all good Christians prayers
ascend up to the Almighty, who is the Ruler of every Battle, and the greatest.
General over all Armies, that he would be so graciously pleased to send down
his holy Spirit to guide and direct his Royal Majesty (the King of Great
Britain) that he may at the said meeting with His Excellence the Earl of
Essex, Lord General of the Parliaments Forces, agree and conclude upon such
Articles of peace that may advance to the Glory of Gods true Religion, and the
peace and union of this distracted Kingdom, that so with unity and concord His
Majesty and the Honorable Court of Parliament may have a happy and blessed
meeting, to settle this Kingdom in its own posture, to which let all good
people say Amen.

It is credibly reported about the Western Countries that His Majesty is
resolved to have a Treaty with the Earl of Essex, and to conclude upon such
matters as shall be for the glory of Gods true Religion, but the day appointed
is not yet known: His Majesty upon the 23 of September came to Shrewesbury,
and at his coming thither propounded these following propositions:

The Mayor and Gentry of the said town condescended to them, being to this
effect. 1. That he was resolved to make that City his place of residence for
some certain time. 2. That His desires was that they would be pleased to
resign the Magazine of that County into His Majesty's custody, which was done
and performed accordingly.

His Majesty's Speech and proteslaiion, made in the Head of his Army, 19. Sept.
After the reading of His Orders.
Gentlemen,
YOu have heard these Orders read; It is your part in your several places to
observe them exactly: The time cannot be long before we come to Action,
therefore you have, the more reason to be careful: And I must tell you, I shall
be very severe in punishing of those, of what condition soever, who transgress
these Iustructions. I cannot susnect your Courage and Resolution; your
Conscience and your Loyalty has brought you hither to fight for your Religion,
your King, and the Laws of the Land; You shall mere with no Enemies, but
Traitors; most of them Brownists, Anabaptists, and Atheists, such who desire to
destroy both Church and State, and who have already condemned you to ruin for
being loyal to Us That you may see what use I mean to make of your va^our, if
it please God to bless it with success I have thought fit to publish my
Resolution and Protestation, which when you have heard me make, you will
believe you cannot sight in a better quarrel; In which I promise to live and
dye with you.

I Do promise in the presents of Almighty God, and as J hope for his Blessing
and Protection. That I will defend and maintain the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, established in the Church of England; and by the Grace of God in the
same will live and die. I desire to govern by The known Laws of the Land, and
that The Liberty and property of the Subject may he by them preserved with the
same Care as my own just Rights. And if it please God by his blessing upon
this Army raised for my necessary defense, to preserve my from this Rebellion,
I do solemnly and faithfully Promise in the sight of God, to maintain The Just
Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and to govern by The known Laws of the
Land to my utmost Power, and particularlyo observe inviolably The Laws
consented to by me this Parliament, In the mean while, If this time of Watre,
and the great necessity and straits I am now driven to beget any violation of
those. J hope it shall be imputed by God and Man to the Authors of this War,
and not to me who have so earnestly labored for the preservation of the Peace
of this Kingdom.

When I willingly fail in these particulars, J will expect no aid or relief
from any man or protection from Heaven; But in this Resolution I hope for the
cheerful assistance of all vood men, and am confident of Gods blessing.

FINIS.

