Exceeding true and joyful NEWS FROM WORCESTER: Wherein is Declared two
glorious Battles performed by the Parliaments Forces against the Kings Army,
September. 24. and 26.

The first by the Earl of Essex with ten Troops of Horse, against Prince
Robert, and Commissary Wilmot, with 14 Troops, within half a mile of
Worcester, who after 4 or 5 hours fight, slew Commissary VVilmot, wounded
Prince Robert in the head, and killed about 30. Common soldiers.

Of the Earl of Essex side were slain Sergeant Major Douglas, and about 20
Common soldiers. This battle was fought upon Monday last, and with much
difficulty his Excellency obtained the victory, and has beaten all the
Cavaleers out of Worcester. The second battle was fought the L. Sey, against
Sir John Byron near Shrewsburie, Sep. 24, 1642.

September, 29. Printed for James Blake, to prevent all false Copies from those
Parts, by order.

C R
central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish
unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these
figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right
Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM WORCESTER.
Brought from thence by the last Post, September the 27. 1442.
ON Sunday last, Mr. FINES drew up his Forces, and began to give an Assault
upon that Gate of the City, which is called Sudburie, and did very good
execution, having almost gotten entrance into the City, but this most happy
attempt was prevented most unfortunately; For before the Gates were absolutely
made open to his Forces, Sir JOHN BYRON drew up a strong force of horse, and
immediately issued forth, and gave them a fierce and violent encounter, which
Master FINES wisely weighing their power and strength, not to be so strong and
able as he did wish, and considering how many worthy lives, and what valiant
blood might be spilt in this quarrel, would not hazz^rd his men upon the
least disadvantage, b^ judiciously weighing all things, he withdrew his Forces
some 4 miles from the City to a place called Knowl ^ill expecting some more
Forces daily to arrive there, by whose aid and assistance he might finish what
he had before begun.

And upon Satterday last, the L. Sey and Captain Brown came to WORCESTER with
their Forces placing them in the most advantageous places for their purpose.

And for the prevention of the enemies flight over the Bridge into Wales, they
placed a strong Garrison at St Jones, almost a mile from the City, by this
means prohibiting and staying them from having ano aid and assistance from the
Welsh. And some other Forces they placed in Perry-vvood about two miles from
the City, and having thus surrounded the City, they made a Battery against the
walls planting their Ordnance at St. Jones, and many happy shots were made
against the town, the Cavaleers answering them again with as much strength as
they could.

But all in vain, for the L. Sey and Captain Brown received no loss or harm,
but it is thought that there mas much harm done in the City.

This fight continued for the space of seven hours many of the Cavaleers being
slain therein, and some of the chiefest Ringleaders in this lewd and wicked
practice against the King, Church and state were wounded, among whom Sir
Sterington Talbot a great complotter in this business, received the first
hurt, being shot in the shoulder.

Master Colbin is likewise dangerously wounded, many more were killed, but the
full and perfect Number of them is not as yet known, they conceiling their
losses; because they would not discourage the rest of their Confederates.

But thus much is certain, the Lord Sey, and Captain Brown have had so happy
success in this their undertakings, that it is generally reported, that they
must very speedily surrender up the City, they having received so great a loss
by this present Encounter.

Here follows the true and exact Description of a great Battle fought by his
Excellency the Earl of Essex, against Prince Robert his Forces, who sallyed
out of the town with ten troops of horse, and met him.

The second Battle fought by his Excellency, ROBERT Earl of Essex, against
Prince Robert, near the City of Worcester, Septem. 26. MDCXLII.
PRince Robert having information, that the Earl of Essex was within 3. miles
of the City, he immediately drew out ten troops of Horse, and marched toward
Bouchers Meadow, about half a mile distant from Worcester, and commanded Sir
John Byron to march with 2000. foot and 700. Horse toward Upton, to assault
the Earl of Essex on the Rear.

Our Artillery was behind, about 9. miles from Worcester, and most of the foot
forces, which was a great encouragement to the Cavaleers, and made them very
forward to meet his Excellency.

But soon was their hopes frustrated; for when the Earl of Essex saw that
Prince Robert had set his men in Battalia, and were resolved to have a pitc'd
Battle, he commanded Sergeant Major Douglas, a most Noble and expert Soldier,
to draw out 200. Horse, and to charge the enemy, which he did with such an
undanted spirit, and so effectually, that 14. of them quickly fell.

Then Col. Sandis, Capt. Wingate, and Cap. Hales adventured to march up to
relieve Sergeant Major Douglas, and gave a second Charge to Prince Robert,
which did very good execution, and as it is credibly reported, Prince Robert
received a sore wound on the Head.

And after 4. or 5. hours fight, much harm being done on both sides, Captain
Austin marched up from the Rear, with his troop and gave a most desperate
Charge, which the enemy perceiving, and being sensible of, they retreated into
the City of Worcester, and Captain Austin followed them into the City, and did
execution on them there, but they stayed not so much as to alight, but marched
away, and his Troop being single, none then came to assist him, could not
pursue, so he kept the Gates of the City, to make entrance for our men, and so
by this means we obtained the City, and good store of Arms belonging to the
Cavaleers, and have taken about 30. Prisoners.

Sergeant Major Douglas was slain on out side, with 20. more, and about 30. of
the Enemy.

The Lord General is now in this City, and does intend to march toward the
Kings Army at Shrewsbury.

FINIS.

