EXCEEDING Welcome Nevves FROM BEVERLEY.

OR York-shires Love to LONDON.

Wherein is declared the Resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire,
to join with the London Volunteers, for the defense of the King and Parliament.

With more Joyful News from the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Also the Parliaments Resolution, wherein they declare that they will live and
die with the Earl of Essex, in the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and
defense of the Kings Honor.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.



LONDON, Printed for John Rider. Aug. 4. 1642.

Exceeding welcome News from BEVERLEY.
ON the 25. of July, his Majesty received several Petitions from the
neighboring People, wherein was expressed many insupportable grievances, and
insufferable injuries, which they had sustained by some Cavaleers that were
Billeted in the neighboring Villages, some 3. Miles distant from the Camp,
withal manifesting that the said Cavaleers had taken their Horses, under a
pretense for his Majesty's Service, and had sold them to several Persons, by
whom they were detained, to the great damage of the said Owners, humbly
desiring his Majesty to take it into his serious consideration, and that
according to his many Declarations and Protestations, that the porest of his
Prootestant Subjects should not want his protection, he would now, not only
redress those present injuries, but protect them from future wrongs and
damages of the like nature.

Which Petitions were by his Majesty graciously accepted, and those Cavaleers
by his Majesty's special command put to exemplary punnishment, to the end that
their examples might deter others from committing the like misdemeanors.

Thomas Sanderson was caused to ride through the Camp, with his fcae toward
the Horse Tail, afterward discharged from his Majesty's Service.

Dudley Kilbourne was put into the Bilboes four hours, and casheer'd likewise.

Sammuel Anderton was in great danger of being hanged, for entering into a
poore-mans House, and threatening him, saying, he would cut his throat, if he
would not tell him where he had hid his old Angels, but being censured to stand
in the Bilboes three several days, he was committed to the Provost-Marshall,
to whom the charge was given, to see the said sentence put in execution.

Several Libels and scandalous Writings against the Parliament, were scattered
in the Camp, which were showed to his Majesty, who was highly displeased
therewith, openly declaring the Authors of those scandalous Writings, to be the
chief promoters of these troubles and distractions, withal promising reward
to him that would produce the Authors, protesting to make them examples to all
the seditious Spirits in the Kingdom.

His Majewy seems to be much discontented, and addicted to melancholy,
delighting in no mirth or recreation, only in surveighing his Army, and
observing the Situation of the Country, and it is generally hoped (however his
Majesty stands engaged to that Party, for the present) that he intends not to
alter the Religion of the Kingdom, nor to make War against his Subjects.

His Majesty does generally declare against Tumults, and Oppressions, and all
his declarations which he frequently publishes, are seconded with
protestations, that his Royal intention is to maintain the true Protestant
Religion, and the ancient Laws established by his Predecessors.

The Cavaleers are very forward in their Attempts against Hull, and apt to
engage themselves in any Design, that may in their judgments tend to the
promotion of a War between the King and Parliament, and it is generally
believed that if his Majesty had bin as forward as they; something had been
begun, that would not have been ended suddenly, against Hull I mean.

The Gentry and Commonalty of Yorkshire, which are now under his Majesty's
command, do declare themselves for the King and Parliament, tand it is thought
as soon as the Forces raised by ahe Parliament shall be on foot, they will
call to astrict account some, that now make their power the limit of their
wills, and rule both his Majesty and them by their beguiling pretenses. There
is shrewd muttering against the Earl of Lindsey, Earl Rivers, the Earl of
Newcastle, Captain Porter, and Mr. Murrey, who are suspected to be the chief
incendiaries and promoters of this War.

There comes in supplies of Men and Horse daily, but all declare themselves
that they come so armed for the defense of the King and Parliament.

The Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, that they only aim at, and desire nothing
more then to maintain the purity and power of Religion, and to honor the King
in his just and Regal Prerogatives, esteeming nothing like the Liberty, Peace,
and Safety of the Kingdom, nor thinking any thing to be too good to be
hazarded in discharge of their consciences for obtaining it: Always reposing
themselves in the protection of Almighty God, which they are confident will
never be wanting in his blessing toward them, while they seek his glory, as
they have found him wonderfully going along with them in all their proceedings.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Joh: Brown, Cler. Parl.

FINIS.
WE the Lords and Commons are resolved to expose our Lives and Fortunes for the
defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings Person,
Honor and Estate, the Power and Privilege of Parliament, and the just Right,
and Liberties of the Subject.

And We do require all those who have any sense of Piety, Honor, or
Compassion, to help a distressed State, and to come in unto our aid, and
assistance: This being the true cause for which we raise an Army, under the
Command of the Earl of Essex, with whom in this cause We will Live and Die.


