EXCEEDING JOYFUL NEWS FROM HOLLAND.

Read in the Honorable House of Commons upon Thursday, being comfortable
Tidings to both Houses of Parliament, and to all the rest of his Majesty's
loving Subjects.

Likewise the Impeachment of Lieutenant Bodley before the House of Peers for
speaking words of dange^ous consequence, which words did tend to the knowledge
of some dangerous plot against the City of London.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

C R
printer's or publisher's device

Printed for Richard Seymour, August, 5. 1642,

Ex-eeding joyful TIDINGS FROM HOLLAND.
Being the happiest and Joyfullest Tidings, that ever came to London.
THe malignant Party has always been pregnant in their Inventions, against
the Legal and Real intentions and Proceedings of Parliament, upon whose
Counsels the strength and prosperity does fully depend.

Yet have their Cares and Procedings bin opposed by the malicious Designs of
ill-affected persons, whose discontented spirits repine at the peace of Church
and Commonwealth, and only please and delight themselves, with the hopes of
Subversion both of Religion and Laws.

Upon the 30. day of July last past, upon the meeting of the LORDS House, the
Assembly being complete and full, there was a Complaint made against one
Lieutenant BODLEY, (who had formerly bin Listed upon the Irish Expedition.

But upon the mature consideration of the House, and the urgency of the present
occasion and Estate of this Kingdom, were put by that service; until another,
and more fit opportunity.

There was a Complaint made against this Lieutenant Bodley, for speaking words
of most dangerous consequence.

Whereupon there issued forth an Order for his present appearance, to make
answer thereunto.

Who upon Saturday next, upon the completing of the House of Peers, this
Lieutenant BODLEY was brought before the house of Lords, and present
Examination was made concerning words which he should speak.

Which words were of great danger and hazard, and did very much concern the
safety of the City of London, which if that Plot had taken effect, it would
have bin a great prejudice to the whole Kingdom, and a great Overthrow to the
City.

But he being Examined, touching the words he spoke, tending to the knowledge
and privacie of some sudden and dangerous Plot to be acted, and put in
execution against the City of London, which plot should have received issue,
and bin brought to perfection either by fire or sword.

Which words and knowledge were denied by the said Lieutenant Bodley, without
the confessing of the least privacie thereof, but was confirmed and testified by
the affirmation of three Witnesses, which came in and gave in their testimony
against him before the House of Lords.

Whereupon he was committed to the Gate house, to be kept in custody there,
until they should take further consideration thereof.

Exceeding joyful News from Holland.
THe States of Holland having received information of the great provisions for
War there made to be sent to the North of England, examined diverse Merchants
thereupon, they also received Information of some certain ships ready laden to
be sent away, upon pretense having Order from the Parliament.

But afterward, upon some distrust the Hollander stayed them, and would not
give their consents for the transporting of that provision thither; which if
they had, God knows what danger might have befallen this Kingdom, by reason
that there are diverse ill affected members in the North, who does aim to bring
this Island to Confusion, and Destruction.

They have likewise stayed diverse persons that were Resolved to go to the
North, but to what end is not as yet known.

This is the Report which was made to the House of Commons, and after some
Debate and Consultation thereupon, returned a speedy message to the Earl of
Warwick, desiring him to be careful of the proceedings there, and to be
diligent in the stopping of such ships as are bound for the Northern Coast, or
elsewhere.

Mr. Hambden made Report to the Commons, that there are great sums of money
raised in Buckingham-shire upon the Propositions for horse; And that the
Country desires there might be 100. l. thereof laid out for the buying of such
Arms for the Country as they stand in need of, which was ordered accordingly.

His Majesty has displaced diverse other great Lords, as the Earl of
Northumberland, Pembroke, and Holland, for no other cause, but d^icharging
their Conscience in Parliament.

Likewise His Majesty does Declare, concerning his raising of Forces, that what
he has done, is but in Order to his own defense.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.



FINIS.

