AN EXPEDIENT FOR The Preventing any Difference BETWEEN His Highness and the
Parliament.

ABOUT The Recognition. The Negative Voice. The Militia.


By a Lover of his Country, that desires at this time to be Namelesse.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-sp^ead-Eagle, at the Westend
of Paul's. 1659.

THough I look not upon the present dispute about the Negative voice, and the
Command of the Militia, as like to give us much trouble, (for Usurpations and
Tyrannies once judged by God, never recover to rise again in the same form).
Yet to satisfy the Doubts and Fears of those honest souls, who see not what
strength they have on their side; I shall desire them to be assured. That there
is Reason and Equity sufficient to stop the mouth of such a claim, by any
single Person in this Nation: and therefore We shall need no other Comprimise
of this Difference, but to reflect upon the Rice and Occasion of this
Government, from whence the Nature and power of it will best appear.

THe present form of Government (then) as it varies from a Republic, was
begotten by Necessity. For the Nation having traversed all the ways of a
Parliament and Counsel of State; (and seen all they could affoard) and at
length finding through long continuance (as standing waters) they did corrupt,
discontent gathered, and fermented, and sought where it might most
advantagiously discover it self; and so fell in with the power of the Army: and
the person of the then General, whom they had found so stour and faithful, (and
withal succesful) and was willing to throw themselves and their cause into his
Arms and Protection, consenting that he should use any means, yea though he
were most arbitrary therein, to ease them of their old Masters, whom they could
bear no longer. So that as I said it was pure necessity and strait that cast us
here, and not any affection to Monarchick Government. The clear intent and
expectation of the honest people (that were accessory to the Devolving the
power here) being: That that person should in the name and power of God (or of
his own Truth and Righteousness which was supposed to be in him) administer
the power of these Nations, to settle us in fredome and peace upon all
accounts, both civil and spiritual: and they never dreamed of a Monarch or a
Family interest, nor did they imagine any need of cautioning it here. Though
others, wiser heads, (such, who perhaps by the opportunity of their high
places, had approached nearer this Temptation in their own hearts) did foresee,
and were aware, what might be the consequence and product of this overhasty
credulity, and trust as afterward indeed it came to pass.

. II. The Protector did clearly run biass to the Honest intentions of those,
that wished him the administration of the Power, when he made himself a civil
Ruler. But changes in States and Governments, being brought forth with such
pangs and throws, as are very uneasy and dangerous, they are not every days
work. It was in vain to retract or withdraw the trust committed to the General,
though many disliked the way he went, nor could men believe that the late
passages and transactions could ever grow into such oblivion, as that He, or
any Man, should think that this Nation should be willing to match the Militia
and the Scepter together in the Government, but only in his Person; (whom, they
looked upon as an Extraordinary person). They having fought against it in the
person of the late King.

. III. Hereditary succession in the Government, being so much disgusted by the
Honest Patriots in the late Parliament. The Nomination of the immediate
succession was indulged; his late Highness, as an Expedient to satisfy the
then present, powerful, strivings for Hereditary succession, which was not
neither yielded unto, but upon a very high confidence of the Spirit and
Principles of his late Highness, to carry him above all private respects, in
the execution of the trust of Nomination.

. IV. His now highness being in possession of the Government, takes therewith
the power of the Militia, which was invested in his Father (and he conceives
also the Negative voice) to descend upon him with the Civil Government. The
Question is whether in truth it do so or no? I conceive not; And first for the
Militia, It is true, the supreme Command of all the Armies in the 3 Nations
was in his late Highness; but not as he was Protector, but as General, which he
was, before he was Protector. So that the Protector or Civil Government was
annexed to the Militia, not the Militia to the Civil Government: or rather the
power of administering to a Civil Settlement, was annexed to the Person, not to
the Power or Office of the General; and that upon the reputation of his
Personal Virtue: His Military Power and Capacity serving only as a strength
and security to him, in the due exercise of the power of Civil Administration
entrusted. So that it was not Oliver Cromwell as Protector, or the supreme
Civil Magistrate that was made General; nor Oliver Cromwell as General simply,
that was made Protector; but Oliver Cromwell General of such a spirit, of such
integrity and faithfulness, that the like qualified Person was not to be found
in the three Nations; that was thought fit for all the Power that could be cast
upon him.

. V. As for the Negative voice as it was never disputed with his late Highness
(where it was suffered to sleep as in a safe hand) for his Personal Virtues; so
was it never (since it was taken away from, or rather with the King and Kingly
Government) concredited, or be trusted with any Power or Person. And indeed it
is a thing altogether superfluous as well as dangerous, for take away from
Parliaments (who sure in this light that is risen upon us, cannot be imagined
(from their source and fountain, the Generality and body of the Nation) to
bring with them that choice discerning (which is singular) to Judge of
spiritual things). I say, take a way from them the Coercive Power in things
spiritual, and purely of the mind, and admit them (as Children of this World)
to be so wise in their Generation, as to be able to Judge what is good and
behoofeful for the Nation, wherein their Stakes and Interests lie; and what use
will there be of a Negative Voice in a Commonwealth as we are (or should be).
Where no distinct Personal or Family Interest, is, or ought to be owned, but
what is, one with the Commonwealth, and in a subserviency thereunto?

. VI. The Negative voice therefore being out of Doors with Kingship, and we
having no Civil Head, now that is Master of the Commonwealth, but a servant to
it: that was set up for that end (though an Honorable Servant, and it is fit
he should be so maintained.) The Resolution is easy.

Let his present Highness be acknowledged and confirmed as supreme Magistrate
in these 3 Nations.

Let the Officers of the Army choose their General, and let him have his
Commission from the Protector and Parliament.

Let his Highness, now being with the Parliament, have the power of Disposing
and Commanding these forces, and of making War and Peace.

The light in which these things do evidence, and offer themselves to the
Judgment and consciences of men, is manifest,

For the first, a single person cannot hurt us, if an unfit power be not
concredited and betrusted with him. When we engaged against a King, it was not
against a single person simply; but so stated and Circumstanced, Arbitrary,
tyrannical, with a luxurious Court, a burdensome State, etc. For this is a
Principle We never intended by that engagement to engage against, what might be
useful to us (no rational man would do so) but what we found hurtful. Therefore
the single Person may stand.

2. When we admitted a single person, and abated so much of the Circumstance;
We gave not up the substance of our Cause, Therefore be not baffled in that:
but if We give the single Person a Negative voice, and the dispose of the
Militia, We give up the very heart and substance of our Cause. Therefore part
not with that.

Neither indeed can his Highness, who is but a single Person, expect whoever
should invest him with the sole Command of the Militia; while the Army and the
Officers thereof keep their integrity, that he can make any use thereof, but
for public ends, and therefore it would be Onus non honos.

3. It is fit his Highness should have an Honorable, though not the Only
Interest in the Commanding the Militia: Therefore let him be always sought
unto, to join with the Parliament in the dispose of the Forces of the Nation.

And as for those of the Other House, let them pass (or so many of them as the
Parliament shall think fit) into the Council of State, and if they have a
Concurrent Vote with his Highness and the Commons, yet no Negative Vote: their
usefulness may be chiefly in the Vacancy of Parliaments, not to be a balance
upon the Commons: let their balance be, that Reason and Righteousness that is
among themselves, as to the things of this World, which is their proper Sphere.

The End.

