An Exact RELATION OF Prince Rupert His marching out of BRISTOLL, the 11. of
this instant September. 1645. according to Articles of agreement made between
him and the Right HONORABLE, Sir Thomas Fairfax.

With the manner how, and the place whither he is to go, as how far the
General himself accompanied him, the number of his Forces both Horse and
Foot, of his Wagons, and other particulars.

Also what Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other Provisions which Sir
Thomas found in the City, Forts, and Castle, fully expressed.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 18. Sept.
1645.

A Letter sent from Bristoll to his friend in LONDON: Showing the manner of
Prince Ruperts marching from thence to Oxford.
Bristoll 12. September. 1645.
YEsterday according to the Articles, Prince Rupert marched out in this manner,
having first drawn all his Foot into the Royal Fort and Castle, his Horse
standing in the Green under the Fort, within the Line, those Wagons appointed
for him being laden with his Baggage, in all not above eight.

He drew out part of his Foot and Horse before his VVagons, and part
following, Himself next with his Lifeguard of Firelocks came forth, all in Red
Coats before him, and his Lifeguard of Horse following, accompanied with some
Lords, viz. Cromwell, Grandison, etc. Colonel Hamonds Regiment of Foot
standing at the Port to receive the Keys of the Fort and march in, Lieutenant
General Cromwell, Colonel Montague, Colonel Rainsborough, and some other
Officers waited at the Port of the Fort for his coming out, and waited upon
him to the General, who stood with the Convoy of Horse without the Line, and
accompanied him over Durdum Down, being almost two miles: The Prince was clad
in Scarlet, very richly laid with silver Lace, mounted upon a very gallant
black Barbary Horse; the General and the Prince rid together, the General
giving the Prince the right hand all the way; the number of the Princes Foot
was about 2000. The Horse with the designed number of two hundred and fifty and
the Lifeguard altogether, made about four hundred: And I think there might be
of Noblemen and Gentlemen at the least three hundred more. The Prince upon the
Green then named the place to which he would march, which was to Oxford, and
quartered at Westberry the last night: Colonel Butler with his Regiment, and
Major Hemington with the Lieutenant Generals Regiment, waited on him as Convoy.

The General upon his return viewed the Royal Fort which certainly is one of
the bravest Citadels in England, in it four and twenty pieces mounted upon
five Bastions, Powder in quantity, Victuals in abundance of all sorts,
fourscore or an hundred tun of Bear, Bread sufficient to serve almost one
hundred thousand men a day.

Upon the Line, Castle, and Forts, might be in all about two hundred pieces of
Ordnance mounted, two or three hundred barrels of Powder, a great Magazine of
Arms, some say three or four thousand, the City it self being the next to
London in the Kingdom; all this success is the Lords doing, which ought to be
mavelous in our eyes. What is next to be done is now to be considered on; I
hope God will counsel us for the best: We shall be very sudden on motion, and
then I shall give you a further account.

So Iremaine, etc.
WE took Basalisk warning piece which was lost in Cornwall, with some other
pieces also lost there; so that at Naseby and Bridgewa^er we have retaken all
the Pieces the Earl of Essex lost in Cornwall. There is left only a Regiment
of Foot in the Fort and Castle, by reason the Sickness is much in the Town;
this day the Army removes to Cavesham and Penford, fresh Quarters free from
sickness until the Money come from Reading, and this place be settled.
Somersetshire is raising two thousand men to recruit the Army, part of which we
are to receive to morrow, and hope for one thousand and five hundred more out
of Gloucestershire.



Articles of Agreement between the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of
his Highness Prince RUPERT, and his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX for the
surrender of the City of Bristol, September. 10. 1645.
THat his Highness Prince Rupert, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers,
Gentlemen, and Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever now residing in the
City of Bristoll, the Castle and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said
City, Castle, and Forts thereof, with Colors, Pikes and Drums, Bag and
Baggage; the Prince his Highness, all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Officers in
Commission, with their Horse and Arms, and their servants with their Horses
and Swords, and common soldiers with their Swords; the Prince his lifeguard of
Horse with their Horse and Arms, and 250. Horse besides to be disposed of by
the Prince, and his lifeguard of Firelocks with their Arms, and each of them
one pound of Powder and a proportion of Bullet, and that none of the persons
who are to march out upon this Article, shall be plundered, Searched, or
Molested. 2 That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick or wouned in
the City, Castle or Forts, shall have liberty to stay till their recovery, and
then have safe Conducts to go to his Majesty, and in the interim to be
protected. 3 That the persons above mentioned, who are to march away, shall
have a sufficient Convoy provided for them to any Garrison of the Kings as the
Prince shall name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoll, and shall have
eight days allowed for their march thither, and shall have free quarter by the
way, and shall have two Officers to attend them for their accommodation, and
twenty Wagons for their Baggage, if they shall have occasion to use the same.
4 That all the Citizens of Bristoll, and all Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
and all other persons residing in the said City, and Suburbs of the same, shall
be saved from all Plunder and violence, and be secured in their Persons and
Estates from the violence of the Soldier, and shall enjoy those Rights and
Liberties which other Subjects enjoy under the Protection and Obedience of the
Parliament 5 That in consideration hereof, the City of Bristoll, with the
Castle, and all other Forts and Fortifications thereof, without any sleighting
or defacing thereof, and all the Ordinance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other
Furniture and Provisions of War (excepting what is before allowed) shall be
delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax to morrow being Thursday the eleventh day of
this instant September by one a clock in the afternoon without any diminution
or imbezelment. His Highness Prince Rupert then naming to what Army or
Garrison of the Kings he will march. 6 That none of the persons who are to
march out on this agreement, shall plunder, hurt, or spoil the Town, or any
person in it, or carry out any thing but what is properly their own. 7 That
upon signing these Articles Colonel Okey and all persons now in prison in the
City of Bristoll, the Castle or Forts of the same, shall immediately be set as
liberty. 8 That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Thomas Fairfax (such as he
shall approve) this night, who are to remain with him until the City be
delivered. 9 That neither the Convoy nor Officers sent with the Prince shall
receive any injury on their going or coming back, and shall have seven days
allowed for their return. 10 That upon the delivery of the Town sufficient
Hostages be given for performance of the Articles on both parts.
Singed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of his Highness
Prince Rupert. Jo. Mine. Jo. Tilyer. W. Vavosor.

Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax. Ed. Montague. Tho. Rainsborough. Jo. Pickering.


FINIS.

