Exceeding Joyful News from the Lord SEY, Being an exact Relation of a great
Battle fought by the said L. Sey, Colonel Hampden, and Colonel Goodwin near
worcester Septem. 2^. against the Lord Coventry, that came to take possession
of the said City.

Likewise another Victory obtained by the Trained Band of Cheshire against the
Welchmen, with the number of them that (...) sl^ine in both Battles.

Also very good News from the Earl of Warwick, showing his victorious
proceedi^gs from the 16. of September to the 23. of the same.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler, Sept. 23. 1642.

Exceeding True and Joyful News from the Lord SAY.
THE proceedings of the Cavaleers at Westchester and diverse other adjoining
Counties has been very cruel and inhumane, committing diverse outrages there,
as they have done formerly in other Countries where they have taken their
progress in a most barbarous manner, and the Inhabitants and Trained Band of
those Countries seeing them more and more to persist in their inhumane actions,
they resolved amongst themselves to have a general meeting, and to conclude of
those particulars that should be for the safety and security of their lives and
livings, and at their meeting they concluded of these particulars: 1. That all
those that were able to bear Arms, should be forthwith summoned in. 2. That
they should be daily exercised and trained up. 3. That they and every one of
them should forthwith ^^pear on the 19 of this month at Chester Heath, 5. miles
from the City of Westchester, which was accordingly put in execution, and upon
the 20 of this month the Cavaleers having information of their intentions,
assembled together, and came with all spend to the s^^d Heath, where the
T^ained B^^d of Ch^shire, and diverse Volunt^ers (...) of Lancashire were
practizi^g and pu^^ing of themselves in a posture of war but at the fir^^
approaching o^ the Cavaleers, the Parliament Forces, (being the Trained Band)
met them about h^lfe a mile from the Heath, and at the first salu^ation slew
ten of the Cavaleers, where there did ensue a great Battle betwixt them, both
sides striving for the victory, behaving of themselves very stoutly and
courageously, but at the last the Welchmen and Cavaleers began to grow weary,
and would gladly have gone to the Mountains, but they could not, for the
Parliaments Forces pursued them so close, that they threw down their Arms, and
creed out for quarter, but there was many of them slain in this Battle, and
some chief Commanders taken prisoners diverse of them being lately come from
Ireland.

Thus has the Parliaments party obtained the day, and won the victory over the
Welsh Cavaleers, which I believe diverse of their Country men will take warning
by them, and learn how to keep within their own bounds and liberties.

Another Famous Battle obtained by the Lord Sey, Colonel Hampden, and
Colonel Goodwin, together with his two sons, over the Cavavaleers in
Worcestershire.
Upon the the 20. of this Month, the Lord Sey and the rest had information that
the Cavaleers were come to Worcester, and that they were resolved to plunder
the Town, (but praised be God they was prevented) for no sooner had the Lord
Sey received intelligence thereof, but he immediately advanced his Forces
toward them, and coming near the City, the Cavaleers came and met us,
whereupon the Lord Sey demanded their intentions, they replying, that as they
had taken possession of the City, so would they keep it; whereupon Colonel
Hampden drew out 200. men and charged them on the Reere and the left Flank,
and having played against them for the space of two hours, the Cavaleers
sounded a Retreat, but the Parliaments Forces and Volunteers being much
incensed against them, would not hearken thereto, but still with their constant
resolution they continued in Fight, insomuch that there was a great slaughter
amongst the Cavaleers and those that could get away, hid themselves for the
present.

Upon the 19 of this present month tidings was brought to the Earl of Warwick
being 3. leagues from the Downs that diverse Ships lay hovering near thereto,
and that they do make diverse sallyes toward the French coast, and it was
supposed, that Sir John Pennington was in the said Fleet, whereupon the Earl
of Warwick sent out 7. fair Ships to scour those parts, and upon the 20. of
this month they hoysed sail and took their coast toward Callis, where having
sallyed two leagues from the Earl of Warwickes Fleet, they espied a company of
Ships hovering up and down, and made toward them, who coming near unto them,
they set a warning piece to know what they were, and for what parts they were
bound, but they would not make answer, neither would they make their obeysanc^
to His Majesty's Ships; whereupon the Earl of Warwick commanded the Gu^ner to
let fly another piece of Ordnance, and Sir John Pennrngton let fly at them
again, insomuch that they began to charge one another very furiously, then the
Earls Ships began a broad side to them, which soon made entrance into the
enemies ships, so that after two or three hours fight, they were glad to
betake themselves to flight, but the Earls Ships purchased them, and sunk two
or three of them. The said Earl has declared, that he will assist both his
Majesty and the Parliament against those Forces that are now gathered together
in this Kingdom to hinder the peace of the same of the same.

FINIS.

