THE EXCISE-MENS LAMENTATION: OR, An Impeachment in behalf of the Commons of
this Nation, against their insulting Publicans, and cruel Oppressors and
Extortioners: With their Acknowledgment, Confession, and Testimony, touching
their proceedings in each County;

And the vast and mighty Sums which they most wickedly retained: Collected
by their unlimitted Power, Spungie Hearts, and long-stretched Consciences.

Also, the rising of the Welch-men against a party of them at Monmouth; and the
manner how Mr. CROW (the Farmer of Excize) ran naked into a Tub of feathers;
where, after a short time, he was taken, and a great Oath and Charge inflicted
upon Him.

Published for information of the People.

London, Printed for G. Horton. 1652.

THE EXCISE-MENS LAMENTATION: OR, Their strange Creed, and Letany, etc.
O God the Father have mercy upon Us, miserable Excize-men; for we have done
those things which we ought not to have done, and left undone those things
which we ought to have done, and there is no truth in Us; Lord pardon all our
high, unjust, and illegal proceedings, and deal not with Us after our sins, nor
reward Us after our iniquities. And we beseech thee Lord power thy grace into
our hearts, that as we have known Christ thy sons incarnation by the message of
an Angel: so by his cross and passion, we may be brought unto the glory of his
resurrection. But Lord, open thou our hearts, and let our purses show forth thy
praise; that so we may with cheerfulness and alacrity return and give in a
most just and due account of all those vast and great sums, which we have
wickedly, fraudulently, and deceitfully gained by an unlimited and
outstretched Conscience; for we must ingenuously acknowledge and confess, that
our carriage and proceedings has been so high rigid and harsh both to the Rich
and Poor, that with a wet finger we could easily clear and lay up 500 l. per
annum, whereas before this blessed Reformation, we were not masters of 50 pence
at the years end: But alas! all these great and ill-gotten Revenues, after
some time of Extortion, began to dissolv and melt like snow in warm gleams:
Therefore, we now earnestly desire to abandon those ways of wickedness; humbly
beseeching the Lord to give us hearts to dread him, and for the time to come
diligently to live after his Commandments.

Yet notwithstanding many there are who still remain very rigid and cruel to
the Poor; and having lately put in practice their cruel proceedings at
Monmouth, the poor people taking ball'd Time by the fore-lock, unanimously
rose, and fell upon he quarters of one Mr. Crow (the Farmer of Excize) beat off
his guard, but he himself ecaped in his shirt, and ran and himself in a Tub of
Feathers; but all would not save him; for at last he became a Bird in hand, and
(contrary to his expectation) set him free with all his feathers; who having
made him swear on the Bible, that he should become an honest man, they
dismissed him without wounds, but half frighted him out of his wits.

Others there are who take upon them the Ministerial Office; but mum! only I
say, if there must needs be a trade driven, and an employment found for the
pragmatique active hands of the Commonwealth, Let them even turn aside to those
Publicans, and Extortioners, who have devoured Widows houses, and brought good
families to a morsel of bread; O that the soldier may be resolved the
Oppression is intolerable, and that the Commonalty may be confirmed where the
Knave lies; for till this fair reckoning be made, it is impossible but there
must be an inward core and grudg between man and man.

O but let us consider, when the Revenue of the Ministry is once taken off,
what itinerant piece of Homily, will venture the merchandise of his labor for
an uncertainty of bread? into what contempt and scandal would that glorious
calling crumble into, when every Clodpate shall sit in Judgment, whether a
Divine deserve his Sunday dinner? It Is true indeed, such pitiful shreds of
predication as the world may produce, may preach through plain song to the
humor of the Vulgar, and the people perhaps delight to have it so: but yet let
me tell you 'twill be a doleful Message, when judgments become their own
Prophets, and the plagues of heaven find no fore runners of their horrid
presence. O but these are times of revelation, and men are more familiar with
the Deity then in the days of old! I grant indeed there is abundance of
pretended intimacy with divine workings, else certainly the modern confidence
were a strange presumption; but nevertheless (with submission to the supreme
censure) the Widow would hardly have found her groat by putting out the candle;
neither we in slighting the Ordinances of God, which are the ministerial means
of our illumination, shall ever by the feel of our groping invention be able to
direct our straying feet in the ways of Righteousness, under the ridiculous
notion of prophetical inspiration; no, though we cut our selves with Knives,
and cry mightily; for that Spirit may either be asleep, or in a journey, or in
pursuit; but resolution brooks no counsel: nay, then we have no refuge but our
tears and prayers; And happier then are the dead, that are already dead, then
the living which are yet alive. Questionless, but there are tendet hearts,
which would show the bowels of their compassion in healing up these Ulcers: yet
if you would know the reason of this obstruction, Saint Paul says, There was a
Law in his members warring against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into
subjection to the Law of sin and death: Therefore, since we have found the
malady, let us endeavor to suppress its fury in the bud, every man mend one,
and let the general prayers mediate for all; for man must die, and the good and
evil of his Works follow him to his sadder doom or happiness; and then, my
hearts,

An honest Conscience, Is worth a Commonwealth.

FINIS.

