Exceeding Joyful News FROM HOLLAND.

BEING A True Relation of two great Battles fought between the Governor of
Flanders Don Francisco de Melos and the Hollanders, upon the 20. and 21. days
of April, 1642.

WITH The Names of the places and Sconces which he assaulted, but was
overthrown by the Hollanders, and many thousands of his men slain.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

LONDON, Printed for John Raymond. 1642.

A Relation of two days fight, upon the 30. and 21. of April last, between
the Governor of Flanders Don Francisco de Melos and the Hollanders, 1642.
Upon the tenth day of April the Governor of Flanders entered the Field with
20000 Soldiers and 5000 horse intending to besiege Iseldike and the two
Sconces upon the River and divided his Army into some four parts, whereof 8000
Foot and 1000 horse he committed to the command of Don Isaacke, Governor of
Antwerpe and charged him to plant his Ordnance before the West part of the
Town that thereby if occasion served he might have the suddener help from the
rest of the Army, and four thousand more before Watts Sconce, under the
command of Minehaere-de Boys governor of Castile.

(...) part which was four thousand more before Gravel Sconce, under the
command of Minehaere de Thairen, a high Dutchman, and the fourth part of his
Army, with four thousand Horse, he reserved for the safeguard of his own
Persun, and lying in Trenches a League from the rest of his Army, the Burgers
of Husden, with a thousand of Soldiers, came out of the Town, and in the Night
very fiercely compassed his Excellencies Companies, and slew near 200. of
them, and forced the rest to leave their Trenches, and upon their flight
retreating back, the Hollanders pursued them, and Fought two hours where 500.
of both sides were slain, insomuch that his Excellency was constrained to fly
for the safeguard of his own person.

Upon which retreare of his Excellency, the the Governor of Antwerpe withdrew
his Forces from Iseldike, and marched toward Gravel Sconce, to assist
Minehaere de Thairen, and immediately upon his coming toward Gravel Sconce,
the Governor of Antwerpe, and Minehaere de Thairen, with diverse Engines and
Fireballs, sealed the Walls of the Sconce, and slew most part therein, but
having not men sufficient to manage the said Sconce, and being likewise
Battered to the ground, his Excellency and his Army was constrained to leave
it as a desolate Place, Then his Excellency and the Governovour of Antwerps
marched toward Watts Sconce, not doubring but that they should have the like
success as at Gravel Sconce, but the Hollander had Fortified it too strong
with Ordnance, and after one hours Fight, the Sconce forced his Excellency and
the Governor of Antwerpe to leave their intended enterprise, and afterward
the whole Body meeting, they marched toward Breda. The Governor of Breda
having intelligence of his Excellencies coming toward the Town, forthwith
commanded the Drums to beat up, thereby proclayming and charging the Burgers
and Soldiers that were in the Town, to be in a readiness against his
Excellencies coming, which was near upon Five thousand Burgers and Soldiers,
besides Five hundred of Horse.

Then his Excellencies Army marching near Breda was intercepted, and his
passage stopped, and almost a whole day kept them in fight with Musketeers,
only at length there was a fresh supply of the Hollanders near upon ten
thousand more which came from the Busse, and they placed themselves in the
rear of his Excellencies Army between Macklin and Bridges, and the Breda
Burgers and Soldiers in the Front, where on the morning as soon as the day
appeared, they had a great skitmish, and took diverse great Persons prisoners,
whereof the Governor of Castile was one, and slew near upon fix thousand of
Horse and Foot, and forced the rest to fly, and for their more nimblenesse of
body they throwed down their Arms, and the Hollanders following them so
close, that they drived his Excellency and his Army almost most within shot of
Macklin City; In all which fight there was not above six or seven hundred of
the Hollanders slain, besides the spoil the Governor Antwerpe and Mine haere
de Chai^en made before Gravell-Sconce.

The Irish who have been ever true to the King of Spain in these parts of
Flanders and Ortoy's, have most pare of them run from their Colors, and it
is supposed they are fled for Ireland.

There has been in these Countries ever since the Earl of Tyrone his Hight
out of Ireland in Queen Elizabeth's time, cere upon ten thousand of Irish
Soldiers, and now in all Flanders and Artoy's there cannot be mustered one
thousand, which yet has been a great weakening to the Country.

It is supposed his Excellency has left with the Hollander, for this Summer,
and intends to draw most part of his Forces toward Arras. Cambray. Doway.
Betoone. Aires. St. Thomas Newport. Castile. Gravelin^^. O^^^nd and D^


And unto many other petty Dorpes in Ortoys, amongst the Walloones, in all
these Towns his Excellency has displaced his Governors, being great Lords, and
Walloones in the Country, and put in their Rooms Spaniards to be Governors
thereof, for it is supposed all the Walloons in Ortoys had rather be under the
subjection of the French King, then the Spaniard, in regard of the heavy taxes
he imposes upon the Country toward the maintenance of his Army.

FINIS.

