AN EXHORTATION Directed to the ELDERS Of the several CONGREGATIONS Within this
Province of LANCASTER.

By the Provincial Assembly at Preston, May 1. 1655.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for LUKE FAVVN, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the PARROT in PAUL'S Churchyard. 1655.

THis Synod taking notice of the want in many Congregations, and some whole
Classical Presbiteries in this Province; and of the languishment of others of
the exercise of that order, and power which our Lord Jesus Christ has placed
in his Church for the keeping out, and removing thence of defilements, and
scandals; and for the restraining, and the recovering of offenders therein, and
perceiving that the said want and languishment arise not from the lack, either
of freedom to act, or of warrant, and call to it, either from God, or man; nor
from the prevalency of Schism, either among the people, or the Elders (which
through the special mercy of God, much to be admired, has been in a great
measure prevented in these parts) nor because there is no occasion to use it;
there is, alas, but too much; nor so much from the backwardness, or aversness
of the people; but mainly for the lack of resolution, care, zeal and diligence
in those who have the charge thereof lying upon them, as having both been
called to, and undertaken it: and considering on the one hand that there is a
standing commission, and command for it in Scripture, and a perpetual need on
man's part of the execution of it: and on the other hand that the ceasing of it
(especially falling out in concurrence with the fickle, backssiding and corrupt
temper of these times) is the inlet of many very great evils to Religion, to
the Church of Christ, and to many particular souls: Has thought meet to
bespeak, by way of Exhortation: all their Brethren that are in place of Rule in
the Churches of this Province, where any such defect is, whether they be the
laborers in the word and Doctrine, or other Elders, unto the reassuming of the
tender sense of their duty in this work into their hearts, and the renewed
execution of it into their hands.

We shall not here enter into the particular remembrance and persecution of the
several grounds which are to prove, or motives which may press unto, or parts,
and proceeding, which are to carry on this Discipline. Supposing those grounds
were apprehended and weighed, when the work of the Reformation of our Church in
the point of Discipline, was first (in these late years) covenanted and
promoted, and the Office of Government was restored among us, and undertaken by
you brethren. And for matter both of incitement unto, and delineation of the
several branches of this work, we refer you to the hortation of this Assembly
of February the seventh, 1648. The revival whereof both in memory and practice,
we recommend unto you.

Suffer us here but to suggest to your Consideration, that which ye already
sufficiently know, that in Church-labour, and in work about souls want of
success, want of the favor, or help of civil Authority, or the urgency of
worldly occasions, none of these is any release from duty.

Successesness, or slow going on, or the occurence of difficulty therein, is no
dismission from duty. We are to labor, and not to faint, even to the utmost
extent of our commission, and to the utmost length of the time in which God is
pleased to call us to, and continue us in his work, howsoever it may speed, and
whatsoever may be the success. At the Word of Christ we must again let down our
Nets for a draught, though we have already toiled a whole night, and caught
nothing. At the Mission of God we must do our Errand, whether they (the persons
we are sent to) will hear, or whether they will forbear. The Servant of the
Lord must be apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing them that oppose
themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance: He must Magnify his
Office (or put it forth to the utmost) if by any means he may provoke to
Emulation his people, and save some of them.

The distance, disfavour, yea, or oppositeness to it of State-Superiors, is no
supersedeas. The Commission that does enable, and the Command that does set
persons to this work is from God, whose imposal no change or crosness of humane
affairs, affections or aspects is to infringe. Civil Authority is but
accidental (though it maybe in its kind assistant) to divine Ordinances: and
yet we do not conceive our selves destitute of such Warrant: The Injunction for
the Government that was given forth remaining (as we take it) still in force:
and there is no man forbidding us to proceed in it. But if now we were, or
hereafter should be either destituted by it, or inhibited, yet no such thing
ought to take us off, or to disanimate us: neither should we therefore count
our selves ex authorized.

Nor yet is a temporal calling, or negotation, anexcuse from this work. The
Kingdom of God, and its Righteousness claims the first place in every ones
seeking that belongs to Christ. Earthly affairs may be a Christians vocation,
but must not be his entanglement, or avocation from the business of Gods House:
No natural relations or civil Employments may impeach a Christians freedom to
Christ's Service.

Having spoken this word to all persons charged with this work as taken
together, we would now have to our Brethren of the Eldership that are called
only to Rule and to those also who labor in the word, and Doctrine, to each
of these a word severally.

To our Brethren who are only called to Rule, we shall say but this: As their
Office is not superfluous, or indifferent, so their Station in it is not
Arbytrarie to them, that it may be put on, or off by them, merely upon their
own choice, or judgment; They have put their hands to the Plough, and what
therefore is it for them to look back from it? their Office in the valuation of
the holy Ghost, is a good work, and worthy of double honor: but withal, it
should be remembered, it is a Work; and a work, wherein they are required to
rule well, and to rule with diligence: We all owe, and must come to an account
unto our great Master now in heaven, how we have received, how we perform, and
how we part with any trust we have from him: And the soundness, and edification
of the Flock, the saving of others souls, and their own rejoicing in the day of
the Lord Jesus Christ, does depend upon the discharge of their Office.

Our Brethren that labor in the Word and Doctrine, we wish seriously to
consider, how behooveful for them in that their heavy charge it is, to have
the Discipline up, and in exercise: We would hope, every one of them to be
sensible of the miss of it (where any is) both in relation to the people, and
to themselves. As to their people, how for lack of it they are exposed to, if
not infested with irreligion, ignorance, error, division, a spirit of security,
pride, and self-willedness, and manifold profaneness in life, and now of late,
very strange, strong, and most dangerous Satanical delusions; and how the
Ordinances of God, which yet they retain among them are through that defect
subject to inefficacy, contempt, and profanation, much more then it might be
hoped they would be, if the Discipline were in force. As to themselves that by
the same means they are brought under much difficulty, perplexity, and grief of
soul, in, and about their administrations: their charge, as to the knowledge of
particular persons, and cases, being not distinctly enough known to them, and
so they are left uncertain to whom to apply themselves, and what, and how to
administer so, as to give to each their portion in due season.

Moreover, hence it is that in public Dispensations there is an offensive
diversity betwixt the practice of one Minister, and of another; from whence
arise distastes, censures, and stomachings betwixt Minister and Minister,
betwixt people and people, and betwixt people and minister; together with
disorderly rangings of people from their proper places; as there is
particularly in the use of both the Sacraments: And in relation to that of the
Lords Supper, we observe that Ministers in many, if not the most places where
the Government is not used, find no other way to acquit themselves, but either
to dispense it promiscuously, or to lay aside, and bereave their flocks, and
themselves wholly of it: neither of which ways we think can be justified.

Here is no room for discussion in relation to each of those courses: Only to
promiscuous admission to the Table of the Lord (it being the commoner, and the
looser way) we will say this, The Church of God (especially as assembled, and
employed about the Ordinances of the Gospel) is a Temple, a City, a Flock, an
Army. To expose then her communion, and the Ordinances of Christ peculiar to
her, unto all comers, is to make her a Temple without a Court, Doors, or
Porters; a City without walls, Gates, and Bars; a Flock without Fold or
Shepherd; and an Army without Guard or Discipline. The Temple of God (which the
Church of Christ is) is holy: the Lords Supper is an holy thing, as in some
other respects, so in as much as the Elements of it were by our blessed Savior
both instituted, and solemnly set apart by prayer unto a holy use; which latter
by virtue of that first institution, and benediction, is continually done by
the Minister: the prohibition of Christ is indefinite, Give not that which is
holy unto the Dogs: And indeed the nature of holiness consists in a separation
from common commerce, or use: the measure of which separation, is the will, or
rule of him that is the Founder, or Author of that holiness. The Rule of the
Gospel is, If thy brother go on in an offense to the neglecting of the Churches
admonition, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. Again, Mark
them which cause offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them. And again, Looking diligently lest any man fail of the Grace of
God: Lest any root ^f bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled: lest there be any Fornicator, or profane person, etc. And elsewhere,
We command you Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly. And, if any man obey
not our word, note that man, and have no company with him. And in another
place, Ye have not rather mourned, that he that has done this deed might be
taken away from among you. Know ye not that a little Leaven leaveneth the whole
lump? Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump. Now I have
written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a Brother be a
Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. Do not ye judge them that are
within? Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person.

And whereas there are some who would have these five last passages (all
comprised in one chapter) or some of them to be taken only of private converse,
or fellowship, not of public, or Church Communion: besides their presumption
in putting a restriction upon the Scripture, serving their own turn without
warrant from it self, they are confuted by the Text it self, which in every one
of those passages insisteth on the same thing, to wit, the ejection of the
wicked person from among them, to whom he writes, the Church of God at Corinth,
the which he resembles to a whole lump or mass, in danger to be tainted by the
corruption of that person, while he was continued among them, as one particle,
or piece thereof. Yea further, the Apostle in his urging upon them the
performance of that act of ejection, inserteth this as an Argument (by which he
plainly applies the whole discourse to this matter of the Lords Supper) For
even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the Feast,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness. What can
the Apostle, as to his Argument in hand, mean by holding out Christ as our
Passover, which is sacrificed for us, and by calling us, therefore, to keep the
Feast with the exclusion of old leaven, but that Christ in the public
administration of his Supper in his Church, is the same in substance to us
Christians, which the Passover was to the Israelites, that this Supper
succeeds in the room of that Passover, and that the Rite of that Passover in
the expurgation of leaven, is a rule or instruction to us in our keeping of
this Supper; when Christ's last Passover was ended, and in the evening in which
he was betrayed, and led away to death, he instituted this Supper, to be a
continual memorial of the Sacrifice of his death; therefore, as the Israelites,
during the feast of the Passover, were to abstain from leavened bread, and for
that purpose they were to put away leaven out of their houses, no leaven was to
be seen with them in all their quarters; so is the Church of Christ now to
observe the Feast of their Passover, the Supper of the Lord, without the
association of wicked persons; that is, not only those that are out of the
Church, but such as, being among them, and of their Brotherhood, and Body, have
lapsed into gross sins, and have not manifested their repentance: and for that
end, when they go about the celebration of that Feast, they are to look
intently to the exclusion of such persons, if any be, from among them, and to
see that their Assembly be a refined, or new lump. This appears to us to be the
clear importance of that place. These are some of the rules describing the
sanctimony of the Churches communion, particularly in the celebration of the
Lords Supper.

Doubtless a Minister has not done his part when he has publicly warned, or
Doctrinally to all in general, declared against unworthy receiving at the Lords
Table; he has invested in him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: not only a
Key, but Keys; that is, as we understand, A Key to bind or shut, as well as a
Key to loose or open; and a Key of Power, or Discipline as well as a Key of
Knowledge or Doctrine. He has a Watch to keep, as well as a Word to declare;
as he may not be a dumb Dog that cannot, or will not bark, so he must not be a
blind, sleeping, or unobserving watchman; as his work is to feed the Church of
God, so he is charged, and that in order thereunto, to take heed to all the
flock, and to take the oversight thereof. That which we read practiced by the
ministers of Christ, or committed to any such to be practiced, or commended in
them when practiced, in order to the fulfilling of the Ministry, and to the
edifying of Churches, that we conceive to be matter of rule now to them who are
set in the same calling, and relation. Now we find that the Apostles, Paul and
Barnabas, were careful, after they had preached the word of the Lord, and
planted Churches, to go again to them, and to see (or, look into) them, how
they did. That Tychicus was sent by the Apostle Paul to the Colossians for the
same purpose, that he might know their estate: that in like manner Paul sent
Timotheus to the Thessalonians, to know their faith: and that the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus is noted, and praised by the Lord Jesus, for that he could
not bear them which were evil, and had tried them, which said, they were
Apostles, and were not, and had found them liars. As on the contrary hand, it
was a charge which he had against the Angel of the Church of Pergamos, that he
had them that held the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, so hateful to him: and
semblably he objecteth against the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, That he
suffered the woman Jezebel, which called her self a Prophetess, to teach, and
to seduce his servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to
Idols.

We are persuaded to extricate a Minister from that labyrinth he may suppose
himself in, betwixt a promiscuous administration on the one hand, and a laying
down that Ordinance on the other; there are other ways besides the choosing and
practicing of either of these, and those clear, and warrantable ones, which (to
our judgment) these are not. And if there be any of our Brethren who cannot
find out any such way, we wish they would be present at our next Provincial
meeting, and concur with us, in advising upon it for their resolution: which
offer we expect they will hearken to, in reference not only to themselves, but
to many of their Brethren (of which number our selves are) who are much
unsatisfied both with the non-administration of some, and with the boundless
administration of others. And we do hereby declare unto them the offense which
is taken (we think justly) by others, and our selves, at the practice of them
both, especially at the latter, that, if they will own their duty in the case
of offenses, they may be moved to accept of this our admonition and offer. And
for the latter, as we know, and resent it to be a plainly antiscriptural, and
very harmful and offensive practice, so we judge it to be a novel course,
against the constant judgment, and order of the Church of Christ in all ages,
and scarce ever professed, or defended by any one before this age, nor in the
latitude its now held, practiced till these very few years. And whereas diverse
that hold this course, seem to have a zeal for the continuance in public of
the Book of Common Prayer, we wish them to remember, that in this they
themselves do manifestly cashier and cross it, and that, whether they admit
persons without beforehand requiring, and taking notice of their intent to
communicate, or they receive such as are uncatechized, or they administer to
them that are openly scandalous livers See for this the Rubric, or Rules
prefixed to the Order for the administration of the Lords Supper. The first and
third Reasons for Catechizing, prefixed to the Order of Confirmation, with the
last rule suffixed to that Order; and the beginning of the Commi^ation against
sinners.
. And for that Book in general (having upon this occasion mentioned it) we may
make this observation truly, that the wholesome Order therein, is for substance,
retained by those that think fit to lay aside the reading, or reciting its
lines verbatim, whilst it is broken, and abolished by those that would (in what
suits with their minds) keep up its form of words: But we thus leave this
point, and this our particular address to our Brethen in the Ministry.

Upon these, and other the like considerations, we exhort you all (our beloved
Brethren) of every congregational Presbytery, whether Ministers, or other
Elders, that have heretofore joined in the Government, to own that work of God,
by applying your selves diligently, and faithfully, to execute the same in all
the duties thereof; and for that end, to cast your eyes continually upon the
flock for the inspection thereof, and constantly, as opportunity is afforded,
to keep the meetings of the Presbyteries, whether congregational, or classical.

And because all men called to this work are not of equal forwardness, and that
which are so far lapsed, as to be out of use may be not easily or suddenly to
be restored, we desire neighbor Brethren of the Ministry, to excite and
strengthen the hands of each other, by mutual exhortation, and counsel; and
every of them to persuade the Elders of their own, and of the adjoining
Congregations to the work: And though all whom it concerns be not presently
gained to it, yet to pursue them still with brotherly invitations, while there
is any hope. And if at the first they attain not to a competent number fully to
act, yet those that are disposed to it, if they have any to concur with them,
let them meet constantly, both Congregationally, and Classically, and we doubt
not but their so doing (through Gods acceptance of, and blessing upon their
willing mind, and offer of themselves to this his work) may have some effect
worth that labor, either to the public advancement of this work, or to their
own edification, and comfort of conscience.

And we propose to them, as a seasonable action, when they reassume this work,
solemnly to humble themselves before God, under the remembrance and sense of
all bypast backwardnesses and obstructions, and of all present imperfections
and impediments; and to seek unto him for his presence, instruction, and help
in this attempt: and then to proceed faithfully, industriously, and resolutely,
as he shall please to lay their duty before them, and open a door to them for
the execution of it, though attended with manifold discouragements and
oppositions. In the carrying on of which, it had need still to be remembered,
that we are to take heed as well unto our selves, as to all the flock. Let each
of us therefore look carefully to himself, and all of us one to another that we
may be both blameless, and ensamples to the flock.

Where any of our Brethren in the Ministry shall be ready to do his part for
the restoring of the Discipline, and he be destitute of an Eldership to ioyn
with him, either by reason there has not hitherto, been any elected, or for
that they that have been chosen to it, persist in refusal to act, or that
otherwise the Presbytery be fallen, as also where the number of Elders is not
competent to the charge; we desire our Brethren in every such place to look
into their respective Congregations, and to essay if any fit persons can be
found, and brought in by election to make up an Eldership, and therein to use
the advice of the classical meeting, or, in supply thereof, the neighbor
Ministers.

And if yet any Minister should be unprovided of an Eldership in his
congregation, we exhort him still to beware of running upon a promiscuous
admission of persons to the Lords Supper, and to use all lawful means for the
prevention of such persons as would, from either seeking, or obtaining it; and
particularly, to endeavor this by a personal address before, to those that
offer themselves to that ordinance, by way of communication with them touching
their understanding and faith; and by instructing, and admonishing them, in
reference to their coming to, or refraining from it, as they shall find their
capacity to be: as also, to repair for mutual advisement and help, to the
classical meeting, and to the Provincial, if they find themselves still
difficultated.

Lastly, We desire, that in every Classis, an account be taken by the meeting
thereof, from time to time, of the state, and proceeding (in relation to this
work) of the Brethren of each congregation within their precincts; as also,
that from every classis, there be sent to the Provincial Assemblies
successively an account of their classical constitution and progress; and
particularly, that the next Provincial meeting be from every classis certified
of their receipt of this our address to them, and of their active concurrence in
the subject matter of it.

For a close of this our Invitation unto the necessary things above pressed,
let us call to mind, and put you in remembrance (Brethren) how those primitive
Elders we read of in the writings of the New Testament stood disposed unto
their respective charges. The Scripture records to us, They were affectionately
desirous of them. They were willing to have imparted to them, not the Gospel of
God only, but also their own souls, because they were dear unto them. Like
mothers of their children, they traveled in birth of them, until Christ were
formed in them. As nurses do their children, they cherished them, and were
gentle among them. Like as Fathers do their children, they exhorted, and
comforted, and charged every one of them. They could not forbear to seek to
know their faith, and to endeavor their establishment, and comfort concerning
it. Their cares of their Churches were like a tumult thronging in upon them
daily. They sought not theirs, but them. They would gladly spend, and be spent
for their souls. In the things wherein they were free, they made themselves
servants unto all, that they might gain the more. They pleased all men in all
things, not seeking their own profit, but the profit of many, that they might
be saved. They naturally cared for their peoples estate. They had great zeal
for them. They prayed exceedingly, and labored fervently in prayers for them.
They had great conflicts (or ag^^^^^) for them. They greatly longed after them
all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. They wished above all things that they might
prosper. They had no greater joy then to hear that those their children walked
in the Truth. It was their life to know them to stand fast in the Lord. They
were to them their hope, joy, crown of rejoicing, glory, their dearly beloved,
and longed for. Not only were their mouths opened, but their hearts were
enlarged to them. They were in their hearts to die and live with them. They
were jealous over them with godly jealousy, that they might present them as a
chaste Virgin unto Christ. These were some of the workings of the minds and
affections toward their flocks of those our Fore-leaders. Now the Father of
mercies, and God of all Grace, grant you, and us, to be like-minded toward the
flock of God which is among us.

This Exhortation is immediately sent, and committed to the hands of our
beloved Brethren undernamed, to be by them communicated to the rest of our
Brethren, to whom it is addressed, within their respective Classes, and with
them jointly to be considered, and put in practice.

FINIS.

