Exceeding Joyful news FROM OXFORDSHIRE.

Being a true relation of a victorious Battle fought by the Apprentizes, of
London, against the Cavaliers wherein were slain 16 of the said Cavaliers.

And not one of the Apprentizes wounded, but one shot through the Arm with a
Pistol.

WITH Diverse other exployts against the said Cavaliers by the Valiant
Apprentizes.

Whereunto is annexed the courageous proceedings of the said Apprentizes who
are resolved to spend their dearest blood for the good of King and Parliament.

Also some remarkable passages from Banbury and Warwickshire.

London, printed for Thomas Watson. Agust 17. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful news from Oxfordshire, being a true Relation of a
victorious battle fought by the Apprentizes of London, against the Cavaliers,
whorein was slain sixteen of the said Cavaleires.
And not one of the Apprentizes wounded, but one that was shor through the arm
with a Pistol.
SHere has been great mercies of God bestowed on us in these times of danger,
and amongst all other mercies, this great mercy of God lately bestowed on us is
not to be forgotten, for these times having brought forth great distractions,
it has pleased GOD to suffer things so to be, that of late there have sprung
up a Generation of factious Persons, Eenemies to the King and Kingdom and
especially to this our present Parliament.

For of late, it pleased God to move the hearts of diverse Officers of the
London Apprentizes, to give themselves Voluntarily to go out for the good of
the Kingdom, against some Cavaliers, who have gathered themselves together in
Oxfordshir against all those who stood for the truth, and for the defense of
the ^arliament.

But now they being settled together and thinking themselves safe, went against
the Town of Banbury, and some of our London Apprentizes who were at that time
lying in Ambush and hearing of their coming (as at last they did) and ceazing
on the said Town, were forced diverse of them to fly, by reason of our London
Apprentizes, who parsuing them hard, at last fell to blows, and slew many of
the Caveliers; who, flying for their Lives, were met by many of their Comrages?
and then coming back, supposing themselves to be far more in number then
the apprentizes, thought to give them a repulse; but in the end, finding them
more courageous then themselves, they were forced to take a second flight; But
the Apprentizes seeing them so to betake themselves to their heels, were the
more incourraged to follow them, and being hard followed diverse of the
Cavaliers were slain to the number of about sixteen, besides others who were
wounder greiveously.

The Apprentizes thus seeing the Cavaliers thus to fly before them, were much
inheartned and are resolved thus to spend their Lives for the Parliament.

For they seeing the affront of their Enemy given them thus to be answered with
the loss of so many, and not one of them to be lost or wounded, save only one
of them, Who by chance was short through the Arm with a Bullet from a Pistol,
by one of the Cavaliers, at their second coming on, yet through the mercy of
God, showed to the proceedings of our Blessed and happy Parliament, they who
were Enemies to them, and to the truth, were beaten back etc. Our Apprentizes
as Loyal and true hearted Subjects with undaunted Sperits do so Resolve still
to go on, in the defense of the true Protestant Religion.

Also there was another meeting of our Apprentizes in a Village near the City
of Oxford, with some resolute Fellows of the Caveliers, yet their resolute
spirits were soon cold, for they having a sight of our London apprentizes,
though small in Number to their sight, yet great in Terror to their feeling,
for they coming against the day, like Apprentizes as they call them, thinking
to make meat for the fowls of the Air, but served for little better use
themselves.

For they meeting both together on a plain, gave an affront to the
apprentizes, calling them London Boys, yet found them London men, for they had
no sooner gave them these words, but they gave fire like men, which gave them
such a manlike cure as made them Boy-like Caveliers.

These were these Cavaliers beaten back to their own disgrace, and the good
of the whole Land; to which proceedings; I pray God give good success, And
thus far have the Parliament speed in their doings for as they have prospered
through the help of God against the malignant parties, who stands out against
the peace of King and Parliament, and seek the utter ruin of the whole
Kingdom; so I pray God that they may prosper.

Diverse passages concerning the taking of some ordnances from Banbury, by the
Eaple of Northampton, and of the Cavalieres violent actions in these Counties.
TO give you farther particular notice of some violent passages committed by
these nefarious Sons of tumult and Rebellion; it is most certain, that there
happened a great contention between my Lord Brook, and the Earl of
Northampton, about the carrying of a piece of Ordinance to Warwick Castle,
which was stayed by my Lord Brook, And afterward upon agreement between them
were returned and brought back to Banbury, and kept in the Castle; but the
Cavaliers laid this plort, and telling those that they met, coming to Aid
Banbury that all things were quiet, they believed them, and went back,
hereupon the Earl of Northampton having plant^d Ordinances on Crowch-Hill, The
Town was in a great fear and uproare, their Captain forsook them and ran
out of the Town, by whom it is most certain that they were Betrayed, so that
men, Women, and Children fled out of the town, the Ministers trembled, fearing
to be abused by the Cavaliers; Who having taken Master Sutton a neighbor
Minister forced him on his knees to drink a health to the confusion of all the
Round header, and to swear that ^e would read the Common prayer, and never
preach any more factious Sermons, they took also possession of Master Harris
his house minister of H^nwell, and of the Lady Copes house, after this the
Ordnance we delivered up to the Cavaliers, 300 horse coming ^o their aid from
the Earl of No^thampton, giving the Lord Brooks no warning thereof, as he
promised to do three days before they should be removed, there were in
company with the Earl of Northampton, Colonel Lunsford, the Lord Wilmot, and
the Lord Dunsmore, who for denying to deliver up the Town Arms by virtue of the
Commission of Array very violently used the Constable, and the Arms and
Ammunition forcibly took away from him.

It is most certain also, that some Cavaliers having at Warwick mounted
Ordnance upon a Steeple by the breaking of some of them in the discharging,
three of the Cavaliers were slain, to show that those that fight against the
Church, and Religion, are no where safe from Gods severe Judgments. Besides
these troopers do daily committ and perpetrate many violent Acts of hostility
round about the Country: benig at Rugby, Hilmorton, Cranburrow, and other
Towns, where they have done very much mischeife, and took away their Arms,
And thus the poor Country is but the Stage, whereupon these cutting Cavaliers
do Act daily tragedies, to the great fear and terror of the whole County, who
to their utmost power, will ever persist in standing for the defense of the
Parliament.

FINIS

