THE TRAITORS Unvailed, OR A Brief and true account of that horrrid and bloody
design intended by those Rebellious People, known by the names OF ANABAPTISTS
and Fifth MONARCHY BEING Upon SUNDAY the 14 th. of April 1661. in NEVVGATE On
purpose to oppose his Majesty's person and Laws.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

THE TRAITORS Unvailed OR A brief relation of that horrid and bloody design
intended by the Anabaptists and Fifth Monarchy.
IT is unknown to all well disposed Christian people of the late Traitorous
insurections and actions in Broadstreet, and Woodstreet, and had not the Lord
out of his great goodness timely suppressed them, it would certainly
(accordingly to their intents) involved the whole Nation in wars and blood,
but finding their Devilish plots not to take effect, thoy have ever since (for
the beter promoting the same) held conference and correspondency with their
deluding Spirits, and taking and observing all opertunities of advantage for
accomplishing their bloody designs, in a secreet and obscure manner, they sent
diverse Letters of advice and counsel from one to the other at several places,
which was to give them notice that on Monday last (at the time when his Majesty
should be at Windsor according to his Majesty's Ancestors custom) they should
unanimosly meet to carry on their work by violence of the Sword, but Gods great
mercy attending his Majesty and this poor Nation, providentially gave
foreknowledge thereof to his Majesty and Counsel, to prevent the same, his
Majesty Counseled with God in his prayers and meditations, and afterward
according to Gods Decree and his Honorable Counsels advice and serious
judgment, he sent his special Warrant to examine all suspicious Houses for
Papers, Letters etc.

The which was accordingly executed in several Houses by one of the Lord
General Monks Captains, with his Officers and Soldiers, and to their
satisfaction diverse Letters were taken which were received from several persons
of great concernment, and large returns in folio of most horrid counsel, their
seditious Sects in all places both near and remote, the persons having them in
custodywere immediately secured, but to further prosecute their good success and
future hopes of timely preventing their cursed atcheivments, the noble Captain
made it his next only business to go to Newgate were very many and dangerous
persons are together, and therefore thought that there they should be better
satisfied and obtain a further and more ample discovery, by taking more of the
like Letters of black advice (which according happened) The particulars in the
searching as follows, being observed by a spectator who was so much in danger
of his own life that he committed his soul to God and never thought to go out
again alive, but their included malice and desire of blood was by providence
unexpectedly and mercifully diverted.

About three of the Clock, at which time they were at the height of their
pretended Devotion in several Rooms and corners of the House, at which
convention the Captain judged it the best opportunity to go up. He demanded the
Keepers to admit him and his assistance up, by showing them his authority and
intent, of his loving the person. Who was first acquainted with the business
and the authority thereof was Mr. Knolls, a Prisoner speaker to the
Anabaptists, who civilly requested to show what Letters and Papers he had in
his Custody, but contrary to the civillity used to him, he insollently
disobeyed his Majesty's Warrant, and violently resisted the search both by his
hands and Tongue, first crying out to his associats that they should secure the
Keepers and take away the Keys, Mr. Hicks a Turnkey would moderatly have
pacified and rationally discust the inconveniency that would but follow like a
headstrong people void of reason, carried him up the stairs upon the leads,
and had not his much entreaty preserved him, they had imediately threw him off
into the Street; some others in the intrim beat one of the Keepers, threw him
down Stairs, took away the Keys and kept them; others were upon one of the
Turnkeys who was basely misused, And had not some pirsoners that lay for Debt
secured him, they had certainly ended his days by a Stab, their malice was so
invetterate toward him, however with one voice they all cried lets through the
Rogue off from the leads. The Captain in the time of this hurly burly was
below, expecting a civil reply of his Demandes, but notice being given him by
the uproares he with his Sword drawn assisted by another Turnkey who at that
punct of time came with the Right Worshipful Sheriff Boulton to see the
Warrant Executed hearing of their perverness to it, they went to Squench the
fire whilst it was in its beginning that though they saw them appear and the
Sheriff commanded Mr Knowlls to go down into his Chamber, and obey his Majesty's
Orders, yet still they persisted in their folly, by securing the Captain in
their own Chamber, and forcibly Knowlls laid hands on Mr. Lowman with a great
Stick as if it were purposely prepared, and the rest of his Companions seized
themselves upon other, but Mr. Lowman being not at all daunted with the
assistance of his Prisoners, by degrees overpowered them, and afterward for
present punishment he committed John Smith into the Hoale (who is a convicted
person for the late Murder committed by the insurrection in Broadstreet) and
was one of the most violent in the House being desirous by his attempts to have
stopped Mr. Lowmans Breath by laying his cruel merciless, and bloody hands upon
his throat.

Mr. Portman was also put into the Hoale, being a chief and principal Actor,
and desperately struck all that did oppose him or his fellows, and had it not
happily fell out that the fifth Monarchy men were all locked in their Chamber
where they were at their meeting, it had certainly been a terrible and cruel
day to all that had been in their way.

But finding their plots were discovered and their hopes frustrated of their
desired ends which should have been brought forth the next day. Then to
preserve their decaying reputation, and respects and good words amongst the
common people, they suddenly sent their messengers abroad to make complaint
first, to have their guilt seem less.

But on purpose to undeceive the people, and to give them better satisfaction
of the reason and truth thereof I have taken the pains as to acquaint all that
are desirous of the same, that they may no longer be deceived by their specious
pretenses, for the Fifth Monarchy men are a people that a true character of
their malicious principles cannot be demonstrated, but their actions make them
appear to be a blood-thirsty and Rebellious people against God and the King.

Whom God Preserve.

