An EXPRESS from the KNIGHTS and GENTLEMEN now engaged with Sir GEORGE BOOTH;
To the CITY and CITIZENS of London, And all other FREEMEN of ENGLAND.
Worthy CITIZENS, and all other our English FREEMEN and BRETHREN,
AS we are Englishmen we are all incorporated into one Body, and though
distinct and different Families, Fortunes, and Qualities, yet fellow Members
and Coheirs of one and the same Birthright; not only by nature, as we are the
Sons of men, (nature obliging all in one Common and equal Bond of Freedom and
Unity,) but by certain sacred Laws and Customs of peculiar and inherent Right
to this Nation; general, equal, and impartial to all, without respect of
persons, rank, quality, or degree, derived through all successions of Ages, by
the blood Justice and Prudence of our Forefathers to us their posterity, as
ours, and the Right of our Children after us, not disinheritable: though this
Age were wholly made up of Apostates and Traitors to Common Justice and
Freedom, and should make sale of, and deliver up their Children as slaves and
vassails, yet English Right abides, to wit, our just Laws and Liberties, and
may justly be reinforced as opportunity may present; Sometimes they sleep but
never dye, their total Extinguishment is not to be imagined so long as any
Englishman, or English-blood abides: and whoever undertaketh, (though by
Arms, or otherwise,) their recovery and redemption is justified in that very
Action by the Laws of God, of Nations, Nature, Reason, and by the Laws of the
Land; and within the Bowels of our Nation amongst our selves no War can be
justified, but upon that score, the contrary is Sedition, Murder, Treason,
Tyranny and what not, and the Instruments thereof no other in the Eye of
English Freedom and Right, but as Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of prey.

Now right worthy and noble Citizens, and all other our English Brethren, let
us consider and lay to heart the sad and deplorable condition of our native
Country: Oppression, Injustice, and Tyranny reigns; Division, Discord, and
Dissimulation fomented and fostered; Trade and industery discouraged, our Land
rent into parties and factions, and the Common Band of Unity Cancelled, our
Fundamental Laws supplanted, High Courts of Justice introduced, the blood of
War shed in times of Peace; Arbitrary and illegal imprisonments, Pattents,
Monopolies Excise, and other payments brought upon us, and continued Contrary
to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; no form or face of Government of
English Constitution amongst us; the name and Authority of the People in
Parliament usurped and abused, and the stamp thereof put upon strange and
prodigious Actions, vexing and oppressing the people with daily Changes and
Alterations in Government, as the Interest of some few ambitious Grandees alter
and change, or get advantages one of another, and all under the Name of a
Commonwealth, when as the Nature is not practiced or intended at all, it being
utterly inconsistent with their very temper and interest; they are wrapped up and
compounded of nothing but guilt blood and Tyranny; and Equal and Common Justice
(the Essence of a Commonwealth) are utterly repugnant thereto; and whatsoever
they can do must be planted and maintained by Sword and violence against the
very Heart and Sense of the Nation; and they know not where nor how to center
an Oligarchy or something they would have to be Masters of the People, and
perpetuate their power and Tyranny, and therefore would amaze and confound us
with their New Debates of a Coordinate Power, or Senate for Life, such as our
English Laws and Liberties know not of, and of pernicious Consequence to this
Nation; so that from these men that thus handle the Stern at Westminster,
there is no expectation of any just Settlement of peace, or Freedom from
oppression; especially considering, the Apostasy, Hypocrisy, Deceit, and
Perjury of those men, their manifold Sollemn Engagements, Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Appeals unto Heaven; Promises, Remonstrances, Declarations all
by them broken again and again, never keeping Faith, Truce, or Oath, being
unbounded, unlimited, Certain to nothing, not to be held either by the Law of
God, of Man, of Conscience, or Reason; and from such Persons in Government good
Lord deliver us, and all the good people of England; and that all this is true
of them, your own Consciences Noble Citizens, and all other the Free people of
England can witness, there is no tongue, no pen is able to vindicate them in
this point, it is known of all, owned by all, and can be denied by none; how
then can any honest or just man shed any blood in their Quarrel, or lend them
Assistance? surely that blood will be required at their hands, and we doubt not
but you will be careful what you do.

And therefore from those Considerations and just provocations we have taken up
Arms in pursuance of, and Inquisition after our Government, Laws, and
Liberties, that every Englishman may be protected and secured in his Religion,
Liberty, and Property; and though it may be suggested, that we intend to
introduce Prosecution for Conscience into the Land again, we do hereby (in the
presence of Almighty God) protest and Declare against all Coercive Power in
matters of Religion, and that to the utmost of our strength (through Gods
Assistance) we will endeavor to the hazard of our Blood and Fortunes the
Freedom and Protection of all virtuous and religious People, by what Name
soever differenced from us, Equal with our selves: And that no Foreign or
other other Authority save only the Civil be exercised in England: That the
Practice of the Law be reformed; all Corrupt Statutes repealed; Annual
Elections of all Officers and Magistrates, with the Constant Succession of
Parliaments restored; our Fundamental Laws cleared and asserted, and whatever
is contrary there to to be abolished: That no Trials be admitted in England for
Life, Limb, Liberty or Estate but by the good old way of Juries, and that they
be restored* to their Original power* and purity: That all Extrajudicial and
Illegal proceedings by High-Courts of Justice, or otherwise, with all Illegal
and Arbitrary Committees be strictly provided against: That the Excise, and all
other Payments and Taxes such as our Ancestors never knew of, together with all
Monopolies and Pattents destructive to Trade and the Common Good of the Nation
be also abolished: And, that our Parliaments and Magistrates be secured from
all Force and Violence; and utterly cleared from all boundless Prerogative, and
unlimited Privilege: That the Right of the Poor in the Commons of England, all
Donations for Charitable Uses, and all Lands formerly belonging to the People
be restored again: And that Mercy and Justice be truly established amongst us.
And for these ends, and what else may be of public good to the Nation, we do
desire, and indeed challenge as of English Right, the speedy Election of a New
Free Parliament.

And thus, Most noble Citizens, Brethren and fellow Freemen of England, we
have dealt truly and plainly with you, and given you the real Grounds and
Reasons of our taking up Arms; looking upon you as the most concerned in the
Nation, and therefore hold our selves the more obliged to give you this Early
Advice of our Candid and Just intentions in this Undertaking, that you may not
be deluded or frighted (though falsely) into any strange opinion of us, either
through your own mistake, or by the policy of those men who will leave no
means unattempted to render us as Public Enemies, Rebels and Traitors,
Plunderers, Tyrants and Persecuters, or whatever is odious and monstrous, to
engage you in Blood.

Believe us, Right worthy Citizens, and Freeborn English Brethren, we have no
Design of Fire or Sword, or of Evil toward you or your City, or any part of
the Nation, or any person in it: We know there are thousands amongst you that
are satisfied in us; it may be indeed that many or most of the Gathered Sepeate
Churches may be fearful and jealous of us, and so may be induced to Arms
against us; but we do again and again protest before Almighty God, and the
whole World, that we have no other purpose toward them, but that they with us,
and we with them, may be bound up as Friends and Brethren in the Common Cause
of our Country, that every Englishman may have English Freedom and Right; and
we do not desire to wrong either Man, Woman, or Child the worth of a
Shooe-latchet: Therefore we hope you will first well advise before you proceed
in a new War, lest you bring not only your own, but others blood on your heads
(for we are resolved to prosecute this to the last drop of our blood.) The Case
of England is laid before you, our Laws and Liberties, they are yours as well
as ours, and for which we have all engaged in the first War, and not to be so
straightly vai^^d as to be set at stake against the private ends of some
ambitious and corrupt persons: Salus Populi, Suprema Lex; Let the People live,
and their Enemies perish.

Therefore we beseech you, we conjure you as English men, to stand by your
Native Country, and your Countries Cause: Our voice is, and it is no other
than the Consent and Voice of the People, A New Free Parliament, A New Free
Parliament; it is the English man's main Birthright, which we are resolved to
put the People in possession of, or to perish with our Swords in our hands. But
if you will not join, but degenerate, we hope nothwithstanding (by Gods
blessing) to carry on this Work: Yet to that just and glorious Work we may
challenge your concurrence, it being your duty as well as ours to endeavor the
procurement thereof: And therefore to you make it our Proposal, to your
Militia, to the Army, and the whole People, for the prevention of a New War,
and the effusion of English blood, that you would be Instrumental with us for
the speedy Election of a New Free Parliament, for the ends aforesaid; and in
the interim all hostility to be forborne* and that a day may be appointed, and
the People suffered to go to their free Elections, and we shall quietly submit
unto their Authority; heartily desiring that all revenge, division, rancor, and
animositie of spirit may be for ever buried in one General Act of Oblivion; And
that all Parties, Sects, and Sorts (now jarring, and making up interests one
against another) may reconcile, cement, and concenter in the common Brotherhood
of English Freedom and Right; in and for which we are

Sir GEORGE BOOTH to a Friend of his in London.
SIR,
MY last to you of the second Instant I understand you have committed to open
view, the Publication whereof was of general Satisfaction to your Friends here,
and for which we all hold our selves obliged. I have sent you here enclosed An
Express from the Knights and Gentlemen engaged with me, and beg this further
addition to your former many Favors, that you would please to take the care
upon you, to get the same printed and published, for the undeceiving of those
amongst you, and all other that are yet doubtful or unsatisfied in us. This
Messenger will inform you of the present State and Condition of Affairs with
us, to whom I refer you. In have I rest,

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend and Servant George Booth.
Manchester Aug. 9. 1659.

