MR. JOHN ELIOT, Called, Doctor of Medicine, HIS LAST Speech and Advice TO THE
WORLD, At his Suffering, March 9. 1694.
TIME will not allow me to give you or the World, a particular Description of
my Life; but I shall endeavor (God assisting me) to give you and the world, a
brief Survey of the most material parts of it.

In the First place, My Parents did most carefully, and diligently Educate me
at Schools: where I was grounded in the Fundamentals of the Protestant
Religion. After I had finished my Course at Schools, my Father and Mother in
Law (my own Mother being dead some Years before did bring me along with them to
Edinburgh, and put me to the University; where I continued till I finished my
whole Course of Philosophy; and it is known to many in the World, that I did
improve my Studies to the best advantage, as to what could have been judged
external: But at that time (and it is not without Regrate I speak it) I had my
own secret Faults and private Debauches; which I covered with all the care
imaginable, lest they might have been brought to my Fathers knowledge, whom
then I had a fear to offend: never considering that the Eye of the Almighty was
upon me, and that my most secret intrigues were not hid from Him. After this I
prosecuted the Study of Anatomy, in this Kingdom, And then, to my infallible
loss, I was withdrawn by evil Company, to act and commit things that were
heinous in the sight of God; and that not privately, but publikly, as if the
Laws both of God and Man, had approven such base and unworthy Actions: For then
I had begun to throw off the Fear, and Reverence I had always had for my Father
(as thinking it a Childish thing) and consequently that Fear and Regard I owed
to the great God of Heaven; and so gave my self to a more loose way of living
than I had formerly done; which occasioned great Grief to my Father, and many
scandalous Reports, whereof some I do confess and acknowledge (and that with an
hearty Sorrow) were too too true; the real commission of them have been the
source and fountain, from which all I have now met with, has sprung.

My Father, after many private Rebukes, and pious Exhortations, sound that
nothing could prevail, nor no Argument was of that force, as to make me
relinquish the Company I then haunted; so to prevent farther Evil, he designed
to send me Abroad: Which accordingly he did, where I continued for Three Years;
in which time my Life was very remarkable, and that upon several occasions;
which the brevity of time will nor allow me to rehearse: But the Company I most
conversed with were a Cabal of People, that went generally under the Notion, of
Wits: Our ordinary Converse was Debates of a high Notion, viz The proving that
there was not a God: The Irrationality of the Trinity, and Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior; And that the Scriptures were composed by a number of aspiring
Brains, who designed to make the World subject to their captious Humor; and to
be short, That Religion was but a Foppry, and Religious Persons a number of
Hypocrites and Sycophants; thus was their Humor to express themselves of what
was Divine; but I do not believe that they entertained these Thoughts for a
Truth, for my own part I never did. In any other Discourse of Natural Things,
abstracting from Divinity, they were most rational and pleasant: But to my
Sorrow I am now sensible, that the intertaining of such Company, together with
my former Sins, and the other Sins I then committed, (which were most grievous
in the sight of God) was the reason that the Lord trysted me with a signal
Misfortune, the Marks whereof are too visible to the World.

After the receiving of this Misfortune, so soon as Strength could allow me, I
came for Scotland; where I was a considerable time in great Affliction and
Trouble, my Father, nor few of my Friends not knowing where I was: During this
my Affliction, I had some Convictions of Spirit, by looking back upon the Tract
and former Course of my Life: but, to my great Grief and Shame, I acknowledge,
that those Convictions continued no longer than my Afflictions: For at that
time the Infirmity of my Mouth was, by all appearance, perfectly Cured, and
that without the lest blemish: So that then I began to forget the Convictions
of Spirit I formerly had, together with the many Vows and Promises of
Amendment I had made to God during my Affliction, and returned as the the Dog
to the Vomit and the Sow to the wallowing in the Mire.

But I had not many Days continued in this flagitious Course of Life, before I
received a casual Stroke upon my Mouth, which rendered me more miserable than
ever; and then I found, to my sad experience, That God would not be mocked; but
as He is Righteous in all His Ways, so He is Just in all his Dispensations:
Which made me (by reflecting upon my many broken Vows and Promises made to Him)
cry out. Have mercy upon O God! for against Thee, and Thee Only have I sinned,
and done Evil in Thy sight. Their Raptures and Motions of Spirit, did continue
during the extremity of my Trouble: but as my Trouble began to be mitigated and
assuaged, so these Motions and Raptures of Spirit did likeways gradually cease,
which I was not altogether unsensible of at that time.

And fearing lest God might tryst me with a farther Affliction, I bended my
Resolutions to an Married Life, as a Remedy against many Inconveniences: This
Design was in a little time afterward effectuat. Being Married, I lived a
retired Life for some Years, wherein I had some Reflections and Convictions
upon my former Course of Life, but, to my great Sorrow, they were short of what
was needful. My Marriage was carried on and done, without the knowledge of my
Father, which with other Circumstances of my Life, was the occasion of an open
Breach betwixt us; but by the Interposition of Friends and my Mother in Law
(who is a good kind Woman) all Differences were taken away.

This being done, my Father and some particular Friends together with my Wife,
did daily solicit me to take advice anent the Curing of my Mouth, which
accordingly I did, and in order the e^o, came to Edinburgh, where I was several
Months under Cure during which time my Wife did visit me twice. The first time
I was extremely Sick, the next time she came; I was pretty well recovered:
There was nothing past betwixt us, but Love and Kindness, and in this manner we
parted It pleased God she Conceived with Child at that time: Yet
notwithstanding I have never seen her since, which is near two Years. In this
time I received two Letters from her, wherein she signified, she would not
Co-habit any longer with me, she gave me no Reason for it, neither do I know
any she could have since our last parting: As to the Infirmity of my Mouth she
knew I had the same some Years before I Married her: but the Reason I judge is,
she has thought that my Cure would be too expensive and I judge it has been
concerted betwixt her and some of her Friends, that this she should do, to be a
hinderance of her paying the Cure; I shall pass this, and its my desire to God
that he may pardon her Sins, and make her sensible of her Error: For she has
been no small Instrument in bringing me to this deplorable End, as the sequel
of my Discourse shall make more clear.

My Father at this time was under Trouble himself; beside I was ashamed to
discover to him the Reality of the Matter, that my Wife had so Treated me, and
my so necessitous Circumstances, in regard I had Married without his Consent.
However by their Actings of my Wife I was redacted to such Straits and Wants,
that I was necessitat to apply to some of my Friends, whereof the deceast Mrs,
Pringle was one, who Entertained me kindly, and was not wanting, as I thought,
in truly commiserating my Condition. But she designed another thing at that
time; which I could not then fathom; the truth of this I find now to my own
Ruin.

This is the way and manner, I was brought to engage in this unhappy Business,
for which I now am to suffer: How this design was carried on, I have
sufficiently declared to the World, especially to Their Majesty's Advocat and
Solicitor, and publicly in the Criminal Court: However you shall know that I
was first employed by the deceast Mr. Nicolson and Mrs. Pringle, to Poison the
Wife of the said Mr. Nicolson, which I did undertake to do, and made them
likeways believe that I actually did it, but had done it so dexterously that it
would require some time before it had its desired effect. And I told them it
would gradually spend her Body, so that the World could judge no other, but
that she had Died of a Decay. Notwithstanding all this, I never so much as
endeavored the Acquaintance of the said Mistress Nicolson, as she her self has
Deponed.

The next thing I was employed in, was to affix a Design of Poisoning upon
Mistress Nicolson and Mistress Hamiltoun her Sister. The meaning is this, That
Mistress Nicolson and Mistress Hamiltoun should have desired me to give them such
a quantity of Poison, as would Poison Mr. Nicolson, this I accordingly did at
the desire of Mr. Nicolson and Mrs Pringle, I was likeways entreated by both
Mr. Nicolson and Mistress Pringle to go along with them to their Majesty's
Advocat, where I had a formal Story of the pernicious Design the two Sisters
had against the Life of Mr. Nicolson: Whereupon the said Mr. Nicolson consulted
Their Majesty's Advocat, how his Life might be secured, and the two Sisters
taken Red-hand in their wicked Design (as he alleged) and accordingly my Lord
Advocat drew a Draught of an Receipt, which the Sisters were to give to me
Subscribed before two Witnesses, and this I was to have from the two Sisters,
before I was to give to them the Poison. After we were parted from my Lord
Advocat, it was concerted amongst us three, viz Mr. Nicolson, Mistress Pringle
and me how the two Sisters Subscriptions should be got, and affixed to the
Receipt, and Witnesses procured: Which was done some days after, in this
manner. viz. Mr. Nicolson brought his Wife's Contract of Marriage to the House
of Mistress Pringle, where her Subscription was counterfeited and affixed to the
forged Receipt by the said Mr. Nicolson, Mistress Pringle being present; the
Subscription of Mrs. Hamiltoun was counterfeited from off a Discharge, granted
by her to the said Mr. Nicolson, her Name was also affixed to the sorged
Receipt by the said Mr Nicolson: This was that which was told me jointly by
them both, at the delivering of the Receipt to me: So I procured the two
Witnesses to Subscribe, their Names being filled up in the Body of the said
Receipt. I likeways caused the Body of the said Receipt to be written by the
Wife of one of the Witnesses, viz Robert Wishart, and I gave it to the said Mr.
Nicolson, who gave back the same to me again with the Names of the two Sisters
affixed to it, and then I procured the Witnesses to Subscribe.

This is the naked Truth, as I have formerly declared, and I take God to
Witness, before Whom ere long I must make my Appearance, that I designed the
Evil of none Living, neither has there Evil happened to those persons against
whom it was designed: For all my Design was to have my Straits and Wants
supplied, without the prejudice of any person.

This Business being the thing for which I must now suffer Death, I must be so
particular as to let you know, that I was the only person that made a perfect
Discovery of this complicated Affair; which my Declarations, before Their
Majesty's Advocat and Solicitor, as likeways before the Criminal Judges in
public Court, does sufficiently testify.

I did in that public Court make an open Confession and and threw my self at
Mercy, I was found Guilty by an Assyze, without adducing any other probation,
save my own Confession, for which I pleaded favor at the Judges Hands; I
received some: But I expected that the Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council,
upon full Information, would have imitated the Great GOD, Who delights not in
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should Repent and Live: For God,
Blessed for ever, will not Reject a Sinner upon his due acknowledging of his
Sins, and throwing himself at the Throne of His Mercy: So I hoped that the
Lords of Council, as gods on Earth, would have shown Mercy upon my ingenuous
Confession, and throwing my self upon their Clemency; but the Great GOD, Whose
Ways are unsearchable, and past finding out, has otherways ordered it; and so
I take it from the Hand of God, and not from M^n: And it is my earnest desire,
that He may give me a Holy Submission to His Will.

Now to the Glory of God, and my great Shame, I have given you a short
Narrative of my wicked and profligate Life, in which I desire you may take
notice of the many and different ways, the most merciful God has taken, to
reclaim me from my Sins and Wickedness: You may likeways observe, the many Vows
and Promises I have made to God, while His afflicting Hand was upon me; and
likewayes the several Convictions I had; but, as I have said, the Rod of
Affliction was no sooner removed, than my Vows and Promises were forgot, and my
Convictions ceased: But at last, by bringing my Body to this Disgraceful and
Untimely End, I hope God in His Mercy has found out a way to preserve my Soul
from Eternal Death; for my Hope is in Christ Jesus: And as I believe in Him
(Lord strengthen my weak Belief) so I expect by His Blood and Merits to see God
in Mercy. In all the Afflictions and Troubles I have met with, and what I am
now trysted with, I do from my Heart and Soul acknowledge the Goodness and
Mercy of God, who, notwithstanding of my many heinous and aggravating Sins,
never drew the Sword of Justice against me; else I had not only been punished
with all temporal Punishments, but I had, long before this time, been thrown
into Eternal Ruin, from which there is no Redemption: So that, I hope, the
Great GOD will make me a Monument of His Mercy, and not of His Justice. I
earnestly desire that all persons may take narrow inspection of my Sins, which
have brought me to be made a public Spectacle, and that they may be earnest
with God that He may give them His Restraining Grace, to preserve them from
falling into the like: For though it pleased God to deal with me in Mercy, that I
am brought to this public place to be an Example, and a Warning to all Men;
for it is justly to be feared, that after this so signal a Caveat, if any shall
commit such like Sins, that God will draw His Sword of Justice against them,
and cut them off in the midst of their Sins, and throw them into utter
Darkness: From which, Good Lord deliver us.

You are to observe, that in the Description of my Life I do particularly
mention my being singularly guilty of Two Sins. The First is, Disobedience to
my Parents, which is a Breach of the First Command, in the Second Table of the
Law: All of you should know, that there is a Blessing that attends the keeping
of this Command; but as I have broken it, so I have deprived my self of the
Blessing that attends it. But besides, I desire that all of you may take
notice, that when I threw off that Fear and Obedience I owed to my earthly
Father. I likeways threw off that Fear and Regard I owed to the Great God: And
therefore I earnestly entreat all you young People, and that for the Love of
God, I desire you may seriously consider what dangerous Consequences attend the
breach of this Command.

The Next is, That I entertained Company with a number of Men, who denied the
Existency of God, mocked at the Trinity, and Incarnation of our Blessed Lord
and Savior, and told that the Scriptures were composed by a number of aspiring
Brains, who designed to subject the World to their captious Humors; and in
sum, that Religion was but a Foppery, and religious Persons, Hypocrites and
Sycophants. The frequent Converse I had with those debaucht Company, had almost
extinguished the true Conception I had of a God; but the only thing that
interrupted this dangerous Opinion, was, That from my younger Years I had
always private Converse with God, though imperfectly, it not being with that
Sincerity as was requisite; yet I still paid a certain kind of Homage to that
Supreme Being, and even at that time when I most haunted that Company: And if
at any time I had omitted that Homage I gave to God, I could have no peace of
Mind until I had discharged my self of that Duty, which was the Only and Great
Motive which hindered me from intertaining the dangerous Principles of these Men.

Yet notwithstanding their daring and blasphemous Discourses, there was one of
them who told me, That he had occasion sometimes to be alone, but was afraid to
continue so for any time: For he said, That he felt something in himself (this
is his own Expression) that did strick him with such terror and horror, and
threw him into such Melancholy Fits, that he was afraid to be by himself, and
therefore sought all occasions of Company, This Gentleman was as roaring a
Gallant as any the Age produced, but otherways as well accomplished as most Men
What may be the Ends of such Men is greatly to be feared; nay, even the worst:
For I my self am too evident an Example of the same. I do therefore desire that
all here present, and to whose knowledge this may come, may be earnest with
God, that He may direct them in such a Holy Course of Life, as that they may
not fall into the Company of such Men, whose Principles are attended with such
dangerous and fatal Consequences.

There is one Thing that does not a little trouble me, and that is, The
neglecting the taking of the Sacrament, which I was never Partaker of,
notwithstanding the false and malicious Stories and Reproaches that pass on me
on that occasion: And I shall assure you, that the omission of that Holy Duty
has been no small Mean in bringing me to a Scaffold: So that as you regard the
Eternal Wel-being of your Souls, and desire to shun the Dangers that are before
your Eyes, do not slight the Opportunity of taking the Holy Sacrament.

There are some here present and some absent, who have spoke most falsely and
contemptibly of me, for which I forgive them and all Men (as I desire to be
forgiven) yet I must tell you, you have not done like Christians: For whatever
my Sins have been, you ought in Christianity to have spoke of me with
Commiseration and Regrate for my Failings; and you should have considered, That
it is the restraining Grace of God, and nothing in your selves, that has
preserved you from falling into worse. This I speak for your good, do not think
I have any Resentments of what has been spoken of this nature.

There are likeways many come here to day, rather to Gaze than to take Example:
But I Charge you and every one of you, in the Name of the Great GOD (before
Whom ere many Moments I must make my Appearance) that you seriously consider
what ye have heard this Day; and if you do otherways, remember I tell you, in
the Name of the Most High, that it will stand in Judgment against you: For I am
persuaded, that God has not only brought me here for a Punishment of my Sins,
but likeways that you and all others may take Warning and Example by me, and
may be Edified by what ye have heard this day, so as that it may be a Mean of
your Conversion and drawing nearer to God. That this may be the effect of what
ye have heard, is my earnest desire to God: So that He may be as much Glorified
in my Death, as He has been Dishonored in my Life. Thus wishing the Lord to
give you a true Repentance, and saving Fath in Christ Jesus, I shall conclude
with the Publican in the Gospel, God have Mercy upon me a poor Sinner.

John Eliot.
Postscript.
IN Regard of the wicked Practices of my Life, and that I have had frequent
Converse with debauched Company I think my self obliged (lest there might be
Mistakes) to give you a brief Account of my Fath, which is this: I Believe God
is; and that in Commiseration of fallen Man, Hesent the Son of his Love Christ
Jesus in to the World, who took upon him Humane Nature: I do believe that he
subjected himself to Death; and by that Sacrifice made Atonement for all those
that should sincerely believe in him: I do also believe, that he arose again
from the Dead, and that he now sits at the right Hand of God the Father, and
that he is making continual Intercession for Sinnas. I believe that there is a
communion of Saints, and that there is a future State: And I believe that God
will reward the Good and punish the Bad: I believe in the Holy Ghost, and that
there is forgiveness of Sins. In sum, I believe all that is contained in the
Apostolic Creed, and on this I venture my Salvation: For by the sincere
believing of this, together with a previous Repentance, I hope to see God in
Mercy.

You all see of what importance, this Belief is; so I entreat you again and
again to be earnest with God to give you a true Repentance (for it is the Gift
of God) and then a saving Faith in Christ Jesus; except you endeavor this, you
can never expect to be partakers of those Eternal Mansions of Bliss, that are
prepared for all those that sincerely believe in Him.

There is one thing I had forgot, Which is, that one of the Witnessees, viz Mr
Joseph Cleland, denied his Subscription in public Court upon Oath, but I take
God to Witness I did see him Subscribe Witness to the forged Receipt, this I
have declared as I am a dying Man, for Exoneration of my Conscience, and that
it may be a mean of his Conviction,

I cannot ommit to tell how Mr Nicolson and Mistress Pringle took all possible
ways, since my coming to prison to persuade me to load my self with the whole
Guilt, and for this end they gave me innumberable fair promises, and Bonds to
the value of five thousand Marks; besides innumerable other things, And with
all told me it was the only way to preserve their lives and my own. For in me
it would be thought no other thing than a pretty invention to supply my wants,
but in them it would be thought a most atrocious and notorious Crime, and that
unless I took the Guilt upon me they would inevitably perish. By such like
Arguments, I consented to their desire, and accordingly Mr Nicolson and I
concerted a Counter- Declaration, which I emitted as come only from my self,
and instigated so to do by a remorse of Conscience (as I pretended, Lord pardon
me for it) I do publicly declare, the said Declaration to be false and an
untruth.

My friends Kindness has been so singular and signal to me on this occasion,
that I cannot pass it with silence: For they have not only taken all lawful
means to preserve my Life, but they have also taken all Christian measures and
methods to preserve my Soul, for which I do here publicly entreat the Almighty
God to reward them with his choicest Blessings here and Eternal Bliss hereafter.

Now I bid you all heartily Adieu, and again and again I desire that you may
imprint on your Hearts what you have heard and seen this day, which if you do,
as I earnestly desire, so I hope the Great GOD will make it a Mean of your
Eternal Good. Lord remember me in Mercy, for my time draws nigh So I end with
the Psalmist, Hid not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble; Hear me
speedily; draw nigh to my Soul and redeem it, Make have O GOD! to deliver me,
make have to help me O LORD! for I am poor and needy, make have unto me O GOD!
Thou art my help and my deliverer, O LORD make no tarrying. Into thy hands I
commend my Spirit.

John Eliot,



EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs. M. DC. XCIV.

Advertisement.
THe before going Speech was all Written by Mr. John Eliot his own Hand, and
many Copies thereof Subscribed by him, before his Execution: And this Copy was
publicly Read upon the Scaffold, in his presence, and by his Order, and Owned
and Acknowledged by him to be True in every Circumstance, and as such he
delivered Subscribed Copies to severals: And this Copy was sent to Sir James
Steuart, Their Majesty's Advocate, and printed by Allowance under Written.

Edinburgh, The Tenth Day of March, One Thousand; Six Hundred and Ninty Four
Years,
Allows this Speech of John Eliot to be Printed.

Polwart.
Ja. Steuart.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THat Francis Spira, and the Second Spira, being a Fearful Relation of An
Atheist' who Died at London, December 1691 in Two Parts: Is to be Sold by
George Mosman, in the Parliamet Closs, Price 8 ss. Bound.


