Elixir Magnum Vitae: OR, The Great ELIXIR of LIFE, Being the most admirable
Cordial-Drink, and its singular Virtues, never before made Public; is now
exposed to Sale, as the most excellent Preservative of Humane Bodies, for the
general good of all Persons.
THis Famous ELIXIR VITAE, was first brought into England by a Person of
Quality, that for many years had traveled into most parts of the Christian
World; who being a Curious Inspector into Nature, and about Forty years a
Student in Physic, for his own Delight and Satisfaction, (but never for Profit
or Gain) most happily found out this Secret or Arcanum, the only immediate
Helper or Restorer of Nature; and has freely Administered the same, very
frequently to his Friends in particular that stood in need thereof, as also to
diverse other Persons in his Travels, both Rich and Poor, to his great
Commendation; and that is that Medicament that he always made use of, and
called it his Jewel.

Now having had the Honor of this Worthy Persons acquaintance for some
considerable time, and thereby contracted great Friendship (together with other
Weighty Reasons) he was pleased freely to Communicate and Impart this Secret to
Me, with the true manner of its Preparation in all particulars; so that now,
it is only at my disposal, and may be had at Mr. Thomas Potter's House, near St.
Clements Church in the Strand, where those that desire it may be furnished with
what quantity they please. Sealed with this Coat of Arms to prevent
Counterfeits. trademark

And Note, That this Cordial-Drink, or Great Elixir, is generally esteemed (and
highly valued) by all persons, that have tried it to be the most Incomparable,
and far exceeding all Drinks or Elixirs, that has hitherto been exposed to Sale
in this Nation.

The Virtues of this Great ELIXIR of Life, are these, viz.
IT is very prevalent against all inveterate pains of the Head, and defends the
Brain from all noxious Fumes that arise from a foul Stomach, or the defects of
the Spleen, watery and windy Vapors, which cause remaining un-remov'd occasions
very unwelcome (and sometimes fatal) effects, as the Vertigo Megrim, or
Giddiness or Swimming in the Head, also a Mist before the Sight, or an
uncomfortable Dimness in the Eyes; in some persons they feel as it were a heavy
weight on their Heads, others are subject to fall, like those with an Epilepsy,
or much discomposed like those who are Paraletical; in others it produces
Vomiting, and pains in the Head by fits, which is occasioned by a Costive body,
but if this Elixir be applied, it certainly keeps the whole body open, and
carries off the cause of these and almost innumerable other Maladies to
admiration. It is most excellent in the cure of Sore and Rhumatick Eeys; for it
takes away the internal cause, and wonderfully strengthens the Sight, it also
diverts sharp Rheumes that fall upon the Throat and Lungs from the Head;
thereby causing sometimes Imposthumations, Quinseys, dry Coughs, or Hoarseness;
and in short, so much impares the Lungs, that a shortness of breath, or Ptisick
follows, and in some, tedious and lingering Consumptions.

It is infallible in the recovery of those that have lost their Smelling, or
Tasting, it cures Imposthumes or Stuffing in the Head, or Noise in the Ears
occasioned by cold; it preserves Hearing even to old age, and very much
strengthens the Memory, and comforts the Animal, Vital, and Natural Spirits.

It Is of excellent operation in procuring a lost Appetite, helps bad Digestion,
and the stoppage of the Stomach; and thereby restores languishing Nature and
Melancoly, drooping Spirits. After any long sickness it procures a fresh quick
and lively habit of Body, it powerfully opposes all black, adust, and
complicated Humors, which are the grand Enemies of Nature, this Elixir being
frequently taken, draws them out of the Veins and Arteries, and thereby
purifies the whole Mass of Blood. It also removes all pains from the Heart, and
perfectly cures all stoppage of Phlegm in such persons that are frequently in
danger of being stifled in their sleep for want of breath; it also gives ease
to aged persons in the Ptisick, and infallibly cures those that are young.

If this Rich Cordial be constantly taken for some considerable time, it
certainly cures the GOVT in those that have been long tormented therewith; in
others it stifles it as it were in the Birth, extracting from all parts of the
Body, those crude and viscous Humors, which may well be called the very Spawn
and Noursher thereof, and this has been often verified in many persons by
experience to their great satisfaction, it also frees the Joints of all
Diseases incident unto them, to admiration; and infallibly expels clotted and
putrified blood or corrupt matter by Stool and Urine, and thereby many internal
Diseases have been cured, as Imposthumations in the Kidneys or inward parts,
Ulcers therein, or in the Bladder, Surfeits of many years standing, or
dangerous Impediments occasioned by inward cold, which otherwise might have
ended in Death; and be assured there is no Medicament in the World comparable
unto it in carrying off the dangerous effects of Drinking and Debauchery; for
it immediately settles the Brain and Stomach, sweetens the Breath, which will
be strongly tainted thereby, and procure a good Appetite It also brings away
the Stone or Cravel by degrees, either in Bladder or Kidneys, to a Miracle; nor
is there a better or more effectual Remedy to be had; for first it dissolves
the Stone, and then expels it into Sand as fine as Flower, in the Urine; and
not only so, but it totally destroys the Matter or Humor, which is the
original cause thereof. This Famous Elixir, never fails to repair or restore
the decayed or wasting Kidneys of Men or Women, and it certainly cleanses both
those, and the Reins also of all Putrefaction and Imperfections whatsoever, and
thereby creates a free and wholesome passage of Urine.

It is singularly prevalent against the King's Evil, Jaundice, Dropsy, and
Scurvey; and it is a most sure Remedy against the Cholick, or Griping of the
Guts; and Bloody Flux in young or old; it stops Vomiting to admiration. Also
this incomparable Elixir of Life, is so great a Friend to the Female Sex, that
they cannot desire a greater, as relating to Health, which by all rational
persons is (or ought to be) esteemed above all the Wealth in the World. It
infallibly cures them of all unhappy Obstructions in Body, and thereby makes
them capable of Conception.

It Is a certain Remedy against the Green Sickness of all sorts, and supports
Nature in her pristine Strength and Vigor, procures a good Complexion,
sweetens the Blood, and in fine puts the body into a very sound and healthful
posture, as can in reason be desired.

Moreover, it is most admirable in killing the Worms of all kinds, in young or
old, as has been experienced by Thousands to their great comfort: and it
speedily (and no less effectually) frees the Liver and Spleen from all
Obstructions, and thereby cures the Fits of the Mother and Spleen,
Falling Sickness, and all other Fits; It is a most excellent Medicine for
Nurses, for it cleanses and thoroughly purifies the Blood, and thence proceeds
good and wholesome Milk, and consequently healthy Children.

This Elixir of Life never fails in curing the Rickets in Children, as also the
Chin-Cough, by opening the passages, it strengthens, cleanses and heals, and
carries off those sharp Humors that occasion the same.

It is most excellent in the alleviating the Burning heat in the Parlms of the
Hands or Soles of the Feet, for by a due application hereof, it gives the
Patient convenient refreshment, and is so friendly to nature, that it rarely
fails to take away the cause of a Distemper, and then it follows most certainly
that the effects must cease.

It cleanses the Spermatick Vessels of all crude Seed and Matter, and makes
the body lively and fit for Generation, and by that means helps Barrenness It
also expels Poison, and is very effectual in rooting out the cause of all
Agues, and Fevers; and is not only an Antidote, but a most excellent Cordial,
in that Infectious and Mortal Disease of the Plague, from which, Good Lord
deliver us.

This incomparable Elixir is more precious than Gold, and will certainly (by
Gods assistance) preserve life in the greatest danger; therefore let none spoil
its Operation in using their bodies to other Physic, if a sick person be not
doomed to Death, or his life by Divine Permission not yet Terminated, no better
Medicament need be administered, and whoever uses themselves to this Elixir,
will very rarely have the Small Pox or Meosles

It is a most excellent Medicine for those that go long Voyages to Sea, and
preserves, as well as cures, those which are afflicted with the Scurvey, and
it is no less excellent for all persons that in the Summer time frequently drink
Mineral Waters, for it carries off the Dregs and Fecies that are usally left,
and too often of very dangerous consequence.

The World would undoubtedly put a high value upon this Elixir, did they but
know its admirable Virtues, in purifying and sweetning the whole Mass of Blood,
and consequently fortifying the Spirits, and thereby put the whole body in so
sound and healthful a condition, that few Diseases shall be able to assault or
offend it, since most Distempers must certainly vail (if Life be not terminated
by God Almighty) to its innocent, but prevalent Virtue and Operation.

Directions for the Administration of this Great Elixir of Life.
THe Dose must be given thus, (consideration being had to the age and strength
of the Patient) from the age of twenty and upwards, no person need take any
more than three or four spoonfuls at most, except it be in very strong Robust
bodies, who are naturally Costive; but in bodies of a more tender nature, they
may being with two spoonfuls, or less if they please; but it must be taken at
night going to bed, be it two, three, or four spoonfuls, and the same quantity
must be taken also the next Morning. The manner of its Operation will be as it
finds cause, in some it will work in six hours, in others in eight or ten,
according as Humors abound, and the body is afflicted with different
Distempers. this Cordial works frequently by Stool Urine and Sweat, but never
by Vomit; it is a Medicine of searching nature, and thereby expels those occult
Maladies which are destructive in the end to all humane kind, nor is like to
other Purging Medicines which usually leave an uneasy binding or astringent
quality behind, but it is in reality of a Balsamic nature, that heals and
strengthens so accurately, that it leaves the body in a most excellent vigorous
condition to administration. Children in the Month may take it thus, viz six,
eight, or ten drops in any distilled Water as shall be thought fit, and as the
Infant, grows on from one month old to twelve, you may increase your drops (as
reason and discretion will direct) till it amounts to half a spoonful, and then
also qualify as aforesaid, and to Children of two years old, give them one
moderate spoonful, and to those of four years old, a spoonful and a half, for
those of seven years of age, two spoonfuls, and for such as are older, use your
discretion.

All persons that accustom themselves to the use of this Cordial-drink, will
from its first dose be very sensible of its strengthening quality it leaves
behind, and so gradually increases or augment the same, till by Gods assistance
an infallible cure be perfected.

For all sudden Indispositions, or Cold taken, use this Elixir for three
Mornings and three Nights together, and by the blessing of God, it will very
rarely fail to perform a cure, let the Malady be what it will; but for old
Distempers that have been habitual and continue inveterate, no person can
reasonably expect that a small quantity should effect a cure; but having
followed the aforesaid Directions, let the person take two spoonfuls at Night,
and the same the next Morning for eight or ten days, after which rest a week
from taking any more, that nature may receive the undoubted benefit intended by
this admirable Cordial; in any fits give a large dose.

Note, That the first two or three days doses, do but stir up the Humors,
which are afterward by a continuation thereof, most happily carried off; and
the Disease (by Gods blessing upon the means) perfectly cured, and Health
restored, to the great joy of the Patient that long languished under the
malignancy of his Distemper.

Now in the Griping of the Guts, according to the strength of the Patient, may
be taken four or five spoonfuls, less or more, as cause requires, and it must
be repeated again in five or six hours, and the same again the third time, if
need require, and you not doubt of a cure.

This Elixir is very excellent for such persons that are weak and Consumptive,
and for such also that have a weak Digestion, for it very much comforts and
strengthens the Stomach, as is before expressed; and in order to this, the
Patient may take a spoonful before Dinner, and another after a few days, in the
performance whereof the Stomach will be so well cleansed and strengthened, that
of necessity the Patient will have a most excellent Appetite: Take the same
quantity aforesaid in an old Ptisick-Cough, either before the fit, or after.

Note, Likewise, that this most excellent Elixir of Life, does far exceed all
Cordial-Drinks, Waters or Sweating Medicines whatever, for they cause great
weakening Sweats, and fails in carrying off the grosser matter, but this Cordial
expels much of the peccant Humor by a kind of Transpiration or breathing
through the Pores, and lastly evacuates the grosser matter from the very Center
of the Body, to the great comfort and satisfaction of the Patient.

And let me advise all persons for their own good, as they expect the benefit
of this Elixir, to be very exact and careful in following these full Directions.

And lastly observe, that it may be taken in a small quantity at any time of
the day, as an Antidote to prevent Diseases, for 'twill be no hindrance to
business, nor need it be seconded with Broth or Posset Drink, as other Purging
Physic is: It is safe for all ages, persons, and Seasons, in the hottest
Summer and coldest Winter, when critical Diseases reign most, and other Physic
cannot be safely, then may this.

In all fits give a large Dose. It has been found by experience to be a most
incomparable Remedy in the highest Fever, even when they Rave: It may be taken
at any time, according to the persons strength, for it immediately quiets the
Spirits, and cheers and comforts them; and at the same time strengthens the
Heart, and drives out the orginal cause by Sweating and by Stool; so that in
few days the person will be refreshed, and the Fever abated to a miracle: They
must apply it two or three times, or as there is occasion; this has in five or
six hours infallibly cured many persons, as is found by daily experience, which
no reasonable person can deny.

This great Cordial comfortably cleanses the Bodies of Women after
Childbearing; and it also effectually cleanses the bodies of all persons
after the Smallpox, or Measles, and carries off all Dregs and poisonous blood
which the Distemper has left behind: It is likewise good for those that are
well, to take two or three Bottles of it at Spring and Fall, by the way of
prevention; for note, That all violent Purges fail in doing what this Cordial
daily does, for their great speedy passing through the Body, generally leaves
the ill effects of the Distemper behind.

This Rare ELIXIR for the Public good, and the benefit of the Afflicted, is
exposed to Sale, at the several places following.
MRs. Andrews, Pewterer, at the end of Gardners-lane in King Street
Westminster. Mr. James Porter, Barbar, at his Shop in St. James's-Market. Mr.
Richard Mills, at the Sign of the Golden-Faulkon, in the Pall Mall. Mr. Thomas
Potter, Barber, at his Shop at St. James's Gate. Mr. Richard Burton, at the
Sign of the Worlds-End in Knights-bridge. Mr. Francis Hopkins, at the Sign of
the Gentleman-Archer, in Compton-street in Soho-Fields. Mr. Bartlet, Distiller,
at the Sign of the Turks-Head in Bedford-street Covent Garden. Mr, Parker, at
the Sign of the Bulls-Head in King Street Bloomsbury. Mr. Christopher Conyers,
Barber, in the same Street. Mr. John Vallers, Shoemaker, next door the
Blackmoors-head in Exeter-street near Covent Garden. Robert Good, Comb-maker,
at the Sign of the Box-Comb near Turn-Stile in Holbourn. Mr. John Peark,
Peruke-maker, at the Sign of the Golden-ball, over against St. Clements-Church
in the Strand. The Widow Johnsons Coffee-house, over against the new Church in
German-street. Mr. Haselwood, a Tobacconist, at the Golden Sugar Loaf in
Long-acre: Mr. Wates, next door to the Sign of the Sun in Peter-street,
Westminster. Mr. Chantrel, Milliner, at the Golden-Bodies in great
Turn-stile-Alley in Holbourn. Mrs. Young, in Middle-Row in Old-street, at the
Sign of the Dripping-Pan. Mr. William Hawkins, at the Sign of the Wheat-sheaf,
in Hatton-Garden. Mr. Yeoman, Milliner, next door to the Sign of the Feathers
in Clare-Market, near Clements-Inn Back-gate. Mr. Robert Clave, at the Sign of
the Three Compasses near the Old-Swan by London Bridge. Mrs. Fuller, at the
lower end of Brook-street, at the Sign of the Two Perukes and Crown in
Ratcliff. Mr. Thomas Stroud's Coffee-house, near St. James's Gate. Mr. Peter
Andrews, a Cane-man, at the Gray-Hound, near Fleet-bridge. Mr. Nicholas Hicks,
Broker, at the Sign of the Hand and Lock of Hair at the upper end of Middle-Row
in Holbourn. Mr. Thomas Prince, Grocer, at the Sign of the Three Sugar-Loaves
in Hatton Garden. At Neds Coffee-House in the Paved Alley in Austin-Fryers by
Broad-street. Mrs Mary Beck, Grocer, in Good-mans Yard in the Minories. Mr.
Stephen Orchard, Slop-seller at Shadwel dock. Mr. Edward Hews at the Sign of
the Dog in Stone-street, near St. Mariovers-Stairs. Mr. William Kean, at the
Sign of the Three-Faulkons at the hither end of Newington Mr. Nicholas Pool,
Faulconer at the Faulkon in Twitnam. Mr. John Wise, Comb-maker, in
Thrist-street in Soho-Fields Mr. Brumigham, in Spittlefields near
Bishopsgate-street. Mrs. Ellots, the Glocestershire Coffee-house, at the lower
end of the Old-Jury. Mr. James Norcock, Snuff-maker, and Perfumer, at the
Jessaminio-Tree and Snuffing-Gentleman next the King-Head-Tavern in
Fleet Street, near Chancery Lane, Mr. Henry Coley, at his house in
Baldwins-Court, over against the Old Hole in the Wall, in Baldwins-Gardens. Mr.
Richard Jones, Bookseller, at the Sign of the White Horse in Little-Britain.
Mr. Nathaniel Thompson, at the entrance into the Old-Sping-Garden, near
Charing Cross.
The Bottle contains half a pint, price 2 s 6 d.


