PSEVDOCHRISTVS: Or, A true and faithful RELATION OF THE Grand Jmpostures,
Horrid Blaspemies, Abominable Practices Gross Deceits;
Lately spread abroad and acted in the County of Southampton, by William
Frankelin and Mary Gadbury, and their Companions.

The one most blasphemously professing and asserting himself to be The Christ,
The Messiah, The Son of God who dyed and was crucified at Jerusalem for the
sins of the People of God.

The other as wickedly professing and asserting her self to be The Spouse of
Christ, called, The Lady Mary, the Queen, and Bride, the Lambs Wife.

Together with the Visions and Revelations, to which they did pretend their
ways of deceiving, with the Names and Actions of sundry Persons deceived by
them.

As also their Examinations and Confessions before the Justices of the Peace,
their Imprisonment, and their Trial before the Judge of Assize, at the last
Assize holden at Winchester, March 7. 1649

Published for a public Benefit and Warning to every one to take heed to
himself, that he be not deceived by the Errors and Deceits of these present
times.

By HUMPHRY ELLIS, Minister of the Word in the City of Winton.

This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the
children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. Is.
37.3. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe
it not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets. Behold, I have
told you before: Mat. 24.23, 24, 25. London, Printed by John Macock, for Luke
Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's
Churchyard. 1650.

To the Reader.
Courteous and Christian Reader,
I Here present to thy view a very sad story, which contains in it a Relation
of such and so high impieties, that like thereunto in all things has not been
yet heard of, to have been acted amongst us in this Nation: The importunate
desire of many Christian Friends, Ministers and others, the expectation of all
the Country hereabout, and the right information of others, (who living at a
distance, even in remote parts of the Nation from us of this place, unto whom
some rumor of these things have come, and who therefore desire to be more fully
informed concerning them,) have required, called for, and necessitated the
publishing thereof. And that the publishing hereof, has been by me thus
undertaken and performed, has not been from any great willingness of mine own
thereto, but that by the importunity of Friends I have been necessitated unto
it, alleging, that by reason of my living and constant residence in this City,
where much of these things have been acted, by reason of my acquaintance also
with the Justices, and with diverse other persons abroad in the Country, I might
be best furnished with Informations for the carrying of it on, and that it was
therefore rather expected of me then of any other. It has been also much
urged, that great benefit might come to the public hereby, that it might be a
special means to warn others to beware of these or the like deceits, that they
be not deceived by them. These Reasons, especially the latter, have wrought
upon me, to appear in publishing thereof, though censures enough for my pains
herein is that which at least is from many to be expected by me. And now,
Reader, if there be any love and zeal in thy heart to the Honor of God and
Christ, thou will here see matter of Lamentation, that amongst us who profess
his Name, any should arise in so high a manner to blaspheam his Name: Of
Lamentation also for the sad Condition of our Nation, that such abominations
are to be found amongst us. Here may thou see what a root of bitterness that
unlimited, lawless, boundless Toleration is of all Religions, and of all things
whatsoever under pretense of Religion, which some under color of liberty of
conscience have contended for: What bitter fruits would soon spring from it,
may be hereby easily discerned. Have thou any interest in God and Christ? see
what cause there is that thou improve it, in thy addresses to the Throne of
Grace, and that not only in behalf of our Land, that it may by his Grace be
spared, notwithstanding these and the like evils committed in it; but also,
that God would be pleased to rebuke this Spirit of Error and Blasphemy that is
thus gone forth, and spreads it self amongst us; That God would also make his
own people to be of one heart, and to strive earnestly for the Faith of the
Gospel, to contend for the Faith once given to the Saints. And that thou may
reap benefit from this Discovery, which is for thy benefit intended, and make
that use which God would have thee to make thereof, is the desire, and shall be
the prayer of,

Thine in the Lord Jesus, and Work of the Gospel, HUMPHRY ELLIS.
Winchester, May 14. 1650.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHat is here discovered in the ensuing Relation, I was for a great part an eye
and ear Witness thereof; other things I had from their Confessions in their
Examinations before the Justices, and from the Testimonies of diverse persons of
known honesty and integrity, whose Testimonies, subscribed with the hands of
those from whom I received them, I have reserved by me. Considering then that I
have such Authorities for the things here reported, which are not things
reported to be done far off, like the stories of some travelers, which if
false, yet could not be easily disproved; nor done long ago, as things
forgotten, out of the memory of man; but things done among our selves, and that
very lately, that they are fresh in the memories of most persons hereabout,
that very easily I might be disproved, should any other things then what are
true be reported by me; and questionless this book will come into the hands of
such who would be very glad of such an advantage, as to be able to charge any
untruth upon it: On the other side, thousands in these parts can witness these
things for the generallity and substance of them to be true, that therefore I
hope none will see any cause to question the truth and credit of the things
here related, how strange soever they might otherwise seem to be unto them.

A true and faithful Relation of the grand Jmpostures, etc.
WHat our blessed Savior has foretold to his Disciples, should come to pass
in the latter Times, and to be a great and manifest sign of his Coming, and of
the end of the World, (viz.) That men shall say, Lo, here is Christ, and lo
there: that false Christ's, and false Prophets shall arise; Mat. 24.23, 24. the
same may be seen truly verified in these times of ours; and the fulfilling
thereof, even in the literal sense of it, will be discovered in this following
Relation. Although I may herein make discovery of the sinful, erroneous,
Heretical and Blasphemous Opinions, speeches and practices, of diverse persons;
yet William Franklin and Mary Gadbury, (the one professing himself to be The
Christ, the other as blasphemously proclaiming him so to be; and both of them
joining together, and effectually prevailing, to the seducing of the Souls of
diverse, to follow them in their ways of destruction;) are the persons whom I
shall especially deal withal; and whose ways and practices of deceiving, with
what has been done by and upon them within these few months past in this
County of Southampton, I shall endevor to lay open and discover. But as that
which may give some light to the following Relation, and the better direct all
that may see or read it, what use they are to make of it, it will be necessary
that I first of all make some discovery of these Persons, their Conditions,
Callings, and manner of living in Times past; the way and means of their
acquaintance together, and associating themselves in so sinful a manner, and
for so wicked an end, to and with one another, with the occasion of their
coming together into this County, according to that understanding thereof I
have received, either by their own Confessions, or the informations, which
those to whom they or either of them have been formerly well known, have given
me concerning them.

William Franklin, a man, as may easily be guessed, much about forty years of
age, was born at Overton, a place not far from Andover in this County of
Southampton, was an Apprentice in London to the Trade of a Rope-maker, has
been about these sixteen years a married man, and has at this time a wife and
three children living in Stepney parish, near London, the place of his
habitation, where he has both lived and exercised, till of late, the Trade to
which he was Apprentice.

For his manner of living, he has been well esteemed in Times past, as a civil
man, diligent in his Calling, honest in his dealings, careful to provide for
his Family, and has born Office in the place and parish where he has lived;
yea, he has been well esteemed in Times past for Religion, having been an
eminent Professor of it, very zealous in the duties of Religion, and very
constant in the practice and observance of the Ordinances of the Gospel: I have
received very good testimony concerning him, that he has been esteemed by the
godly as an eminent Saint, as a choice Professor of godliness: he has been of
late years much afflicted, his Family visited with the pestilence, himself also
(as I have heard) sick of it: he was also in a condition of desertion, doubting
of the love of God, but had afterward reviving by the Promises of grace
applied to him; besides sickness both in body and mind, he has been somewhat
distracted in his brain: I have seen it testified under the hand of Charles
Stamford, Surgeon, that in the year 1646. William Franklin was distracted,
that he had bled him diverse times, and used other means for that distemper:
This of his distemper I the rather write concerning him, that I may not be
censured to conceal any thing that might in the least extenuate his offenses,
especially seeing that several Certificates concerning this his distempered
condition were presented in his behalf, when he stood at the Bar before the
Judge at the Assize; and intimating that what was done by him to be while he was
in distracted fits. Yet this I must also add, That I find not those
Certificates, which I have seen, to certify any thing directly of his being in
such a distemper since the year, 1646. While he has been in prison in this
City, I have several Times seen him, and had concerning his Opinions and
Practices much conference with him, but could never see or hear ought from him,
which might argue him in the least to be so distempered; but rather in such a
cautious wary manner expressing himself, that what ever he spoke, was
sufficient to show him to be a man all this time in a sober mind, enjoying the
right use of his Intellectuals, his understanding faculty, according to the
strength of those parts he was endued withal, very free from any such natural
distemper. And though I have also spoken with diverse, that have several times
talked and conversed with him since his coming into this Country, yet I never
heard of any to declare, that any thing in all this time has been seen or
heard to proceed from him, which might argue him so distempered: therefore for
these Reasons thus expressed, although I cannot but say, the man has been
mightily possessed with a spiritual frenzy, in what has been declared and done
by him; yet I cannot admit any thing of such a natural distemper to be alleged
to extenuate these great evils which he has fallen into.

But to return to that Relation of him whence we have thus digressed: In that
affliction and distemper of his before mentioned he fell into diverse strange
temptations; and many blasphemous passages and expressions, saying, That he was
God, that he was Christ, fell from him, and were uttered by him: but he
afterward recovered from that distemper and affliction of body and mind, and
both discerned and acknowledged that Satan had attempted to bring him under
strong delusions: he began to follow his Calling again, he went to the
Congregation, or gathered Church, to which he did belong, and whereof he was a
member, and there humbly and graciously, to the apprehensions of those that
heard him, acknowledged to the glory of God, and his own shame, that he had
sinned, and blasphemed God, and was held for a time by Satan, and his own
heart, under that strong delusion: he declared how God delivered him, he warned
all to keep close to the written Word of God, to watch and pray, that they
entered not into temptations; and to take heed they were not led away from the
Truth by the error of the wicked, and so did fall from their own stedfastness.
After this, he walked sometime in fellowship with that Congregation, and there
was great hope that he was now well recovered from such delusions; but however
not long after he fell again into, and was more deeply then before plunged in
such spiritual delusions; for now he pretended to have received some
Revelations and Visions, which he endeavored to manage (as the manner of such
is) with fair speeches, and seeming Scripture-Gospel-expressions, and pretended
to prophecy and foretell things to come: he got acquaintance amongst some of
those that deny Ordinances, Scriptures, Christ, and are fallen from all
Gospel-principles; and, as it seems, learned their ways: He then pretended that
he could speak with new Tongues, and would babble out words which neither
himself or others were able to understand: and as it is the property of wicked
men and seducers to wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived, so has
it been with this man, till at length he has attained to that height of
impiety and blasphemy, which shall be declared in this Relation: By these
spiritual deceits he so fell into, was he also led into much impiety, as to
beat and abuse his Wife, to deny her to be his Wife, to keep company with other
women; for all which evils he was at length, and that very deservedly, excluded
by the Congregation to which he belonged.

I will now leave William Frankelin a little, till having said somewhat also of
his Companion and Partner in wickedness, Mary Gadbury, I may declare how they
came acquainted, and what were the ways of deceit here practiced by them.

This Mary Gadbury is a married woman, about thirty years of age, her husbands
name is James Gadbury, who (as her self says) about seven years ago forsook
her, and with a servant he had went away from her into Holland, whither (as her
self also says) she went to him, about five years since, but stayed very
little time with him, since that she has neither seen him, or heard from him,
but with a daughter she has lived ever since, asunder from him in London.

The place of her living, as she has declared, has chiefly been in Watling
street in London, though, as I have heard, she has of late much shifted her
habitation from place to place; her employment has been to sell small Wares,
as Laces, Pins, Bandstrings, and other trifles for Gentlewomen. For the manner
of her living I have but little on certain grounds to declare: She pretends for
her self, that she has been long time affected to Religion, and to have been a
frequent hearer of the Word, of Mr Sedgwick, and Mr Case, in times past, but of
late chiefly of Mr J. Goodwin, and Mr Jesse. I have seen a Petition directed to
the Judge of Assize in her behalf, subscribed with the hands of diverse men and
women, who, as I suppose, live in or near Watling street, the place of her
living, declaring her to have been of honest conversation, to have lived in
good repute, and religiously among them: But I have heard others reporting
otherwise concerning her, as if she had been noted in times past to have been
of a vicious, lewd, light behavior: She has acknowledged concerning her self,
that by one of her neighbors she was accused before the last Lord Major to keep
a naughty house; but of these things concerning her living, I have nothing upon
certain information to write, but leave it to others, by farther enquiry at the
place of her habitation, to satisfy themselves, if they desire it, concerning
her.

And now let me declare how these persons came acquainted, and engaged together
in their sinful employment and undertaking here in this Country: for this let
me acquaint the Reader, That Mary Gadbury having been first committed to
Bridewell, was some few days after sent for thence by the Justices, to be
committed to the Common-Goal, at which time being examined, she was more free
then formerly to declare her self; and besides what was taken by the Justices
as her Examination, and might serve them for their proceedings in Law with her,
she was willing also to make farther discovery of the Visions, Revelations and
Voices which she pretended unto, and therein of the way of their acquaintance
together, the occasion of their coming together into this County, and the
things here done by them, which she did in a Discourse of at least two hours
long, and which I, who was then and there present, took from her in writing, as
nigh as might be word for word: This voluntary and free Confession of hers I
shall now make use of, as that which will furnish me with matter to carry on
this Relation, faithfully herein reporting the things I then received, and
wrote from her, the whole of it in the order she delivered it I shall not
transcribe, for it would be teadious to the Reader so to do, and many things
therein are very impertinent to such a Relation as this is; but I shall select
out of it such things as are material, disposing them also into such a method
as I have proposed to follow in this Discovery.

Concerning her first acquaintance with William Frankelin, she declared in that
her Confession, That it was by means of a woman who lived in the house with
her, that this woman told her concerning William Frankelin, that she having
been at his house, she saw him there embracing a man, whom she called a Devil;
but he reproving her for it, said, it was not so, but he was one beloved of
God: and farther declared to her concerning him, that she had seen such a man,
who had been in such a condition of misery, as she had never known any to have
bin in the like, but one who had destroyed his body by shooting himself, and
that from this man, (viz. William Franklin) she had heard very sweet things:
Upon this she desired of that woman to bring the man she so spoke of unto her,
by whom also he was brought unto her: At his first coming unto her, he spoke
some words which were then dark unto her, but some what of God she apprehended
so sweet in them, that an Echo sounded in her to what he said: At his
departing she said to him, My love is with me; and he answered to her, My Peace
be with you: And after that he was departed, and she gone to bed, and waking
after her first sleep, she was full of joy and singing, so was also the woman
who lay there with her, who had brought this William Franklin unto her: This
their singing was heard by a neighbor, who coming to them said they were
Witches. Hitherto the occasion concerning her first acquaintance with William
Franklin, out of her own Confession.

What so deeply engaged these persons to one another after this their first and
so sudden acquaintance is next to be discovered: Concerning which we will again
have recourse to Mary Gadburies Confession, and the Relation she made therein,
of several Visions, Revelations, Voices, which she pretended to had and
received.

In that her Confession she declared, that she has had certain Fits, which she
cannot call Convulsion Fits, nor knows how to express them, which would set her
whole body in a trembling, and shake the bed wherein she lay, and continue upon
her some times from two a clock at night, to seven in the morning. Her first
taking with such a fit was upon a Sabbath day, about twelve a clock at night,
which came so violently, as it set her whole body on trembling, working to her
fingers ends, and that so strongly, as if she should have been strangled by it,
at which time a voice spoke forth from her, and said, It is the Lord, it is the
Lord; but she could not say it was her own voice: At which time clapping her
hands together, she had brought to her remembrance a Scripture, which she never
heard before, as she can remember; The trees shall clap their hands for joy:
Then the voice that spoke within her before, spoke again, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen: And then it said further, There shall be no King, but the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: And further again, Rejoice, O daughters of Sion,
break forth into singing: It said also, The Saints shall judge the Earth, and
the World shall confess and say, This is the City of the Lord: As also, It
shall be the desire of all Nations: And also, It shall be no more called the
people of Patience, (a gathered Church so called,) or the people of Goodwin,
but the people of the Lord. She further declared, that she then saw such a
brightness, which she was not able to behold, which for its bigness seemed half
as big as the Moon, when at the full; and though she had laid her sheet and rug
upon her face, she yet saw it through all, that she cried out, she was not able
to behold it, it was so glorious: There appeared also within the curtains of
the bed so many stars, that the curtains seemed as full as they could hold with
them, that she cried out, O the Angels of the Lord! The which her cry was also
heard by the woman that lay in the same room at her beds feet; and being in
extremity of pain, she also cried out, Elo, Elo, My God, why have chou forsaken
me? and then the pain left her: After which the Voice spoke again unto her as
before, I will not so deal with thee again, but as with a Lamb: and then she
lay down, and had a little sleep, upon her awaking, the same voice spoke again
unto her, as formerly, I have sent many a love token to thee, but now thou
shall see me face to face: It said also, I will send my Son in person of a man,
who shall rule over the Nations, and they shall see him face to face, eye to
eye: There were also Trumpets sounding as it were within her, and they had
names given them, as of the seven Angels, pouring down at every sound vials of
wrath, and at the last it was said, Now the seventh Angel sounds. She
declared, that she did not believe to see a personal Reign of Christ, but only
spiritual in the Soul, till she had heard the voice speak, as is before
mentioned. She further said, that all this which she had thus declared, came to
her at several times. She also moreover declared, that after the first time
William Franklin came several times to her house, once in a week or fortnight,
and that before he came in at the doors, the voice before mentioned did speak,
Behold, an Israelite, in whom is no guile: And again, I have spoken to thee in
Parables, but now speak no more in Parables, but show thee plainly of the
Father. But that one time especially, William Franklin coming to her house,
(being soon after that time that the Voice said unto her, That the Lord would
sind his Son to reign in the person of a man,) she demanded of him thus: Has
God revealed to you, that his Son shall reign in the person of a man? To which
he replied, I am the man: Whereupon she (as laughing at his words) said, That
she looked for the same body to come, that suffered, and was laid down at the
Sepulcher at Jerusalem: To which he answered, That that was an old body, but
that which he now has is a new body: She then told him of his relations, that
he was a married man, and had wife and children, which she was startled by: To
which he answered, That the body and nature of Franklin, born at Overton,
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, the Lord had destroyed, though
the destruction thereof were not, as of the body, laid in dust, visible to the
creature, to be seen by it: And as for the woman his wife, he owned her so to
be his wife, while he carried about that body, in which he was so joined to
her, and he then also owned his children to be the children of that body, but
now they were no more to him then any other woman and children, and that he had
a Command from God to separate from her, and that company he before had with
her, and that he had not bedded with her as formerly for three years before. As
concerning these things thus declared by William Franklin, Mary Gadbury
acknowledged, in that her Confession, that she had many reasonings within her
self concerning them, and had much ado to entertain them; but at last that she
did assent to it, that it might be, and was so, as he had said, and that she
was not ashamed to declare it to be so to some of her neighbors. Hitherto in
this particular from the Confession of Mary Gadbury: In which we may perceive
William Franklin asserting himself to have a new body, in a sinful manner
renouncing and disclaiming his relation to his wife and children, and
blasphemously declaring himself in his Answer to the woman's Question, to be the
Son of God, who should here reign in the person of a man, and so to be the
Christ: We have here also this foolish woman not only hearkening to these his
Blasphemies, reasoning and entertaining discourse with him upon them, but very
easily brought over to give credit unto them; like the woman in the beginning,
reasoning with, and giving credit unto, the Serpent, the Devil, persuading her
husband also, as this woman now presently spreading abroad among her neighbors
these delusions wherewith she has been deceaved. As further testimony of the
truth of these things here declared, I can for my self testify, That since the
imprisonment of these persons in this City, and that the sufferings they fell
into had somewhat broken the sinful league that was between them, that they
began to accuse each other, for being the cause of one another troubles, as it
is usual with companions in evil so to do, when they are in trouble together,
that I, with diverse others, heard Mary Gadbury relating these very things in
the presence and hearing of William Franklin, and, as we say, to his face, and
charging him hereby to have deceived her, and he not able to deny the truth of
these things she so declared concerning him: But questionless the Voices she
pretends unto to have heard, speaking concerning Franklin, when he came unto
her, that he was an Israelite, in whom was no guile, and that now he would
speak to her plainly of the Father, and not in Parables (she believing these
Voices to be of God, as you will afterward be informed she did) was that which
wrought upon her to be so easily persuaded to give credit to these his
Blasphemies; and by giving credit to them, now to apply to him, as the person
in whom should be verified, what the Voice had spoken in her, of Gods sending
his Son to reign in the person of a man over the Nations, who should so see him
eye to eye, face to face, and so to declare of this person, as if he were the
Christ, the Son of God, in whom all this was verified, who was now come to
reign upon the Earth in the person of a man, even as the Voice had spoken to
her.

After all this William Franklin, who before pretending a Command from God, had
renounced his wife, and separated from her, does also tell this Mary Gadbury,
that it was revealed unto him, that she was the woman which was set apart for
him, as her self also declared in her Confession. This also, together with the
former deceits, was so embraced by this silly deluded woman, (if I may reckon
her herein deluded, and not rather, as I and diverse others have jealousy
thereof, and too much ground for it, that all this deceitful business was, by a
compact together, plotted by them, that they might deceive the better,) that
she has the impudence, as to go to William Franklins house, there of his wife
to enquire for him, and to demand of his wife concerning him, whether he were
her husband; which the woman affirming, and that she had been so many years
married to him, and had had diverse children by him; this strumpet (for so she
now becomes) answers her, That he was not her husband, nor she his wife, that
they were not appointed one for another, she must go with those for whom she is
appointed, and he with those for whom he is appointed, meaning, it is like,
with her self. This I received from Franklins wife, who with tears related this
and other passages to me.

Yea further does this impudent woman proceed, That when William Franklin had
been one time at her house, when he was ready to go away, she persuades him to
abide there that night with her, which he said he would to do her good, so that
he stayed there that night, and lay in the same house and room, if not in the
same bed with her, (which I have heard by some charged upon her, and she scarce
able to deny it:) She pretends that she was exceedingly troubled when he was
ready to go away, that she was even ready to faint, the cause whereof she
apprehended to be, that she had something to speak, but could not utter it, yet
that she could not be quiet till she had spoken it, which was this, of
persuading him to stay all night with her: This I have from her own Confession:
As also, that for this she was accused by her neighbors to keep a naughty
house, and by a Warrant brought before the last Lord Major, by whom being
examined, she said, that she had no husband but the Lord of Hosts: She was
afterward for this committed to the Counter, from whence after a nights
imprisonment she was released upon bail, bound over to answer it at Guild Hall,
where she appeared, but w^^hout any thing done to her was dismissed, as she her
self related.

Yea, as a further discovery of the strong delusions whereby this woman is
possessed, does she pretend to have seen the Lord in a Vision, in the Voice to
bid her sell what she had, and follow him, which accordingly she did, selling
all she had, save only one bed, but could not be in quiet till she had sold
that likewise; with the money she (as she was wished) fed the hungry, and
clothed the naked, save a small part of it which she kept, and which she spent
shortly after. This I received from the information given me by Mr Peter Blake
of Andover, who demanding of her why she left her profession, gave this in
answer as the reason of it.

We now see these two persons deeply engaged to one another, and the occasions
thereof; the man forsaking his wife and children to accompany himself with
another woman, and she as much embracing him, and selling all to follow him, as
her Lord and Christ.

They are now fitted for a march to go forth into some Country or other, to the
seducing and deluding of others to follow them in their ways of destruction:
This County of Hamp-shire is to be the stage, whereon they intend to play the
rest of their parts; but what occasioned their coming into this County in
particular, as well as the things done by them in it, comes now to be declared.

What ever is undertaken by these persons, something of some Visions,
Revelations, or Voices must be pretended as the ground of it, and the better to
deceive others thereby. This County of Southampton would seem of all other the
most unfit to be chosen by them, to carry on their design in it; William
Franklin being this Countryman, born and bred at Overton, a town in it, as I
have before declared; so that he could not in this Country be long hid, and his
Condition, and relation to his Wife and Children being at the place of his
birth well known, it could not but be a very great scandal to their way, his
forsaking them, and accompanying with another woman: This having been by some
put to them, and their folly censured in it, the Visions and Revelations seen
by them have been alleged as the Reason of it. Hear we then what Mary Gadbury
has related in her so large Confession, several times before already mentioned
in relation to this particular also.

She declared that she saw in Vision a perfect man, as in the Clouds, with
clothing on, and a sharp sword in his hand: She saw him taking down a Child,
and setting it as in a Church, or Congregation, in the midst of the People; and
the Child was so beautiful that she had never seen the like. She then looked
for the man, but could see no more of him at that time, but only the hair of
his head. But another time she saw the same man again in Vision, running so
fast, that she had never seen the like; and it was revealed to her as the
meaning thereof, that he made haste, and it was full time. She also saw the
same man again in another Vision, coming from off the top of an house, and
flying toward this Country; and the Country was named to her to be an hill
Country, the Land of Ham, which she understood to be this Country of Hampshire,
and it was so revealed unto her to be, by the like voice that had so several
times spoken before unto her. When she saw the man so flying, a Lamb also flew
after him as close as might be, and she saw the wool of the Lamb upon the back
of it; and the Voice spoke in her, and said concerning it, This is the Bride,
the Lambs Wife, the Church of the living God. All this was seen by her, but
very little before she came with William-Franklin into this County: And as soon
as she had seen this Vision, she took occasion to declare it to William
Franklin, and he declared, that it had been also revealed to him to go into the
hill Country, the Land of Ham: And now it was (as appears by the circumstances
of her Relation) that William Franklin told her, that it had been revealed to
him, that she was the woman who was set apart for him. The construction made by
both of them of all this, was, That by the Vision which she had seen, and the
Revelation which he had, both so answering to one another, they were warned to
go together into that Country of Hampshire. This Vision has been declared by
her to be a Heavenly Vision, which she judged she might in no wise be
disobedient unto. And this she declared to be the Reason that brought them down
into this Country; and having resolved upon their journey but two nights before
they undertook it, the Voice that had spoke to her at first, and so all along
in the several Visions, said then also unto her, I have made an end of sin and
transgression for me and my people: And afterward, at another time, it said,
Awake, awake, ye that sleep; put on your beautiful garments, O Daughters of
Sion; for the marriage of the Lamb is come. Upon all this she came down into
this County, which otherwise she was very loath to do; that though sickness
which she had, and for her health sake, as also to avoid the trouble and
clamours of Franklins wife, made her willing to leave the City, and come into
the Country; yet these things so revealed in these Visions and Voices to her,
was the Reason of their choice of, and coming into this Country. Hitherto you
have in all this the words of Mary Gadburies own Confession, as nigh as may be.

By these Visions thus occasioning their coming into this Country, we see,
First. The Scripture abused in this particular; the Land of Ham. must be with
them Hampshire: From the Scripture is this expression of the Land of Ham
borrowed, Psalm. 105.23. and Psa. 106.22. The Holy Ghost thereby meaning the
Land of Egypt, as the Text it self expounds it; Israel also came into Egypt;
and Jacob sojourned in the Land of Ham: and that Land of Egypt was so called
the Land of Ham, because by Hams posterity it was replenished with people, and
inhabited: The name of that Country is in the Original Misraim, who was one of
Hams sons, by whom that Country was peopled: But this County of Southamptou,
vulgarly called Hampshire, must be the Land of Ham with them, because the first
syllable of it is Ham. Thus does the Devil in these Visions teach them to abuse
Scripture. Secondly, It appears, by the construction these persons made of
these Visions, that they applied it wholly to themselves, That Franklin was the
running flying man, and Mary Gadbury must be the Lamb flying close after him;
How else could their so flying toward such a Country be a warning and
direction to them in Vision to go into that Country? Hereby it came to pass,
that as the former Visions had declared William Franklin to be the Christ; so
by this which the Voice is said to speak of the Lamb, by this woman, applied to
her self, she becomes the Bride, his wife. Hence it was I suppose, that as he
was proclaimed by her to be the Christ, so she declared of her self, and was
acknowledged by their seduced Followers, to be the Spouse of Christ; and she
blasphemously to apply to her self the Scripture of the Lambs marriage being
come, and his Bride to have made her self ready, which she pretends by her
Voice to have been spoken to her. Thus is Franklin now in the room of Christ to
her, he taking to himself what is proper to Christ; and she putting her self in
the room of the Church, Christ's mystical body, to be the Spouse of Christ, the
Bride, the Lambs wife.

By what has been before declared, we find these persons with their minds
fraught with all manner of the highest Blasphemies, resolved upon a journey
into this County of Southampton, whither by their Visions they pretend to have
been directed. According to this their Resolution in November last, Anno 1649.
they undertake this their resolved journey: and all that hitherto has been
related of the Transactions of these persons and dealings of them, toward one
another, was much within the compass of a quarter of a year (as nigh as by any
circumstances I can guess) from the time of their first acquaintance, to their
undertaking of this journey. At this time here mentioned, William Franklin
forsaking his Wife, Children, Calling, Employment, Family, and taking Mary
Gadbury unto him, associating himself with her, as if his wife, (but indeed
rather to say the least, his Concubine,) and she also (notwithstanding her
knowledge that he had a Wife and Children, and her self also, for ought she knew
to the contrary, a married woman, and her Husband living) does yet join her
self unto him, as his Companion in wickedness, and both together came from
London to Andover, a Town in this County of Southampton, in the Wagon that
weekly travelleth between these places. Thus while the written Word of God
charge every man that has a Family to live in and with it, to provide for
it, and reckons him worse then an Infidel that does not so do; and warns all
to fly fornication, and all such uncleanness, and whatsoever has the
appearance of evil in it, in respect of that or other sins: Yet can these
persons by their Visions and Revelations find pretenses to cast off all their
Relations, and the Duties of them, and in such a way (that cannot by any that
knows it, or shall read this relation of it, but be censured for fleshly
unncleanness) associate themselves unto, and keep company with one another; to
such a height of imprety are they already grown, and that through the just
Judgment of God, having forsaken his Word, and giving heed to such Visions,
Revelations, and Voices, whereof not God, but the Devil, must be judged the
Author, they being so contrary to God and his Word; if yet there were indeed
any such Visions, and were not things barely devised by them, the better to
deceive one another, and others by them.

Being come to Andover, they take up their lodging at the sign of the Star,
which Inn is kept by one Michael Rutlie, who together with his wife, have been
well esteemed for the profession of Religion, and after some acquaintance of
these persons with this man and his wife, they could pretend to them that in
some vision they had seen both of them, and that in some revelation it had been
made known to them, that there should be their lodging; while they were there,
which was about the space of a month, in all the time of it that they were
there together, they kept company one with another, and as husband and wife
they lay in the same bed together: The Sabbath day after their arrival at
Andover, William Frankelin (as I have heard) offered to preach in the public
place there, but that being denied him, he would yet presume to do it in the
Inn where he lay, which also he did several times while he was there, diverse
resorting thither to hear him; he stayed not long there, but he returned up to
London, to supply himself with money, but with a promise to return again in a
fortnight, and at his return to take a house for their living in Overton, where
she should be placed and abide, and where he would supply her with maintenance,
though he himself by reason of his trade, must be forced to be sometime from her
at London: While William Franklin was at Andover, (before his journey up to
London) they contained themselves from spreading their blasphemies, supposing
that it would not be seasonable so soon to do it, till he by his preaching and
discourse might somewhat have insinuated himself into the minds of people apt
to be deceived, which having a very plausible and affected (though slow) manner
of speech, delivering things in language that people were not easily able to
understand, having a seeming show of spirituality in it, he soon deceived many
people, making them to admire the things they understood not; but he having
herein by preaching acted his part first, the rest is to be done by her in his
absence, as Mahomets wife tells among her Gossips, that her husband was a
Prophet, and so first spread abroad the fame of that false Prophet; so must the
queen in her deceitful companions absence, tell abroad that she had seen
Christ in the person of a man, not declaring him to be the person at present
whom she did thereby intend, that so by the time he should return, it would
somewhat appear how their design would take, and what might be like to be the
effect of it: Thus have they plotted their business, and each has their part
to act in it, as they are most fitted for it.

As soon therefore as William Franklin was departed, and was upon his journey
toward London, Mary Gadbury now by his departure left alone to act her part by
her self, does presently begin to spread it abroad, that she had seen Christ in
the person of a man; and that the rumor of this might the better spead it self
abroad, she took all opportunities for the divulging of it: This report
therefore of hers being not in a cold manner delivered, but with much
earnestness insisted upon, persisted in, and pressed by her, as that which by
no arguments of any whatsoever she would be beat off from, did so on spread it
self amongst the people by reason of the strangeness of it, and by reason of
the resort to that place, being a considerable Market Town, and the house
wherein she lay an Inn, and place of great entertainment; the whole Country
was also from thence presently filled with the rumor of it; And now do
multitudes of persons both of that Town, and also of the Country, resort to
her lodging to visit and to speak with her, the person of whom such strange
things have been heard by them, and generally all the discourse with her is
concerning what she had so asserted of her seeing of Christ in the person of a
man: Concerning this her report, some labor by questions to search further
into it, and try what further discovery can be had from her concerning it,
diverse questions therefore are proposed to her concerning the person, in seeing
of whom she so asserted that she had seen Christ, as what manner of person he
was, his shape and form, to obtain from her some description of it, what
should be the end of his coming, where should be his present abode, what should
be spoken by him at his first appearance to her, and by what occasion she first
came to the sight of him.

Company thus coming to her, thus also reasoning and questioning with her,
where she saw any set to oppose her, and able to discover her deceits and
blasphemies, very sly would she be in disclosing any thing to them, or in their
presence, and would usually declare at such times that she was not then free to
speak; yea, in her own large confession (out of which I have already related so
many things) she declared, that when some came to oppose her, it, was given her
to discern it, and that the voice that all along had spoken to her should then
also speak to her, and say, Seal up the vision, and that this was the cause of
her silence to them, and unto those who would especially with any zeal declare
against the things she asserted, and against her also for her blasphemies, she
would usually give some reproachful language, calling them Satan, or some such
names; and when she would speak most moderately to them, it would be to tell
them, that their eyes were not yet open, the time would come when their eyes
should be opened, and they should then see what she had now told them: But
where she saw any persons though but seemingly to comply with her, (for so by a
seeming compliance deceiving her, some got these things from her, which
otherwise they should not have heard) or any that were weak in understanding,
not able to discern and discover her deceits and blasphemies, or any that she
saw were credulous, ready to be shaken, easily to be wrought upon by her, to
these she would freely speak and deliver her self, and use all means to win
upon them to the seducing of them: Something also has been gotten from her in
answer to the several Quaeres before mentioned, wherein she would declare many
things of her visions and revelations answerable to what has been from her own
confession before related, especially upon declaring of the occasion of her
sight of him whom she called the Christ; such a description would she also give
of his person, to be a plain man in gray clothes, that she knew the place of
his living in London, how gloriously he at first appeared, that she could not
behold his glory, but desired his coming to her in a plainer form, and that in
a fortnight he would come down thither to Andover to her; and many such things
she declared in the description of him, which so well agreed to William
Franklin, who had been with her, and was now gone to London, promising her in a
fortnight to return, that many presently deemed that he was the person in all
this held out by her to be the Christ; the end of his coming she would declare
to be to reign upon the earth, to erect and set up his Kingdom, and for what
he should speak to her, that he had never honored any woman in so appearing to
her, as he now did honor her in this his appearance to her.

These, and many such like, were the things declared by her in the conferences
she had with sundry persons, in answer to the questions by them proposed to
her, many blasphemous expressions did now also at sundry times fall from her in
relation to her self, as if she were the Bride, the Lambs wife, yea, and did
take it no robbery to be equal to God; the Scripture, when in any conference
alleged to her, was generally flighted by her, the greatest Authorities she
alleged was her own visions and revelations, many of which were yet in
Scripture-expressions delivered by her, that she might deceive the better by
them: And it is a wonder to consider that any person should be not so much
weak, as sottish, to believe those so manifest, palpable, gross delusions, and
blasphemies, as were thus vented by this deceitful woman, yet so it was, that
many both in Town and Country were some shaken, some wholly seduced by these
her deceits.

It would be tedious to the Reader, and that which would cause this Relation
(wherein I desire, and shall endeavor all possible brevity) quickly to swell
into a considerable volume, should I proceed to relate what was declared by
this blasphemous woman: (while she was thus by her self at Andover venting her
blasphemies) in the several conferences between her, and sundry particular
persons who came to see her, and to have (and had) discourse with her.

It shall therefore content me (and I hope it will my Reader also) to declare
what passed between this seducing woman, and those that being seduced by her,
did hearken to her, and follow her in these her ways of deceit, and
blasphemy, and the way and course taken by her, which by the permission of
God, and through the efficacy of Satan, was effectual to the seducing of them:
That large confession of Mary Gadburies so oftentimes before mentioned, I shall
now again have recourse unto, and make use of it, as that which will
sufficiently furnish me with matter to carry on this part of my relation.

In that her confession she declared, that while she was at the Star in
Andover, (while as yet William Franklin was with her, and not gone upon his
journey toward London, as is before related) she was one night so taken as a
woman in travail, and with such pains so coming and going, as throes of a
woman in that condition; but that the pains she now endured were more painful
then those of women in that condition, which she could well tell, having had
the experience of both: At which time of her pain, the same voice mentioned
before to have spoken to her in the former visions, spoke this now again, Shall
I bring to the birth, and not give strength to bring forth? All that night
(wherein these pains and this voice came thus unto her) she was very ill with
them, and all the day following also, which was the Sabbath day, wherein diverse
came to hear William Franklin speak somewhat unto them; the day after being
Monday, VV.F. went to London, after whose departure she began to declare, that
she had seen the Lord Christ in the person of a man, and this amongst others
she declared in particular to Mr. Woodward, which Mr. Woodward was then
Minister of Crooxeaston, a village some few miles distant from that town of
Andover, and to Edward Spradbury, which Edward Spradbury is by his profession a
Clothworker living in Andover, and to him she also declared, concerning the
pains before mentioned then continuing upon her, how great they were, and that
she should never have rest till she were delivered of what she travailed
withal: Thus far already her confession: But before I go further in it, it
will be necessary I give some information to my Reader which may serve to clear
his understanding somewhat, concerning what here already is, and what further is
to be related to him.

The Reader is therefore here to understand, that these pains and travails
which this deceitful woman does thus pretend unto (if any such pains there
were, and that these were not things altogethe feigned by her) she pretends
also to be of God, and to be for some spiritual, and not for any natural
birth, and she seems to take ground for this from the speech of the
forementioned voice unto her concerning it; but how wickedly and blasphemously
that saying of the Lord by his Prophet concerning Sion his Church, and
concerning the birth of Christ, the man-child, and of all his people, raised
and borne together, vertually with and in him in his Resurrection, Esa. 66.7,
8, 9. according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. he has quickened us and
raised us together with Christ, is here I say, sinfully, wickedly,
blasphemously applied, and assumed by this blasphemous creature to her self,
making her self thereby to be the Sion there mentioned: But strange it cannot
be thought, that having set up this W. F. to be the Christ, and applying to him
what is proper to Christ, and her self to be the Bride, the Lambs wife, the
Spouse of Christ, she should now thus apply and assume to her self what
concerning Sion and the true mystical Spouse and Church of Christ is delivered
in the Scripture.

Here also is further to be known, that this foolish woman was usually wont,
as wickedly to apply to her selse in these her falsely pretended travails that
speech of the Apostle, Gal. 4.19. saying in general that she did travail in
birth till Christ were formed in them, to those with whom she conferred, and in
particular when she perceived any one like to be wrought upon, and seduced by
her, then would she pretend her travail to be for such a one, who being at
length wholly wrought upon and seduced by her, it must be ascribed to her
travails, as an effect of them, that must be the person for whom she was in
travail, and such a person the spiritual birth now brought forth by her;
according to this is that which she has thus declared of her pains and
travells to be understood by us: But one thing I may not omit here fit to be
inserted, evidenced by a Constable, when the business concerning the pretended
travails of this woman and her spiritual birth was examined and heard before
the Judge of Assize, viz. that he heard from Edward Spradbury that this woman
had been in travail, and was delivered; and asking of what she had been
delivered, it was answered, of a Dragon, and what she was so delivered of, her
Lord and Christ had slain it on the bed: -- Hence I suppose it was, that so
strong a report was sometime raised and carried about the Country, as if this
woman had been in some real travail, and had been indeed delivered of a
Serpent, or some such monstrous birth.

But let us now return to the course of our Relation, and for the carrying of
it on, have recourse again to the large confession of that woman, declaring
therein her dealing with sundry particular persons, and the seducing of them,
Edward Spradbury is the first that (by any circumstance I can find) was seduced
by her, and gave credit to her blasphemies; and though I cannot learn by what
means he was wrought upon by her, yet I perceive he stuck not long at the
business, but was quickly persuaded to follow her in her deceits, to believe
according to what she had asserted, William Franklin to be the Christ, and
with many blasphemous expressions to declare him so to be unto others also, and
to serve this woman as a very active instrument for seducing of other persons;
for thus it follows in the Confession, That Edward Spradbury riding that way
went to M. VVodwards at Crooxeason, and there told Mr. VVoodward's wife what he
had heard this woman to say, viz. of her having seen Christ in the person of a
man; but that Mrs. VVoodward not enduring to hear of it, said, I do think it is
a Devil, but that a few days afterward Mrs. VVoodward [as she did her self
declare and acknowledge] had it in a vision revealed to her, that this Mrs.
Gadbury was the woman in the Revelation, clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, and there travailing in pain.

She moreover declared in this her confession, that in the time of W. Franklins
absence at London, she could not take her rest one night in the week, she would
very willingly have slept in the day, but that the voice said to her, thou
shall take no rest til I have accomplished my work; and it said moreover, she
is coming, she is coming: Of whom the voice thus spoke, she declared she could
not tell; but supposed it to be spoken of a woman in Wells, named Joan Garment,
whom she had never seen outwardly, but she had seen her in vision; Thus can
these deceitful persons, though 100. miles distant, see one another in visions.
and Joan Garment, had also seen her in vision, and declared concerning her,
That there was a woman in London, set apart of God for a great work, and to be
one of the Sealed, but is therein mistaken, as appears by what follows: Of
this Joan Garment she thought the voice to have spoken, but shortly after Mrs.
Woodward came; at whose coming she that had before been very silent (the voice
having bid her to seal up the vision) was now very free in speaking, and
rejoiced exceedingly, and was not able to conceal her joy, or contain her self
from tears, although she did much endeavor it, knowing that Mrs. Woodward had
something revealed to her, though what it was, was as yet not unto her self
revealed. But now Mrs. Woodward being come, she declared, that it had been
revealed to her, that the glory of God should be seen in her, (meaning this M.
Gadbury) and that she had evil thoughts of her, Now also I suppose it was Mrs.
W. related her forementioned vision.
but it had been thus revealed to her; do not have such thoughts, for thou
peircest her, thou woundest her. That night there supped together with this
Mary Gadbury in her chamber, Mr. Woodward and his wife, and Edward Spradbury.
At the end of their supper, though she was very well, yet she felt on a sudden
something rising in her like to stop her breath, which made her to cry out; and
they all that were with her came, and some held her head, some her back; at
last she cried to them to be unlaced with speed, or to have her laces cut;
which being done, she yet thought, she should have died with extremity of pain,
her pains were like to women's throes going and coming; and after the great pain
was over, a laughter arose in her for the abundance of glory which she saw; the
voice spoke in her, though not so audibly as for others to hear it, Who has
believed our report, Scripture most blasphemously abused.
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? and she her self spoke out these
words; so sudden as you see this change, so suddenly will the Lord appear to
all. Upon this Mrs. Woodward said, by what I now see I believe with more
confidence then before. How also does Mrs. Woodward invite the woman to go to
her house with her the next day, by reason the people of the Star were
unnatural to her, and she her self was also directed by a command, the voice
speaking, go with her; but it had not so much power in it, as to make her go
presently, only it was revealed to her, and she declared it to Mrs. Woodward,
that though she went not her self, yet the vision she had before seen of the
woman in travail, should again be with her: upon this Mrs. Woodward the next
day went home: Thus far her confession for this, of what passed between her
and Mrs. Woodward, whereby we see this Mrs. W. wholly perverted, even
renouncing her faith in Christ, giving up her self to this deceiver, and
together with Edward Spradbury become the proselites of this seducing
deceitful Strumpet.

We have seen how well this M. Gadbury has acted her part, and it is now time
to inquire after W. Franklin, he (as has been before related) going to London
with a promise of returning in a fortnight, was as good as his word, and did
return according to the time appointed, upon Saturday the 8. of December, and
being returned, he declared to this woman, (as her self has expressed in her
confession) that he was bid by a voice that spoke to him, to make have, and
come away, and was by it informed and made sensible of her condition at the
Star, and how unnatural and unkind the people of that place were unto her; for
so it was that by this time of Franklin's return, it was sufficiently divulged
and known about the town, that these persons were not husband and wife, as it
was before supposed, but that he had forsaken his wife and children to keep
company with this woman, and she also to be a married woman; information hereof
came sundry ways to this town, as from Overton, not far thence, the place of
W. Franklins birth and breeding, where himself, his condition, and his
relations were very well known; and also from London, where W. Franklins wife
having understood her husband and this woman in the Andover wagon to be gone
together into that Country, did inquire out Goodman Hunt the Waggoner, and
inquiring after her husband, did with many tears make unto him a most sad
complaint, and doleful Iamentation, for her husbands so forsaking of her, and
leaving her thereby in so miserable a condition, that she had no means of
subsistence, but that she wanted bread for her self and her children: This
report from W. Franklins wife was by Hunt the Waggoner, upon his return brought
down to Andover, and was a great means to make these persons grow very odious
in that place: And now was this by diverse objected to M. Gadbury (sometime
before W. Frankelins return) how, or with what pretense she could or durst to
keep company with such a man, whom she knew to be another woman's husband, and
in accompanying with her to forsake his wife and children; and was likewise
charged upon both of them together at his return; unto which she would answer;
that W. Fr. had no wife after the flesh but she, nor had she any other husband
after the flesh but he; that it is possible a woman and children might so lay
claim to him, who yet were no wife and children of his; he having a new body
and nature, they were dead to him, and he to them; that she looked upon this as
but the scandal of the world.

However this so great a scandal they were not able to wipe off so easily, but
that it had deep impression on diverse to render these persons odious unto them;
yea Michael Rutlie and his wife, their host and hostess, who kept the star,
and with whom they lodged, now began to grow strange, and as they reckoned it,
unnatural and unkind to them; insomuch that W. Fr. returning the Saturday, on
the Monday and Tuesday following, both he and his companion having this of
their sinful practice by Mr. Rutlie related to them, who endeavored also to
declare to them from the word of God, which they little regarded how sinful it
was; they were warned by him to depart, and with all speed that might be to be
gone out of his house: at which time of their being thus warned to depart,
diverse strange and blasphemous expressions came from W. Frankelin, saying, That
he knew his Maker, and his Maker knew him, and he was one with his Maker: and
now they charged Mr. Rutlie, as if he were another Pilate, thus persecuting of
them, thus receiving the scandal of the world against them.

There being now no longer abode for them at Andover, and M. Gadbury having
told this W. Frankelin upon his return of Mrs. Woodwards invitation; it is now
very acceptable to them, and they bethink themselves of accepting of it, and
going thither; accordingly on Tuesday December 11. departing from Andover they
arrive at Crooxeason, where they are very welcome to Mr. VVoodward and his
wife, and have their entertainment there in his house for about the space of
six weeks, til by the Justices Warrants they were sought after, and
apprehended, as you will afterward understand. Mrs. VVoodward [as M.G. has
confessed] had been told concerning the wife and children of VV. F. but she did
not then regard it, looking now upon the principle of God in the creature, and
what had been revealed to her. Thus with these persons, it is nothing to lay
aside natural relation and affection, to desert, yea to run away from wife and
children, yea in an adulterous way to keep company together, and to lie with
one another, if something of a Vision or Revelation may be pretended; though
herein be enough to discover such visions and revelations to be of the Devil,
and not of God, when occasion shall be given by them, and encouragement also to
persons, to walk in such sinful practices so manifestly contrary to the Word
and Will of God. Being now settled in their fresh quarters at Crooxeason, where
they are sure to have free quarter; having made so good an exchange, by
removing from an Inn to a private (and that a Ministers) house; being I say
here settled, VV. Frankelin declares, that it is revealed to him, that this
place where they now were is the wilderness appointed for the nourishing of
the woman, a time, times and half a time: here he stayed a month, and after
that went again upon another journie to London: And now, what was done at this
place, and what visions, revelations, voices, this M. Gad. pretends at this
place to have received also, I shall make some discovery of from her own
confession.

She declared in her confession, that one night of her being at Crooxeason,
awaking after her first sleep, she felt a weight upon her breast, as if it had
been a stone of a load weight; and she said, The former travail brought forth
Mrs. Woodward; and this seems to be another travail for another birth.
O Lord when shall I be released of this misery? at last the Voice spoke unto
her, and what it spoke was chiefly concerning two men, living near Andover, the
name of the one being Rutlie, the other Bunnie, and also of a woman whose name
is VVaterman; these persons had much exclaimed against Frankelin and her, for
that he having a wife and three children should keep company with another
woman, and for saying that he was the Christ. The Voice naming these persons,
said of them, They have a godly zeal in them, they love what thou love, they
speak not against my glory, but against the old nature which is gone; they see
no farther then that; the Voice also hid her by M Woodward to send for Rutlie
and Bunnie, and it said of them, they shall be pure they shall see me: then the
Voice spoke forth aloud, This she said was spoken with such violence in her,
that she feared she should have been strangled with the force of it.
as the voice of a man roaring out in speaking, I am the Lord of Hosts, JEHOVAH
is my name, the high and holy one; I am of a pure eye, a God that cannot behold
iniquity; I will unveil my self now, and they shall see me face to face, eye
to eye. It is no more the morning star, but the great day of the Lord is come.
Then the Voice spoke directly to, and of her self saying, Thou shall be clothed
in a white robe which I will give thee, and they shall all see thy whiteness,
for I have made thee pure; O gross pride, deceit and hypocrisy!
as it is all pure within, so shall it be without; thou shall be clothed all in
white, a resemblance of the inward purity, and I will make thee to be as a
Phoenix. Then the Voice commanded her to speak for a thing that was in the
house, (which was some white linen cloth) and to make her a white robe
therewith, which should serve only for the present, for she should afterward
be covered all over with white: She told Mrs. VVoodward what the Voice had said
concerning the white cloth, but Mrs. W. told her that she would speak to her
husband to buy some Holland of seven groats an ell, to serve for that use,
whereby it seems Mrs. VVoodward, was not willing to be so easily cheated of her
white cloth. With this answer, this M. Gadbury was much troubled, yet she
thought to speak no more for it: but Mrs. W. being gone forth, the Voice said
again to her, Does she think that will suffice? the best things belong to thee:
but M. Gad. declaring her self loath to trouble her, the Voice said, If she be
offended, I will pacify the offense; then she called Mrs. Woodward again, and
asked her, if she thought any thing too good for the Lord: who answered, no;
and so at length both her self and her husband gave their consent to part with
the linen cloth to her, for the use she desired. Thus by a fine trick of
cleanly conveyance, is Mrs. W. cheated out of her white cloth, and M. G. by
this Artificial way of deceitful cheating and juggling, has got her a good
piece of cloth, and accordingly makes her an outer-garment with it, that it
might show forth her inward purity: she now sees, that if she has a mind to
any thing which any of her proselites has, it is but to pretend a Voice or
Vision for it, and it must presently be given to her.

But to return to her confession, wherein she farther declared, that one night
being broad awake, she saw a white foot, which the Voice commanded to rest upon
her, Which I suppose to be the same night wherein she had the former vision.
and to her sight the foot was set upon her shoulders; and she saw no more of
it: at which time all within the curtains of her bed was a great brightness,
by a multitude of stars, that exceeded the morning star in brightness: At that
morning the Voice spoke aloud in her, Arise, arise, all ye that sleep; which
Mr. VVoodward hearing, and supposing she had called him, he arose, and came
into the chamber where she lay, and he declared that he saw the brightnesses at
his feet; and at that time the Voice said, That the comprehensive power of
heaven, A most blasphemous lie.
was for that instant gathered into that room, and it also said, All they that
come before the presence of the Lord, and are not pure, let them tremble. It
was also revealed to her, that it would have been dangerous for Mr. VVoodward
so to have come in at that time; had it not been for the forementioned message
that was to be done by him.

In the morning she spoke to Mr. VVoodward to go to Rutlie and Bunnie, which he
did, (for it seems all must be ready to serve her) but they made slight of the
message.

But the woman VVaterman, she saw in a vision, and that she had a great oven in
her house, and she had three looking glasses in the house, whereof one stood
before the oven; A profound vision and interpretation.
and it was interpreted to her, that these glasses were for Goody VVaterman to
see her self in. This Goody VVaterman, though it does not appear to me, that
she had any messenger sent to her as the two men had; yet she the next Sunday
going to Andover, was with a great power drawn, even whether she would or no
to come to Crooxeason to M. Gadbury; whither when she came, she was in an
exceeding great sweat, This is in the confession, and does not this look like a
piece of Witchcraft?
but knew not the end of her coming; she stayed there all night, and in the
evening sitting by the fire side, she said aloud, O Lord that I may not be
deceived. She fetched her breath short, she cried out, Mistress VVoodward,
Mistress Woodward, why keep you me here in prison? at which words M. Gadbury
said; that she her self wept exceedingly, and declared concerning this Goody
Waterman, that she was even^ rent and torn in pieces; and she cried out and
said, O Lord how can thou bring down the strongest heart that is? Rutlie is
so high and strong, yet the Lord can bring him down, and that she had fought
against the Lord, and now could not but confess that it was he. And thus Goody
VVaterman, notwithstanding her long standing off, Here end those informations I
had from the large confession of Mary Gadbury so often mentioned.
and great opposition she sometime made against them, is at length deluded, and
brought over to them by their deceits.

This effect of their deceits on this woman, is now the more advantageous to
them, they having at least seemingly been so much before opposed by her. And
what from the thing it self, and the strange manner of it, it now works on Mr.
VVoodward the Minister, in whose house these persons were entertained, and who
therefore was privy to all these proceedings; for (as I have heard himself
relate it in his own confession before the Judge of Assize, where being charged
to give credit to these deceits of Frankelin, and for declaring him to be the
Christ) he acknowledged himself for sometime to be much troubled, not able to
close with what was by them delivered: that he asked of Frankelin whether he
were the Christ; and that Frankelin should answer, that that was not the body
of Christ, but he had the Father as a lion, Christ as a Lamb set at his breast,
and that he was now come to call in believers: he farther confessed, that after
this, being much troubled he went to his barn, and there sat down; where a
perfect audible voice was heard by him, which said unto him, arise, and declare
what thou have seen; yet that he kept his own counsel notwithstanding, and
declared this to no other, but that afterward Goody VVaterman comes and tells
them that Frankelin was one borne at Overton, and was a Seducer, and in a
railing manner went away from him; but that they [ viz. Frankelin and Gadbury]
said that she would be sorry for it, and see her error, that about four or
five days after Goody Waterman came again, desiring to see God in all, and
that the third time of her coming she sat down on a stool, and was there the
whole afternoon, and at night going away she said she could not, but was in
prison and bondage, and afterward declared to them that Satan was possessed of
her, but that now she was delivered; and (said she) the power that I
reproached, that has delivered me, and this (said M. Woodward) seized so on my
spirit, that it caused me to entertain what I am now charged withal. This of
Mr. Woodwards confession I heard declared by him to the Judge, and took it
also in short hand as well as I possibly could in such a crowd of people: And
by this confession of his it appears, that what by the glorious things he had
seen, as he pretended, and by the things which the persons themselves declared
to him, as also that of the Voice which he heard, and these passages of this
woman, they saying she would be sorry for what she had done against them; and
she her self afterward making such a confession concerning them, and so
believing in them, all this caused Mr. Woodward also to give up his Faith to
them, as his wife had before given him example of it: And questionless, as in
the beginning the woman was first in the transgression, and being deceived her
self served Satan as an instrument to deceive her husband also; so that this
woman Mrs. VVoodward, having been first deluded, (as you have read) did
contribute her utmost assistance to these deceivers to deal with, and to
prevail upon her husband to deceive him also, and accordingly together they
thus prevailed in it.

Most of these passages thus before related, of the visions of M. Gadbury, and
concerning Goody VVaterman, and Mrs. VVoodward, happened in the time of VV.
Franklins being at London, where he stays not long, but as being herein very
punctual in his word and promise, at his appointed time down he returns
again to visit his Consort, to see how their design did thrive, as also to
afford what assistance he could, to the further advancing and carrying of it
on: In all the time of his abode at Crooxeason he is very diligent, not in
discourses only, but sundry times preaching there in Mr. VVoodwards house,
thereby drawing together the more company unto him: And indeed by reason of the
strangeness of the report carried about the Country concerning these persons,
and the things done by them, multitudes of persons now resort to Mr. Woodwards,
to see, hear, and speak with them, of whom some come only for the novelty of
the business, and to satisfy themselves with the sight of such strange
persons; some as not crediting the things reported, to confer with the
persons themselves for their better assurance; but others being credulous
persons, wavering and uncertain in matters of Religion, having itching ears
after some new things, were soon drawn away and seduced by them: For now
(besides the persons before mentioned Mr. Woodward and his wife Goody
VVaterman) diverse others do also become their Proselites, as John Noyce, Edward
Spradbury of Andover, Henry Dixon of Stockbridge, with several others; how
these persons were wrought upon, and seduced by them, I have not certain
information, only that I have heard in general concerning them, especially of
Edward Spradbury, that several strange sights or visions, and something of
seeming-glorious appearance was seen by him in them, which is supposed to be
that which chiefly prevailed upon him and others of them.

But now does this poisonous infection begin amain to spread it self, having
gotten many, and these also very active persons, to be the Preachers,
spreaders, and publishers of it abroad to the people: These do even make it
their business to publish it to persons whom they may have any occasion to do
withal, and to assert it with abundance of confidence, as what is firmly
believed by them, and which with all the reason they can, they persuade others
to embrace and entertain also, that he (that is this Franklin) is the Son of
God, the Christ, the Messiah, the Lamb slain from the foundation, that
suffered on the Cross, and was the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and had the key
of the bottomless pit, that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no
man opens, etc. with many other such like blasphemous expressions published
by them concerning him. These had also their several offices and titles
accordingly given them; so that John Noyce was John the Baptist, sent forth to
tell that Christ was come upon the earth; Henry Dixons office was to be one of
the destroying Angels mentioned in the Revelation, sent forth to curse the
earth, and the Inhabitants of it, and his usual curses were in a most
execrable manner, to bid the Plague of God be upon the heart of persons, and
the Devil to take them: Thus Mr. George Pottisary, an honest godly man in this
Country informed me, that he so cursed me in a conference with him. In an
Information I have in writing sent to me from Thomas Wilkins, Constable of
Andover, he writes to me thus:

Dixon said, that there was neither God nor Devil, and that all things came by
nature, and did curse me with these curses, the Plague of God upon thy heart,
the Devil take thee; he said that I should be damned in three weeks, and that
I should come howling and crying, and wish that I could touch the lower hemme
of his garment; and he said of himself, that he was the destroying Angel sent
to curse the earth: Thus the Information of Thomas Wilkins.

Now Edward Spradbury had gotten a somewhat better office; for William Franklin
said, that he was one of the two Witnesses mentioned in the 11. of the
Revelation, as John Lewis has in writing to me certified, adding that he would
testify it upon Oath, but the usual office of this Spradbury was to be an
healing Angel; and so what Dixon had in the discharge of his office cursed and
destroyed, he came as an healing Angel to heal and restore again; wherefore
when any person did discover offense at these curses, and horrid imprecations
by Dixon uttered, he would tell them they should not be offended at it, that it
was his office, and what he did therein was but the discharge of his office,
but that he himself was the healing Angel: Of this wicked society was also
one William Holmes of Houghton, he seems to be a partner of Dixons in his
office of being a destroying Angel.

Here take a true account of what passed between him, and one Mr. Burret a
Minister, being in the Parish of Houghton, which I have asserted under Mr.
Burrets own hand thus:

Houghton, Jan. 17. 1649.
The day and year above written coming to two men which I had at work, there
was talking with them William Holmes, junior, of Houghton, having a gun in his
hand, and in his mouth many hard speeches and blasphemies against God; amongst
the which, at my first approach, this was the first, That he was one of the
Vials of Gods wrath, to confound Mr Warren, my self, and the rest of the
Parish, which he said were all damned: Upon my reply, I pray you William leave
these fond and strong delusions, and have God in your heart: He answered, What
do thou know what God is? (or to that purpose:) God is a Toad, a Snake, O
horrid blasphemy!
and a Devil. At which words I left the place, and upon it, which can witness
the same, and more,

John Butler, Daniel Crowder, and Robert Holmes. Ita testatur, Christophorus
Burret.


I was also credibly informed, that at the same time when he uttered these
fearful Blasphemies, he also added thereto this grievous curse, The plague of
God confound thee and thy Religion. Oh what an height of impiety and boldness
in wickedness are these persons thus come unto! whose heart can but tremble at
such grievous Blasphemies against the Divine Majesty, and wonder at the
wonderful patience and long-suffering of God, so forbearing such persons, by
whom his holy and glorious Name and Being is so grievously blasphemed?

This William Holmes having been formerly a very loose and profane young man,
was so far wrought upon by the Ministry of Mr Warren, (who is Minister of that
Parish) that he left his vicious courses, and became very hopeful for Religion;
but is now fallen into this depth of wickedness, enough to be so a warning to
others, that he who thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

Thus the leaven and poison of this infection, dispersed abroad by such active
publishers of it, begins to spread exceedingly, that too many now begin to be
taken with it, that such notice and great offense is justly taken thereat by
diverse godly and well affected Ministers, and others, that they think it
necessary for the peace of the County, now ready to be hereby endangered; as
also for the good of Souls, and out of a tender affection to them; especially
for the Glory of God and Christ, whose Name and Honor is so stricken at, and
grievously blaspherned, to think upon some course, whereby to stop the further
spreading of this so great an evil.

Accordingly, the last Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden in this City of
Winton for this County of Southampton, in the beginning of January, many and
great Informations and Complaints from sundry well-affected peeple were there
brought and presented to the Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace for this County,
then and there met together, concerning these practices of these persons,
desiring justice against them, and some course thereby to be taken for the
restraining of them. The Justices of the Peace (as in duty they ought) declared
themselves very sensible of these things, and of the Glory of God, and good of
their Country, so highly concerned in them: And accordingly with all speed were
Warrants granted out by several of them, to the Constables of those parts, for
the apprehending of William Franklin, and some others of these so dangerous
persons. These Warrants were with as much speed as might be put in execution by
the Constables; by them were William Franklin, and with him Mr Woodward, Henry
Dixon, Edward Spradbury, apprehended: and besides what was done toward these
persons upon their apprehension by the Bailiff of Andover, (where they were
either apprehended first, or brought thither,) whose care and faithfulness in
this business is much to be commended; they were from thence brought hither to
Winchester upon Monday, January 27. and there presented before those Justices
of the County, who live at this City, by them to be examined, and proceeded
withal accordingly. With those persons thus apprehended, and brought by the
Warrant, came also others of their own accord, though not included in that
Warrant, as M. Gadbury, Mrs Woodward, Goody Waterman and some others. I do not
hear that John Noyce was here present: particular complaint was made afterward
against William Holmes, and particular Warrant granted for the apprehending of
him, but he either departing from his habitation, or some way or other hiding
himself, was not at all yet apprehended, that he neither appeared now, or at
any time, before the Justices, or at the Assize. But those persons who were
thus apprehended, with the others that came so together with them, not so much
to see what would be done with them, as to assist them, and witness the same
thing with them in their Tr^al and Examinations, and together they came with
abundance of confidence and boldness, to stick unto those things which they had
asserted and with which they knew they should be accused. The Justices before
whom they were brought, and by whom they were now to be examined, were Mr
Thomas Bettesworth, and Mr Richard Gobbe; Their Appearance and Examination was
at Mr Bettosworths house, who lives in the Close here at Winchester: At the
time of their Examination great multitudes of persons resorted to the house, to
see and hear what would be done with them, or said by them.

It would be tedious to the Reader, and that which the brevity I desire, and
shall endeavor in this Relation, will not bear, should I now proceed largely
to set down the whole of their carriage before the Justices, and of the things
spoken by them, according to that credible information I received of it: But
some most material passages I shall have respect unto, together with the
Examinations of some Witnesses taken upon Oath, and the Examinations of the
persons themselves attested by them, by subscribing their names to them: These
will be the most authentic Testimonies I can present my Reader withal of the
blasphemous speeches and practices of these persons; and wherein he may see,
from the Confessions of the persons themselves, a Confirmation of the most or
most material things that have been before related.

As concerning their carriage before the Justices, it was with abundance of
boldness and confidence; in general there asserting whatsoever had been before
declared by them, and toward others whom they had occasion to converse
withal, with abundance of scorn and contempt: Goody Waterman, a very talkative
woman, said to the company, That if they were not there, the house would fall
down upon them, and if they should not speak, the stones would speak: And being
very forward in speaking after this manner, Mrs Woodward told her, That she saw
much of the Power of God, in carrying her forth to speak so as she did. This
Goody Waterman, to one that bid her stand farther from him, saying, that her
breath did stink, answered, that she defied what he spoke, and her breath was
the breath of the Lord: And concerning another young woman, one of their own
company, who had spoken somewhat wherein she was contradicted, she also
answered, That what that young woman spoke was not much to be regard, she being
but a babe of a week old; and indeed it was their manner to reckon their age
from the time of their first believing in this Deceiver, as if they had been
but then born. When one speaking of William Franklin, called him Fellow; Mary
Gadbury at the hearing thereof, holding up her hand at him, said, Thou dog, how
dare thou call thy Savior Fellow; thou art not worthy of a crumb.

Thus may these, and many other such like passages which fell from them, serve
to discover their height of confidence in their blasphemous Assertions, as also
the impudent boldness of their carriage.

But leaving these things, we will now proceed to the Confessions and
Examinations of these persons themselves, and Witnesses concerning them,
setting down first what was attested by some Witnesses, and next what were
their own Confessions.

And first take here the Testimony of Fortunatus Wats of Woodhay, who was the
first that I can hear of to have given evidence against these persons, and his
evidence had been given in to the Justices before they granted their Warrants
for the apprehending of these persons; but may now be here very fitly inserted.
His Evidence was thus.

A man aged about thirty or forty years, on Monday the 17. of December, 1649.
at Mr Woodwards at Crooxeason in Hampshire, affirmed himself to be Christ, the
Son of the living God; the Messiah that sits at the right Hand of God; the
Corner stone, the Lamb of God, that was slain at Jerusalem, and had the wound
yet on his body unhealed: That his Spirit was abroad, gathering in of Souls;
that he came now in the fullness of time to save the very Elect, and is none of
those false Christ's spoken of in Scripture, but the true Christ indeed: If any
would know my name, I am, said he, the great King of Heaven, without any guile
in my mouth, without beginning of time, or end of days. He undertook to forgive
sins;

and by name did so to me Fortunatus Wats of Woodhay in Hampshire, Witness my
hand, December. 20. 1649. And this he subscribed his name unto,

Now you shall have the Examination of some Witnesses, delivered upon Oath
before the Justices, at Andover and at Winchester, after their Apprehension.

The accusation of Peter Blake of Andover in the County of Southampton,
Merchant, given upon Oath before several Justices of the Peace at Andover, the
26. of January, 1649.
HE says upon Oath, That Edward Spradbury of Andover, Clothworker, affirmed,
that one lately lying at the Star in Andover aforesaid, naming himself
Franklin, was, the Lord of Life and Glory: and that he was the Messiah, the
Lamb slain from the foundation; that he had the key of the bottomless pit, that
shuts and no man opens, and opens and no man shuts: That he was the
Christ, the Savior of the World; The Christ that suffered on the Cross: The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. And this, and more to the like purpose, was spoken
by the said Edward Spradbury, in the hearing of the said Peter Blake, at the
dwelling house of the said Edward Spradbury in Andover aforesaid, on Monday the
21. of January, 1649.

Peter Blake. For so he subscribed his name.

The Examination of Richard Cook against Henry Dixon, January 26.
He says upon Oath, that Henry Dixon said this present Evening in Andover, in
this Accusants presence, and diverse others, That he the said Dixon was the God
of Light, and the God himself.

And now also did Thomas Wilkins deliver in that testimony of his before
mentioned, wherein he so affirmed upon Oath, this Dixon to say, That there was
neither God nor Devil, but all things came by nature: Such a Spirit of frenzy
and contradiction, as well as Blasphemy, possesses these persons, as in the
same breath, to affirm, That there is no God; and yet that he himself is God:
That there is neither God nor Devil; and yet presently in his cursing to use
the names of both of them.

The Examination of John Lewis taken before the Justices.
He says, that William Woodward of Crooxeason, Minister, said, that the man
who was at his house, being one named Franklin, was the Lord of Life and Glory:
and that he had received glorious things from him: and that one who believed
him not to be so, was afterward convinced, and came to see the glory of the
Lord, and acknowledged him to be the Lord of glory. He farther says, That
Edward Spradbury told him, that Franklin said in his presence, that he had
trodden the winepress of the wrath of God; and that he the said Edward Spradbury
was one of the two Witnesses mentioned in the Revelation; that he was slain for
the testimony of Jesus Christ: and that the said man, named Franklin, was
slain, dead, and risen again in glory.

I have moreover an information which this John Lewis sent me under his hand,
concerning the same thing, declaring that William Franklin should say, That he
was the Lord of Life and Glory; that he was the Lamb slain from the foundation;
that he was the ever-living Son of the Father; that he had the key of the
bottomless pit: that it was he who dyed without the gates of Jerusalem.

This I John Lewis certify upon my Oath.

The Examination and Evidence of Mr Thomas Musprat of Winchester.
He affirms, that being at Andover, he found Mr William Woodward with one
Spradbury, and one Dixon, who jointly affirmed, that the said Franklin was the
Christ, and Savior of mankind: And he the said Thomas Musprat finding fault
with Mr Woodward to be in company with such men, he the said Mr Woodward
replied, That he had seen the glory of the said Franklin, and did rejoice in
it: Whereupon the said Thomas answered, that all glory was created or
uncreated, and demanded which of these two he had seen in the said Franklin; to
which, after some waving the question, he at last answered, that it was the
uncreated glory.

This Evidence of Mr Musprats was given by him upon Oath, before the Judge of
Assize also, and then I heard his Evidence, and taking it in writing, find it
somewhat more full then this which I have thus transcribed from the Justices
Record of it, at least in the first part of it: for upon his Oath then he
declared, that being so in Andover, these persons (viz.) Mr Woodward, Dixon,
Spradbury, jointly affirmed to him, Franklin to be the Son of God: upon which
he distinguished of Sons of God by Adoption and by Nature; and would know of
them, in which of these respects they would have that man to be the Son of God:
They thus answered to him, that they knew nothing of that distinction; but that
Franklin, whom you so call, is the Son of God, and Savior of the World.

Thus I have related the Testimonies and Evidences of several of the Witnesses,
all which speak very home, to discover the great Blasphemy whereof these
persons are guilty. I shall now also set down their own Confessions in their
Examinations before Mr Bottesworth and Mr Cobbe, the Justices, wherein you will
see what these Witnesses testified to be by themselves asserted, that in a case
so clear, as their own Confession makes it, we shall not need further
witnesses, now hearing themselves speak.

The Examination of Edward Spradbury of Andover, Clothworker.
He affirmed, that the man, whom some men call Franklin, is the Messiah, the
Lamb slain from the Foundation; and that he had the key of the bottomless pit,
that he shuts and no man opens, and opens and no man shuts; the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah. He affirmed that he heard the man, whom some men call
Franklin, preach twice at the Star in Andover, and once at Croox-eason at Mr
Woodwards, at all which several times he took Texts; but many other times he
has heard Instructions from him without taking Texts.

The Examination of Henry Dixon of Stockbridg.
He affirms, that about a fortnight since, and not at any time before, he
came acquainted with one which some men call Franklin, but he affirms him to
be the Son of God, the Christ crucified for our sins, now come down from
Heaven. He affirms, that he himself is one of the seven Angels spoken of in
the Revelation; and that he is sent to plague the Earth, and that he is sent by
God.

The Examination of Mr Woodward.
He affirms, that Franklin, and the woman called Mary Gadbury, who came with
him, did call themselves man and wife, and that they lay together in one bed in
his house about a fortnight.

The Examination of Margaret Woodward, wife to Mr William Woodward.
She affirms, that the man examined before us, whom we called Franklin, is
her Lord, and her King, and that she is saved by his Death and Passion. Farther
she says, That the man, her Savior, was nothing but dry bones; his flesh was
clean scrap't away, and his skin and bone hanged together: and his skin
likewise very suddenly fell off from him, and that he had nothing left but the
hair of his head, and of that one hair was not diminished; and afterward new
flesh came again as a young child. She does farther affirm, that there was a
woman with him, which he calls his Spouse, and others call her the Queen, and
that they continued together, and lay together at her House about a fortnight;
and that she was one night one hour in strong travel, and brought forth a
spiritual birth, which this Examinant received from her. She farther says,
That he did preach in her house two or three times, and that her family did
hear him, and diverse others; and that he did often deliver much spiritual
discourse, when he did not preach.

But not being satisfied with that Answer, in regard that it was suspected that
she was delivered of a child, and had destroyed it, the Justices were very
earnest with her to know the truth farther, and told her, they did believe
there was substance in that birth, and that it was not altogether spiritual,
and did expect that she should satisfy them in it, and tell them the Truth.
She answered, that she could best tell, in regard she was present, and received
what the Queen was delivered of; and said, it was of that man which she called
Franklin, but in a spiritual manner, persuading them that Franklin was
transfigured, and had no substance left him; and that she received him as a
Savior (from the woman called the Spouse) in the shape of a man; and moreover
told the Justices, that what was in the Scripture, of either Old or New
Testament, was but Types and Shadows, which she did not now regard, having the
Substance.

Thus far the Examination and Confession of Mrs Woodward, of whom it is to be
noted, that when she was called in by the Justices to be examined by them, Mary
Gadbury calling her, said, Come in my Elect Lady: And Goody Waterman, the woman
so often before mentioned, said then of her self also, that she was the Kings
Daughter, all glorious within.

But let us now come to those who were the Principals in all this business, and
consider what was done with them.

Concerning them therefore it is to be known, that the Justices had much to do
with them to get an Answer from them to any the questions they proposed,
concerning their Names, Conditions, Callings, Habitations: they would either
answer, they had no name, no habitation, according to the flesh, intimating
thereby that they were wholly spiritual, the flesh wholly destroyed in them;
and thereby all these things of name, relation, habitation, which were fleshly
also. But it being intimated to them by one of the Justices, that they must
then deal with them as with Rogues, committing them to Bridewel, the house of
Correction; for so it seems the Law does judge those to be Rogues, that being
examined, cannot, or will not, declare their names, conditions, calling, or
place of their habitations, and accordingly appoints the House of Correction
for them. William Franklin therefore being soon sensible of this, and the
danger he was in thereby, receded from his before professed Resolution, and now
became willing to submit to Examination, and accordingly being examined, made
this following Confession.

The Examination of William Franklin, taken the 28. of January, 1649.
He says, his Living is at Stepney, beyond London, and that he is by Trade a
Rope-maker; and that he has now, according to the flesh, a wife and three
children living. He says farther, that about a month since he went to the
house of Mr William Woodward, a Minister, at Croexcason, and that he had a
woman with him, which he calls his Spouse, and has been acquainted with her
a long time: And does affirm, That it was revealed to him in a Vision, that she
should be set apart for his use, and that he should separate from his own wife;
which she the said Spouse at the first motion, having a great opinion of his
integrity, believed, and consented to go with him whither he pleased. And
immediately after they had another Vision, whereby they were warned to go into
the Hill Country, into the Land of Ham, which they interpreted to be into
Hampshire; and so being obedient unto that heavenly Vision, they came both
together in Hunts Wagon to Andover. He farther says, That he often preached at
Mr Woodwards house in the presence of Mr Woodward, and his wife, and whole
family, and sometimes twenty more, and sometimes more: And says, That he is
the Son of God, and was crucified without the gates at Jerusalem, and that his
body has been wounded, broken, and often offered up for sin, and that it was
about three years and an half since that he assumed this fleshly body of his,
and that he is not to suffer any more in this mortal body. It being told him
That he could not be the Christ, Christ being in Heaven at the right hand of
the Father, as the Scripture testifies, but he being here bodily must be a
Deceiver, he answered, Those things of the Scripture were gone, and were
nothing to him but types and shadows. And thus you have also the Examination
and Confession of W. Franklin.

But Mary Gadbury, not so sensible of the danger she should expose her self
unto, by refusing to be examined, and concealing her name and habitation when
required of her, refused still to give any direct Answer to those things: and
therefore all that I can understand at this time to be answered by her, was, to
that of her name, that she had no name according to the flesh, but a new name;
to that concerning her husband, (there being ground enough to judge that she had
an husband,) that she had now no husband according to the flesh, but that her
maker was her husband, the Lord of Hosts was his name, and he was within her:
and being questioned concerning her lying with Franklin every night, though he
were a married man, as it had been witnessed their so lying together, which
though she could not deny, yet she affirmed, that it was without pollution or
defilement, and denied that there had been any carnal copulation between them.
Speaking of William Franklin, she affirmed, that he was crucified at Jerusalem;
and being demanded whether she had been at Jerusalem, and when, she answered,
that she had been there about a week ago; of which her Answer she afterward
gave this Reason, saying, that Jerusalem was every where. And this is the whole
that I can find to have been then taken of her Examination.

But that one thing of the woman's impudence is moreover noted, which is, That
it being supposed by many who were present at her Examination, that she was
painted, her complexion being so very fresh and beautiful: that the truth
thereof might be discovered, one of the Justices took a candle, (for this their
Examination was at night,) and told her, that she looked so fair, that he did
scarce believe it to be natural; whereupon she stepped forth presently, and very
boldly put her face very near to the candle, and said, That she was glad the
glory of God did shine so beight in her face, that they were forced to admire
it.

The Examination of these several persons being now thus past, the Justices
designed and endeavored, if possible, to obtain from William Franklin, the head
of this blasphemous company, some Recantation of these his many Blasphemies,
and some acknowledgment of his great evil therein, hoping that such an
Acknowledgment and Recantation from him, the Ringleader, might be a means to
startle all the rest of the seduced party, that so followed him, and hung upon
him; to this purpose they begin to deal with him: They set before him the
danger he had now brought himself into by these his wicked practices, and
endeavor to make him sensible, that there is no way for him to obtain favor,
to save himself from the great danger he was in, and to recover liberty, unless
he be sensible, and make acknowledgment of his wickedness, in these abominable
practices, to the undeceiving of others; and put him also in hope, that by this
means some favor might be obtained by him. And indeed William Franklin, now at
length becoming sensible of his condition, and the trouble and danger which he
and plunged himself into, apprehends it his best way to hearken to the advice
of the Justices, as the only means left him to save himself, and to obtain
favor: And therefore does he, in answer to that advise of theirs, pretend
himself to be sensible of the evil of the way he had thus walked in, and
professes himself (at least outwardly and seemingly) willing to make such an
Acknowledgment and Recantation as they proposed to him, hoping and expecting
thereby (as it appears) to find favor from them. This therefore of his
profession being accepted of, a form of a Recantation is presently by Justice
Bettesworth drawn up, offered to him, and is, in the very words of it,
subscribed unto by him.

The Recantation of William Franklin.
He now confesses, that he is sorry that he has affirmed himself to be
Christ, and that he was crucified for the sins of all men, and that there was
no salvation but by faith in him, and does heartily repent, and does himself
hope to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ crucified, as in the Gospel is
set forth unto us, and that he will openly recant from his former blasphemous
Opinions; and cause all that have been misled by him, to the uttermost of his
power, to forsake the false Opinions and Delusions which he has brought them
into.

To this he subscribed his name, William Franklin; adding also thereunto these,
or words to the like purpose, That what he professed now in this his
Recantation, he intended by the Grace of God to stand unto.

By this Recantation presently a great distraction arose amongst the whole
party; nor can it be imagined, but that they should be much confounded hereat,
not knowing themselves what to do, ashamed so suddenly to renounce what but
even now with so much con^^dence they asserted, and yet how to stick to it they
knew not, he that was the head of their party having so soon and solemnly (as
it appeared) disclaimed what either he of himself, or they concerning him had
thus asserted, reckoning them to be but blasphemous Opinions; no wonder
therefore that they are so confounded, and know not what to do. Mary Gadbury,
when this was first shown to her by the Justices, at the very time of it,
looking upon Franklin with a very angry countenance, demanded, Have thou done
this? is this thy hand? At which he remaining some time silent, at last
answered, You see what the times are; Or, you see what condition we are fallen
into. She also afterward often times professed, That she should never have
believed this, though ten thousand had told her so, had she not her self seen
it; That she should have laid down her life for the truth of what she had
declared concerning him, who did now see her self to be abused by him; she kept
not company with him as Franklin, but was persuaded by him, that that name and
nature was gone, that he would not be called by that name, and now to see him
subscribe the name of William Franklin, and that also to such a Recantation,
made her see, that she had been deceived by him. Edward Spradbury, when he came
to the sight of it, looking as angerly upon Franklin, yea holding up his hand
at him, as if he would have stricken him, said, Thou Villain, how have thou
deceived us by thy lies? And thus he that even now was their Lord and Christ,
their Savior, that dyed for their sins, is presently, even in the same instant
of time and place, reckoned a Villain, that by lies deceived them: So
uncertain, so changeable, are these giddy people, and upon such ^andy
foundations is their whole salvation laid by them. And Mr Woodward, who before
pretended that he saw his uncreated glory, and rejoiced at it, could now
presently upon this say, That he thought there was Witchcraft in it, and
supposed they were Witches* Such a sudden change, such a great confusion is
thus on a sudden wrought among them.

After these things of the Examinations of these Persons and Witnesses was thus
over, the Justices proceeded to dispose of the persons themselves, and it was
thus: That Mr Woodward, Edward Spradbury, Henry Dixon, were bound over to the
Assize, then to appear, and before the Judge to answer these and such like
things they should be charged withal: but William Franklin and Mary Gadbury
were both of them committed to prison, upon suspicion of having the one two
wives, the other two husbands; which suspicion and commitment of theirs
thereupon was upon very good grounds, and very just; for Franklin acknowledged
in his Confession his having a wife and three children, and there was
sufficient information of the woman, that she had an husband also; and yet for
these thus to accompany together, to call one another husband and wife, and as
husband and wife ordinarily to lie together, could not but be just ground for
such a suspicion and commitment upon it: William Franklin therefore, having his
Mittimus made, is presently sent to the Common-Goal, where he is received, and
as a Felon, (being thus committed upon just suspicion of Felony,) has irons
upon his legs, and in this condition continues so fettered in prison till the
time of the Assize: but Mary Gadbury having so accompanied with another woman's
husband, and besides the Charge of that suspected Felony and Adultery, refusing
to declare her name or condition, is as a lewd woman, and rogue in law,
committed first to Bridewell, the house of Correction, where she lay a week,
and in that space several times received the Correction of the house, according
to the custom of it: The Monday after, February 4. she is sent for thence by
the Justices, and brought before them: And having now suffered a little
hardship, and tasted some what of the smart of the whip, the height of her
spirit begins to be somewhat abated; now she with abundance of tears laments
her condition wherein she is, and desires all favor that may be from the
Justices; she does now readily answer to all their Interrogatories concerning
her name, her calling, her husband and children, her acquaintance with this
man, and the occasion of their coming into this Country; all which was such as
I have before related concerning her, that therefore it may be somewhat tedious
here again to relate and insert it: And besides what she spoke to the Justices
in answer to these and the like questions, as that which might serve them in
their proceedings in Law with her: She was very forward of her own accord to
declare such things which they (because they concerned not them in their
proceedings) listened not much after: but therein discoursing so at large, as
she did of her Visions, Revelations, Voices; I, who was there by, had the
patience to hear her at least two hours discoursing and relating of such
things, and what she spoke, I writ from her own mouth, being willing thereby to
learn somewhat of the wiles of Satan, whereby she and others by her had been
deceived: and thus I received from her self at this time that large Confession
so often before mentioned, whence I have presented so many things already to
the Reader.

After all this of her Confession, is she dealt withal as Franklin had been,
to procure some acknowledgment and Recantation from her; and besides the
Arguments wherewith he had been persuaded, now used toward her also, it is
farther pressed by the example of what Franklin had done; and she pretending to
be willing thereunto, a form of a Recantation was presently drawn up, presented
or read to her, acknowledged and subscribed by her: And it was thus:

The Recantation of Mary Gadbury.
I Mary Gadbury do hereby acknowledge, that I have been deceived by the
temptations of the evil one, the Devil, in a sinful way accompanying with one
William Franklin, a married man, and ascribing to him what is proper to CHRIST;
And do declare my self heartily sorry, that I ever spoke of him under the names
of my Lord, and my Christ, which I have sinfully given unto him: And renouncing
these and all such deceits, I profess my self to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of his people, who is now in Heaven at the
right Hand of the Father, by whose Righteousness alone I hope and expect to
obtain Life, and everlasting Salvation.

To this her Recantation she subscribed by making her mark, she having not
skill to write her name.

And now upon this, is this woman removed from Bridewel to the Common-Gaol,
whither Franklin had been before committed, upon suspicion of Felony, as has
been before related; and so these two companions in wickedness, after the
several places they had been in, though a week separated, are now met together
in the Gaol, where they lie expecting the Assize, then to be either released,
or otherwise according to Law dealt withal.

While these persons thus lay in prison together, between the time of their
Commitment and the Assize, about the space of five weeks, they were by great
multitudes of persons from diverse places, resorted unto and visited, but for
several ends; Some to satisfy themselves in the sight of those who had so
filled the Country with the rumor and report of the strangeness of their
Actions and Opinions: Others, that were godly, and settled in Religion, to
confer with them, to enquire into the Principles whereby they were acted, to
find out the wiles of Satan, whereby they and others by them had been
deceived; and if possible to convince them the more of the greatness of that
evil whereof they were thus guilty. Some again, out of respect to them, did
often visit them; for they wanted not those (no not in this City) who (as foul
as their Crimes were) would speak and plead for them; did look upon them as
persons wronged and persecuted: and by these was provision sent in daily unto
them, whereby they were (the woman at least) as well supplied with necessaries,
as if at liberty. Notwithstanding these sufferings, which these persons had
thus fallen into, and discovery made thereby of their so sinful and abominable
practices and blasphemies, yet was all the endevor that might be used to keep
up the hearts of their parties abroad: For the more credit of which I shall
here insert a Passage of a Letter, written by one, sometime a Cavalier in Arms
in Wallingford Garrison against the Parliament; but since his discharge of that
service married a wife, pretended somewhat to Religion, in a short time run
through diverse Sects and Opinions, forsook his wife, betook himself to another
woman, at least to too much familiarity with her, and is now a Soldier in one
of the Garrisons of this County, from whence he wrote the Letter I mention to
the woman, whom, forsaking his wife, he had so much followed. This Letter by
some means intercepted, from the Original of it, by a special friend imparted
to me, I transcribed the whole of it: the name of this person, and place where
he is, I shall forbear, for some Reasons, to mention; but the truth of what I
here insert, is too notoriously known by diverse in these parts, to whom this
Relation will come; nor shall I set down the whole of the Letter, but only
that part of it, which relates to the business I am upon: And it is thus:

Well, I am filled with the quickening Spirit, and with the Holy Ghost; and I
hope ere long to enjoy that Light I told you of: For here is Elias flying in
his fiery Charet. Already strange things are done about Andover and Winchester:
many men's hearts fail them for fear; for there is one who says, he is Christ,
and with Him the Lady Mary, who declares strange things: They never miss to
make trumpets sound in the very bellies of their Converts, and great ships
appear to the view of all people near them. If they desire to speak with an one
whom they never before saw, if they speak to any to go for them, they must, and
cannot refrain, when that they send for them; and messenger and all come,
though they go five or six miles, they come again in half an hour. Lights
appear upon the breasts of many: let them discourse with whom they will, Priests
or else, they all are converted, leave all, and follow them: For the most part
it is thought they have converted to them five or six hundred; and now they are
in Winchester Prison: and since that, He has been seen amongst his members,
many of them; I say, Lies and all.
He has been seen amongst them in appearance, and yet His Body all the while
in the Prison, with a hundred more of the like nature, which here I cannot
declare. Thus far the Letter, the Conclusion whereof was with this subscription:

From and to all Eternity, Thine own self, MALLANCHOLICVS.
With this Verse also at the foot of the Letter.

'Cause God in Ginger I do use to own,
The Holy Crew great love to me have shown.



By this passage of the Letter, notwithstanding that most of the Particulars
are notorious lies and falsehoods; and if they were truths, I mean, that such
things had been seen and done, yet could prove nothing, unless that this
deceivers coming was such as our Savior has foretold should be the coming of
the false Christ's in the latter times of the world, with signs and lying
wonders, whereby if possible to deceive the very Elect: yet it hereby appears
with what false reports the hearts of this wicked party abroad were yet
supported.

Among the many that visited these persons in this the time of their
imprisoment, I acknowledge my self to be one, who (still with some othess with
me) went several times to them, and had as often conference with them: I have
reserved by me in writing the substance of what in discourse passed between us,
which I shall not now relate, only something in general concerning either of
them.

As for the man William Franklin, I found it very hard at all to deal with him;
for he carried himself very warily, jealous of me (or any, unless well known to
him) especially if there were any else in company; as if there coming were to
entrap him, and learn somewhat against him: He is naturally very slow of
speech, but now he was very shy of delivering himself at all; but in that
discourse I could obtain with him, I heard some complaints fall from him of the
trouble he was now in, but very little that might discover any true sense of
the great evil he had committed, of which I labored chiefly to make him
sensible: yea, so far, for ought I could ever perceive, of being sensible
thereof, that he rather labored to put it off, to deny it, to make it to be but
the mistakes of others, that he should say he was indeed a Son of God, but
never to have affirmed himself to be the Son of God. No particular
acknowledgment of any thing could be got from him, only he would in general
say, If I have done any man wrong, if I have deceived any one, I shall be sorry
for it: and so sheltered himself under such generals as these, without any
particular acknowledgment at all, notwithstanding he had in his Recantation
under his own hand confessed the substance of what he was by any charged. In
what related to Religion he appeared very ignorant, even in the Principles of
it, but very plausible in his speech, that might easily insinuate it self into
the minds of the simple; his speech and language was wholly according to the
Familists Dialect, from whom I suppose he had sucked in all these wicked
Principles, upon which he was acted: He would oftentimes alledg Scripture in
his discourse, and speak much in the language of it, but very strangely
abusing, perverting, wresting it from the true sense thereof by his Allegorical
fancies.

But as for the woman M: Gadbury, she was more free, but very uncertain in her
discourse; sometimes she would seem to plead somewhat for the things wherewith
she was charged: for her accompanying with Franklin, lying with him, and the
appearance of Adultery and uncleanness that was in it, I heard her alledg that
of the Apostle, Have I not power to lead about a sister, a wife, etc. And it is
remarkable what was told me by a godly Minister, to be spoken by her unto him,
when he asked whether she were not ashamed of it, viz. That Adam and Eve in
innocence were naked, and were not ashamed; but sin brought shame into the
world: but when they come to be in Christ, it is again taken away. For William
Franklins being Christ, she would plead the union of the Saints and Christ
together: But at other times, especially after she had been a little time in
Bridewel, and was thence removed to the Gaol, she would seem with tears to
lament her condition, and the trouble she was in; and would seem heartily to
acknowledge how much she had been deceived, and had given the glory of God and
Christ to another; That it was well with her till she looked down upon the
creature, and had respect to Franklin, by whom she would say, she was deceived,
even undone by him, and lay all the blame upon him; and that she should not
endure to look upon him any more: But after a little time of her being in
Prison with him, she began again to look upon him, and be too familiar with
him: But even then, when she seemed most to acknowledge her evils, and how much
she had been deceived, yet she would still stick to those Visions and
Revelations she had related, that they were not of Satan, not delusions, but of
God; it was the Voice of Jehovah spoke so to her: all the world should not take
her off from it. And though both I and others in this labored much with her, to
make her sensible that these were deceits, and rehearsed many of them, and
declared how contrary for matter and end, and unlike in manner, to Gods
revealing himself to his people they were, that if she acknowledged (as she
did) Franklin to be a deceiver, her self to be deluded by him, she might well
see these to be deceits and to be of the Devil, which had so bin the means to
draw her from Christ to give her self to another: That this was her first error
and inlet to all the rest, her slighting Scripture to hearken to these deceits;
and though she did recover from this, she might be as apt to fall into the like
evil again, so long as such ways of Revelation, besides and contrary to the
Scripture, were respected by her; and with these and such like Arguments was
she often persuaded, but nothing would in this prevail, but she would stand it
out even to the death those Visions to be of God; by all which may be easily
discerned what little opinion is to be had of her feigned Recantation, and how
soon she may be expected to fall again into the like or greater evils, when
that corrupt principle of giving heed to such wicked Visions and Revelations
shall be so tenaciously held and asserted by her.

Thus these persons abiding in prison, at length the Assize comes, which began
here on Thursday, March 7. and upon Friday, March 8. in the morning, were both
these persons presented at the Bar, before the Lord Chief Justice Rolls, then
one of the Judges for this Western Circuit, and who here sat upon those
businesses which relate to life and death. William Franklin was first proceeded
withal; but the business with him held not much debate, he renounced what he
was charged withal, denied himself now to be the Christ, declared that he
desired to be a Member of that Body whereof Christ is the Head, and hoped to be
saved by him; he moreover declared himself (yet but in general according to his
manner) to be sorry for his Errors, and what he had done amiss; his
Recantation, before mentioned, was then again presented to him, and owned by
him, and in the face of the whole Court he subscribed thereunto. And this was
all that I could learn by way of Examination, or Trial, to be done with him,
for I was not present at it; but I came time enough to see and hear the
proceedings which followed with Mary Gadbury, and the other persons, Mr
Woodward, Spradbury, Dixon, who, as has been before related, were bound over
to the Assize. Mary Gadbury being presented at the Bar, and now both Franklin
and she standing there together, the Informations were read, which were given
into the Justices, and which I have before set down; diverse Witnesses of credit
did there also Viva voce deliver to the Judge what they knew in the business,
and some confirmed upon Oath what was before testified by them to the Justices,
and some spoke more fully to what these persons were charged withal:
especially the Constable, who served the Warant upon them, whereby they were
apprehended, he testified, that Franklin told him concerning himself, that he
was Christ, the Savior of the world, who dyed on the Cross for the sins of the
people, that he was Alpha and Omega, and that he who believed in him should be
saved: And that when he came to serve his Warrant upon them, they asked him,
how he durst be so bold as to come in the presence of the Lord, and bid him put
his shoes from off his feet, for the place whereon he stood was holy ground.
And that at that time, looking in upon them, and seeing them in bed between the
sheets together, they checked him for being so bold as to see them there: He
also witnessed concerning the woman, that she said of her self, that she was
Mary the mother of Christ, who bare this Christ; and that she was the woman
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet: He also witnessed, That Mr
Woodward laid open to him the Image of Daniel, to persuade him (had he not had
more grace then to believe it) to be of their opinion: Diverse other things were
also witnessed concerning Mary Gadbury, as that she should say of Franklin,
That she had no other husband after the flesh but him, nor he any other wife
but her self; she denied not but another woman might lay claim to him, but no
one could say he was her husband, but her self: Other Testimonies being the
same with what has been before related, I forbear to proceed in farther
Relation of them.

Mary Gadbury having now obtained liberty to speak for her self, answered, That
she had indeed believed otherwise concerning Franklin then now she did, for she
followed him not as Franklin, as now she perceives him to be: But as concerning
her lying with him, concerning which many questions were asked her of the
reason of it, and she rebuked as guilty of adultery in it; she answered, to
free her self from being accounted a harlot, That Franklin had denied to her
that he had any wife and children, and that he knew not such fleshly relation,
that she companied not with him as a carnal, but as a spiritual man, and she
denied any whoredom whatsoever, forshe companied not with him for camal
copulation, nor was there any such between them; she companied not with him in
an upcivil way, but as a fellow-feeler of her misery; at which last word the
whole Court laughed exceedingly, some saying, Yea, we think you companied with
him as a fellow-feeler indeed* She having thus spoken, the Judge declared, with
much detestation, the evil of these opinions and practices, That the opinions
were so gross, that it could not be believed any one in his wits could follow
them, but especially wondering at this of a Ministers being seduced by them:
And for what she alleged of her not lying with him as a carnal, but as a
spiritual man, he said, That so might any whore say the like, and might this be
allowed her, pretend the like conceit to color any adultery and whoredom
whatsoever; that in all this she showed her self to be a lewd woman, and that
Bridewell was too good for her: In fine, this at length was the sentence of the
Judge concerning either of these, That Franklin should lie in Gaol till he give
good security for his good behavior; and that the women be committed to
Bridewell, and there lie till the next Quarter Sessions: And though the woman
pleaded that she might not be punished twice for the same offense, having been
before in Bridewell; yet could she not get it remitted, but was rather told,
That the punishment was too light for such a lewd woman; and her offense was
the greater* because she so committed it under the cloak of Religion. She also
presented a Petition to the Judge, which though her release could not be
obtained by it as she desired, yet because it is an Acknowledgment of the
substance of what has been before related concerning her, I shall here insert
it.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice Rouls, and Justice Nicholls.
The humble Petition of Mary Gadbury, lately living in Watling-street.
THat your Petitioner, who has ever lived in honest conversation, and in good
repute amongst her neighbors, and all that ever knew her, living religiously
amongst them, as they do hereby testify for her the same by their hands
hereunder written, until by the means of a woman who lodged in your Petitioners
house, who brought one Franklin unto her, who most falsely feigned himself to be
Christ, by whose vehement persuasions (he showing her Scripture for his false
pretenses) your Petitioner was seduced (he forcibly persuading her) to believe
in him, and to sell all that she had, and follow him, as her Christ and
Savior, which your Petitioner did, and now she is by his means utterly undone,
and cast into Bridewell, a prisoner there at Winchester.

In compassion of the premises, and your Petitioners contrition, and great
sorrow of heart for her said offense, she in all humility humbly beseeches,
that your Lordships will be pleased that she may be relieved in the same, and
that your Peticioner may by your charitable goodness be released out of the
said prison.

But not able to obtain her desired liberty by this her Petition, let us leave
her to her sentence for Bridewell, and Franklin for the Gaol, and consider what
was likewise done with the other parties.

After this proceeding with these persons, Mr Woodward was called, who at first
denied his owning of Franklin to be Christ; but diverse things were testified
against him concerning it: in particular Mr Musprat did there again deliver
upon oath before the Judge, what he had formerly testified concerning him and
others of them to the Justices; and he himself, after many questions that
passed forcing him thereto, at length largely confessed what of Visions and
Voices he had seen and heard, and how he had been seduced by them; adding
withal, in answer to a question by the Judge proposed to him, That he thought
there was juggling in the business: The sentence at length pronounced against
him was the same with Franklins, That he be committed to the Gaol, there to lie
till he bring in good security for his good behavior: And because it was
proved, that it was known to him and his wife, that Franklin was a married man,
and yet he entertained these persons in an adulterous way, lying together in
his house, it was ordered by the Judge, That Mrs Woodward, his wife, be indicted
for a Bawd, the Indictment delivered to the Grand Jury was found by them, and
she not being then present to answer it, he was bound to bring her in to answer
it at the next Assize: and as I have been well informed, his living or
Parsonage was by Order of the Committee afterward, and that very justly,
sequestered from him, to be given to another.

After Mr Woodward, were Edward Spradbury and Henry Dixon called, and both also
appeared: Dixons Examination before the Justices, wherein he had affirmed
Franklin to be the Son of God, was read; he acknowledged he had said so, but
that he did find it otherwise now: being asked whether he were one of the
destroying Angels, as he had before affirmed himself to be, he answered, that
he was not, and now acknowledged that he was Harry Dixon of Stockbridg, and not
such a person. Spradbury also being asked whether Franklin were the Messiah,
acknowledged that he did sometimes say so, but would not now affirm him to be
so: At length both of these received the same sentence that Will: Franklin and
Mr Woodward before them had, (viz.) To be committed to Gaol, and there to lie,
till they put in good security for their good behavior; and accordingly Mr
Woodward, Spradbury, Dixon, are presently seized on by the Jailer, and taken by
him into his custody. And thus you have the Trials and Censures of these
several persons: These three last, Mr Woodward, Spradbury and Dixon, being
acquainted in the Country, lay not long in prison, but the same day wherein
they were committed, offered such security which would be bound for them, and
which was accepted, and were accordingly the same day released. Mary Gadbury
was according to order taken to Bridewell, and received correction there again,
according to the order of the house, where also she continued till the Quarter
Sessions holden here the week after Easter, at which time petitioning with
tears to the Justices for her liberty, acknowledging also publicly her errors
and wickedness, she was discharged by them; and the week after (the last week,
on Monday, April 22. 1650.) she went from this City of Winchester toward
London, in the Wagon which weekly travelleth between these places: But William
Franklin not so acquainted in the Country, and his crime so great, that there
is none but would be ashamed to be bound for him, lies in prison yet, is there
at this present, not being yet able to find such sufficient security that may
be accepted; and how much longer he may continue there, is to me altogether
unknown.

Thus have I now presented my Reader with a true, faithful, impartial Relation
of the doings and sufferings of these Blasphemers; in respect of the things
done, rather then of what they suffered indeed, a tragical story. I shall now
conclude the Relation it self with presenting to my Reader a brief Synopsis of
it, in the names of the Actors in it, with the parts acted by them therein;
which were,

William Franklin, Blasphemously making himself to be The Christ, the Messiah,
the Savior of the world, crucified for the sins of the people.

Mary Gadbury, as blasphemously called, and calling her self, The Spouse of
Christ, the Bride, the Lambs Wife, the Lady, the Queen, the Mother of Christ
that bears him, the woman clothed with the Sun, who travels in birth for the
bringing forth of those spiritually that were seduced by them.

Goody Waterman, The Kings daughter all glorious within.

Mr William Woodward, a Minister, their Proselyte, who professed he saw his
glory, and rejoiced to see it.

Mrs Woodward, his wife, The Elect Lady.

John Noyce, John the Baptist, whose office was to declare the coming of this
counterfeit Christ into the world.

Edward Spradbury, One of the two Witnesses, and an healing Angel.

Henry Dixon, One of the destroying Angels, whose office it was to be sent
forth to curse and destroy the Earth.

William Holmes, junior, Another destroying Angel, sent forth also to curse and
destroy the Earth. Diverse other persons also there were engaged in this wicked
business, of whom not having such clear and particular Information, I have not
inserted their names in this Relation.

And having thus concluded the Relation it self, let me desire of every one to
whom it shall come, and who shall be the Reader of it, to consider seriously
with himself, whether he has ever known, read or heard of the like
abominations to be acted in the World. How great must this wickedness needs be,
for men professing the Name and Gospel of Christ, and so eminent in the
profession of it as some of these sometimes were, not only to depart from
Christ and renounce him, (for how could these things have been acted by these
persons without a manifest denying of Christ, renouncing the Faith, and
reckoning to be even a fable whatsoever the Scripture has recorded concerning
him?) but also to proclaim, and set up another in his stead, to be the Christ;
and to ascribe to such a person whatsoever is due and proper to Christ; and for
such an one to assert himself to be the Christ, and all of them to assume so
wickedly such Titles and Offices to themselves in the service of him. Surely
what Sleidan has reported in the tenth Book of his Commentaries, concerning
the blasphemous Opinions, speeches, and practices of John of Leiden, and the
Munsterian Anabaptists, is nothing in comparison of the things I have here
related concerning these persons. David George, Tho: Muncer, William Hacket,
came very short in their Blasphemies and Wickednesses, to what has thus been
by these acted. And had they not, together with their blasphemous Opinions,
fallen into such wicked practices, as might deservedly bring them under the
censure of the Magistrate, and were so timous^y taken notice of, and a stop put
to their wickedness by them, what the sad effects of these their ways might
have been, is easy to be imagined. We have heard of many strange and
blasphemous Opinions vented abroad in these times of ours, but surely never any
came to such an high degree of blasphemy (that ever I could hear of) as these
persons have done. In all which there is surely much to be learned by us; great
use may be made of this Relation for our Instructions: and such remarkable
passages, as are here represented, ought not to pass us without some serious
consideration of them, and of the use and benefit we are to receive from them.

First, Here may we learn by experience the Truth of Christ, and of his Word,
the Scriptures; for how are we forewarned by them, (O that we might all be
thereby also fore-armed,) that there shall come false Christ's, and that they
shall come with signs and lying wonders; that many shall be deceived by them:
That men shall creep in cunningly, who shall privily bring in damnable
Heresies, denying the Lord that bought them: All which we may see, even to the
letter, verifled in this Relation: So that these persons, thus eminently
fulfilling the Scripture, notwithstanding their impugning of it, give us ground
thereby to be settled in our faith concerning the divine Authority of it.

Here is the patience and long-suffering of God to be admired! who,
notwithstanding he be so jealous of his glory, that he will not give it to
another, nor communicate to any other besides that Authority which he has
given to the Son, whom he has exalted and anointed to be both Lord and Christ,
should yet exercise such forbearance toward persons so extremely guilty in
^^^se their actions of such high affront, yea, Treason against his Divine
Majesty; not only denying to his Son the glory to which he is exalted, which
every knee is by his Command to bow unto; but also invading it, assuming it to
themselves, setting up another in his stead, ascribing to him what is due and
proper to Christ. O that this patience, forbearance, and long-suffering of God
might lead those to whom it has thus been shown, to true Repentance of those
great Treasons, which, against the Majesty of himself, and Son, they have thus
committed.

Tremble we at the Example of Divine Justice we here find discovered: Wherein
is the Justice of God more seen, then in his spiritual Judgments, of all
Judgments the greatest? By God were the Gentiles given up to the lusts of their
hearts, to all uncleanness, to dishonor their bodies, to a reprobate mind, to
do things not convenient, etc. whereby they became so guilty of all these evils
recorded concerning them, Romans 1.24, 28, 29. And all this, because knowing God
in his Works, they yet glorified him not as God, nor gave thanks to him, Verse.
21. By God were the Apostatizing Christians under the Papacy given up unto
strong delusions, to believe all the lies of the man of sin; and this in
Judgment also, for their retaining the Truth in unrighteousness, not bel^eving
the Truth, but taking pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. So how
could it be, that any persons should be so grossly deceived, for any one so to
renounce Christ, as to set up himself in his stead? or for any others to harken
to such manifest dece^^s, and to give up themselves, and their faith, to such a
deceiver, were there not the just Judgment of God giving them up in Judgment
thereunto, and some great, though possibly secret evil, the cause of it. By all
which we may see, that if God in Judgment leave persons to themselves, there is
no evil so great, which they would not suddenly, by the power of inward
corruption, and of Satan's temptation, fall into, so as to be led about by Satan
at his will, and become his Instrument, even in the greatest wickednesses.

In this Relation there has been much discovered from the Confessions of the
persons themselves of Visions, Revelations, Voices, which they pretend unto, to
have been seen and heard by them; but whether any such things have been so seen
and heard by them, as by them is reported, has been by some questioned;
apprehending all these their Relations of them to have been only by themselves
devised, to deceive the better by them. I deny not but such things may have
been seen and heard by them which they have related; which some, who have
endeavored to take as near a consideration of them as may be, have imput^^ to
witchcraft, and a secret compact with the Devil therein: But this I dare
confidently assert concerning them, That being for the matter and manner of
them so unlike to any the dealings of God with his servants, yea, even then,
when by Visions and such like ways he made himself and his Will known to them;
(and therefore I desire the Reader to consider either, and compare them
together;) and the end of them being so manifestly wicked, as to cause men to
slight the Word, and have it in contempt, passing that by, to harken to these
things; tending also to draw men from Christ, and to set up a Deceiver in his
stead, to destroy, and not to confirm the faith of any; and this to have been
in some the effect of them, that therefore surely they were not of God, but of
the Devil, the father of lies, who has thus deceived by them: And for the
Devil to be able to effect and represent such things to the fancy and senses of
men, and to have done thus with others, and by such means deceived men, is I
suppose, even to all unquestionable, that I need not go about the proof of it.
Discern we then here somewhat of the wiles of this our spiritual Enemy: The
persons he chooses thus to deal withal were such as slighted the Scriptures,
and inclined to such things as these; easy therefore to be deceived by them:
and such are the persons the Devil does usually make choice of to deal in such
a way withal; and in all these Revelations is the Scripture yet made use of,
though in the whole of it misapplied: Almost all is delivered in
Scripture Phrase, language, and expression. The Devil thus transforming himself
into an Angel of light, thereby the better to deceive them, and others by them.
What a warning may this be to many in these times, with whom the Scripture; are
so much in contempt, that they look on them as low things, themselves above
them; and set up a teaching of the Spirit within themselves, without besides,
against, and contrary to them: and are ready to entertain, what, under the
notion of Enthusiasms and Revelations, shall be brought to them. When once
persons are come to such a slighting of the Scripture, then are they, if not
past hope of recovery, yet certainly in the snare of the Devil, too fast
entangled by him, and in the road way of Error: nor can they have in themselves
any security at all from being carried away with the strongest deceits and
delusions. Consider the Jews and Papists, setting up Dagon and the Ark, their
Talmud and unwritten Traditions, with the holy Scripture: and while they accuse
the Scripture of imperfection, obscurity, etc. make it by these to be supplied,
by these to be explained; how has God visited these? giving up the one to a
spirit of slumber, to have eyes not to see, and ears not to hear, unto this
day: not more Vagabonds through the Earth in their Conversation, then in their
Opinions, in respect of the vanity and uncertainty of them; and even when Meses
is read a vail is upon their Understandings: and giving up the other also to
strong delusions, to believe lies, to give heed to lying spirits, and doctrines
of Devils. Consider the Germane Munsterian Anabaptists in their time, as much
neglecting Scripture, and setting up Revelations, which they much pretended
unto, given up by God to act such abominations, which have made the remembrance
of them odious to all posterity that has heard of them. The great sin of
slighting, contemning the Scripture, the Word of God, is never left unvisited,
unpunished by God; Visited it is, not only with an uncertainty in matters of
Religion, that having left this pillar and Cloud of fire which should guide
them through the Desert of this world, they are as men wandering in a
Wilderness, where no way is; like Cain, in respect of Religion Vagabonds,
settled in nothing, carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine, constant
and certain in nothing but inconstancy and uncertainty; and also at length
given up to the grossest deceits and delusions which the Examples of many in
these times, as well as of the persons I have here had to do withal, may
evidence to us: For having left this certain light of the Sun of the Word, the
Ignes Fatui, which they follow, never leave them till they have plunged them
into some pit or other. Greater measure of light and spiritual enjoyment these
men usually pretend for this; but, as the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Romans
1. Pretending to be wise, they became foolish: so are these very carnal,
wherein they pretend to be spiritual, and are so discovered to be by the light
of the Word in their most spiritual notions, by every spiritual Christian, that
so it may be truly said unto them, and of them, They have rejected the Word of
the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them?

If the consideration of these many sad Examples of Divine Justice, upon the
Contemners of the Word, may not suffice to reclaim those that are already
plunged in the guilt of this evil, yet I hope they may serve to warn those who
are yet free from this contagion, especially all the people of God, that they
take heed how they fall into it, and thereby into temptation, and the snare of
the Devil; but rather let this of the Divine Authority, Perfection, Sufficiency
of the Scriptures be, as well as the first Principle, for the Foundation of our
Faith, that is learned and received by us, which the Apostle Peter directs us
to, 2 Pet. 1.20. Knowing this first of all: That holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost: and therefore what they spoke, and is from them
recorded in the Scriptures to be of Divine Authority, I would put the Emphasis
on, (...), Knowing it first of all; as if it were that Principle which is first
to be received by us: So let this Principle be constantly cleaved to, that we
receive nothing in matters of Faith and Religion, but what we have from it; For
if once we fall from this, we fall from all. Look not then after new
Revelations, but hear what the Spirit speaks in the Scripture to the Churches.
And by this Word of Truth try all things; Try the spirits, whether they are of
God; for now are there many false spirits gone abroad into the world. Surely
they are but deceitful Merchants, and such is the ware they bring unto us,
which they will not endure to be brought to this light to be tried. Cause we
have to be very jealous, That that silver is reprobate, counterfeit, drossie,
which they would obtrude upon us, not suffering it to be tried by this
Touchstone: To the Law, and to the Testimony; they who speak not according to
this, it is because there is no light in them. And be as diligent to enquire
after the sense, as well as words of Scripture, lest by the words, contrary to
the true sense, we be deceived.

From what has been held out in this Relation, may diverse receive some warning
to themselves in other things, besides what are now mentioned.

First, To the persons themselves, the Agents and Instruments in this great
evil, let them consider whence they have fallen, and repent: Consider the
greatness of their sin by the fearful aggravations which it will admit; For one
to assert himself to be the Christ, and others to declare him so to be, are
they not both guilty of the highest Treason that can be imaginable against the
King of Heaven? and while they endevor to persuade others to join with them in
these their evil ways, is it not to draw subjects from their allegiance, to
destroy their Faith, and murder their Souls thereby.

Surely they have preached another Jesus, another Gospel, then what Paul
preached; let them therefore consider whether they come not under that Curse
which is by him against such denounced, Gal. 1.8, 9. Cause they have enough
with Peter to weep bitterly for this so great an evil; and to look up to that
Jesus whom they have pierced, by whom alone they must be saved from the guilt
of that Treason which against him they have committed: Let them also take heed
they return no more to this or the like folly, lest their latter end be worse
then their beginning. And though I may be likely to incur some displeasure from
them, for thus publishing their names and actions, yet, if there be in them any
true sight, and detestation of these wickednesses wrought in their hearts, they
will not be much displeased at the publishing of it, for the warning of others
by their example, but be also provoked hereby to make as public Declaration
of their Repentance, as public notice has been taken of the sin committed by
them.

Many such there are who walk in that way of profession, which amongst us bears
the name of Anabaptism, to whom also something might here be delivered by way
of warning: Of all the several ways and sects in the profession of Religion,
which men, separating from the Reformed Churches, have fallen into since the time
the Reformation began: I know none so eminently blasted of God, that either for
the Congregations of them, or particular persons, have been given up unto, and
been guilty of such Errors and sinful Practices as those I now speak of, not to
instance in times past, and the practices of those of this profession in
Germany, left on record by the testimony of those who deserve sufficient credit
with us, but only to have respect to our own times; See we not their
Congregations, even in all places, shattered and broken to pieces, and that not
by the hand of man, by the persecution of any Enemies, but by the immediate
hand of God, and by the divisions which have risen up amongst and within
themselves: that it is now a rare thing to find a Congregation of that
profession: some of them there may be yet holding together in London, but in
all the Countries hereabouts, where Churches of them have been in several
places erected, and where but few years since there has been much and zealous
disputing for that way, there is not now, that I know of, a Church of them to
be seen, but the members of them living in as scattered a divided way one from
another, as may be: yea, refusing to own that very way, for which they before
so zealously contested, as the only way of God; even ashamed of it, as if but a
carnal Administration: Have not their Churches been the Nurseries and
Seminaries of all these many Errors which have overspread the face of our
Nation? that from them have mostly proceeded, and bin sent forth, all these
false teachers, the Instruments of divulging of them: Antitrinitarianism,
Arminianism, Socinianism, etc. with many other gross Heresies, how have they
been professed in them? where have the Scriptures been so much slighted, and
Revelations cried up, as among them? and for Revelations how much have they
pretended to them? especially when their deceitful pretense of shaking fits was
so much in fashion of late amongst them? And so from this slighting the Word of
God have fallen into all manner of Errors whatsoever.

From them also have proceeded those very Deceivers, whose deceits and
wickednesses I have here related. William Franklin was sometime a zealous
Professor of that way; so was Edward Spradbury, Mrs Woodward, and many others
of them: yea, it has been observed amongst us, that scarce any appeared to
harken to these Deceivers, to countenance them, and incline to their deceits,
but such who had been this way engaged. In a public Dispute, publicly
managed in the Church at Bazingstoke in this County, in the beginning of
November last, by some godly Ministers of this County (with whom I was then
somewhat engaged in the same cause with them) in behalf of Infant Baptism, I
saw Edward Spradbury there appear, and heard him speak in opposition to us; Mrs
Woodward also (as I have been informed) was there, and privately spoke, to the
encouraging of the parties who opposed us; and yet both of them, in very few
weeks after, were entangled in these deceits, and harkened unto this Deceiver,
to the even denying and renouncing of Christ, as has been before related of
them; and became as zealous for a time against those who opposed this their
counterfeit Christ, as they had so lately been against Infant Baptism. I deny
not, but some there are of this way of Anabaptism whereof I speak, that I look
upon as godly persons, who hold fast to the Scriptures, and to many fundamental
doctrinal Truths delivered in them: but have they not cause in all these things
to take notice of the hand of Gods Justice, so prosecuting that way of theirs;
and to be very jealous, whether that way be of God, which has been thus
eminently in all times, all along, so blasted by God? Yea, and farther to
consider, whether there be not just ground to judge, that their separating from
all the Churches of Christ, which are not of their opinion, and disclaiming all
fellowship with them as Antichristian, which has generally been the practice
of those of their way, their casting also of children out of their Churches, by
denying Baptism to them, leaving all the generation of mankind in infancy in
the world, the Kingdom of the Devil, not owning them to belong to the Kingdom
of Heaven, the Church, but denying any thing of the free grace of God in
Gospel Ordinances to be held out unto them, to the great undervaluing and
eclipsing of that abundance of the grace of God now in the Gospel held out unto
us: Whether, I say, these be not the sins which God has thus visited upon
them, in his thus blasting their way, and giving up the most eminent Professors
of it to these ways of delusion? For surely God is jealous of the glory of his
Grace, and will not endure it to be undervalued; very tender of his Churches,
and of the little ones in them, that he will not suffer those, who so cenfure
the one, and so highly offend against the privileges of the other, to pass
unpunished. Oh that therefore these things might be so considered by these
persons, that the warning they have in them might be seriously laid to heart by
them.

Many there are who profess to expect a personal coming of Christ to reign here
upon the Earth, and I deny not but some, eminent in learning and godliness,
have held forth somewhat like thereunto; but I well remember what a learned
friend of mine said long since unto me, when that opinion of Chiliasm was first
cried up amongst us, (viz.) That it might be just with God for some Deceiver
under that pretense to come among them, and prevail for a time, to the
deceiving of such; and that this opinion did hold out a ground and foundation
for such a deceit: I have now seen it somewhat truly verified; for this opinion
has been the foundation of all these deceits, I have here related, to have
been acted. Mary Gadbury ^elieves Christ shall come in the flesh to reign here;
she asks of William Franklin whether it had been revealed to him; he takes the
advantage to deceive by it, and says, I am the man, and she as quickly
believes him; and through all this Relation these seem to be the things held
out, That as Christ should come to reign here on the Earth, so William Franklin
was he, now come accordingly here to reign, and set up his Kingdom; nor think I
that his deceits were or could be by any entertained, unless this were first
believed and expected by them. I hope therefore that such an example as this is
will make men wary how they entertain such an opinion which seems to give such
an occasion to it.

But some there are who deservedly are called Seekers, who, if they judge not
themselves to be above Gospel Ordinances of Word and Sacraments, and look upon
them as carnal low Administrations, yet please themselves to live without them,
censure all the Churches of Christ, who walk in the practice of any of his
Ordinances, to be Antichristian; deny that there is any true Ministry,
Churches, Sacraments, or any to be, till some extraordinary person or persons
be immediately sent of Christ, as Apostles, for the restoring of them: Upon
which ground themselves live without practice of any of these Ordinances, or of
any Church Society, and condemn and censure those who walk in the practice of
them; whose opinion to recite is to refute, and the evil of it cannot but be
easily discerned, and be also by all the people of God justly exploded, that
have had in their souls any true experience of the benefit and comfort God
gives in to the Souls of his people, who, in an humble and conscionable manner,
walk in the practice of his Ordinances, and attend upon them: But let them also
consider how easily they lay themselves open to such deceits, how easy a thing
it may be for them to be deceived by any Deceiver, that taking the advantage of
this expectation of theirs, shall pretend himself to be such a one as is
expected by them; yea, cause they have to take heed of it, that God in judgment
give them not up thereunto, for this contempt and slighting of his Ordinances.

And may not this at last be warning to every one, to be jealous of himself,
and his own standing; That he who thinks he stand, take heed lest he fall,
seeing such sad examples of the great and dangerous falls of these and such
like persons. Take we heed of an uncertainty in matters of Religion, of being
Scepticks in it, affected with every novity; and Athenian like, hankering in
our minds after it; and beware of these whom we see possessed with such a
spirit of giddiness in matters of Religion, that they know not what to fix or
settle upon: See we the evil of error, how it pollutes a man: A corrupt
judgment quickly causing a corrupt life, so that those who cherish and
entertain error quickly proceed to much impiety: Of which these persons are
also sufficient examples; when once a person is entered into the path of error,
and is fallen from his ^^edfastness in the truth, he knows not where to settle;
as appears in these persons, running from one Error in Religion to another,
till they at length attained to that height of blasphemy, that I think the like
has searce been heard of; and usually the proceedings of men in their changes
from one Error to another, is still for the worst, according to that of the
Apostle, Evil men and Deceivers wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. But prize we truth, and the true knowledge of it; labor
we to attain it, but labor we also as much to be settled in it, that we be not
carried about with every wind of doctrine, but be rather able to contend for
the faith against the gainsayers of it; hold we fast the mystery of Faith in a
good conscience, lest turning aside from the one we make shipwreck of the
other: Surely Christ's sheep know the voice of Christ, and can discern and
distinguish it from the voice of strangers: The Lord make us of the number of
these his sheep, and give us the ointment of his Spirit, that we may know all
things at least that are necessary to be known, being guided thereby into the
way of truth, we may be preserved from the deceits of the many Antichrists
which are now abroad in the world.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

JOSEPH CARYL.
May 18. 1650.

