Tears of Repentance: Or, A further Narrative of the Progress of the Gospel
Amongst the INDIANS IN NEW ENGLAND:

Setting forth, not only their present state and condition, but sundry
Confessions of sin by diverse of the said Indians, wrought upon by the saving
Power of the Gospel; Together with the manifestation of their Faith and Hope in
Jesus Christ, and the Work of Grace upon their Hearts.

Related by Mr. Eliot and Mr. Mayhew, two Faithful Laborers in that Work of the
Lord.

Published by the Corporation for propagating the Gospel there, for the
Satisfaction and Comfort of such as wish well thereunto.

Isay, 42. 3. A bruised Reed shall be not break, and the smoking Flax, shall
be not quench. London: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to Sold at
his Shop, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. 1653.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General CROMWELL.
WHat the Jews once said of their Centurion, He loved our Nation, and built us
a Synagogue, the same may we affirm upon a more Noble Account of Your Lordship,
and of those faithful Centurions and Soldiers under Your Conduct; by how much
the Adventure of your Lives in the Cause of God, for the Good of your Country,
is a more infallible Demonstration of your Love to it: forasmuch as the King of
Saints, is also King of Nations, and when he shall be the desire of all
Nations, will prove their safest Interest. Upon consideration whereof, it was
but equal that Mr. Eliot a faithful Laborer of Christ in spreading the
Everlasting Gospel to the Poor Indians, should prefix Your Lordships Name to
his Relation of the Progress of Divine Grace amongst them: And with his
Judgment, We of the Corporation, who are subordinately entrusted, do so far
concur, especially moved thereunto by that liberal and Exemplary Contribution
to this Glorious Work lately promoted by Your Lordship, and Your Officers with
the Army, that we thought not fit either to sever that Narrative, and this of
Mr. Mayhew's, or to send them abroad under any other Name to the Public View.

Coopers-Hall, London, March, 26. 1653. Signed in the Name, and by the
Appointment of the said Corporation, by William Steel, President.

To the much Honored Corporation in London, Chosen to Place of Public Trust
for the promoting of the Work of the Lord among the Indians in NEW ENGLAND.
Worthy Sirs,
IT has not been from any disrespect to your selves, that I have not formerly
directed to your Presence, and presented into your Hand, what have already been
let go, which made Relation of the Work of God among the Indians in this Island
(commonly called Martins Vineyard) This year there was an opportunity not to be
refused, of certifying the Right Worshipful John Endicot Esquire, Governor of
the Massachussets in New England of what I had to communicate concerning the
Indians, from whose hand also you will receive it; but yet I may not for
several causes, neglect the writing to your selves the same things, with more
particulars since adjoined, in the conclusion to accompany the former unto your
Pious and Prudent consideration, to which they are committed to be (as I have
received them from God) the tokens of more Grace in store to be bestowed on
Indian souls.

Highly esteemed in the Lord Jesus,

WHen the Lord first brought me to these poor Indians on the Vinyard, they were
mighty zealous and earnest in the Worship of False gods, and Devils; their
False gods were many, both of things in Heaven, Earth, and Sea: And there they
had their Men-gods, Women-gods, and Children-gods, their Companies, and
Fellowships of gods, or Divine Powers, guiding things amongst men, besides
innumerable more feigned gods belonging to many Creatures, to their Corn, and
every Color of it: The Devil also with his Angels had his Kingdom among them,
in them; account him they did, the terror of the Living, the god of the Dead,
under whose cruel power and into whose deformed likeness they conceived
themselves to be translated when they died; for the same word they have for
Devil, they use also for a Dead Man, in their Language: by him they were often
hurt in their Bodies, distracted in their Minds, wherefore they had many
meetings with their Pawwaws (who usually had a hand in their hurt) to pacify
the Devil by their Sacrifice, and get deliverance from their evil; I have
sometimes marvelled to see the vehemence of their Spirits, which they acted
with no less bodily violence therein. The Pawwaws counted their Imps their
Preservers, had them treasured up in their bodies, which they brought forth to
hurt their enemies, and heal their friends; who when they had done some notable
Cure, would show the Imp in the palm of his Hand to the Indians, who with much
amazement looking on it, Deified them, then at all times seeking to them for
cure in all sicknesses, and counsel in all cases: This Diabolical way they were
in, giving heed to a multitude of Heathen Traditions of their gods, and many
other things, under the observation whereof, they with much slavery were held,
and abounding with sins, having only an obscure Notion of a good greater than
all, which they call Mannit, but they knew not what he was, and therefore had
no way to worship him.

What an entrance I had at first amongst these miserable Heathen, how called
thereunto, and what success God blessed us with, has been in some measure
already published, which will I hope through the dew of Gods blessing from
Heaven, have such a gracious increase, that the blossoming and budding time
shall at least be acknowledged, and by many more God blessed for it, in the
growth of the fruit to more maturity; Since it has pleased God to send his
Word to these poor captivated men (bondslaves to sin and Satan) he has through
mercy brought two hundred eighty three Indians (not counting young children in
the number) to renounce their false gods, Devils, and Pawwaws, and publicly in
set meetings, before many witnesses, have they disclaimed the Divinity of their
formerly adored multitude, defied their tyrannical Destroyer the Devil, and
utterly refused the help of the Pawwaws in any case; neither have they at any
time, either by threatenings or flatteries been drawn thereto, although their
lives have been in hazard; yea, eight of their Pawwaws have forsaken their
Devilish craft, and profitable trade as they accounted it, for to embrace the
Word and Way of God. The Indians which do pray to God, were not compelled
thereto by power, neither also could they be allured by gifts, who received
nothing for about seven years time, much less that which counterpoyse their
troubles, and exceed to the drawing of them from the beloved ways of their own
Worships: Surely it were great uncharitableness, and derogatory from the glory
of God, to think that none of these are truly changed, and that God himself by
his Word and Spirit, has not in mercy prevailed in their hearts against these
evils; nay, may we not hope and be persuaded by this, and some other
appearances of God amongst them, that some of them are truly turned to God from
Idols, to serve the Living and true God? Serve him, through mercy they do in
some hopeful Reformations, walking inoffensively and diligently in their way,
which I hope will more plainly appear when they are in a way more hopeful (by
the blessing of God to their further well-being) which I hope will be in the
best time.

I cannot but take notice of this good providence of God by the way, That he
has mercifully preserved all the Indians which call upon his Name (from the
beginning of the Work unto this day) from all extraordinary evil, whereby the
Devil and Witches use to torment the Bodies and Minds of Men, not one of them
or their children (as I know) or have heard have been touched by them in this
kind (only a Pawwaw or two, have not been delivered from his Imps presently
after his renouncing of them, but for some time have had the sense of them in
his Body with much pain:) The mischief that the Pawwaws and Devils usually do
to the common Indian this way, is both by outward and bodily hurt, or inward
pain, torture, and distraction of mind, both which I have seen my self: To
accomplish the first, the Devil does abuse the real body of a Serpent, which
comes directly toward the man in the house or in the field, looming or having
a shadow about him like a man, and do shoot a bone (as they say) into the
Indians Body, which sometimes kills him. An instance whereof I can give,
whereby it may the more plainly appear, that it is a great mercy to be
delivered therefrom; and it is of a youth, who living with his Parents upon a
neck of Land, They did not pray unto Jehovah, yet their Neighbors who lived
there with them, did; This Youth was hurt after the same manner, and then
presently his Parents pulled down the house they lived in, and fled to an
Island near by, where I saw the Indian thus hurt in his Thigh, he was
grievously tormented, and his Kindred about him mourning, not knowing where to
find any comfort, or help, for cure could not be had from their gods or
Pawwaws: I then took the opportunity to reason with them about their way, with
the best wisdom God gave me, but all in vain, for they would not hear to seek
the true God, notwithstanding he had shown his displeasure so apparently
against them for their former refusing of Him, but they still followed on their
wonted Serpentine Machinations: The Pawwaws, and their devilish train, with
their horrible outcries, hollow bleatings, painful wrestlings, and smiting
their own bodies, sought deliverance, but all in vain, for he died miserably.
Hereby, and by several other things, I perceive that they are not (in a manner)
indifferent, whether they serve their own gods or not, or change them (as some
think) for they are naturally like the Heathens of Chittim and Kedar, which
would not change their gods, which yet are no gods; when God blames his people
for changing their glory for that which does not profit; I hope therefore that
it is something of Grace, that many choose to worship the true God. But touching
the former vexing mischiefs, A Sachem, and no good friend to the work, could
not but acknowledge the blessing of God among the Praying Indians; When I came
over (said he) at the further end of the Island, there was a storm (mentioning
the aforesaid evils, with some more) but when I came to this end I found a
calm, the Praying Indians were all well, they arose in the morning, Prayed to
God, and went about their business, and they are not hurt nor troubled like the
other Indians: And the Pawwaws themselves, some of them do say, That they
cannot make their Power seize on any of them: Questionless they have tried
their Skill, and Satan has not been wanting to assist them, who is so
unwilling to fall down from his Rule, and to be driven from his old
Possessions. A Pawwaw told me, who was of no small note among the Heathen
formerly, and also with the best, now he has forsaken his Pawwawing, That
after he had been brought by the Word of God to hate the Devil, and to renounce
his Imps (which he did publicly) that yet his Imps remained still in him for
some months tormenting of his flesh, and troubling of his mind, that he could
never be at rest, either sleeping or waking: At length one time when I went
down to keep the farthest Lecture about seven miles off, he asked me some
Questions, whereof this was one, viz. That if a Pawwaw had his Imps gone from
him, what he should have instead of them to preserve him? Whereunto it was
Answered, That if he did believe in Christ Jesus, he should have the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in him, which is a good and a strong Spirit, and will keep him
so safe, that all the Devils in Hell, and Pawwaws on Earth, should not be able
to do him any hurt; and that if he did set himself against his Imps, by the
strength of God they should all flee away like Muskeetoes: He told me, That he
did much desire the Lord, it might be so with him. He further said, That ever
since that very time God has in mercy delivered him from them, he is not
troubled with any pain (as formerly) in his Bed, nor dreadful visions of the
night, but through the blessing of God, he does lie down in ease, sleeps
quietly, wakes in Peace, and walks in safety, for which he is very glad, and
praises God.

This last spring, the Indians of their own accord made a motion to me they
might have some way ordered amongst them, as a means whereby they might Walk in
good Subjection to the Law of God, whereunto they desired to enter into
Covenant; they told me that they were very desirous to have their sins
suppressed which God did forbid, and the duties performed, which he has
Commanded in his Word; and thereunto they desired me to inform them, what
punishment the Lord did appoint to be inflicted on those which did break any
part of His Law, for they were very willing to submit themselves to what the
will of the Lord is in this kind. I was not willing on the sudden to draw forth
in writing an Answer to their desire, but rather chose to take a longer time of
Consideration in a Work of so great Concernment, and refer them to the Word of
God, showing them many places for their information, most whereof they had
heard of formerly: They also further desired, That they might have some men
Chosen amongst them with my father and my self, to see that the Indians did
walk orderly, and that such might be encouraged, but that those which did not,
might be dealt with acording to the word of the Lord; I could not but approve
and encourage the motion, seeing they spoke not as those in Psalm. 2. 3. Let us
break their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us, but sought total
subjection and strict obedience to God: yet I told them that it was a matter of
great weight, showing them many things which I thought necessary for them to
know, but needless now to relate. A day of fasting and prayer to repent of our
sins, and seek the gracious help of our God for Christ Jesus sake, we
appointed; and another shortly after to finish the work in: Some of the Indians
spoke something for their benefit; and about ten, or twelve of them prayed, not
with any set Form like Children, but like Men endued with a good measure of the
knowledge of God, their own wants, and the wants of others, with much affection,
and many Spiritual Petitions, savoring of a Heavenly mind; and so are they
streitned in respect of help from man, that it appears the more plainly to be
the Dictates of Gods Spirit. A Platform of the Covenant in Answer to their
desires, I drew forth the same morning in the Indian Language, which I have
here sent in English.

We the distressed Indians of the Vineyard (or Nope, the Indian name of the
Island) That beyond all memory have been without the True God, without a
Teacher, and without a Law, the very Servants of Sin and Satan, and without
Peace, for God did justly vex us for our sins; having lately through his mercy
heard of the Name of the True God, the Name of his Son Christ Jesus, with the
holy Ghost, the Comforter, three Persons, but one most Glorious God, whose Name
is JEHOVAH: We do praise His Glorious Greatness, and in the sorrow of our
hearts, and shame of our faces, we do acknowledge and renounce our great and
many sins, that we and our Fathers have lived in, do run unto him for mercy,
and pardon for Christ Jesus sake; and we do this day through the blessing of
God upon us, and trusting to his gracious help, give up our selves in this
Covenant, We, our Wives, and Children, to serve JEHOVAH: And we do this day
choose JEHOVAH to be our God in Christ Jesus, our Teacher, our Lawgiver in his
Word, our King, our Judge, our Ruler by his Magistrates and Ministers; to fear
God Himself, and to trust in Him alone for Salvation, both of Soul and Body, in
this present Life, and the Everlasting Life to come, through his mercy in
Christ Jesus our Savior, and Redeemer, and by the might of his Holy Spirit; to
whom with the Father and Son, be all Glory everlasting. Amen.

After I had often read this Covenant and expounded it unto them, they all with
free Consent willingly and thankfully joined therein, and desired Jehovah his
blessing for Jesus Christ his sake, the Lord be gracious to our beginnings.

Within two or three weeks there came an Indian to me in business, and by the
way he told me, that some Indians had lately kept a day of Repentance to humble
themselves before God in prayer, and that the word of God which one of them
spoke unto, for their Instruction, was Psalm. 66. 7. He rules by his Power for
ever, his eyes behold the nations, let not the rebellious exalt themselves. I
asked him what their end was in keeping such a day? He told me those six
things: First, they desired, That God would slay the rebellion of their hearts.
Secondly, That they might love God, and one another. Thirdly, That they might
withstand the evil words and temptations of wicked men, and not to be drawn
back from God. Fourthly, That they might be obedient to the good Words and
Commands of their Rulers. Fifthly, That they might have their sins done away by
the Redemption of Jesus Christ. And Lastly, That they might walk in Christ's way.

Now for the state of things with us, we are by the help of God about to begin
a Town that they may Cohabit and carry on things in a Civil and Religious way
the better; The praying Indians are constant attenders to the word of the Lord,
and some of them (I hope) conscionable seekers after the knowledge of God, and
themselves, and not without obtaining (by the grace of God) some saving benefit
to their own Souls, which will by his own blessing, in the best time, more
plainly appear. About 30. Indian Children are now at School, which began the
Eleventh day of the Eleventh month. 1651. they are apt to learn, and more and
more are now sending in unto them. The Barbarous Indians, both men and women,
do often come on the Lecture days, and complaining of their ignorance,
disliking their sinful liberty, and refusing the helps, and hopes of their own
power, seek Subjection to Jehovah, to be taught, governed, and saved by him,
for Jesus Christ's sake. The Name of the Lord alone be praised for what is
begun; What is further needful, I earnestly desire may be fervently prayed
for, and expected by faith, to be effected, and finished by the gracious hand
of God, who have laid the foundation, and will not leave his own works
unperfect, which is the comfort of an unworthy Laborer in the Lords Vinyard,
and an earnest desirer to be remembered at the Throne of Grace.

Having a little more liberty, I shall certify you of something more, which I
have taken notice of amongst the poor Indians.

I observed that the Indians when they chose their Rulers, made choice of such
as were best approved for their godliness, and most likely to suppress sin, and
encourage holiness, and since they have been forward upon all occasions, to
show their earnest desire thereof. There was an Indian that was well approved
for his Reformation, that was suspected to have told a plain Lie for his Gain;
the business was brought to the public Meeting, and there it was notably
sifted with zeal and good affection; but at length the Indian defending himself
with great disdain, and hatred of such an evil, proved himself clear, and
praised God for it. The same Indian was a little before, very sick, and he told
me that when he thought he should die, he did so love God, that he was not
unwilling to die, and leave his wife, and children, or any thing else, but that
he was only desirous to live for this cause, That he might be more taught by
the Word of God, and be helpful to teach the Indians the Way of God.

I have also observed how God is pleased to uphold some of these poor Indians
against opposition. I was once down toward the further end of the Island, and
lodged at an Indians house, who was accounted a great man among the Islanders,
being the friend of a great Sachem on the Mayn; this Sachem is a great Enemy to
our Reformation on the Island: At this man's house when I had sat a while, his
son being about thirty years old, earnestly desired me in his Language, to
relate unto him some of the ancient Stories of God; I then spent a great part
of the night (in such discourse as I thought fittest for them) as I usually do
when I lodge in their houses, what he then heard (as he expressed) did much
affect him: And shortly after he came and desired to join with the praying
Indians to serve Jehovah, but it was to the great coffeehouse of the Sachems
on the Mayn, and those Indians about him: News was often brought to him that
his life was laid in wait for, by those that would surely take it from him,
they desired him therefore with speed to turn back again; The man came to me
once or twice, and I perceived that he was troubled, he asked my counsel about
removing his Habitation, yet told me, That if they should stand with a sharp
weapon against his breast, and tell him that they would kill him presently, if
he did not turn to them, but if he would, they would love him, yet he had
rather lose his life than keep it on such terms; for (said he) when I look back
on my life as it was before I did pray to God, I see it to be wholly naught,
and do wholly dislike it, and hate those naughty ways; but when I look on that
way which God does teach me in his Word, I see it to be wholly good; and do
wholly love it. Blessed be God that he is not overcome by these temptations.

The next thing I judge also worthy to be observed, My Father and I were lately
talking with an Indian, who had not long before almost lost his life by a wound
his Enemies gave him in a secret hidden way, the mark whereof, he had upon him,
and will carry it to his grave: This man understanding of a secret Plot that
was to take away his Enemies life, told my Father and I, That he did freely
forgive him for the sake of God, and did tell this Plot to us that the man's
life might be preserved: This is a singular thing, and who among the Heathen
will do so?

I observe also that the Indians themselves do endeavor to propagate the
knowledge of God, to the glory of God and the good of others: I heard an Indian
(after I had some discourse with the Indians in the night) ask the Sachem, and
many others together, how they did like that counsel they heard from the word
of God: They answered, very well; then said he, why do you not take it? why do
you not do according to it? He further added, I can tell you why it is, Because
you do not see your sins, and because you do love your sins; for as long as it
was so with me, I did not care for the Way of God; but when God did show me my
sins, and made me hate them, then I was glad to take Gods Counsel: this I
remember he spoke, with some other things, with such Gravity and truth, that
the Sachem and all the company was not able to gainsay.

Myoxeo also lately met with an Indian, which came from the Mayn who was of
some note among them; I heard that he told them of the great things of God, and
of Christ Jesus, the sinfulness and folly of the Indians, the Pardon of sin by
Christ, and of a good life; and so were they both affected, that they continued
this discourse two half nights, and a day, until their strength was spent: He
told him in particular, how a Believer did live above the world, that he did
keep worldly things always at his feet (as he showed him by a sign) That when
they were deminished, or increased, it was neither the cause of his Sorrow, or
joy, that he should stoop to regard them, but he stood upright with his heart
Heavenward, and his whole desire was after God, and his joy in him. Now Much
honored in the Lord, and all that love Christ Jesus in truth, let me prevail
with you that we may be presented by you at the Throne of Grace in his
worthiness to obtain those blessings, that concerns his Kingdom and Glory; our
comfort and Salvation: And you are, and shall also be, ever humbly so prayed
for, by him, who is

From the Vinyard the 22. of October, 1652. Yours obliged, and ever to be
commanded in the Work of the Lord Jesus Thomas Mayhew.

To His Excellency, the Lord General Cromwell; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be
Multiplied.
Right Honorable,
ENvy it self cannot deny that the Lord has raised and improved You in an
Eminent manner to overthrow Antichrist, and to accomplish, in part, the
Prophesies and Promises of the Churches Deliverance from that Bondage: In all
which Service, the Lord has not only kept Your Honor unsteined, but also
caused the Luster of those precious Graces of Humility, Faith, Love of Truth,
and Love to the Saints, etc. with which, through His Free Grace, He has
enriched You, to shine forth abundantly beyond all exception of any that are,
or have been Adversaries to Your Proceedings. Now as the design of Christ in
these days is double, namely, First, To overthrow Antichrist by the Wars of
the Lamb; and Secondly, To raise up His own Kingdom in the room of all Earthly
Powers which He does cast down, and to bring all the World subject to be ruled
in all things by the Word of His mouth. And as the Lord has raised and
improved You, to accomplish (so far as the Work has proceeded) the first part
of His Design, so I trust that the Lord will yet further improve You, to set
upon the accomplishment of the second part of the design of Christ; not only by
indeavoring to put Government into the hands of Saints, which the Lord has
made You eminently careful to do, but also by promoting Scripture Government
and Laws, that so the Word of Christ might rule all. In which great Services
unto the Name of Christ, I doubt not, but it will be some Comfort to Your heart
to see the Kingdom of Christ rising up in these Western Parts of the World; and
some confirmation it will be, that the Lords time is come to advance and spread
His Blessed Kingdom, which shall (in his season) fill all the Earth: and some
encouragement to your heart, to prosecute that part of the Design of Christ,
namely, That Christ might Reign. Such Considerations, together with the
Favorable Respect You have always showed to poor New England, has imboldned
me to present unto Your Hand, these first Confessions of that Grace which the
Lord has bestowed upon these poor Natives, and to publish them under the
protection of Your Name, begging earnestly the continuance of Your Prayers for
the further proceeding of this gracious Work: And so committing Your Honor to
the Lord, and to the Word of His Grace, and all Your weighty Affairs to His
Heavenly Direction, I rest

Your Honors to serve You, in the Service of Christ JOHN ELIOT.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Know thy Soul longs to hear Tidings of Gods grace powered out upon these
goings down of the Sun, because the Spirit of God by the Word of Prophecy,
uses to raise up and draw forth such actings of Faith, as accord with the
accomplishment of those Prophesies, when the time of their accomplishment is
come. When Israel was to return from Babylon, the Spirit by the word of
Prophecy, raised up such actings of Faith, as were put forth in the exercise
of all gifts necessary for the accomplishment thereof. Daniel prays.
Zerubbabel has a Spirit of Ruling, the peoples affections are loose from their
dwellings, and have a Spirit of Traveling. Ezra, Nehemiah, and all the rest of
the Worthies of the Lord, are raised at that time to accomplish what is
Prophesied. In these times the Prophesies of Antichrist his down fall are
accomplishing. And do we not see that the Spirit of the Lord, by the word of
Prophecy, has raised up men, instruments in the Lord hand, to accomplish what
is written herein. And the Spirit of Prayer, and expectation of Faith is raised
generally in all Saints, by the same word of Prophecy. In like manner the Lord
having said, That the Gospel shall spread over all the Earth, even to all the
ends of the Earth; and from the riseing to the setting Sun; all Nations shall
become the Nations, and Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ. Such words of
Prophecy has the Spirit used to stir up the servants of the Lord to make out
after the accomplishment thereof: and has stirred up a mighty Spirit of
Prayer, and expectation of Faith for the Conversion both of the Jews, (yea all
Israel) and of the Gentiles also, over all the world. For this Cause I know
every believing heart, awakened by such Scriptures, longs to hear of the
Conversion of our poor Indians, whereby such Prophesies are in part begun to be
accomplished. Yea, the Design of Christ being to erect his own Kingdom, in the
room of all those Dominions, which he does, and is about to overturn: You shall
see a Spirit by such words of Prophecy powered forth upon the Saints (into
whose hands Christ will commit the manageing of his Kingdom on Earth) that
shall carry them forth to advance Christ to rule over men in all affairs, by
the word of his mouth, and make him their only Lawgiver, and supreme Judge,
and King.

It is a day of small things with us: and that is Gods season to make the
single beauty of his humbling Grace, to shine in them, that are the veriest
ruins of mankind that are known on earth; as Mr. Hooker was wont to describe
the forlorn condition of these poor Indians. I see evident demonstrations that
Gods Spirit by his word has taught them, because their expressions, both in
Prayer, and in the Confessions which I have now published, are far more, and
more full, and spiritual, and various, then ever I was able to express unto
them; in that poor broken manner of Teaching which I have used among them.
The^ir turning Doctrins into their own experience, which you may observe in
their Confessions, does also demonstrate the Teachings of Gods Spirit, whose
first special work is Application. Their different Gifts likewise, is a thing
observable in their Confessions, wherein it is not to be expected that they
should be all Eminent, it is not so in any Society of men; but in that there be
some among them that are more eminent, it is a sign of Gods favor, who is
raising up among themselves, such as shall be his instruments to conveigh a
blessing unto the rest. Their frequent phrase of Praying to God, is not to be
understood of that Ordinance and Duty of Prayer only, but of all Religion, and
comprehends the same meaning, with them, as the word [Religion] does with us:
And it is observable, because it seems to me, That the Lord will make them a
Praying people: and indeed, there is a great Spirit of Prayer powered out upon
them, to my wonderment; and you may easily apprehend, That they who are
assisted to express such Confessions before men, are not without a good measure
of enlargement of Spirit before the Lord.

The points of Doctrine that are here and there dropped in their Confessions,
may suffice at present for a little taste to the Godly discerning Saints, That
they are in some measure instructed in the chief points of Salvation, though
there be no Doctrinal Confession on purpose set down to declare what they have
learned, and do believe.

If any should conceive that that word which they so often use [I thought, or I
think] should need explication, as a godly Brother did intimate to me on the
Fast day, let this suffice, That it is to be Construed by the present Matter:
For sometimes it is a thought of Faith; sometime of Fear; sometime of Unbelief;
sometime of Carnal Reason; and sometime of Ignorance.

Lastly, It is plainly to be observed, That one end of Gods sending so many
Saints to NEW ENGLAND, was the Conversion of these Indians. For the Godly
Counsels, and Examples they have had in all our Christian Families, have been
of great use, both to prepare them for the Gospel, and also to further the
Lords work in them, as you may evidently discern in most of their Confessions.

Beloved Reader, I have no more to say as necessary to Prepare for the
following Matter, only to beg, yea earnestly to beg the continuance of all your
Prayers; by the power whereof (through the Grace and Intercession of Christ) I
believe this wheel of Conversion of these Indians, is turned: and my Heart
has been always thereby encouraged, to follow on to do that poor little I
can, to help forward this blessed Work of Spreading and Exalting the Kingdom of
our dear Savior Jesus Christ, under the direction and protection of whose Word
and Grace, by Faith committing you; I rest,

Your unworthy Brother, in our dear Savior, JOHN ELIOT.

To the Christian Reader.
THE Amplitude, and large Extent of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth,
when the Heathen shall be his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth
his Possession; and when all Kings shall fall down unto him, and all Nations do
him service, all contrary Kingdoms and Powers being broken in pieces and
destroyed, is a thing plainly and plentifully foretold and promised in the Holy
Scriptures; Psalm. 2. 8. and 22. 27. and 72. 11. and 86. 9. Dan. 2. 35. 44, 45.
and 7. 26, 27. Zech. 14. 9. And although as yet our Eyes have never seen it so,
nor our Fathers before us, many Nations and People having hitherto been
overspread, and overwhelmed in Pagan Blindness and Ignorance, having scarce
ever heard of Christ, or of His Name; and many others that in some sort have
heard of Him, having no more Grace but to make and maintain Opposition against
Him, and against His Kingdom, some more professedly, and others more covertly
and under fairer pretense, as in the great Dominions of the Turk, and of the
Pope, is apparent; yet the time is coming, when things shall not thus continue,
but be greatly changed and altered, because the Lord has spoken this Word, and
it cannot be that his Word should not take effect: And if the Lord have spoken
it, his People have good ground and reason to believe it, and to say as the
holy Apostle in another case, I believe God that it shall be even as it was
told me, Act. 27. 25. Yea, to believe it and wait for it, as for that which in
Gods appointed and due time shall surely come to pass, and not fail, as Hab. 2.
3. And not only so, but heartily to desire it, and fervently to pray for it, as
a thing wherein the Glory of God, and of Jesus Christ is not a little concerned
and interessed; for if the multitude of People be the Kings Honor, Prove. 14.
28. it must needs be the Honor of Christ Jesus the King of Sion, when
multitudes of People do submit unto Him as to their King; and therefore it
should be earnestly craved of God by all his Saints in their Prayers, that so
it may be, according as the Sanctifying of Gods Name, and the coming of his
Kingdom are the two first Petitions in that Rule and Pattern of Prayer
commanded, and taught by our Savior to His Disciples, Matthew. 6. 9, 10. And no
man needs to doubt but that those things which are matter for Faith and Prayer
to be exercised about their accomplishment, are matters of Thanksgiving when
once they come to pass.

Which being so, the godly Christian, who shall read or hear this ensuing
Relation concerning the workings of Gods Grace toward these Indians in
New England, and the Confessions of sundry amongst them, will, I doubt not, see
abundant cause of thanksgiving to the Lord therein. For hereby it will appear,
That the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus which every faithful soul, does so much
desire to see enlarged, is now beginning to be set up where it never was
before, even amongst a poor people, forlorn kind of Creatures in times past,
who have been without Christ, and without God in the world, they and their
Fathers, for I know not how many Generations; yea, so far from knowing and
acknowledging God in Christ, that they have been little better than the Beasts
that perish. But now they that were far off, the Lord is at work to make them
near unto himself by the Blood of Jesus, as Ephesians. 2. 13. that they which in time
past were not a People, might ere long become the People of God; and they be
called Beloved, which were not Beloved; and in the place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my People* that there ere long, they might be called, The
Children of the Living God, as 1 Pet. 2. 10. Romans 9. 25, 26. which is the Lords
doing, and it ought to be marvelous in our eyes. And the truth is, there are
many marvels in it; marvelous free grace, and riches thereof, to look upon a
People so wretched and unworthy; yea, it were marvelous Grace so much as once
to offer the Salvation of God in Christ to any such as they are, being not only
the poor and maimed, halt and blind, but also, as it is in Luk, 14. 21. ranging
and roving in the Highways, and Hedges; and yet behold, even these are not
only invited, but their hearts inclined to come in. Mavelous Wisdom and Power
is in it also, that of matter so rugged, and unlikely the Lord should ever
frame and fashion any gracious and holy building to Himself, which I hope He is
now a doing. And to say no more, His mervelous Sovereignty and Liberty is
therein to be observed also, who till now of late has seen meet never to look
after this People, but has suffered them all this while to walk in their own
ways, ways of Sin, and ways of Death: yea, and though there has been
Plantations of the English in the Country now 20. years and more, yea, some a
matter of 30. years, or thereabout, yet of all this time (except some little
workings in a few) no considerable work of Grace has appeared amongst the
Indians till now of late; so true is that saying, The times and seasons, the
Father has put them in his own Power, Act. 1. 7.

If any shall say, Oh but, we are doubtful whether any sound and saving work be
yet wrought in them or no: Such an one I would wish seriously to weigh and
consider the ensuing Confessions, and then perhaps he will be better satisfied
touching this Point; for there he shall find many expressions savoring of their
clear sight and sense of sin, and that not only of gross and external sins, but
also of such as are more inward in the Heart and Soul: Also he shall find
expressions tending to show their expecting all righteousness and salvation by
Christ alone. Now considering how the Work of the Spirit of God is said by
Christ Himself to consist in great part in convincing of sin, and of
righteousness; of sin in men's selves, and of righteousness in Christ, Joh. 16.
9. And considering also, how the least beginnings of Grace are accepted of him
that would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, Matthew. 12.
20. And lastly, considering how it were not reasonable to expect such ripeness
in these people, as might be expected and found in others, who have had more
time and means, and better help and breeding than these have had: If these
things I say be considered, it may be an Inducement to hope the best in charity
concerning the Work of Grace in their Souls, as Charity hops all things,
believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. But thus much at the least I conceive is
clear, and cannot be denied that since the Word of God has been taught and
preached among them, the Spirit of the Lord has been working thereby in the
hearts of many of them such Illumination, such Conviction, etc. as may justly
be looked at (if not as a full and through Conversion, yet) as an hopeful
beginning and preparation thereto, if the Lord be pleased to go on with what he
has begun, as I hope he will. And if there were no more but only an hopeful
beginning, and preparative to Conversion, yet even this were matter of much
comfort to the Saints, and of thanksgiving to the Lord; as it was in Israel at
the building of the Temple, when no more was yet done, but only the foundation
laid, Ezr. 3. 10, 11. yet even then they sung for joy, giving praise and
thanksgiving to the Lord: How much more should it be so, if the Work of
Regeneration be already truly wrought in any of them, as I hope it is in
sundry; In such case, how ever it be with men on Earth, sure there is joy in
Heaven amongst the Angels of God, when there is so much as one sinner that is
truly brought home to God by Repentance, Luke 15. 7. 10.

But how shall we know that the Confessions here related, being spoken in their
Tongue, were indeed uttered by them in such words, as have the same
signification and meaning with these that are here expressed, for we have only
the testimony of one man to assure us of it? It is true, we have only the
testimony of one man for it; but yet it is such an one, as is unwillingly alone
in this matter, having seriously endeavored to have had diverse other
Interpreters present at Natick that day, but could not obtain what he did
desire and endeavor herein; a man whose pious and painful labors amongst this
People, have rendered him approved and highly honored in the eyes of his
Brethren about him, for indefatigable diligence, and earnest love to the Lord
Jesus, and their poor souls; a man whose integrity and faithfulness is so well
known in these Parts, as gives sufficient satisfaction to beleev that he would
not wittingly utter a falsehood in any matter whatever, and much less so many
falsehoods, and that in such a public manner, in the view of God and the World,
as he must needs have done if he have coined these Confessions of his own head,
and have not to his best understanding truly related them in our Tongue,
according as they were uttered by them in theirs.

If any shall then ask, If there be such a Work of God amongst them, Why were
they not combined and united into Church Estate, when there was that great
Assembly at Natick, on the thirteenth of October. last? Such an one may do well
to consider, that the material Temple was many years in building, even in the
days of Solomon, who wanted no helps and furtherances thereunto, but was
abundantly furnished therewith, and longer in Re-edifying after the Captivity;
and therefore no marvel if the building of a Spiritual Temple, an holy Church
to Christ, and a Church out of such rubbish as amongst Indians, be not begun
and ended on a sudden; It is rather to be wondered at, that in so short a time,
the thing is in so much forwardness as it is. Besides, It is a greater matter
to have Indians accepted and owned as a Church amongst themselves, and so to be
invested with all Church Power as a Church, when yet they are not furnished
with any to be an able Pastor and Elder over them, by whom they might be
directed and guided in all the Affairs of the Church, and Administrations of
the House of God: this I conceive is a far greater matter than the admitting of
them as Members into any Church or Churches of the English already so
furnished; which latter (for ought I know) might speedily be done, and with
much satisfaction, if it were suitable in regard of their different Language,
and the remoteness of their Habitations, whereas to the former there seems to
be a great necessity, or expediency at the least, that they should first be
provided of some to be afterward set over them in the Lord. Even amongst the
English, when any company amongst us have united themselves into Church Estate,
it has been usual that they have had one or other amongst them upon whom their
eyes have been set, as intending them to be Pastors or Teachers to them;
afterward, when once they should be combined as a Church, and where it has so
been, they have found the comfort and benefit of it; whereas those few that
have proceeded otherwise, have found trouble and inconveniency therein. And if
it be so amongst the English, who usually have better abilities, how much more
amongst the Indians, whose knowledge and parts must needs be far less? Not to
insist upon the Rehearsal of those two Reasons mentioned by the Reverend Author
of this Relation, viz. The shortness of the time to furnish the Work that day,
and the want of Interpreters, of whom there was not any present himself.
Concerning which Reasons, I can freely ad my testimony, that those two were the
principal, if not the only Reasons which that day were insisted on, and
publicly rendered for deferring the Inchurching of them to another time.

It may be some have thought, and I hear some have spoken little less, That
this whole business of the Indians, of which there have been so many speeches in
Old England and New, is but a devise and design to get money, and that there is
indeed no such matter as any Work of Gods grace amongst that People. But if
there were any truth in this saying or Surmise, I marvel why the Magistrates
and Elders then present at Natick, did upon the reasons rendered, advise the
deferring of the inchurching of the Indians that day, and why they did not
rather hasten forward the Work without any more ado, or longer delay. For the
report of a Church of Indians would in all likelihood have more prevailed for
the end alleged, than all that has been reported hitherto But our attending
in this business to the Honor of Jesus Christ, and the good of this poor
peoples souls, and so to that which Rule and right Reason required, rather than
to what might seem conducible for wordly advantage, may be a sufficient witness
of our sincerity, contrary to the conceit and surmise before mentioned, and a
sufficient confutation of it. And yet though they be not combined into
Church Estate, there is so much of Gods Work amongst them, as that I cannot but
count it a great evil, yea, a great injury to God and his goodness for any to
make light or nothing of it. To see and to hear Indians opening their mouths,
and lifting up their hands and their eyes in solemn Prayer to the Living God,
calling on him by his Name JEHOVAH, in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and this
for a good while together; to see and hear them exhorting one another from the
Word of God; to see them and hear them confessing the Name of Christ Jesus, and
their own sinfulness, sure this is more than usual. And though they spoke in a
language, of which many of us understood but little, yet we that were present
that day, we saw them, and we heard them perform the duties mentioned, with
such grave and sober countenances, with such comely reverence in gesture, and
their whole carriage, and with such plenty of tears trickling down the cheeks of
some of them, as did argue to us that they spoke with much good affection, and
holy fear of God, and it much affected our hearts. Nor is it credible to me,
nor for ought I know to any that was present that day, that in these things
they were acted and led by that Spirit which is wont to breath amongst Indians,
the Spirit of Satan, or of corrupt Nature, but that herein they had with them
another Spirit.

But if there be any work of Grace amongst them, it would surely bring forth,
and be accompanied with the Reformation of their disordered lives, as in other
things, so in their neglect of Labor, and their living in idleness and
pleasure. I confess the Allegation is weighty, and I deny not but some sober
and godly persons, who do heartily wish well to this work, have been as much
troubled in their minds touching this particular as any that I know of. But yet
something may be said in answer thereto, and chiefly this, That since the Word of
God came amongst them, and that they have attended thereto, they have more
applied themselves unto Labor than formerly: For evidence whereof, appeal my be
made to what was seen at Natick that day, and is still to be seen in that
place, I mean the Grounds that they have fenced in, and clawed and broken up,
and especially their capacious Meeting House, the Dimensions whereof are
expressed in the Relation: little did I think when I saw that Fabric, but that
some English Carpenter or other had had the chief hand in the framing and
erecting of it; and that more hands than Indians, yea, and more English than
one had been employed about it. But now understanding that the Indians alone
were the Builders of it, it is a good testimony to me both of their industry,
and likewise of their Skill; for where these are utterly wanting, yea, where
there is not some good measure of them, such a Building I conceive could never
be raised. It is true, that considering the manner of their bringing up, being
little accustomed to labor, but the contrary, it is not much to be marveled if
they be not comparable therein to some English, who from their Childhood have
been trained up thereto; yet we see they are coming to it, and I hope will fall
to it more and more; let all that love their souls, pray for them that they
may, yea, let all that love the Lord Jesus Christ pray for them, that the Work
of God may still prosper amongst them, that many more of them may be turned
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and that being
converted they may be preserved in Christ, and be built up in him to further
growth and perfection, from day to day. And let unfeigned thanksgiving be
rendered to the Lord by his Saints for all that is already wrought amongst them:
And Oh, let the English take heed, both in our dear Native Country, and here,
lest for our unthankfulness, and many other sins, the Lord should take the
Gospel from us, and bestow our mercy therein upon them, as upon a Nation that
would yield the fruits thereof in better sort than many of us have done. The
sins of the Jewish Nation to whom the Gospel was first preached, provoked God
to take his Kingdom from them, and to call in the Gentiles: yet it appears by
Romans 11. 11. 14. 31. that this mercy vouchsafed to the Gentiles, shall in time
provoke the Jews to an holy Jealousy, and Emulation, to look after that mercy
again that once they refused, that so through the mercy bestowed on the
Gentiles, they (I mean the Jews) might at last again obtain mercy. Happy were
the English if we could yield the fruits of Gods Gospel, that it might not be
taken from us; and happy also if the mercy coming to these Indians (though not
yet taken from us) might provoke us so to do, that so the Kingdom of God, the
Gospel of Salvation, being not taken from us, and given to them, but though
given to them, yet might still continue with us, and with our Posterity from
Generation to Generation.

Dorchester in New England this 13th of 10ber 1652. RICH. MATHER.

A brief Relation of the Proceedings of the Lords Work among the INDIANS, in
reference unto their Church Estate; The Reasons of the not accomplishing
thereof at present: With some of their Confessions; whereby it may be discerned
in some measure, how far the Lord has prepared among them fit Matter for a
CHURCH.
THese Indians (the better and wiser sort of them) have for some years inquired
after Church Estate, Baptism, and the rest of the Ordinances of God, in the
observation whereof they see the Godly English to walk. I have from time to
time, delayed them upon this point, That until they were come up unto Civil
Cohabitation, Government, and Labor, which a fixed condition of life will put
them upon, they were not so capable to be betrusted with that Treasure of
Christ, lest they should scandalize the same, and make it of none effect,
because if any should through temptation fall under Censure, he could easily
run away (as some have done) and would be tempted so to do, unless he were
fixed in an Habitation, and had some means of livelihood to lose, and leave
behind him: such Reasons have satisfied them hitherunto. But now being come
under Civil Order, and fixing themselves in Habitations, and bending themselves
to labor, as does appear by their works of Fencings, Buildings etc. and
especially in building, without any English Workmans help, or direction, a very
sufficient Meeting House, of fifty foot long twenty five foot broad, near
twelve foot high betwixt the joints, well sawen, and framed (which is a
specimen, not only of their singular ingenuity, and dexerity, but also of some
industry) I say this being so, now my argument of delaying them from entering
into Church Estate, was taken away. Therefore in way of preparation of them
thereunto, I did this Summer call forth sundry of them in the days of our
public Assemblies in Gods Worship; sometimes on the Sabbath when I could be
with them, and sometimes on Lecture days, to make confession before the Lord
of their former sins, and of their present knowledge of Christ, and experience
of his Grace; which they solemnly doing, I wrote down their Confessions: which
having done, and being in my own heart hopeful that there was among them fit
matter for a Church, I did request all the Elders about us to hear them read,
that so they might give me advice what to do in this great, and solemn
business; which being done on a day appointed for the purpose, it pleased God
to give their Confessions such acceptance in their hearts, as that they saw
nothing to hinder their proceeding, to try how the Lord would appear therein.
Whereupon, after a day of Fasting and Prayer among our selves, to seek the Lord
in that behalf, there was another day of Fasting and Prayer appointed, and
public notice thereof, and of the names of Indians were to confess, and enter
into Covenant that day, was given to all the Churches about us, to seek the
Lord yet further herein, and to make solemn Confessions of Christ his Truth and
Grace, and further to try whether the Lord would vouchsafe such grace unto
them, as to give them acceptance among the Saints, into the fellowship of
Church Estate, and enjoyment of those Ordinances which the Lord has betrusted
his Churches withal. That day was the thirteenth of the eighth month.

When the Assembly was met, the first part of the day was spent in Prayer unto
God, and exercise in the Word of God; in which, my self first; and after that,
two of the Indians did Exercise; and so the time was spent till after ten, or
near eleven of the clock. Then addressing our selves unto the further work of
the day, I first requested the reverend Elders (many being present) that they
would ask them Questions touching the fundamental Points of Religion, that
thereby they might have some trial of their knowledge, and better that way, than
if themselves should of themselves declare what they believe, or than if I
should ask them Questions in these matters: After a little conference
hereabout, it was concluded, That they should first make confession of their
experience in the Lords Work upon their hearts, because in so doing, it is like
something will be discerned of their knowledge in the Doctrines of Religion: and
if after those Confessions there should yet be cause to inquire further
touching any Point of Religion it might be fitly done at last. Whereupon we so
proceeded, and called them forth in order to make confession. It was moved in
the Assembly by Reverend Mr. Wilson, that their former Confessions also, as
well as these which they made at present, might be read unto the Assembly,
because it was evident that they were daunted much to speak before so great and
grave an Assembly as that was, but time did not permit it so to be then: yet
now in my writing of their Confessions I will take that course, that so it may
appear what encouragement there was to proceed so far as we did; and that such
as may read these their Confessions, may the better discern of the reality of
the Grace of Christ in them.

The first which was called forth is named Totherswamp, whose former Confession
read before the Elders, was as follows:
BEfore I prayed unto God, the English, when I came unto their houses, often
said unto me, Pray to God; but I having many friends who loved me, and I loved
them, and they cared not for praying to God, and therefore I did not: But I
thought in my heart, that if my friends should die, and I live, I then would
pray to God; soon after, God so wrought, that they did almost all die, few of
them left; and then my heart feared, and I thought, that now I will pray unto
God, and yet I was ashamed to pray; and if I eat and did not pray, I was
ashamed of that also; so that I had a double shame upon me: Then you came unto
us, and taught us, and said unto us, Pray unto God; and after that, my heart
grew strong, and I was no more ashamed to pray, but I did take up praying to
God; yet at first I did not think of God, and eternal Life, but only that the
English should love me, and I loved them: But after I came to learn what sin
was, by the Commandments of God, and then I saw all my sins, lust, gaming,
etc. (he named more.) You taught, That Christ knows all our hearts, and sees
what is in them, if humility, or anger, or evil thoughts, Christ sees all that
is in the heart; then my heart feared greatly, because God was angry for all my
sins; yea, now my heart is full of evil thoughts, and my heart runs away from
God, therefore my heart fears and mourns. Every day I see sin in my heart;
one man brought sin into the World, and I am full of that sin, and I break Gods
Word every day. I see I deserve not pardon, for the first man's sinning; I can
do no good, for I am like the Devil, nothing but evil thoughts, and words, and
works. I have lost all likeness to God, and goodness, and therefore every day I
sin against God, and I deserve death and damnation: The first man brought sin
first, and I do every day ad to that sin, more sins; but Christ has done for
us all righteousness, and died for us because of our sins, and Christ teaches
us, That if we cast away our sins, and trust in Christ, then God will pardon
all our sins; this I believe Christ has done, I can do no righteousness, but
Christ has done it for me; this I believe, and therefore I do hope for pardon.
When I first heard the Commandments, I then took up praying to God, and cast
off sin. Again, When I heard, and understood Redemption by Christ, then I
believed Jesus Christ to take away my sins: every Commandment taught me sin,
and my duty to God. When you ask me, Why do I love God? I answer, Because he
gives me all outward blessings, as food, clothing, children, all gifts of
strength, speech, hearing; especially that he gives us a Minister to teach us,
and gives us Government; and my heart fears lest Government should reprove
me: but the greatest mercy of all is Christ, to give us pardon and life.

Totherswamp The Confession which he made on the Fast day before the great
Assembly, was as follows:
I Confess in the presence of the Lord, before I prayed, many were my sins, not
one good word did I speak, not one good thought did I think, not one good
action did I do: I did act all sins, and full was my heart of evil thoughts:
when the English did tell me of God, I cared not for it. I thought it enough if
they loved me: I had many friends that loved me, and I thought if they died, I
would pray to God: and afterward it so came to pass; then was my heart ashamed,
to pray I was ashamed, and if I prayed not, I was ashamed; a double shame was
upon me: when God by you taught us, very much ashamed was my heart; then you
taught us that Christ knows all our hearts: therefore truly he saw my
thoughts, and I had thought, if my kindred should die I would pray to God;
therefore they dying, I must now pray to God: and therefore my heart feared, for
I thought Christ knew my thoughts: then I heard you teach, The first man God
made was named Adam, and God made a Covenant with him, Do and live, thou and
thy Children; if thou do not thou must die, thou and thy Children; And we are
Children of Adam poor sinners, therefore we all have sinned, for we have broke
Gods Covenant, therefore evil is my heart therefore God is very angry with me,
we sin against him every day; but this great mercy God has given us, he has
given us his only Son, and promises, That whosoever believes in Christ shall
be saved: for Christ has dyed for us in our stead, for our sins, and he has
done for us all the words of God, for I can do no good act, only Christ can,
and only Christ has done all for us; Christ have deserved Pardon for us, and
risen again, he has ascended to God, and does ever pray for us; therefore all
Believers Souls shall go to Heaven to Christ. But when I heard that word of
Christ, Christ said Repent and Believe, and Christ sees who Repents, then I
said, dark and weak is my Soul, and I am one in darkness, I am a very sinful
man, and now I pray to Christ for life. Hearing you teach that Word that the
Scribes and Pharisees said Why do thy Disciples break the Tradition of the
Fathers? Christ answered, Why do ye make void the Commandments of God? Then my
heart feared that I do so, when I teach the Indians, because I cannot teach
them right, and thereby make the word of God vain. Again, Christ said If the
blind lead the blind they will both fall into the ditch; Therefore I feared that
I am one blind, and when I teach other Indians I shall cause them to fall into
the ditch. This is the love of God to me, that he gives me all mercy in this
world, and for them al I am thankful; but I confess I deserve Hell; I cannot
deliver my self, but I give my Soul and my Flesh to Christ and I trust my soul
with him for he is my Redeemer, and I desire to call upon him while I live.

This was his Confession which ended, Mr. Allin further demanded of him this
Question, How he found his heart, now in the matter of Repentance

His answer was; I am ashamed of all my sins, my heart is broken for them and
melts in me, I am angry with my self for my sins, and I pray to Christ to
take away my sins, and I desire that they may be pardoned.

But it was desired that further Question might be forborne, lest time would be
wanting to here them all speak.

Then Waban was called forth, whose Confession was as follows; no former
confession of his being read unto the Elders.
BEfore I heard of God, and before the English came into this Country, many
evil things my heart did work, many thoughts I had in my heart; I wished for
riches, I wished to be a witch, I wished to be a Sachem; and many such other
evils were in my heart: Then when the English came, still my heart did the same
things; when the English taught me of God (I coming to their Houses) I would go
out of their doors, and many years I knew nothing; when the English taught me I
was angry with them: But a little while ago after the great sikness, I
considered what the English do, and I had some desire to do as they do; and
after that I began to work as they work; and then I wondered how the English
come to be so strong to labor; then I thought I shall quickly die, and I feared
lest I should die before I prayed to God; then I thought, if I prayed to God in
our Language, whether could God understand my prayers in our Language;
therefore I did ask Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Mahu, If God understood prayers in our
Language? They answered me, God does understand all Languages in the World. But
I do not know how to confess, and little do I know of Christ; I fear I shall
not believe a great while, and very slowly; I do not know what grace is in my
heart, there is but little good in me; but this I know, That Christ has kept
all Gods Commandments for us, and that Christ does know all our hearts; and
now I desire to repent of all my sins: I neither have done, nor can do the
Commandments of the Lord, but I am ashamed of all I do, and I do repent of all
my sins, even of all that I do know of: I desire that I may be converted from
all my sins, and that I might believe in Christ, and I desire him; I dislike my
sins, yet I do not truly pray to God in my heart: no matter for good words, all
is the true heart; and this day I do not so much desire good words, as
thoroughly to open my heart: I confess I can do nothing, but deserve damnation;
only Christ can help me and do for me. But I have nothing to say for my self
that is good; I judge that I am a sinner, and cannot repent, but Christ has
deserved pardon for us.

This Confession being not so satisfactory as was desired, Mr. Wilson
testified, that he spoke these latter expressions with tears, which I observed
not, because I attended to writing; but I gave this testimony of him, That his
conversation was without offense to the English, so far as I knew, and among
the Indians, it was exemplar: his gift is not so much in expressing himself
this way, but in other respects useful and eminent; it being demanded in what
respect, I answered to this purpose, That his gift lay in Ruling, Judging of
Cases, wherein he is patient, constant, and prudent, insomuch that he is much
respected among them, for they have chosen him a Ruler of Fifty, and he Rules
well according to his measure. It was further said, they thought he had been a
great drawer on to Religion; I replied, so he was in his way, and did prevail
with many; and so it rested.

The next that was called, was William of Sudbury, his Indian Name is Nataous;
his former Confession read before the Elders, was as follows:
I Confess that before I prayed, I committed all manner of sins, and served
many gods: when the English came first, I going to their Houses, they spoke to
me of your God, but when I heard of God, my heart hated it; but when they said
the Devil was my god, I was angry, because I was proud: when I came to their
houses I hated to hear of God, I loved lust in my own house and not God, I
loved to pray to many gods. Five years ago, I going to English houses, and they
speaking of God, I did a little like of it, yet when I went again to my own
house, I did all manner of sins, and in my heart I did act all sins, though I
would not be seen by man. Then going to your house, I more desired to hear of
God; and my heart said, I will pray to God so long as I live: then I went to
the Minister Mr. Browns house, and told him I would pray as long as I lived;
but he said I did not say it from my heart, and I believe it. When Wahan spoke
to me that I should pray to God, I did so. But I had greatly sinned against
God, and had not believed the Word, but was proud: but then I was angry with my
self, and loathed my self, and thought God will not forgive me my sins. For
when I had been abroad in the woods I would be very angry, and would lie unto
men, and I could not find the way how to be a good man: then I believed your
teaching, That when good men die, the Angels carry their souls to God; but evil
men dying, they go to Hell, and perish for ever. I thought this a true saying,
and I promised to God, to pray to God as long as I live. I had a little grief
in my heart five years ago for my sins: but many were my prides; sometime I was
angry with my self, and pityed my self; but I thought God would not pardon such
a proud heart as mine is: I believe that Christ would have me to forsake my
anger; I believe that Christ has redeemed us, and I am glad to hear those
words of God; and I desire that I might do all the good ways of God, and that I
might truly pray unto God: I do now want Graces, and these Christ only teaches
us, and only Christ has wrought our redemption, and he procures our pardon
for all our sins; and I believe that when believers die, Gods Angels carry them
to Heaven: but I want faith to believe the Word of God, and to open my Eyes,
and to help me to cast away all sins; and Christ has deserved for me eternal
life: I have deserved nothing my self; Christ has deserved all, and gives me
faith to believe it.

Willam of Sudbury: His Indian Name is NATAOUS. The Confession which he made on
the fast day before the great Assembly was as follows.
BEfore I prayed to God, I committed all sins; and serving many gods. I much
despised praying unto God, for I believed the Devil, and he did daily teach me
to sin, and I did them: sometimes hearing of God my heart did hate it, and went
to my own house, because I did love to commit all sin there. About Six years
ago, a little I liked to hear of God, and yet I hated that which was good:
hearing that Cutshamoquin prayed, then I thought I will pray also: a year
after, I heard of praying to God, and I went to Mr. Browns house and told him I
will pray to God as long as live; he said, I doubt of it, and bid me cut off my
hair, and I did so presently; and then I desired to be like God, and Jesus
Christ, and to call on him, but I found it very hard to believe; yet I thought,
I will pray as long as I live. Hearing that Word, That Christ dyed for us, was
buried and rose again, and hearing of that Word also, Seek peace and embrace
the Word: then I began to believe that Christ died for us, for sin; and I saw
my heart very full of sin. And hearing that word, That Christ went to the Mount
Olives, and ascended, I believed and thought, Oh that God would pardon me; but
I fear he will not, because I have been so long time a sinner. Sometime I am
angry with my self, for my many Evil thoughts in my heart; and to this day I
want grace, and cannot confess, because I have been so great a sinner: and this
day I confess, a little I pray, and that I can pray but a little and weakly.
When I heard that word of God, That all from the rising to the setting Sun
shall pray I first under stood it it not, and wondered how it should be: after
I saw that when they believe and obey God, then he will teach them to do right
things, and God will teach us to do al things for God, sleeping and waking to
be with God. But still do foolishly, and not according to my prayer: I cannot
get pardon of my sins, for my sins are great in thought, word, and deed: and no
man can cast off his own sins, but that is the work of Christ only to work it
in us; a man cannot make a right prayer but when Christ assisteth him; then we
shall do all things well. I believe that Christ is God, and the Son of God
because when he dyed, he rose again, and he dyed for our sins; and I believe he
is in Heaven and ever prays for us, and sends his gospel unto us: and I am
angry with my self, because I do not believe the word of God, and gospel of
Jesus Christ.

The next which was called forth was Monequassun, who is our Schoolmaster;
whose former Confession, read before the Elders, was as follows.
I Confess my sorrow for all my sins against God, and before men: When I first
heard instruction, I believed not, but laughed at it, and scorned praying to
God; afterward, when we were taught at Cohannet (that is the place where he
lived) I still hated praying, and I did think of running away, because I cared
not for praying to God; but afterward, because I loved to dwell at that place,
I would not leave the place, and therefore I thought I will pray to God,
because I would still stay at that place, therefore I prayed not for the love
of God, but for love of the place I lived in; after that I desired a little to
learn the Catechism on the Lecture days, and I did learn the ten
Commandments, and after that, all the points in the Catechism; yet afterward
I cast them all away again, then was my heart filled with folly, and my sins
great sins; afterward by hearing, I began to fear, because of my many sins,
lest the wise men should come to know them, and punish me for them; and then
again I thought of running away because of my many sins: But after that I
thought I would pray rightly to God, and cast away my sins; then I saw my
hypocricy, because I did ask some questions, but did not do that which I knew:
afterward I considered of my question, and thought I would pray to God, and
would consider of some other Question, and I asked this, Question, How should I
get Wisdom? and the Answer to it did a little turn my heart from sin, to seek
after God; and I then considered that the Word of God was good; then I prayed
to God because of the Word of God. The next Lecture day you taught that word of
God, If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives freely to them
that ask him, and upbraideth no man, James, 1. 5. Then again a little my heart
was turned after God, the Word also said, Repent, mourn, and believe in Jesus
Christ: this also helped me on. Then you taught, That he that believes not
Christ, and repents not of sin, they are foolish and wicked; and because they
believe not, they shall perish: then I thought my self a fool, because I
believed not Christ, but sinned every day, and after I heard the Word, I
greatly broke the Word. But afterward I heard this promise of God, Who ever
repents and believes in Christ, God will forgive him all his sins, he shall
not perish; then I thought, that as yet, I do not repent, and believe in
Christ: then I prayed to God, because of this his Promise; and then I prayed to
God, for God and for Christ his sake: after that again I did a little break the
Word of Christ. And then I heard some other words of God, which showed me my
sins, and my breakings of Gods word; and sometimes I thought God and Christ
would forgive me, because of the promise to them that believe in Christ, and
repent of sin, I thought I did that which God spoke in the Promise. Then being
called to confess, to prepare to make a Church at Natick, I loved Cohannet; but
after hearing this instruction, That we should not only be Hearers, but Doers
of the Word, then my heart did fear. And afterward hearing that in Matthew,
Christ saw two brethren mending their Nets, he said, Follow me and I will make
you Fishers of men, presently they followed Christ; and when I heard this, I
feared, because I was not willing to follow Christ to Natick; they followed
Christ at his Word, but I did not, for now Christ says to us, follow Me: then
I was much troubled, and considered of this Word of God. Afterward I heard
another word, the blind men cried after Christ and said, Have mercy on us thou
Son of David, but after they came to Christ, he called them, and asked them,
What shall I do for you? they said, Lord open our eyes; then Christ had pity on
them, and opened their eyes, and they followed Christ; when I heard this, my
heart was troubled, then I prayed to God and Christ, to open mine eyes, and if
Christ open my eyes, then I shall rejoice to follow Christ: then I considered
of both these Scriptures, and I a little saw that I must follow Christ. And now
my heart desires to make confession of what I know of God, and of my self, and
of Christ: I believe that there is only one God, and that he made and rules
all the World, and that he the Lord, gives us al good things: I know that God
gives every day all good mercies, life, and health, and all; I have not one
good thing, but God it is that gives it me, I believe that God at first made
man like God, holy, wise, righteous; but the first man sinned, for God promised
him, If thou do my Commandments, thou shall live, and thy children; but if
thou sin, thou shall die, thou and thy children; this Covenant God made with
the first man. But the first man did not do the Commandments of God, he did
break Gods Word, he believed Satan; and now I am full of sin, because the first
man brought sin; daily I am full of sin in my heart: I do not daily rejoice in
Repentance, because Satan works daily in my heart, and opposes Repentance,
and all good Works; day and night my heart is full of sin. I believe that Jesus
Christ was born of the Virgin Mary; God promised her she should bear a Son, and
his Name should be JESUS, because he shall deliver his people from their sins:
And when Christ came to preach, he said, Repent, because the Kingdom of Heaven
is at hand; again Christ taught, Except ye repent and become as a little child,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore humble your selves
like one of these little children, and great shall be your Kingdom in Heaven.
Again Christ said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden with sin,
and I will give you rest: take up my Cross, and Yoke, learn of me, for I am
meek, and ye shall find rest to your souls, for my yoke is easy, and burden
light: these are the Words of Christ, and I know Christ he is good, but my
works are evil: Christ his words are good, but I am not humble; but if we be
humble and believing in Christ, he pardons all our sins. I now desire to
believe in Jesus Christ, because of the word of Christ, that I may be converted
and become as a little Child. I confess my sins before God, and before Jesus
Christ this day; now I desire all my sins may be pardoned; I now desire
repentance in my heart, and ever to believe in Christ; now I lift up my heart
to Christ, and trust him with it, because I believe Christ died for us, for all
our sins, and deserved for us eternal life in Heaven, and deserved pardon for
all our sins. And now I give my soul to Christ because he has redeemed: I do
greatly love, and like repentance in my heart, and I love to believe in Jesus
Christ, and my heart is broken by repentance: al these things I do like well of,
that they may be in my heart, but because Christ has all these to give, I ask
them of him that he may give me repentance, and faith in Christ, and therefore
I pray and beseech Christ daily for repentance and faith; and other good ways
I beg of Christ daily to give me: and I pray to Christ for all these gifts and
graces to put them in my heart: and now I greatly thank Christ for all these
good gifts which he has given me. I know not any thing, nor can do any thing
that is a good work: even my heart is dark daily in what I should do, and my
soul dies because of my sins, and therefore I give my soul to Christ, because
I know my soul is dead in sin, and daily does commit sin; in my heart I sin,
and all the members of my body are sinful. I believe Jesus Christ is ascended
to Heaven through the clouds, and he will come again from Heaven: Many saw
Christ go up to Heaven, and the Angels said, even so he will come again to judge
all the world; and therefore I believe Gods promise, That all men shall rise
again when Christ comes again, then all shall rise, and all their souls comes
again because Christ is trusted with them, and keeps their souls, therefore I
desire my sins may be pardoned; and I believe in Christ; and ever so long as I
live, I will pray to God, and do all the good ways he commands.

Monequassun, The Confession which he made on the Fast day before the great
Assembly was as follows
I Confess my sins before the Lord, and before men this day: a little while
since I did commit many sins, both in my hands and heart; lusts thefts, and
many other sins, and that every day: and after I heard of praying to God, and
that others prayed to God, my heart did not like it, but hated it, yea and
mocked at it; and after they prayed at Cohannet I still hated it, and when I
heard the Word I did not like of it, but thought of running away, because I
loved sin: but I loved the place of my dwelling, and therefore I thought I will
rather pray to God, and began to do it; a little I desired to learn the ten
Commandments of God, and other points of Catechism; and then a little I
repented, but I was quickly weary of repentance, and fell again to sin, and
full of evil thoughts was my heart: and then I played the Hypocrite, and my
heart was full of sin: I learned some things, but did not do what God
commanded, but I sinned and played the Hypocrite; some things I did before man,
but not before God. But afterward I feared because of my sins, and feared
punishment for my sins, therefore I thought again I would run away; yet again I
loving the place, would not run away, but would pray to God: and I asked a
Question at the Lecture* which was this, How I should get wisdom? the Answer
made me a little to understand: but afterward I heard the word If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally to all that ask, and
upbraideth none. But then I did fear Gods anger, because of all my sins,
because they were great. Afterward hearing that Word, That Christ is named
Jesus, because he redeemeth us from all our sins: I thought Christ would not
save me, because I repent not, for he saves only penitent Believers; but I am
not such an one, but still a daily sinner. Afterward hearing that Word, Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled:
then I thought I am a poor sinner, and poor is my heart: then I prayed to God
to teach me to do that which he requires, and to pray aright. Afterward
hearing that word, Who ever looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has already
committed Adultry with her in his heart; then I thought I had done all manner
of sins in the sight of God, because he sees lust in the heart, and knows
all the evil thoughts of my heart; and then I did pray unto God, Oh! give me
Repentance and Pardon. Afterward when I did teach among the Indians, I was
much humbled because I could not read right, and that I sinned in it; for I
saw that when I thought to do a good work, I sinned in doing it, for I knew not
what was right, nor how to do it. In the night I was considering of my sins,
and could not find what to do: three nights I considered what to do, and at
last God showed me mercy, and showed me what I should do. And then I desired to
learn to read Gods Word, and hearing that if we ask wisdom of God, he will give
it, then I did much pray to God, that he would teach me to read. After a years
time, I thought I did not rightly seek, and I thought I sinned, because I did
not rightly desire to read Gods Word, and I thought my praying was sinful, and
I feared, how should I, my wife, and child be clothed, if I spend my time in
learning to read; but then God was merciful to me, and showed me that Word,
Say not, what shall I eat, or drink, or wherewith shall I be clothed, wicked
men seek after these; but first seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and these things
shall be added to you; then I pr^yed God to teach me this word, and that I
might do it: and then I desired to read Gods word, what ever I wanted.
Afterward hearing that we must make a Town, and gather a Church at Natick, my
heart disliked that place; but hearing that word, That Christ met two Fishers,
and said, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men, and they presently
left all and followed him; hearing this, I was much troubled, because I had not
believed Christ, for I would not follow him to make a Church, nor had I done
what he commanded me, and then I was troubled for all my sins. Again hearing
that word, That the blind man called after Christ, saying, thou Son of David
have mercy on me; Christ asked him what he would have him do, he said, Lord
open my eyes; and presently Christ gave him sight, and he followed Christ: then
again my heart was troubled, for I thought I still believe not, because I do
not follow Christ, nor has he yet opened mine eyes: then I prayed to Christ to
open mine eyes, that I might see what to do, because I am blind and cannot see
how to follow Christ, and do what he commands, and I prayed to Christ, Teach
me Lord what to do, and to do what thou say; and I prayed that I might
follow Christ: and then I thought I will follow Christ to make a Church. All
this trouble I had to be brought to be willing to make a Church: and quickly
after, God laid upon me more trouble, by sickness and death; and then I much
prayed to God for life, for we were all sick, and then God would not hear me,
to give us life; but first one of my Children died, and after that my Wife;
then I was in great sorrow, because I thought God would no hear me, and I
thought it was because I would not follow him, therefore he hears not me: then
I found this sin in my heart, That I was angry at the punishment of God: but
afterward I considered, I was a poor sinner, I have nothing, nor Child, nor
Wife, I deserve that God should take away all mercies from me; and then I
repented of my sins, and did much pray, and I remembered the promise to follow
Christ, and my heart said, I had in this sinned, that followed not Christ, and
therefore I cried for pardon of this sin: and then hearing of this Word, Who
ever believes in Christ, his sins are pardoned, he believing that Christ died
for us; and I believed. Again hearing that Word, If ye be not converted, and
become as a little Child, you cannot go to Heaven; then my heart thought, I do
not this, but I deserve Hell fire for ever; and then I prayed Christ, Oh! turn
me from my sin, and teach me to hear thy Word; and I prayed to my Father in
Heaven: and after this, I believed in Christ for pardon. Afterward I heard that
Word, That it is a shame for a man to wear long hair, and that there was no
such custom in the Churches: at first I thought I loved not long hair, but I
did, and found it very hard to cut it off; and then I prayed God to pardon that
sin also: Afterward I thought my heart cared not for the Word of God: but then
I thought I would give my self up unto the Lord, to do all his Word. Afterward
I heard that word, If thy right foot offend thee, cut it off, or thy right
hand, or thy right eye; its better to go to Heaven with one foot, or hand, or
eye, than having both to go to Hell; then I thought my hair had been a
stumbling to me, therefore I cut it off, and grieved for this fin, and prayed
for pardon. After hearing that word, Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden with your sins, and I will give rest to your souls; then my heart
thought that I do daily hate my sins, Oh! that I could go to Christ! and Christ
looks I should come unto him, therefore I will go unto him, and therefore then
I prayed, Oh! Christ help me to come unto thee: and I prayed because of all my
sins that they may be pardoned. For the first man was made like God in
holiness, and righteousness, and God gave him his Covenant; but Adam sinned,
believing the Devil, therefore God was angry, and therefore all we Children of
Adam are like the Devil, and daily sin, and break every Law of God, full of
evil thoughts, words, and works, and only Christ can deliver us from our sins,
and he that believes in Christ is pardoned; but my heart of my self cannot
believe: Satan has power in me, but I cry to God, Oh! give me faith, and
pardon my sin, because Christ alone can deliver me from Hell; therefore I pray,
Oh! Jesus Christ deliver me. Christ has provided the new Covenant to save
Believers in Christ, therefore I desire to give my soul to Christ, for pardon
of all my sins: the first Covenant is broke by sin, and we deserve Hell; but
Christ keeps for us the new Covenant, and therefore I betrust my soul with
Christ. Again, I desire to believe in Christ, because Christ will come to
judgment, and all shall rise again, and all Believers in this life shall then
be saved; therefore I desire to believe Christ, and mortify sin as long as I
live; and I pray Christ to help me to believe: and I thank God for all his
mercies every day: and now I confess before God that I loath my self for my
sins and beg pardon.

Thus far he went in his Confession; but they being slow of speech, time was
far spent and a great assembly of English understanding nothing he said, only
waiting for my interpretation, many of them went forth, others whispered, and a
great confusion was in the House and abroad: and I perceived that the graver
sort thought the time long, therefore knowing he had spoken enough unto
satisfaction (at least as I judged) I here took him off. Then one of the Elders
asked, if I took him off, or whether had he finished? I answered, That I took
him off. So after my reading what he had said, we called another.

The next who was called forth was Ponampam, who had formerly twice made
confession, and both read before the Elders. His first Confession was as
follows.
When God first had mercy on us, when they first prayed at Noonanetam, I heard
of it, and the first word that I heard was, That all from the rising of the sun
to the going down thereof, shall pray unto God; and I thought, Oh! let it be
so. After I considered what the word may be, and understood by it, That God was
merciful; afterward when you always came to us, I only heard the word, I did
not understand it, nor meditate on it, yet I found that al my doings were sins
against God; then I prayed unto God. Afterward I heard, That God would pardon
all that believe in Christ! and quickly after I saw my sins to be very many; I
saw that in every thing I did, I sinned: and when I saw these my sins against
God, I was weary of my self, and angry with my self in my heart; but the free
mercy of God, caused me to hear his word, and then I feared because every day
sin was in my heart, and I thought in vain I looked to Christ: Then hearing
this word of Christ, that Christ taught through every town, and village, Repent
and believe. If any one repent, and mourn, and believe, I will pardon him; then
my heart thought I will pray to God as long as I live: but sometimes my heart
was ashamed, and sometimes my heart was strong, and God sees my heart: I now
desire to repent, and believe in Christ, and that Christ will pardon me, and
show mercy to us all.

Ponampam, His Second Confession was as follows:
WHen I prayed not unto God I ever sinned every day: but when Noonanetam
Indians first prayed, I heard of it, and three nights I considered whether I
should pray or no, but I found not how to pray unto God, but how not to pray:
but then I heard Gods free mercy in his word, call all to pray, from the rising
of the Sun to the going down thereof; yet presently I lost that word, and
sinned again, and committed many sins. Then Gods free mercy showed me in the
Catechism, That God made all the World, yet my heart did not believe, because I
knew I sprung from my Father and Mother: I did always act many sins, because I
was born in sin, and in vain I heard Gods word. Then I heard Gods Word, That
Christ was made man, yet I did but hear it, though I thought it might be true:
I thought I would cast off all sin, but then I found that I loved them very
much. I heard Gods promise to Abraham, To increase his Children as the Stars
for number, but I believed not, because he had but one Son: and thus I cast off
the word, and committed sins. I heard also from the word, That all men are not
alike to God, some are first to God, [or preferred before other;] but I did not
believe it because all men die alike; therefore they are not the Sons of God,
and God is not their Father: So still I believed not the Word, but broke Gods
Word daily, and in vain I heard Gods Word. Afterward I heard that Word of God
to Moses, I Will be with thy mouth, for who makes the seeing Eye, or hearing
Ear, is it not I? says the Lord: then I understood a little of God, and of his
Word; but still I acted much sin. Afterward I heard that Word of Free Grace,
Repent, and believe the Gospel, and who ever believe shall be saved; then my
heart believed, then I saw I had prayed but before man, and so was my hearing,
or any other duty; and I saw other of my sins against God; and then I saw that
my heart did not beleev as it should, and I desired to be open in my doings; I
saw I brake every command of God: yet presently I lost this, and the Word of
Christ was of little worth unto me; and I saw I loved sin very much. Then again
I heard that word, That all shall pray from the rising to the sitting Sun; then
I thought I will pray to God, and yet only my tongue prayed. Then again I heard
the Catechism, That God made Adam and Eve, and all the world, and a little I
believed that word. Afterward I heard another word, That they are Bastards, not
Sons, whom God afflicts not: I did a little think this to be a truth, and then
I prayed more unto God, and yet I saw I feared man more than God: but
notwithstanding, I have prayed unto God from that day unto this day; yet I see
I sin every day. When I heard that Word that God spoke to Moses in the Mount by
a Trumpet, and said, Thou shall not have any other God, thou shall not lust,
nor lie, nor kill, etc. I saw all these I had broken; I heard the Word, but
sinned in what I heard: I heard that my heart must break and melt for sin, and
believe in Christ, and that we should try our hearts if it be so; yet I could
try but little, nor find but little, but still I sinned much. I heard that
Word, That they which cast off God, God will cast off them; and I feared lest
God should cast me away, because of my sins: I was ashamed of my sins, and my
heart melted, and I thought I will give my self to God, and to Christ, and do
what he will for ever; and because of this promise of pardon to all that repent
and believe, my heart desires to pray to God as long as I live.

Ponampam; The Confession he made on the Fast day, before the great Assembly
was as follows:
BEfore I prayed unto God, I committed all manner of sins; and when I heard the
Catechism, That God made me, I did not believe it, because I knew I sprang from
my Father and Mother, and therefore I despised the Word, and therefore again I
did act all sins, and I did love them. Then God was merciful to me, to let me
hear that Word, That al shall pray from the rising to the s^^ting Sun; and then
I considered whether I should pray, but I found not in my heart that all should
pray: but then I considered of praying, and what would become of me if I did
not pray, and what would become of me, if I did pray; but I thought if I did
pray, the Sacbems would be angry, because They did not say, pray to God, and
therefore I did not yet pray; but considering of that word, that all shall
pray, I was troubled, and I found in my heart that I would pray unto God; and
yet I feared that others would laugh at me, and therefore I did not yet pray.
Afterward God was yet merciful to me, and I heard that God made the World, and
the first man, and I thought it was true, and therefore I would pray to God,
because he has made all; and yet when I did pray, I thought I prayed not
aright, because I prayed for the sake of man, and I thought this to be a great
sin. But then I wondered at Gods free mercy to me, for I saw God made me, and
gives me all mercies: and then was I troubled, and saw that many were my sins,
and that I do not yet believe; then I prayed, yet my heart sinned, for I prayed
only with my mouth: and then I repented of my sins, and then a little I
considered and remembered Gods love unto us: but I was a sinner, and many were
my sins, and a little I repented of them; and yet again I sinned, and quickly
was my heart full of sin: then again was my heart angry with my self, and often
I lost all this again, and fell into sin. Then I heard that word, That God sent
Moses to Egypt, and promised I will be with thee; that promise I considered,
but I thought that in vain I did seek, and I was ashamed that I did so: and I
prayed, Oh God teach me truly to pray, not only before man, but before God, and
pardon al these my sins. Again I heard that word, that Christ taught through
every Town and Village, Repent and believe, and be saved, and a little I
believed this word, and I loved it, and then I saw all my sins, and prayed for
pardon. Again I heard that word, He that casts off God, him will God cast
off; and I found in my heart, that I had done this, and I feared because of
this my sin, lest God should cast me off, and that I should for ever perish in
Hell, because God has cast me off, I having cast of God: then I was troubled
about Hell, and what shall I do if I be damned! Then I heard that word, If ye
repent and believe, God pardons all sins; then I thought, Oh that I had this, I
desired to repent and believe, and I begged of God, Oh give me Repentance and
Faith, freely do it for me; and I saw God was merciful to do it, but I did not
attend the Lord, only sometimes; and I now confess I am ashamed of my sins, my
heart is broken, and melts in me; I am angry at my self; I desire pardon in
Christ; I betrust my soul with Christ, that he may do it for me.

By such time as this man had finished, the time was far spent, and he was the
fifth in number, their speeches being slow, and they were the more slow at my
request, that I might write what they said; and often I was forced to inquire of
my interpreter (who sat by me) because I did not perfectly understand some
sentences, especially of some of them: these things did make the work long-som,
considering the enlargement of spirit God gave some of them; and should we have
proceeded further, it would have been sunset before the Confessions in
likelihood would have been finished, besides all the rest of the work that was
to be done to finish so solemn a work; and the place being remote in the woods,
the nights long and cold and people not fitted to lie abroad, and no competant
lodgings in the place for such persons, and the work of such moment as wonld
not admit an hudling up in have. And besides all this, though I had fully used
all fit means, to have all the Interpreters present that I could, that so the
intetpretation might not depend upon my single testemony, yet so it was that
they all failed, and I was alone (as I have been wont to be in this work) which
providence of God was not to be neglected in so solemn a business. Wherefore the
Magistrates, Elders, and Grave Men present, advised together what to do, and
the Conclusion was, Not to proceed any further at present, yet so to carry the
matter, as that the Indians might in no wise be discouraged, but encouraged; to
which end, one of the Elders was requested to speak unto the English, the two
above said Reasons, viz. The want of Interpreters, And want of Time, to finish
at this time so solemn a Work; but to refer it to a more fitting time. And I
was desired to declare it to the Indians, which I did to this purpose, That the
Magistrates, Elders, and other Christian People present, did much rejoice to
hear their Confessions, and advised them to go on in that good way; but as for
the gathering a Church among them this day, it could not be; partly, Because
neither Mr. Mayhew, nor Mr. Leveridg. nor any Interpreter was here (for whom
they knew I had sent, some of themselves being the Messengers to carry Letters
time enough) and it was Gods Ordinance, That when any were to judge a Case,
though they could believe one Witness, yet they could not judge under two or
three. Also I told them, That themselves might easily see there was not time
enough to finish so solemn a work this day; therefore they advised, and God
called to refer it to a fitter season; in which advice they rested: And so was
the Work of that day, with prayers unto God, finished; the accomplishment being
referred to a fitter season.

As for my self, the Lord put it into the hearts of the Elders, to speak unto
me words of Comfort, and acceptance of my poor Labor, expressing their loving
fear, lest I should be discouraged by this disappointment: I shall therefore
nakedly declare, and open my very heart in this Matter. The Lord he knows,
that with much fear, and care I went about this work, even unto the sensible
wasting, and weakening of my natural strength, knowing that the investing these
young Babee in Christ, with the highest, and all the external privileges of
the Church, the Spouse of Jesus Christ on Earth, would have drawn upon me much
more labor and care, lest they should in any wise scandalize the same; unto
which I have now more time assigned me by the Lord to prepare them, yea, and a
greater advantage than I had before, because this dispensation of the Lord,
does give me occasion to instruct them of their need to be filled with deeper
apprehensions of the weight and solemnity of that great Work, though it is most
true, that they also came on unto it with many fears, and questions, what they
should do when they should be a Church: When therefore I saw the Lord by the
Counsel of his Servants (which is an holy reverend Ordinance of Christ) and by
his Providence denying me the help of all Interpreters, having many witnesses
how much care and pains I took every way I knew, to be supplied therein; and
that the work it self was extended by the Lords gracious enlarging them in
their Confessions, so that the day was not sufficient to accomplish it; I say,
when I saw the Lord speaking that delatory word, I cannot express what a load
it took off my heart, and I did gladly follow the Lord therein, yea, and I
bless the Lord for that day, that it was carried so far as it was, for the
cause of Christ has many ways gained by it, many hundreds of the precious
Saints, being much comforted and confirmed in their hopes of this work of
Christ among them, and their faith and prayers much quickened by what they heard
and saw. And because all witnesses failed me, let me say but this, I began, and
have followed this work for the Lord according to the poor measure of grace
received, and not for base ends. I have been true and faithful unto their
souls, and in writing and reading their Confessions, I have not knowingly, or
willingly made them better, than the Lord helped themselves to make them, but
am verily persuaded on good grounds, that I have rather rendered them weaker
(for the most part) than they delivered them; partly by missing some words of
weight in some Sentences, partly by my short and curt touches of what they more
fully spoke, and partly by reason of the different Idioms of their Language and
ours.

Now follow those Preparitory Confessions, which were read before the Elders,
most of them.
The first that made a public Confession, and was took in Writing, was Peter,
a Ruler of Ten among them, a Godly man, who quickly after he had made this
Confession, fell sick, and died, and now injoyeth the fruit of his Faith, the
end of his Hope, the salvaion of his Soul, among the Blessed; where I am
persuaded he shall be found in the great day. His Confession was as follows.
When I first prayed to God, I did not fear God, but I feared perdition,
because the English had told me, that all should be damned, that call not upon
God. But now I know that God made all the world, and I fear him; now I believe
that which you teach is true; Now I believe that God calls us to Natik, that
here we may be ruled by God, and gather a Church; now I believe that it is Gods
Command, that we should labor Six days, and keep the Sabbath on the Seventh
day: now my heart is greatly abased for all my sins; for we see though we pray
to God we are ready to offend each other, and be angry with each other, and
that we love not each other as we should do; and for this I grieve and my heart
cries: now I remember that God says thou shall not lust, but before I prayed
to God I was full of lusts. God says, We must have but one Wife, and at first
did make but one man and one woman; but I followed many women. God says,
Remember to keep the Sabbath day holy; but I did hunt, or shoot, or any thing
on the Sabbath day: many other sins I committed; but now I see them, and will
cast them away because they are vile, and God forbids them: when I prayed
first my sins were not pardoned, for my praying is worth nothing: now I am
humbled, and mourn for my sins and yet cannot deliver my self nor get pardon,
therefore I trust Christ with my soul.

The next Confession was made by John Speene, as follows. His first
confession was this,
WHen I first prayed to God, I did not pray for my soul but only I did as my
friends did, because I loved them; and though I prayed to God, yet I did not
fear sin, nor was I troubled at it. I heard that when good men die, their souls
go to God, and are there happy, but I cannot say that I believed it. Afterward
my heart run away into the country, after our old ways, and I did almost cast
off praying to God. A little while after that, I saw that I had greatly sinned,
and then I saw all my sins, before I prayed to God, and since I prayed to God,
and I saw that God was greatly angry for them, and that I cannot get pardon for
them; but yet my heart says I will pray to God as long as I live: I thought
God would not pardon me, and yet I would cast away my sins. I did greatly love
hunting, and hated labor: but now I believe that word of God, which says, Six
days thou shall labor. and God does make my body strong to labor.

John Speene, This Confession being short in some main points, he afterward
made Confession as follows.
WHen I first prayed I prayed not for my soul, but for the sake of men, I loved
men, and for their sakes I prayed to God. Before I prayed many were my sins,
and my heart was heaped full, and ran over in all manner of lusts and sins.
After I heard of praying to God, I let it fall and regarded it not; after I
came to hear the word, I sometimes feared, but soon lost it again. Then my
heart ran away after our former courses, and then what ever I heard I lost,
because my heart was run away; and many were my sins, and therefore I could not
get pardon, because my heart run away, and many were my sins, and I did indeed
go into the Country. But afterward, I hearing the Catechism, I desired to
learn it, and then I believed that when Believers die, their souls go to God,
and are ever happy; when Sinners die, their souls go to Hell and are ever
tormented; and that when Christ judges the world, our bodies rise again, and
then we shall receive the judgment of Christ; the good shall stand at his right
hand, the bad at his left: this I believed was true, and then I saw all my
great follies and evils: and now my heart desired to lay by hunting, and to
work every day; and this is Gods Command, and therefore a good way; God said,
Thou shall work six days, and if thou work, thou shall eat; therefore I believe
it, and my heart promises that I will this do as long as I live. Now I see I
did great folly, for now I hear that God says Work; and now I fear because God
has afflicted me, in taking away my brother a Ruler: now I am troubled, I fear
I sinned in not believing our Ruler, because now God has taken him away; he
taught me good words, but I believed them not, and now I repent because Christ
calls me to it: great is the punishment of God in taking away our Ruler; and
now I pray, and say to Christ, Oh Jesus Christ Christ I have sinned: I believe
that if I repent and be humbled, and pray not only outwardly but inwardly, and
believe in Christ, then God will pardon all my sin; but I cannot get pardon of
sin, I cannot deserve pardon, but only Christ has merited pardon for us: I
cannot deliver my self from all my sins, but Christ redeemeth, and delivers
from all sin: I deserve not one mercy of God, but Christ has merited all
mercies for us.

The next are the Confessions of Robin Speene, who three several times came
forth, and confessed as follows. His first Confession:
I Was ashamed because you taught to pray to God, and I did not take it up; I
see God is angry with me for all my sins, and he has afflicted me by the death
of three of my children, and I fear God is still angry, because great are my
sins, and I fear lest my children be not gone to Heaven, because I am a great
sinner, yet one of my children prayed to God before it died, and therefore my
heart rejoices in that. I remember my Panwaning [for he was a Panwan] my lust,
my gaming, and all my sins; I know them by the Commandments of God, and God
hears and sees them all; I cannot deliver my self from sin, therefore I do
need Christ, because of all my sins, I desire pardon, and I believe that God
calls all to come to Christ, and that he delivers us from sin.

Robin Speen, His Second Confession.
I Have found out one word more: great are my sins, and I do not know how to
repent, nor do I know the evil of my sins; only this one word, now I confess I
want Christ, this day I want him; I do not truly believe nor repent: I see my
sin, and I need Christ, but I desire now to be redeemed: and I now ask you this
Question, What is Redemption? I answered him, by showing him our estate by
Nature, and desert, the price which Christ paid for us, and how it is to be
applied to every particular person; which done, he proceeded in his Confession
thus: I yet cannot tell whether God has pardoned my sins, I forget the Word of
God; but this I desire, that my sins may de pardoned, but my heart is foolish,
and a great part of the Word stays not in my heart strongly. I desire to cast
all my sins out of my heart: but I remember my sins, that I may get them
pardoned, I think God does not yet hear my prayers in this, because I cannot
keep the Word of God, only I desire to hear the Word, and that God would hear
me.

Robin Speen, His Third Confession.
ONe word more I call to mind, Great is my sin! this says my heart, I have
found this sin, when I first heard you teach, that all the world from the
rising to the sitting Sun should pray to God, I then wondered a^ it, and
thought, I being a great sinner, how shall I pray to God; and when I saw many
come to the Meeting, I wondered at it: But now I do not wonder at that work of
God, and therefore I think that I do now greatly sin: and now I desire again to
wonder at Gods Works, and I desire to rejoice in Gods good ways. Now I am much
ashamed, and fear because I have deserved eternal wrath by my sins: my heart is
evil, my heart does contrary to God: and this I desire, that I may be redeemed,
for I cannot help my self, but only Jesus Christ has done all this for me, and
I deserve no good, but I believe Christ has deserved all for us; and I give my
self unto Christ, that he may save me, because he knows eternal life, and can
give it; I cannot give it to my self, therefore I need Jesus Christ, my heart
is full of evil thoughts; and Christ only can keep my soul from them, because
he has paid for my deliverance from them.

The next are the Confessions of Nishohkou; who twice made preparitory
Confessions; the first of which only, was read before the Elders.
GOD in Heaven is merciful, and I am sinful: when I first heard the Word of
God, I neither saw nor understood; but after, when you taught these words, Be
wise, Oh all ye people, and believe in Jesus Christ, then I prayed unto God;
yet afterward I sinned, and almost forsook praying to God. Afterward I
understood, That God who made all the World was merciful to sinners: and truly
I saw my heart very sinful, because I promised God to pray as long as I live,
but my heart has not so done. Again I promised God I will follow Christ in all
things, and now I find my heart backward, and not so forward to make a Church.
God promises, If foolish ones pray to God for Wisdom he will give it: this
Promise I believe, but I find my heart full of temptations; but now I promise
God, as in the Psalm, Psalm, 101. 2.
All my works shall be done in wisdom, for I confess al my works and words, have
been foolish. God is wise and good, but I am foolish. God who has made the
World, sent his own Son Jesus: and Jesus Christ has died for us, and deserved
for us, pardon and life, this is true; and he has done for me all Gods
Commandments, for I can do nothing, because I am very sinful. God in Heaven is
very merciful, and therefore has called me to pray unto God. God has promised
to pardon al their sins, who pray unto God, and believe in the Promise of
Christ, and Christ can give me to believe in him.

When he had made this Confession, he was much abashed, for he is a bashful
man; many things he spoke that I missed, for want of through understanding some
words and sentences: therefore before the Fast day he made another Confession,
which was not read before the Elders; which was as follows.

Nishohkou
I am dead in sin, Oh! that my sins might die, for they cannot give life,
because they be dead: before I prayed to God, I did commit all filthynesse, I
prayed to many gods, I was proud, full of lusts, adulteries, and all others
sins, and therefore this is my first Confession, that God is merciful, and I
am a sinner, for God have given unto me instruction and causes me to pray unto
God, but I only pray words; when I prayed, I sometimes wondered, and thought
true it is that God made the world, and me: and then I thought I knew God,
because I saw these his works, and then I was glad sometimes, and gave thanks;
yet presently again I did not rejoice in it. Again sometimes I thought, now I do
well because I pray, and work not on the Sabbath days, but come to the
Meetings, and hear the Word of God: But afterward again, I thought I do not
well, because true it is, That yet I do not truly pray; for now I see I sin when
I pray, because there is nothing but sin in my mouth, or hand, or heart, and
all sins are there, for of these my sins my heart is full, because my heart
does sometimes lust, and steal, and the like. Again, I was not only proud
before I prayed, but now I am proud. Again, sometimes my heart is humbled, and
then I pray, Oh God have mercy on me, and pardon these my sins; yet sometimes I
know not whether God did either hear my prayer, or pardon my sins. Again,
afterward I thought I had greatly sinned, because I heard of the good way of
praying unto God, but I do wickedly because I pray not truly, yea, sometimes I
have much ado to pray with my mouth, and therefore I sin. I heard of that good
way, to keep the Sabbath, and not to work on that day, and I did so: but yet
again I sinned in it, because I did not reverence the Word of God; yea, and
sometimes I thought that working on the Sabbath was no great matter. Again, I
heard it was a good way to come to the Meetings, and hear the word of God, and
I desired to do it; but in this also I sinned, because I did not truly hear:
yea, sometimes I thought it no great matter if I heard not, and cared not to
come to hear, and still I so sinned. Then I thought God was angry, because I
have greatly sinned; desiring to do well, and yet again to sin. When I desired
to do well, then I sinned, and in all things I sinned. But afterward I was
angry with my self, and thought I will not sin again; and what God says, is
good, but I am sinful because I have done all these evils. Again, sometimes my
heart is humbled, and then I repent, and say, Oh God and Jesus Christ, have
mercy on me, and pardon my sins. Now I desire truly to pray; now I desire to
reverence the Word every Sabbath day: now I desire to hear the Word of God
truly; now I desire to bend my heart to pray, and it may be God will hear me:
but quickly after a temptation comes to my heart, and I did not desire it.
Again, sometimes I did think, true it is I can do nothing of my self, but Jesus
Christ must have mercy on me, because Christ has done for me all Gods
Commandments and good Works, therefore my heart says, Oh Jesus give me desires
after thee: sometimes I think it is true, I have greatly sinned against God,
but great are his mercies: sometimes I hear the Word on the Sabbath day, and he
gives it me, [that is, makes it my own] sometimes I say the great and mighty
God is in Heaven, but these are but words, because I do not fear this great and
mighty God; and I sometimes regard not Gods Word, and make it of none effect,
because I do not that which is good, but commit sin: sometimes I say I know
Christ, because I know he died for us, and has redeemed us, and procured
pardon for us: yet again I say I sin, because I believe not Christ, for that
only is right to believe in Christ, and do what he says; but I think I do this
in vain, because I yet do not truly believe in Jesus Christ, nor do what he
commands, and therefore my heart plays the hypocrite; and now I know what is
hypocrisy, namely, when I know what I should do, and yet do it not. Sometimes
I think I am like unto Satan, because I do al these sins, and sin in all things
I do; if I pray I sin, If I keep Sabbath I sin, if I hear Gods Word I sin,
therefore I am like the Devil. Now I know I deserve to go to Hell, because all
these sins I have committed: then my heart is troubled, and I say, Oh God and
Christ pardon all my sin, for I cannot pardon my sins my self; for the first
man brought sin into the world, and therefore I am sinful, therefore I pray thee
O Lord pardon all the sins which I have done. Again, sometimes my heart is
humbled, and I desire to fear God, because he is a great God, and I desire to
do what he says, and now I desire to do the right way, and now I desire to
believe Jesus Christ; and sometimes I think it may be God will hear me, it may
be he will pardon me, yet again I think I cannot be ashamed of sin; but now I
am ashamed of all my sins, and my heart is broken, and all these my sins I cast
off, and take heed of: yet then again I sometimes say to God, I cannot my self
be humbled, or break my heart, or cast off sin, but I pray thee O Jesus help me
to do it. Again, sometimes I confess this is true, I cannot redeem my self, nor
deliver my self, because of all these my many sins; truly, full is my heart of
sin in every thing, all my thoughts, my words, my looks, my works are full of
sin; true (...) therefore I cannot deliver my self from sin; Oh redeem thou my
soul from Hell and torment, for I like not to do it with my own hand, therefore I
desire Jesus Christ, that I may delight in him; take thou me and my soul,
because thou have done Gods word, and all good works for me, and have procured
pardon for all my sins, and have prepared pardon in Heaven, therefore I desire,
Oh I desire pardon: but I sometimes think Christ does not delight in me because
I do much play the hypocrite, but if I truly believe then he will pardon, but
true faith I cannot work; Oh Jesus Christ help me, and give it me.

Another who made Confession, is named Magus; which is as follows:
HEretofore I believed not, that God made the world, but I thought the world
was of it self, and all people grew up in the world of themselves. When any bid
me pray to God, I said I cannot, and none of our Rulers believe or pray to God;
yet I went about to seek how to pray to God. I told the wise men, I seek how to
pray to God, and all of them could not find how to pray to God. Afterward I had
a desire to pray God, lest I should lose my soul, but my heart run away, and I
could not find how to pray to God, and therefore I thought of going away; yet I
also thought if I do go away, I shall lose my ground. But after this I heard of
Gods anger against me, and I believed it; for God made the first man good, and
told him if he did well he should live, and this day I believe all men should
do so: and then I thought I will pray as long as I live, and I will labor,
because Gods promise is, If we labor we shall eat; and I see that that is a
true word; for they that do labor do eat [that is, have wherewith to be fed] I
see that sin always has continued, from the beginning of the world. I believe
that word which God told Eve, That in sorrow she should bring forth Children,
and I see it daily to be true. I believe that word of God, that sin brings
misery, and all shall die, because by sin, we break all the Commands of God: I
have been full of lusts, and thefts, etc. all my life, and all the time I have
lived. I have done contrary to the Command of God. And I am now grieved, now I
hear of all my sins: I believe Christ does convert me to God, and he calls
Children, and old men, and all men to turn unto God, and from their sins; he
calls to sorrow and repentance, and ever to believe in Christ; and who ever
does this, shall be ever blessed in Heaven; but if he do it not, he perishes:
if he turn not from sin, dying, he shall go to Hell for ever. I think also,
that so long as I live, God does give me life. I believe that we ought to
gather into a Church, to serve God as long as we live. But I do not know
whether yet God has pardoned my sins, or not; but I know Christ, and I know he
has already dyed for me, because I cannot redeem my self.

Another who made Confession, was named Poquanum; which was as follows. His
first Confession.
A Great while ago the English would tell me of God but I hated it, and would
go out of doors, when they so spoke unto me, and I murmured at it. When the
Indians first prayed to God, I did not think there was a God, or that the Bible
was Gods Book, but that wise men made it: When some prayed to God, I went with
them, but I did not know God. Afterward my mind was changed thus far, That I
desired to be wise, as others were, but yet I knew nothing of God; yea, after I
prayed to God. I still did think there was no God. Afterward I found this in my
heart, That we pray to God for our souls, then I thought all my praying was
nothing, because I was so foolish that I never thought of dying: but after, I
learned, That all must die, and good men's souls go to Heaven; and then I
thought of dying, and of my soul: but then I thought we prayed for nothing but
that our souls might go to Heaven; I knew nothing of Christ. But after, when
the Children were Catechized, and taught the ten Commandments, I hearkened, and
by them I came to know that there was a God, and that there was sin against
God; and hereby God made me to see all my sins, both before I prayed to God,
and since; and I saw Gods anger against me for my sins, before, and since I
prayed, because sometimes I came not to the Meeting; brake my word, regarded
not my children, and I see sin in me, and therefore I do greatly fear Gods anger.

Poquanum; His Second Confession was as follows:
BEfore I prayed unto God, I greatly sinned, I prayed to many gods, and used
Panwaning, Adultery, Lust, Lying, and al other sins, and many were my sins,
evil thoughts, evil words, and nothing else but evil, hatred, and pride, and
all sins against God, coveting other men's goods; when I stole, I added lying to
it when I had done; I was very proud, I much hatred many men, and loved them
not because I was angry with them; and thus I did every day: I would slander my
neighbors, great was my pride, I was daily angry with my neighbors, my heart
was always full of such ways. When the English said, Pray to God, I cared not
for God, because I loved sin, nor did I desire that God should forgive my sin.
Afterward I heard the word, That if we truly pray, mourn for sin, cast off sin;
desire to hear the word, and believe in Christ, God will then pardon, and when
he dies Christ will lead him to Heaven: I much rejoiced to hear of this
pardon, but I must truly believe in Christ, else I shall not have pardon; and
first I thought God will not pardon me, because I still sinned. But afterward I
heard, That though we should pray as long as we live, and never sin more, yet
that was of no value; but we must believe in Christ, else there is no pardon;
and this I rejoiced at.

Another who made Confession, is named Nookau, which is as follows. His first
Confession.
FIve years ago, before I prayed I was sick, I thought I should die; at which I
was much troubled, and knew not what to do; then I thought, if there be a God
above, and he give life again, then I shall believe there is a God above, and
God did give me life: and after that I took up praying to God. Now I believe
God, one God that made all the World, and governs it, yet this I only said
with my mouth, I did not truly believe it in my heart. Then I understood, That
God made the first man good, and like God, but he sinned, and we have lost Gods
Image, and are like the Devil, and deserve Hell and Damnation: this I now know,
and see that I am foolish, and sometime think not of God in an whole day,
sometime I do think of God every day; sometime my heart greatly sins, then
sometime I presently fear, but again sometimes I am slow to fear; I am very
foolish because I do not understand the Word, but break the Word of God. I
believe the Catechism we learn to be according to the Word of God; but the
writings of the Bible are the very Words of God, and the Spirit of God is the
Word, and that God gives all things that are good: I now see my sins before I
prayed unto God, and since, and I believe that God sees them all: and my heart
fears, because I do not yet forsake my sins, and I think God will not forgive
me: because my heart is wicked; I know not when Christ forgiveth my sins,
others may know, but I desire that my sins may be pardoned for Christ his sake.

Nookau, His Second Confession.
BEfore I prayed to God, I greatly sinned every day, I was proud, and lived in
adultery, lying, etc. and my heart always full of evil thoughts, and when the
English would instruct me, I then thought my ways evil, but the business of
praying to God, good; then I did think, if I could first understand, then I
would pray to God, and I was glad to hear of any that did pray to God. When I
heard that word at Cohannet, Who ever lacks wisdom, let him ask it of God;
let fools pray to God, and he will give them wisdom: I thought I was a fool,
and I believed that Word of God. I heard that word of the dry bones, God bid
them hear, and promised to put flesh, and sinews, and skin upon them, and make
them live; therefore I desired to hear, because I believed the dry bones, and
that I was one that did not know God: afterward I was glad of praying to God.
Sometimes I believed not God, and God will not look on such, always I thought
God will not forgive me. I wondered at all that prayed to God, because I thought
God had given them wisdom: then I thought I am glad I pray to God. Sometime my
heart is broken because I shall lose all in this world, and lose my soul also,
because I believe not, for all the Words of God are true which he has taught
me. Now this day I think I will confess the truth; Because I have sinned, I
want Jesus Christ: and I will truly confess God, because of that word of
Christ, He that confesses me before men, him will I confess before my Father:
I wonder at this Instruction, I desire to confess my heart.

Another who made his Confession is named Antony, upon whom the Lord was
pleased the last Winter to lay an heavy stroke; for he and another Indian being
at work sawing of Board, and finishing the Piece, they laid it so short, and
the Roll not so steadfast, insomuch that this man being in the Pit directing to
lay the Piece, and the other above ordering thereof, it slipped down into the
Pit upon this man's head, brake his nether Chap in two, and cracked his Skull,
insomuch that he was taken up half dead, and almost strangled with blood; and
being the last day of the week at night I had no word until the Sabbath day,
then I presently sent a Chyrurgion, who took a discreet order with him; and God
so blessed his endeavors, as that he is now well again, blessed be the Lord:
and whereas I did fear that such a blow in their Labor might discourage them
from Labor, I have found it by Gods blessing otherwise; yea, this man has
performed a great part of the sawing of our Meeting House, and is now fawing
upon the School-house, and his recovery is an establishment of them to go on;
yea, and God blessed this blow, to help on the Work of Grace in his soul; as
you shall see in his Confession, which follows.
BEfore I prayed to God I always committed sin, but I do not know all my sins,
I know but a little of the sins I have committed, therefore I thought I could
not pray to God, because I knew not al my sins before I prayed to God, and
since I heard of praying to God: formerly when the English did bid me pray unto
God I hated it, and would go out of their houses, when they spoke of such
things to me. I had no delight to hear any thing of Gods Word, but in every
thing I sinned; in my speeches I sinned, and every day I broke the Commands of
God. After I heard of praying to God, that Waban and my two brothers prayed to
God, yet then I desired it not, but did think of running away; yet I feared if
I did run away some wicked men would kill me, but I did not fear God. After
when you said unto me, pray, my heart thought, I will pray; yet again I
thought, I cannot pray with my heart, and no matter for praying with words
only: but when I did pray, I saw more of my sins; yet I did but only see them,
I could not be aware of them, but still I did commit them: and after I prayed
to God, I was still full of lust, and then a little I feared. Sometimes I was
sick, and then I thought God was angry, and then I saw that I did commit all
sins: then one of my brothers died, and then my heart was broken, and after him
another friend, and again my heart was broken: and yet after all this I broke
my praying to God, and put away God, and then I thought I shall never pray to
God: but after this I was afraid of the Lord, because I always broke my
praying to God, and then my heart said, God does nor hear my prayer. When I was
sick, and recovered again, I thought then that God was merciful unto me.
Hearing that word of God, If you hear the Word of God, and be forgetful
hearers, you sin against God; then I thought God will not pardon such a sinner
as I, who daily did so, and broke my praying to God. When I heard the
Commandments, I desired to learn them, and other points of Catechism, but my
desires were but small, and I soon lost it, because I did not desire to
believe: then sometimes I feared Gods anger because of al my sins; I heard the
Word and understood only this word, All you that hear this day, it may be you
shall quickly die, and then I quickly saw that God was very angry with me. Then
God brake my head, and by that I saw Gods anger; and then I thought that the
true God in Heaven is angry with me for my sin, even for all my sins, which
every day I live, I do. When I was almost dead, some body bid me now believe,
because it may be I shall quickly die, and I thought I did believe, but I did
not know right believing in Christ: then I prayed unto God to restore my
health. Then I believed that word, That we must shortly appear before Jesus
Christ; then I did greatly fear lest if I believed not, I should perish for
ever. When I was near death, I prayed unto God, Oh Lord give me life, and I
will pray to God so long as I live, and I said, I will give my self, soul, and
body to Christ: after this, God gave me health, and then I thought, truly, God
in Heaven is merciful; then I much grieved, that I knew so little of Gods Word.
And now sometimes I am angry, and then I fear because I know God sees it: and
I fear, because I promised God when I was almost dead, that if he gives me
life, I will pray so long as I live; I fear lest I should break this promise to
God. Now I desire the pardon of all my sins, and I beg faith in Christ, and I
desire to live unto God, so long as I live; I cannot my self get pardon, but I
daily commit sin, and break Gods Word, but I look to Christ for pardon.

Another who made His Confession is named Owussumag; which is as follows:
WHen I first heard that Waban prayed to God, and after that many more prayed.
I first feared praying to God, and instruction, and I hated instruction by the
Word of God, and always I laughed at them who prayed to God; and I always
thought I will yet more commit sin: and I went into the Country, and there I
acted much lust, adultry, and the like, and all my Neighbors, we did together
seek after wickedness, and every day I was proud, and of high or open eyes.
When some of my neighbors began to pray, I went away into the Country, but I
could find no place where I was beloved. Then I heard, That when believers die,
they go to Heaven, when sinners die they go to Hell; and my heart considered,
What good will it be if my soul go to Heaven? But two years ago, I began to
think, I had sinned against God; and then sometimes I feared, yet again sinned;
but my fear was of man, not of God: Then ever my heart said I should be better,
if I would pray to God, and sometimes I believed that which I was taught, yet
again, last year, I sought to go away afar off, but I could think of no place,
but I should be in danger to be killed. Then again I much remembered my sins:
and again I thought, What will become of me, if I die in my sins? and then I
thought it was good for me to pray unto God so long as I live; and then my
heart turned to praying unto God, and I did pray, and my heart feared when I
heard the word read and taught, and I was glad to hear the Word of God; and
then I purposed to pray as long as I live. Sometime I did daily see my sins,
and fear, for I cannot get pardon, only in Jesus Christ. Then I heard that
word, I thank thee oh Heavenly father, that thou have revealed these things to
babes; and that word, that we must forgive each other: then I saw that I
believed not one word from Christ, not any word of God; and daily my heart
wept, that Christ might pardon all my sins against God and Christ: and now unto
this day my heart says* I desire the good ways of praying to God, but I
cannot know them of my self, but Jesus Christ must teach me them. When I heard,
That only Christ must teach me them. When I heard, That only Christ must pardon
our sins, and that for Christ God will pardon our sins, this day I rejoice to
hear that word of God, and all that Christ has taught me: and now I purpose,
That while I live, I will pray unto God, and Jesus Christ only: and this day I
see I cannot know how to find good thoughts; but this day I desire pardon for
all my sins, and to cast them away.

Another who made Confession, is named Ephraim, his Indian Name I have
forgotten. It is as follows:
ALL the days I have lived, I have been in a poor foolish condition, I cannot
tell all my sins, all my great sins, I do not see them. When I first heard of
praying to God, I could not sleep quietly, I was so troubled, ever I thought I
would forsake the place because of praying to God, my life has been like as if
I had been a mad man. Last year I thought I would leave all my sins, yet I see
I do not leave off sinning to this day; I now think I shall never be able to
forsake my sins. I think sometimes the Word of God is false, yet I see there is
no giving over that I might follow sin, I must pray to God; I do not truly in
my heart repent, and I think that God will not forgive me my sins; every day my
heart sins, and how will Christ forgive such an one? I pray but outwardly
with my mouth, not with my heart; I cannot of my self obtain pardon of my sins*
I cannot tell all the sins that I have done if I should tell you an whole day
together: I do every morning desire that my sins may be pardoned by Jesus
Christ; this my heart says, but yet I fear I cannot forsake my sins, because I
cannot see all my sins: I hear, That if we repent and believe in Christ, all
our sins shall be pardoned, therefore I desire to leave off my sins.

This poor Publican was the l^st which made his Confession before I read them
unto the Elders, and the last of them I shall now publish. I will shut up these
Confessions with the Confession (if I may so call it) or rather with the
Expression, and manifestation of says, by two little Infants, of two years
old, and upward, under three years of age when the died and departed out of
this world.

The Story is this,

THis Spring, in the beginning of the year, 1652. the Lord was pleased to
afflict sundry of our praying Indians with that grievous disease of the
Bloody Flux, whereof some with great torments in their bowels died; among which
were two little Children of the age abovesaid, and at that time both in one
house, being together taken with that disease. The first of these Children in
the extremities of its torments, lay crying to God in these words, God and
Jesus Christ, God and Jesus Christ help me; and when they gave it any thing to
eat, it would greedily take it (as it is usual at the approach of death) but
first it would cry to God, Oh God and Jesus Christ, bless it, and then it would
take it: and in this manner it lay calling upon God and Jesus Christ until it
died: The mother of this Child also died of that disease, at that time. The
Father of the Child told me this story, with great wonderment at the grace of
God, in teaching his Child so to call upon God. The name of the Father is
Nishohkou, whose Confession you have before.

Three or four days after, another Child in the same house, sick of the same
disease, was (by a divine hand doubtless) sensible of the approach of death,
(an unusual thing at that age) and called to its Father, and said, Father, I am
going to God, several times repeating it, I am going to God* The mother (as
other mothers use to do) had made for the Child a little Basket, a little
Spoon, and a little Tray: these things the child was wont to be greatly
delighted withal (as all children will) therefore in the extremity of the
torments, they set those things before it, a little to divert the mind, and
cheer the spirit: but now, the child takes the Basket, and puts it away, and
said, I will leave my Basket behind me, for I am going to God, I will leave my
Spoon and Tray behind me (putting them away) for I am going to God: and with
these kind of expressions, the same night, finished its course, and died.

The Father of this child is named Robin Speen, whose Confessions you have
before, and in one of them he makes mention of this child that died in faith.
When he related this story to me, he said, He could not tell whether the sorrow
for the death of his child, or the joy for its faith were greater, when it died.

These Examples are a testimony, That they teach their children the knowledge
and fear of God, whom they now call upon; and also that the Spirit of God
co-worketh with their instructions, who teaches by man, more than man is able
to do.

I have now finished all that I purpose to publish at this time; the Lord give
them Acceptance in the hearts of his Saints, to engage them the more to pray
for them; and Oh! that their judgings of themselves, and breathings after
Christ, might move others (that have more means than they have, but as yet
regard it not) to do the like, and much more abundantly.

FINIS.

