A DISCOURSE CONCERNING RIOTS.

Occasioned by some of the People called QVAKERS, being Imprisoned and Indicted
for a RIOT, for only being at a peaceable Meeting to Worship GOD.

Written by one of that People, THOMAS ELLWOOD.

Thou shall not Wrest Judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

If thou see the Oppression of the Poor, and violent Perverting of Judgment
and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher than
the highest, regards, and there be higher than they, Eccl. 5.8.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
MDCLXXXIII.

The Occasion of this Discourse.
THE Proceedings of late, in City and Country, against some of the People
called Quakers for Riots, for only Meeting peaceably together to serve and
worship God, first put me upon Inquiring into the Nature of Riots. What upon
that Inquiry I have found, I here present to Public view, for common benefit,
that none through ignorance may be occasion of bringing an unjust suffering
upon an innocent People, and thereby Guilt upon themselves. I do not pretend
much skill in Law (a Study and Profession I was never bred to.) But having
spent some hours on this Occasion, in searching what the Law Books say in this
Case, I hope I may (without incurring the Censure of Presumption) communicate
my Gleanings to such of my well-meaning Countrymen, as have not leisure or
opportunity to inform themselves otherwise. I solemnly declare I have no other
End or aim in this work, than to do Good and prevent Evil: Which Consideration,
with men of Candor and Ingenuity, will be, I hope, a sufficient Apology for
any seeming boldness in this Undertaking.

A Discourse concerning Riots, etc.
THat the Nature of a Riot may be the better understood, I intend to observe
this Method.

1. To set down the strict and proper Signification of the word.

2. To Inquire what the statute Law says Concerning it.

3. To observe what the Common Acceptance of the word [Riot] is in Common Law.

4. To show the Contrarieties between Riots and peaceable Religious Meetings

1. Then, to begin with the Signification of the word.

Cowell, a Doctor of the Civil Law, and the King's Professor thereof in the
University of Cambridge, says, The word Riot ( in Latin, Riotum) comes of the
French, Rioter, that is, Rixari ( which signifies to Chide, Scold, Brawl,
Strive, or Quarrel.) Cowelli Interpreter, verbo Riot.

Lambard says, Riot I think to be derived from the French word Rioter,
signifying to scold (or brawl) because such manner of Acts be commonly
accompanied with words of Brawl. Eirenarcha l. 2. cap. 5.

Blunt says, Riot (in French Riote) is a brawling scolding Contention.
Glossograph. verbo Riot.

Judge Coke says, Riotum (a Riot) comes of the French word Riotter that is,
Rixari: which (as I noted before) signifies to scold, brawl, quarrel, etc. it
Inst. 3. part cap. 79. Tit Riots.

Keeble says, Riot is of the French Riotter, to scold or brawl, because such
manner of Acts be commonly accompanied with words of brawl. Assistance to
Justices of the Peace, p. 645.

This is enough to show how unapplicable the word Riot, in its proper and true
signification, is to a peaceable, quiet, Religious Meeting, which admits not of
any scolding, brawling, quarrelling, or the like.

2. As to Statute Law, although diverse statutes were anciently made for the
Suppressing of Riots, Routs and unlawful Assemblies, as 13 H. 4.7. -- 2 H. 5.8.
and 19 H. 7.13. Yet none of them define or describe what a Riot is. So that I
find nothing in the Statute Law will add Light to this Inquiry; and therefore
we must have recourse to the Common Law, and observe,

3. What the Common Acceptance of the word [Riot] is in the Common Law.

Cowell says, It signifies in our Common Law, the forcible doing of an unlawful
act by three or more Persons assembled together for that purpose.

Cowelli Interpreter, verbo Riot. The same says Lambard in his Eirenarcha l. 2.
c. 5. The same says West, Part 2. Symbol. Tit. Indictments. The same says R.
Blunt in his Glossograph. verbo Riot. The same says Tho. Blunt in his
Law-Dictionary, verbo Riot, The same (in effect) says the Book called Les
Terms de le Ley, Tit. Riot, p. 244. And to the same purpose speaks Keeble, in
his Assistance to Justices of the Peace, p. 645.

Thus in short they define a Riot: but in the further opening of it, there are
seven things I observe the Law Books make essential to a Riot; which I will set
down severally.

1. The first is the Number of Persons engaged in it; which may be any Number
above Two.

2. The second is, that there besome fact actually done. For if three Persons
or more should assemble together, and with intent to do such an act as would
amount to a Riot: yet if they do it not, but depart again without doing any
thing, their so assembling is no Riot.

A Riot, says Lambard, is thought to be, where three or more persons be
disorderly assembled to commit with force any such unlawful act, And do
accordingly execute the same. Eirenarcha l. 2. c. 5.

Judge Coke says, Riot in the Common Law signifies when three or more do any
unlawful act, as to beat a Man, etc. Instit. 3. Part. c. 79. Tit. Riots.

A Riot, says Pulton, is where three persons or above do assemble themselves
together to beat or maim a Man, etc. And they do it. Pult. de Pace Regis, fol.
25.

Dalton says, Where three persons or more shall come or assemble themselves
together, to the intent to do any unlawful act, with force or violence, against
the Peace, or to the manifest terror of the People, -- If they do execute any
such thing indeed, then it is a Riot. Country Justice, c. 85. Tit. Riots. The
same says Meriton in his Guide for Constables p. 93.

A Riot, says Keeble, is thought to be, where three or more persons be
disorderly assembled to commit with force any such unlawful act, And do
accordingly execute the same. Assist. to Just. p. 645.

Shepherd having showed what Number of Persons, and what kind of unlawful Act
can make a Riot, says, a Riot is, where they do not only begin, and go on, but-
finish their work, or with unlawful Weapons do such an unlawful act, Grand
Abridgment Part 3. p. 259.

From all which it is evident, that for any number of Persons barely to
assemble themselves together (though it were with a Riotous intention) is no
Riot, unless the same persons being so assembled, do commit some such unlawful
Act as in construction of Law will amount to a Riot, (and of what kind that
must be, shall be our next Inquiry.) So that, if in a peaceable manner to
preach or pray could legally be interpreted a Riotous act: yet those Meetings
which are wholly silent, wherein there is nothing said, nothing done; or
wherein (which is much alike) no proof can be made of any thing said or done
(and such, it seems, was that Meeting, which gave occasion to this discourse)
such Meetings to be sure cannot be Riots.

3. A third thing is, that the act or deed done must be not only unlawful, but
injurious to another. This appears by the Examples given by the most Eminent
Lawyers that have written of this Subject.

Judge Coke says, A Riot in the Common Law signifies, when three or more do
any unlawful act: then to explain what he means here by an unlawful act, he
immediately adds, As to beat any man, or to hunt in his Park, Chase or Warren,
or to enter or take possession of another Man's Land, or to cut or destroy his
Corn; Grass or other profit. Instit. 3. p. c. 79. Tit. Riots.

Shepherd, having showed what number of persons must be present to make a Riot,
adds, A second thing that must be in the Case to make up any degree in these
Offenses must be, that the Assembly they go with, or their intent and design
must be evil, to do some hurt to Men or that which is theirs: then instances
thus, As breach of Enclosures, or Banks, or Conducts, Parks, Pounds, Houses,
Barns, the burning of stacks of Corn, or the like; or to enter into Lands, to
beat others, or to carry away their Wives, or the like. Grand Abridge. 3. part
p. 259 Tit. Riots.

Fitz-herbert explains the unlawful act which makes a Riot, by these Examples,
viz. To beat or to maim another, Fitz-h. Office of Just. of Peace, p. 53.

Lambard uses these Examples viz. To beat a Man, or to enter upon a Possession
forcibly. Eirenarcha, lib. 2. c. 5. The same are in the Book called Les Terms
de la ley. Tit. Riot. p. 244.

Pulton says, A Riot is where three Persons or more do assemble themselves
together, to the intent to beat or maim a Man, to put down a house, wall, pale,
hedge, or ditch; wrongfully to claim or take Common or way in a ground, to
destroy any Park, Warren, Dovehouse, Pond, Pool, Barn, Mill, or stack of Corn;
or to do any other unlawful act, with force and violence, and against the
Peace, and they do it. Pult. de Pace Regis, fol. 25.

Meriton says, Where three Persons or more shall come or assemble themselves
together, to the intent to do any unlawful act, with force or violence, against
the Person of another his Possessions or Goods (then he instances particulars)
As to kill, beat, or otherwise to hurt, or to imprison a Man; to pull down an
House, Wall, Pale, Hedge, or Ditch; Wrongfully to enter upon or into another
Man's Possession, House or Lands, etc. Or to cut, or take away Corn, Grass,
Wood, or other Goods wrongfully; or to hunt unlawfully in any Park or Warren,
or to do any other unlawful act, (with force or violence) against the peace,
or to the manifest terror of the People, -- if they do any such thing in deed,
then it is a Riot. Guide for Constables, p. 92. 93. For this he cites diverse
Authors, particularly Dalton, who gives the self-same Examples of an Unlawful
Riotous act, and out of whom he seems to have transcribed this verbatim. So
that I need not repeat what Dalton there says; but shall only observe out of
him, that one of the Reasons he gives, why, If diverse do assemble and gather
together to play at certain unlawful Games and Sports (which he mentions) it is
no Riot, is, because These Meetings (says he) usually are not with any intent
to offer or do violence or hurt to the Person, Possessions or goods of any
other. Dalt. Country Just. c. 85. Tit. Riots.

By all these Instances it is evident, that those unlawful acts which the
Common Law takes notice of as Riots, are such as are some way or other
injurious and hurtful to the Persons or Possessions of others: But quiet and
peaceable Meetings, for the worship of God only, are no ways injurious or
hurtful to the Persons or Possessions of any. So that it is not every unlawful
Meeting, or Assembly of People forbidden by the Law, that will amount unto a
Riot. It Is true indeed, every Riot is an unlawful assembly; but (the Terms are
not convertible) every unlawful Assembly is not a Riot. Dalton says, The
manner of doing an unlawful act by an Assembly of People, may be such (and so
handled) as that it shall not be punished as a Riot. Country Just c. 86. p.
221. And both Lumbard and Keeble, from Marrow, assure us, that an unlawful
thing may be so done, as that it cannot be made a Riot. Eirenarcha, l. 2. c. 5.
assistance to Just. p. 645. And so says Shepherd also, Grand Abridgment 3.
part. p. 260.

And to manifest yet further, that by an unlawful act in a Riotous sense, the
Law Books intend such an act as is injurious or hurtful to the person or
possessions of another, they tell us that, unlawful act which makes a Riot,
must be Malum in se, Evil in it self and of its own nature. This Dalton
implies, when he says that to play at Football, Bucklers, Bear-baitings,
Dancings, Bowls, Cards, or Dice, or such like Games or disports (which he
confesses are unlawful) is no Riot, because they are not Evil in themselves.
Country Just. c. 85. But in the last Edition of Dalton, (printed last year,
with many considerable Additions by another hand) it is said expressly, an
unlawful assembly, Riot, or Rout, is where three or more shall gather together,
come or meet in one place, to do some unlawful act with violence, and that
unlawful act must be Malum in se, that is, Evil in it self) and not Malum
prohibitum (not evil forbidden, only.) See the new Edition of Dalton's Country
Justice, c. 136. Now if (according to these) that unlawful act which makes a
Riot must be evil in it self; or injurious, then surely it cannot possibly be a
Riot for people to assemble peaceably and quietly together to worship God: for
certainly no man can harbor a thought, that it is evil in it self for Men and
Women to worship God, or to assemble together, in a peaceable manner, for that
end. And it is manifest that the statute of the 22 Car. 2. (commonly called the
Conventicle act) which prohibits those Meetings to greater Numbers, does not
take those Meetings to be evil in themselves, because it permits them to lesser
Numbers.

4. A fourth thing essential to a Riot is force or violence. So all agree.

Cowel says, It signifies in our Common Law, the forcible doing of an unlawful
act, etc. Cowels Interpreter, verbo Riot.

West says, A Riot is the forcible doing of an unlawful act, etc. Symbol. 2.
part Tit. Indictments.

R. Blunt says, Riots signifies in our Common Law, the forcible doing of an
unlawful act, etc. Glossograph. verbo Riot.

Tho. Blunt says, Riot signifies the forcible doing an unlawful act, etc.
Law-Dictionary, verbo Riot.

Keeble says, A Riot is thought to be where three or more persons be disorderly
assembled to commit with force any such unlawful act, etc. Assist to Just. p.
645.

Lambard not only defines a Riot to be, where three or more persons be
disorderly assembled to commit with force, any such unlawful act: but at his
entrance upon the Discourse of Riots, having premised that many Contentions may
be without any apparent show of Assembly against the Peace; I will leave them,
says he, and resort to those other that the Commission says to be done vi
armata; and thereupon he proceeds to describe Riots, Routs, etc. So that it is
plain he looked upon that act which could make a Riot, to be an act done vi
armata, with armed force, or, as the Phrase is, with force and Arms. And
therefore, treating of what one Justice may do in the Case or a Riot, he says,
He alone (or with his Servant) may go to the place, and such as he finds
Riotously assembled and Armed, he may arrest, -- and may take their Weapons
from them. Eirenarcha, l. 2. c. 5. Tit. Riots. Which implies that they must be
Armed, they must have Weapons, that commit a Riot.

But Shepherd speaks full and plain: For describing an unlawful assembly, Rout
and Riot, he says, Rout is, where being thus met they move, being weaponed,
from the place of their Meeting toward the place where they propose to do this
act, in a turbulent way to effect it, etc. But a Riot, he says, is where they
not only begin and go on, but with Unlawful Weapons finish or do such an
unlawful act. Grand Abridgment 3. part. p. 259.

Dalton says expressly, It seems it can be no Riot, except there be an intent
precedent to do some unlawful Act, and with Violence or Force, Count. Just. chapter
85. Thus all concur, that that Act which makes, or can be made a Riot, must be
a forcible Act, or an Act done with force. So that No Force, No Riot. And
therefore, seeing our peaceable, quiet, Religious Meetings are wholly free from
force and violence, it follows that they are also free from Riot.

Now that none may err through Misapprehension that the words [ vi armata, or
with force and Arms] are words of Form only, and not material and essential to
a Riot; let me add what Lambard says thereupon. Even as the Civilians do
handle two sorts of Force: of which they call the one vim, and vim simplicem,
privatam, sive quotidianum; and the other vim armatam, atrocem, and publicam,
because the first is void of any fearful outrage, and the latter seems to
kindle the Coals of Sedition it self: So likewise, says he, our Law takes
knowledge of two manners of Force: whereof the one is rather intellectual than
actual, and may therefore be termed, A Force in the Consideration of Law, which
accounts all that to be vis, which is contrary to Jus. But the other is
apparent by the Act it self, which always carries some fearful Show, and
matter of Terror (or trouble) with it. Eirenar. l. 2. c. 4. p. 140. And
therefore (l. 2. c. 5. p. 174.) he explains [vis armata] to be that, which does
bring manifest Terror unto the Subject. And as he makes that which he calls an
intellectual force, or a force in the consideration of Law, to relate to Suits
and Actions at Law for Trespasses, etc. So (in his first Book, c. 2. p. 7.) he
declares, It is no part of the Justices Office to forbid lawful Suits and
Controversies, but to suppress injurious force and violence moved against the
Person, his Goods or possessions. And in p. 10. he says, I conclude that this
furious Gesture and beastly force of body or hands (and not every Contention,
Suit and disagreement of minds) is the proper subject and matter about which
the Office of the Justices of the Peace is to be exercised. Now since a Riot is
the proper subject and matter about which the Office of Justices of the Peace
is to be exercised, it follows that that vis armata, that force and Arms, which
is of necessity to the making of a Riot, must needs be this furious Gesture,
this beastly force of body and hands (as Lambard calls it) which brings terror
to the people, and which our Meetings are free from. Dalton also, undertaking
to show what the Law accounts to be force, and what weapons be offensive in
these and the like cases, says, To have Harness, Guns, Bows and Arrows,
Cross-bows, Halberts, Javelins, Bills, Clubs, Pikes, Pitchforks, or Swords not
usually born by the Parties, shall be said to be vis armata. And so to use
casting of Stones, hot Coals, scalding Water or Lead, or be said to be vis
armata; Country Just. c. 77. p. 203.

5. A Fifth thing is the previous Intent of the Persons assembled. Both Lambard
and Keeble tell us, The intention and purpose of those that be assembled is
worthy the weighing. And they instance some Cases of persons that being met at
an Alehouse, a Christmas-Dinner, or a Church Ale, fell together by the Ears
and fought, yet this was no Riot (but a sudden Affray only) because they did
not come thither with intention to fight; Eiren. l. 2. c. 5. Assist. to Just.
Tit. Riots.

Shepherd says, If many come together unarmed, they know not why themselves;
this is no offense punishable, unless it can be known, that they came to some
Evil Intent, or that they do miscarry themselves in some Evil Act. Now, since
we come together unarmed, not to any Evil Intent, but to a very good Intent,
namely, to serve and worship the true God, in a peaceable manner, and do not
miscarry our selves in any Evil Act in our Meeting: Surely (if Shepherd might
be Judge) Our Meetings are not Riots.

Dalton speaks home; It seems, says he, it can be no Riot, except there be an
intent precedent to do some unlawful Act, and with violence or force; Count.
Just. chapter 85. Now the intent of our Meetings being only to serve and worship
God, and that not with violence or force, but in peace and quietness, it
seems such Meetings cannot be Riots.

6. A Sixth thing essential to a Riot is, Breach of the Peace. The Peace must
be broken, or it is no Riot. In this all agree. And lest any doubt should arise
what is intended by, or what will amount to a Breach of the Peace in this Case,
the Law Books well explain it.

Lambard says, Two special things there are, that be common and must concur,
both in the unlawful Assembly, Rout and Riot; the one that three persons (at
the least) be gathered together: -- the other, that they being together, do
breed some apparent disturbance of the Peace, either by signification of
Speech, Show of Armor, turbulent Gesture, or actual and express violence: so
that either the peaceable sort of men be unquieted and feared by the fact, or
the lighter sort and busybodies be imboldened by the Example; Eiren. l. 2.
chapter 5.

Cowell, following him, says, Two things are common both to Riot, Rout and
unlawful Assembly; the one, that three persons at the least be gathered
together: the other, that they being together do breed disturbance of the
Peace; (How?) either by signification of Speech, show of Armor, Turbulent
Gesture, or actual and express violence; Coweli Interp. verbo Riot.

Shephard says, These two things are common both to the Riot, and the Rout, and
unlawful Assembly. There must be three persons at the least gathered together
in it: the other, that being together, they do breed disturbance of the Peace,
either by signification of Speech, show of Armor, Turbulent Gesture, or actual
and express violence, etc. Grand Abridgment, part 3. p. 259.

Dalton says, As there must necessarily be three persons at the least,
assembled together, to make a Riot, etc. So their being together and their
demeanor must be such, as shall or may breed some apparent disturbance of the
Peace; either by threatening Speeches, Turbulent Gesture, show of armor, or
actual force or violence (to the terror and fearing of the peaceable sort of
People, or to the emboldening and stirring up of such as are busy-headed, and
of evil disposition, by such fact) or else it can be no Riot, etc. Country
Just. c. 87.

Tho. Blunt says, Two things are common both to rout, riot and unlawful
Assembly; The one, that three persons at least be gathered together: The other,
that they being together, do disturb the Peace, either by words, show of Arms,
Turbulent Gesture, or actual violence; Law-Diction. verbo Rout.

Keeble says, Two special things there are that be common, and must concur both
in the unlawful Assembly, Rout and Riot. 1. That three persons at the least be
gathered together; -- 2. That their being together do breed some apparent
disturbance of the Peace, either by signification of Speech, show of Armor,
Turbulent Gesture, or actual and express violence. So that either the peaceable
sort of men be unquieted and feared by the Fact, or the lighter sort and
busybodies be imboldened by the Example; Assist. to Just. p. 645. And says
he, p. 646. (And so says Lambard also, Eien. l. 2. c. 5.) If many do meet to
play at Bowls, Tables, or Cards (which yet are unlawful Games forbidden by the
Statute of 33 H. 8. 9.) and do use no misbehaviour against the Peace, they are
not punishable in this degree. How much less then are they punishable in this
degree, ( viz. of Riot) who meet together for a good and godly end only, to
worship God, and use no misbehaviour against the Peace!

By all these Testimonies it appears, both that to the making of a Riot there
must of necessity be a breach of the Peace; and also wherein that Breach of the
Peace consists, namely, in threatening Speeches, show of Armor, turbulent
Gesture, or actual violence. And that this is indeed the true and proper
meaning of the words [Breach of the Peace,] might be further confirmed by other
Evidences, out of Lambard's Eiren. l. 1. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 3. But most plainly
out of Dalton, who having defined Peace (in a legal sense) to be An Abstinence
from actual and injurious force and offer of violence, says, The breach of this
Peace seems to be any injurious force or violence moved against the person of
another, his Goods, Lands, or other possessions, whether it be by threatening
words, or by furious Gesture, or force of the body, or any other force used in
terrorem; Count. Just. c. 3. But well known it is to all, that know our
Meetings, that no injurious force or violence is moved by us in our Meetings
against the Person, Goods, Lands, or Possessions of any: So that the peace is
not broken by us in our Meetings, and consequently our Meetings are not Riots.

7. The Seventh and last thing essential to a Riot is, Terror to the people;
that is, That the thing done be either of it self, and in its own nature so
dreadful, or performed in such a formidable and affrighting manner, that the
People are thereby struck with terror.

Lambard, proceeding to speak particularly of Riots, Routs, etc. says, I will
leave those contentions which may be without any apparent show of Assembly
against the Peace, and resort to those other that the Commission says to be
done vi armata, and that to bring manifest Terror unto the subject. And a
little after, he mentions the use of Harness on Mid summer-night in London, or
on May Day in the Country, Which (being for sport only) is, says he, ' no such
offense (that is, no Riot) seeing no Terror follows of it: And, says he, the
words In terrorem populi seem to be material in an Indictment of this kind;
Eiren. l. 2. c. 5.

Dalton says, An Assembly of an hundred persons or more (yea though they be in
Armor) yet if it be not in terrorem populi, and were assembled without any
intent to break the peace, it is not prohibited by any of these Statutes ( viz.
which were made against Riots, etc.) nor unlawful. And he gives the same
instance Lambard gave of the Assembly of People, and their use of Harness upon
Midsummer-night in London, Which (says he) being only for disport, is lawful;
and though it be with a great Assembly of People and in Armor, yet it being
neither in terrorem populi, nor to do any Act with force and violence against
the peace, it is lawful, says Dalton, Count. Just. c. 85. And he shows
further, (chapter 87.) That if diverse in a Company shall go, on a lawful occasion,
armed and in harness, to the terror of the people, though they have no intent
to fight, or to commit a Riot, yet this is a Rout by the manner of their going.
But on the other hand, if they had gone in privy Coats of Plate, Shirts of
Mail, or the like, to the intent to defend themselves from same Adversary, This
(says he) seems not punishable within these Statutes; and the Reason he gives
is, For that there is nothing openly done in Terrorem populi, to the terror of
the people.

Keeble (treating of Riots, and reciting the words of Lambard, though he cites
Crompton for the Author) says, To use Horns on Mid-summer Night in London, or
on May day in the Country, for sport only, is no such offense (that is, is no
Riot) seeing no terror follows it; and the words [in Terrorem populi] seem,
says he, to be material in an Indictment of this kind. Assist. to Just. p. 646.
With Keeble's Judgment I choose to close this point, both as he is the last (so
far as I know) that has written on this Subject, and for that his Book has
the Approbation of all the twelve Judges.

Many other Authors I could have quoted on this Subject, and some too of great
Name, as Marrow, Kitchen, Brook, Crompton, etc. whom I find cited by others to
this purpose; but not having read these Authors my self, I forbear useing them,
that I might not rely on any authority taken up at second hand.

Thus having gone through the several Parts of a Riot, according to the
Distribution premised, I take a Riot, in short, to be this. When three persons,
or more, are assembled together in Arms, with a fore-intent and purpose to do
such an unlawful act, as is both evil in it self, and hurtful to another,
either in person, or estate; and do it, in a forcible manner, to the apparent
Breach or disturbance of the Peace, either by threatening words, show of Armor,
turbulent Gesture, or open violence, and to the manifest terror of the People.

4. Now because (according to the Rule, Contraria juxta se posita magis
elucescunt, i. e.) when Contraries are set one by another, their Contrarieties
do the more manifestly appear, I will briefly set forth the Contrarietys
between Riots and peaceable Religious Meetings, by opposing our Meetings to
Riots, through the several Particulars before mentioned.

And first as to number of Persons. In a Riot (if the fact be such as the Law
accounts Riotous) any number of Persons above two is sufficient to commit a
Riot.

But in those Meetings for the exercise of Religion which are forbidden by the
Conventicle-act, it is not unlawful even by that act for four persons beside
the Family (how numerous soever that be) to assemble together. So that even in
point of Numbers there is a material difference between Riots and Religious
Meetings: which shows, the Parliament that gave liberty to four persons besides
the family to meet, did not understand those Meetings to be Riots. The
Conventicle-act does not permit Riots: But the Conventicle-act does permit
Religious Meetings to such Numbers as (if those Meetings were of a Riotous
nature) are sufficient to make a Riot; Therefore such Meetings are not Riots.

2. In a Riot there must of necessity be some overt act, some deed done, some
fact committed by the persons assembled (which may come under the Cognizance of
outward evidence) more than their bare assembling together, else it cannot be a
Riot.

But (as in none of our Meetings there is any Riotous act, so) in such of our
Meetings as are wholly silent there is no overt act at all, no deed done, no
fact committed by any of the persons assembled (which may come under the
cognizance of outward evidence) more than their bare assembling: therefore such
Meetings cannot be Riots.

3. In Riots, the fact done must be not only unlawful, but injurious or hurtful
to another, either in person or estate.

But our Meetings (if at all unlawful) are no way injurious or hurtful to any,
either in person or estate: therefore our Meetings are not Riots.

4. That act which makes a Riot must be done vi armata, with force and arms, or
in a forcible manner.

But our Meetings are not held, nor is there any thing done by us in them, vi
armata, with force and arms, or in a forcible manner: therefore our Meetings
are not Riots.

5. To make a Riot, there must be a previous intent in the persons assembled,
to do some such unlawful act as is evil in it self and hurtful to others, and
that with force.

But in our Meetings, we have no previous intent to do any such unlawful act,
as is evil in it self and hurtful to others; nor have we any other intent at
all, than sincerely and really to serve and worship God, and that without force
or violence: therefore our Meetings are not Riots.

6. It is not a Riot, unless the Peace be broken or disturbed by the persons
assembled, either by threatening speeches, show of armor, turbulent Gesture, or
open violence.

But in our Meetings, the Peace is never broken nor distrubed by us, we give no
threatening Speeches; we show no armor (nor have any to show) we use no
Turbulent Gestures; nor do we offer violence to any: therefore our Meetings are
not Riots.

7. It is not a Riot, except it be done with Terror to the People. But our
Meetings are not held with Terror to the people: therefore our Meetings are
not Riots.

How truly I have stated the Case, on the one hand, with respect to Riots, the
many Quotations in the foregoing Discourse will show. How true an account, on
the other hand, I have given of our Meetings, the whole Nation (and all Nations
wherein we have Meetings) may judge. Upon the whole, my request is, that all,
both Justices and Jurors, who are or shall be concerned in this or the like
Case, will seriously weigh the matter, and not strain the Law beyond its due
Extent. To oppress any by color of Law, is the greatest abuse of Law. I
entreat Grand Juries therefore to regard Justice, to regard their Oath. They
are sworn expressly to Examine diligently, and true presentment make, etc. They
are sworn expressly, to present the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth, to the best of their knowledge. Now that they may not break their Oath,
but that they may true Presentment make, that they may present nothing but the
Truth, that they may not present a Falsehood for Truth, I entreat them again and
again to examine diligently both what Riots are, and what our Meetings are. And
if upon such diligent Examination they find any of those material and essential
Differences between our Meetings and Riots (which I have before observed) that
then they will, like just Men and Christians, keep themselves clear from making
false Presentiments instead of True, from writing Billa vera (a true bill) upon
that Bill (and delivering it in as such upon their Oaths (which perhaps in
three parts of four is utterly and apparently false, The like request I make to
Petit Juries in the like case, who are sworn Well and truly to try, and true
deliverance make, etc. according to their Evidence. Which evidence ought to be
of good fame: for it is a Maxim, Justitia non potest cum Scelerato Commercium
habere; Justice can have no Commerce with a wicked graceless person: And Turpes
a tribunalibus arcentur. Vile persons ought to be rejected by Courts of
Judicature. And therefore witnesses are required to be, not only Legales,
Lawful men, but Probi, virtuous and good men, men of approved honesty, from
such Witnesses the Jury may expect (and ought to have before they find any Man
guilty) a plain, full and clear evidence of every material part of the charge
laid against him; and let me add, of all such Circumstances also, as may any
way aggravate the Offense: for nothing that may endammage the accused party
should be taken upon Presumption or supposition, nor without plain and clear
Proof. The witnesses disposition is therefore called evidence, because it makes
the Truth or falsehood of the charge evident and plain: and says Coke,
Probationes debent esse evidentes and perspicuae, proofs ought to be evident
and clear. O that all men concerned in these and such like Cases, would so
conscienciously and considerately discharge the duty of their Offices, that
with comfort they might give account thereof at the Great Judge at the last
day! For why should any draw upon their own heads the guilt of Perjury, and the
vindictive cry of oppressed Innocents?

But if there be any that are eager and desirous in their minds to have our
Meetings punished as Riots; Let me entreat them also to consider, How
dishonorable a Reflection it would be both to the Government, and to the
Religion established thereby, If peaceable, quiet, Religious Meetings,
conscienciously holden only and alone for the worship and Service of God
(wherein no Evil is either acted or intended, no violence or force used, no
breach of the peace made, no terror given: but an innocent, meek, passive, and
truly Christian behavior and deportment shown) should be judicially declared
Riots, and punished as such: when at the same time our Law Books assure us,
that not only playing at Bowls, Dice, Cards, etc. But even the Numerous
assemblies that frequent those more Clamorous, Rude, Impetuous and Boisterous
sports of Dancings, Football playing, Baerbaitings, Bucklers or Fencings, and
such like, are not Riots, Routs, nor unlawful assemblies, shall such vain and
Ruffianly sports, wherein so much Rudeness, disorder and Prophanness is
committed, (and which seem to be so near of Complexion to Riots) be declared to
be no Riots: and shall peaceable and Religious Meetings, wherein only God is
worshipped (and which have no show nor appearance of Riots in them) be
condemned for Riots! God forbid.

If any should think our Meetings may be Riots, because we sometimes meet in
the open Streets or in the Highway; Let such consider, that we do not meet in
the Streets or Highways by Choice, but by Constraint. We come not with intent
to meet in the Streets or Highways, but in our Meeting Houses. But where we
are shut out and kept out of our Meeting Houses, we are necessitated to meet
abroad. And yet there also we demean our selves peaceably and quietly, not
offering violence or injury to any, nor coming with any Intent so to do. And if
any should apprehend, that our not departing immediately upon a Constable's
making Proclamation, does make our Meetings Riots, it may not be amiss for such
to inquire, whether there be any statute in force, that does empower
Constables, and other inferior Officers, to make such Proclamation, and
requires the persons assembled forthwith to depart thereupon. The act made in
the first year of Q. Mary, c. 12 (which appointed the making of Proclamation,
in some Cases of another nature, though not by a Constable, so far as I
observe) being but a temporary act continued by Q. Eliz. (in the first year of
her Reign, c. 16.) to the end of the next Parliament after her death is long
since expired, or discontinued, as Pulton, Dalton and Keeble declare. However,
if it were in force, it would not reach us or our Meetings, which are not
guilty of any of those Offenses, against which that act was made.

Lastly, I desire the Reader to observe, that the difference between a Riot,
Rout and unlawful assembly, is only in the execution or Non-Execution of that
act, which, being done, makes a Riot. In all things else they are alike, there
must be the same number of Persons to make an unlawful assembly; as to make a
Riot. There must be the same previous intent in the one as in the other; the
fact intended to be done in an unlawful assembly, must be of the same nature
with that which is dome in a Riot, that is, it must be evil in it self and
injurious to another, as well in the one as in the other. There must be vis
armata, force and arms to the making of an unlawful assembly, as well as to
the making of a Riot. There must be breach of the peace to make an unlawful
assembly, as well as to make a Riot. There must be Terror to the people to make
an unlawful assembly, as well as to make a Riot. All the ods is, that if the
Persons so assembled, in such forcible manner, to the Breach of the Peace and
Terror of the People, do not actually perform that unlawful act, which is evil
in it self and injurious to the Person, or Possessions of another, but depart
again without proceeding to do it, then it is only an unlawful assembly;
whereas if they indeed do it, then it is a Riot. And a Rout is a degree between
both, when after the Persons are so assembled, there is some Progress made,
they ride, go, or move forward, toward the Execution of such Unlawful and
injurious act, and yet do not actually execute it.

Postscript.
SInce I have undertaken to discourse of the nature of Riots, and there is some
mention in Holy Scripture of Rioting, etc. it will not be amiss to show what
Rioting is in Scripture sense also.

The Prodigal Son (in the Parable, Luke 15.13.) is said to have wasted his
substance with Riotous living [(...)] living Profusely and dissolutely, as
Pasor explains it. The same word (in the substantive) is used, Ephesians. 5.18. and
rendered, Excess; which Baeza expounds to be, Omnis Profusio, eaque summa cum
Turpitudine conjuncta; All manner of Profaneness, and that joined with the
greatest Filthiness. It is used again, Tit. 1.6. where it is required that the
Children of such as were to be ordained Elders, should be [(...)] not accused
of Riot, that is, of leading a dissolute and profuse life. The same word is
used again, 1 Pet. 4.4. and very well explained by the Verse foregoing. For the
Apostle having said (Verse 3.) The time past of our lives may suffice us to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts,
Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquettings and abominable Idolatries; adds Verse.
4.) Wherein they (the Gentiles, who yet walked in such things) think it
strange, that you ran not with them to the same Excess of RIOT, viz. to walk in
Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquettings, etc. So that
it is clear, that by Riot here ( ver. 4.) he means the Lasciviousness, Lusts,
Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquettings and abominable Idolatries (which he
had newly mentioned, Verse 3. and) which the Christians, it seems, before
Conversion, having walked with the Gentiles in, were now, after their
Conversion to Christianity, thought strangely of, and blasphemed, but the
Gentiles, for not running on still in the same. These are of the Places (so far
as I observe) wherein (...) is Read in the New Testament; It signifies, says
Leigh, Two things: 1. Excess in Expenses, opposite to Frugality. 2. Excess in
Delights (whether it be in Meats or Drinks, or the like) opposite unto
Temperance: and it signifies these Vices in an Extremity. Or (as he gives it
from another) (...), that is, Prodigality, is taken in a twofold sense: either
Properly, and then it signifies that Vice, whereby any one keeps not his
Estate, Wealth, or Money; but squanders it away lightly and unprofitably upon
any thing without any apparent advantage to himself or others. Or Improperly,
and then it signifies Luxury, by which we lavishly waste our Estates upon our
Pleasures and Lusts, upon Plays, Feasts, Excess of Apparel, etc.

Carmel. a Lapide says, (...) signifies, 1. Surfeiting by too much Eating or
Drinking, Excess, Lasciviousness. 2. Luxury, and Lust. Zanchy says, It
signifies Riotous Excess and Profuseness joined with the greatest Villainy.
This, and more of this kind, see in Leigh's Crit. Sacra. which sufficiently
shows what kind of thing Riot was in the Apostles days.

Mention also we have of Rioting, in Romans 13.13. Let us (says the Apostle) walk
honestly (or decently, (...)) as in the day; not in Rioting and Envying and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in strife and envying.
Rioting here may well be understood by its Companions it is associated with,
viz. Drunkenness, Chambering, Wantonness, Strife, The word here used for
Rioting is (...), which in Gal. 5.21. and 1 Pet. 4.3. is rendered Revelling. Nor
is it elsewhere used in the New Testament, that I remember. In Latin it is
turned Commessatio, which (says Leigh) signifies Excess of Belly-chear in
Riotous Feasting. And, he says, St. Ambrose expounds it, Luxurious Feasting and
Banqueting, wherein (says he) men take liberty to all Lascivious and Riotous
behavior; Crit. sacra.

There is one place more in the New Testament where we read the word Riot, and
that is in 2 Pet. 2.13. where the Apostle speaks of some, who counted it
pleasure to Riot in the day time. The Greek word there used is [(...)] which
signifies Excess of Pleasures and effeminating Delicacies. It is used in the
same sense, Luke 7.25. and James 5.5. in which last place it is joined with a
word that signifies to live Wantonly. (Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth,
and been Wanton [(...)] ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of
slaughter; ye have condemned and killed the Just, says the Apostles James) a
word not elsewhere used in the New Testament, save in 1 Timothy 5.6. where we
read, She that lives in Pleasure [(...)] is dead while she lives. These are
the Pleasures the Apostle Peter called Riot. And this is all I remember to have
read of Riot and Riotting in the New Testament.

In the Old Testament, I meet with it but twice, Prove. 23.20. Be not among
Wine-bibbers; amongst Riotous Eaters of Flesh. Chap. 28.7. He that is a
Companion of Riotous persons, shameth his Father. In the Margin, He that
feeds Gluttons, etc. There is also a Marginal Reference to Chap. 29.3. where
it is said, He that keeps Company with Harlots spends his substance. In
Latin these Texts are turned by Hierom, Pagnine, Montanus, Tremellius and
Junius, by the words Commessatio, Commessator, and Comedo (an old obsolete
word) all signifying Gluttonous Gourmandiging, or inordinate Eating and
Drinking, whereby men do Riotously waste and consume their Estates. Let this
suffice, without particular Application, to show what Rioting and Rioters are
in Scripture sense.

THE END.

