A FRIENDLY CHECK TO Dr BASTWICK: Sent unto him in a Letter from a Presbyterian
friend.

JAMES 5. 9. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned;
Behold, the Judge stands before the door.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Wood-street. M. DC. XLV.

TO THE WORTHILY HONORED, Dr John Bastwick.
Honored Sir,
IT was the enquiry sometime of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (What do men
say of me? or, who do they say I am?) not that he cared for the popular vote,
nor that he was ignorant of the opinion the world had of him, or the
construction or interpretation they gave of his actions; he knew the world was
evil, and therefore would speak evil: but he was more inquisitive to know what
the godly said of him, and therefore demands a second question: But who do
(you) you, my Disciples, say I am? It would be convenient for a man, for a
Christian man to say sometimes, what do the godly and wise say of me, and what
interpretation do they give of my actions? for by this means sometimes they may
hear by others what is in their own hearts, and come to know that in
themselves, which because of self they knew not before. Such a question as
this, Sr, I heard you not long since ask in company where providence cast both
you and me, viz, what acceptance has my book (meaning, the Presbyterian
dependent, etc.) found among the people? but I must confess it was in modest
terms beseeming you; the answer then returned was not so plain as was desired.
Sr, I shall give you now an account of what approbation that book and two more,
viz. has had by the wise and godly; but before I speak to that, let me say
something of the first question, viz. what men say of you? Sr, they recognize
and call to mind, that not long since God called you to suffer under a proud
and insulting generation of men, which for their pride and partiality God has
made them vile and base before all the people: herein God honored, I say
honored, because God honors us more to set us about any of his work,
though it be to suffer for him, then we honor him; I say again, honored you,
and two or three more, whereas if he pleased, he might have honored many
others of his then upright servants to suffer for him, which by the same
assisting and supporting grace God gave you, they would have honored God as
much as you did; But as if you three were the only three Worthies, to you it
was given to suffer for his Name. For the carriage and constancy you all
showed in your sufferings, where your persons were not known beyond the
confines of three Kingdoms; your names were honored, and were like a precious
box of ointment poured out, sending forth an odoriferous and fragrant smell,
God brought you out of your sufferings, heard the prayers and tears of his
people for you, enlarged you, imprisoned your adversaries: a great mercy and to
be had in everlasting remembrance. This called for thankefullnesse and
circumspection at your hands. Suffering Saints, when delivered, should walk
humbly, or else they lose their glory. Hezekiah as faithful and upright a
servant of God as God had any, was sick, sick to the death in the opinion of
his doctors, and in the observation of the Jews, the first man say they that
ever recovered of that disease; but his heart was lifted up, he rendered not to
God according to his great goodness, you know the consequence. Sr, this is the
fear, the godly jealousy your friends godly and wise have of you, that you are
lifted up, that you render not to God according to his great goodness, and
they fear this is the effect that will ensue upon this, that as when you
humbled your self and honored God, God honored you, so now you beginning to
exalt your self, and so dishonouring God, God will humble you. St Paul was
beholding to God for a preventing Pill in this kind, a thorn in his flesh, a
messenger of Satan: Sr, in one word, your friends, your godly wise friends,
your Presbyterian friends, must I call them so, fear you have lost a great deal
of the exercise of your graces, by which you have lost a great deal of the
luster of your graces, and clowded that good report you had once amongst the
Saints; and this is that which the godly say of you; and I shall say no more to
the first query, only the Lord show you your own heart, and humble you for your
own sin.

Now, Sr, I shall give you an account what men say of your late works; As for
your Presbyterian dependent Gods ordinance, the wise and godly say, that for
the first part of it, there is worth and weight in it, being founded upon the
Scripture; though they that are of the contrary opinion slight it, and pufte at
it; a fault of theirs, and savours too much of pride and selfishnesse: yet I do
not see they shake those Arguments by any of their encounters. But as for many
passages by the bye, many expressions, especially in the latter part of that
book, wherein more particularly you disparage their learning and their
preaching, the Presbyterians dare not own but do disclaim, they being not of
the number of them that commend themselves, and discommend and disparage the
gifts and graces of dissenting Brethren: they can I fear too truly say of some
of the Independent party, they are too proud, and censorious, and selfish, that
they are passionate, and carry on private interests under public pretenses,
and that there is more self and passion in some of their Arguments, then there
is reason or Divinity: yet for all that, they can acknowledge their parts,
their graces; they can say, such an one is an Independent, for distinction, and
yet say he is a godly man, and a learned man, and they can spy grace, and love
grace in a dissenting Brother: If there be any that fail herein among the
Presbyterians, as why may there not be one that may somewhat disparage that
party, as there is in the contrary party those that are a shame to them, those
whom they disclaim either their persons or practices; I say, if there be any
such amongst them or us, let them bear it themselves, but let not the whole
suffer. This is the fault you charge upon Mr I. L. charging the whole
Parliament, when but some particular persons do offend. I conceive, Sr, you
have to do with the worst of them, and suppose they are the very worst of men,
yet your Master Christ never taught you to revile them that revile you, and to
upbraid all for the folly and weakness of some of that party: Michael the
Archangel disputed with the Malignants father, the grand Malignant, yet me
thinks there is a great deal of emphasis even in the translation, it says, he
[durst] not bring in, and he durst not bring in [a] or one railing accusation
against Satan: how then should any dare to bring many railing accusations
against them, whereof some of them at the least are dissenting brethren? and if
we should ungrace some of them, if I may so speak, we should be as faulty as
some of them are for unchurching us.

It may be you will say, Sr, all this is too general, and charges must be
particular, but wherein in particular do my godly friends and Presbyterians
dislike and disclaim me? In these things more especially do your friends bewail
your apparent mistakes.

First, In your commending of your self, and there is a vein of this that
runs through your three last books; this I am sure as Solomon does dislike, and
counsels the contrary, so you never learned it of your Master Christ, nor of
any godly, wise, sober and praiseworthy Presbyterian. It is the fault (and
worthily taken notice of) of some of the Independent party, for commending
themselves as the only learned, the only Saints, that they look as impartially
on things as flesh and blood can in any juncture of time (a phrase of theirs)
when others that indeed are impartial in this can see the contrary in some of
them, and do bewail it, in stead of upbraiding them with it.

Secondly, Your Presbyterian friends think you faulty, and herein go not along
with you, in discommending and disparaging the gifts or graces of the contrary
party. Sr, cannot the Nut-shell be thrown away; and the kernel kept? must the
least of good be thrown away, because it has much dross? does God see a
little grace in us in a deal of corruption, and shall not we do so too? because
some of that party have done much disservice to the Church and state, shall we
say all of them do so? I my self know to the contrary, and of some I dare say,
it is through their weakness and infirmity. It is the fault of the Caviliers,
where they come and find a little goods, they leave none: will you where you
find but a little goodness, plunder them of all? this is a fault, and
worthily calls for your taking notice of it. You will fetch an argument from
Bellarmine, or another Popish writer, yea and commend his learning. We say,
give the Devil his due, much more to a dissenting Brother.

Thirdly, The Presbyterians disclaim your charging of the whole party to be
such as the worst of them are: Some are proud, imperious and impetuous in their
way, censorious, uncivil, full of wrath, they can see nothing praiseworthy but
in themselves, no light like theirs, nor no reason like theirs; others are
unlearned, irrational and brutish in respect of those; now to say all are thus
and thus, as this and this man is, so are all the rest; this the wise and godly
do disclaim.

Fourthly, The bitterness of your expressions are justly disliked and
disclaimed. Sr, it needs not; let them that have bad causes use bad words and
Billingsgate dialect: ill words, bitter expressions prove nothing, nor commend
not the cause vindicated. The Presbyterian Cause is no such Cause that needs
railing expressions, or bitter speeches. Sr, to speak plain, there are many
expressions in your first, second and third book, that are much below the parts
and learning of Dr Bastwick; many of them are unbeseeming, unsaintlike,
uncivil expressions. Look but in your just defense to I. L. page 39. and 40.
and many other places. I am ashamed to name the expressions: And in the mean
time you cry out against them for their unchristian and uncharitable
expressions; as Plato charged Diogenes, to tread down his pride (as Diogenes
called it) with greater pride. What needs so much gall? one would have thought
you of all other men had learned the just measure and proportion of every
ingredient. Does Jests and Jears, light and extravagant expressions become Dr
Bastwick? they are quite below you; and you put these jears in their mouths to
deride your friends, for truly, Sr, this is the fruit of many of your
expressions in your books, where you have eased your self, you have burdened
your friends, and they lie under them.

I shall name no more; but herein in these particulars especially I dare say,
and that not without some ground of what I say, all the godly and wise that are
of the Presbyterian party, that I do hear of or meet with upon any occasion, do
dislike you, and do bewail your mistakes herein.

As for your Adversary Mr I. L. you easily persuade your friends that he has
wronged and abused you; he sticks at none, but strikes at all; a learned and
religious Assembly of Ministers, yea the Supreme Court must pass under his
Satyricall lash, and he impetuously must rage and rail at both of them. I am
confident that if God loves him he will lay his proud spirit low enough, before
God has done with him; Yet I will not Reprobate him by no means, he may come
and see his errors, and obtain pardon of the Parliament; yea and God yet may
make use of him, when he is fitted for employment; so I shall leave him with
this request to him, that whilst he writes and fights against an Arbitrary
power, he be not a servant to his own lusts and passions, whilst he speaks
against the powers that are of God.

And for you, Noble Sr, let this request be granted by you, that which you
desire of others, Read your own Books over with candid ingenuity, because your
Pen is not infallible; take it once more in your hands, not to write more till
you have got more humility, because we suffer much by what you have written,
but to correct what you have written; such a margent as this I presume would be
very pleasing to God, and profitable to your self and others: by doing this
you will make your parts to be acknowledged, your graces to shine; you would
endear your friends, and stop the mouths of your adversaries; and which is
more then all, in this God would be glorified. The Lord put it into your heart
to do that which will be most for Gods glory and for the Churches good,
increase all the graces of his Spirit in you, make you shine more and more like
the Sun to the midday, when the light of the wicked shall be put out like a
candle: This is the prayer of,

Sir, Your Brother in Christ, S. E.

FINIS.

