The Serious REPRESENTATION OF Col. William Air Prisoner in the Castle at
Oxford; Tendered to the Consideration of the Parliament, Army, and Kingdom, For
the clearing of his Innocence, and manifesting his Integrity toward the Freedom
of the Nation, and Establishment of the just Power of Parliaments equally
representing the People.
Gentlemen,
I Am glad that I have this opportunity to clear my self from those aspersions
cast upon me by L. G. Cromwell, and other Officers, saying, That I was rather an
Enemy to the Freedom of this Nation, then a Friend: I can speak boldly from a
testimony within me, for above these twenty years, my spirit has been carried
forth always to entreat the Lord that he would make me an instrument in the
removing the Oppressions from the People of this Nation, that has been and is
exercised over them by the wills of men, and to deliver the Jews from their
long captivity: I likewise have bin ready to take all opportunities to act in
any station for that end, waiting on God for accomplishing of that he has
promised to his People, to set them at liberty. Fifteen years ago, I was forced
to leave this my Native Land, for opposing the Service book, and other
Traditions of men, and lived in New England till the sitting of the last
Parliament, at which time I returned to my Native Country, with rejoicing,
hoping to have seen more done by them for the Freedom of the People, then yet
is; and being at Sherborn in the County of Dorset, with my friends, and there
denying the Service book to be of Divine Institution, the Lord Digby's
Chaplains did preach against Col. Star and my self in the Assembly, and stirred
up the people to apprehend us, in so much that we both were forced to flee for
our lives: I fled to London, and there was preserved by Major General Skippon,
and other friends in Kent, till the Wars begun; seeing that God had given an
opportunity for the removing all Tyranny, I freely offered my self a Volunteer
in Colonel Hollis his Regiment, as a Sergeant under Captain Lacy, and what was
done by me as an instrument when my Captain was wounded, and Captain Parker and
other Officers ran away, at Edghill, telling the Soldiers, they were all dead
men, and I seeing the Soldiers of the Colonels Company marching off, I ran
beyond them, telling them, I would dye before them, if they would not face
about: They told me, they had none to lead them: I said, I would; and presently
they followed me with cheerfulness: I made them Officers of their File-Leaders;
And what other services were done by me, is well known: and at Brainford
leading on the first Forlorn-hope; and fighting the men at the Brick-kill all
the day after; L. G. Cromwell hearing of me, sent for me, and entreated me to
accept of the Quarter Masters place in his Troop, and said he would soon make
me a Captain of Horse, (for I had deserved much more;) He further desired me to
help him to some godly men (for most of his Troop were Rogues) telling me, he
would fain see what a Troop of godly men could do; for he said, That, under
God, It must be honest men that must deliver the People from their Oppressions:
To answer his desires, I sent him many honest men, and went my self, and in a
very short time made him as gallant a Troop as ever marched in England; and what
was done by me, in bringing in of honest men for the raising of his Regiment
and Army for the opposing of the Common Enemy, is well known to most of the
Associate Counties, who will think that L. G. Cromwell has lost the Reason of a
man, when they hear of his ungrateful dealing with me, for standing to my first
Principles; and he would often (when he was low) stroke me on the head, saying,
The Nation was bound to bless God for me: But when he saw the Country and
Soldiery respect me, he and his Creatures studied how to make me odious in the
sight of all honest men: and for the particular wrongs he did me, I never spoke
of them till he imprisoned me at Ware, and then I sent him a memorandum of all
the particulars: but for my imprisonment at that time I knew no cause, but for
saying to them, That God had owned us and our Cause so far, that there was no
Enemy in the field to oppose us, and yet there was nothing done for England or
Ireland, as to a Settlement; and wishing them to consider it, lest, after all
the Blood, Treasure, and Pain, that had been spent, we go back into the
wilderness of affliction farther then ever: for the Cavaliers would take the
advantage of the Discontents of the People to rise and make a new War, which
afterward proved true: For which words many of the Officers would immediately
have destroyed me, if God had not prevented them. Moreover, I heard Sir
Hardress Waller say to L. G. Cromwell (when they quartered at Kingston) We Will
order 10000 men for Ireland, but they shall never go thither: We Will give them
quarters, and if we have any occasion to make use of them, they are ready; if
not, we will disband them at Spring, and send them for Venice. Sir Hardress Waller
told Lieut. Col. Sadler and my self as much, when their Headquarters were at
Putney: My Regiment at their disbanding petitioned to have gone for Ireland, if
they would have transported them, and other Regiments would have done the like,
but it would not be granted, although they had fasted seven years for to have
relieved that Kingdom: and I know many men have been countenanced and ordered
to raise men for Ireland, and kept them together till they have undone
themselves, and then have been ordered again to disband: I my self have been
countenanced twice since the disbanding of my first Regiment: This Spring, I
had three Troops that were willing to have engaged in that Service, and L. G.
Cromwell gave me orders to quarter them, promising me within few days I should
have a settlement for it, in the mean time the General put forth a Declaration,
That upon pain of death no man should take quarters without his Commission;
upon which I went to L. G. Cromwell again, and told him, I had given Order to
those three Troops to quarter according to his pointment, to which he answered,
that I should bring in my conditions, for my going to Ireland, to him in
Writing, and on Thursday after I should have a Settlement, which accordingly I
did, but nothing was done in it; whereupon the General did call me to a Council
of War for my giving Order to those Troops to quarter as aforesaid, and then L.
G. Cromwell did deny that he gave me any order to do it, and likewise tore his
own Order in pieces; and if I had not had good witness to prove it, I had dyed
for it. Again, Commissary Ireton asked me whether I could not go for Ireland
without 4, or 500 men at my heels? I told him if it were his own case, that
Enemies were in his habitation, he would go with as much strength as he could
to remove them; and that my Wife and Childrens losses were as great as any that
came from Ireland, and as yet never received any thing from the Parliament,
which augmented my desires for that Service, to prevent their ruin: To which
he replied, he would thresh for a living rather then to keep up Forces to
burden the Country: I told him that it would be a greater burden to the
Country, if they did disband those Forces, and raise other; for it would be
time, within a fortnight, to be going, if they did intend to send any Force
thither this year: He answered that they must be disbanded: These things being
rightly considered, I offer it to all rational men, whether they intended for
the Relief of Ireland, or no. And now to add to my afflictions, They have cast
me again into prison, for no cause, that I know of, but for owning what we have
fought for these seven years; only they pretend for my being in the Party that
was betrayed at Burford in May lost; of which I will give you an Account;
(viz.) I hearing there was a Warrant from Derby house (who are resolved, as
appears, to act what they please) to apprehend me; and knowing by sad
experience what it was to fall into their hands, I was loath to expose my self
to public view, but withdrew my self into the Country, and being there, I
heard of two Regiments that refused to go for IRELAND, and (desiring to be
satisfied upon what Grounds they did it) I came to the Party the same day they
were betrayed; where, meeting with Cornet Den, he told me that they had no
other end in what they did, but to maintain their Engagements made at Triploe
Heath, from which many of the Officers had dissented and brought a reproach
upon themselves and the whole Army; therefore they are bound in conscience to
do their endeavor to take it off before they desert this Nation: To which I
answered, If that were their Resolution, then I should be glad to see them
continue faithful therein: He said, If I go to their Randezvouz I should know
more of the business, for the General had sent Commissioners to them, who are
to read their Letters at the head of our Troops, and much of the day was spent
therein: as they marched off their Randezvouz, a party of horse appeared in the
field, who, they thought to be the Generals, immediately drew up, resolving to
stand to their Engagements, saying one to another, It was not the King only
they fought against, but to take of Tyranny and Oppression from the People,
exercised now more then ever; the party that did appear was Reynolds men, and
coming near Newbridg Cornet Den understood they were interceted by Colonel
Reynolds, and seemed to be angry with the Commissioners, telling them, they had
abused them, for they told them that the General said, That there should be no
hostility used against them, till they had sent an Answer, which as yet (they
knew) they had no time to write; Major White answered, That he would lose his
life if Reynolds had any Order from the General to keep the bridge; but when
they came thither, Reynolds affirmed, That he had an Order from the General to
keep it, and said, he would lose his life there before they should pass; so
they, unwilling to draw their swords against their fellow Soldiers, marched
over the River a little above the bridge, then Major White entreated the
Officers to draw into some Town to quarter, and to consider of that Answer he
had drawn up for them, and did engage his life, that the General should not
come near them, nor so much as a hair of their heads be touched by him, until
they had returned their Answer; upon which Engagement they went into Quarters,
where, before they could finish their Answer, the General fell upon shooting in
at every window where they saw light, at which Alarm I wondered, hearing what
had past betwixt the Commissioners and them, for they had not been above an
hour and half in their quarters before they fell upon them; as for my own
particular I had taken up my Lodging at an Inn upon my own account, having no
Command, nor being under any, yet was robbed of all I had, and carried before
the General, who asked me, What I did there, and who sent me? I answered him, I
was able to go about my own business without sending; and for my being there, I
was a Volunteer at the first, and I hoped I might be so still, and till that
which we fought for were accomplished, if there were but ten men appeared for
it, I would make eleven. What need you Col. Air, (says the General) is not
all done that we fought for? have we not cut off the Kings head, and the Lords
heads? I answered, That was not it we fought for, but to remove Oppression and
Tyranny, which yet remains? Lieu. Genesis Crumwel said, Hark, my Lord, what an
insolent fellow is this, he tells you that Tyranny remains? I told him it was
evident. Upon that Lieu. Genesis Crumwel railed at me, saying, I was a wicked
fellow: I desired him to name any one particular action he ever knew me commit.
But to stop my mouth he bid the Marshal take me away, and after three days I
was brought by the Generals Warrant to Oxford Goal, a Copy of which I have here
inserted. Viz.

YOu are herewith to receive from the Marshal General the body of Mr Eyres, who
was taken the 14; of this instant month with the Mutineers at Burford, in
hostility against the Parliament and Army, and him safely keep, until he shall
be released by due course of Law, and hereof you are not to fail, as you will
answer the contrary.

Given under my Hand and Seal, May 18. 1649. T. FAIRFAX.

To the Keepers of the County Prison in the Castle of Oxford.
For the Charge of being in Arms against a Parliament I utterly abhor and deny
it; I know a Representative legally and successively chosen by the People, is
the only means under God to preserve the Nation from Slavery, (provided they be
not chosen and kept together by the power of the Sword,) and I should rejoice
to see such an opportunity offered for all that party in the Nation that have
stood up for their Liberty, to elect an equal and free Parliament; and for
that party, though they were declared Mutineers, they were not declared Enemies
when I was with them, neither were they men that had deserted their
Engagements, but such as did desire to be faithful in what they had promised to
the People. The Parliament formerly pleaded for their Justification, touching
the late War against the King, That Safety was the supreme Law, and that the
People were the best Judges of Safety; That although a General had power to
command his Army, and to punish with death those that refused to obey his
Commands in order to safety, yet if a General should go about to turn his
Artillery upon his own Soldiers, they might not only reason the Case with him,
but hold his hands also; and that their Act in so doing, being in order to
safety, was no resisting of Authority, or transgression of Law, I shall leave
it to the judicious Reader to make application. But to proceed; It is a sad
thing when those that do rule will not keep Engagements, nor suffer others. I
have lived among heathens, who have nothing but the light of nature to be their
Rule, yet they abhor men that break their Engagements, or commit any dishonest
action, saying, Such men shall go to a bad place when they dye. If heathens
live thus, let all us that name the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Oh let
no man any longer make Religion a cloak for deceit, nor take it upon them to be
Christians, when they live and act below the very heathen: For know that God
will not be mocked, but will punish for those things, though they prosper for a
time, for the Lord says, Their day is coming wherein they shall fall, and
there shall be none to help them.

Gentlemen, I cannot forget how often you have declared, that you would do your
endeavor to make this Nation free; if you intend it, I desire you would declare
in your last Act, (wherein you say it shall be Treason for any man to speak
against the present Government,) whether you mean the Government we enjoyed
under the late King? If so, you all know that the Foundation of that Government
was established by Theft and Robbery, when the sixth Duke of Normandy his
Bastard took advantage of the Distractions of this Nation, came over with an
Army, and persuaded the Britains to sit still, and he would ease them of all
the burdens the Saxons laid upon them, and would preserve them in all their
Rights and Privileges, they being willing to be eased harkened to him, but he
had no sooner overcome the Saxons, but broke all his Engagements he had made to
the People of the Nation, turning them all out of their possessions, except
Kent, and carried most of the Gentry beyond the Sea, and gave the Lands and
Possessions of this Realm to his Soldiers, making of them Knights, and Lords,
and Freeholders in every County, and such of the common people that would use
their own Land, were to enjoy it from them under the tenure of Knight Service
and Villanage, but since have brought it to Copy and Lease-hold, forcing our
Ancestors from generation to generation, to buy their own Lands, or else their
children were turned out of doors: to maintain this they banished all the
Ministry, and brought Priests from France, and made them Masters of all the
Pulpits in the Land, who preached up the Power the Bastard had thus got, to be
the Power of God, and to be the Lords anointed: also he erected a Foundation of
Laws, summoning the people from all parts of the Land to their new made Courts
at Westminster, the people then crying out for a Parliament, which was granted
to them, but none suffered to have a Vote in the Election of the Members but
Freeholders, which were most of them their own creatures; so to this day most
of the People know not their Rights, for the Law is in an unknown tongue,
therefore this Government cannot set them free, and there is yet none other
established; and if you mean that which remains in your wills, you did ill to
cut off the Kings head; for going about to rule according to his will. I cannot
forget that you have declared and voted the People under God the Fountain and
Original of all just Power, I therefore desire you to cast your selves upon the
People, whose Servants ye ought to be, that they might immediately choose a new
Representative, who may erect a just Foundation of Government, and proffer it
to the People for their assent, that they may choose who they please to see it
executed, that for ever there may be a distinction between Law Makers and Law
Executors. This I offer as my Judgment, conceiving it to be every English-mans
Birthright; Thus hoping that you that take it upon you to be the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, will not keep my liberty from me, but allow me my
Birthright, who do remain yours to serve you for the good of the Nation,

From my unjust Imprisonment in Oxford Goal, June 11. 1649. WILL. AIR.

FINIS.

