An Exact and full RELATION OF THE LAST FIGHT, Between the KINGS Forces and Sir
WILLIAM WALLER. Sent in a Letter from an Officer in the Army to his friend in
London.

Printed to prevent misinformation.

LONDON Printed for Ben. Allen, in Popes-Head-Alley.

July 5. 1644.

AN EXACT AND FVLL RELATION OF THE LAST FIGHT between the KINGS Forces and Sir
WILLIAM WALLER.
From Borton the place of our Randevous the 30th of June, 1644.
WE have thought good to give you the best and truest Relation of our late
passages, and Gods providence toward us. After several days marching; on
thursday night last about seven of the Clock we faced the Kings body at
Cropready bridge near Banbury, and all day, the next day, and yesterday till
noone being Saturday, about ten of the clock in the forenoone we discovered
their Army to be upon the march toward Daintry: and as some (who were since
taken prisoners) affirm, their intent was from thence to York: Whereupon
command was given to some particular persons to advance after them, and fall in
their Reere: But it proved the middle of their whole body.

According to the order, our Regiment of Horse and Collonell Vandrosses,
advanced under the Command of Lieutenant General Middleton, and Captain
Butler, Adjutant General, and four Companies of Farnbam foot, and five
Companies of Sir Williams own Regiment, under the Command of Lieutenant
Collonell Baines, (sometime a Brewer in London) Quartermaster General to the
foot.

They had placed a Guard to secure Cropready-bridge, which we readily beat
off, and made the bridge our own by a party of Dragoons, and past over the
River between us and Banbury, (for till then we were on the one side of the
River, and they on the other) being over the River, through misinformation,
we too speedily pursued the enemy, (being informed that their whole body was
marched away, when as a third part of them were left behind unknown to us.
We pursued them above a mile, till we came to a bridge, where their Foot made
a stand, drew up and faced us; we being within Musket shot of them, only our
four eldest Troops, (viz.) Sir Arthurs, Captain Okees; Captain Foleyes, and
Captain Gardners: They overthrew a Carriage to barricado the bridge, and
planted it with Musketeers. This occasioned our Retreat back again, being
unwilling too far to engage our selves, having no Foot within above half a
mile of us, and discovering their Army behind us, upon our retreat we
discovered the party of Foot (drawn over with us) by an unresistable body of
the enemies Horse, of some thirty Troops, and two regiments of Foot put to
disorderly retreat, which hastened our march back again, and coming back we
found the way to the bridge within a quarter of a mile, stopped with the enemies
Horse and Foot, who were got between our Foot and the bridge: For whose relief
(although our way back lay on the right hand, we advanced up to their body on
the left hand up the hill, and with our four Troops charged the Kings own
Regiment, and put them to a retreat; but the other Troop commming down upon
us, (there being of them in all some three Regiments) with whom we were in no
case able to deal, we were necessitated to retreat very disorderly, having put
their body of Horse into a combustion, having slain three Colonels, whereof one
was Sir William Butler, a Papist of Kent, Lieutenant general of Horse (viz.)
Wilmut was sore wounded, and his Lieutenant General taken prisoner, and
committed to the custody of two Soldiers, who in our disorderly retreat lost
him again: We slew diverse other of their Officers both in our charge and in
our retreat, the way being filled with their foot and horse, many whereof were
wounded sorely, slew others, and took some prisoners. Coming back to the
Bridge, the Hamblets very honorably and stoutly made good the Bridge, kept
back the enemy, and recovered three pieces of our Ordnance, which we had lost;
we having lost some half a dozen small pieces besides, which were unadvisedly
drawn over before the Foot were ready to march along with them, and the men
running a way with the horse, we could not draw them back again: being over th
bridge, we rallied together, and drew our body toward anoher place of the
river, where the enemy made show of coming over, but we kept them on the other
side; although we could not attain what we attempted, yet we hereby bravely
caused them to draw back their whole body from their march onward toward
Daintry, which must retard their journey to York. Having faced them several hours
together, toward evening the King sent his trumpeter to our General, with a
message to this effect, that if our General pleased, he would send a Herald of
Arms, which at the head of our Army should proclaim a gracious Message. The
answer from our General was returned thus, That he had no commission to treat
with his Majesty concerning peace; but if he pleased to send to the two Houses
of Parliament, we should remain his faithful subjects. In the time of our
facing we exchanged several Cannon shot, as we conceive forty shot apiece,
but through Gods mercy, all their Cannon shot gave us but the loss of one
horse, not one man; but our shot, the Lord so ordering it, caused them to draw
back their body out of our reach, where they abode all night. We took in the
fight two Horse Colors of theirs, and we lost three Foot Colors, we have lost
Lieutenant Colonel Baines, who as we hear, would not take quarter, we have
lost Col. Wembs, Collonell of our Artillery, and Lieutenant Collonell Baker,
Lieutenant Collonell to Sir Williams Regiment of foot.

We have lost of ours, and taken prisoners near upon one hundred, or six
score. Captain Oaks has lost some ten men, whereof one Master Cresey it one:
Captain Gardner has lost near as many: Captain Foleys four, and three
wounded, whereof one Thomas Steme, an apprentise formerly to Master Lloyd, who
lived in Watling-street is one, being shot into the thigh, the thigh bone
broke, and run through both buttocks with a tuck: We this day sent him and
another, one John Nicklis to Warwick, there to be carefully provided for. We
have lost but one Officer in all our Regiment, praised be God, and that is
Captain Perries Cornet.

It was an infinite mercy of God we had not been all lost, which we desire may
be taken notice of, with solemn thanks to God almighty, who was our only
helper: as also for the double good effect it wrought; viz. it drew their body
back from marching toward York; and we relieved some six hundred horse that
were coming to join with us, whom the enemy had faced above a quarter of an
hour, coming from Northampton, who had not we take this course, in all
probability they had been all cut off. We have taken a Major of the Kings
own Regiment, his name is Web, he is mortally wounded, not likely to
recover: Our Officers and Soldiers are very well, and very cheerful,
willingly content to go on with the work, if we can but be supplied with bread
and water, our lodging having for several nights been, and still is, on Gods
cold earth, over-shaddowed with the Canopie of heavens sweet Firmament, and God
in much mercy has afforded us sweet temperate weather; nothing has been so
short with us as Bread for men, the earth afford ng grass for our horses. We
still continue facing one another, the River between us, we maintain
Cropready-bridge, and hinder their passage over to us, waiting what they will
do, and expecting further supplies, either from Col. Brown, Lord Gray, Colonel
Murey, or the Earl of Denbigh, whom it pleases God to send. They have a far
larger body of horse then we, but for foot we dare encounter, being no ways
fearful to deal with their horse.

We desire not to bury the mercies of God in oblivion, but to tell of his
loving kindness, and desire that all our friends may be acquainted with his
goodness to us in this delivery, that they may be the better stirred up, both
in public and private to bless God, and rejoice with us.

We desire your prayers for our good success, and that is the greatest comfort
that under God we have, that we have a stock of prayers still going on among
all Gods people. His Majesty was under a tree in the field not above
Pistoll*shot where we charged his horse, as some of our own men, and some of
their prisoners affirm. We have about 80. of theirs prisoners; there is now
another Trumpeter come from his Majesty, but for what we know not, it is sure
no parley, for our Cannon plays at them. My Capt. man, Henry Philips the
Barbar is taken prisoner: my man Thomas Sugar charged with me, and came off,
blessed be God, safe and well, and did good service.

All our Officers and Soldiers in this business behaved themselves very
stoutly. Lieutenant General Middleton, and Adjutant General Butler, charged
with us very gallantly; Lieutenant General Middleton was accidentally
dismounted, and one of Captain Oaks his men dismounted, and mounted him on his
horse, and after brought off the Lieutenant Generals own horse and pistols,
for which the Lieutenant General has made him a Captain Lieutenant, and he
shall be his child so long as he lives. I fear the Post will be gone, I take
leave, a thousand times farewell, the Lord preserve you and us all, which is
the desire of thy truly loving Brother till death,

Tho. Ellis.

Postscript.
THe Trumpeter from his Majesty, as I hear, brings this message: that the King
will give our General leave to march away with his foot and horse, provided he
will leave his Artillery and Ammunition behind him, but blessed be our God, we
are not in that strait as yet; were we, we would rather choose to leave some
of our blood to do him good. Several friends I know will send to see this
Letter, therefore I pray thee bestow a dozen of points thereon,

Vale.
FINIS.

