The EARL of PEMBROKE'S SPEECH Jn the House of PEERS, Upon debate of the
Citie's Petition for a Personal Treaty, to be had with His MAJESTY in London.

And also upon debate of those Reasons given by their Lordships unto the
Commons, for not sending the three Propositions before a TREATY.

Printed in the year, 1648.

The EARL of PEMBROKE'S SPEECH Jn the House of Peers, upon debate of the
Cities Petition for a Personal Treaty, to be had with His Majesty in London.
The CITIZENS being withdrawn, his Lordship spoke as follows.

My Lords,
I Thank God you had no reason to make me your Speaker: And truly (all things
considered) I have as little reason to be a Speaker as any man: And yet I will
speak; for I have been learning these seven years how to do it extrumpere. I
have helped too to baul down Bishops and Scholars, and Ministers for dumb-dogs,
and do you think I Will be a dumb-dog too? A halter I will: If I should sit
still and say nothing, and let His Majesty come to London, that were the way to
make me dumb indeed, for I can say no more for my self then a dog. I hope the
door is fast, that the Citizens do not hear me, because I Will speak my mind:
What though I do not know my own mind? Yet I Will speak it as well as I can.
It Is known I am a true Englishman, though I cannot speak good English, and as
honest a man too as my Lord Say can make me; and therefore (my Lords) now I
have lived long enough with you, I mean to dye with the House of Commons, or
else (they say) I shall be no Lord; And so say I to you: Grass and hay, (my
Lords) we are all mortal, and must be tied up to the Manger.

I have been for the City too in my time, when they would pay their money; hear
reason, and invite us to dinners. Hang them Rascals, they cannot say but we
have given them their Belly-fulls too, (I pray God they do not hear me.) This
time twelvemonth they made a young man of me, and yet (as simple as you think
me) I am an old man: They drew me into a new War, and made me wait upon a new
Speaker, and Vote His Majesty's coming to London: But I was a mad man, I knew
not what I did then; for, if the Army had not had the more mercy, I had been a
Traitor as well as the rest, for ought I know. Do ye think then I Will Vote the
King home again? no I warrant you, I am an old Bird, and scorn Chafe, or to
be made a Traitor any more for any King in Christendom. I am an old thing made
new now: My man Michael tells me I am an Independent. I think I am a good
Christian, I; but Citizens and Scots are Jews: And who knows but that
Personall-Treaty may be a new name for Popery?

You may bring in Popery, and break the Covenant (if you please my Lords) but I
dare not. I am sure we have reason to regard it; For we have gotten well by it:
we have gotten the Crown Lands, Church Lands, the Cavaliers Lands; every man's
Lands too, if we please, and the Devil and all: And how shall we keep them, if
we do not keep the Covenant? For my part, I Will keep to my Oaths, and rather
then part with them, Dam me I Will swear down all this Personal Treaty.

And good reason too; for they say it will undo all that we have been doing
these seven years: And for my part, I thought all had been undone already, then
what needs any more undoing by a Treaty? My Lords, if we must undo, let us
undo as the House of Commons does. They do one thing to day, and undo it to
morrow. They Voted they would never make any more Addresses to the King, and
made us Vote so too, and then they made us un-vote all again. And truly, I
think this is a hard Chapter, for, I cannot read the meaning of it, but I am
sure they do not mean a Treaty, if they can help it.

I like the way of sending Propositions, I; for, I love to go on errands. I am
sure it is an Honorable employment for an old man to be the States
half-penny-Boy; and I am glad, the Commons will not hear your Reasons for the
Kings coming, before He have signed the three Propositions. For, observe (my
Lords) if they should hear Reason, they might go whistle: Mistake me not, I
mean if they should hear any Reason but their own, and I think that is all the
Reason in the world, for it is Reason of State, or the States own Reason. There
I think I hit it; for, all other Reason is Malignant and High Treason. Why then
should we Treat with the King? For he will talk Malignant Reason, and reason of
State too, but then, here is the matter (my Lords) he will not talk the States
Reason, and therefore judge ye, whether the State have any reason to talk with
Him, when He will talk nothing but Treason, and by that means (my Lords) make
you, or me, or any of us all Traitors to our Faces. Trust Him that will, for my
part, I shall have as little to say to Him as any of you all, and yet you fee I
am a good Speaker, according to the States Reason.

I think, we never had good world, since we had so much Reason: For my part
(I Will speak my mind plainly) I never had any reason of my own, nor will I own
ever any but Michael Oldsworth's and the States, and by the life of Pharaoh, I
think they two are as reasonable Creatures as any in the world. But to this
point of Reason I mean to speak more, now I come to examine your Lordships
Reasons of State, which the House of Commons have Voted contrary to the States
Reason: For as I take it (my Lords) they are the STATE, and you know we are all
bound to submit to the STATE, or else we are Traitors; I am sure few of us but
have been made so for not submitting, and it is Gods mercy we are not all
Traitors. Howsoever, I Will be one no more, if I can help it, but keep as well as
I can to the States Reason, and I advise your Lordships to do so too; for they
care not a Fig for all your Reasons, nor I neither. God's Death, I am sure some of
you have no reason to the contrary; you know how you were whip't with the
Black-Rod lately; and I can tell you, there is a black-Book too at the
Headquarters: If you will do reason, ye may, but (mark ye, my Lords) it is very
dangerous to talk Reason, it is the only way to be put in the black-Book, and
then you know the black-Rod follows. I am an old man, I, and some of you are
old enough too, but (you see) we are not past whipping, and yet you will not
take warning.

Howsoever, I shall have a care of one, and in the mean time see what reason
you have to venture to talk Reason to the STATE. If you were their
Fellow-Commoners, you might have some reason to make bold to give them Reasons,
but being as it is, me thinks you might know your distance. You say you would
not have the three propositions offered to the King before the Treaty; First,
because the Citizens here, and diverse Counties have petitioned for it. The
Citizens! It Is true, they have brought us in a Petition here for it. But the
more Rascals they: They may go home and say their Prayers; for, they are not
like to be heard here. What do they pray when they should curse? Dam me do they
think the States a Camelion to live upon air, good words, and Petitions, and
Treaties? They were all for a new-war, and drew me in too this time Twelve
months, and now they are against a new-war. Is there any Reason in this, when
the States have not yet done their business? must They do and undo as well as
the STATE, and now by doing nothing quite undo the STATE? They shall be hanged
first, Dam me they shall: I am somewhat the more eager against this, (my Lords)
because you say it is Reason; but yet I hope the Citizens do not hear me. I
would not have all that I speak, to be spoken on the House-Tops, because
usually (my Lords) I seldom speak, but I am o'th Top of the House before I am
aware. But this I say, why should they stand for Peace and Treaties, that first
set afoot the war! And now when we expect they should serve another
Apprentiship to the STATE to maintain the war, they meant to leave Reformation
like Dun in the mine, and are become so Popish as to Cross us with Treaties.
If they were for a new-war this time Twelvemonth, it is all the Reason in the
world they should be so now. What though the Case be not the same, nor the
STATE the same now that it was then? I hope the Cause and the State are alive
still, and will be as long as the King and the Cavaliers live; and outlive them
too; for, They are the Same still, and fitter for another world then the STATES
world: For the STATES world runs round, and has done so these seven years, but
the King and the Cavaliers are the same still: And therefore (my Lords) I shall
conclude with as good Logic as any I have left in the University, as long as
the King and the Cavoliers are the same, the CAUSE must needs be the same,
though the STATE be not the same, but mangled, and rent, and patch't, and
new-modeld, and the Covenant likewise cracked all to pieces. And where is your
Reason now (my Lords?) does it not follow then, that they ought not to take the
same Course to maintain the war against the King and the Cavaliers, and not
trouble the STATE thus with Treaties? especially, seeing Guilds Hall is the
same, the Excise, the City-Bags, and Public Faith too, are all the very same
still, and as full and fluent as ever. And if these fellows that come here to
vex the STATE thus with Petitions, will not go home in Peace, to forward a
new-war, and be the same men again that they have been, I hope the Army will
come and pickle them up in the Tower, and serve them the Same Sauce, their
fellows had this time Twelvemonth. For what other end (I pray you) do we keep
the Army, or the Army keep us?

And now (my Lords) that I have done with the Citizens, I shall fall upon the
Counties. What have they to do with Petitions? they are out of their Calling:
they should follow the Plough, and let the STATE alone to Harrow, and fetch in
Harvest. I warrant you they had rather have a King, and see us Quartered, then
endure any more Free Quarter; but I think the States-Guard quartered them
sufficiently, and made drawn-Cats of 'em, I mean the Surrey-men, so that I
think they, or the rest, will have little stomach again to come a Petitioning.
What reason then (my Lords) have you to regard what They say for a Treaty? They
can but talk (you see) and the State can fight, and be never the more Traitors
for it; but if these fight, they are Traitors presently, as soon as we have
conquered them. I tell you (my Lords) if the STATE had voted me a Soldier, I
would have no more mercy upon these Fellows than if they were Traitors in
gingerbread. What though They would bite? I have ventured ere now the tender'st
Member that I have, with a biting Thing, and layn in a month for it under the
Surgeons hands; and I Will venture my Tongue with any Biter of them all, but I Will
be sure to have a care of my Head for the service of the STATE; and who knows,
whether I may keep it if there be a Treaty? But I wonder what good my head
would do them: I am not weary of it yet, for, I never much troubled it, nor
have been much troubled with it, and yet I should be much troubled to part with
it. It Is true, I for my part never got any thing by it, and I suppose no Body
else will: Therefore they had as good let it alone. But neither you have any
Reason to venture yours, nor I mine; and therefore to this part of your reason
(my Lords) I say the Counties are as very Rascals as the Citizens, that would
have us to pull an old House upon our Heads by a Personal Treaty. They would
have a disbanding of the Army too, would they? Bus they shall snap short; For,
I love the Army, Dammee I do dearly. Sink me, they would have us disband I
think too, and sit no longer; but if the Army will love us, we will love the
Army; for, why should the Counties be so much against the Soldiers, poor
wretches! Consider (my Lords) an twere your own case; for, it might have
pleased God to have made some of us Soldiers. And so (my Lords) I think I have
mauled your first reason against the three Propositions.

Your second Reason is, because His Majesty has often declared, that he will
sign nothing till all things be concluded, and therefore that the sending of
those three must needs cause delay to the Treaty. I would have you to know (my
Lords) I am not for delays, I hate them; for, I think I am as hasty as any
man; but yet I care not, if we delay a Treaty with God or the King till
Doomsday, and that I think is a fair time; for, it may be to morrow for ought
we know: And it is a very fit time, I think, since His Majesty will agree to
nothing till the conclusion of all things. I wish him well, he was my Master,
but I care not much for seeing him, nor for kissing his hand; I can kiss my
Lady May, and she is my Mistress. I care not for kissing of men: I am an old
man, and it is not for me to be kissing: but if she be for a personal Treaty,
then indeed this Reason holds good against delay, and I am of your opinion.

Then you say too, it is contrary to the rules of treating to grant any thing
before the Treaty. Have we done what we list all this while, and must we go by
Rule now? Then it will follow too, that we must let the King rule again. He is
in a fine condition to rule, is he not? I thought we could have ruled one
another better than he. I am sure my Lord SAY rules me, as well as ever I would
desire; and I believe he rules you as well as me; and then we can never be
against the Rules of Treating, as long as he rules the Roste, because he says
a Treaty is out of all Rule, and none but unruly Fellows do stand for it, and
it is not for our Honors (my Lords) to be unruly: But Dammee, I think we
cannot be unruly; for, we have as good a disciplined Army as any is in the
world to rule us.

But I say further, that it was the desire of the Scots to have His Majesty
come to some of his houses near London, and therefore we should yield to it
presently, to keep a fair correspondence with them. Dammee and sink me (my
Lords) what have we to do with them now? we had occasion to use them a while
ago, but now that they have helped us to conquer the King, we have done with
them. We (my Lords) must be ruled, but the Scots (you see) are the Lords of
misrule. For my part, I Will have nothing to do with them; I cannot abide a Scot;
for, a Scot switch't me once, and cracked my crown with my own staff, the
very virge of my Lord-Chamberlainship, and now they are all coming to switch
you too. They say Hamilton is their General. He is a Duke; I cannot abide a
Duke, because I am not one my self; but do not I look as like a Duke as
Hamilton? Well, I might have been one, if I had had wit enough to keep that
honor which I had: But I had honor; what then had I to do with wit? That Is for
Poor Rogues; for, wit and honor seldom meet together. I know many men count
swearing to be wit; and if I had been so witty as to keep close to my Oaths at
Court, and not broke them by playing false with the King, and forswear my
self by taking the State's Oaths, and the Scots Oath: Dammee I had been as
good a Duke before this time, as any Scot of them all. But hang Dukes, we are
Princes now, an't please the Commons.

As for the King's coming to one of his houses, I know not what that means, for
he has never a house: I say they are the State's houses time out of mind, at
least these seven years, ever since His Majesty was turned out of doors. I am
afraid, if he should come to any of his houses, and we not agree with him, nor
let him be King again, we shall be turned out of our House, and the Commons out
of their House; and then we shall not have a house to hide our heads in. Mark
ye too (my Lords) it must be to some one of his houses near London. How do you
like that? I am sure some of you have no houses near London, and ye thought to
make bold with His Majesty's. God's Death, I thought ye had housed him for that
purpose, and will ye now give over housekeeping?

You say likewise, there is more reason to offer a Treaty with him now, then
there was heretofore at Oxford and Uxbridge. Well (my Lords) you may do what
you will. Sink me if I don't live and die with the House of Commons. I am for
the State, I: But if you will undo your selves with reason, I cannot help it: you
see the Cavaliers have undone themselves with it already. And if you will beggar
your selves with it too, and leave me to keep house here by my self, you may.
You know the House of Commons and I are all one; and if you leave the House of
Peers to me and two or three more, the Commons House and ours will soon be
all one too. Hang reason then, will you provoke the State, and leave my company
for a little reason? You know whither my Lord of Holland is gone for his
reason, and what is become of my Lord Francis and the rest, and where His
Majesty is with all his reason, and where I am that have reason. You talk of
treating at Oxford and Uxbridge. It Is true, His Majesty baffled us with reason:
but how has he prospered after it? I believe it never did any body any good;
and I am sure, though we had no reason to get the better, yet we got the better
with no reason: And therefore because we thrived so well then without reason, I
think it is wisely done to deal out of all reason ever since. And so (my Lords)
I think I have tickled you for all your Reasons, against our sending of the
three Propositions before a Treaty.

Now (my Lords) in the next place I Will prove the Propositions themselves to be
so reasonable, that I know you will never trust to your own Reasons again. What
though they are unreasonable, yet they are not so, if I keep to my former
distinction, that is, not according to Reason of State, but the States Reason;
for seeing a Treaty would quite undo the STATE, sure it is all the reason in
the world, they should propound things out of reason, on purpose to prevent
Treating. Therefore I Will maintain the first Proposition is most reasonable,
that the King should recall all Proclamations and Declarations against us; and
well he escapes so too; for, I am sure he slandered us sufficiently with a
matter of truth, though he called us out of our Names: God's Death! which of all us
are Rebels and Traitors? Do I look like one? what, am I a Faux or a Catesby? I
am sure I had no hand in this last powder plot; nor the first neither: I scorn
to be a Traitor, I dammee; what Declarations and Proclamations to cut off our
Heads, and not recall them? you may choose whether you will have 'em recalled or
no, but sink me I Will have 'em recalled. What shall our heads be fitted with an
Iron Cap-case, and set a sunning these Dog-daies upon the top of the house here
to spoil our complexions? dammee we must all come to it, if we be Rebels and
Traitors: Traitor then in his face, if he will not recall his Proclamations;
for, they will make us traitors in spite of our teeths, if we do not make them
treason against the STATE. What though the House of Commons have made us
traitors in many things in spite of our teeths? I hope the STATE may do any
thing? and be no treason: Therefore I say these Proclamations are treason
against the STATE, and so not to recall them is to be a traitor against the
STATE.

But the Cavaliers say, if the King recalls them, then he makes Himself and
Them to be the traitors. And all the reason in the world believe me, for, do
what we can we cannot make them traitors; why then should not he make them so
to our hands? for, I am sure we use them like traitors; and one had better be
traitors (I think) than used so: But they are stubborn fellows, their
shoulders are broad enough to bear any thing, and therefore the STATE has
reason to make them the Traitors I remember when they proclaimed my Lord of
Essex a Traitor, and my Lord SAY here a traitor, all that stuck to them
traitors. I am sure I stuck to them close, and yet I think we are never the
worse traitors for being proclaimed. What Is a Proclamation? I am sure there are
some in the STATE that have torn his Majesty's Proclamations. How can they be
Traitors then? But I Will tell you (my Lords) who are the traitors. The Kings
evil Counselors are the traitors; for, they never left him till we shut him
up close prisoner, and put them away. We are the Kings great Council now: What
though we will not let him come amongst us? yet I am sure we are his best
Council; for, we save him a great deal of trouble, and dispatch all things
for him without a hearing, and so I hope we shall dispatch him too, if he will
not recall. Judge you then (my Lords) whether he had not best recall his
Proclamations.

Now, for the second Proportion for settling of Church Government, there is all
the Reason in the world for it: For, I say every tub ought to stand upon his
own bottom: Why then should not the Church of England be settled upon a Scotch
bottom? Here Is such a deal of do about a Church and Religion; I tell you
plainly (my Lords) I am an Independent; I love it better than Presbytery, and
yet I think they are both but a tale of a tub: But howsoever, it is an ill tub
that has no bottom: therefore (my Lords) I keep to my first saying, the Church
will never be settled, till every tub stands upon its own bottom. Judge you
then, whether I am not fit to be a Reformer: The Assembly says, we must reform
according to the Word of God. For my part, I never trouble my self to read a
word of it, and yet you know I am an Assembly-man. What need I read the Word of
God, when I keep a Chaplain to read it? Besides, they say the reading of it
would spoil my oaths, and I Will not leave one word of my oaths for all the word
of God: But I am willing to be rid of the Scotch Oath, because they say it is
taken out of the Word of God, and it may be so for ought I know. But yet I
would feign keep the Covenant, because it has kept many of us these hard
times, and because it keeps the Bishops away from us. I cannot abide Bishops,
they have so much learning and antiquity: I hate Surplices too, ever since Mr.
Henderson preached it up for the Whore of Babylons smock. It seems he had taken
it up often, for he had many a Bout with her (as Mr. Sedgwick says) now and
anon too: But hang the whore of Babylon; she is an an old whore, and I am an
old man (I thank God) but I cannot abide old whores, nor you neither (my Lords)
I hope. Therefore judge you, whether His Majesty ought not to settle
Church Government presently, that all old whores may be excommunicated.

As for our third Proposition, for the settling of the Militia, I know not well
what to say to it. This Militia is a hard word, and so is public Faith, but
yet the Citizens made a shift to swallow it. The Devill's in their guts, they
will down with any thing these hard times; and they will down with Militia too
if we would let them. Sure, it is a very hard word; for, we have much ado to
make His Majesty part with it, and we are as loath to part with it as His
Majesty. But I think we have made him part with it in spite of his teeth. What
though he will not give it us? we have it already, and we are fools (I think)
if we do not keep it. What, take away our Arms? does he think to make the
STATE cross the cudgells, and be Popish again? The STATE shall order Hammond
to trip up his heels first, and if he cannot do it, Rolph shall go and make
him kick up his heels. He is a member of the STATE's Militia; he may do it.
Dammee he may, for, no body that I see dares question him. Judge you then,
whether His Majesty had not as good let us cut his throat with the Militia as
without it. And so (my Lords) I think the three Propositions are very
reasonable, and that you will never trouble the STATE with any more reasons
against them.

Now (my Lords) for the Cities Petition here before us, I have but one word
more to say. I say, their Petition is worse than your reasons. They would have
a Treaty too, and no propositions; but they are not half so mannerly to the
STATE as your Lordships; for, you give reasons, but they bring not a word of
reason that I can understand; and yet they will have no nay to a Treaty. Hang
'em Rascals; it is to save their purses. They had rather save their purses,
than themselves or the STATE: but Dammee their purses and they are both
R^probates, and therefore I say the STATE must damn them both. It Is possible in
time the STATE may hang them for all their services; I do not mean the
Aldermen in their own chains; for, the Troopers will find other ware for
execution: And well they deserve it; for, the poor Army has taken the pains
to conquer the Kingdom, and them too; and yet the churles are so miserable,
they never could find in their hearts to give them so much as one meal of
thanksgiving; therefore I think after their cold breakfast before Colchesler,
they had best come and fall aboard upon the City. I am sure they have some
friends here that will bid them welcome: Shippon has a thousand Horse for the
purpose; and I think they will help pretty well to fetch recruits out of these
dogged fellows of the City, and keep out a personal Treaty.

Then mark (my Lords) they will have this Treaty to be in London. No other place
will serve them to have the King in but London. I thought they had Kings enough
at London already: but they will have King Charles; that is a malignant word if
you put God to it; for, it is the Cavaliers word, and I am for neither. I hope
(my Lords) you will be so too, and not turn Cavaliers now at last; for, what
should we do with King Charles? which of us can look him in the face? Dammee, I
think you have as little reason to treat with him as I. Well (my Lords) I have
spoken my mind; I pray you do not order the printing of my Speech; for, I would
not have every body know my mind before my self. I should speak oftener if I
might be less in print; for, a Speech in print is near kin to learning, and I
hate learning; I hate King; I hate King Charles. Do you do so too, and le'ts
love one another, and be obedient to the STATE: For, Dammee, sink me and rammee
nine miles into the bottom of a hedge, we are undone, if we do not make slaves
of the City, and keep off a personal Treaty.

FINIS.

