blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)By his
Excellency the Lord General AND THE Council of State.
WHereas Information is given that several persons disaffected to the Peace of
this Commonwealth, upon occasion of the present change of Government, do
assemble together in a riotous and tumultuous manner in the great Level of the
Fenns, and contrary to the Law in that case provided, throw in Enclosures, and
by violence and force dispossess the Adventurers for Dreining the said great
Level, who in pursuance of an Act of Parliament, have been established in the
possession of several proportions of Land allotted to them in recompense of
their said undertaking: which his said Excellency, and Council of State, taking
into consideration, and how illegal and prejudicial to the peace of this Nation
such proceedings are, have held themselves obliged straightly to forbid (as
they do hereby) all such unlawful Assemblies, and riotous Actings for the
future.

And to the end that all pretenses may be taken away from the said persons, The
Council has appointed uninteressed persons of the several Counties wherein the
Level lies, to be Commissioners, to be Resident from time to time upon the
place, to hear and determine in a short and easy way, particular Complaints
and Grievances in reference to the Dreining of the great Level, to whom all
such persons may in a peaceable manner make their application, and have right
done unto them; And therefore if any Persons whatsoever shall hereafter
continue the aforesaid force and violence, or disturb the said Adventurers, or
their Agents, in their possession, or proceeding in the Works of Dreining,
according to the said Act of Parliament, or otherwise demean themselves in any
riotous, disorderly, or tumultuous manner, they are to be looked upon as
disturbers of the public Peace, and be proceeded against accordingly; And all
Majors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other
Magistrates and Officers both Civil and Military, are hereby required to be
very careful and vigilant in the premises, and if any thing be done contrary
hereunto, they are to be aiding and assisting to bring the Offenders to
punishment.

Wednesday June 29. 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That
this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Thurloe Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Thomas Brewster, and by and for Henry
Hills, MCDLIII.


