By the Commissioners for Charitable Uses.
Hertf. ss.
WHereas there is a special Commission directed to Us, under the great Seal of
England, by his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, for the redressing of the
misimployment and concealing of Lands, Goods, and Stocks of Money heretofore
given to Charitable uses, as well by Kings and Queens of England, as by other
well-disposed persons. Some for relief of aged impotent and poor people; Some
for maintenance of sick and maimed Soldiers, and Mariners, Schools of
Learning, Free-Schools, and Scholars in Universities; Some for repair of
Bridges, Ports, Havens, Cause-wayes, Churches, Sea banks, and Highways: Some
for education and preferment of Orphans; Some for or toward relief, Stock or
maintenance for houses of Correction; Some for Marriages of poor Maids; Some
for supportation, aid and help of young Tradesmen, Handicrafts-men, and Persons
decayed: And others for relief or redemption of Prisoners or Captives, and for
aid or ease of any poor Inhabitants concerning payment of Fifteens, setting out
of Soldiers and other Taxes: We do therefore in conscience of our duty toward
God and Man, hereby order and declare, That if any poor person or persons
whatsoever, under any the qualifications before specified, do or shall find
themselves justly grieved with fraud or violence, in the concealment,
detention, or abuse of any (though never so rich and great Oppressors) of any
thing that is or shall be due to them, or any of them by the gift, appointment
or assignment of any well disposed persons, and shall make their grievances
appear before us to be real; That they and every of them so grieved, shall have
and receive sufficient remedy in the same both for what has been formerly
concealed or detained, as also for what is at present concealed or detained
from them amongst such cruel oppressors, their heirs, executors, and
administrators, if they or any of them have Assets in Law or Equity, with all
possible speed, and without any fear of their Adversaries malicious power or
greatness, either for the present or for time to come; And also that if any
person or persons shall out of a due sense and apprehension of the oppressed
and perishing condition of the Poor, make any just complaint of any concealment
or detention of any Gift, Appointment, or Assignment of any Lands, Rents, or
Moneys belonging to any Poor by whomsoever, and shall or can make a clear and
full discovery thereof, every such person or persons so doing shall and may
recover the same before us for the use of the said Poor, together with all the
arrears, against any such unjust dealers whomsoever, their heirs, executors, or
administrators, if they or any of them have Assets either in Law or Equity. And
for their further encouragement herein, the said Discoverers shall have and
receive a fourth part of the damages awarded against such Delinquents to be
allowed them for their charges, care and pains herein; and we do hereby further
will and require all Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor, and all other
Officers authorized by Law, to sue for and recover such rights to such uses, to
account for and pay what they have recovered to the use of any poor concerned
therein, And to sue for where none else will or can prosecute what they have
not recovered, being due, upon penalty to pay damages for their neglect
herein, being found guilty thereof by due Inquisition; And that none may be
ignorant how to perform what they would or should do herein, We do appoint all
that are or may be concerned in what is by us required as aforesaid, to repair
to Mr. Clement Farnham Clerk of the Commission, at his chamber in Grayes-Inne,
in the Garden Court up the six stone Steps, who shall and will be ready to
receive their presentiments, and to direct and instruct them at all convenient
times. For the better effecting whereof, we do hereby will and require all and
singular the Ministers of the County of Hertford, as well within liberties, as
without, to make publication hereof in their several congregations, both in
the forenoon and afternoon of the next Sabbath Day after his or their receipt
of the same, and afterward to cause it to be fixed on the Church-Doors, where
it may be easily seen and read by all people: And that no person or persons
whatsoever presume or attempt either to deface or take it off from thence, upon
their perils, to be proceed against as contemners of his Highness Authority and
Commission.

June 26. 1656. The Commissioners first sitting will be at the White-Hart in
Ware, on Wednesday the 16 of July, 1656.




