A REFUTATION OF Some of the False Conceits IN Mr. LOCKE's ESSAY CONCERNING
Humane Understanding. Together with a Brief Answer (in Latin) to the
Argumentation of GERARDVS de VRIES against the Innate Idea of GOD. By Edmund
Elys, sometime Fellow of Baliol-Colledge in Oxford.

(...) Plato.

LONDON: Printed for, and Sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in Newgatestreet,
and John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church-street. 1697.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE main Point in Debate in these Small Tracts, is, Whether it be most to the
Glory of the Father of Spirits, and to the Excellency of the Humane Immortal
Spirit, his Offspring; That an Idea of God, the Infinite Spirit, and Intellect,
should be Concreated with, or Ingenerated into it, when made in his Image,
Genesis 1. 27. Or such Idia only Rise up within it by its own Formation, in the
Exercise of Its-Self upon External Objects, under the Ministry of Sense, and
its Ratiocinations upon them. It is easily acknowledged, The Latter comes in as
an Additional to the Former, and Flows Necessarily from it. For the Invisible
Things of Him, from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the Things that are made, even his Eternal and Godhead, 1. it be
denied, but that This Method of Sense is nearest, and lies most open to us in
this Degenerate State, wherein we are sunk down into Matter and Sense.

But this will not Decide the Controversy; That alone can do it, that can give
us the Original Make of our Minds, or Intellectual Spirits; and wherein the
Divine Glory most manifested it self within us at the First: And that is the
Word of God Alone.

Now That bath Declared, The (...): The Idea of God, (as the Word Properly may
be Translated) is Manifested in men; For God has showed it to Them, by the
same Impress of Creation, by which He made Weights for the Wind, and a Way for
the Lightning of Thunder. He said, by Intellectual Inspiration, Job 28. 28. The
Fear of the Lord, That is Wisdom.

As now in Regeneration, or New Creation, the Spirit is Renewed, in the same
Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness and True Holiness, Ephesians 4. 24.
Colossians 3. 20. So He was First Created.

The Eclipse on this Idea is by Sin, and Corruption, the Alienation from God,
through the Ignorance in us, and because of the Blindness of our Hearts, v. 18.
We are now Condemned, as to the Mines, in Attaining Knowledge, and to work by
Sense first.

This is the Great Intention of the Following Animadversions, which according
to Solomon's Advice, Hastens to the Conclusion of the Matter, Eccles. 12. 13.
Comprising Much in Little; and so is Recommended to Divine Blessing, and
Public Acceptance; as Asserting from Scripture, and Reason Enlightened by it;
An Understanding cannot be an Understanding in the Glory and Dignity of the
First Creation; but it must have the Image, and Idea of the Infinite, All
Creating Understanding upon it, and within it; though infinitely exceeding it.

A REFUTATION OF Some of the False Conceits in Mr. LOCKE's ESSAY concerning
Humane Understanding.
Essay concerning Humane Understanding, Book 1. Chapter 2. TO Imprint any thing on
the Mind, without the Mind's perceiving it, seems to me hardly intelligible.
Answ. Almighty GOD, the ONE Being Absolutely Infinite, is in All Creatures, and
in a peculiar manner, in All Rational Souls, in that they are capable of
Reflecting upon Him, being in themselves, and in All other Creatures.

The First Act of the Rational Soul is the Perception, or Apprehension of Being
Absolute or Universal: For it is impossible the Soul should Perceive or
Apprehend this, or that to be, without any Notion or Appreheesion of Being
Absolute, or Universal, which Being is GOD.

In the Notion, or Idea of GOD is implied the Idea of All Things; since He is
the Fountain of All Being.

To imprint any thing on the Mind, or Rational Soul, without the Mind's
perceiving it, is as Intelligible as to make or create the Mind without the
Mind's perceiving it. When we say, That GOD has imprinted an Idea of Himself
upon the minds of All men: Our meaning is this, That he has made use of such a
Nature or Mode of Being, that whenever we REFLECT, (...), (according to such
a State in which we were Created), upon our own Souls, we cannot but have some
Notion or Perception of Him, In whom we Live, and Move, and have our Being.

The Corruption of Humane Nature chiefly consists in the Defection of the WILL
from the Divine Goodness, to which Only it ought to be Fully and Absolutely
Inclined; and in the Defection of the UNDERSTANDING of the One Infinite
Essence; which Defection of the UNDERSTANDING arises from the Perverseness of
the WILL being Bent upon such Objects, as if they were Absolutely Good, which
are but Vanity and vexation of Spirit; unless they are affected by the WILL or
Intellectual Appetite, ((...)) Only in Reference to GOD the Fountain of All
Goodness; i. e. the One Being Absolutely Infinite.

To make Reason, says he, discover those Truths thus imprinted, is to say, that
the Use of Reason discovers to a man, what he knew before. Answ. By the Use of
Reason, or Exercise of our Understanding; we discover, or come to the Knowledge
of that which was in our Understanding before, though we did not Actually
Apprehend or Reflect upon it. Hence it appears that this Gentleman's most
Confident Assertion is no better than a Gross Falsehood: That we may as well
think the Use of Reason necessary to make our Eyes discover Visible Objects, as
that there should be need of Reason, or the Exercise thereof, to make the
Understanding see what is Originally engraven in it.

We hope this Gentleman, upon a more mature Consideration, will not deny, That
it is Necessary that any Object should be in the Understanding, as impressed upon
it, or proposed to it, before it can be Perceived, Known, or Assented unto, as
a Verity, or that which Really is.

A thing visible must be in sight; that is to say, it must make some impression
upon the Visive Faculty, before it can be seen. So an Object of the Intellect
must make some Impression before it can be Actually Perceived, or Known.

Chap. 3. Sect. 1. The Ignorance wherein many men are of them; ( viz. Practical
Principles;) and the slowness of Assent wherewith others receive them, are
manifest Proofs that they are not Innate. Answ. This Ignorance and Slovvness
are manifest Proofs that there is a Perverseness in the WILL, Hindering the
Understanding from a due Reflection upon those Practical Principles which are
all implied in the Notion, or Idea of the ONE Being Infinite in All Perfection:
For nothing can be more manifest than this, That this Being is to be Loved
with all our Heart, and with all our Soul. Upon this depend All other
Practical Principles.

Chap. 3. Sect. 8. Conscience is nothing else but our own Opinion of our own
Actions. And if Conscience be a Proof of Innate Principles, Contraries may be
Innate Principles, since some men, with the same Bent of Conscience, prosecute
what others avoid. Answ. Conscience is not Opinion, but that Faculty of the
Rational Soul, by which, if Rightly Exercised, we Reflect upon our own Actions
with a certain Notice of their conformity or Difformity to the Law of GOD.

An Opinion that any man has, That he pleases GOD in what is Really Wicked, is
not Conscience, but the Defilement, or Pollution of Conscience.

Book 2, Chap. 16. Sect. 8. This is observable in Number, That it is that which
the Mind makes use of in measuring all things that by us are measurable; which
principally are Expansion and Duration; and our Idea of Infinity, even when
applied to those, seems to be nothing but the Infinity of Number. Ans. Number
is not Infinite in the most strict and proper sense of the word Infinite: It is
indeed Indefinite, or Indeterminate, but it implies a Contradiction that it
should be Infinite, because it had a Beginning; and so was Bounded a Part Ante.

Its being Indefinite, or Indeterminate, clearly suggests the Idea of the ONE
Being Absolutely Infinite, which is the Foundation, or Origin of Every Unite
in Number, which we could not cenceive to be Multiplicable in Infinitum, if we
had not some Conception, or Idea of ONE whose Power is Infinite, which is the
Only True GOD.

Chap. 17. Sect. 14. They who would prove their Idea of Infinite to be
positive, seem to me, to do it by a pleasant Argument taken from the Negation
of an end; which being Negative, the Negation of it is positive. Answ. We say,
there is nothing but what is Transcendently Positive in the Idea we have of
that Infinite, which we Attribute to GOD: Conceiving that he has no Bounds, or
rather, that he is beyond all Bounds, or Modes of Being; we conceive that He Is
Actually ALL that CAN Be: So that it implies a Contradiction that any thing
should ever Exist, but what Derives its Being from Him, and retains it only in
a Continual Dependence upon Him. In the Coversation I have had in the World,
the Divine Providence has given me many occasions to make Observations of
Rational Souls, in Reference to their Notion of the Deity, far Different from
those which have been made by this Learned Man. I have Observed many Women, and
Chilaren, and Iliiterate Men that have had a much clearer Perception of the
Divine Essence, more Pure, and Unmixt with Error, than He with all his Wit, and
Learning has Attained unto. They in the Simplicity of their Hearts have
Reflected upon That which may be known of GOD manifest in them, Viz. That
Notion, or Idea of GOD, which GOD Himself has Given, Proposed, or Enhibited to
their Understanding, or Spiritual Perceptive Faculty; whereas this Author
Averting his Mind (as much as He can) from the Apprehension of any such Idea,
Frames to himself an Idea of the Creator, which Implies a Conceit that the
Divine Excellence, or Perfection differs, In the Degrees of the same Kind of
Perfection. from that which is in Men and Angels. Here the Learned, and Pious
Reader may Perceive how this Author by deserting the Ground of all Right
Ratiocination, the Innate Idea of GOD, and Phantasying that the Best Idea he
can have of Him, must be the Result of his own Ratiocination, he becomes (as
the Apostle speaks) Vain in His Imaginations concerning Him, by Attributing to
Him, Perfection of the SAME KIND with that which we find in our selves, and in
other Creatures, and so putting Bounds, or Limits to the TRANSCENDENCY of the
Divine Being.

That the Judicious Reader may see, that I do not wrong this Author; I shall
here Recite those Words of His, upon which I ground this charge against him.

Chap. 23. Sect. 33, 34, 35. If we Examine the Idea we have of the
Incomprehensible Supreme Being, We shall find that we came by it the same way;
and that the complex Ideas we have both of God, and separate Spirits, are made
up of the simple Ideas we receive from Reflection, v. 9. having from what we
experiment in our selves, got the Ideas of Existence, and Duration, of
Knowledge, and Power; of Pleasure, and Happiness; and of several other
Qualities, and Powers, which it is better to have than to be without when we
would frame an Idea, the most suitable we can to the supreme Being, we enlarge
every one of these with our Idea of Infinity; and so putting them together,
make our complex Idea of God. For that the mind has such a Power of enlarging
its Idea received from Sensation and Reflection, has been already, showed. Here
he plainly Refers to those Words,

Chap. 17. Sect. 13. I think, it is evident that the Addition of Infinite
things together (as are all lengths, whereof we have the positive Ideas) can
never otherwise produce the Idea of Infinite, than as Number does; which
consisting of Additions of Finite Unites one to another, suggests the Idea of
Infinite, only by a Power we find we have, of still increasing the Sum, and
Adding more of the SAME KIND, without coming one jot nearer the end of such
Progression. In the 34th Section of this 23d Chap. He has these Words --

And to Frame the Idea of an Eternal Being: The Degrees, or Extent, wherein we
ascribe Existence, Power, Wisdom, and all other Perfection (which we can have
any Ideas of) to that Sovereign being which we call GOD, being all Boundless,
and Infinite, we Frame the best Idea of him our Minds are capable of. Sect. 35.
Tho in his own Essence GOD be but Simple, and Uncompounded, yet I think I may
say, we have no other Idea of him, but a Complex one of Existence, Knowledge,
Power, Happiness, etc. Infinite and Eternal. To what he speaks of a Complex
Idea of GOD, we answer, That a Complex Idea, in reference to his Essence, must
needs be False: But we may have such a Conception or Idea of Him, in reference
to his Works, which may be called a Complex Idea: But any such Idea may be
Resolved into the Simple Idea of His Essence, Viz. Of Being Absolutely
Infinite. In that He grants that the Idea of GOD implies Existence without
Beginning, or End (Sect. 34.) He plainly discovers the Force of the Innate Idea
of GOD in His own Soul: For that which Is without Beginning, or End, Infinitely
Transcends any Object, the Idea whereof implies NUMBER, or DEGREES of
Perfection. We grant, that the Notion of Finite Perfections Growing, or
Increasing In Infinitam, Suggests to us the Idea of GOD, or rather Prompts us
to Reflect upon It: But we deny that this Idea Implies any other Being than
that which Infinitely Transcends ALL DEGREES of Wisdom, Power, Goodness, etc.
That Are, or can be. But this Author talks of Degrees Boundless, and Infinite:
And how can we conceive any Being to Transcend such Degrees? To this I Answer,
that DEGREES, or PROGRESSIONS must have a Beginning, and so be Bounded a Part
Ante, and consquently can never be Boundless, or Infinite.

Sect. Tho, says He, in his own Essence GOD be simple, and uncompounded, yet I
think we have no other Idea of him, but a Complexion of Existence, Knowledge,
etc. To this I Answer, First, That the Simple Idea of NECESSARY EXISTENCE,
implies the Infinity of Knowledge, Power, etc.

Secondly, here I observe another Instance of the Force, and Efficacy of the
Innate Idea of the Divine Essence in the Soul of this Man, in that he
Acknowledges that GOD in his own Essence is Simple, or Uncompounded, which
every Man must Acknowledge to be True, so far as he Reflects upon the (...), as
the Only Ground of All True Rationcination.

Sect. 36. This farther is to be observed, that there is no Idea, we Attribute
to God, which is not also a part of our Complex Idea of other Spirits. Ans. Any
Conceit of the Nature or Essence of GOD, which does not imply Absolute
Infinity, is not the True Idea of GOD, but an IDOL.

Book 4, Chap. 10. Sect. 7. I think, this I may say, that it is an ill way of
establishing this Truth, and silencing Atheists, to lay the whole stress of so
important a Point, as this, upon that sole Foundation: And take some Men's
having that Idea of God in their minds (for it is evident some Men have none.
and some worse than none, and the most very different) for the only Proof of a
Deity; and out of an over Fondness of that Darling Invention, Cashier, or at
least endeavor to invalidate all other Arguments, and forbid us to hearken to
those Proofs, as being weak, or Fallacious, which our own Existence, and the
sensible parts of the Universe, offer so clearly and cogently to our Thoughts,
that I deem it impossible for a considering Man to withstand them. Ans. We
affirm, that Every Creature, Every part of the Universe Proves the Existence of
the CREATOR, as the Prime Cause of all THINGS, and EVENTS (Sin only excepted.)
But we affirm also, that what He Signified to MOSES by calling himself, IAM, He
signifies to every Rational Soul, That He Is Absolutely, or Universally: He is
Actually ALL that Can Be: This Signification, Idea, or Intellectual
Representation of the Divine Essence, Every Creature, Every EFFECT of the
Divine Power, that comes to our Notice, Suggests unto us, or Proposes to our
CONTEMPLATION. This Truth is most certainly Signified by these Words of the
Blessed Apostle, Romans 1. 20. (...).

The Invisible things of Him being understood, being(...), MINDED, Observed,
Reflected upon, (...), by the things that are made, As the means, or Occasion
of such Reflection, (...), are clearly seen, are Perceived, or Apprehended by a
kind of INTUITIVE Knowledge; The Eyes of the Understanding being Fixed upon an
IDEA, An Intelectual Image, or Representation of HIM: Which Image, is That
concerning which we have this Divine Testimony, Genes. 27. GOD Created Man in
his own IMAGE. Power, and Godhead are Synonymous Terms, each of them
Signifying, The ONE ALMIGHTY, The ONE Being Infinite in All Perfection Of Him,
and through Him, and to Him, are All things:

To whom be Glory for ever. AMEN. EPOY KYPIE ISOY.
Gerardus de Uries In Exercit. 2. Sect. 7. haec Verba habet:
QUaelibet, aiunt, ex nostris Ideis requirit causam, in qua vel formasiter, vel
erninenter contineantur perfectiones, quae in Idea representantur. Habemus
autem Ideam Dei, Tanquam Entis infinite perfecti: Ergo aliqua ejus causa erit,
in se vel formaliter, vel eminenter perfectiones illas continens, quae in Idea
tali repraesentantur, id est, infinitas. In Nullo ero Finito infinitas
perfectiones existunt. Ergo datus aliquod infinite perfectum, in quo omnes
illae perfectiones contineantur, quodque adeo sit illius Ideae causa. Quod
ipsum est Deus. Ad quae notandum, Ideam, quae per omnia Deum representat, sic
ut a part sui existit, necessario poscere infinitam sui causam, quia and ipsa
talis est infinita. At vero ejusmodi Ideam ut men's humana habeat, tantum abest
ut ne quidem habere possit. Constat enim, vim concipiendi, non esse ipsa mente
majorem; quare, cum haec finita sit, etiam illam esse talem. Unde conficitur
non posse finitam nostram mentem clara aliqua Idea sibi positive repraesentare,
perfectiones infinitas tanquam tales; Cognoscere tamen pro modulo infinite
perfectum, fateor; verum non aliter quam perfectiones finitas multiplicando;
iisque omnes limits ac imperfectiones detrahendo; ac denique judicando majus
id esse, quam quod a finita mente comprehendi queat. Quae omnia cum a mente
nostra fieri possint, Ideae infiniti entis causam aliquam extra mentem quaerere
nil est necesse; nedum ut et statuatur infinita, Non aliter, inquit, quam
Perfectionor Finitas Multiplicando. Resp. Nequaquam Coneipimus SIMPLICITER
INFINITUM, seu DEUM Verum and Aeternum, Perfectiones Finitas Multiplicando: Nam
hoc esset existimare Perfectiones in Creaturis esse Ejusdem Generis cum
Perfectionibus, seu Attributis Divinis, Quae nihil aliud sunt, quam ipsa
Divina, sou Ipsum Simpliciter Infinitum a Meat nostra Conceptum sub Variis
Cogitandi Modis cum Respectu ad Varios Ejusdem INFINITI Effioientis in rebus
Finitis Effectus.

Dissertat de Conceptu Infiniti, Sect. 7. Ego prorsus autumo Conceptum
Infiniti, qua talis, in mente nostra Negativum esse, non Positivum: Demonstro:
Quicquid Positive concipimus id Intellectui nostro tanquam illi
approportionatum occurit. Fieri namque non potest, ut aliquid positive a mente
nostra attingatur, quod captum ejus excedit, in quantum ni mirum eum excedit,
quoniam implicat intellectum nostrum positivo modo versari circa id, quod sua
natura est extra ejus sphaeram activitatis. Resp. Contradictionem implicat, ut
Id non sit sum Positivum, quod Men's nostra Aprehendit sub Ratione, seu IDEA
SIMPLICITER INFINITI, Quod, manifestum est, Infinite nostram Excedere Sphaeram
Activitatis Intellectivae, adeo ut Id nullo modo Possit Men's nostra
Comprehendere: Nec tamen hinc sequitur, quod Ipsum INFINITUM a Mente nostra,
seu Intellectu Positive non Attingatur. Quicquid id est, quod Men's nostra
Concipere potest per aliquam Ideam, seu Conceptum a seipsa Formatum, hoc certe
est ipsi Intellectui Approportionatum; sed Nulla est Proportio inter Mentem
nostram atque Ipsum Simpliciter Infinitum, DEUM Opt. Max Cujus Notio, seu Idea
ab Ipso DEO in Mente nostra est Formata, in quam Men's nostra seu Intellectus se
Potest Reflectere, sed nullo modo Potuiteam Formare, seu Efficere.

Sect. 2. Quamvis sit certissimum nos merito ob validas rations judicare id,
in re infinita plus est quam in Finita; and per quod res infinita constituitur
in esse Infiniti, esse a part rei, quam maxim positivum; negatur tamen illud
plus realitatis, quod est in re Infinita, eamque Infinitam facit, Te Idea
quadam positiva concipere; quod docuisse omnino necesse fuerat ad conficiendum,
nos Infinitum per veram Ideam, and non'tantum per Negationem Finiti percipere.
Resp. Hinc constat nos illud Plus Realitatis Idea Positiva Concipere, quod
explicit, and direct Concipiamus, Illud esse Sum Positivum; nempe Infinitum
omnia Creata, seu Finita ipsa Realitate, seu Entitate Infinite Excedere.

Diatr. de Ideis Innatis, Sect. 8. Sufficit ad id, ut Ideam Dei infinite
perfecti formet Men's ipsa, si perfectionibus, quarum Ideam ex creaturis hausit,
sic fines detraxerit, ut nullam amplius in eis advertat limitationem, quam
advertit omnino in rebus creatis; Hoc vero cur excedat mentis vires audire
lubet. Respondeo, Veram Dei Infinite Perfecti Ideam non aliquam includere
Perfectionem Ejusdem Generis cum istiusmodi Perfectionibus, quarum Ideam Men's
ipsa ex Creaturis hausit: Sed quaelibet Creatura Cogitata, seu Intellectu
Percepta Sufficit, ut Instrumentum Providentiae Divinae, ad excitandum
Intellectum, ut Reflectat fese in Ideam DEI Opt. Max. UNIUS Simpliciter
Infiniti; hoc est, in ipsam nostri Intellectus Modificationem, quae provenit,
seu emanat a Peculiari Modo, quo DEUS, Essentia Simpliciter Infinita Inest in
omni Anima Rationali. Percipere INFINITUM, nisi per Ideam ab Ipso INFINITO
Provenientem, tantum abest, ut Valeat Humanus Intellectus, quantum, ut Valeat
Corpus suis ipsius viribus e Terris ad Astra ascendere.

Sect. 2. At vero telum hinc in me coniiciendum erat trabale. Nimirum 'Cum D.
de Vries Ideam Dei Innatam neget, and per discursum eam formari doceat ab ipsa
mente, non video, ait, qua ratione eam propositionem, Deus Existit, ad
immediatas, noeticas, and innatas refer queat. Utique tamen queo: quia
innatam Dei notitiam sola assentiendi pronitate definivi. Resp. Ego dico illam
huic; Propositioni Deus Existit; Assentiendi Pronitatem aliunde non oriri, nisi
ab Innata DEI Opt. Max. Idea, quae scilicet nihil aliud est, nisi ipsa (ut
supra dixi) Nostri Intellectus Modificatio, etc. Quicquid est in Rerum Natura,
Intellectui Humano Applicatum, Sufficeret, si Pravitas Voluntatis non obstaret,
ad excitandum Intellectum, seu Facultatem Intellectivam ad Actum Intelligendi
seu clare, ac distinct Percipiendi CREATOREM in omni Creatura, Peculiari Modo
in omni Anima Rationali, Existentem. To clare ac distinct CREATOREM Percipere
includit To Percipere Virtualiter, seu Implicit; vel Formaliter, seu Explicit
Eum Esse UNUM Simpliciter Infinitum.

Vale, Amice Lector. Faxit Deus Opt. Max. ut ad summam Summae Veritatis
Notitiam Amando potius, quam Disquirendo pervenire annitamur: Nec unquam nobis
licere censeamus Quaestiones discutere, an hoc vel illud sit Verum, nisi
sanctissimo istiusmodi Studio adducti, ut OMNI VERO Cum OMNIO BONO in Aeternum
perfruamur.

San. AUGUSTINUS in Psalmum 27. Non est Lumen Nostrum Ex Nobis, sed Tu
Illuminabis Lucernam meam, DOMINE. EPOY KYPIEISOY FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books lately Printed and Published for W. Marshall at the Bible
in Newgate Street, and J. Marshall at the Bible in Grace-Church Street.
1. A New methodifed Concordance, price 6 d.

2. A Cabinet of Hell unlockt, or the late grand Conspiracy; in a Sermon, Acts
23. 13. there were more than 40 which had made this Conspiracy, price 6 d.

3. God acknowledged; or the true Interest of the Nation, by B. K. price 6 d.

4. The everlasting Covenant, or the Nature of the Covenant of Grace opened;
being a sweet Cordial for a drooping soul, by B. K. price 6 d.

5. The true spring of Gospel Light, and sense of sin, Jesus Christ and him
crucified, evidently set forth by his spirit in his word; delivered in a Sermon
preached at London, and since enlarged, by Richard Davis, price 6 d.

6. An Examination of the Pacifick Paper, chiefly consisting of absolute
Election of particular Persons, with the Universality of Redemption, and the
Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, price 4 d.

7. A short View of some Reflections, made by a Nameless Author; with some
remarks upon the Union in the late Agreement in Doctrine, among the dissenting
Ministers in London, price 6d.

8. A Rejoinder to D. W's reply; to the first Part of Neomianism unmaskt,
wherein his Difference is examined, and his Arguments answered; whereby he
endeavors to prove the Gospel to be a new Law with sanction, and the contrary
is proved, price 6 d.

9. A Compendium of the Covenant of Grace, as the most solid support under the
most terrible Conflicts of Death; though armed with Desertion, Decay of Grace,
and sense of Guilt, by Walter Cross, M. A. price 6 d.

10. An Account of some dying sayings of Susannah Yeats, with her funeral
Sermon, by Tho. Wording Minister, price 6 d.

11. Bunyan of Election and Reprobation, unfolded and explained, in eleven
Chapters, pr. 6d.

12. Christinaity the great Mystery, in answer to a late Treatise, Christianity
not Mysterious; together with a Postscript Letter to the Author, price 1 s.

13. A Discourse, being the substance of several Sermons on the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; wherein the true spiritual nature thereof is opened and
unfolded; showing also in what sense it is, that true believers do eat and
drink the body and blood of Christ, price 6 d.

14. A choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ; or, a short word of Advice to
all saints, but especially to those that be in Church Fellowship; whereby they
may be helped to stand upon the right Foundation, by Tho. Wilcocks, price. 6d.

15. Evangelical Essays, being a discovery of the everlasting Gospel Life of
Christ, by George Sicks, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

16. An Exposition on the whole Book of Ecclesiastes, by Geo. Sicks, price
bound 3 s.

17. Christ made Sin; with D. Crisps own Answer to an Exception against his
Assertion of Christ; being the first Gift to a Believer before the acting of
Grace in him, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

18. The Young Man's Guide for Drawing, Limning and Etching, with printed
Directions, price 1 s.

19. More work for the Dean, in Vindication of Henry Borow, Guinwood and
Penery; with a Petition of those persecuted Christians; wherein is showed their
barbarous usage, price 6 d.

20. Mr. Walls Answer to an Indictment, preferred by the Jury upon Oath at
Surry Sessions, held for the County of Croyden; against several Inhabitants in
Southwark; together with a Copy of the indictment, price 2 d.

21. A Discourse of the Powers of the world to come; or the Miraculous Powers
of the Gospel and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, price 1 s.

22. The Catechism of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in the 1000 years:
Showing by Scripture. 1. The great Article of Redemption. 2. Resurrection. 3.
The Mystery of Saints not dying but changed. 4. Judgment. 5. The delivery up
of the Kingdom to God all in all, dedicated to the Bishops in Parliament, by T.
B. p. 6d.

23. Rich Redivivus; or, Mr. Jeremy Rich's Shorthand improved in a more brief
and compendious Method than has been set forth by any heretofore, now made
public for the general advantage, by Nath. Stringer, A quondam Scholar to the
said Mr. Rich, price 1 s.

24. Anatomy spiritualized, in which is considered 1. The happy State of man's
Integrity in his first Creation. 2. The woeful Apostasy of Man from God by his
original sin. 3. Man's restoration by the second Adam, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

25. Meditations and Discourses on the Glory of Christ in his Person, in two
Parts, bound 2 s. 6 d.

26. D. Owen of the Spirit and his Work; and of spiritual Gifts, being an
addition to his Folio, bound 2 s.

27. The true Nature of a Gospel Church, bound 3 s.

28. Evidencies of the Faith of Gods Elect, left by D. Owens, for his wives
private Meditations, bound 1 s.

29. Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, useful for all Families, by D. Owen,
price bound 6 d.

30 A Guide to Church Fellowship and Order, according to the Gospel
Institution, by D. Owen, pr. bound 6 s.

31. Cook's Surgery and Anatomy; with the Marrow of Physic: With twelve Copper
Cuts, price bound 6 s.

32. Tackenius's Chemistry with his Clavis, bound 3 s.

33. A plea for ancient Gospel. 1. Of Christ and the Elect. 2. Of the Covenant
of Grace, 3. The Natures of saving Faith. 4. Of the free Offer of Christ to
Believers. 5. Of Union to Christ before Faith. 6. Of Justification only by
Faith. 7. Of the way to attain Assurance, by D. C. price bound 3 s.

34. Ashood's Heavenly Trade, price bound 6 d.

35. The best Treasure, or the unsearchable Riches of Christ, by Mr. Ashood,
price bound 2 s. 6 d.

36. Observations of English Bodies, with physical Receipts for most Distempers,
price bound 2 s. 6 d.

37. The fullfilling of Scripture, last Edition, price 2s 6d

38. Eyre's of free Justification of a Sinner, price 2 s.

39. A View of the State of Mankind in the first and second Adam, price 4 d.

40. A Map of Salvation and Damnation, price. 6 d.

41. Donners's of Believers Baptism, second Edition enlarged, price bound 2 s.

42. Faith and Order of Congregational Churches in England agreed upon, price
bound 6 d.

43. Mr. Davis's Hymns, the second Edition, bound 1s.

44. The Child's Delight, fitted for the Education of Children and Youth, as
spelling. reading, casting Account; with Letters to parents, price bound 6 d.

45. Doctrine according to Godliness, being a Body, of Divinity, by D.
Chaunsey, price bound 2 s.

46. Terms of Toleration, or an abstract of the Act of parliament. for the
Liberty of Dissenters, price 2 d.

47. A Funeral Sermon, by Sam. Blower, price 6 d.

48. An answer to Lock of humane understanding, pr. 6 d.

49. Multum in parvo, a spelling Book for Youth, price 2d.

At the places abovenamed you may be supplied with most Sorts of Stationary
wares, likewise Paper Hangings. by the yard or sheets, as Paper-Books, Quils,
Wax. Pens, Pencils, Wafers, with the best writing Ink. far exceeding Holmans
Powder Ink for blackness and holding of its Color

At the places above mentioned you may be supplied with most of D. Owens Works,
and Mr. Beverlys, etc.


