By the Council of State.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas the Council of State has received Information, that there is an
endeavor by Colonel John Lambert, and other Officers (lately reduced) to raise
a new War, and to unbroil the Nation in blood and distractions, and to hinder
the Members from meeting in the next Parliament, on whose free Council (under
God) the hope of settling the Nations does principally depend. And being
informed that Colonel John Hewson, Col. Ralph Cobbet, Col. Edward Salmon, Col.
Ashfeild, Major Creed, Major General Tho. Harrison, Col. John Okey, Major
Wagstaff, Lieutenant Col. Miller, Captain John Blackwell, Captain Richard Dean,
and Major Gladman (some of them being the number of those nine Officers upon
whom the Parliament put a mark of displeasure, for their former disturbing of
Parliament Authority, and Colonel Robert Lilburn, Who was summoned to attend
the Council, and came accordingly to London, has lurked privately about the
Town, and is since departed, without making his Appearance) are persons
apprehended to be dangerous, and bent to engage with the said Colonel John
Lambert, in disturbing the Peace of the Nation, and to interrupt the sitting of
the next Parliament. The Council does therefore hereby strictly charge, and
require the said Colonel John Hewson, Col. Ralph Cobbet, Col. Edward Salmon,
Col. Ashfeild, Major Creed, Major General Thomas Harrison, Col. John Okey,
Major Wagstaff, Lieutenant Colonel Miller, Captain John Blackwell, Capt.
Richard Dean, Major Gladman, and Col. Robert Lilburn, to appear and tender
themselves to the Council at White Hall, within three days after the
proclaiming of this Proclamation, in the County or place where any of the said
persons are or shall be, under the pains and penalties of being proceeded
against, and of having their Estates to be forthwith Seized and Sequestered for
the use of the Commonwealth, in case of their failer to appear according to the
time limited by this Proclamation.

Given at the Council of State at Whitehall, this one and twentieth day of
April, 1660.
LONDON, Printed by Abel Roper and Tho. Collins, Printers to the Council of
State.


