blazon or coat of arms
By the Committee of Safety of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. A PROCLAMATION Declaring the continuance of Justices, Sheriffs,
and other Officers.
FOr the continuance of the Administration of Justice, preservation of the
public Peace, and the better carrying on the Affairs of the Commonwealth, we,
being entrusted with the care thereof, have thought fit to Publish, and
Declare, and do hereby Publish and Declare, That all such person and persons,
as on the first day of October, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, were
Justices of the Peace in any Counties, Cities, Precincts, Liberties, or Places,
in England, Wales, or the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, by Force and Virtue of
any Commission or Commissions, under the Great Seal of England; and had by such
Commissions, Power and Authority to Enquire of, Hear, and Determine Felonies,
Trespasses, and other Offenses, and to do other things in the same Commissions
more at large expressed: And all such person and persons, who on the said First
day of October, by Force of any Commissions or Letters Patents, under the said
Great Seal, were Sheriffs of the several Counties, Precincts, and Places in
England, Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, be, and are hereby continued
Justices of the Peace, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Sheriffs
respectively, of, and in their, and every of their several respective Counties,
Cities, Precincts, Limits, Jurisdictions, and Places respectively, from, and
after the said First day of October, and shall so continue, and be, until there
shall be new Commissions and Letters Patents, or Commissions under the Great
Seal of England, for the constituting of Justices of the Peace, and Oyer and
Terminer, and of such Sheriffs, of, and in the said several Counties, Places,
and Precincts respectively made, and duly published. And they, and every of
them shall have, and may lawfully Use, Exercise, and Enjoy all and every the
Jurisdictions, Powers, and Authorities whatsoever, which by the Laws and
Statutes, Justices of Peace of Oyer and Terminer, or Sheriffs respectively,
may, or might lawfully Use, Exercise, or Enjoy, and they, and every of them
respectively, are hereby required and enjoined to do the same. And all and
every the said Sheriffs have hereby Power and Authority, and are enjoined to
execute and make return, according to usual course of all Writs issued or to be
issued. And all and every Act, return of any Writs, or other thing whatsoever,
Had, Made, Done, Used, or Exercised, or to be Had, Made, Done, or Exercised by
the said Justices and Sheriffs respectively, or by any other Officers or
Ministers, or other person or persons whatsoever, by command or authority, by,
or derived from, by, or under them respectively, is hereby Declared to be good
and effectual. And all Commissioners for the monthly Assessments, Collectors,
Receivers, and Receivers General of the said Assessments, Auditors, and
Receivers, and other Officers of the public Revenue in the several Counties
and Precincts, Commissioners of the Customs and their Officers in the
respective Ports, and Commissioners of Excise, and every of them, and the
subordinate Officers of them, and every of them, are hereby authorized and
required to proceed in the execution of their several and respective Duties,
and to put in ure all and every the Powers and Authorities committed unto them,
and every of them in their respective places; and to do all and every Act and
Thing incident thereunto, as fully as they did, or might have done, on, or
before the said First day of October. And all and every person and persons
whatsoever, are hereby required to conform themselves in payment of their
respective Duties of Custom and Excise, and of the said monthly Assessments,
and all other Revenues belonging to this Commonwealth accordingly, as they
tender the preservation of the public Peace: and to the end that free Quarter,
and other mischiefs and inconveniences that may happen by their neglect or
failer therein, may be avoided.

Given at Whitehall the 31. day of October, 1659.
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

William Robinson, Clerk of the Committee of Safety.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to the Committee of
Safety.


