The Earl of PEMBROOKES SPEECH TO NOL-CROMWELL, Lord Deputy of IRELAND.

With his Royal Entertainment of him at his Manor of Ramsbury in Wiltshire,
on his Journey to Ireland; On Thursday, July 12. 1649.

Taken Verbatim by Michael Oldisworth, and by him Recommended to one of his
Lordships Tenants, to see it carefully Printed and Published.

July 30th NOD-NOL, Printed by the Printer of the House of Lords, 1649.

The Earl of PEMBROOKES SPEECH TO NOL-CROMWELL, Lord Deputy of IRELAND.
My Lord,
DAmme, I may say King well enough; for be-God I know no man fitter to be King
then your self: Has not your Honor Conquered all that the Kings in England
have Conquered for many Generations? My Chaplain read me a Chapter, and said,
That all Generations should call her blessed: but Sink me, I am sure all the
Generations in England are damned if they call not your Honor blessed; and I am
bound to bless you too for coming hither; and you have done a blessed work
too, in removing that Tyrant King, that man of Sin; and you are a going on with
another blessed work, and that is Reducing of Ireland; your Honor has happily
subdued the Levellers; strengthened and enriched your friends, and impoverished
your Enemies; you have taken away the House of Lords; Damme, I never affected
the Lords House, nor Gods House neither; and for the Lords Prayer, I have done
what I can to abolish it: because I would not have the people so much as put in
mind of Lords; Sink me, if I know any more Lords then my Lord Fairfax and your
Self; and if the people will say the Lords Prayer, then let them pray for your
Lordships, as it becomes good Christians: the Land is yours, you have wone it
by the Sword; and then, you are not only Lords but Landlords, and all the
people in England your Tenants, and ought to pray for you, and pay you Rent
too; Damme, I am your Tenant, and though I am old and cannot fight for you, yet
I am not so old, but I can pay you Rent: It Is true I am a member of Parliament;
and so (as yet) free from Taxes; yet I were an ill member if I would not force
my Tenants to pay you Rent; Damme, I had forgot my self, for they be your
Tenants, and pay you as much, or more Rent, then they do me. 'Zbloud, would
they had more heavier Taxes on them for me, because they grumble: I am informed
by my man Michael, that they curse the Parliament; which I hold to be Treason,
if not high treason; for, if to say, our Government is tyrannical, be high
treason; Cursing must needs be high treason; nay blasphemy too: and if your
Lordship shall give me power but to Hang and Draw* Refuse me if a Traitor shall
live; Damme, the Rogues will not stick to say, That we are Traitors our selves,
although we are the Keepers of their Liberties; and if we keep their Liberties,
we ought to keep their Money too, their Law and Religion, nay, their very
Wives. if* it please us: and if we suffer some to be killed to preserve the
rest, be God, I think it is State policy: if we spend three parts of their
means, to preserve the fourth; I see no reason but the fourth should be at our
disposing; so long as we are the Keepers; My Lord, I will speak unto you in a
Parable, I am (I thank your Honors) made chief Keeper of C^^ringdon Park, that
was the late Kings; there have I Herds of Deer; My Lord, are not these Herds
of Deer at my disposing? If I kill one heard, that the rest may have the more
pasture, who ought to contradict it? and if I, or my Keeper make their Skins
pay for Paling or Fencing in my Park; Damme, it is the part of a good Keeper,
and such good Keepers I hope are the Parliament, and every Member thereof; and
if they be good Keepers, will they not keep their own? and if they can keep
their own, nature teaches, that they may as well keep others: I keep a Pack of
Dogs, and Damme, I think they have as deep mouths as any; but imagine another
has a Dog, has a deeper mouth then my whole kennell; ought I not (if my
Neighbor or Tenant deny me this Dog) to force him from him, to make complete
my Cry?

My Lord, Ireland; it may be a Million, and about ten thousand men; if you want
a Million more, and twenty thousand men more, to make the Irish Cry; Damme, if
they will not raise the Men, and find the Money, they may be made Cry
themselves: you may, and ought to take it where you can find it; Necessity must
not observe a Law in these days; My Lord, if you are necessitated, you may
command me to fight as old as I am; Damme, I were a Rogue if I should deny ye;
yet I think I hate fighting my self as much as any man in England; yet though I
hate it in my self, my Lord I would not have you think that I hate it in your
Honor; no, my Lord, I hope I have more wit then so; I honor Valor in
whomsoever I find it: Had not your Honors V^lour been tried* at Marston-Moor,
we had been all Myr'd and Moored too before this time; or had you not Rowted
the Scots, we had not escaped so Scot* free as we do, nor enjoyed the good
things of the Land: Damme, it is an unthankful Land, and a blind Land, for they
understand not, they see not the blessings that you have won them; but I hope
there is no Member of Parliament but understands, and is sensible enough of
them: Damme, I am sensible, and if your Honor loves Hunting, you shall be
sensible that in my old days I deserve a Park as well as the City of London; I
love a Cry of Dogs better then a pair of Organs: Mistress May loves them too,
and I love her as well: Sir, I am a Member for Bark-shire, and then (if I
should not love barking and bawling too, I should not love my Country) my Lord,
when old Dogs bark, they give Counsel; but if they bite, they bite sor^;
Damme, we must bark and bite too, and all little enough; for ought I can
understand; we must learn to hunt men, as well as we do Hares, or Foxes either.

My Lord, Rebels into Ireland; and therefore I have said the more concerning
hunting; I wish you good sport, that you may catch your Game, I mean the
Game-Royal; a good hound upon the Chase will not leave the hot scent to follow
a Rascal Deer; My Lord, you have been well flesht; pursue the ROYAL-GAME, the
rest, any Curre will pull down.

My Lord, Ireland, nor Scotland neither, that should keep me back; Refuse-me if
I was ever backward for the good of the State; I was, I confess, Lord
Chamberlain to the late King; I swore Allegiance to Him and His Heirs; Sinkme,
I have been too much addicted to Swearing, but what of that? if I forswear
again what I have sworn, I am the more excuseable; an Oath is binding but for
the time, and you know there is a time for all this; a time to break Oaths, as
well as keep them, if the State requires it: We must be Obedient; Obedience is
better then Sacrifice, and if I be not as Obedient as another, then I am a
Rebel, and a Traitor, and deserve as much to suffer as the late King, the Lord
Capel, or any else.

My Lord, Commons before Michaelmas; where I make no doubt, but I shall give
consent to the making such Laws as shall make this Nation glorious; for if we
do not afflict them; then they cannot be glorious; it is afflictions must wean
them from the World; and if they be weaned from the World, then they may the
better seek after heaven, where is all real Glory; thus we made the late King a
glorious King; Damme, I think he had the better of it, if he had a Crown of
Glory for his Earthly Crown; though we have his Lands and Goods to boot; we
cannot live always to enjoy them; it is true we have the profit of them for a
time; but what can we profit by them in the end, when we come to render an
account? We are but the Peoples Stewards as well as He; and as we are Stewards,
we are to be entrusted with their Goods and Lives; and if we make not use of
them as we should, pray who can call us to an account here? I know there is no
Earthly power above us; but Confound-me, I am half of the judgment that there
is a Heavenly power above us, and that is our King, our Prince, that ought to
Rule us, and his Rule is in this World, and the Air: mistake me not my Lord, I
do not mean the Prince of the Air that rules in the Children of diso^edience,
that the wicked Cavaliers serve* I mean the Spirit; we are led by the Spirit,
have our rules from the Spirit (and not from Scriptures, that is Superstition)
and dare not but do what the Spirit moves us too; and if we do amiss, it is
the Spirit that works it in us, and not we; and if the Spirit bid me kill my
King, must I not do it? Damme if it were my Father or my Mother, or my dull
Wise either, I should spare them no more then the fire did my house, when it
burnt it to the ground.

My Lord, Spirit that now has a working in Nature, which Spirit does personate
me, and has made many Speeches in my Name, which I utterly Renounce; Nay my
Lord, your Honors are not free from this vile Calumnious Spirit, even under
your very Noses; My Lord, I have been jeared into sickness, and had died if I
had not been jear'd out of it again; they brought me so near my Grave, that
they made my Will; and I think I had died* but that I was loath the wicked
should have their Will of me: Damme, I hope to live yet to make my Will my
self, and in it remember your Honor; if your Honor will do me the favor, as to
send to the Parliament, to tell them what they put forth in my Name; 'Zbloud, I
had better have no name, then no fame; and Iudge-me, I have as little as can be
among the Common sort. My Lord, I beseech* you let this Spirit be conjured
down, or else we must down our selves, and if any thing other then good should
happen to us by reason of the ungodly abroad, I fear a great many at home will
take their parts; it is good to prevent in time, my Lord, to quench the flame
before it get too high, or else it may happen to burn our fingers. My Lord, I
hear Ormond is 30000 strong, besides what Inchiquin, Ards, and Monro is;
besides your old Enemies are come to assist them, at Kildare, Eyron, Dives,
Langdale, Ashton, Hopton, and the Devil and all: And if they get Ireland my
Lord, we may ere long hang up our pipes, and our selves too; My Lord; the way I
would wish you, is to treat with the Earl of Darby, about the rendering the Isle
of Man; you will get a Crown too boot; if we must have a King, (as the people will
never be quiet else) as good you as another; Damme, we must have a King; for so
many men, so many minds; Lilburn will have one thing, another party another, a
third another, and then we fall together by the ears; then comes the Prince
and parts us; What will become of us then? No my Lord, win a Crown and wear it;
it is but taking down the Excize, or making at the beginning of your reign some
seeming* good Law, as Richard the 3d did, and that will win the peoples
affections to you.

My Lord, I am an ill Orator, and something given to swearing, which I hope
will not be much distasteful unto you, considering I am an old man; and Damme,
old men are subject to old infirmities; if your Honor lives, you will be old
your self as I am; Swounds, I wish you long life; and could with a good
Conscience say, Vive le Roy; a Pox Confound-me if I could not; 'zblood, I am
something short winded since my sickness; but Dam-me, Ram-me, Sink-me, if I
mean not what I say; and so for this time I make an end; desiring your Honor to
sit, and taste of that Welcome your Humble Subject and Servant can make you.

Your Honors humble Servant, PHILIP, Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery.
Vera Copia.

Ramsbury, July 12. 1649.


FINIS.

