seal of the CommonwealthBy the Committee of Safety Of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland. A PROCLAMATION Requiring the Departure of the
Persons herein mentioned, out of the Cities of London and Westminster, and
places adjacent.
THe Committee of Safety having received certain Information, that great
numbers of persons, who have been in actual Arms under the late King and his
Son, or on their behalf, have, and do daily resort to the Cities of London
and Westminster, for the better carrying on some mischievous design against the
said City of London, and the Peace of the Commonwealth; And that the Tumullts,
which have lately been in the said City of London, have been not only promoted
and designed by such dangerous persons, but themselves have been the chief
Actors in, and Abettors of them, although they have endeavored to color the
same under the pretense and name of Apprentices (some of which have been
cunningly seduced and instigated by them) that thereby they might take
advantage to possess the wealth and riches of the said City, to enrich
themselves, being, for the most part, persons of profligate Lives and desperate
Fortunes. And the said Committee being sensible in how great danger the said
City, and the Inhabitants thereof, and the parts adjacent are, by the residence
of such persons here, where they do but watch for an opportuuity to effect
their malicious and cruel purposes, to the ruin of the said City, and the
embroiling of the People of this Commonwealth in further troubles. For
preventing the said dangers, and preserving the Peace and Safety of the said
Cities, and of the Commonwealth, The Committee of Safety hold it necessary to
publish and declare, and they do hereby Order, enjoin, and require, That all
and every person and persons, who have been in actual Arms under the late King,
or Charles Stuart his Son, against the Parliament or this Commonwealth, or
have aided, advised, abetted or assisted the said late King in the War against
the Parliament, or in any War, by, or on the behalf of the said Charles Stuart,
do, before One of the clock in the afternoon of Saturday the seventeenth day of
December instant, depart out of the Cities of London and Westminster, and all
other places within the late Lines of Communication, or Weekly Bills of
Mortality, and twenty miles of the same, and not return into any place or
places within the said twenty miles, until the third day of February next,
without license from the said Committee of Safety: And that the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and Commissioners of the Militia,
and all Constables and other Officers of the said City of London, and all
Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other Officers, Civil and Military,
within the City of Westminster, Counties of Middlesex, Kent, Surrey, Hertford,
and Essex, within their respective Liberties, Precincts and Jurisdictions, do
cause search to be made for all and every the persons aforesaid so required to
depart, who shall from and after the said 17 day of December instant, be and
remain within the said Cities and places aforesaid, or shall return thither
within the time before limited, without License from the said Committee of
Safety, and them, and every one of them to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended and committed to prison, by warrant un^er the hands and seals of
the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, or one of them
respectively; and forthwith return the names of such person and persons, as
shall be so apprehended, to the said Committee of Safety: And all Keepers of
Goals of Prisons are hereby authorized and require to receive all and every
such person and persons into their respective Goals and Prisons, and the^ to
keep under safe custody, until they shall be discharged by Warrant or Order
from the Committ^^ of Safety, as every such Keeper of any Goal or Prison will
answer the contrary at his peril. And ^hereas by an Act of Parliament published
in print by Order of the 13 of July last, It is Enacted, Tit all Popish Priests
and Jesuits, and all persons whosoever that have been in Arms against the
^arliament, or Commonwealth, since the year 1641. that ought to have made their
compositions and have not finished the same, or have not been pardoned by the
Parliament, and all Delinquent excepted from composition should then forthwith
depart out of the said Cities of London and Wes^^insters and the Lines of
Communication: And that if any the aforesaid person or persons should found
within England after the first day of August 1659. that then all and every such
person or ^sons, being apprehended or taken, should be proceeded against as
Traitors to the Commonwealth ^^d should be so adjudged, condemned and executed
accordingly: The said Committee of Saf^ do hereby require the said Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners for t^^ Militia, Constables and
other Officers, within the Cities and Counties aforesaid respectively, ^au^e
diligent search for all and every such person and persons, and them, and every
of them (except has have in pursuance of the said Act been licenced by the
Parliament or Council of State, to sta^ Town) to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended and imprisoned, and proceeded against accordi^^ to the said Act.
And it is hereby Declared, That if any person or persons, shall discover and
^rehend, or cause to be apprehended any the last mentioned offenders, such
person so discovering or ^rehending, or causing such offender to be
apprehended, shall have and receive to his own use, all th^ods and personal
estate of all and every such offender as aforesaid, as a reward for his said
ser^; And that all and every person or persons, who shall from and after the
said 17 day of Decem^^^ ^nstant, discover and apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended and ^ther person or persons, hereby re^ed to depart out of the said
Cities of London and Westminster, and places aforesaid, and bring ^^^erson
before the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners of
the (...) or any of them respertively, shall have and receive a reward
according to their desert, by Order ^he said Committee of Safety.

Given at Whitehall this 16. day of December 1659.
ORdered by the Committee of Safety, that this Proclamation be forth printed
and published.

Wil^^ ^obinson, Clerk of the Committee of Safety.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers Committee of Safety.


