blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651) AN
INSTRVCTION Unto Josias Bervers, Francis Massenden Esqs Sir William Roberts
Knight, John Packer, Henry Pit, Mathias Valentine and Robert Aldsworth Esqs
WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for sale of several Lands
and Estates forfeited, to the Commonwealth, for Treason, and published the
eighteenth of November 1652. the persons, body politic, or corporate, their
Heirs, Successors, or Assigns, who were to have the benefit of the Saving
therein expressed, were, some time before he first day of February last, to
deliver in writing unto the Commissioners (appointed by an Act, entitled, An
Act for transferring the powers of the Committee for Obstruction) or any four
or more of them, a particular of his or their Right, Title, Interest* Claim,
Demand, Charge, Encumbrance, or Estate, in Law or Equity, and to obtain an
allowance thereof before the said Commissioners, or any four or more of them,
at or before the first day of April last.

And whereas several claims have been delivered to the said Commissioners,
which they could not determine by the said first day of April, you or any four
or more of you are hereby authorized and required, at any time before the
fifteenth day of August next coming, to hear and determine all such claims and
causes as aforesaid, which were delivered in, by or before the said first day
of February; whereof all persons concerned therein are to take notice, and
conform themselves thereunto. Given at the Council of State at White Hall, this
fifteenth day of June 1653.

Thursday June 16. 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, that
this Instruction be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Thurloe Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Henry Hills, and Thomas Brewster, MDCLIII.


