By the Council of State.
A PROCLAMATION.
THe Council of State being entrusted, in this Interval of Parliament, with
Preservation of the Public Peace; and being well informed, That some Persons,
from mistaken Apprehensions of the temper of the Army, do secretly attempt the
debauching* and alienating the Affections of some in the Army, from that
Obedience and Duty which they owe, and (as upon good Grounds is hoped, and
believed) bear to the present Authority, established by Parliament, and to
their Superior Officers in the Army; HAVE therefore thought fit, hereby to
declare, and make known, their great dislike of such Proceedings, as tending,
and aiming at the disturbance of the Peace of this Commonwealth, and engaging
it into new Distractions and Blood (now that such a Door of Hope is opened of
Deliverance and Settlement.) And do hereby charge and require, all and every
Person and Persons, of what sort or degree soever, whether belonging to any the
Armies of this Commonwealth, or others, to forbear, at their uttermost perils,
all Applications, of what kind soever, to any the Officers or Soldiers of the
Armies of this Commonwealth, by way of Agitating, or otherwise, with design or
endeavor, by word or act, to beget Dissatisfactions in any such Officer or
Soldier, toward the present Government; or to withdraw them from their
Obedience to their Superiors; or to make Combinations or Factions in the Army,
to the disturbance thereof, or endangering the Peace of the Nation.

And the Council do hereby Empower, and Require all Officers, both Military and
Civil, and all Soldiers, and others, upon certain Information given them of any
Person or Persons, contriving, advising, or prosecuting any design, or endeavor
to the purposes aforesaid, forthwith to seize and secure every such Person and
Persons, and him, and them, to bring or send in custody to the Council of
State, to answer the same: And albeit, the Council have reason to hope, That
every Person concerned in the Safety and Public Interest of the Nation, will
be thereby sufficiently obliged to discover and bring to condign punishment all
Offenders in this kind; yet for the better encouragement of all whom this may
concern, to be faithful to that Duty which they owe to their Countries Peace,
the Council does hereby Declare and Promise, That for every Person, who upon
due proof to be made, shall appear to have acted under the name of an AGITATOR,
or otherwise, for the mischievous ends and purposes aforesaid, there shall be
allowed, and paid out of the Public Treasure of this Commonwealth, the sum of
Ten Pounds, to the Officer or Officers, Soldier or Soldiers, who shall
discover, secure, and bring or send in custody, to the Council, any such Person
as aforesaid. And all Officers, Military and Civil, are required upon request
made in that behalf, to be aiding and assisting in the apprehending, securing,
and bringing in custody, to the Council, all and every Person and Persons who
may be justly charged with the Crimes aforesaid. And the Chief Officers of the
respective Regiments, Troops, and Companies of the Army, are required
forthwith, after it shall come to their Hands, to cause this Proclamation to be
published in the Head of their Regiments, Troops, and Companies, to the intent
the same may be better taken notice of, and put into the more effectual
Execution.

Saturday March 24. 1659. At the Council of State at VVhitehal.
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

W. JESSOP,
Clerk of the Council.
Printed by Abel Roper, and Tho: Collins, Printers to the Council of State.


