Additionall ORDERS AND RULES Agreed and Resolved by The Commissioners of
Excise, to be Observed by all Sub-Commissioners and their Deputies in the
several Port Towns, throughout England and Wales, for the due managing of the
said Ports in relation to goods Imported or Exported.
I.

YOU are to Sign no Warrant for the taking up of any Goods or Merchandise
before the Merchant has made due Entry under his hand with you, or paid the
Duty of Excise: all which Enteries you are to keep upon a File in the Office of
Excise, and to keep a Register Book of those Entires, fair written.

II. You are from the said Entries, to frame and keep an Account with every
particular Merchant in a fair leadger book in the way of Debtor and Creditor,
making him Debtor for what he imports, and Creditor for what he sells and
transports again.

III. You are to admit of no Certificate for any goods, coming from any Port of
England, or Wales, but what is signed by the Officers for the Excise; besides
the Certificate, signed by the Officers for the Customs and Excise.

IV. You are strictly to hold the Shopkeeper, and Consumptioner that imports
any goods of his own Trade, to the Rule of the Act, viz. not to suffer him to
take away his goods being duly entered, until veiwed by the sworn Officers, and
the Excise paid, according to the fifteenth Article.

V. You are according to the twenty fifth Article, forthwith to appoint
Officers to take view of all Merchants goods resting in their Warehouses,
Cellers, etc. and to see what goods they have remaining upon their hands, and
to compare the returns made by those Officers, with the particular accounts of
the Merchants in your book, and for all that is not duly discharged in your
book, by Sale, Certificate of Expostation, allowance for leakadge defects,
waste accidents, and the like, and is not upon their hands; you are forthwith
to require Excise for the same, and then you are to adjust his account unto
that day, and to transfer the ressat upon a new account.

VI. You are strictly to look after the shipping of all goods outward,
especially such as are to be sent from Port to Port, that you suffer none to
pass without a Certificate from you directed to the Sub-Commissioners in the
Port to which it goes, or to the Surveyor-General in the Port of London if sent
thither, in which Certificate to be particularly expressed, viz. 1. The name of
the Ship or Vessel, carrying the same, and the Master thereof. 2. The true
denomination and number of the Bales, Packs, Casks, or other Vessels, in which
the said commodities are contained. 3. The net, weight, measure, or just
contents and values of the several commodities expressed in words, and not in
figures. 4. To express whether the duty of Excise be paid, and when or whether
Bond be entered into for the delivering, and due entry of the goods in the
Office of Excise in the Port, whither the goods are sent, and the time when,
this to be particularly expressed, and not under those general words
accustomarily used, viz. for which satisfaction is given.


VII. You are quarterly to send up an account of all fines and forfeitures by
you levied, together with the receipts of all such informants, and other
persons to whom the moiety of such fines, and forfeitures, shall be by you
disposed of and given, deducting the necessary charges from the whole,
according to the forty first Article of the said Act.

VIII. You are to keep due Register of all the judicial proceedings, entering
into the same the proof made upon any information, and all other things
necessary for the clearing of your proceedings, according to the Rule of the
Act; and you are to enter in a book by it self all Affidavits, which shall be
taken from time to time, by any person, either for the clearing and discharging
of any accounts, for delivering up any Bond; which Affidavits so taken are to
be signed and subscribed by such person or persons as shall make the same
accordingly.

IX. In all your warrants for the Commitment of any person to Prison, you are
to certify the cause, and your proceedings according to the Rule of the Act.

X. You are to close your account at the quarter, and forthwith to send the
same, observing such form in the keeping and making up your accounts as shall
be prescribed to you by the Accomptant General appointed by the Commissioners
for the Office of Excise London.

XI. You are to receive no moneys due for Excise privately, the one without the
cognizance of the other, but in the Office or place in which you sit for the
receipt of the same, and you are to enter to account all moneys received,
precisely upon the same day you receive it.

XII. If any Vessel bound for London, from any other Port, touch at your Port,
and there deliver or unload any of the goods mentioned in any of their
Certificates, you are required to certify what of the said goods are landed
with you, either on the back of the Certificate, or writing distinct,
mentioning it to be part of such a Certificate.

XIII. You are enjoined to send up Transcripts of all such Tickets and
Certificates as have already come to your hands from any Port, Place, or
Sub-Commissioner, since the 25 of March 1654. and for the future, quarterly to
send up with your account, transcripts of all such Tickets and Certificates as
shall hereafter come to your hands.

XIV. For the better prevention of counterfeit Tickets and Forgeries, you are
from time to time, to send up your own names together with the name of the
Person or Persons employed under you, or entrusted in your absence, in a fair
paper, all subscribed by you and them, each man writing his own name thereto
severally, and when you make any change of subordinate Officers, you are to
intimate the same in like manner as directed, which paper so subscribed is to
remain in the Office here, to be compared with the Certificates here as often
as received.

XV. The Office Seal to be affixed to every Cocquet and Certificate.

XVI. And lastly, you are to take special care, That you nor your Deputies Sign
any Certificate, or let pass twice for one and the same parcel of Goods, that
shall at any time be transported from your Port to any other Port or Place
whatsoever.

May 19. 1654.
ORdered by the Commissioners of the Excise, That the foregoing Orders be
observed of all and every the Sub-Commissioners of the Ports accordingly.

Thomas Tucker, Register.

seal of the Commonwealth from 1649-53 (before the start of the Protectorate in
1653)
London, Printed by John Macock, and Gartrude Dawson. 1654.


