blazon or coat of arms

George Keith HIS SAYING, That the Light within is not sufficient to Salvation
without something else: PROVED To be contrary to the Foundation of the
Christian Religion.
By EDMUND ELYS.
BY the FOUNDATION of Christianity I understand the Ground, or Reason we have
to Believe that JESUS CHRIST is a Person ALL-SUFFICIENT to Save his People from
their Sins: His People, that is to say, those who put their whole Trust and
Confidence in Him, to Deliver them from ALL EVIL, and to bring them to the
Everlasting Enjoyment of all that is Truly and Really GOOD for them. The People
called Quakers plainly, and expressly Declare, that by The Light within, they
understand JESUS CHRIST Himself, and all that comes from Him, tending to the
CONVICTION, and CONVERSION of Sinners. Now since The Light within is the Only
True and Eternal SON of the Only True and Eternal GOD, LIGHT OF LIGHT, VERY
GOD OF VERY GOD (yet but one God) is it not a kind of Blasphemy to say, That
the Light within is not Sufficient without Something Else? How vain and absurd
(to say no worse) is G. KEITH's Insulting over G. WHITEHEAD in the Pamphlet he
Entitles, G. KEITH's Second Narative, in these words: Here now at length he
has openly shown his Deism and Antichristian Doctrine, for if it be an
offensive and false Assertion to say, The Light within is not sufficient to
Salvation without something else, the Contradictory must be true, that the
Light within is sufficient to salvation without any thing else, and so without
Christ's Blood outwardly shed, and his Sacrifice on the Cross, and Intercession
for us in Heaven, all which are something else than the Light within Men.
Answer; such a Proposition as this, the Light within is sufficient to Salvation
without any thing else, is to be Rejected for this Reason, that such words
imply this false supposition, that there may be something, that is not included
in the signification of (...) Goloss. 1.17. (...). By him (Jesus Christ, the
Light within) all things Consist, that is, they have their Being (...) in him,
whose Nature Praeexistent to the Humane Nature which HE was Pleased to Assume
for Us Men; even for our Salvation, is the One NATURE, or BEING Absolutely
Infinite. I shall here Recite some words of a Letter I sent to G. KEITH in
Answer to one I Received from Him: You say, the Light within Us could not
become a Curse for Us, nor be Hanged on a Tree; To this I Answer, That the Same
Person, or HE HIMSELF who is the Light within Us, became a Curse for US, and
was Hanged on a Tree. You say also, That GOD is in all the Devils, and he is
Light Essentially in them all; and yet would it not found harsh to thy Ears to
say, The Light in all Devils is sufficient to their Salvation? etc. Answ. such
a saying would indeed sound very harsh to my Ears: For GOD is not in the Nature
of Devils, as he is in the Nature of Man: For our Salvation, not for the
Salvation of Devils, the TRUE LIGHT was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the
Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was Crucified also for Us, under Pontius
Pilate: He Suffered, and was Buried; and the third Day he Rose again according
to the Scriptures, and Ascended into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand of
the Father, and he shall come again with Glory to Judge the Quick and the Dead,
whose Kingdom shall have no End. Whosoever does not Act contrary to the
Manifestation of his present Duty, may be truly said, to walk in Light; and
shall from time to time have so much (Explicit, or Implicit) Knowledge of what
our Blessed LORD has done, and Suffered in the Flesh, and of his Intercession,
etc. as the True Light, the Infinity of Wisdom, Knows to be necessary for him:
whosoever therefore Faithfully adheres to the Light within, though he be deprived
of the Sight or Hearing of the Holy Scriptures, of all Good Books, and of all
Religious Society, he shall as certainly Remain in a State of Salvation, as if
he had all such outward Means of Grace. I shall say no more at this time, but
that I Beseech Almighty GOD to Give his Grace to Thee, and my Dear Christian
Reader, That we may know the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge; that we
may be Filled with all the Fullness of GOD.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street
near the Market, 1697.


