blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)^ct for
a Day of Public Thanksgiving to be observed throughout England and Wales, on
Thursday the First of November, 1649. Together with a DECLARATION of the
Grounds thereof.
THe great and wonderful Providence, wherein the Lord has eminently gone
forth in mercy toward this Nation, have been such, that however many do shut
their eyes, or murmr against them, or at least refuse to join in Public
Acknowledgements, and Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the same; Nevertheless,
the Lord has been pleased to publish to all the world, That it is the work of
his own hand: Nor has his infinite goodness and favor been restrained to
England only, but extended to Ireland, which he has been pleased to remember
in its low estate; and when his People there were as dry bones, He has not
only revived them in a way almost as miraculous as a Resurrection from the
Dead, but been pleased to raise both them and us to a high pitch of hope, That
the Lord will go on to perfect his work in ^^^d, and make it likewise at last a
quiet Habitation for his People, and establish the power and purity of ^^^el
there. The consideration whereof, and of the Goodness and Power of God in the
late wonderful (...) which he has been pleased to give unto the Parliaments
Forces there before Dublin (never to be for^^^^^ And the further progress God
has made in giving in Drogheda, a place of great Strength and Conse^^^^^^
^efended by a considerable number of their prime Officers and Soldiers, the
particulars whereof are ex^^^^^^ ^n the Lord Lieutenants and other Letters,
lately Printed; and since that, by striking Terror into the (...) the Enemy, so
as they have yielded up or deserted many other considerable Castles and
Garrisons, as ^^^^^ndalk, Carlingford, the Newry, and other Places, and some
other additional Victories which God has cast in (...) not but make a deep
impression on the hearts of all that fear the Lord, and provoke them to
exceeding ^^^^^lness and Rejoicing.

^^on consideration of all which, the Parliament out of their deep sense of so
great and ^ontinued Mercies, Have thought fit, as in duty to God, to set apart
a day for public and solemn Thanksgiving to the Lord, the Author of these
Mercies: And they do there^^ act and Ordain, That Thursday the First of
November next, be kept as a day of pub^^^^^ ^hanksgiving to the Lord, in all
the Churches and Chapels, and places of Divine (...) within this Commonwealth
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon ^^^ed: And that the
Ministers of the respective Parishes and places aforesaid, be and here^^^^ are
required and enjoined to give public notice on the Lord's Day next preceding
the ^^^^st of November, of the day so to be observed, to the end the People of
their several Con^^^^^ons may the more generally and diligently attend the
public Exercise of Gods Wor^^^^ (...) Service, there to be dispensed upon
this occasion; At which time, that the People may (...) particularly and fully
informed of this great Victory and Successes, the said Ministers (...) by
required to publish and read this present Act. And for the better observation
of the day, (...) ^arliament does hereby inhibit and forbid the holding or use
of all Fairs, Markets, and ser^^rks of men's ordinary Callings upon that day:
And all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of ^^^ce, Constables and other Officers, be
and are hereby enjoined to take especial care of (...) observance of the said
day of Thanksgiving accordingly.

Die Jovis, 11 Octobr. 1649.
^^^^red by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forth with
printed and published*

Hen: Scobell, Cleric' Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.


