AN Earnest Request TO MR. JOHN STANDISH, etc.

Upon Occasion of a SERMON of his Preached at WHITE HALL, before His MAJESTY.

September 26. 1675.

FROM PATROPOLIS, Directly over against IRENOPOLIS.

Printed in the Year 1676.

AN EARNEST REQUEST TO MR. JOHN STANDISH.
SIR,
THere is a Sermon of yours, which having flown up and down the City a Quarter
of a Year, is at length come into the Country, and has reached my meanness,
who am one that very seldom sees those new Books that come abroad, but was
Tempted by what I heard of your Discourse to send for it, and satisfy my self
about it: For I was very loath to believe Common-Fame, or to trust to any men's
jealous surmises, as I doubt you have done; especially since it would cost me
no great pains, nor much Money to see the truth my self. It was a good while
before I could procure it; but when it came, and I had Read it over, I was soon
convinced that you are not wronged, however you may have wronged others. For I
found there such an heavy, nay Bloody Accusation of your Brethren, that it
raised a trouble in my mind, beyond what you, (who enjoy your ease in a sweet
University-Retirement) can imagine. So great it was that I could not Sleep till
I had expressed my Resentment of it; which moved me immediately to take my Pen,
and publicly declare the sense of many honest men, with whom I discourses
concerning it.

They are amazed, Sir. To think in what condition this poor Church and Kingdom
is, if all that you say be true; or if it prove a Slander* Either way they are
astonished, to hear from White-Hall-Pulpit, either that this Church nourishes
such Vipers in its Bosom as you have given notice of; or, if your notice be
false, that any man should have the Face to appear there; and Spit such
Venomous words against his innocent Brethren. For you tell his Majesty that
there are certain men, who would Supplant Christian Religion with Natural
Theology, and turn the Grace of God into a Wanton notion of Morality; who
impiously deny both our Lord and his Holy-Spirit; who make Reason, Reason,
Reason their only Trinity; and Preach up Natural and Moral Religion without the
Grace of God, and Faith in Christ. The Fruits and consequents of whose
Doctrines are, that there is no such thing as Supernatural Grace; That every
man must be his own Savior, or he is Damned for ever, etc. And these
Deceiptful workers, these false Apostles, (you would have His Majesty and the
Bishops think) are crept in among us. Else you have laid out your pains and
Oil (to use your own Phrase p. 12.) to as little purpose as they that spend
their Breath in declaiming against Sins quite out of fashion etc. And your
Sermon would have served better, and been more proper for the swaggering
Polanders (you speak of p. 28.) then the Court of England. You are an
Ambassador, no doubt, Of more than Common Prudence, Sagacity, and Judgment,
one that understands his errand throughout (as your words are, p. 10.) And
thefore, it is to be presumed, would not give a Prince and his Court a false
Alarm, nor be so impertinent as to trouble that great Assembly with your
entreaties, and Beseechings to beware of men who are no where to be found among
us; nor have expressed your fears least they grow the only Divines in vogue by
the next Age; nay, that we may live to see our youth trained up in the
Cracovian Catechism, unless you intended they should think, that they are at
work already in our Church to supplant Christianity, batter down the Trinity,
and exalt Nature, Rreason and Morality above the Grace of God, and Faith in
Christ.

It is no less charge than this which you have brought against some of our
Preachers. A Charge which contains Crimes of so high a Nature, that either you,
or they whom you mean, deserve the severest punishment. Who they are you
particularly aim at, I am ignorant; but I something wonder that you are not
called upon by the whole Body of the London Clergy, who are most likely to be
concerned in this matter, to interpret your meaning, and declare who these
Pests are, by whom the Church is endangered. For whilst the Charge remains thus
General, and no body is named, the very best of them shall be branded by
malice, as occasion serves, with these fearful Crimes. There are many
Calumnies, I know, which a wise man should rather slight then take any notice
of: But there are others of such a nature, that they ought not to be despised;
but of which the greatest men in the Church have ever endeavored to clear
themselves. You are not ignorant I suppose of that which some Laymen
understand very well; how St. Hierom and St. Augustine are concerned to purge
themselves, when lesser Crimes then Heresy are objected to them. And therefore
since you endeavor to fix even this horrid Brand on some or other of our
Clergy, and leave us at liberty to suspect any body, because you name no body;
there is none of them but has reason to ask, as the Apostles did our Savior,
when he told them one of them should betray him, Sir, is it I? is it I?

Speak, Sir, for Gods sake, though they think fit to be silent, and say
nothing; speak, and tell us who the men are, on whom you have set so black a
Character. You are bound to answer, and give us some account of it, both for
the sake of us poor Laymen, and for the sake of the rest of your Brethren.

First we of the Layety have reason to demand of you who they are, that we may
carefully avoid them, and preserve our selves from being missled by them. As
you love the salvation of all men, which now the Church prays, in this
Ember-week, its Ministers may set forward; do not deny us this request. For we
poor Souls are in a dangerous case, if we follow those, with such veneration as
is due to the Ministers of Christ, who carry all these Pestilent Heresies in
their Breasts. They will not fail to insinuate them into us, when they have
once insinuated themselves into our esteem and affection. And they cannot
easily miss of that, since you tell us they are men whose Lives are specious,
that appear outwardly very innocent, and can carry matters slily, Amusing men
with other fears, while they are pecking at the foundation of our Faith with
their Axes and Hammers, that is (as you interpret it) With their great
Blasphemies, and less Criticismes. We have the greater reason to press you to
discover these close Hypocrites, as you call them, who are ever pecking with
those dangerous damnable Tools, and yet make no noise. For we are in an
apparent hazard, unless you help us* to be Cousened by such cunning
Crafts-Masters: Who have the skill, I suppose, to put off these poisonous
Doctrines as cleanly, and with the same Artifice that they manage their lives.
I must call to you therefore again, in the name of a number of Pious souls,
that you would tell us, where these men live, and what are their Names. For
they are Devils it seems, who walk up and down in the shape of Saints. And
therefore, again I beseech you, if you have any compassion in you, let us know
where they haunt, and who they are, lest they draw us to Hell with them,
persuading us all the while we are safe, and in the way to Heaven.

Which I also beg of you, for the sake of your Brethren of the Clergy: who
shall never be able to say any thing against the enemies of our Religion, but
presently the names of Socinians and Pelagians shall be cast in their teeth;
and a Sermon of Mr. J. Standish before the King shall be their voucher. For
while you leave it uncertain who they are, any body, (as I said) may be drawn
within your Charge; and Malice and ill Nature will be sure to fix your
Character on those, who shall most zealously oppose their Frenzies. This is no
vain surmise; for to my knowledge there are those who do God and his Church
much service, on whom some fasten this suspicion; though they are as far from
any such Heresies, as Mr. J. Standish himself. You have gratified those at a
very high rate who wish our destruction; for they are the men that cry up your
Sermon, (being extreme glad to hear so much ill of us) not the Children of the
Church of England. I am sure all that I have met withal in our parts are sorry
to see you doing the work of our enemies; whose art it has still been (as they
learn from our Great Archbishop in his Book again Fisher) To blast their
opposers with the name of Heretic; for this serves to shrivle the Credit of
the persons, and the persons once brought into contempt and ignominy, all the
good they desired in the Church, falls to dust, for want of creditable persons
to back and support it.

Speak out therefore, Good Sir, I again most earnestly entreat you. Let not the
Credit of any person be blasted by your means. Leave not ignorance and Malice
any longer to their guesses, who the men are you intend. But tell their names
plainly, fix your Character upon the very persons that deserve it: That so they
may retain no longer any Credit to do mischief, and the rest of your Brethren
may not lose the credit which they have to do good. I know not by what rules
you judge of your self: But I should not take my self any longer to be a lover,
of God of my Brethren, and of the Church, if I were in your case, and did not
answer these reasonable desires. You can do it far more easily sure, then you
composed your Sermon. The men's names, I should think, are at your fingers ends,
since you are so well acquainted even with their close Hypocrisy. Therefore by
the next return of the Carrier, after this is come to your hand, they at London
may expect to hear that you have sent to the Press a list of those men, who you
suspect at least believe no Trinity, but Reason, Reason, Reason, and who
believe there is no supernatural Grace, and that every man must be his own
Savior.

And if you please, oblige us so far as to tell us by the way, why you scorn
Reason so much; which distinguishes you from a beast, and has made you choose,
I hope, to be a Christian. For what was it that led you to the belief of
Christianity? Do you owe it only to your Education? Is there no Reason why you
believe one God in three Persons? We have been taught even by those, whom you
miscall, and vilify that there is the greatest Reason, or in your Phrase,
Reason, Reason, Reason for it. Because God has revealed himself in this
manner, and the Church has always thus understood him, and next to the voice
of God, we reverence the voice of the Universal Church. Whom do you gratify by
decrying Reason? Need you be remembered who they were that pretended the Spirit
against all your learning, and would have pulled down the places, wherein you
acquire it? What greater advantage could they have desired then some such
Champions as you to have joined with them, in kicking Reason out of doors: And
then they had soon thrown you all out together with it.

But I am ashamed to say any more of this. I believe you are able to give a
good reason for any thing, unless it be of this, why you think or fear there
are such men among us as you have described. Why you said it, many guess the
reason: but what reason you have to think it true, none can imagine. And
therefore desire you would be pleased to tell us; that we may join with you in
crying them down, as much as some do Reason. We will lift up our voice, and
instead of Reason, Reason, Reason, we will cry as long as we have Breath, down
with them, down with them, down with them; out of the Pulpit, even to the
Ground.

But if you stop your Ears, and will not vouchsafe to hear or regard these
earnest Petitions which I send you in Print, and in the name of diverse true
Children of this Church; there will be great reason to think that there is a
Guilt lies at your door. little less foul then that you lay at other men's. And
then the R. R. Fathers the Bishops of the Church are most humbly beseeched that
they would hear our cry, and call you to an account: making you open your mouth
either to confess those wicked men, or else to condemn your self. I have heard
that Apelles Painted Calumny, with many Companions, and strong Supporters, such
as Envy, Ambition, Whispering, Backbiting, and Treachery, etc. But behind her
there followed Repentance, with her head hanging down to the earth, in a
mournful habit, with tears and shame beholding Truth appearing afaroff. There
are a great many think that they see a very barefaced Calumny painted by Mr.
J. Standish in his Sermon If they be not mistaken, her Companions and Upholders
are very visible. But they can as yet see no such attendant waiting on her, and
following her as Repentance; no Tears, no Blushing, no Shame. The reason is
they cannot tell how to make Truth appear; unless our Spiritual Fathers will be
pleased to cause him to finish what he hasbegun, and to bring her forth.

We humbly therefore implore their help, and cry to them with as much
earnestness as consists with the duty of Children, Search out the Truth, search
out the Truth, in this matter. It is your power R. Fathers to make this
Gentleman Blush, if instead of a Sermon, he has sent a Libel into your
Diocesses; as many fear he has. But if he have not, you will not quite loss
your labor; for I hope you will be able, if he be found faithful, to put those
to shame whom he convicts of such Heresies. You ought, (with due Reverence to
your High Place and Office be it spoken) to have so much care of the Flock
committed to your Charge, as to make enquiry after such Grievous Wolves as he
describes: Who is the only man, as far as I can learn, that knows them, and is
able to inform you where they lurk. Let him be summoned therefore to appear
before you and required to do the Church of God so much service, as to detect
those Wolves; that their Sheeps-Cloathing may be pulled off, and Mr. Standish,
not they pass for innocent.

He may be willing perhaps to do that privately to your Lordships, which he
will not do openly to the World, give in a list, that is, of those men's Names
who deprave the Christian Religion among us by those forenamed Heresies. There
is the greater reason he should do it, because he pretends cause to fear, least
we live to see our youth (unless effectual care be taken) trained up in the
Cracovian Catechism, instead of that of the Church of England. A sign that he
thinks these Pestilent Heretics very numerous; unless he and his partakers (if
he have any) have instructed their youth so ill and suffered them to be so
corrupted, that they will be as ready to catch any infectious Doctrines, as
some bodies do the Plague. Call upon him therefore to let you know where these
Pests are: Let not such a blot lie upon this Church, over which God has made
you Overseers, as either they or he have cast upon it. This will be the most
effectual care you can take (which he beseeches from you as well as I) to
prevent this evil from over-spreading us. It will do more good then his
preaching, if he will be persuaded to make a discovery of these dangerous men
to you.

Whom we beseech you to examine, sift, and try if they be found guilty, let
them be expelled the Church as they deserve, and suffer such punishment as the
Law inflicts. I am no Advocate for them, nor shall I beg for the least mercy or
mitigation, if you proceed in the most rigorous manner with them: Being as
great a stranger to their Heresies as I am a stranger to Mr. Standish, whose
face I never saw. And therefore I hope none will so much as fancy I have any
spleen at him, when I move on the other side; that if no such men can be found,
then Mr. John Standish may be severely punished for his slander. Which is the
greater, because it is against Gods Priests, and before His Sacred Majesty, and
with so high a confidence, from a man that knows his duty better. Let not this
man go away without some special mark either of your kindness, or of your
severity. If he can produce these Antitrimitarian and other Heretics, let him
be preferred to those Dignities, which perhaps A. B. C. D. and I do not know
who enjoy. But if there be none of this stamp that can be produced, then let
Mr. John Standish be punished (I will not say as the old Law requires, in the
same manner that he would have served others) but with the loss, at least, of
his Chaplains place, which he has so notoriously abused. Use your best
endeavors that he may never more appear before His Majesty: But be put rather
to some open shame for defameing those so boldly and publicly, who piously
apply their endeavors, it is like, to serve God and his Church with much labor
and industry; whilst such as he (if he have any followers) sit still, and do
little, as far as appears, but study invectives against their Brethren.

Pardon this Vehemence I most humbly beseech your Goodness, which I doubt not
is equal to your Wisdom and prudence. If I have been too bold in pressing that,
which I conceive to be the duty of my Superiors, and shall hear that this
Paper is condemned by you; I will condemn it too in my own private thoughts,
and beg pardon of Almighty God for my rashness. Though I think I have great
reason for what I have done, yet I will not be so presumptuous as to oppose my
thoughts to yours: But shall condemn that my self, which you shall judge
imprudently done, or not with sufficient modesty.

I am in good earnest, and very sincere in this Profession; which perhaps Mr.
Standish may not think unfit to imitate. For if you my Lords, will not be
pleased to concern your selves in this Calumny, (as all that I meet withal
think they have reason to call it) then I must return back to him, and
earnestly beseech him to call himself to a strict account, and examine upon
what grounds he has indicted his Brethren of, at least the suspicion of such
foul Crimes, as if they be true, make them most detestable. Let him ask himself
what moved him to it. Was it pure zeal for the glory of God, and the good of
souls? or was it Envy at the Reputation which some men have got, by their
diligent preaching and writing, in the Church of God: and fear lest they should
step into those preferments, of which perhaps he thinks himself far more
worthy? I accuse him of nothing of this nature, because I know him not; but it
will be safe for him to search his heart, whether something of these or such
like ill affections, do not lurk more secretly there, then he fancies
Socimanism does in others. I will not put him upon any enquiries about the rest
of his Sermon (though some I perceive would fain be satisfied about many
particulars besides this) let him only ask himself again, what assurance he
has that he did not wrong the innocent, in this part of it: For a number of
grave persons, whom I have spoken withal, and that know the world better then
he, are very confident, upon particular search that they have made, there are
no such men as he has described, among our Clergy. And if he find that his
declamation was grounded on weak surmises, and there is nothing substantial to
support so dreadful an accusation; let him condemn himself for a grievous
offender. Let him fall upon his knees and beg Gods pardon: let him inflict that
penance on himself, which his fault deserves, though the Church suffer him to
escape without any Censure. It will be too much perhaps to expect that he
should make satisfaction to his Brethren whom he has wronged, by open
confession under his hand, that he was rash and too easy to believe evil of
others (to use no harsher word) If I were as they, I should take his silence
for such a confession; and look upon him as a man truly sorry for his sin, if
after this he hold his. Peace

I have but one word to add to him, and a word to some others, who I hear are
prone to entertain the same Jealousies, and then I have done.

Mr. Standish, let me beseech you once more to consider (together with all that
has been said) how rude and barbarous a thing it was for you who live in the
shade, as I may say, in a cool delightful retirement, to come out of it merely
to revile those men, many of which it is thought, bear the Heat and Burden of
the day. If you had not accused them of Heresy, (let that be set aside) yet
you cannot but think it a piece of very ill nature, when you seriously reflect
upon it, for you who live at your ease, and enjoy a pleasant life in a
College, to appear with your Flourishes before the Court, and there vapor
over your deserving Brethren, those Painful Laborious, men who have the
constant Cure of Souls, and contend in that station with innumerable
difficulties. They have load, (one would think) enough upon them; you needed
not have laid on an heavy load of Reproaches. They meet with enemies too many,
it is very hard, that their Friends become their Enemies: they with whom they
walk to the same House of God in company, rise up against them. This is bitter;
and needs a deal of patience to bear it.

And the more, because there are a sort of men I hear, who as they have been
prone to entertain these suspicions, so will not suffer themselves to be
disposessed of them; notwithstanding all that those men, whom they aim at, have
said and done both in public and private, to purge themseves, and all their
acquaintance of all such Heresies, or any thing that looks like them. These are
persons of a strange disposition, whose bare surmises must be believed against
other men's downright protestations. They pretend it seems to see into the
heart. They are not to be informed by words what their neighbors think; but
they look into them, as they say Angels do into one another thoughts, by I
know not what immediate intuition. There is no way to deal with these men:
Patience is the only refuge in this case, together with serious appeals from
them to the All-seeing God, who knows the hearts of those that sensure (and
what they aim at) as well as of those that stand susspected. And I am sure some
of those whose names are endeavored to be blasted, address themselves to him,
in the words of Susanna. v. 42. O everlasting God, that know the secrets,
and know all things before they be; thou know that they have born False
witness against me, and behold I am condemned; where as I was never guilty of
such things as these men (though I hope not Maliciously) have invented against
me, And the Lord who, as it there follows, heard her voice, will sure hear
theirs: and will make their righteousness (to use the Psalmists words) as clear
as the light, and their just dealing as the noon day. Which will move many good
men, To praise God with a loud voice, who saves them that trust in him. and
teach even. you, Mr. Standish to learn that lesson better, which you have often
no doubt heard, 11. Eccles. 7. with which I shall conclude.

Blame not before thou have examined the truth: understand first, and then
rebuke.
FINIS.

