Militia's in the respective Counties within this COMMONWEALTH.
BE it Enacted and Declared by this present Parliament, and by the Authority
thereof, That all and every the persons nominated and appointed, or to be
nominated and appointed by the Council of State, for the Forming, Listing,
Raising, Settling and Disposing of the Militia in the several and respective
Counties of this Commonwealth, Shall be, and are hereby Authorized and
Empowered to do, execute and perform, All and every the Powers and Authorities
granted by any Act, Order or Ordinance of Parliament, for Raising of any Forces
of Horse or Foot for the Service and Safety of the Commonwealth of England; And
that the said Commissioners already nominated, or hereafter to be nominated by
the Council of State, be Authorized and Required forthwith to Summon before
them, all and every the Militia Forces lately Listed or Raised in their several
and respective Counties, whether they be Horse or Foot, with all their Officers
and Soldiers, to be drawn into one or more Bodies, unto some one or more
Rendezvouzes in eath County respectively, as the Commissioners shall think fit;
And to take care and provide, That all and every person and persons, who do, or
shall find or provide, and are or shall be charged with Horsemen or Footmen,
shall immediately furnish the said Horsemen or Footmen so charged upon them
respectively, with one full months Pay, the same to be Paid or Reimbur^ed by
Appointment of Parliament out of, or by way of Assessments or otherwise; And
all Commissioners, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, are to follow such Orders
and Directions, as they shall from time to time receive from the Parliament or
Council of State appointed by Authority of Parliament; And the said
Commissioners, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, are hereby Required to do
their respective Duties herein with all diligence and faithfulness, upon pain
of being Censured and Adjudged Enemies to their Country, and to undergo such
penalties as in that behalf shall be by the Parliament thought fit to be
inflicted upon them. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Commissions formerly granted by the Council of State, unto any Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains and other Officers, upon the last Act for
the Militia's of the Commonwealth, be Revived, Continued, and shall stand in
full force until the First day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty one,
unless the Parliament or Council of State shall give other order.

Tuesday the 12th of August. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


