London, and Liberties thereof, and the parts adjacent.
THE Parliament of England, do Enact and Declare, and it is hereby Enacted and
Declared, That the Committee of the Militia of the City of London, or any nine
or more of them, shall have power, and are hereby authorized to charge such
Inhabitants who are constantly dwelling within the said City and Liberties
thereof, and such persons who have Stocks going in trade within the limits
aforesaid, and absent themselves, as they or any Nine of them shall esteem able
to find and maintain Horses, with Furniture and Rider, or Horse and furniture
without Rider, at their proper charges, for the defense of the Parliament, City
of London, Liberties and parts adjacent; so as no person shall be charged for
the raising and maintaining of more then two Horses, Furniture and Riders, to
be put under such Commanders and Officers as the said Committee shall think
fit: And the said Horse being Listed, Trained and Exercised, to be employed by
the said Committee, or by suc whom they shall appoint, to suppress all Tumults
Rebellions, and Insurrections that shall happen within the said City, and
Liberties, and parts adjacent.

And it is further Enacted; That if any person or persons shall be charged to
find Horse, Furniture and Riders, or Horse and Furniture without Riders as
aforesaid, and shall refuse or neglect to provide the same within eight days
after notice thereof given to them in person, or left in writing at their
dwelling, shall forfeit and pay twenty pounds; and if they or any of them shall
neglect or refuse to send forth their Horse, with Furniture and Rider, or Horse
and furniture without Rider, provided and furnished as aforesaid, when and as
often as he or they shall be summoned thereunto by the said Committee of the
Militia, or such Commanders or Officers as they shall appoint, in default
thereof shall forfeit and pay Forty shillings upon every such failing, or
suffer four days Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize, to be inflicted upon
every such Offender; and the several Penalties aforesaid to be levied by
Distress, and sale of the Goods of such Offenders, by the said Committee of
the Militia, or such as they shall appoint; And the said Committee shall have
power, and are hereby authorized to give such satisfaction to such persons as
they shall employ in levying the said Fines as the Committee of the Militia shall
think reasonable; and the moneys so raised, to be employed by the said
Committee, for the payment of the forces under their command: and that all such
persons that shall be charged to find Horse, Furniture and Riders as aforesaid,
and shall yield obedience thereunto, shall during that time be freed from service
in the Trainedbands and Auxiliaries within the said City and Liberties thereof.
Provided always, That the number of the Horse exceed not Six hundred, and the
Riders thereof be such as the Committee of the Militia, or such as they shall
appoint, shall approve of. And it is further Enacted, That hereafter
Proclamations shall be made, and Summons given by beat of Drum, or otherwise,
In the Name of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, and for their
Safety, and the Safety of the City of London, Liberties thereof, and parts
adjacent. Provided, That this Act do continue in force until the four and
twentyeth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and one, and no longer.

Die Martis, 4 Iunii, 1650.
Ordered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliament.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1650.


