HONI ^ SOIT ^ QVI MAL ^ Y ^ PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT ^



A COLLECTION OF THE STATUTES Made in the REIGNS of King Charles the I. AND
King Charles the II.

With the ABRIDGMENT of such as stand Repealed or Expired.

Continued after the Method of Mr. PULTON.

WITH Notes of References, one to the other, as they now stand Altered,
Enlarged or Explained.

TO WHICH ALSO ARE ADDED, The Titles of all the Statutes and Private Acts of
PARLIAMENT Passed by their said MAJESTY'S, until this present Year, M.DC.LXVII.

With a TABLE directing to the Principal Matters of the said STATUTES.

By THO: MANBY of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, James Flesher, and Henry Twyford, Assigns of
Richard Atkyns and Edward Atkyns Esquires; Anno Dom. 1667.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

A View and Digest of the Heads and Titles of the several STATUTES from the
First Year of King CHARLES the First, until this present time, according to
the Order of Statutes in this Book mentioned.
Anno Primo CAROLI primi nuper Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for punishing of diverse Abuses on the Lords Day called Sunday, Cap.
1. Fol. 1. 2 An Act to enable the King to make Leases of Lands parcel of his
Highness Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the same, Cap. 2. fol. 1. 3 An Act
for the Ease of obtaining Licenses of alienation, and in the pleading of
alienations with License, or of Pardons of alienations without License in the
Court of Exchequer or elsewhere, Cap. 3. fol. 2. See Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
4 An Act for the further Restraint of Tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and other
Victualling-houses, Cap. 4. fol. 2. 5 An Act for the Confirmation of the
Subsidies granted by the Clergy, Cap. 5. fol. 3. EXP. 6 An Act for the Grant of
two entire Subsidies granted by the Temporalty, Cap. 6. fol. 3. 7 An Act that
this Session of Parliament shall not determine by his Majesty's Royal Assent to
this and some other Acts, Cap. 7. fol. 3.
Anno Tertio Caroli Primi Regis, etc.
THe Petition exhibited to his Majesty by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled concerning diverse Rights and
Liberties of the Subject, with the Kings Majesty's Royal Answer thereunto in
full Parliament. Folio 3. 1 An Act for the further Reformation of sundry abuses
committed on the Lords Day commonly called Sunday, Cap. 1. fol. 5. 2 An Act to
Restrain the passing or sending of any to be Popishly bred beyond the Seas,
Cap. 2. fol. 5. 3 An Act for the better suppressing of Unlicensed
Ale-house-keepers, Cap. 3. fol. 6. 4. An Act for Continuance of diverse
Statutes, and for Repeal of diverse others, Cap. 4. fol. 7. 5 An Act for the
establishing of the Estates of the Tenants of Bromfeild and Yale in the County
of Denbigh, and of the Tenures, Rents, and Services thereupon reserved
according to a late composition made for the same with the Kings Majesty then
Prince of Wales, Cap. 5. fol. 11. 6 An Act for Confirmation of the Subsidies
granted by the Clergy, Cap. 6. fol. 11. EXP. 7 An Act for the grant of Five
entire Subsidies granted by the Temporalty, Anno Quarto Caroli Regis, Cap. 7.
fol. 11.
Anno Decimo sexto and decimo septimo Caroli Primi Regis, etc.
1 AN Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long
intermission of Parliaments, Cap. 1. fol. 11. Rep. and Alt. 16 Car. 2. cap. 1.
2 An Act for the Relief of his Majesty's Army, and the Northern Parts of this
Kingdom, Cap. 2. fol. 11. EXP. 3 An Act for the Reforming of some things
mistaken in the late Act made in this Parliament for the granting of Four
Subsidies, Entitled, An Act for the Relief of his Majesty's Army in the
Northern Parts, etc. Cap. 3. fol. 11. EXP.
Anno decimo septimo Caroli Primi Regis, etc.
4 AN Act for the further Relief of his Majesty's Army in the Northern Parts of
this Kingdom, Cap. 4. Fol. 11. 5 An Act for the better raising and levying of
Mariners, Sailors and others for the present Guarding of the Seas, Cap. 5.
fol. 12. EXP. 6 An Act concerning the limitation and abbreviation of Michaelmas
Term, Cap. 6. fol. 12. 7 An Act to prevent Inconveniences which may happen by
the untimely Adjourning, Proroguing or dissolving of this present Parliament,
Cap. 7. fol. 14. EXP. 8 A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage,
and other sums of money payable upon Merchandises Exported and Imported, Cap.
8. fol. 14. EXP. 9 An Act for the speedy Provision of Money for Disbanding of
the Army, and settling the Peace of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
Cap. 9. fol. 14. EXP. 10 An Act for Regulating the Privy Council, and taking
away the Court commonly called the Star Chamber, Cap. 10. fol. 14. 11 An Act
for Repeal of a Branch of a Statute 1 Eliz. concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical, Cap. 11. fol. 16. 12 A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage
and Poundage, and other Sums of money payable upon Merchandise Exported and
Imported, Cap. 12. fol. 17. EXP. 13 An Act for securing of Moneys due or to be
due to the Inhabitants of the County of York, and other adjoining Counties,
wherein his Majesty's Army is or has been Billited, etc. Cap. 13. fol. 18.
EXP. 14 An Act Declaring unlawful and void the late proceeding touching
Ship Money, and for the vacating of all Records and Process concerning the
same, Cap. 14. fol. 18. 15 An Act against diverse Encroachments and oppressions
in the Stannary Courts, Cap. 14. fol. 19. 16 An Act for the certainty of
Forests, and of the Meers, Meets, Limits and Bounds of the Forest, Cap. 6.
fol. 21. 17 An Act for the Confirmation of the Treaty of Pacification of
England and Scotland, Cap. 17. fol. 22. EXP. 18 An Act for securing the
Public Faith, the remainder of the friendly assistance and relief promised to
our Brethren of Scotland, Cap. 18. fol. 22. EXP. 19 An Act for the Regulating
of the Clerk of the Market, and for the Reformation of false Weights and
Measures, Cap. 19. fol. 22. 20 An Act to prevent vexatious proceeding touching
the Order of Knighthood, Cap. 20. fol. 24. 21 An Act for the free bringing in
Gunpowder and Saltpeter from foreign Parts, and for the free making of
Gunpowder in this Realm, Cap. 21. fo. 24 22 A Subsidy granted to the King of
Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of money payable upon Merchandise Exported
and Imported, Cap. 22. fol. 25. 23 An Act for the Raising of Mariners and
Sailors for the Guarding of the Seas and his Majesty's Dominions, Cap. 23. fol.
25. EXP. 24 An Act to relieve Captives taken by the Turks, and to prevent the
taking of others hereafter, Cap. 24. fol. 25. EXP. 25 A Subsidy granted to the
King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of money payable upon Merchandises
Exportable and Importable, Cap. 25. fol. 25. EXP. 26 An Act for the Raising of
Mariners and Sailors for the Guarding of the Seas, and his Majesty's Kingdoms,
Cap. 26. fol. 25. EXP. 27 An Act for the dis-enabling all persons in Holy
Orders to exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, Cap. 27. fol. 25.
Rep. 13 Car. 1. cap. 2. 28 An Act for the Raising of Soldiers for the defense
of England and Ireland, Cap. 28. fol. 25. EXP. 29 A Subsidy granted to the King
of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of money payable upon Merchandises
Exportable and Importable, Cap. 29. fol. 25. EXP. 30 An Act for a Contribution
and Loan for the distressed people of Ireland, Cap. 30. fol. 25. EXP. 31 A
Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of money
payable upon Merchandise, Cap. 31. fol. 25. EXP. 32 An Act for the Raising of
400000 l. for the Defense of England and Ireland, and for payment of Debts
undertaken by the Parliament, Cap. 32. fol. 25. EXP. 33 An Act for the Reducing
the Rebels in Ireland to their obedience to his Majesty and the Crown of
England, Cap. 33. fol. 25. EXP. 34 An Act for Explanation of a former Act for
Reducing the Rebels in Ireland, Cap. 34. fol. 25. EXP. 35 An Act to enable
Corporations to adventure in Ireland, Cap. 35. fol. 25. EXP. 36 A Subsidy
granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of money payable
upon Merchandise to be Exported and Imported, Cap. 36. fol. 25. EXP. 37 An Act
for the further Reducing the Rebels in Ireland to their obedience to the King
and Crown of England, Cap. 35. fol. 25. EXP.
Anno Duodecimo Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
1. AN Act for removing and preventing all Questions and Disputes concerning
the Assembling and Sitting of this present Parliament, Cap. 1. Fol. 26. 2 An
Act for putting in Execution an Ordinance mentioned in the said Act for an
Assessment of 70000 l. per mensem for 3. months. EXP. Cap. 2. fol. 26. 3 An
Act for the continuance of Process and Judicial proceedings, cap. 3. fol. 27. 4
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other sums of money
payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported, Cap. 4. fol. 28. 5 An Act for
continuing the Excize until the 20th of August 1660. Cap. 5. fol. 30. EXP. See
13 Car. 2. cap. 7. 6 An Act for the present nominating of Commissioners of
Sewers, Cap. 6. fol. 30. 7 An Act for Restoring unto James Marquess of Ormond
all his Honors, Manors, Lands and Tenements, whereof he was in Possession on
the 23th day of October 1641. or at any time since. Cap. 7. fol. 30. PR. 8 An
Act for continuing of the Excise till the 25th day of December. 1660. Cap. 8.
fol. 31. EXP. See 13 Car. 2. cap. 7. 9 An Act for the speedy Provision of Money
for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea.
Cap. 9. fol. 31. EXP. 10 An Act for Supplying and Explaining certain Defects in
an Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of Money for Disbanding and
Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea. Cap. 10. fol. 31.
11 An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion. Cap. 11. fol.
31. 12 An Act for Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings, Cap. 12. fol. 39. 13 An
Act for Restraining the taking of Excessive Usury, Cap. 13. fol. 42. 14 An Act
for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on the 29th day of May, Cap. 14. fol.
42. 15 An Act for the speedy Disbanding of the Army and Garrisons of this
Kingdom, Cap. 15. fol. 43. 16 An Act for enabling the Soldiers of the Army now
to be Disbanded, to Exercise Trades, Cap. 16. fol. 43. 17 An Act for the
Confirming and Restoring of Ministers, Cap. 17. fol. 44. 18 An Act for the
Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation, Cap. 18. fol. 44. 19 An
Act to prevent Frauds and Concealments of His Majesty's Customs and Subsidies,
Cap. 19. fol. 49. 20 An Act for raising Sevenscore thousand pounds for the
complete Disbanding of the whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy,
Cap. 20. fol. 49. EXP. See Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. 21 An Act for the speedy
raising of Seventy thousand pounds for the present supply of his Majesty, Cap.
21. fol. 49. EXP. See 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. and 10. 22 An Act for the Regulating
the Trade of Bay-making in the Dutch Bay-Hall in Colchester, Cap. 22. fol. 49.
23 A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors for the
increase of his Majesty's Revenue during life, Cap. 23. fol. 49. 24 An Act for
taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in Capite and by
Knights-Service, and Purveyance, and for settling a Revenue upon his Majesty in
lieu thereof, Cap. 24. fol. 54. 25. An Act for the better Ordering the selling
of Wines by Retayl, and for preventing abuses in the mingling, corrupting and
vitiating of Wines, and for setting and limiting the prices of the same, Cap.
25. fol. 61. 26 An Act for the Levying of the arrears of the Twelve months
Assessment commencing the 24th of June 1659. and the Six months Assessments
commencing the 25th of December 1659. Cap. 26. fol. 63. EXP. See 13 Car. 2.
cap. 7. 27 An Act for granting unto the Kings Majesty Four hundred and twenty
thousand pounds by an Assessment of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the
month, for 6 months, for Disbanding the remainder of the Army, and paying off
the Navy, Cap. 27. fol. 63. EXP. 28 An Act for further Supplying and Explaining
certain defects in an Act, Entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of Money
for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea,
Cap. 28. fol. 63. EXP. 29 An Act for the Raising of Seventy thousand pounds for
the further Supply of his Majesty, Cap. 29. fol. 63. EXP. 30 An Act for the
Attainder of several persons guilty of the horrid Murder of his late Sacred
Majesty King Charles the First, Cap. 30. fol. 64. 31 An Act for Confirmation of
Leases and Grants from Colleges and Hospitals, Cap. 31. fol. 67. 32 An Act for
Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, Woolfells, Fullers Earth, or any kinds of
scouring Earth, Cap. 32. fol. 67. 33 An Act for Confirmation of Marriages, Cap.
33. fol. 69. 34 An Act for Prohibiting the Planting, Setting or Sowing of
Tobacco in England and Ireland, Cap. 34. fol. 70. 35 An Act for Erecting and
Establishing a Post Office, Cap. 35. fol. 71. 36 An Act impowring the Master of
the Rolls for the time being, to make Leases for years, in order to new build
the old Houses belonging to the Rolls, Cap. 36. fol. 74. 37 An Act for making
the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial, PR. Cap. 37. fol. 74.
Private Acts.
AN Act for the restoring of Henry Lord Arundel of Warder to the possession of
his estate. An Act for the restitution of Thomas Earl of Arundel, Surrey and
Norfolk, to the Dignity and Title of Duke of Norfolk. An Act to restore to
Wentworth Earl of Roscomon, of the Kingdom of Ireland, all the Honors, Castles,
Lordships, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Ireland, whereof James Earl of
Roscomon his Great-Grand Father, or James Earl of Roscomon his Father, etc. An
Act for restoring of Sir George Hamilton unto his Lands and Estate in Ireland.
An Act for maintenance of the Vicar for the time being of the Vicaridge of
Royston in the Counties of Hertford and Cambridge, and of his Successors,
Vicars of the said Vicaridge. An Act for enabling Sir William Wray to sell
Lands for payment of his debts, and raising of Portions for his younger
Children. An Act for naturalizing of Gerard Vanhenthusen, Daniel Demetrius, and
others. An Act for enabling of John Newton the younger, and William Oakeley, to
make sale of Lands for payment of debts, and raising of Portions, etc. An Act
for the levying of certain moneys due upon the Collection for the Protestants
of Piedmont. An Act for the Naturalization of John Boreel Esquire Eldest Son of Sir
William Boreel Knight and Baronet. An Act for the Naturalization of Abraham
Watchtor born beyond the Seas. An Act for restoring of Sir Thomas Grimes
Baronet, to his Estate. An Act for enabling George Fawnt of Foston in the
County of Leicester Esquire to sell and conveigh part of his Lands, for payment of
several Debts and Legacies charged upon his Estate by Sir William Fawnt Knight
deceased, and for the raising of Portions for his younger children, and making
his Wife a Jointure. An Act for Naturalizing Francis Hide and others. An Act to
nable Joseph Micklethwaite an Infant, and his Trustees, to sell Lands for
payment of his Fathers Debts. An Act for raising portions, and making provision
for maintenance for the younger children of Sir Edward Gostwick. An Act for
confirming the Sale of the Manor of Hitcham, sold to Charles Do, by Sir John
Clark Knight and Baronet, and for settling and disposing other the Lands of the
said Sir John Clerk and Dame Philadelphia his Wife. An Act for the settling of
some of the Manors and Lands of the Earl of Cleaveland in Trustees, to be sold
for the satisfying of the Debts of the said Earl, and of Thomas Lord Wentworth
his Son. An Act for the disappropriating of the Rectory appropriate of Preston,
and uniting and consolidating of the said Rectory, and of the Vicaridge of the
Church of Preston; and for assuring of the Advowson, and right of Patronage of
the same unto the Master, Fellows, and Scholars of Emanuel College in
Cambridge, and their Successors. An Act for making the Precincts of Covent
Garden Parochial.
Anno Decimo tertio Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
AN Act for Safety and Preservation of his Majesty's Person and Government,
against Treasonable and Seditious Practices and Attempts, Cap. 1. fol. 75. 2 An
Act for Repeal of an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for disenabling all
persons in Holy Orders to receive any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, Cap.
2. fol. 77. 3 An Act for the Declaring, Vesting and Settling of all such Moneys,
Goods and other things in his Majesty, which were Received, Levied or Collected
in these late times, and are remaining in the hands or possession of any
Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors or others not pardoned by the Act of
Oblivion, Cap. 3. fol. 77. 4 An Act for a Free and Voluntary Present to his
Majesty, Cap. 4. fol. 78. 5 An Act against Tumults and Disorders upon pretense
of preparing or presenting Public Petitions or other Addresses to his Majesty
or the Parliament, Cap. 5. fol. 78. 6 An Act Declaring the Sole Right of the
Militia to be in the King, and for the present Ordering and disposing the same,
Cap. 6. fol. 78. 7 An Act for Confirming Public Acts, Cap. 7. fol. 79. 8 An
Act for Providing necessary Carriages for his Majesty in his Royal Progress and
Removals, Cap. 8. fol. 80. 9 An Act for the establishing Articles and Orders
for the regulating and better Government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of War
and Forces by Sea, Cap. 9. fol. 81. 10 An Act to prevent the Unlawful Coursing,
Hurting or Killing of Deer, Cap. 10. fol. 85. 11 An Act for Confirming three
Acts therein mentioned, Cap. 11. fol. 85. 12 An Act for Explanation of a Clause
contained in an Act of Parliament made in the 17th year of the late King
Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a Branch of a Statute, Primo
Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, Cap. 12. fol.
86. 13 An Act for Vesting the Arrears of the Excise and New Impost in his
Majesty, Cap. 13. fol. 87. 14 An Act for Confirming an Act, Entitled, An Act
for Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation, and several other
Acts both Public and Private mentioned therein, Cap. 14. fol. 87. 15 An Act
Declaring the Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures imposed upon the Estates and
Persons of certain notorious Offenders Excepted out of the Act of Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, Cap. 15. fol. 88.
Private Acts.
An Act for ascertaining and Establishing the Fees of the Masters of the
Chancery in Ordinary. An Act for Confirming a Sale made by Sir Thomas
Prestwich, and others of the Manor of Holm, and certain Lands in the Parish of
Manchester in the County of Lancaster, unto Sir Edward Mosley Baronet. An Act
for Restoring of Thomas Radcliffe Esquire to all his Lands and Possessions in
England and Ireland. An Act enabling John Harbin Esquire to settle, sell, and
dispose of several Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
with the Appurtenances in the County of Somerset and Dorset, therein mentioned,
for Payment of his Debts, and to make provision for his younger Children. An
Act to enable the Sale of some of the Lands of Thomas Hunt Esquire and John Hunt
Gent. for the payment of their Debts. An Act for settling the Manors Knoll,
Seal, and Kempsing, in the County of Kent, upon the Earl of Dorset, and his
Heirs, and charging the Manor of Bexhill, and the Manor or Farm of Cawding,
and other Lands in the County of Sussex, with a Rent charge of One hundred and
thirty pounds per annum in lieu thereof. An Act for Confirmation of the Charter
and Privileges of the Master, Wardens, and Commonalty of Weavers, Fullers, and
Clothiers in the City of Worcester. An Act for Settling of several Lands, late
of Sir Edward Baesh Knight, upon Sir Ralph Baesh Knight of the Bath, Heir of
the said Sir Edward and his Heirs. An Act for Confirmation and Explanation of
an Act for the Settling of some of the Manors, and Lands of the Earl of
Cleaveland in Trustees, to be sold for the satisfying of the Debts of the said
Earl and Thomas Lord Wentworth his Son. An Act for the Uniting the Parsonages
of St. Andrews, and St. Mary Witton in Droitwich, in the County of Worcester.
An Act to enable John Lord Abergavenny, Son and Heir of Henry late Lord
Abergavenny, to sell certain Lands for payment of his Debts, and Preferment of
his Brother and Sisters. An Act for the Naturalizing of Francis Brudenel Esquire
Son and Heir Apparent of the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brudenel, and of the
Right Honorable Anna Maria, Countess of Shrewsbury, Daughter of the said Lord
Brudenell, and now Wife of the Right Honorable Francis Earl of Shrewsbury. An
Act for the Reviving a Settlement of certain Lands on John Orlibeare for life,
the Remainder to the Sons of the said John successively, and the Heirs Males of
their Bodies, etc. An Act for Confirming and Continuing an Act for the
necessary Maintenance of the Work of Draining the great Level of the Fens. An
Act for Confirming of an Enclosure of Land, formerly used for a Common Highway
from Parsons Green to Southfield in Fulham, and the Settling of other Land for a
Common Highway in lieu thereof. An Act enabling Trustees to sell certain Lands
and Tenements in the Counties of Suffolk and Norfolk, for payment of the Debts
of Richard Gipps Esquire and providing Portions for his younger Children.
Anno decimo tertio Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc. The Second Meeting of
the Parliament.
1 AN Act for the well governing and regulating of Corporations, Cap. 1. fol.
90. 2 An Act for prevention of Vexations and Oppressions by Arrests, and of
delays in Suits of Law, Cap. 2. fol. 91. 3 An Act for granting unto the Kings
Majesty, Twelve hundred and threescore thousand pounds, to be Assessed and
Levied by an Assessment of Threescore and ten thousand pounds by the month for
Eighteen months, Cap. 3. fol. 93 EXP. 4 An Act to Enable the Kings Majesty to
make Leases, Grants and Copies of Offices, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
parcel of his Highness Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the same, and for
Confirmation of Leases and Grants already made, Cap. 4. fol. 93.
Private Acts.
AN Act for Confirming an Act for Restoring of the Marquess of Hertford to the
Dukedom of Somerset. An Act for Confirming an Act for Restitution of Thomas
Earl of Arundel, Surrey and Norfolk, to the Dignity and Title of Duke of
Norfolk. An Act for Confirming of Private Acts. An Act for dividing Trinity
Church in Kingston upon Hull from Hasle. An Act to enable Algernon Peyton
Doctor of Divinity, to make Sale of part of his Lands for payment of Debts.
Anno Decimo tertio and decimo quarto Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for preventing the mischiefs and dangers that may arise by certain
Persons called Quakers, and others, refusing to take lawful Oaths, Cap. 1. fol.
94. 2. An Act for Repairing the Highways and Sewers, and for Paving and
keeping clean of the Streets in and about the Cities of London and Westminster
and for reforming of Annoyances and Disorders in the Streets of places adjacent
to the said Cities, and for the Regulating and Licensing of Hackney Coaches;
and for the enlarging of several strait and inconvenient Streets and Passages,
Cap. 2. fol. 95.
Anno Decimo quarto Caroli Secundi Regis, etc.
3 AN Act for Ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom,
Cap. 3. fol. 102. 4 An Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And for
Establishing the Form of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests
and Deacons in the Church of England, Cap. 4. fol. 108. 5 An Act for Regulating
the Making of Stuffs in Norfolk and Norwich, Cap. 5. fol. 115. 6 An Act for
Enlarging and Repairing common Highways, Cap. 6. fol. 119. 7 An Act to
Restrain the Exportation of Leather and Raw Hides out of the Realm of England,
Cap. 7. fol. 123. 8 An Act for Distribution of Threescore thousand pounds
amongst the Truly Loyal and Indigent Commission-Officers, and for Assessing of
Offices, and Distributing moneys thereby raised for their further supply, Cap.
8. fol. 125. EXP. 9 An Act for the relief of poor and maimed Officers and
Soldiers who have faithfully served His Majesty and his Royal Father in the
late Wars, cap. 9. fol. 125. 10 An Act for establishing an Additional Revenue
upon his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for the better support of His and
Their Crown and Dignity, cap. 10. fol. 126. 11 An Act for preventing Frauds,
and regulating abuses in his Majesty's Customs, cap. 11. fol. 130. 12 An Act
for the better Relief of the Poor of this Kingdom, cap. 12. fol. 138. 13 An Act
prohibiting the Importation of Foreign Bonelace, Cut-Work, Imbroidery, Fringe,
Bandstrings, Buttons and Needlework, cap. 13. fol. 143. 14 An Act directing the
Prosecution of such as are accountable for Prize-Goods, cap. 14. fol. 144. 15
An Act for Regulating the Trade of Silk-Throwing, cap. 15. fol. 145. 16 An Act
for the more speedy and effectual bringing those persons to Account, whose
Accounts are excepted in the Act of Oblivion, cap. 16. fol. 147. 17 An Act for
relief of Collectors of Public Moneys, and their Assistants and Deputies, cap.
17. fol. 148. 18 An Act against exporting of Sheep, Wool, Wooll-fells,
Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wooll-flocks, Fullers-Earth,
Fulling-Clay, and Tobacco-pipe-clay, cap. 18. fol. 148. 19 An Act against
Importing of Foreign Wooll-cards, Card-wire, or Iron-wire, cap. 19. fol. 150.
20 An Act for providing Carriage by Land and by Water, for the use of his
Majesty's Navy and Ordnance, cap. 20. fol. 151. 21 An Act for preventing the
unnecessary Charge of Sheriffs, and for ease in passing their Accounts, cap.
21. fol. 152. 22 An Act for preventing of Theft and Rapine, upon the Northern
Borders of England, cap. 22. fol. 155. 23 An Additional Act concerning matters
of Assurance used amongst Merchants, cap. 23. fol. 156. 24 An Act declaratory
concerning Bankrupts, cap. 24 fol. 458. 25 An Act for the restoring of all such
Advowsons, Rectories, Impropriate Gleab-lands and Tithes to his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects as were taken from them, and making void certain Charges imposed on
them upon their Compositions for Delinquency by the late Usurped Powers, cap.
25. fol. 158. 26 An Act for reforming of Abuses committed in the weight and
false packing of Butter, cap. 26. fol. 159. 27 An Act for repairing of Dover
Harbor, cap. 27. fol. 161. 28 An Act for the regulating of the Pilchard Fishing
in the Counties of Devon and Corn-wall, cap. 28. fol. 162. 29 An Act for the
reversing the Earl of Strafford his Attainder, cap. 29. fol. 163. 30 An Act for
the Importing of Madder pure and unmixed, cap. 30. fol. 163. Rep. 15. Car. 2.
cap. 16. 31 An Act to prevent the Inconvenience arising by melting the
Silver-Coyn of this Realm, cap. 31. fol. 164. 32 An Act for the better
Regulating of the Manufacture of Broad Woollen Cloth within the West Riding of
the County of York, cap. 32. fol. 164. 33 An Act for preventing the frequent
abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable and unlicensed Books and Pamphlets:
and for Regulating of Printing and Printing Presses, cap. 33. fol. 167.
Private Acts.
AN Act for settling of the Estate of James late Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
according to agreement of Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Mary Duchess
Dowager of Richmond and Lenox, and the Lady Mary her Daughter, and the Trustees
of the said Lady Duchess. An Act for confirmation of certain Letters Patents
made, and to be made to the Right Noble Lord, George Duke of Albemarle, of
several Honors, Manors and Hereditaments, granted, or mentioned to be granted
to him by His Majesty. An Act for confirming the Estate of John Marquess of
Winchester in certain Manors and Lands, whereof the Deeds and Evidences were
burnt and lost at the taking of the Castle of Basing. An Act to confirm the
sale of certain Lands sold by Ferdinando late Earl of Huntingdon, for the
payment of his own and his Fathers debts. An Act for settling a Capital Message
or Mansion House, with the Appurtenances, in Kensington in the County of
Middlesex, upon Baptist Viscount Campden and his Heirs. An Act for confirming
an Act for restoring to Thomas Lord Culpeper, Son and Heir, and sole Executor
of John Lord Culpeper Baron of Thorsway, and Master of the Rolls, deceased, all
his Honors, Manors, Lands and Tenements, Leases not determined, and
Hereditaments whatsoever, whereof the said John Lord Culpeper was in possession
on the twentieth of May, 1642. or at any time after, which have not been since
sold or aliened by the said John late Lord Culpeper, by Acts or Assurances to
which himself was party and consenting. An Act to enable the Bishop of London
to lease out the Tenements now built upon the Site of his Palace in London. An
Act for the Naturalizing of Philadelphia, Wife to the Right Honorable Thomas
Lord Wentworth. An Act for confirming several Acts therein mentioned. An Act
for confirming of two Acts therein mentioned. An Act for the Endowment of
several Churches by the Lord Viscount Scudamore of Sligo in the Realm of
Ireland. An Act for the disuniting the Hundreds of Dudston and Kings Barton
from the County of the City of Gloucester, and restoring them to be part of the
County of Gloucester. An Act for making Navigable of the Rivers of Stower and
Salwerp, and the Rivulets and Brooks running into the same, in the Counties of
Worcester and Stafford. An Act for the making Navigable of the Rivers of Wye
and Lugg, and the Rivers and Brooks running into the same, in the Counties of
Hereford, Gloucester and Monmouth. An Act for settling certain Manors and Lands
late of Sir James Enyons Baronet, on Sir Henry Puckering alias Newton Baronet,
and Sir Charles Aderly Knight, his surviving Trustees, to sell for payment of
Debts. An Act for confirmation of certain Decrees of Sewers, made by the
Commissioners for the limits of the Level of the River of Ancholm in the County
of Lincoln. An Act for confirming a Decree made on the behalf of Thomas Derham
Esquire and the Improvements, Exchanges and Allotments therein mentioned. An Act
for the enabling Sir Thomas Lee Baronet, to exchange some Lands settled upon the
Marriage of Dame Anne Lee his now Wife, in consideration of another Settlement
of Lands of equal value in lieu thereof. An Act for discharging the Manors of
Stodscomb and Holwell, and other Lands in the County of Devon, from the trust
of one hundred and fifty years, made unto John Earl of Exeter, John Earl of
Bridgwater, and Oliver Earl of Bolingbrook. An Act for supplying a supposed
defect of the words, Stand and be seized, in a Deed for settling of diverse
Manors and Lands on Sir Henry-Frederick Thynne. An Act for confirming the
Copyhold Estates of diverse of his Majesty's Copyhold Tenants within the Honor
of Clitherow in the County Palatine of Lancaster, parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster, according unto several Decrees in the Court of Duchy Chamber of the
said County Palatine. An Act for confirmation of the Estates of several Tenants
and Copyholders of the Manors of Rannes, Irchester, Rushden, and several
other Manors, parcels of the Duchy of Lancaster. An Act for confirming,
explaining, and enlarging an Act, entitled, An Act for the levying of certain
Moneys due upon the Collection for the Protestants of Piedmont. An Act to
enable the sale of some of the Lands of William Milward Esquire for payment of some
of his Debts. An Act vesting certain Lands in Bleasby in Sir John Mounson the
younger, Robert Thorold Esquire and Anthony Air the elder Esquire and their Heirs, to
sell for payment of the debts of Sir Robert Dallison, and William Dallison. An
Act to enable the Trustees of Henry Nevil Esquire to sell certain Manors, Lands
and Tenements in the Counties of York and Leicester for payment of his and his
Son William Nevils debts, and likewise to confirm and strengthen the sale of
such Lands as they have already sold in the County of York. An Act for the
making void certain Fines unduly procured to be levied by Sir Edward Powel
Knight and Baronet, and Dame Mary his wife. An Act for sale of Sir Robert
Slingsby deceased his Lands for payment of his debts. An Act to enable Sir
Anthony Brown to sell Lands for payment of debts. An Act to enable Anthony
Etrick to sell Lands for payment of his Debts. An Act for the Naturalizing of
Anna Ferrers and several other persons named therein. An Act for the
Naturalizing of Mark Le Pla and others. An Act for the Repairing of Bengworth
Bridge in the County of Worcester. An Act to enable Rowland Okeover Esquire to sell
certain Lands in the County of Derby. An Act to enable Mrs. Clemence Rivers and
Mrs. Rose Rivers to sell certain Lands and Houses for payment of the Debts of
Edward Rivers Esquire deceased, and provision for his younger children. An Act to
enable Thomas Peck Esquire to sell a Manor and some Lands in the County of
Norfolk, for the payment of his Debts and other uses. An Act for confirmation
of Agreements made between Thomas Bushel Esquire and the Miners of Rowpits in
Somersetshire, for recovering their drowned and deserted works. An Act for the
settling certain Lands belonging unto Francis Tindal Gentleman upon Trustees to
be sold for the payment of Debts. An Act for confirmation of three Acts therein
mentioned.
Anno decimo quinto Caroli Secundi, Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for repairing the Highways within the Counties of Hertford,
Cambridge and Huntingdon, cap. 1. fol. 173. 2 An Act for the punishment of
unlawful cutting or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Underwood, and Destroyers
of young Timber Trees, cap. 2. fol. 176. 3 An Act to explain and supply a
former Act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds amongst the truly
Loyal and Indigent Commission-Officers, and for assessing of Offices, and
distributing the moneys thereby raised for their further supply, cap. 3. fol.
179. EXP. 4 An additional Act for the better ordering the Forces in the several
Counties of this Kingdom, cap. 4. fol. 179. 5 An Act for Regulating select
Vestries, cap. 5. fol. 182. 6 An Act for Relief of such Persons as by Sickness
or other Impediment, were disabled from subscribing the Declaration in the Act
of Uniformity, and explanation of part of the said Act, cap. 6. fol. 183. 7 An
Act for the encouragement of Trade, cap. 7. fol. 184. 8 An Act to prevent the
Selling of live fat Cattle by Butchers, Cap. 8. fol. 188. 9 An Act for granting
Four entire Subsidies to His Majesty by the Temporalty, Cap. 9. fol. 188. EXP.
10 An Act for Confirming of Four Subsidies granted by the Clergy, Cap. 10. fol.
188. 11 An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of
Excise, and preventing the Abuses therein, Cap. 11. fol. 188. 12 An Explanatory
Act for Recovery of the Arrears of Excise, Cap. 12. fol. 193. 13 An Additional
Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Revenue arising by Hearth-money,
Cap. 13. fol. 193. 14 An Act for Settling the Profits of the Post Office, and
Power of granting Wine-Licenses, on his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and
the Heirs Males of his Body, Cap. 14. fol. 195. 15 An Act for Encouraging the
Manufactures of Making Linen Cloth and Tapistry, Cap. 15. fol. 198. 16 An Act
for Regulating the Herring, and other Fisheries; And for Repeal of the Act
concerning Madder, Cap. 16. fol. 199. 17 An Act for Settling the Draining of the
Great Level of the Fenns, called Bedford Level, Cap. 17. fol. 200.
Private Acts.
AN Act to enable Edward Marquess of Worcester to receive the benefit and
profit of a Water-commanding Engine by him invented, one Tenth part whereof is
appropriated for the benefit of the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors. An
Act for settling an Annuity of Three hundred pounds per Annum upon Charles Earl
of Portland, and for the benefit of Willoughby Whitelock, Bulstrode Whitelock,
and Charleton Whitelock, Infants, and for confirming of agreements made to
compose Suits in Law against them. An Act for Settling the Charitable Gift of
John Guest. An Act to enable Sir John Packington and his Trustees to sell, or
otherwise dispose of certain Lands for the payment of his Debts, and raising
Portions for his younger children. An Act to enable Edward Chaloner Esquire to make
provision for Anne his Wife, and his younger children. An Act for the
Naturalizing of Charlottee Hessen Killegrew, and others. An Act to Empower Sir
John Drake and others to make sale of Lands for payment of the Portion of Ellen
Brisco Widow. An Act to enable the Sale of the Lands of Richard Senior, and
Anthony Senior deceased, for payment of some of their Debts. An Act for the
Settling of the Lands of the Earl of Kent and the Lord Lucas, on the Marriage of
the said Earl with the Daughter and Heir apparent of the Lord Lucas. An Act for
the Settling of a Free School in Witney in the County of Oxon, being Erected and
Endowed by Henry Box Citizen and Grocer of London, deceased. An Act to enable
the Bishop of Winchester to Lease out the Tenements now built upon site of his
Mansion House in the Parish of Saint Saviors in Southwark in the County of
Surrey; and the two Parks, and other Demesns at Bishops Waltham, and other
Lands in the County of Southampton. An Act for Repairing and better preserving
the Key of the Port of Wells in the County of Norfolk. An Act for the Governing
of the Hospital of Saint Oswalds in the County of Worcester. An Act to Enable
Sir Francis Boynton Baronet, and Richard Robinson Esquire, to Sell certain
Lands of John Robinson Esquire for payment of Debts, and Leasing of other Lands for
making Provision for his younger Children. An Act for making void certain
Conveyances made by Caryll Lord Molleneux in the late times. An Act to Confirm
a Deed made by Charles Pitcarne Esquire. An Act for the Naturalization of Dame
Elizabeth Jacob, and others. An Act for the Naturalizing of George Willoughby
and others. An Act for Confirming an Act for Naturalizing of Peter de la
Pierre, alias Peter's, and John de la Pierre, alias Peter's.
Anno Decimo sexto Caroli Secundi Regis, etc.
1 AN Act for the Assembling and holding of Parliaments once in Three years at
the least; And for the Repeal of an Act, Entitled, An Act for the preventing
of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments, Cap. 1.
fol. 213. 2 An Act for preventing of Abatements of Writs of Error upon
Judgments in the Exchequer, Cap. 2. fol. 213. 3 An Act for Collecting the Duty
arising by Hearth- Money, by Officers to be appointed by His Majesty, Cap. 3.
fol. 214. 4 An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, Cap. 4. fol.
216. 5 An Act to prevent the Disturbances of Seamen and others; And to
preserve the Stores belonging to His Majesty's Navy-Royal, Cap. 5. fol. 220. 6
An Act to prevent the delivering up of Merchants Ships, Cap. 6. fol. 221. 7 An
Act against deceitful, disorderly, and excessive Gaming, Cap. 7. fol. 222. 8 An
Act for Continuance of a former Act for Regulating the Press, Cap. 8. fol. 223.
Private Acts.
AN Act for Vacating certain Conveyances made by Sir John Packington Baronet,
to Christopher Henn and others. An Act for the sale of the Manor of
Ingoldesby, and diverse Lands in Ingoldesby in the County of Lincoln, for
raising Portions for the two Daughters and Coheirs of Sir William Armin the
younger Baronet, deceased. An Act for the sale of certain Lands for payment of
the Debts of Sir Sackvile Glemham. An Act to enable Trustees for Sir William
Kyte to sell Lands for the payment of Debts. An Act for Confirmation of the
Enclosure and Improvement of Malvirne Chase. An Act for Settling the Charitable
Gift of Abraham Colfe Clerk, for Erecting and Endowing Two Free-Schools, and an
Almes-house at Lewisham in Kent. An Act for Naturalizing Dame Katherine Sayer
and others. An Act to enable Francis Cottington, or Charles Cottington to
Settle and Dispose of Lands in Jointure for any Wife or Wives they shall take
in Marriage. An Act to enable Charles Cotton Esquire to make Leases of Lands
for payment of Debts. An Act for the making of the Church Erected at Falmouth,
a Parish Church, and no part of the Parish of Gluvias, of Chapelry of St.
Budock.
Anno 16 and 17 Caroli II. Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty, of Twenty four
hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, to be
Raised, Levied and Paid in the space of Three years, cap. 1. fol. 224. 2 An Act
for Regulating the Measures and Prices of Coals, cap. 2. fol. 253. 3 An Act for
the Returning of able and sufficient Jurors, cap. 3. fol. 254. 4 An additional
Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of EXCISE, cap. 4. fol.
255. 5 An Act to prevent Delays in extending Statutes, Judgments and
Recognizances, cap. 5. fol. 256. 6 An Act for Repealing of part of an Act of
Parliament, entitled, An Act directing the prosecution of such as are
accomptable for Prize-goods, cap. 6. fol. 256. 7 An Act for continuance of a
former Act for Regulating the Press, cap. 7. fol. 258. 8 An Act to prevent
Arrests of Judgment, and Superseding Executions, cap. 8. fol. 258. 9 An Act to
empower the Chancellor of the Duchy to grant Commissions for taking
Affidavits within the Dutchy-Liberty, cap. 9. fol. 259. 10 An Act for
continuance of a former Act for Repairing the Highways within the County of
Hertford, cap. 10. fol. 259. 11 An Act for Draining of the Fenn, called
Deeping-Fenn, and other Fenns therein mentioned, cap. 11. fol. 261. 12 An Act
for making the River Avon Navigable from Christ-Church to the City of
New-Sarum, cap. 12. fol. 270.
Private Acts.
AN Act to enable Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, to sell certain
Lands in the County of Devon. An Act for the enabling of Trustees to sell part
of the estate of Samuel Sandys the elder Esquire, and of his son Samuel Sandys,
for payment of debts. An Act for confirming a Deed of Settlement between the
Earl of Thanet and his younger Brothers. An Act to enable the Bishop of
Winchester to convey One hundred Acres of Land, lying in the great disparked
Park of Bishops-Waltham in the Parish of Bishops-Waltham in the County of
Southampton, upon the Rector of the said Parish Church of Bishops-Waltham, and
his Successors, in lieu of all Tithes and Payments for Tithes due to the said
Rector and his Successors for Waltham-Parks. An Act to enable the Lord Henry
Powlet, George Withers and John Mompesson, to sell the Manor of Abbots-Anne in
the County of Southampton. An Act to enable Henry Lord Loughborough, to make
the River and Sewer Navigable from or near Bristow Causey in the County of
Surrey, into the River of Thames. An Act to enable Trustees for the Lord
Strangford, to sell Lands for payment of Debts. An Act for restoring of Sir
Charles Stanley in blood. An Act for the settling of several Manors, Lands and
Tenements of Sir Jacob Astley, lying in the Counties of Norfolk and Warwick. An
Act for settling the Estate of Sir Robert Carr Baronet. An Act for making the
River of Medway Navigable in the Counties of Kent and Sussex. An Act for making
diverse Rivers Navigable, or otherwise passable, for Boats, Barges, and other
Vessels. An Act for settling of Differences between the Towns of Great and
Little Yarmouth, touching the lading and unlading of Herrings, and other
Merchandises and Commodities. An Act for the Naturalizing of Dederic alias
Richard Comes, and others. An Act for confirming of an Act, entitled, An Act
to enable Joseph Micklethwaite an Infant, and his Trustees, to sell Land for
payment of his Fathers debts. An Act for the inabling of Thomas Juckes of
Treliddan in the County of Mountgomery Esquire, to sell Lands for the payment
of his Debts, and raising of younger childrens portions. An Act to enable
Francis Lee Esquire, to sell Lands for payment of Debts, and to make provision
for his children.
Anno Decimo septimo Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for granting the sum of Twelve hundred and fifty thousand pounds to
the Kings Majesty, for His present further Supply, cap. 1. fol. 273. 2 An Act
for Restraining Non-Conformists from Inhabiting in Corporations, cap. 2. fol.
278. 3 An Act for Uniting Churches in Cities and Towns Corporate, cap. 3. fol.
279. 4 An Act for Continuance of a former Act for Regulating the Press, cap. 4.
fol. 280. 5 An Act for attainting Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild, and Thomas
Scott of High Treason, if they render not themselves by a day, cap. 5. fol.
281. 6 An Act for taking away of Damage Clear, cap. 6. fol. 281. 7 An Act for
a more speedy and effectual proceeding upon Distresses and Avowries for Rents,
cap. 7. fol. 282. 8 An Act for avoiding Unnecessary Suits and Delays, cap. 8.
fol. 283. 9 An Act for granting One months Assessment to His Majesty, cap. 9.
fol. 283.
A Private Act.
An Act for the Naturalization of Lewis Blanquefort and others.
Anno decimo octavo Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act for Raising Moneys by a Poll, and otherwise toward the Maintenance
of the present War, cap. 1. fol. 286. 2 An Act against Importing Cattle from
Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas; and Fish taken by Foreigners, cap.
2. fol. 298. 3 An Act to continue a former Act for preventing of Theft and
Rapine upon the Northern Borders of England, cap. 3. fol. 299. 4 An Act for
Burying in Woollen only, cap. 4. fol. 299. 5 An Act for encouraging of Coynage,
ca. 5. fol. 300.
Private Acts.
AN Act for enlarging the time given by a former Act for Redemption of
Mortgages made by the Earl of Cleveland. An Act for Naturalizing of Isabella of
Nassau, Wife of the Right Honorable the Lord Arlington, one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State. An Act for Supply of part of the Jointure of
the Lady Elizabeth Neell. An Act for Settling the Estate of John Bodvell
Esquire, deceased. An additional Act for Enabling the Sale of Lands to pay the
Lord Strangford's Debts.
Anno decimo nono Caroli Secundi Regis Angliae, etc.
1 AN Act Explanatory of the Act for Raising Moneys by a Poll, and otherwise,
toward the Maintenance of this present War, cap. 1. fol. 302. 2 An Act for
Erecting a Judicature for Determination of Differences touching Houses Burned
or Demolished by reason of the late Fire which happened in LONDON, cap. 2. fol.
303. 3 An Act for Rebuilding the City of LONDON, cap. 3. fol. 304. 4 An Act for
Relief of poor Prisoners, and setting of them on work, cap. 4. fol. 315. 5 An
Act extending a former Act concerning Replevins and Avouries, to the
Principality of Wales and the County Palatines, cap. 5. fol. 316. 6 An Act for
Redress of Inconveniences by want of Proof of the Deceases of Persons beyond
the Seas, or absenting themselves, upon whose Lives Estates do depend, cap. 6.
fol. 316. 7 An Act to prevent the Disturbances of Seamen and others, and to
preserve the Stores belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal, cap. 7. fol. 316. 8
An Act for granting the sum of Twelve hundred fifty six thousand three hundred
forty seven pounds thirteen shillings to the Kings Majesty, toward the
Maintenance of the present War.
Private Acts.
AN Act for Naturalizing of Hesther le Lov, the Daughter and Coheir of Gideon
le Lou, Lord of Coliumbers in Normandy, the now Wife of the Right Honorable
Denzill Lord Hollis of Ifield. An Act for Confirming, Explaining and Enlarging
an Act, Entitled, An Act to Enable John Lord Abergaveny, Son and Heir of Henry
late Lord Abergaveny, to Sell certain Lands for Payment of his Debts, and
Preferment of his Brother and Sisters. An Act for the Illegitimation of the
Children of the Lady Anne Roos. An Act for Sale of a Message in Chiswick, for
Payment of the Debts of Edward Russel, Esquire. An Act for Confirmation of a
Settlement of the Estate of Sir Seymour Shirley Baronet. An Act for Settling the
Moiety of the Manor of Iron Acton on Sir John Pointz. An Act for Settling an
Estate in Trust for the benefit of Mistress Elizabeth Pride and her Children.
An Act for the Ascertaining the Bounds of the several Rectories of Swaffham St.
Ciriac, and of Swaffham St. Mary's, within the Town of Swaffham Prior, in the
County of Cambridge, and for the Uniting of the two Churches there. An Act for
the Restoring of Francis Scawen Gent. in Blood. An Act for Naturalizing Dame
Mary Frazer and others. An Act to Enable a Sale of Lands for payment of the
Debts of Henry Kendall Esquire. An Act for Settling part of the Lands of Henry
Mildmay Esquire deceased, for payment of his Debts, and making Provision for
his Children. An Act to Enable Leicester Grosvenor and his Trustees to Sell
certain Lands for payment of Debts.
Anno Reg. CAROLI, Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Primo.
AT the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighteenth day of June, Anno Dom.
1625. in the first year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord,
CHARLES, by the grace of God, of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued until the Eleventh day of July
following, and then adjourned until the first day of August following, unto
Oxford; To the high pleasure of Almighty God, and to the Weal public of this
Realm, were enacted as follows.

CAP. I.
There shall be no Assemblies for unlawful Pastimes upon the Lords Day.

FOrasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God than the true and sincere
Service and Worship of him according to his holy Will, and that the holy
keeping of the Lords Day is a principal part of the true Service of God, which
in very many places of this Realm has been, and now is profaned and neglected
by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting Bear-baiting,
Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common Plays, and other unlawful Exercises and
pastimes upon the Lords Day: And for that many quarrels, blood-sheds, and other
great inconveniences have grown by the resort and concourse of people going out
of their own Parishes to such disordered and unlawful exercises and pastimes,
neglecting Divine Service both in their own Parishes and elsewhere: Be it
enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and ^emporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, Unlawful Writings and Pastimes on the Lords Day forbidden.
That from and after forty days next after the end of this Session of
Parliament, there shall be no meetings, assemblies, or concourse of people out
of their own Parishes on the Lords Day within this Realm of England, or any the
Dominions thereof, for any sports and pastimes whatsoever; nor any
Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common Plays, or other unlawful
exercises and pastimes used by any person or persons within their own Parishes,
Every person using any unlawful pastimes on the Lords Day, shall forfeit 3 s.
4 d. to the poor of the Parish.
and that every person or persons offending in any the premises, shall forfeit
for every offense three shillings four pence, The same to be employed and
converted to the use of the poor of the Parish where such offense shall be
committed: And that if any one Justice of the Peace of the County, or the chief
Officer or Officers of any City, Borough, or Town corporate where such offense
shall be committed, upon his or their view, or confession of the party, or
proof of any one or more witness by oath, which the said Justice or chief
Officer or Officers shall by virtue of this Act have authority to minister,
shall find any person offending in the premises, the said Justice or chief
Officer or Officers shall give Warrant under his or their hand and seal to the
Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where such offense shall
be committed, After conviction by Warrant from a Justice, etc. the Constables,
etc. may levy the P^na^^s etc. General ^ss^^ Limitation of this act^on. The
Ecclesiastical ^^^^^diction (...) abridge^,
to levy the said penalty so to be assessed, by way of distress, and sale of
the goods of every such offender, rendering to the said offenders the overplus
of the money raised of the said goods so to be sold; And in default of such
distress, that the party offending be set publicly in the stocks by the space
of three hours; And that if any man be sued or impeached for execution of this
Law, he shall and may plead the general Issue, and give the said matter of
Justification in evidence. Provided, That no man be impeached by this Act,
except he be called in question within one month next after the said offense
committed. Provided also, That the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this
Realm, or any the Dominions thereof, by virtue of this Act, or any thing
therein contained, shall not be abridged, but that the Ecclesiastical Court may
punish the said offenses, as if this Act had not been made: This Act to
continue until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no
longer. 3 Car. 4. continued until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament. Stat. 3 Car. 1. 17 Car. cap. 4. continued until other Order by
Parliament.

CAP. II.
All Leases to be made within three years by the Kings Majesty of the
Dutchy-Lands of Cornwall confirmed.

WHereas the King our Sovereign Lord, being in the lifetime of his Royal
Father of blessed memory, seized of the said Dukedom of Cornwall, did bargain
and contract for Leases and Estates to be made of diverse Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, parcel of the said Dukedom of Cornwall, which
Leases and Estates his Majesty was enabled to have made in his Fathers
lifetime, by an Act of Parliament made in the last Session of Parliament,
entitled, An Act to enable the most excellent Prince Charles to make Leases of
Lands, 21 Jac. 29.
parcel of his Highness Duchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the same. And
because his Majesty having received diverse Fines and sums of Money,
according to the said Contracts, and having entered into Treaty with diverse
others for like Estates, the finishing of which Contracts, and making the said
Leases, was prevented by his Majesty's access to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, is graciously pleased for the good of his poor Tenants of the said
Duchy Lands, to proceed to the full accomplishment of the Contracts, and
Leases of the premises.

All Leases to be made within three years by the King, of the Duchy Lands of
Cornwall if all be good.
Be it therefore Enacted by our said Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of this present Parliament, That all Leases to be made within
the space of three years next ensuing by our said Sovereign Lord the King, by
Letters Patents, Indentures, or other Writings under his great Seal of England,
or Seal of the Court of Exchequer, of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, parcel of the possessions of the said Duchy of Cornwall, or
annexed to the same, shall be good and effectual in Law, according to the
purport and content of the said Leases, against our said Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and against all and every person or
persons, that shall hereafter have, inherit or enjoy the said Dukedom of
Cornwall, by force of any Act of Parliament or other limitation whatsoever.

Except they be made for above 3^ years or 3 lives, etc.
Provided always, That every such Lease so to be made, of any Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments in possession shall be made but for three Lives, or
fewer, or for one and thirty years or under, or some other term of years
determinable upon one, two, or three lives, and not above. And if such Leases
be made in reversion, That then the same, together with the Estates in
possession, do not exceed three Lives, or the term of one and thirty years,
and not in any wise dispunishable of waste: The ancient Rent to be reserved,
and if none anciently, a reasonable Rent.
And so as upon every such Lease shall be reserved the ancient or most usual
rent, or such rent as has been yielded or paid for the greater part of twenty
years next before the making of the said Leases, and shall be reserved due and
payable, by, or to him or her that shall have the Inheritance or other Estate
of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments. And where no such rent
has been reserved or payable, that then upon every such Lease, there shall be
reserved a reasonable rent, not being under the twentieth part of the clear
yearly value of the Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments contained in
such Lease.

All covenants etc. contained in such Leases shall be good.
And be it further Ordained and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
That all Covenants, Conditions, and Reservations, and other Agreements
contained in every Lease so to be made as aforesaid, shall be good and
effectual in Law, according to the words and contents of the same, as well for,
and against them to whom the reversion of the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments shall come, as for and against them to whom the said Leases shall
come respectively: As if our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty at the time
of the making of such Covenants, Conditions, and Reservations, and other
Agreements, were seized of an absolute and indefeizible Estate in Fee-simple,
in the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments: Saving always to all
and every person and persons, The right of others saved,
bodies Politic and Corporate, their heirs and successors, executors,
administrators and assigns, (other then our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, and his Heirs, and all and every person and persons that shall
hereafter have, inherit, or enjoy the said Dukedom of Cornwall, by force of any
Act of Parliament or other limitation whatsoever) all such rights, titles,
estates, customs, interests, terms, claims, and demands whatsoever, of what
kind, nature, or quality soever, of, in, to, or out of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any of them, as they or any of them had, or
ought to have had before the making of this Act, to all intents and purposes,
and in as large and ample manner and form, as if this Act had never been had or
made: This Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

CHAP. III.
An Act for the Ease in obtaining of Licenses of Alienation, and in the
Pleading of Alienations with License, or of Pardons of Alienations without
License in the Court of Exchequer, or elsewhere, Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 24. All
Fines, Seizures, and Pardons for Alienations, and all incidents thereunto are
taken away and discharged.

CHAP. IV.
Foreigners, as well as Inhabitants, shall not be permitted to tipple in Inns,
Alehouses, etc.

21 Jac. 5.
WHereas in the last Parliament it was Enacted, That if any person or persons,
whatsoever his or their ha^itation or abiding be, should after be found, upon
view, or his own confession, or proof of one witness, to be tippling in any
Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house; 1 Jac. 5. 4 Jac. 5.
such person or persons should be thenceforth adjudged and construed to be
within the Statutes of the first and fourth years of the late Kings Majesty's
reign, King James of famous memory: The one entitled, An Act to restrain the
inordinate haunting of tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and other
Victualling-houses: And the other entitled, An Act to repress the odious and
loathsome sin of Drunkenness, as if he or they had inhabited and dwelled in the
City, Town Corporate, Market town, Village or Hamlet, where the Inn, Alehouse,
or Victualling-house was, or should be, where he or they should be so found
tippling, should incur the like penalty, and the same to be in such sort levied
and disposed, as in the said Act is expressed, concerning such as there
inhabit, but no punishment by any or either the said Acts, or by any other
Statute, is inflicted upon the Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, or Victualler, that
permits, or suffers such person or persons, not there inhabiting, to tipple in
his Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house: The Innkeeper, etc. that permits a
forreigner to tipple in his house, shall ^^e^r the penalty provided by 2 Jac. ^.
For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted, That every Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, and
other Victualler, that at any time after the end of this Session of Parliament
shall permit and suffer any person or persons, not inhabiting in the City, Town
Corporate, Market town, Village or Hamlet, where such Inn, Alehouse, or
Victualling-house is or shall be, to tipple in the said Inn, Alehouse or
Victualling-house, contrary to the true intent of any or either of the said
former Statutes, the said Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, and Victualler so
offending, shall incur the same penalty, and in such manner to be proved,
levied and disposed, as in the former Statute of the first year of his said
late Majesty's reign is appointed for permitting such to tipple as dwell in the
same City, Town corporate, Market town, Village or Hamlet.

And be it further enacted, That the keepers of Taverns, Vintners and
Victuallers to be within this and the other Statutes.
and such as do sell Wine in their houses, and do also keep Inns, or
Victualling in their houses, shall be taken to be within the said two former
Statutes, and also within this Statute.

CAP. V.
Three entire Subsidies granted by the Spiritualty. EXP.

CAP. VI.
Two entire Subsidies granted by the Temporalty. EXP.

CAP. VII.
This Session of Parliament (by reason of the increase of the Sickness and
other inconveniences of the season requiring a speedy Adjournment,
nevertheless) shall not determine by his Majesty's Royal assent to this and
some other Acts. EXP.

ANd all Statutes and Acts of Parliament, Acts that are to have continuance
shall remain in fo^ce.
which are to have continuance unto the end of this present Session, shall be
of full force after the said Adjournment, until this present Session be fully
ended and determined: And if this Session shall determine by dissolution of
this present Parliament, then all the Acts aforesaid shall be continued until
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament: And all Statutes and Acts
of Parliament, When the Acts which are now to pass shall take effect.
which before the said Adjournment shall pass by his Majesty's royal Assent,
shall be put in execution immediately after forty days after the said
Adjournment, notwithstanding that by the words or letter of the said Acts, or
any of them, they be limited to take effect, or be put in execution, from; or
at any time after the end of this present Session.

Anno Reg. Caroli, Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Tertio.
AT the Parliament began at Westminster the Seventeenth day of March, Anno Dom.
1627. in the Third year of the Reign of our most gracious Sovereign Lord,
CHARLES, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued until the Twenty sixth day of
June following, and then prorogued unto the twentieth day of October next
ensuing: To the high pleasure of Almighty God, and to the weal public of this
Realm, were enacted as follows.

A Declaration of diverse Rights and Liberties, of the People to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.
HVmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, The Petition of Right.
and Commons in Parliament assembled, That whereas it is declared and Enacted
by a Statute made in the time of the Reign of King Edward the First, 34 Ed. 1.
commonly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo, That no Tallage or Aid
shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in this Realm, without the
good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this Realm; And by
Authority of Parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the reign of
King Edward the third, 25 Ed. 3. Rot. Parl.
it is declared and Enacted, That from thenceforth no person should be
compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will, because such Loans
were against reason, and the Franchise of the Land; 1 Ed. 3. 6. 11 R. 2. 9. 1
R. 3. 2.
And by other Laws of this Realm it is provided, That none should be charged by
any Charge or Imposition called a Benevolence, nor by such like charge: By
which the Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this Freedom, That they should not be
compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like charge, not set
by common consent in Parliament:

Yet nevertheless, of late, diverse Commissions, directed to sundry
Commissioners in several Counties, with instructions, have issued; by means
whereof your People have been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend
certain sums of Money unto your Majesty, and many of them, upon their refusal
so to do, have had an Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by the Laws
or Statutes of this Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make
Appearance and give Attendance before your Privy Council, and in other places;
and others of them have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry other
ways molested and disquieted: And diverse other Charges have been laid and
levied upon your People in several Counties by Lord-Lievetenants,
Deputy-Lievetenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of Peace, and others,
by command or direction from your Majesty, or your Privy Council, against the
Laws and free Customs of this Realm:

9. H. 3. 29.
And where also by the Statute called The great Charter of the Liberties of
England, It is declared and Enacted; That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or his free Customs,
or be outlawed or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land:

28. Ed. 3. 3.
And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the third, it
was declared and Enacted by Authority of Parliament, That no man, of what
estate or condition that he be, should be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor
taken, nor imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death, without being brought
to answer by due process of Law:

St. 37. Ed. 3. 18. St. 38 Ed. 3 9. St. 42 Ed. 3. 3. St. 17. R. 2. 6.
Nevertheless, against the tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws
and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects have
of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: And when for their
deliverance they were brought before your Justices by your Majesty's Writs of
Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order, and
their Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet were returned back to
several Prisons, without being charged with any thing to which they might make
answer according to the Law:

25. Ed. 3. 9.
And whereas of late great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the Inhabitants, against their
wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn, against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the
great grievance and vexation of the People:

25. Ed. 3. 9.
And whereas also by Authority of Parliament, in the five and twentieth year of
the reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and Enacted, That no man
should be fore-judged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter and
Law of the Land; 9. H. 3. 28. 25. Ed 3. 4. 28. Ed. 3. 3
And by the said Great Charter, and other the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in
this your Realm, either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by Acts of
Parliament: And whereas no offender, of what kind soever, is exempted from the
proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm; Nevertheless, of late diverse Commissions under
your Majesty's great Seal have issued forth, by which certain persons have been
assigned and appointed Commissioners, with power and authority to proceed
within the Land, according to the Justice of Martial Law, against such
Soldiers and Mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should
commit any Murder, Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other outrage or misdemeanor
whatsoever, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to Martial
Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to proceed to the trial and
condemnation of such Offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to
death according to the Law Martial:

By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of
the Land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed.

And also sundry grievous Offenders, by color thereof claiming an exemption,
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused or forborne to proceed against such Offenders according to the
same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said Offenders were punishable
only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commissions as aforsaid; Which
Commissions, and all other of like nature, are wholly and directly contrary to
the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm:

The Petition.
They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Majesty, That no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament; And that none be
called to make answer, or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be
confined, or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof; And that no Freeman, in any such manner as is before
mentioned, be imprisoned or detained; And that your Majesty would be pleased to
remove the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your People may not be so
burdened in time to come: And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by
Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled; And that hereafter no Commissions of
like nature may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed
as aforesaid, lest by color of them any of your Majesty's Subjects be
destroyed, or put to death, contrary to the Laws and Franchise of the Land.

All which they most humbly pray of your most excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, That the awards, doings and
proceedings, to the prejudice of your People, in any of the premises, shall
not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example: And that your Majesty would
be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your People,
to declare your royal will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid, all your
Officers and Ministers shall serve you according to the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, as they tender the Honor of your Majesty, and the Prosperity of
this Kingdom. Stat. 17 Car. cap. 14.

CAP. I.
A restraint of diverse abuses committed on the Lords day.

FOrasmuch as the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, is much broken and
profaned by Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Wain-men, Butchers and Drovers of
Cattle, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of Religion; Be it therefore
enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and by the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That no Carrier with any Horse or Horses, A Carrier etc.
that travels upon the Lords day, shall forfeit 20. s.
nor Waggon-men with any Wagon or Wagons, nor Car-men with any Cart or Carts,
nor Wain-man with any Wain or Wains, nor Drovers with any Cattle, shall after
forty days next after the end of this present Session of Parliament, by
themselves, or any other, travel upon the said Day, Butchers that sell or kill
victual upon that day, shall forfeit 6. s. 8. d.
upon pain that every person and persons so offending shall lose and forfeit
twenty shillings for every such offense: Or if any Butcher by himself, or any
other for him, by his privity or consent, shall after the end of the said forty
days, kill or sell any Victual upon the said Day; That then every such Butcher
shall forfeit and lose for every such offense the sum of six shillings and
eight pence; The said offenses, and every of them, being done in view of any
Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other head Officer of any City or Town corporate,
within their limits respectively, or being proved upon Oath by two or more
witnesses, or by the confession of the party offending, before any such
Justice, Mayor, or head Officer, within their several limits respectively,
wherein such offense shall be committed; To which end, every such Justice,
Mayor, or head Officer, shall have power by this Act to minister an Oath to
such witness or witnesses: All which sums or penalties shall or may be levied
by any Constable, After conviction, and by warrant from a Justice, etc. the
Constables etc. may levy the said forfeitures to the use of the poor; or they
may be recovered by Suit.
or Churchwarden, by Warrant from any such Justice or Justices of the Peace,
Mayor, or other head Officer as aforesaid, within their several limits where
such offense shall be committed or done, by distress and sale of the Offenders
goods, rendering to the party the overplus; or shall be recovered by any person
or persons that will sue for the same, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any
of his Majesty's Courts of Record, in any City or Town corporate, before his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in their General Sessions of the Peace: All
which forfeitures shall be employed to and for the use of the poor of the
Parishes where the said offenses shall be committed or done, saving only that
it shall be lawful to and for any such Justice, Mayor, or head Officer, out of
the said Forfeitures, to reward any such person or persons that shall inform or
otherwise prosecute any person or persons offending against this present Act,
according to their discretions, so that such reward exceed not the third part
of the Forfeiture: Provided that such Bill, Plaint, or Information shall be
commenced, sued and prosecuted in the County, City, or Town corporate, where
such offense shall be committed and done, and not elsewhere, wherein no Essoin,
Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed to the Defendant. Provided always,
That it shall be lawful for any Constable or Churchwarden, that shall have any
Suit or Action brought against them for any Distress by them or any of them to
be taken by force of this present Act, to plead the general Issue, and to give
the special matter in Evidence; Provided likewise, That no person or persons
whatsoever shall be impeached by this Act, unless he be thereof questioned
within six months after the Offense committed. Provided further, That this Act
shall not in any sort abridge or take away the Authority of the Court
Ecclesiastical. This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament. St. 1 Car. 1. Continued and made perpetual. 17 Car. cap. 4.

CAP. II.
A restraint of passage, or sending any person beyond the Seas to be Popishly
bred.

FOrasmuch as diverse ill affected persons to the true Religion established
within this Realm, have sent their children into foreign parts to be bred up in
Popery, 1. Jac. 4. He that goes himself, or sends any other beyond the seas to
be trained up in Popery, etc. shall be disabled to sue, etc. and shall lose all
his goods, and shall forfeit all his lands, etc. for life. Stat. 27 El. 2. Stat.
3 Jac. 5.
notwithstanding the restraint thereof by the Statute made in the first year of
the reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James of famous memory; Be it
Enacted, That the said Statute shall be put in due execution: And be it further
Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That in case any person or persons, under the obedience
of the King, his heirs and Successors at any time after the end of this Session
of Parliament, shall pass or go, or shall convey or send, or cause to be sent
or conveyed, any Child, or other person, out of any of the Kings Dominions,
into any the parts beyond Seas, out of the Kings obedience, to the intent and
purpose to enter into, or be resident or trained up in any Priory, Abbey,
Nunnery, Popish University, College or School, or House of Jesuits, Priests,
or in any private Popish Family, and shall be there, by any Jesuit, Seminary
Priest, Friar, Monk, or other Popish person, instructed, persuaded, or
strengthened in the Popish Religion, in any sort to profess the same, or shall
convey or send, or cause to be conveyed or sent, by the hands or means of any
person whatsoever, any sum or sums of Money, or other thing, for or toward the
maintenance of any Child, or other person, already gone or sent, or to go, or
to be sent, and trained and instructed, as is aforsaid, or under the name or
color of any Charity, Benevolence, or Alms, toward the relief of any Priory,
Abbey, Nunnery, College, School, or any Religious House whatsoever: Every
person so sending, conveying, or causing to be sent and conveyed, as well any
such Child or other person, as any sum or sums of Money, or other thing, and
every person passing or being sent beyond the Seas, being thereof lawfully
convicted, in or upon any Information, presentment, or Indictment, as is
aforesaid, shall be disabled from thenceforth to sue or use any Action, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, in course of Law, or to prosecute any Suit in any Court
of Equity, or to be Committee of any Ward, or Executor or Administrator to any
person, or capable of any Legacy or Deed or Gift, or to bear any Office within
the Realm, and shall lose and forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and shall
forfeit all his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Rents, Annuities, Offices,
and Estates of Freehold, for and during his natural life.

A convert shall not incur the penalties aforesaid. Stat. 27. El. 2.
Provided always, That no person sent or conveyed as aforesaid, that shall
within six months after his return into this Realm, conform himself unto the
present Religion, established in this Church of England, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Statutes made concerning
Conformity in other cases required from Popish Recusants, shall incur any the
penalties aforesaid.

And it is enacted, That all and every of the Offenses against this Statute may
be inquired, heard and determined before the Justices of the King's Bench, or
Justices of Assise, or Jail-deliver, or of Oyer and Terminer of such Counties
where the Offenders did last dwell or abide, or whence they departed out of
this Kingdom, or where they were taken.

Provided also, That if any person or Child, so passing, or sent, or now being
beyond the Seas, shall after his return into this Realm, conform himself to the
present Religion, established in this Church of England, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Statutes made for or concerning
Conformity in other cases required from Popish Recusants, for and during such
time as he or she shall so continue in such Conformity and obedience, according
to the true intent and meaning of the said Laws and Statutes, shall have his or
her Lands restored to them again.

CAP. III.
The Forfeiture and Punishment of him that keeps an Alehouse without License.

Whereas, by an Act made in the fifth year of the reign of King Edward the
sixth of famous memory, entitled, an Act for keepers of Alehouses to be bound
by Recognizance, amongst other things, ^. and 6. Ed. 6. 25
it is enacted, That if any person or persons, other then such as should be
from thenceforth admitted and allowed by the Justices mentioned in the said
Act, should after the day in the said Act limited, obstinately, and upon his
own authority, take upon him or them to keep a common Alehouse or
Tippling-house, or should, contrary to the commandment of the said Justices, or
two of them, use commonly selling of Ale or Beer, That then the said Justices
of Peace, or two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) should, for every
such offense, commit every such person or persons so offending to the Common
Gaol within the same Shire, City, Borough, Town corporate, Franchise or
Liberty, there to remain without bayl or mainprise by the space of three days:
And before his or their deliverance, the said Justices shall take recognizance
of him or them so committed, with two Sureties, that he or they should not keep
any common Alehouse, Tippling-house, or use commonly selling of Ale or Beer, as
by the discretion of the said Justices should seem convenient: And the said
Justices should make Certificate of every such Recognizance and Offense, at the
next Quarter Sessions that should be holden within the same Shire, City,
Borough, Town corporate, Franchise or Liberty, where the same should be
committed or done, which Certificate should be a sufficient Conviction in Law
of the same Offense: And the said Justices of Peace, upon the said Certificate
made, should in open Sessions assess the Fine for every such Offense at twenty
shillings, as by the said Act may appear: Which Law has not wrought such
Reformation as was intended, for that the said Fine of twenty shillings is
seldom levied, and for that many of the said Offenders, by reason of their
poverty, are neither able to pay the said Fine of twenty shillings, nor yet to
bear their own Charges of conveying them to the Gaol; And moreover, do leave a
great charge of Wife and Children upon the Parishes wherein they live: In
regard whereof, the Constables and other Officers are much discouraged in
presenting them, and the Offenders become obstinate and incorrigible:

For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament,
That if any person or persons, He that keeps an Alehouse, etc. without license,
shall forfeit 20. s
after forty days next ensuing the end of this present Session of Parliament,
shall upon his own authority, not being thereunto lawfully licensed, take upon
him, or them, to keep a common Alehouse or Tippling house, or use commonly
selling of Ale, Beer, Syder, or Perry, That then every such person or persons,
shall for every such Offense forfeit and lose the sum of twenty shillings of
current money of England, to the use of the poor of the Parish where such
offense shall be committed; The same offense being viewed and seen by any
Mayor, Bailiff, or Justice of Peace, or other head Officer, within the several
limits, or confessed by the party so offending, or proved by the oath of two
witnesses to be taken before any Mayor, Bailiff, or other head Officer, or any
one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace, The Constables or Churchwardens
shall levy the said forf. to the use of the Poor.
who by virtue of this Act shall be authorized to minister the said oath to any
person or persons that can or will justify the same, being within the limits
of their said Commission; The said penalty to be levied by the Constables or
Churchwardens of the parish or parishes where the said offense shall be
committed; Who shall be accountable therefore to the use of the poor of the
said parish by way of distress, to be taken and detained by warrant or precept,
from the said Mayor, Bailiff, Justice or Justices, or other head Officer, by
whom the said offense shall be viewed, or before whom the same shall be
confessed, or proved as aforesaid: and for default of satisfaction, within
three days next ensuing, The party that is not able to pay the forf. shall be
whipped.
the said distress to be by the said Constables or Churchwardens apprised and
sold, and the overplus to be delivered to the party or parties offending, and
this to be only for the first offense. And if such offender or offenders shall
not have sufficient Goods and Chattels whereby the said twenty shillings may be
levied by way of distress, as aforesaid, or shall not pay the said sum of
twenty shillings, within six days after such conviction as aforesaid, That
then the said Mayor, Bailiff, Justice or Justices, or other head Officer,
before whom the said Offender shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall commit all
and every the said offender or offenders to some Constable or Constables, or
other inferior Officer or Officers of the City, Borough, Town, Parish or
Hamlet, where the offense shall be committed, or the party apprehended, to be
openly whipped for the said offense, as the said Justice or Justices shall
limit or appoint.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, The officer neglecting to punish
the offender shall be imprisoned or pay ten shillings.
That if any Constable or inferior Officer shall neglect to execute the said
precept or warrant, or do refuse, or do not execute by himself, or some other
to be by him appointed, upon the offender the punishment limited by this
Statute, that in that case it shall and may be lawful for the said Mayor,
Bailiff, Justice or Justices of Peace, or other head Officer, to commit the
Constable or other inferior Officer so refusing, or not executing the said
punishment by himself or some other, to the common Gaol of the said County,
City, or Town corporate, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until the
said Offender or Offenders shall be by the said Constable or Constables, or
other inferior Officer so refusing, or not executing the said punishment, or
some by his or their procurement, punished and whipped, as is above limited and
declared, or until he or they so neglecting or refusing, shall have paid the
sum of forty shillings of lawful money of England, unto the use of the poor of
the parish for their said contempt.

And be it further Enacted, For the second and third offense the offender shall
be committed to the house of correction.
that if the said Offender or Offenders being an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper,
shall offend in any of the premises the second time, and be thereof lawfully
convicted in manner and form aforesaid, That then the said Mayor, Bailiff,
Justice or Justices of the Peace, or other head Officer shall commit him, her,
or them unto the house of Correction, there to remain for the space of one
month, and be dealt withal as idle, lewd and disorderly persons. And if such
Person or Persons shall again offend, and shall be thereof convicted, as
aforesaid, that then the said offender and offenders, for every such offense,
shall be committed unto the said house of Correction, as aforesaid, there to
remain until by the order of the Justices in their general Sessions for the
County, City, Borough, or Franchise, he, she, or they shall be delivered from
thence.

Provided always, that such offender or offenders, as shall be punished by
virtue of this act, The offender punished by this act, shall not be again
punished by 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and contra. Alehouses kept in the time of Fairs
excepted.
shall not be punished again for the same offense by the former Act, made in
the fifth year of King Edward the sixth aforementioned. And that such offender
or offenders as shall be punished by virtue of the before mentioned Act, made
in the fifth year of King Edward the sixth, shall not be punished again for the
same offense by virtue of this present Act, nor any thing therein contained.

Provided always, That in such Towns and places, where any Fair or Fairs shall
be kept, that for the time only of the same Fair or Fairs, it shall be lawful
for every person or persons to use common selling of Ale or Beer in Booths, or
other places there, for the relief of the Kings Subjects that shall repair unto
the same, in such like manner and sort as has been used and done in times
past, this Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.
St. 11 H. 7. 2. 1 Jac. 9. 4 Jac. 10. 21 Jac. 7. 1 Car. 4.

CAP. IV.
Diverse Statutes made perpetual, others continued, and some others repealed. 1
El. 17.
When Corn may be transported, etc.

BE it Enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, That one Act made
in the first year of the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act
for the preservation of spawn and fry of fish, except the proviso in the said
Act mentioned, that the same Act shall not extend to the Rivers of Tweed, nor
Waters or Rivers, whereof the Queen was answered of any yearly rent or profit,
nor to Farmers, Owners or Occupiers of the Rivers of Wye, Vske, 13 El. 20.
and other Rivers in the said proviso mentioned or contained: One Act made in
the thirteenth year of the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act
touching leases of Benefices, and other Ecclesiastical livings with Cure,
together with all and every explanations, additions, 27 El. not printed.
and alterations thereof, or of any of them, or to any of them, made by several
Statutes, in the fourteenth, eighteenth, 3 J^c. 8. The four acts above
mentioned, made perpetual.
and three and fortieth years of her said late Majesty's reign.

And one Act made in the seven and twentieth year of the reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for the maintenance of the Peer and Cobb of
Lyme Regis in the County of Dorset.

21 Jac. 17. made perpetual.
And one Act made in the third year of the reign of the late King James,
entitled, An Act for the avoiding of unnecessary delays of executions, be by
authority of this present Parliament, made perpetual, and shall from henceforth
stand in full force and effect, and be put in due execution for ever hereafter.

And be it also enacted by the same authority, That one Statute made in the one
and twentieth year of the reign of the late King James, entitled, An Act
against Usury, which act was to continue for the space of seven years, from the
four and twentieth day of June, which then should be in the year of our Lord,
one thousand six hundred twenty and five, and so to the end of the first
Session of Parliament then next following, be also by authority of this
Parliament made perpetual.

2^ H. 12.
And it is further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, That one Act made in the
one and twentieth year of the reign of the late King Henry the eighth,
entitled, an Act for the true making of Cables, Halters and Ropes:

And that part of one Act made in the Parliament holden at Westminster by
prorogation the fourth day of November, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 1^.
and continued until the first day of February next after, in the third and
fourth years of the reign of the late King Edward the sixth, by which it is
ordained and enacted, That no Person or Persons after the time in the said Act
mentioned, shall sell again alive Cattle in the said act mentioned, at or in
the Market or Fair wherein he bought the same, during the time of the same Fair
or Market, under the pains therein contained:

And that no person being a Butcher, and using the craft or mystery of
Butchery, shall at any time after the said feast buy any fat Oxen, Steers,
Ronts, Kine, Heifers, Calves, or Sheep, and sell, or cause to be sold the same
again alive, upon pain of forfeiture of every such Ox, Steer, Ront, 3 and 4 Ed.
6. 21.
Cow, Heifer, Calves or Sheep, bargained or sold contrary to the form of that
Act:

One other Act made in the same Parliament, entitled, an Act for the buying
and selling of Butter and Cheese, together with one Statute made in the
Parliament holden in the one and twentieth year of the reign of the late King
James, 21 Jac. 22.
entitled, an Act for the explanation of the Statutes made in the third, and
fourth, and fifth years of the reign of the said late King Edward the sixth,
concerning the traders of Butter and Cheese:

^ El 5.
And so much of an Act made in the fifth year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, entitled, an Act touching certain politic constitutions, made for
the maintenance of the Navy, as is not repealed by any later Statute, nor does
concern the eating of flesh, or using of fish upon the Wednesday; Nor the
transportation of herring, or other Sea fish; Nor freedom of subsidy, Custom
or Tonnage for the same: Nor Transportation of Corn, nor the prohibiting the
bringing into this Realm any Cod or Ling in Barrels or other Casks, together
with all and every other additions, explanations and alterations made
thereunto, or thereof, or of any part thereof, by any Statute or Statutes made
sithence the making of the said last mentioned Act, and in force the last day
of the Session of Parliament that was in the one and twentieth year of the
Reign of the late King James:

5 El. 7.
And one other Act made in the said fifth year, entitled, an Act for avoiding
diverse foreign wares made by handy-crafts Men beyond the Seas:

8 El. 10.
And an Act made in the eighth year of the Reign of the said late Queen
Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for Bowyers, and the prices of Bows:

13 El. 21.
And one Act made in the thirteenth year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, entitled, an Act that Purveyors may take Corn and Victuals within
five miles of Cambridge and Oxford in certain cases:

14 El. 5.
And so much of an Act made in the fourteenth year of the Reign of the said late
Queen Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for the punishment of Vagabonds, and the
relief of the poor and impotent, as concerns the taxing, rating, levying and
employing of Gaol-mony:

^8 El. 3.
And so much of an Act made in the eighteenth year of the Reign of the said late
Queen Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for the setting the poor on work, and
avoiding Idleness, as concerns Bastards begotten out of lawful Matrimony,
with this, that all Justices of the Peace within their several limits and
precincts, and in their several Sessions, may do and execute all things
concerning that part of the said Statute, that by Justices of the Peace in the
several Counties are by the said Statute limited to be done:

18 El. 20.
And an Act made in the said eighteenth year of the reign of the said late Queen
Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for repairing and amending the Bridges and
Highways near unto the City of Oxford:

2^ El. not printed.
And one Act made the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of the said late
Queen Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for the good Government of the City or
Borough of Westminster:

27 El. 14 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 20. 27 El 28.
And two other Acts made in the said seven and twentieth year of the Reign of
the said late Queen Elizabeth, the one entitled, an Act for reviving of a
former Statute, for the true making of Malt, together with the Statute by the
said Act revived; and the other entitled, an Act for the keeping of the Sea
banks, and Sea works in the County of Norfolk:

And one Act made in the one and thirtieth year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, 31 El. 8.
entitled, an Act for the true gawging of Vessels brought from beyond the
Seas, converted by Brewers for the utterance and sale of Ale and Beer:

And two Acts made in the five and thirtieth year of her said late Majesty's
Reign, 35 El. 10.
the one entitled, an Act for the Reformation of sundry abuses in Clothes,
called Devonshire Kersies or Dozens, according to a Proclamation of the four
and thirtieth year of her said Majesty's Reign; the other entitled, an Act for
the bringing in of Clapboard from the parts beyond the Seas, 35 El. 11.
and the restraining of the transporting of wine Casks, for the sparing and
preserving of Timber within the Realm:

And so much of one Act made in the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of the
said late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, an Act to retain the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due obedience, 35 El. 2.
as has not been since repealed by any other Statute:

And the several Acts hereafter mentioned, 39 El. 4.
made in the nine and thirtieth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
that is to say, an Act entitled, an Act for the punishment of Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, with the provision annexed thereunto, 2 Jac. 25.
39 El. 10.
by one Act made in the first year of the reign of the late King James,
entitled, an Act for continuing and reviving of diverse Statutes, and for
repealing of some others: An Act entitled, St. 23 El. 7. 39 El. 14.
an Act for the increase of Mariners, and for maintenance of Navigation,
repealing a former Act made in the three and twentieth year of her said
Majesty's Reign, bearing the same title: an Act entitled, an Act prohibiting
the bringing into the Realm of foreign Cards for Wool; an Act entitled, St.
23 El. 7. 39 El. 14. 39 El. 16. 39 El. 17. 43 El. 3. 43 El. 5. 43 El. 2. 1 Jac.
25
an Act for restraining the excessive making of Malt; an Act against lewd and
wandering persons, pretending to be Soldiers or Mariners: And the several Acts
hereafter mentioned, made in the three and fortieth year of the said late Queen
Elizabeth; that is to say, an Act entitled, an Act for the necessary relief of
Soldiers and Mariners; an Act entitled, an Act to avoid trifling and
frivolous Suits in Law in her Majesty's Courts at Westminster; an Act
entitled, An Act for relief of the Poor, with the addition thereunto made, by
an Act made in the first year of the reign of the late King James, entitled,
an Act for continuing of diverse Statutes, and for repeal of some others, and
with this further addition: And be it Enacted, The Overseers of ^o^ Poor may
put out Apprentices. The Churchwardens, etc. may set up any Trade to ^^n^ the
poor work. 43 El. 10. 43 El. 5. 1 Jac. 7. St. 39 El. 4. 1 Jac. 8. 1 Jac. 22.
That all persons to whom the Overseers of the Poor shall according to the said
Act bind any children Apprentices, may take and receive, and keep them as
Apprentices: And also that the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
mentioned in the said Act, made in the said three and fortieth year, may by,
and with the consent of two or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, within their respective limits, wherein shall be more Justices than
one; and where no more shallbe than one, with the assent of that one Justice of
the Peace, set up, use, and occupy any Trade, Mystery, or Occupation, only for
the setting on work, and better relief of the Poor of the Parish, Town, or
Place, of, or within which they shall be Churchwardens or Overseers of the
Poor, any former Statute to the contrary notwithstanding: An Act entitled, an
Act for the true making and working of Woollen Cloth; an Act entitled, an Act
to prevent Perjury, and subornation of Perjury, and unnecessary expense in
Suits of Law: And the several Acts made in the first year of the reign of the
late King James, after mentioned: One Act entitled, an Act for continuance and
explanation of the Statute made in the nine and thirtieth year of the reign of
the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, an Act for punishment of Rogues, Vagabonds
and sturdy Beggars; another entitled, an Act to take away the benefit of
Clergy for some kind of Manslaughter: another entitled, an Act concerning
Tanners, Curriers, Shoo-makers, and other Artificers, occupying the cutting of
Leather, saving for such part thereof as is repealed by one other Act, St. 4
Jac. 6. 1 Jac. 27.
made in the fourth year of his said late Majesty's reign of England, in that
behalf: Another entitled, an Act for the better execution of the intent and
meaning of former Statutes made against shooting in Guns, and for the
preservation of the Game of Pheasants and Partridges, and against the
destroying of Hares with Hare-pipes, 1 Jac. 18. 1 Jac. 6. St. 5 El. 4 1 Jac. 31.
and tracing Hares in the Snow; an Act entitled, an Act for avoiding of Deceit
in Selling, Buying, or spending corrupt and unwholesome Hops; an Act entitled,
an Act for explanation of the Statute made in the fifth year of the late Queen
Elizabeth's reign, concerning Laborers: an Act for the charitable relief and
ordering of persons infected with the Plague: And the several Acts made in the
third year of the Reign of the late King James, after mentioned, That is to
say, 3 Jac. 9. 3 Jac. 10. 3 Jac. 11.
one Act entitled, an Act for relief of such as lawfully use the Trade and
Handy-craft of Skinners: Another Act entitled, an Act for rating and levying
of the charges for conveying of Malefactors and Offenders to the Gaol: Another
Act for transporting of Beer over the Seas: 3 Jac. 13. 4 Jac. 11.
One other entitled, an Act against unlawful hunting and stealing of Deer and
Conies: And one Act made in the fourth year of the reign of the said late King
James, entitled, an Act for the better provision of Meadow and pasture, for
the necessary maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage, in the Manors, 7 Jac. 1.
Lordships, and Parishes of Merden, alias Mawarden, Boddenham, Wellington,
Sutton Saint Michael, Sutton Saint Nicholas, Murton upon Lugge, and the Parish
of Pipe, 7 Jac. 4. 7 Jac. 12.
and every of them, in the County of Hereford: And the several Acts made in the
seventh year of the Reign of the late King James after mentioned, the one
entitled, an Act for the better execution of Justice, and suppressing of
criminal Offenders in the North parts of the Kingdom of England: 7 Jac. 12. 7
Jac. 13.
Another entitled, an Act for the due execution of diverse Laws and Statutes
heretofore made against Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and other lewd
and idle persons: St. 3 Jac. 23. 7 Jac. 18.
Another entitled, an Act to prevent the spoil of Corn and Grain by untimely
hawking, and for the better preservation of Pheasants and Partridges: One other
Entitled, an Act to avoid the double payment of Debts: One other Entitled, An
Act for the explanation of one Statute made in the second Session of that
present Parliament, entitled, an Act against unlawful hunting of Deer and
Conies: And one other Act entitled, an Act for the taking, landing, and
carrying of Sea-sand for the bettering of grounds, 25 H. 8. 11.
and for the increase of Corn and Tillage within the Counties of Devon and
Cornwall: And that one part of the Statute made in the five and twentieth year
of the Reign of the late King Henry the eighth, entitled, an Act for the
destruction of wild fowl, which was repealed by a later Act in the Parliament
holden in the third and fourth years of the reign of the late King Edward the
sixth, S^. 3 and 4. El. ^. 7. S^. 21. Jac. 28. ^ M. 5.
and revived in the Parliament holden in the one and twentieth year of the
Reign of the late King James: and one Act made in the first year of the Reign
of the late Queen Mary, for and concerning the making, repairing and amendment
of the common highway and Causey, in the Counties of Dorset and Sommerset,
between the Towns of Shaftsbury and Sherborn, St. ^1 ^ ^.^8. 21 ^ac. 6. 21 Jac.
18
in the County of Dorset, and revived in the said one and twentieth year: And
also the several Acts hereafter mentioned, made in the said one and twentieth
year of the Reign of the late King James: That is to say, an Act entitled, an
Act concerning Women convicted of small felonies; 4 Jac. 2. 21 Jac. 20. 21 Jac.
27.
and one Act entitled, an Act for the continuance of a former Statute made in
the fourth year of the Reign of the said late King James, entitled, an Act for
the true making of woollen clothes, The 5^ Statutes above mentioned continued
until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.
and for some addition and alterations, in and to the same, together with so
much of one Act made in the said fourth year as was in force the last day of
the Session of Parliament, holden in the said one and twentieth year: and one
other Act, entitled, an Act to prevent and reform profane swearing and
cursing: and one Act, entitled, an Act to prevent the destroying and murdering
of bastard Children, by virtue of this Act, shall be, and continue until the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament in force and effect, as the
same were the first day of the Session of Parliament, 1 Car. 1. Continued.
Continued til some other Act be made for continuance or discontinuance of the
said Act. Mat. 17 Car. cap. 4. When Corn may be transported. Start 21 Jac. 28.
holden in the first year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is: And be it also Enacted, that one Statute made in the said first year of his
Majesty's Reign that now is, entitled, an Act for punishing of diverse abuses
committed on the Lords day, shall continue in force until the end of the next
Session of Parliament.

Provided nevertheless, that so much of every of the said Act, as by any new
Act made in this Session of Parliament, are or shall be explained, altered or
repealed, shall for so much thereof from the end of this Session of Parliament
stand and be in force, as by those other Acts shall be ordained.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, That when the prises of Corn or Grains at the times, Havens and
Places, when and where the said Corn or Grain shall be bought, shipped or
laden, exceed not the rates hereafter following, viz. the quarter of Wheat at
thirty and two shillings the quarter; the quarter of Rye, at twenty shillings;
the quarter of Pease and Beans, at sixteen shillings; the quarter of Barley or
Malt, at sixteen shillings, of current English money; That then it shall be
lawful for all and every person and persons, being Subjects of the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and born within this Realm, to carry and
transport of his own, and to buy to sell again, in Markets and out of Markets,
and to keep, or sell, or carry and transport any of the said Corns and Grains,
from the places where they shall be of such prices, unto any part beyond the
Seas, in amity with his Majesty, as Merchandise in Ships, Crayers, or other
Vessels, whereof any English born Subject or Subjects then shall be the owner
or owners, or the same to carry and sell in other places within this Realm or
Dominion thereof: Any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding. And that the Kings Majesty, The Custom and Punsdage of Corn.
his Heirs and Successors, shall have and receive by the Customers and Officers
of his Ports, for the Custom or Poundage of every quarter of Wheat to be
transported, by force of this Statute, out of this Realm, two shillings of
every quarter; of other grain, sixteen pence: which said several sums so to be
had and taken as Custom or Poundage, shall be in full satisfaction of all
manner of Custom or Poundage for the said Corn or Grain, by any Constitution,
Order, Statute, Law, or Custom heretofore made, used, or taken, for
transporting of any such manner of Corn or Grain, or made in this present
Session of Parliament, or hereafter to be made.

The Kings Proclamation may restrain transportation of Corn.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, That the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may at all times
by his and their Writ of Proclamation to be published generally in the whole
Realm, or in any of the Counties of this Realm, where any Ports are, command,
that no person shall by virtue of this Act, transport or convey any manner of
Grain out of his Highness Dominions generally, or out of any special Ports to
be in the said Proclamation particularly named, for such time as shall be
therein limited and appointed: And it shall not be lawful for any person to
carry out any such Grain contrary to the tenor of the said Proclamation, upon
such pains and forfeitures as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, are and
have been provided and ordained in that behalf, This Act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Welsh Cottons.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, that no person or persons shall incur any
penalty, for want of length, breadth, or weight of Welsh Cottons, under the
price of 15 d. the yard, or 2 s. the goad, so as they be not mixed with hair,
or other deceitful stuff, nor for any others above that price, except they
shall be mixed as aforesaid, or shall shrink above the rate of half a yard in
12 yards of length, or weigh less than fourteen ounces the yard, or hold not
full three quarters of a yard broad.

16 E. ^. ^.
And be it also Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That that part of one
Statute made in the fi^teenth year of the reign of the late King Richard the
second, by which it is ordained, that no manner of Spicery, after that it be
brought into the Realm, shall be carried out of the same Realm by Aliens nor by
Denizens, upon pain of forfeiture thereof: And one Statute made in the
sixteenth year of the reign of the late King Richard the second concerning
Liveries: 16 R. 2. 4. 20 R. 2. 2.
and one other Statute made in the twentieth year of the reign of the late King
Richard the second, by which it is ordained that no Vaclets, called Yeomen, nor
other of lesser estate than an Esquire, shall use or bear any sign of Livery,
called Livery of Company of any Lord within the Realm: And one Statute made in
the first year of the reign of the late King Henry the fourth, concerning
giving of Liberies: 7 H. 4. 7. 6 H. 4. 14. 13 H. 4. 3. 8 H. 6. 4. 8 Ed. 4. 2. 3
H. 7. 1. 3 H. 7. 12. A repeal of the 9 Statutes last mentioned.
And one statute made in the 7th year of the reign of the late King Hen. the
4th. concerning giving of Liveries: And one other Statute made in the 13th year
of the reign of the late King Henry the fourth, concerning giving of Liveries:
And one Statute made in the eighth year of the reign of the late King Henry the
sixth, concerning Liveries: And one Statute made in the eighth year of the
reign of the late King Edward the fourth, concerning Liveries: and so much of
one Statute made in the third year of the reign of the late King Henry the
seventh, concerning the Star Chamber, as touches or concerns the punishment
of those that shall give or take Liveries: And one other Statute made in the
said third year, concerning taking of Liveries by the Kings Officers and
Farmers, be from henceforth repealed.

And be it also enacted by authority of this Parliament, 7 Jac. 20. continued
until the next Parliament.
that one Act of Parliament made in the seventh year of the reign of the late
King James, entitled, An Act for the speedy recovery of many thousand Acres of
marsh grounds, and other grounds, within the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk,
lately surrounded by the rage of the Sea, in diverse parts of the said Counties,
and for the prevention of the danger of the like surrounding hereafter, be
continued, and shall stand in force until the end of the next Session of
Parliament. 17 Car. cap. 4.

CAP. V.
The Estates of the Tenants of Bromfield and Yale, in the County of Denbigh,
and of the Tenures, Rents, and Services thereupon reserved, (according to the
late composition made for the same with the Kings most Excellent Majesty, then
Prince of Wales) ratified and confirmed. PR.

CAP. VI.
Five Subsidies granted by the Spiritualty. EXP.

CAP. VII.
Five Subsidies granted by the Temporalty, Anno quarto Caroli Regis. EXP.

Anno Regni Caroli Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Decimo
Sexto.
AT the Parliament begun at Westminster the third day of November. An. Dom. 1640.
In the sixteenth year of the Reign of CHARLES the first, by the Grace of God,
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To
the High pleasure of Almighty God, and to the weal public of this Realm, were
Enacted as follows:

CAP. I.
Parliaments to be called and held every third year. REP. and ALT. 16 Car. 2.
cap. 1.

CAP. II.
A Grant of four entire Subsidies for the Relief of His Majesty's Army and the
Northern parts of the Kingdom. EXP.

CAP. III.
Some things mistaken in the last Act reformed, and the Acts of the
Commissioners and other Officers by them appointed, made good. EXP.

Anno decimo septimo Caroli Regis.
CAP. IV.
A Grant of two Subsidies for the further Relief of His Majesty's Army, and the
Northern parts of the Kingdom. EXP. And diverse Statutes continued.

ANd be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the passing of this present
Act, Diverse Statutes continued.
or of any other Act or Acts, or his Majesty's Royal Assent to them or any of
them in this present Session of Parliament, shall not be any determination of
the said Session, 3 Car. cap. 4. continued further.
and that all Statutes and Acts of Parliament which have their continuance, or
were by an Act of Parliament made in the third year of the Reign of his Majesty
that now is, entitled, An Act for the Continuance and Repeal of diverse
Statutes, continued until the end of the first Session of the then next
Parliament, shall by virtue of this Act be adjudged ever since the Session of
Parliament in the said third year to have been of such force and effect, as the
same were the last day of that Session, and from thenceforth until some other
Act of Parliament be made touching the continuance or discontinuance of the
said Statutes and Acts in the said Act of the third year of his Majesty's Reign
continued as aforesaid.

CAP. V.
The Lord Admiral and others by his authority may Raise and Impress Mariners,
Sailers, and others, for the present guarding of the Seas, and necessary
Defense of the Realm. EXP.

CAP. VI.
Michaelmas Term abbreviated.

Inconvenience^ Michaelmas term being so soon after the feast of Saint Michael.
Whereas the Term of S. Michael, commonly called Michaelmas Term, does begin so
soon after the Feast of Saint Michael, that it is generally found to be very
inconvenient to His Majesty's Subjects both Nobles and others, as well for the
keeping of the Quarter Sessions next after the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, and the keeping of their Leets, Law-dayes, and Court-Barons, which
they can by no means attend, in regard of the necessity of their coming to the
said Term so speedily after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, to appear
upon Iuries, and to follow their Causes and Suits in the Law, the same time
being the chief time of all the year for the sowing of Land with Winter Corn,
and for the disposing and setting in order of all their Winter Husbandry and
business, and for the receiving and paying of Rents; And in many parts of this
Kingdom Harvest is seldom or never Inned till three weeks after the said Feast.

Therefore the Kings most Excellent Majesty, out of the Princely care that he
has of all his loving Subjects, having a special care to the increase and
continuance of their wealth and good Estates, by the assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the authority of the same, Ordains, Enacteth, and Establishes, That in
the said Michaelmas Term there shall be six common days of Return only, and
not above; that is to say, The first day of Return thereof shall be, and be
called, A die Sancti Michaelis in tres Septimanas; In Michaelmas term shall be
lie common days of Return only.
The second day of Return of the same Term, shall be, and be called, A die
Sancti Michaelis in unum mensem; The third day of Return of the same Term,
shall be, and be called, In Crastino animarum; The fourth day of Return of the
same Term, shall be, and be called, In Crastino Sancti Martini; The fifth day
of Return of the same Term, shall be, and be called, In Octabis Sancti Martini;
And the sixth day of Return of the said Term, shall be, and be called, A die
Sancti Martini in quindecem dies.

And that the same days of Return shall be observed in all the High Courts of
Record of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors hereafter to be
holden at Westminster, or other place or places at the assignment or
appointment of our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors; And that
from and after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, The Return
days to be observed.
there shall not be, nor be called any days of Return in Octabis Sancti
Michaelis, nor a die Sancti Michaelis in quindecem dies, nor either of them;
And that the said Term of Saint Michael yearly for ever, from and after the
said Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, begin in and upon the
said Tres septimanas Sancti Michaelis, whenever it shall happen to fall
(except it be on the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, and then on the morrow
next after) for the keeping of the Essoins, Proffers, Returns, and other
Ceremonies heretofore used and kept in like manner and form, Two return days
taken away.
as has been used to be done in the day of the Return, commonly called,
Octabis Sancti Michaelis, and that the full Term of Saint Michael shall yearly
for ever, When the term shall begin.
from and after the Feast of Saint Michael next coming, in all the aforesaid
Courts of Rec^^d begin, and take his commencement upon the quarto die of the
said tres septimanas Sancti Michaelis, and not before, as formerly it has been
used upon the quarto die of Octabis Sancti Michaelis, (except it be on the
Lords day, commonly called Sunday, and then on the morrow next after.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if after the Feast
of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, H^w days shall ^e given or W^^ts
in real actions, other then writs of entry, right, or advowson, or dower.
any Writ in any real Action other then Writs of Entry for common Recoveries,
and writs of right of Advowson, and writs of Dower, Unde nihil habet hereafter
mentioned, come in, and be returnable in His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas,
in the day of Return of Tres septimanas Sancti Michaelis, then day shall be
given in Crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae; And if a die Sancti Michaelis
in unum mensem, then in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae; if in Crastino
animarum, then in Quindena Paschae; if in Crastino Sancti Martini, then a die
Paschae in tres septimanas; if in Octabis Sancti Martini, then a die Paschae in
unum mensem; if in Quindena Sanc^ Martini, then in quinque septimanas Paschae;
if in Octabis Sancti Hillarii, then in Crastino Ascensionis Domini; if in
Quindena Sancti Hillarii, then in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis; if in Crastino
Purificationis beatae Mariae, then in Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis; if in Octabis
Purificationis beatae Mariae, then in Quindena sanctae Trinitatis; if in
Quindena Paschae, then a die sanctae Trinitatis in tres septimanas; if a die
Paschae in tres septimanas, then a die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas; if
a die Paschae in unum mensem, then a die Sancti Michaelis in unum mensem; if a
die Paschae in quinque septimanas, then in Crastino animarum; if in Crastino
Ascensionis Domini, then in Crastino Sancti Martini; if in Crastino sanctae
Trinit. then in Octabis sancti Martini; if in Octabis sanctae Trinitatis, then
in Quindena sancti Ma^^ini; if in Quindena sanctae Trinitatis, then in Octabis
sancti Hillarii; if a die sanctae Trinitatis in tres septimanas, then in
Quindena Sancti Hillarii.

How days shall be given in the^^ writs.
And for the more speedy proceeding in Writs of Dower, and Writs of Entry for
common Recoveries, to be sued and prosecuted, by Writs of Entry, or Writs of
Right of Advowson: Be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That if
after the said Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, any Writ of
Dower unde nihil habet, or any writ of Entry whereupon a common Recovery is to
be sued, or Writs of Right of Advowson be returnable, a die Sancti Michaelis in
tres septimanas, then a day shall be given in Octabis Sancti Martini; if a die
Sancti Michaelis in unum mensem, then in Quindena Sancti Martini; if in
Crastino animarum, then in Octabis Sancti Hillarii; if in Crastino Sancti
Martini, then in Quindena Sancti Hillarii; if in Octabis Sancti Martini, then
in Crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae; if in Quindena Sancti Martini, then
in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae; if in Octabis Sancti Hillarii, then in
Quindena Paschae; if in Quindena Sancti Hillarii, then a die Paschae in tres
septimanas; if in Crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae, then a die Paschae in
unum mensem; if in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae, then a die Paschae in
quinque septimanas; if in Quindena Paschae, then in Crastino Ascentionis
Domini; if a die Paschae in tres septimanas, then in Crastino Sanctae
Trinitatis; if in Mense Paschae, then in Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis; if in
Quinque septimanas Paschae, then in Quindena Sanctae Trinitatis; if in Crastino
Ascentionis Domini, then a die Sanctae Trinitatis in tres septimanas; if in
Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis, then a die Sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas; if
in Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis, then a die Sancti Michaelis in unum mensem; if
in Quindena Sanctae Trinitatis, then in Crastino Animarum; if a die Sanctae
Trinitatis in tres septimanas, then in Crastino Sancti Martini.

Provided nevertheless, and be it likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
In writs of Dower after issue joined, fifteen days between the Test and
return sufficient.
that in all writs of Dower, Unde Nihil habet, after issue joined, it shall not
be needful or requisite to have above fifteen days betwixt the Test and
Return of the Venire facias, or any other Process to be sued out for the trial
of the said issue, but that the Writ of Venire facias, and other Process after
Issue joined, until judgment be given, having only fifteen days between the
Test and Return thereof, shall be good and effectual in Law, as is used in
personal Actions: any Law, Statute, or usage to the contrary heretofore
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Crastino Ascentionis a
good return.
that from and after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel now next coming,
the said day of Return, called Crastino Ascentionis Domini, shall be a good and
perfect Return, to all intents and purposes, as any other of the said days of
Return before mentioned is or has been used, notwithstanding there be not
fifteen days between the quarto die of the said Return of Crastino Ascentionis
Domini, The Essoin days.
and the Essoin day of the Return of Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis.

And be it further enacted, Writs in personal actions, having day from tres
Michaelis, till Crastino Ascentionis good. Proviso for writs returnable 1641.
Exp.
That all Writs and Process in personal Acttions hereafter to be made out of
any of his Majesty's said Courts at Westminster, and having day from tres
Michaelis, until Crastino Animarum, shall be good and effectual in Law,
notwithstanding there be not fifteen days betwixt the quarto die of the said
tres septimanas sancti Michaelis, and the days of Essoin of Crastino Animarum;
Any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary heretofore notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be if further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that
all writs and Process to be made, from and after the Feast of Easter, in the
year of our Lord God 1641. Returnable in Octabis, or Quindena sancti Michaelis
now next ensuing, or having days betwixt any of the said Returns, shall by
force of this Act have day, unto tres septimanas sancti Michaelis next, and the
parties to the said writs and Process shall then appear, and plead, and proceed
thereupon, to all intents and purposes, as if the said Writs and Process had
been made returnable a die sancti Michaelis in tres septimanas.

And whereas before the making of this Act, Writs of summons ad Warrantizandum,
upon common recoveries, and writs of Right of Advowson abridged to five Returns.
all Writs of Summons ad Warrantizand. against the Vouchees upon Common
Recoveries had in writs of Entry, and writs of Right of Advowson, were made for
nine Returns inclusive; Now for the more speedy perfecting of such Recoveries,
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the said Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel next, all and every such writs of Summons ad
Warrantizand. upon the appearance of the Tenant to every such writ of Entry,
and writ of Right of Advowson, shall and may be made, and abridged to five
Returns, as writs of Summons, ad Warrantizand. in writs of Dower, unde nihil
habet, heretofore have been used and accustomed.

And it is further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that all common writs
and Process, Common writs and process to keep the aforesaid returns.
as well personal as mixed, which shall fortune to be returnable in the said
Michaelmas Term, shall have and keep the said Returns of A die sancti Michaelis
in tres septimanas, a die sancti Michaelis in unum mensem, in Crastino
animarum, in Crastino Sancti Martini, in Octabis Sancti Martini, and a die
Sancti Martini in Quindecem dies, or any of them.

Provided always, And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid,
Special days may be appointed as have been used. Days in assise of Darrein
presentment, and in plea of quare impedit, and in attaint, not contrary hereto
shall be firm.
that in such and like cases, and Process, as special days have been used to
be appointed and assigned, and given for the returning of writs, and Process;
It shall be lawful to the Justices of every of the Kings said Courts of Record,
for the time being, in all the Process by them awarded, to assign, and appoint
special days of Returns, as by their discretions shall be thought convement.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
days in Assise of Darrein presentment, and in Plea of Quare Impedit, limited
and appointed by the Statute of Marlebridge, and also the days to be given in
Attaint, limited in the Statute made in the fifth year of the Reign of the
Noble King Edward the third; And also in the Statute made in the three and
twentieth year of the Reign of the late King Henry the eighth of worthy memory,
being not contrary to the Tenours of this Act, shall be holden firm and stable,
and shall stand in their full force and effect.

CAP. VII.
1 Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 1.
This Parliament shall not be Dissolved, Prorogued, or Adjourned, but by Act of
Parliament. EXP.

CAP. VIII.
Tunnage and Poundage.
A Subsidy Granted to the King of Tunnage, Poundage, and other sums of Money
payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported, from the 25th of May, 1641. to
the 14th of July next. EXP.

CAP. IX.
Provision of Money for the speedy Disbanding the Armies, and settling the Peace
of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, by raising and charging several
sums of Money upon persons according to their Ranks, Dignities, Offices,
Callings, Estates, and Qualities therein mentioned, and Commissioners to issue
for levying the same. EXP.

CAP. X.
For Regulating the Privy Council, and for taking away the Star-Chamber-Court.

Recital of Ma^^-Ch^rl^, and several Statutes. St. 3. li. 7. 1. 5 E. 3. cap. 9.
Whereas by the Great Charter many times confirmed in Parliament, It is
Enacted, That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised of his
Freehold or Liberties or Free Customs, or be Outlawed or exiled, or otherwise
destroyed, and that the King will not pass upon him, or condemn him but by
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; And by another Statute
made in the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, It is Enacted,
That no man shall be attached by any accusation, nor fore-judged of life or
limb, nor his Lands, Tenements, Goods, nor Chattels seized into the Kings hands
against the form of the Great Charter, and the Law of the Land; and by another
Statute made in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of the same King
Edward the Third, 25 E. 3. cap. 4. Stat. 5.
It is accorded, assented, and established, that none shall be taken by
petition, or suggestion made to the King, or to his Council, unless it be by
Indictment or Presentment of good and lawful people of the same Neighborhood
where such Deeds be done, in due manner, or by Process made by Writ Original at
the Common Law, and that none be put out of his Franchise or Freehold, unless
he be duly brought in to answer, and foreiudged of the same by the course of
the Law, and if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed and
holden for none. 28 E. 3. cap. 3.
And by another Statute made in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of
the same King Edward the Third, It is amongst other things Enacted, That no man
of what Estate or condition soever he be, shall be put out of his Lands or
Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, without being brought
in to answer by due process of Law; And by another Statute made in the two and
fortieth year of the Reign of the said King Edward the Third, 42 E. 3. c. 3.
It is Enacted, That no man be put to answer without presentment before
Justices, or matter of Record, or by due process and writ original, according
to the Old Law of the Land, and if any thing be done to the contrary, it shall
be void in Law, and holden for error. And by another Statute made in the six
and thirtieth year of the same King Edward the Third, 36 E. 3. c. 15.
It is amongst other things Enacted, That all pleas which shall be pleaded in
any Courts before any the Kings Justices, or in his other places, or before any
of his other Ministers, or in the Courts and places of any other Lords within
the Realm, shall be entered and enrolled in Latin; And whereas by the Statute
made in the third year of King Henry the seventh, 3 H. 7. cap. 1.
power is given to the Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer of England for the time
being, and the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or two of them, calling unto
them a Bishop and a Temporal Lord of the Kings most Honorable Council, and the
two Chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, for the time being, or
other two Justices in their absence to proceed, as in that Act is expressed,
for the punishm^^^ of some particular offenses therein mentioned, And by the
Statute made in the One and t^^ntieth year of King Henry the Eighth, 21 H. 8.
cap. 20
The President of the Council is associated to join with the Lord Chancellor
and other Judges in the said Statute of the third of Henry the seventh
mentioned, But the said Judges have not kept themselves to the points limited
by the said Statute, but have undertaken to punish where no Law does warrant,
and to make Decrees for things having no such Authority, and to inflict heavier
punishments then by any Law is warranted:

All matters ^^^minable in (...) Star Chamber man be ^^^^^nable and (...) ^^o
by the Common Law.
And forasmuch as all matters examinable, or determinable before the said
Judges, or in the Court commonly called the Star Chamber, may have their proper
remedy and redress, and their due punishment, and correction by the Common Law
of the Land, and in the Ordinary course of Justice elsewhere; and forasmuch as
the reasons and motives inducing the erection and continuance of that Court do
now cease; and the proceedings, Censures, and Decrees of that Court, have by
experience been found to be an intolerable burden to the Subject, and the
means to introduce an Arbitrary Power and Government; And forasmuch as the
Councel-Table, has of late times assumed unto it self, a power to intermeddle
in Civil causes and matters, only of private interest between party and party,
and have adventured to determine of the Estates and Liberties of the Subject,
contrary to the Law of the Land, and the Rights and Privileges of the Subject,
by which great and manifold mischiefs and inconveniences have arisen, and
happened, and much incertainty by means of such proceedings has been conceived
concerning Men's Rights, and Estates; For settling whereof, and preventing the
like in time to come;

Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, Court
of Star Chamber and all its powers dissolved.
That the said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, and all Jurisdiction,
Power, and Authority belonging unto, or exercised in the same Court, or by any
the Judges, Officers or Ministers thereof, be from the first day of August, in
the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred forty and one, clearly and
absolutely dissolved, taken away, and determined; and that from the said first
day of August, neither the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, the Lord Treasurer of England, the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal, or
President of the Council, nor any Bishop, Temporal Lord, Privy-Councellor, or
Judge, or Justice whatsoever, shall have any power, or authority to hear,
examine, or determine any matter, or thing whatsoever, in the said Court
commonly called the Star Chamber, or to make, pronounce, or deliver any
Judgment, Sentence, Order, or Decree, or to do any Judicial, or Ministerial Act
in the said Court; And that all and every Act, and Acts of Parliament, and all
and every Article, clause, and sentence in them, and every of them, by which
any Jurisdiction, power, or Authority is given, limited, or appointed unto the
said Court commonly called the Star Chamber, or unto all, or any the Judges,
Officers, or Ministers thereof, or for any proceedings to be had, or made in
the said Court, or for any matter or thing to be drawn into question, examined,
or determined there, shall for so much as concerns the said Court of
Star Chamber, and the power, and authority thereby given unto it, be from the
said first day of August repealed, and absolutely revoked and made void.

And be it likewise Enacted, Like Jurisdiction in several other Courts repealed
and taken away.
That the like Jurisdiction now used and exercised in the Court before the
President, and Council, in the Marches of Wales, and also in the Court before
the President and Council established in the Northern parts: And also in the
Court commonly called, the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, held before the
Chancellor, and Council of that Court: And also in the Court of Exchequer of
the County Palatine of Chester, held before the Chamberlain and Council of that
Court; The like Jurisdiction being exercised there, shall from the said first
day of August, One thousand six hundred forty and one, be also repealed and
absolutely revoked and made void, any Law, prescription, custom, or usage; Or
the said Statute, made in the third year of King Henry the seventh, Or the
Statute made the One and twentieth of Henry the Eigth, Or any Act, or Acts of
Parliament heretofore had, or made, to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding; And that from henceforth no Court, Council, No Court or
Council to have the like Jurisdiction.
or place of Judicature shall be erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed
within this Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or
exercise the same, or the like Jurisdiction, as is, or has been used,
practiced, or exercised in the said Court of Star Chamber.

Be it likewise declared, and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
The King nor his privy Council shall have no Jurisdiction over any man's estate.
That neither his Majesty, nor his Privy-Councel, have, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, power, or authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel,
or any other Arbitrary way whatsoever, to examine or draw into question,
determine, or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or
Chattels, of any the Subjects of this Kingdom: But that the same ought to be
tried, and determined in the ordinary Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary
course of the Law.

And be it further provided and Enacted, That if any Lord Chancellor, Penalties
upon great Officers and others for the first offense.
or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Kings
Privy Seal, President of the Council, Bishop, Temporal Lord, Privy Councellor,
Judge, or Justice whatsoever, shall offend, or do any thing contrary to the
purport, true intent and meaning of this Law, Then he, or they, shall for such
offense forfeit the sum of Five hundred pounds of lawful Money of England, unto
any party grieved, his Executors or Administrators, who shall really prosecute
for the same, and first obtain Judgment thereupon, to be recovered in any Court
of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information,
wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid-Prayer, Privilege, Injunction,
or Order of restraint shall be in any wise prayed, granted, or allowed, nor any
more then one Imparlance. And if any person, against whom any such Judgment, or
Recovery, shall be had as aforesaid, shall after such Judgment or Recovery,
offend again in the same, then he, Second offense.
or they, for such offense, shall forfeit the sum of One thousand pounds, of
lawful money of England, unto any party grieved, his Executors, or
Administrators, who shall really prosecute for the same, and first obtain
Judgment thereupon, to be recovered in any Court of Record at Westminster, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in which no Essoin, Protection,
Wager of Law, Aid-Prayer, Privilege, Iniunction, or Order of Restraint, shall
be in any wise prayed, granted, or allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.
And if any person against whom any such second Judgment, or Recovery shall be
had, as aforesaid, shall after such Judgment, Third offense.
or recovery, offend again in the same kind, and shall be thereof duly
convicted, by Indictment, Information, or any other lawful way,, or means, that
such person so convicted shall be from thenceforth disabled, and become by
virtue of this Act incapable, Ipso facto, to bear his, and their said Office,
and Offices respectively, and shall be likewise disabled to make any Gift,
Grant, Conveyance, or other disposition of any of his Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, or Chattels, or to take any benefit of any Gift,
Conveyance, or Legacy to his own use.

And every person so offending shall likewise forfeit and lose unto the party
grieved, Treble damages to the party grieved.
by any thing done contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Law, his
treble damages, which he shall sustain, and be put unto, by means, or occasion
of any such Act, or thing done, the same to be recovered in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid-Prayer,
Privilege, Injunction, or Order of Restraint, shall be in any wise Prayed,
Granted, or Allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.

Every person committed contrary to this Act shall have an Habea^ Corpus.
And be it also provided and Enacted, That if any person shall hereafter be
committed, restrained of his Liberty, or suffer imprisonment by the Order or
Decree of any such Court of Star Chamber, or other Court aforesaid, now, or at
any time hereafter, having, or pretending to have the same, or like
Jurisdiction, power, or authority, to commit, or imprison as aforesaid; Or by
the command or Warrant of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors in their
own Person, or by the command or Warrant of the Councel-board, or of any of the
Lords, or others of his Majesty's Privy Council, That in every such case, every
person so committed, restrained of his liberty, or suffering imprisonment, upon
demand or motion made by his Counsel, or other employed by him for that
purpose, unto the Judges of the Court of Kings Bench, or Common Pleas, in open
Court, shall without delay, upon any pretense whatsoever, for the ordinary Fees
usually paid for the same, have forthwith granted unto him a Writ of Habeas
Corpus to be directed generally unto all and every Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister,
Officer, or other person, in whose custody the party committed or restrained
shall be, and the Sheriffs, Jailer, Minister, Officer, or other person in whose
custody the party so committed or restrained shall be, shall at the return of
the said Writ, and according to the command thereof, upon due and convenient
notice thereof given unto him, at the charge of the party who requires or
procures such Writ, and upon security by his own bond given, to pay the charge
of carrying back the prisoner, if he shall be remanded by the Court, to which
he shall be brought, as in like cases has been used, such charges of bringing
up, and carrying back the prisoner, to be always ordered by the Court, if any
difference shall arise thereabout, bring or cause to be brought the body of the
said party so committed, or restrained, unto and before the Judges or Justices
of the said Court, from whence the same Writ shall issue in open Court, and
shall then likewise certify the true cause of such his detainer, or
imprisonment, and thereupon the Court within three Court-dayes after such
return made and delivered in open Court, shall proceed to examine and determine
whether the cause of such commitment appearing upon the said return be just and
legal, or not, and shall thereupon do what to Justice shall appertain, either
by delivering, bailing, or remanding the prisoner. And if any thing shall be
otherwise wilfully done or omitted to be done by any Judge, Justice, Officer, or
other person aforementioned, contrary to the direction and true meaning hereof,
That then such person so offending shall forfeit to the party grieved, Treble
damages in default.
his treble damages, to be recovered by such means, and in such manner, as is
formerly in this Act limited and appointed for the like penalty to be sued for
and recovered.

To what Courts this Act shall extend.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That this Act, and the several clauses
therein contained, shall be taken and expounded to extend only to the Court of
Star Chamber, and to the said Courts holden before the President and Council in
the Marches of Wales, and before the President and Council in the Northern
parts; and also to the Court commonly called the Court of the Duchy of
Lancaster, holden before the Chancellor and Council of that Court: And also in
the Court of Exchequer of the County Palatine of Chester, held before the
Chamberlain and Council of that Court; And to all Courts of like Jurisdiction
to be hereafter erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed as aforesaid; And
to the Warrants and directions of the Councel-boards, and to the commitments,
restraints, and imprisonments of any person or persons made, commanded, or
awarded by the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors in their own person, or
by the Lords and others of the Privy Council and every one of them.

Offenders of this Act shall be impleaded within two years after any offense.
And lastly, provided, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons shall be
sued, impleaded, molested, or troubled for any offense against this present
Act, unless the party supposed to have so offended, shall be sued or impleaded
for the same within two years at the most after such time wherein the said
offense shall be committed.

CAP. XI.
A Repeal of the Branch of a Statute primo Elizabethae, concerning
Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical.

Whereas in the Parliament holden in the first year of the reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth late Queen of England, there was an Act made and established,
Entitled, An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, St. 1 Eliz. 2,
and abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant to the same; In which Act, amongst
other things, there is contained one Clause, Branch, Article, or Sentence,
whereby it was Enacted to this effect; Namely, That the said late Queens
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, should have
full power and authority by virtue of that Act by Letters Patent under the
Great Seal of England, to assign, name, and authorite, when, and as often as
her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, should think meet and convenient, and
for such, and so long time as should please her Highness, her Heirs or
Successors, such person or persons being natural born Subjects to her Highness,
her Heirs or Successors, as her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors should think
meet to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under her Highness, her Heirs and
Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and pre-eminence, in any
wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within
these her Realms of England and Ireland, or any other her Highness Dominions
and Countries, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct, and amend all
such errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities
whatsoever, which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, Authority or
Jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected,
restrained or amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue,
and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And that such person
or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized and appointed by her Highness,
her Heirs or Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him or them made and
delivered, as aforesaid, should have full power and Authority by virtue of that
Act, and of the said Letters Patents under her Highness, her Heirs or
Successors to exercise, use, and execute all the Premises, according to the
tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents, any matter or cause to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas by color of some words in the aforesaid Branch of the said Act,
High Commission Court
whereby Commissioners are Authorized to execute their Commission according to
the tenor and effect of the Kings Letters Patents, and by Letters Patents
grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have, to the great and insufferable
wrong and oppression of the Kings Subjects, used to fine and imprison them, and
to exercise other Authority not belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
restored by that Act, and diverse other great mischiefs and inconveniences have
also ensued to the Kings Subjects, by occasion of the said Branch and
Commissions issued thereupon, and the executions thereof: Therefore for the
repressing and preventing of the aforesaid abuses, mischiefs and
inconveniences in time to come;

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The said branch of the
stat. 1 El. c. 2. repealed.
and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the foresaid Branch, Clause, Article, or Sentence
contained in the said Act, and every word, matter, and thing contained in that
Branch, Clause, Article, or Sentence, shall from henceforth be repealed,
annulled, revoked, annihilated, and utterly made void for ever, any thing in
the said Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Rep. St. 13 Car. 1.
cap. 11.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Archbishop, Bishop,
Power taken away from Archbishops, Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons and
Courts. Exp. St. 13. Car. 2. c. 12.
nor Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, Official, nor Commissary of any
Archbishop, Bishop, or Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister of Justice, nor
any other person or persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Eccesiastical
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, by any Grant, License, or Commission of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by any power or authority derived
from the King, his Heirs, or Successors, or otherwise, shall from and after the
first day of August, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, one thousand
six hundred forty and one, award, impose, or inflict any pain, penalty, fine,
amerciament, imprisonment, or other corporal punishment upon any of the Kings
Subjects, for any contempt, misdemeanor, crime, offense, matter, or thing
whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical cognizance, or
Jurisdiction, Oath ex officio. St. 13 Car. 2. cap. 12.
or shall ex officio or at the instance or promotion of any other person
whatsoever, urge, enforce, tender, give, or minister unto any Churchwarwarden,
Sydeman, or other person whatsoever, any corporal Oath, whereby he or she shall
or may be charged or obliged to make any presentment of any crime, or offense,
or to confess or to accuse himself, or her self of any crime, offense,
delinquency, or misdemeanor, or any neglect, matter, or thing whereby, or by
reason whereof he or she shall or may be liable or exposed to any censure,
pain, penalty, or punishment whatsoever, upon pain, and penalty that every
person who shall offend contrary to this Statute, Penalty, treble damages and
one hundred pounds.
shall forfeit and pay treble damages to every person thereby grieved, and the
sum of One hundred pounds to him or them who shall first demand and sue for the
same, which said Treble damages, and sum of One hundred pounds shall and may be
demanded and recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, or Plaint, in any Court of
Record, wherein no privilege, Offenders convicted, disabled from any office or
employment by the Kings Letters Patents.
Essoin, protection, or wager of Law, shall be admitted or allowed to the
Defendant. And be it further Enacted, That every person who shall be once
convicted of any act or offense prohibited by this Statute, shall for such act
or offense be from and after such conviction utterly disabled to be or continue
in any office, or employment, in any Court of Justice whatsoever: or to
exercise or execute any power, authority, or jurisdiction by force of any
Commission, or Letters Patents of the King, his Heirs, or Successors.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the said first day of August,
No new Court to be erected with the like power.
no new Court shall be erected, ordained, or appointed within this Realm of
England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall or may have the like power,
jurisdiction or Authority, as the said High Commission Court now has, or
pretends to have. But that all and every such Letters Patents, Commissions,
and Grants, made, or to be made by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, And
all Powers and Authorities Granted or pretended, or mentioned to be Granted
thereby, and all Acts, Sentences and Decrees, to be made by virtue or color
thereof, shall be utterly void, and of none effect.

CAP. XII.
A Subsidy Granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, Tunnage and Poundage.
and other sums of Money payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported, from
the 15th of July, 1641. to the 10th of August next. EXP.

CAP. XIII.
Such Moneys secured as are or shall be due to the Inhabitants of the County of
York, and the other adjoining Counties, for the Billet of the Soldiers and to
certain Officers of the Army who forbear part of their pay, according to an
Order in that behalf made in the Commons House of Parliament this present
Session, for such part of their pay as they shall so forbear. EXP.

CAP. XIV.
The late Preceedings touching Ship Money declared unlawful, and all Records
and Process concerning the same made void.

Ship^rits.
Whereas diverse Writs of late time, issued under the Great Seal of England,
commonly called Ship-Writs, for the charging of the Ports, Towns, Cities,
Buroughs, and Counties of this Realm respectively, Certioraries.
to provide and furnish certain Ships for his Majesty's service: Mittimus.
And whereas upon the Execution of the same Writs, and Returns of Certioraries
thereupon made, and the sending the same by Mittimus into the Court of
Exchequer, Process has been thence made against sundry persons pretended to be
charged by way of Contribution, for the making up of certain sums assessed for
the providing of the said Ships, and in especial in Easter Term, Scire facias
against John Hampden Esquire Demurrer.
in the thirteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now
is, a Writ of Scire facias was awarded out of the Court of Exchequer, to the
then Sheriff of Buckingham-Shire, against John Hampden Esquire, to appear and
show cause, why he should not be charged with a certain sum so assessed upon
him, upon whose appearance and demurrer to the proceedings therein, the Barons
of the Exchequer adjourned the same case into the Exchequer-Chamber, where it
was solemnly argued diverse days, and at length it was there agreed by the
greater part of all the Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench, and Common
Pleas, and of the Barons of the Exchequer, there assembled, That the said John
Hampden should be charged with the said sum so as aforesaid assessed on him;
The main grounds and reasons of the said Justices and Barons which so agreed,
being, that when the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned,
and the whole Kingdom in danger, the King might by Writ under the Great Seal of
England command all the Subjects of this His Kingdom at their charge to
provide and furnish such manner of Ships with Men, Victuals, and Munition, and
for such time as the King should think fit, for the defense and safeguard of
the Kingdom, from such danger and peril; and that by Law the King might compel
the doing thereof, in case of refusal, or refractorinses, and that the King is
the sole Judge, both of the danger, and when, and how the same is to be
prevented, and avoided; according to which grounds, and reasons, all the
Justices of the said Courts of Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, and the said
Barons of the Exchequer, having been formerly consulted with by his Majesty's
command, Extrajudicial Opinion.
had set their hands to an extraiudicial opinion, expressed to the same
purpose; which Opinion, with their names thereunto, was also by his Majesty's
command enrolled in the Courts of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and
Exchequer, and likewise entered among the Remembrances of the Court of
Star Chamber, Judgment.
and according to the said agreement of the said Justices, and Barons, Judgment
was given by the Barons of the Exchequer, That the said John Hampden should be
charged with the said sum so assessed on him; And whereas some other Actions
and Process depend, and have depended in the said Court of Exchequer, and in
some other Courts against other persons, for the like kind of charge, grounded
upon the said Writs, commonly called Shipwrits, all which Writs, and
proceedings as aforesaid, were utterly against the Law of the Land.

Shipmoney and proceedings thereupon contrary to Law.
Be it therefore declared and Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the said charge imposed upon the Subject, for the
providing and furnishing of Ships, commonly called Ship Money, and the said
extrajudicial opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs, and
every of them, and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the
said Justices and Barons, and the said judgment given against the said John
Hampden were, and are contrary to, and against the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, the right of property, the liberty of the Subjects, former resolutions
in Parliament, and the Petition of Right made in the third year of the Reign of
his Majesty that now is.

St. 3 Car. 1. Petition of right to be observed.
And it is further declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every the particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of Right, shall
from henceforth be put in execution accordingly, and shall be firmly and
strictly holden and observed, as in the same Petition they are prayed and
expressed; and that all and every the Records and remembrances of all and every
the Judgment, Judgments and proceedings* touching ship money and all entries,
records, and inrolments thereof made void.
Inrolments, Entry and proceedings, as aforesaid, and all and every the
proceedings whatsoever, upon, or by pretext or color of any of the said Writs,
commonly called Ship-Writs, and all and every the Dependents on any of them,
shall be Deemed and Adjudged to all intents, constructions, and purposes, to be
utterly void and disannulled; and that all and every the said Judgment,
Inrolments, Entries, Proceedings, and Dependents of what kind soever, shall be
vacated and cancelled in such manner and form as Records use to be that are
vacated.

CAP. XV.
Touching Encroachments and Oppressions in the Stannary Courts.

WHereas King EDWARD the first of famous memory, did for the Amendment of the
Stannaries in the County of Devon, E. 1. Charter.
grant diverse Franchises and Liberties to the Tinners there: And whereas in the
Parliament in the fiftieth year of King EDWARD the third, upon the petition of
the Commons of the County of Devon, certain Branches and Articles of the said
Charter were explained in manner following, That is to say, whereas one Article
of the said Charter is in these words following, Explained 50 E. 3.
viz. Sciatis nos ad emendationem Stannariarum nostrarum in Com. Devon. ad
tranquilitatem and utilitatem Stannatorum nostrorum praedictorum earundem
Concessisse pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, Quod omnes Stannatores praedicti
operantes in Stannariis illis quae sunt Dominica nostra, dum operantur in
eisdem Stannariis, liberi sint and quieti de placitis nativorum, and de omnibus
placitis and querelis Curiam nostram and haeredum nostrorum qualitercunque
tangen. Ita quod non respondeant coram aliquibus Justiciariis vel Ministris
nostris seu haeredum nostrorum de aliquo placito seu querela infra praedictas
Stannarias emergen. nisi Coram Custode nostro Stannariarum nostrarum
praedictarum, qui pro tempore fuit (except. placitis terr', vitae and
membrorum) nec recedant ab operationibus suis per summonitionem alicujus
Ministrorum nostrorum, seu haeredum nostrorum, nisi per summonitionem communem
dicti Custodis nostri; Et quod quieti sint de omnibus tallag Theolon. stallag.
auxiliis and aliis custumis quibuscunque in villis, portubus, feriis, and
mercatis infra Com. praedict. de bonis suis propriis, etc. Whereupon the said
Commons prayed a Declaration, as follows, Request, Sur quoi plese declarer
si auters persons q^ les Esteymos operantz in les Estemeryes averont and
enjoyeront la franchise gen^te per la dite chartre du Roy desicome la dite
chartre voet. Quod omnes Stannatores praedicti operantes in Stannariis illis
sint liberi, etc. Et autres persons q^ les onerours cestassavoir leros Maistres
que les lovent and leros servants and auters claymont mesne la Franchise. Et
auxint plese declarer si les ditz onerours y averont les Franchises in auters
temps q^ quant ils averont in mesme Lestemery desicome la chre' voet. Dum
operantur in eisdem Stannariis sint liberi, etc. Upon which request answer was
made, as follows: Respons. En droit de les dites paroles operantes in
Stannariis illis and dum operantur in eisdem Stannariis, Soient clerement
entenduz de operariis laborantibus duntaxat in Stannariis illis sine fraud and
dolo, and non de aljis, nec alibi laborantibus. And whereas the said Commons
prayed a farther Declaration as follows: Request, Item soit declarez, si le
Gardein de Lestemery puisse tenir plee inter Esteymo and Forreyn de querele
sourdante aeillos q^ en les lieux on ils sont onan^tz desicome la Chre'voet.
Quod Custos noster praedictus vel ejus locum Tenens teneat omnia placita inter
Stannatores praedictos emergen. and etiam inter ipsos and alios forinsecos de
omnibus transgressionibus, querelis, and contractibus factis in locis in quibas
operantur infra Stannarias praedictas similiter emergen. etc. Quar ill tient
plee des tieux quereles sourdantz in chescune part deins le dit Count. Upon
which, answer was made in these words, viz. Resp. Et en droit de ceste Article,
se ent extend la Jurisdiction cleremente solonc les paroles del dit Chre'
Cestassavoir; In locis ubi iidem operarii operantur and nemy aiilours ne en
autre manner. Which Charter so declared, was repeated again; And in the eigth
year of the Reign of King Richard the second commanded to be put in execution.

And whereas the said King Edward the first made the like Charter to the
Tinners in the County of Cornwall, 8 R. 2.
which Charter was in the foresaid Parliament upon the request of the Commons
of the County of Cornwall declared in the same manner and words. The like
charter to Tinners in Cornwall.


And whereas the Tinners of the Counties of Devon and Cornwall have by virtue
of the said Charters enjoyed diverse and great Liberties, and are quit from all
Toils, Tollages, Aids, and other customs in the Villes, Ports, Fairs, and
Markets, Declaration.
within the said Counties respectively: Which great Liberties do of right
belong to the working Tinner, working without fraud or deceit in the Stannaries
aforesaid, and not to any other nor elsewhere working, and were granted to the
said Tinners for their encouragement in their works: And whereas of late years
sundry Inhabitants within the said Counties, Abuse of liberties.
and others, to entitle themselves to the said Liberties, have by fraud and
covin, for small or no considerations, bought and acquired, and do buy and
acquire to themselves decayed Tinne-works, and small and inconsiderable parts
in the same and other Tinne-works; which abuses are done principally to enable
the said false and fained Tinners, to vex and sue their Neighbors in the
Stannary Courts, where for the most part the Defendant is unjustly debarred his
Costs, although the cause be adjudged with him, and the Jurisdiction of the
said Stannaries has, contrary to ancient right and usage, and the said
Charters, been endeavored to be extended out of the places where the Tinners
do work, through the whole Counties of Devon and Cornwall respectively, which
is no way for the benefit of his Majesty, but for the singular lucre of some
private persons: And whereas by the said abuses great inconveniences do follow,
(That it is to say) the Inhabitants of the said Counties are miserably vexed,
oppressed, and imprisoned, His Majesty defrauded of His Aids and Customs, and
the Lords and Owners of Fairs, Markets, and other Franchises of their Tolls and
Duties, and the government of the Country exceedingly confounded and eluded,
the said false and fained Tinners claiming when they list to be Tinners, and
when they list to be Foreigners; besides, that if timely provision be not
made, the certain decay of his Majesty's profit in the Tinne-works will ensue,
for that the same being divided into so many hands and parts cannot
conveniently be set on work, nor contribution raised for the working the same.

The former declarations confirmed.
Be it therefore Enacted by his Majesty, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the said
Declarations be henceforth held and duly observed with this, that the words of
the said Charters and Declarations, In locis ubi operantur, In locis ubi
operantur. how expounded.
be expounded of the Ville, Tithing, and Hamlet, where some Tinne-work in work
is situate, and not elsewhere, and no longer then the same Tinne-work is or
shall be in working. And if any person or persons that shall be sued in the
said Stannaries, shall swear, or tender his or their oath in the said Court
where he or they shall be sued, that he or they are not, None but Tinners to be
sued, unless by working Tinners.
nor is, nor time of the Suit commenced was not, nor were a Tinner or Tinners,
then such Defendant or Defendants shall be forthwith discharged of such Suit,
unless that the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs do forthwith make oath that the said
Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, is or are true and working Tinners, without fraud or
deceit: and that the cause of his or their Suit arose within the said
Stannaries, or concerns Tin or Tinne-works. And if any person being not re
vera, and without fraud, a working and laboring Tinner, in or about some
Tinne-work, Persons sued by others shall have their action.
set on work within one half year next before his Suit, shall sue, prosecute,
or implead in any the said Courts, or before the Warden, Vice-warden, or
Steward of the said Stannaries, any person or persons that is or are not a
Tinner or Tinners at the time of such Suit commenced, Then the Defendant and
Defendants in every such case, shall have his and their action at the common
Law, against such person suing or prosecuting, wherein he shall recover ten
pounds, Such action to be brought within two years.
and his damages and costs of Suit; Provided that such Action be brought within
two years next after the Action or Suit brought in the said Stannary Courts, or
before the said Warden, Vice-Warden, or Steward.

And be it declared and Enacted, That in all cases where the Plaintiff or
Defendant, Plaintiffs or Defendants, Costs in Stannary courts.
are to have costs by the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, there also the
Plaintiffs and Defendants shall have the like costs in the Stannary Courts. And
in regard that the said Charters were granted for the ease and advantage of the
Tinners, and not for their disadvantage or oppression, and yet diverse of them
who for special reasons have desired to sue at the common Law, have been
restrained;

Tinner may set forfeitures at the common law.
Be it declared and Enacted, That it shall be lawful to and for the said
Tinners, if they think fit, to sue any Foreigners at the common Law; the said
Charter, or any usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Abuses of poor Bailiffs in the Stannaries.
And whereas the Bailiffs of the said Stannary Courts are very numerous, and are
persons of small or no credit, and yet upon their return that any person is
become surety for any other upon Arrest by Process out of the said Courts, such
person who sometimes knows nothing of the matter, is by false Returns of the
said Bailiffs made liable to the debt or demand, which Bailiffs, by reason of
their poverty, are often not responsible, and so the party without remedy:

How sureties may be sued.
Be it enacted, That no person or persons be charged or troubled as surety by
any Return of any Bailiff or Bailiffs of the said Stannaries, unless that the
person or persons returned Surety or Sureties, shall in the presence of two
witnesses subscribe or sign a note in writing, that such person or persons is
or are become Surety or Sureties; which note shall mention the names of the
Plaintiffs and Defendants in the suit, and the sum or damages in demand, and
the nature of the Action, and shall be Signed or subscribed by the said
Witnesses, and returned and filed in the Court out of which such Process shall
issue, and no Bailiff or Bailiffs of the said Stannaries shall be admitted as
witnesses to any such note.

And whereas in the said Stannaries it is used, that if the Bailiffs return any
Person arrested, that if such person make default at the day, he shall be
condemned, and Execution is suddenly awarded, when as often the party was not
arrested:

No Defendant shall be condemned on a bailiffs return, unless on a note
subscribed by the party.
Be it further Enacted, That no Defendant shall be condemned upon such Return
for not appearing, unless also a Note under the Hand or Sign of the party
arrested, and subscribed by two such Witnesses, as aforesaid, be returned into
the said Court, at or before the day of Appearance; and the said Bailiff or
Bailiffs shall take but four pence for every such note as aforesaid and it is
provided, that none shall be bailed upon arrest there till he give such Note.

Bail.
And in case any the said Bailiff or Bailiffs shall return a Rescous against any
Person or Persons, Rescous.
he or they shall be admitted to Traverse the said Return; which Traverse, if
it be found with him or them so Traversing, then he or they shall be no further
troubled or occasioned by reason of such return.

CAP. XVI.
For the certainty of the Meets, and Bounds of the Forests,

WHereas by Act of Parliament made in the first year of the Reign of the late
King EDWARD the Third, It is ordained, That the old Perambulation of the
Forest in the time of King Edward the First, St. 1 Ed. 3.
should be thenceforth holden in like form as it was then ridden and bounded,
and in such places where it was not bounded, the King would that it should be
bounded by good Men and lawful:

And whereas for many Ages past certain Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds of the
Forests, have been commonly known and observed in the several Counties wherein
the said Forests lie:

And whereas of late diverse Presentiments have been made, and some Judgments
given, whereby the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds of some of the said
Forests have been variously extended, or pretended to extend beyond some of
the said Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds so commonly known, and formerly
observed; to the great grievance and veration of many Persons having Lands
adjoining to the said Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds so commonly known, and
formerly observed: And whereas of late time some Endeavors or Pretenses have
been to set on foot Forests in some parts of this Realm, and the Dominion of
Wales, where in truth none have been nor ought to be, or at least have not been
used of long time: For remedy thereof, may it please your most Excellent
Majesty, that it be Declared and Enacted by Authority of Parliament:

And be it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, What shall
be the Meets and Bounds of Forests.
and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That from henceforth the Meets, Meers, Limits, and
Bounds of all and every the Forests respectively, shall be to all intents and
purposes, taken, adjudged, and deemed to extend no further respectively, then
the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds which in the several Counties
Respectively, wherein the said Forests do lie, were commonly known, reputed,
used, or taken to be the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds of the said Forests
respectively, in the twentieth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord
King JAMES, 20 Jacob.
and not beyond in any wise, any Perambulation or Perambulations, Presentiments,
Extents, Surveys, Judgments, Records, Decrees, or other matter or thing
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding: And that all and every the
Presentiments since the said twentieth year made, and that all and every other
Presentment and Presentiments, Presentiments contrary hereunto shall be v^^d.
and all and every Judgment and award upon, or by reason or pretert of any such
Presentment or Presentiments, and all and every Perambulation and
Perambulations, Surveys, Extents, and other Act and Acts, at any time
heretofore had or made, by which the Meets, Meers, Limits, or Bounds of the
said Forests, or any of them, are, or are pretended to be further extended
then as aforesaid: And also all and every Presentment of any person or persons
at any Justice seat, Swainemote, or Court of Attachments, for, or by reason, or
by color of any Act or Acts whatsoever done or committed in any place without,
or beyond the said Meets, Meers, Limits, or Bounds respectively, so commonly
known, reputed, used, or taken as aforesaid, and all and every Fine and Fines,
and amerciament and amerciaments, upon, by reason or color of any such
Presentment or Presentiments, shall from henceforth be adjudged, deemed, and
taken to be utterly void, and of no force or effect, any Law, Statute, Record,
or pretense whatsoever, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No place where no
Justice seat Swainemote cour^ or attachment, etc. has been within (...) years
shall be accounted Forest.
That no place or places within this Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales,
where no such Justice seat, Swainemote, or Court of Attachment have been held,
or kept, or where no Verderers have been chosen, or regard made within the
space of sixty years next before the first year of his Majesty's Reign that now
is, shall be at any time hereafter judged, deemed, or taken to be Forest, or
within the Bounds or Meets of the Forests; But the same shall be from
thenceforth for ever hereafter De-afforrested, and freed, and exempted from the
Forests Laws; Any Iustice-seat, Swainemote, or Court of Attachment held or
kept within, or for any such place or places, at any time or times since the
beginning of His Majesty's said Reign, or any presentment, enquiry, Act, or
thing heretofore made, or hereafter to be made or done to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, For
ascertaining of Meets, etc. Commissions shall be issued.
That for the better putting into certainty, all and every the Meets, Meers,
Bounds, and Limits of all and every the Forests, as aforesaid. The
Lord-Chancellour, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time
being, shall by virtue of this Act upon request of any of the Peers of this
Kingdom, or of the Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, or any of them,
grant several Commissions under the Great Seal of England, to Commissioners to
be nominated respectively by the said Peers, Knights, and Burgesses, or any of
them, to enquire of, and find out by Inquests of good and lawful men upon Oath,
and by the Oaths of Witnesses to be produced at the said Inquests, and by all
other lawful means, all, and every the Meers, Meets, Bounds, and Limits of the
Forests respectively, which were commonly known to be their Meers, Meets,
Bounds, and Limits respectively, in the said twentieth year of the Reign of our
late Sovereign Lord King James; And to return the Inquests so taken into the
Court of Chancery; and that all and every the Sheriffs, and Bailiffs, of, and
in every County wherein any such Inquests shall be so to be taken; And all and
every the Verderers, Forresters, Rangers, and other Officers of the Forests
respectively where any such Officers be, shall be assistant, and attendant to
the execution of the said Commissions, according as by virtue of the said
Commissions respectively they shall be commanded; And where no such Officers
are, or where such Officers be, if they, or any of them shall refuse, or
neglect such assistance, and attendance as aforesaid, Then the said
Commissioners shall, and may, proceed without them in the execution of the said
Commissions.

Forests shall not extend beyond the meets, etc. so returned.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Forests whereof
the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds be so returned, and certified by virtue of
any the said Commissions as aforesaid, from thenceforth shall not extend, nor
be extended, nor be deemed, adjudged, or taken to extend any further in any
wise then the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds that shall be so returned, and
certified: And that all the places, and Territories that shall be without the
Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds so returned and certified, shall be, and are
hereby declared to be from thenceforth free to all intents and purposes, as if
the same had never been Forest, or so reputed; Any Act or Acts, matter, or
thing whatsoever, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Grounds deafforrested shall be excluded.
Provided, and be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all and every
the grounds, Territories, or places which have been, or are De-afforrested, or
mentioned to be De-afforrested, in, or by any Letters Patents, Charters, or
otherwise, since the said twentieth year of the Reign of our said late
Sovereign Lord King James, shall be excluded, and left out of the Meets, Meers,
Limits, and Bounds of the Forests, which are to be enquired of, returned, and
certified by virtue of the said Commissions, or any of them respectively: And
shall be, and hereby are declared and Enacted to be utterly De-afforrested,
free, and exempt to all intents and purposes, as if the same had never been at
all Forest, or so reputed: Any thing in this present Act contained, or any
other Act, matter, or thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Tenants, Owners, etc. of lands excluded shall enjoy their ancient commission,
etc.
Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That the Tenants, Owners, and
Occupiers, and every of them, of Lands, and Tenements which shall be excluded,
and left out of the Meets, Meers, Limits, or Bounds of the Forests to be
returned, and certified by virtue of any the said Commissions, shall, or may
use, and enjoy such Common, and other profits and easements within the Forest,
as anciently, or accustomably they have used, and enjoyed: Any thing in this
present Act contained, or any Act or Ordinance made in the three and thirtieth
year of King Edward the first, or any Custom, or Law of the Forest, or any
other matter, or thing, to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

CAP. XVII.
Scotland.
A confirmation of the Treaty of Pacification between England and Scotland, with
the Commissions and Articles thereupon. EXP.

CAP. XVIII.
For securing by public Faith the remainder of the friendly assistance and
relief promised to those of Scotland. Scotland.
EXP.

CAP. XIX.
The Office of Clerk the Market allowed and regulated, for the reformation of
Weights and Measures.

Grievances by Clerks of the Market, and anequality in weights and measures.
FOrasmuch as the undue execution of the Office of Clerk of the Market has been
very grievous unto diverse of his Majesty's most loving Subjects, who have been
much troubled by unnecessary Summons, and charged with exactions of diverse sums
of Money, by color of the said Office, and in regard the said evils have
partly arisen by means of an inequality of Weights and Measures throughout this
Kingdom^ and by granting and letting to Ferme the said Office of Clerk of the
Market, and the Execution thereof in and through all or the most of the several
Counties of this Kingdom for great sums of Money, which the said Fermours or
Grantees, by their unjust and undue proceedings in the said Office, do extort
from his Majesty's Subjects again, to their great impoverishment, and yet
little or no redress at all in their said Weights or Measures, or any benefit
thereby accruing to his Majesty: For remedy whereof, and for regulating of all
Weights and Measures according to the true intent of this Statute, and the
other Statutes in the behalf formerly made and provided, and preventing the
said inconveniences.

There shall be but one measure, one weight, and one yard. St. 9 H. 3 25. 14 E.
3. 12. 27 E. 3. 10.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same:
That from henceforth there shall be but one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard,
according to the Standard of the Exchequer throughout all the Realm, as well in
places privileged, as without; Any usage or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding: And that every Measure of Corn shall be striked without heap:
And whosoever shall sell by, or keep any other Weight, Measure, or Yard, then
as aforesaid, whereby any Corn, Grain, or other thing is bought or sold, after
six months after the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall forfeit
for every such offense five shillings, Forfeiture.
being thereof lawfully convicted by the Oath of one sufficient Witness, before
any Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other head Officer of the County, City, or Town
Corporate respectively, where the said Offense shall be committed: Who by
virtue of this Act shall have power to administer an Oath in that behalf: How
to be levied.
Which said sum or penalty of five shillings shall be levied by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, or some or one of them
where such Offense is or shall be committed, to the use of the Poor of the same
Parish, of the Goods and Chattels of such Offenders by way of Distress and Sale
of the Offenders Goods, rendering the Overplus to the party so offending. And in
default of such Distress, it shall be lawful for any Justices of Peace, Mayor,
or other head Officer of the County, City, or Town corporate respectively, to
commit the said party to the Prison or Gaol there to remain without Bail or
Mainprise, until he shall pay such sums of Money forfeited, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Clerk of the Market his
limits.
That no Clerk of the Market of the Kings House which now is, or hereafter
shall be, or of the Prince His Highness, His Heirs or Successors, which is or
shall be Duke of Cornwall, or His or Their Deputy or Deputies, shall hereafter
execute his or their said Office or Offices respectively, in any part of the
Kingdom, but only within the Verge of the Kings Court where it shall then
reside for the time being. And that it shall be always hereafter lawful for
any Mayor, Mayor, head Officer, and Lords of Liberties have power as clerks of
the Market.
or other head Officer of any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, or for any
Lord or Lords of Liberty, Liberties or Franchises, his or their Deputy or
Deputies, or Agents, according to their several Liberties and Jurisdictions, to
have full power to execute the said Offices respectively, as they ought or
might have done before the making of this Act; And for the more ease of his
Majesty's Subjects.

Be it further Enacted, Forfeiture of ^lerke of the Market for offenses,
That if any Clerk of the Market within his aforesaid precincts and limits of
the Verge of the Kings house only, or any Mayor, or other Officer whatsoever,
who by virtue of this Act shall have power to inquire of any abuses in Weights
and Measures, shall seal or give allowance unto any other Weight or Measure,
Weights or Measures, other then according to the said Standard of the
Exchequer, or shall upon reasonable request and warning, refuse to seal or give
allowance unto such Weight or Measure, Weights or Measures, as are according to
the said Standard of the Exchequer, paying only such Fee or Fees for such
allowance, as by the Statute or Statutes, or by ancient custom, are in that
behalf formerly provided and allowed, and no more; That then the said Clerk of
the Market, Mayor, and other Officer, or Officers, of such City, Borough, or
Town, and the said Lord and Lords of Liberty or Liberties, and his and their
Deputy and Deputies, and Agents respectively, shall forfeit for every such
offense five pounds, to be levied as aforesaid, to the use of the poor of the
parish where such offense is, or shall be committed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Clerk of the
Market, Forfeiture for taking unlawful fines or fees.
his Deputy or Deputies, or Agents within the Verge aforesaid, or any Mayor, or
any other Officer or Officers of any City, or Town, or any Lord or Lords of
Liberties, his or their Deputy or Deputies, Agents, or Assigns respectively,
shall take or receive of any of his Majesty's Subjects, by color of the said
Office, any common Fine or Fines, or any Fees, other then are formerly allowed
by the Statute or Statutes, or ancient custom in that behalf made or used,
shall take any Fee or Fees, or other sum of money, Reward, or consideration,
for the making, Signing, or Examination of any Weights or Measures which have
been formerly Marked or Sealed, or shall Impose or Assess, or cause to be
Imposed or Assessed any Fine or Amerciament, Fines or Amerciaments without a
due and legal trial of the Offenses, for which the said Fine or Fines,
Amerciament or Amerciaments are Imposed or Assessed, or shall otherwise
misdemean himself in the execution of his said Office, and be thereof lawfully
convicted, He shall forfeit for the first Offense, whereof he shall also be so
lawfully convicted, five pounds; And for the second offense, ten pounds; And
for the third offense, and every other offense afterward twenty pounds, to be
levied as aforesaid, to the use of the p^or of the Parish where such offense
shall be committed.

And be it Enacted, That whosoever shall be fined or amerced by virtue of this
Act, St. 13 R. 1. 4. Persons ^ined by this Act not to be ^ined upon any former
law. Rents of ferms of corn excepted.
shall not be again fined or amerced for the same offense, by virtue of any
former Law or Statute.

Provided always, That this Act or Statute shall not extend to the Rents of
Ferms or Lands, or any Corn or Grain, due or payable to any Lord or Lords, or
any Colleges, Houses, or other Societies, by virtue of any ^ease or Leases, or
other Covenant or Agreement, but that the same during the continuation of such
Lease, Leases, or other Agreements, shall be paid, delivered, and performed in
such measure and form as the same has been paid, delivered, and performed,
before the making of this Act: And that such measure, Water measures to be
continued.
that is commonly called Water-measure, in any Ports, Maritime Towns, or other
places, shall be still used and continued as formerly the same has been; Any
thing in this Statute contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. The general issue, may be pleaded.


Provided also, That no Justice or Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Bailiff, or
other head Officer, Churchwardens, Overseers, or any other authorized by this
Statute for the due execution thereof in any point, shall be sued, impleaded,
or otherwise impeached, for doing, or executing their said Offices
respectively: And if any Suit or Suits hereafter shall be Commenced against
them, or any of them, their Agents, or Assistants, touching the premises, That
then it shall, and may be lawful for them, and every of them so sued, or
troubled in any Court, or Courts, wheresoever, to plead the general issue, Not
Guilty, and to give this Statute in Evidence, or any other special matter in
Evidence.

Treble costs for unjust vexation.
And in ease by, or upon this Law, they or any of them shall be found not
guilty, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuited, the Defendant, or Defendants, shall
recover treble Costs against the Plaintiff for his unjust vexation.

CAP. XX.
None shall be compelled to take the Order of Knighthood.

Writs issued for persons to take the order of Knighthood.
WHereas upon the pretext of an ancient custom, or usage of this Realm of
England, That Men of full age, being not Knights, and being seized of Lands or
Rents, of the yearly value of forty pounds, or more (especially if their seisin
had so continued by the space of three years next past) might be compelled by
the Kings Writ, to receive or take upon them the order or dignity of
Knighthood, or else to make Fine for the discharge or respite of the same;
Several Writs about the beginning of his Majesty's reign issued out of the
Court of Chancery, for Proclamations to be made in every County to that
purpose, and for certifying the names of all such persons, and for summoning
them personally to appear in the Kings presence before a certain day, to be
there ready to receive the said Order or Dignity: Upon return of which Writs,
and transmitting the same with their Returns into the Court of Exchequer,
Returns.
and upon other Writs for further inquiry of the names of such persons issuing
out of the said Court of Exchequer, Process by Distringas was thence made
against a very great number of persons, Distringas.
many of which were altogether unfit, in regard either of Estate or quality,
Fines.
to receive the said Order or Dignity, and very many were put to grievous Fines
and other vexations for the same, although in truth it were not sufficiently
known how, or in what sort, or where they, or any of them should, or might have
addressed themselves for the receiving the said Order or Dignity, and for
saving themselves thereby from the said Fines, Process, and vexations: And
whereas it is most apparent that all and every such proceedings, in regard of
the matter therein pretended, is altogether useless and unreasonable; May it
therefore please your most Excellent Majesty, that it be by authority of
Parliament declared and Enacted.

No person shall be compelled to take on him the order of Knighthood, nor
undergo any fine for that cause.
And be it declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons in this Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That from henceforth no person or persons, of what condition, quality,
estate, or degree soever, shall at any time be distrained, or otherwise
compelled by any Writ or Process of the Court of Chancery, or Court of
Exchequer, or otherwise by any means whatsoever, to receive or take upon him or
them respectively, the Order or Dignity of Knighthood, nor shall suffer or
undergo any Fine, Trouble or Molestation whatsoever, by reason or color of his
or their having not received, or not taken upon him or them the said Order or
Dignity: And that all and every Writ or Process whatsoever, and all and every
proceeding which shall hereafter be had or made contrary to the intent of this
Act, shall be deemed and adjudged to be utterly void: And that all and every
process proceeding, and charge now depending by reason or color of the said
pretended custom or Writs aforesaid, or of any the Dependants thereof, shall
from henceforth cease and stand, be and remain discharged and utterly void; Any
former Law or Custom, or any pretense of any former Law or Custom, or any
other matter whatsoever, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding, Stat. 1
E. 2.

CAP. XXI.
Liberty for bringing in of Gunpowder and Saltpeter from Foreign parts, and
for the free making of Gunpowder in this Realm.

Mischiefs by prohibiting importing of Gunpowder.
WHereas the Importation of Gunpowder from foreign parts has of late times
been against Law prohibited, and the making thereof within this Realm
engrossed, whereby the price of Gunpowder has been excessively raised, many
powder works decayed, this Kingdom very much weakened and endangered, the
Merchants thereof much damnified, many Mariners and others taken prisoners, and
brought into miserable Captivity and Slavery, many Ships taken by Turkish and
other Pirates, and many other inconveniences have from thence insued, and more
are likely to ensue if they be not timely prevented:

Liberty to all to import gunpowder.
Be it therefore declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for all and
singular persons, as well Strangers as natural born Subjects of this Realm, to
import and bring into this Kingdom any quantities of Gunpowder whatsoever,
paying such Customs and Duties for the same, as by authority of Parliament
shall be limited and set down.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All
Subjects may make and sell Gunpowder, and import Saltpeter.
That it shall and may be lawful, to and for all and singular his Majesty's
Subjects of this his Realm of England, to make and sell any quantities of
Gunpowder, at his and their will and pleasure, and also to bring into this
Kingdom any quantities of Saltpeter, Brimstone, or any other materials
necessary or requisite for the making of Gunpowder.

And lastly, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, Penalty for putting in execution Letters Patents, Proclamations, etc.
against this liberty.
from and after the tenth day of August, which shall be in the year of our Lord
God One thousand six hundred forty and one, shall put in execution any Letters
Patents, Proclamation, Edict, Act, Order, Warrant, Restraint, or other
Inhibition whatsoever, whereby the Importation of Gunpowder, Saltpeter,
Brimstone, or other the materials aforementioned, or any of them, from Foreign
parts, or the making of Gunpowder within this Realm, shall be any way
prohibited or restrained, That then the said person and persons so offending
shall incur and sustain the pains, penalties and forfeitures contained and
provided in the Statute of provision and praemunire made in the Sixteenth year
of King Richard the Second.

CAP. XXII.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage, Poundage, and other sums of Money,
Tunnage, Poundage.
payable upon Merchandise, Exported, and Imported from the 9th of August, 1641.
to the first of December next. EXP.

CAP. XXIII.
An Act for the better raising and Levying of Mariners, Sailers, and others,
Mariners.
for the present guarding of the Seas. EXP.

CAP. XXIV.
For Relief of Captives, taken by Turkish, and other Pirates, Captive.
and one per Cent. on Customable goods for three years to be paid, and received
by the Lord Mayor and Chamberlain of London for that purpose. EXP.

CAP. XXV.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage, Poundage, etc. from the last of
November 1641. Tunnage, Poundage.
to the first of February next, and the like until the second of July 1642. EXP.

CAP. XXVI.
For the better Ra^sing and Levying of Mariners, Sailers, and others, Mariners.
for the present guarding of the Seas. EXP.

CAP. XXVII.
Persons in Holy Orders shall not exercise certain temporal powers and
authorities. Persons in Holy Orders.
REP. Stat. 13 Car. 1. cap. 2.

CAP. XXVIII.
For the better Raising and Levying of Soldiers for the present defense of the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland. Soldiers.
EXP.

CAP. XXIX.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, Tunnage, Poundage.
and other sums of Money payable upon Merchandise, Exported and Imported from
the last of January 1641. to the 25th of March next ensuing. EXP.

CAP. XXX.
A Contribution and Loan toward the Relief of Ireland. Contribution.
EXP.

CAP. XXXI.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, Tunnage, Poundage.
and other sums of Money payable upon Merchandise exported and imported from
the second of May 1642. to the second of July next following. EXP.

CAP. XXXII.
For the Raising and Levying of Moneys for the necessary defense and great
affairs of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and for the payment of Debts
undertaken by the Parliament. Ireland.
EXP.

CAP. XXXIII.
An Act for the speedy and effectual reducing of the Rebels in Ireland. EXP.

CAP. XXXIV.
Certain Clauses explaining another Act for the reducing the Rebels in Ireland.
EXP.

CAP. XXXV.
Corporations and Bodies Politic enabled to partake of the benefit of an Act
for reducing the Rebels in Ireland. EXP.

CAP. XXXVI.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage, Poundage, and other sums of Money,
Tunnage, Poundage.
payable upon Merchandise exported, and imported from the 14th of March 1641.
to the third of May next ensuing. EXP.

CAP. XXXVII.
For the further advancement of an effectual and speedy Reduction of the Rebels
in Ireland. EXP.

Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
Duodecimo.
AT the Parliament begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April,
Anno Dom. 1660. In the Twelfth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign
Lord, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued until the
Nine and twentieth day of December then next following, and then Dissolved by
his Majesty; To the high pleasure of Almighty God, and to the weal public of
this Realm, were Enacted as follows:

CAP. I.
The Assembling and Sitting of this present Parliament.

St. 17 Car. 1. cap. 7. St. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.

The Parliament begun 3 Nov. 16 Car. declared to be dissolved. St. 13 Car. 2.
cap. 1

The Lords and Commons now sitting declared to be the two Houses of Parliament.


FOr the preventing all Doubts and Scruples concerning the Assembling, Sitting,
and Proceeding of this present Parliament; Be it Declared and Enacted, and it
is Declared and Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, and by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the
Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, the third day of November, in the
Sixteenth year of the Reign of the late King CHARLES of blessed Memory, is
fully Dissolved and Determined; And that the Lords and Commons now sitting at
Westminster, in this present Parliament, are the Two Houses of Parliament, and
so shall be, and are hereby Declared, Enacted, and Adjudged to be to all
Intents, Constructions, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding any want of
the Kings Majesty's Writ or Writs of Summons, or any Defect or Alteration of,
or in any Writ or Writs of Summons, or any other Defect or Default whatsoever;
as if this Parliament had been Summoned by Writ or Writs in his Majesty's Name,
according to the usual Form, and as if His Majesty had been present in person
at the Assembling and Commencement of this present Parliament: Provided
always, That this Parliament may be dissolved by his Majesty after the usual
manner, as if the same had been summoned by Writ or Writs in his Majesty's
Name: The Kings assent to this Act shall not determine this Session.
Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, That His Majesty's Royal Assent to
this Bill shall not determine this present Session of Parliament.

CAP. II.
An Act for putting in Execution an Ordinance mentioned in the said Act, for an
Assessment of 70000 l. per mensem, for three Months. EXP.

CAP. III.
Process and Judicial Proceedings Continued.

WHereas the four first Returns of Easter Term, in the year One thousand six
hundred sixty, of late called, from Easter day in fifteen days, from Easter
day in three weeks, from Easter day in one Month, and from Easter day in five
weeks, or any of them, cannot be conveniently kept or holden: Now for avoiding
all manner of discontinuances whatsoever, which by occasion thereof should or
might happen, or be in any Matter or cause whatsoever, Process, Writs, etc.
shall not be discontinued for not holding certain days of Return.
in any the Courts at Westminster: Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That no Pleas,
Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, or other thing or
things whatsoever, Pleaded, Returned, or Depending, or having day or days in
any of the said Courts, in or at the said several Returns or any of them, or at
any other day or days certain after any of the said Returns, shall be in any
wise discontinued, or put without day, for or by reason of the not keeping or
holding of the said Returns, or days, or any of them; but that all and
singular the said Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process,
Precepts, and other the Premises aforesaid, shall stand, continue, and be good
and effectual in Law, to all Intents and Purposes, as if the said Returns and
days, and every of them, had been actually kept and holden in all and every
the said Courts; Any Law, Statute, Custom, or Usage to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

The said Writs, Process, Pleas, etc. returnable and pleadable at a certain day.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Pleas, Writs,
Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints, Process, Precepts, and other thing or things
whatsoever aforesaid, pleadable, or to be pleaded, Returnable, or to be
Returned, or having day in any manner whatsoever at any of the said Returns, or
any day or days certain after any of the said Returns, Be and are hereby
continued and adjourned, unto, (and shall and may be Pleaded, Returned, Heard,
and Determined in the respective Courts aforesaid) at, or on the fifth Return
of the said Term, of late called, In the morrow of the Ascension of our Lord;
And that all parties in any Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits, Plaints,
Process, or other thing or things whatsoever, having days given them at any of
the said four first Returns, or at any other day or days certain, after any of
the said Returns in the said Courts, or any of them, by virtue of this present
Act, have the said Return of late called, In the morrow of the Ascension of our
Lord, prefixed them therein; And that all Sheriffs, Officers, and other
Ministers whatsoever, and every of them respectively, keep in their hands all
Writs, Bills, Process, and Precepts, and all other things whatsoever in them
directed respectively Returnable, or to be Returned in the several Courts
aforesaid, at the said four first Returns, or any of them, in or at any day
certain, as aforesaid, until the said fifth Return, of late called, The morrow
of the Ascension of our Lord, and then Return the same into the said several
Courts respectively, That such proceedings may be then had thereupon, as should
have been had, in case the said four first Returns had been kept and holden.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Writs, Process,
Plaints, Process, Writs, Pleas, etc. under certain titles and names, may be
prosecuted and proceeded upon.
Pleas, Informations, Indictments, or Judicial proceedings, had, Commenced, or
prosecuted before the fifth day of May, in the said year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred sixty, in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Custodes
Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti; or, in the Name, Style, Title, or
Test of The Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament; or in
the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging; or in
the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; or in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Richard Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging, shall be put without day abated, quashed, or
discontinued by his Majesty's most just re-assumption of the actual Exercise of
his Kingly Government in this Kingdom; nor shall the same be cause of Error,
Abatement, or Discontinuance, but that all such Writs, Process, Plaints, Pleas,
Informations, Indictments, and Judicial Proceedings, and all Commissions for
taking of Answers, or Examination of Witnesses, Commission for taking of Fines,
and Warrants of Attorney, Guardians, or Prochein-Amy, shall stand and be
continued, and shall and may be proceeded upon, prosecuted, and returned,
notwithstanding the same were commenced or prosecuted in English, and
notwithstanding the present happy Change and Restitution of his Majesty's Name
and Style in Judicial Proceedings.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, Process and proceedings
in English in Courts of Justice to continue. EXP.
That one pretended Act made in the year of our Lord, 1650. entitled, An Act
for turning the Books of the Law, and all Process and Proceedings in Courts of
Justice, into English, shall stand and be in force, as if the same had been a
good and effectual Act, from the first Return of Easter Term, in the year of
our Lord 1651. until the first day of August, in the year of our Lord, 1660.
and no longer. And whereas by one other pretended Act, made in the said year of
our Lord, 1650. entitled, An Act touching Corn and Meal, It was Enacted, or
mentioned to be Enacted, That from and after the twentieth day of November,
1650. It should and might be lawful to and for any person or persons,
Defendant or Tenant, for or by reason of any matter to be pleaded, set forth,
or alleged in Bar to any Action Real, Personal, or mixed, in any Court of
Record, to plead the General Issue of Not Guilty, or the like General Issue
proper to the Nature of the Action or Suit commenced; and for his or their
Discharge or Acquitting to give any such matter in evidence to the Jury that
shall try the same; and that the said matter shall be as available to such
person or persons, Defendant or Tenant, to all intents and purposes, as if the
said matter had been specially pleaded, set forth, or alleged in Bar of such
action.

Be it further Enacted, That the said pretended Act, Pleading the General Issue.
as touching the pleading of the General Issue, shall by authority hereof,
stand and be in full force and effect according to the Tenor thereof, until the
said first day of August, as if the same had been a good and effectual Act of
Parliament, EXP.
and no longer.

Provided always, That where the General Issue has been since the said
twentieth day of November, 1660. pleaded, or shall before the said first day of
August in the said year of our Lord 1660. be pleaded in any action, That then
upon the Trial of the said Cause, such Evidence shall and may be allowed, as if
the said pretended Act touching the pleading of the General Issue had been and
continued a good and effectual Act of Parliament not determined or discontinued.

Provided also, That his Majesty's Royal assent to the passing of this Bill,
shall not extend, His Majesty's Assent to this Bill does not determine the
Session.

All Writs, Patents.

Commissions etc. to issue in the Kings name as formerly.


or be construed to extend to the determining of the Session of this present
Parliament.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That all Writs, Patents, and
Commissions for Constituting Justices of either Bench, and Barons of the
Exchequer, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver, and Precepts
upon Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver, and all other
Commissions hereafter to be made by the Clerk of the Crown in the Chancery,
Charters, and Letters Patents under the Great Seal, of Lands, Liberties,
Honors, or Offices, do or may issue in the Kings Majesty's Name, in the same
manner as was usual before the making of the said first recited pretended Act,
any thing in this present Act to the contrary thereof before expressed, in any
wise notwithstanding. St. 13. Car. 2. cap. 12.

CAP. IV.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tonnage and Poundage, and other some of
Money payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported.

The Causes and Trusts upon granting the Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament, reposing Trust and Confidence in Your
Majesty, in, and for the Guarding and Defending of the Seas, against all
persons, intending, or that shall intend the disturbance of Your said Commons,
in the intercourse of Trade, and the invading of this Your Realm, For the
better defraying the necessary Expenses thereof, which cannot otherwise be
effected without great charge to Your Majesty, Do, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords in this Your present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, Defending the Seas.
to the intent aforesaid, Give, and Grant unto You our Supreme Liege Lord and
Sovereign, A Subsidy of Tonnage granted to the King.
one subsidy, called Tonnage, That is to say, Of every Ton of Wine of the
growth of France, or of any the Dominions of the French King, or Crown of
France, that shall come into the Port of London, and the Members thereof, by
way of Merchandise, by your Natural born Subjects, the sum of Four Pounds and
ten shillings of current English Money, and so after that Rate; and by
Strangers and Aliens Six pounds of like money; And of every Ton of the like
Wine, which shall be brought into all, and every the other Ports and places of
this Kingdom, and the Dominions thereof, by way of Merchandise, by Your
Natural Born Subjects, the sum of Three pounds, and by Aliens Four pounds and
ten shillings, And of every Butt or Pipe of Muscadels, Malmseys, Cutes, Tents,
Allicants, Bastards, Sacks, Canaries, Malligoes, Maderoes, and other Wines
whatsoever, commonly called Sweet Wines, of the growth of the Levant, Spain,
Portugal, or any of them, or of any the Islands or Dominions to them, or any of
them belonging, or elsewhere, that shall come, or be brought into the Port of
London by your Natural born Subjects, the sum of Forty five shillings of
current English money, and so after that Rate, And by Strangers and Aliens
Three pounds of like money: And of every Butt and Pipe of the like Wine, which
shall come, or be brought into all, every, or any the other Ports and Places of
this Kingdom, and Dominions thereof, by way of Merchandise, by Your Natural
Born Subjects, the sum of Thirty shillings, and by Strangers Forty five
shillings. And of every Awm of Rhenish Wine, or Wine of the growth of Germany,
that shall be brought into this your Realm, and the Dominions thereof, by your
Natural Born Subjects, The sum of twenty shillings, of current English money,
and strangers and Aliens Twenty and five shillings, which several Rates are the
same which are expressed in a certain Book of Rates herein after mentioned and
referred unto. And also one other Subsidy called Poundage, That is to say of
all manner of Goods and Merchandise of every Merchant, A subsidy of poundage.
Natural Born Subject, Denizen, and Alien, to be carried out of this Realm, or
any your Majesty's Dominions to the same belonging, or to be brought into the
same by way of Merchandise, of the value of every twenty shillings of the same
Goods and Merchandises, according to the several and particular Rates and
values of the same goods and Merchandises, as the same are particularly and
respectively Rated and Valued in the said Book of Rates herein after mentioned
and referred unto, Twelve pence, and so after that Rate. And of every Twenty
shillings value of any the Native Commodities of this Realm, or Manufactures,
wrought of any such Native Commodities, to be carried out of this Realm, by
every, or any Merchant Alien, according to the Value thereof in the said book
expressed, Twelve pence over and above the Twelve pence aforesaid, Except and
foreprized out of this Grant of Subsidy of Poundage, all manner of Woollen
Clothes, made or wrought, or to be made or wrought within this Realm of
England, commonly called Old Draperies, and all Wines before limited to pay
subsidy of Tonnage, and all manner of Fish, English taken, and brought by
English bottoms, into this Realm, and all manner of fresh Fish, and bestial,
that shall come into this your Realm; and all other Goods and Merchandises,
which in the said book of rates are mentioned to be custome-free.

Exceptions out of the subsidy of poundage.
And further, We your said Commons, by the advice, Assent and Authority
aforesaid, do give and grant unto You, Our said Liege Lord and Sovereign, for
the causes aforesaid, One other Subsidy, That is to say of and for every short
woollen cloth to be exported by Your Natural Born Subjects of this your Realm,
and the Dominions thereof, called broad Cloth, not exceeding twenty eight yards
in length, and threescore and four pounds in weight, the sum of three shillings
and four pence of Current English money, and for every Cloth of short cloth of
old Drapery of lesser length, and weight, accounting so many pieces to a short
cloth, as limited and appointed thereunto by the said Book of Rates, to be
likewise exported by your said natural born Subjects, the like sum of of three
shillings four pence, and so after that rate, and by Strangers and Aliens six
shillings and eight pence for every short cloth accounted as aforesaid; which
several Rates are accordingly expressed in the said Book of Rates herein after
mentioned and referred unto, A subsidy of strangers Aliens.
To have, hold, take, enjoy, and perceive the Subsidies aforesaid, and every of
them, and every part and parcel of them unto your Majesty, from the four and
twentieth day of June inclusively, The said subsidies granted to the King
during his life.
in the Twelfth year of your Majesty's Reign, for and during your Majesty's
life, which God long preserve.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Wines,
Goods, The penalty for not paying the subsidy.
or other Merchandise, whereof the Subsidies aforesaid are or shall be due,
shall at any time after be shipped or put into any Boat or Vessel, to the
intent to be carried into the parts beyond Seas, or else be brought from the
parts beyond the Seas into any Port, Place, or Creek of this Realm, or other
your Majesty's Dominions, by way of Merchandise, and unshipped to be laid on
Land, the Subsidy, Customs, and other duties due or to be due for the same not
paid, or lawfully tendered to the Collector thereof, or his Deputy, with the
consent and agreement of the Comptroller and Surveyor there, or one of them at
the least, nor agreed with for the same in the Custom House, according to the
true meaning of this Act, that then, from the said four and twentieth day of
June, all the same Wines, Goods and Merchandises whatsoever shall be forfeit to
your Majesty, the one moiety of the rate thereof to your Majesty, and the other
moiety to him or them that will seize the same, or sue for the same; And that
it may please Your Majesty, Merchants strangers shall be well entreated.
That all Merchants, as well Denizens, as Strangers, coming into this Your
Realm, be well and honestly entreated and demeaned, for such things as Subsidy
by this Act is granted, as they were in the time of Your Noble Progenitors and
Predecessors, without oppression to them to be done, paying the Subsidies
aforesaid.

And, be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Goods or
Merchandise, A Proviso for such whose goods be taken by Pirates or perished on
the Sea.
as aforesaid, of any Merchant being born Denizen after the said four and
twentieth day of June, has been, or at any time hereafter during Your
Majesty's life, shall be taken by any Enemies or Pirates upon the Sea, or
perished in any Ship or Ships, that shall happen to be taken or perished,
during Your Majesty's Life, whereof the Subsidies and other Duties aforesaid,
are, or shall be duly paid, or agreed for as aforesaid; and that duly proved
before the Treasurer of England, Commissioners of the Treasury, or Chief Baron
of the Exchequer for the time being, by the examination of the same Merchants,
if they be alive, or of their Executors or Administrators, if they be dead, or
by two credible Witnesses at the least sworn, or other reasonable Witness and
proof sworn, then the same Merchant or Merchants, his, or their Executors or
Administrators, shall or may newly ship, in the same Port where the goods and
Merchandise aforesaid were, or shall be Customed, so much other Merchandise or
Goods, as the same goods or Merchandise are, or shall be lost as aforesaid,
shall amount unto in custom, without paying of any thing for the same, so as
the same Proof be recorded and allowed of in the Court of Exchequer, The
Customs of any goods shipped in Carracks or Galleys.
and certified unto the Collectors of the Customs of the Port where the same
Wares or Merchandises are to be newly shipped without Custom, as aforesaid.
And further, That every Merchant-Denizen who shall hereafter Ship any Goods or
Merchandise in any Carrack or Gally, shall pay to your Majesty all manner of
Customs, and all the subsidies aforesaid, as any Alien born out of the Realm.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to all and every Your
Subjects, Shipping of Herrings.
at his and their will and pleasure, to convey and transport out of this Realm,
in Ships and other Vessels of any the Subjects of this Realm, all and every
kind of Herrings and other Sea fish, to be taken on the sea by any the Subjects
aforesaid, from or out of any Port or Harbor of this Realm, to any place out of
your Majesty's Dominions, without paying any Custom, Subsidy or
Poundage-moneys for the same Herrings, or other Fish so carried or transported
during your Majesty's life, any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And because no rates can be Imposed upon Merchandise, No rates to be imposed
on Merchandise without authority of Parliament.
imported or exported by Subjects or Aliens, but by common consent in
Parliament, Be it further Enacted and Declared, by the Authority aforesaid,
that the Rates intended by this present Act, shall be the rates mentioned and
expressed in one Book of Rates entitled, The Rates of Merchandise, That is to
say, the Subsidy of Tonnage, the Subsidy of Poundage, and the Subsidy of
Woollen cloths, or old Draperies, as they are rated and agreed on by the
Commons House of Parliament, A book of rates agreed by the Commons house of
Parliament.
set down and expressed in this Book, to be paid according to the Tenor of the
Act of Tonnage and Poundage, from the four and twentieth day of June
inclusively, in the twelfth year of his Majesty's Reign, during his Majesty's
Life, and subscribed with the hand of Sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet, Speaker
of the House of Commons; Which said Book of Rates composed and agreed on by
Your Majesty's said Commons, and also every Article, rule and clause therein
contained, shall be and remain during Your Majesty's Life, as effectual to all
intents and purposes, as if the same were included particularly in the Body of
this present Act.

And it is further Enacted, That during the continuance of this present Grant,
The fees of the Custom Officers.
where the Goods Exported or Imported, amount to the value of five pounds or
more, the Customers and Collectors, and all other his Majesty's Officers in the
several Ports, shall take and receive such Fees, and no other, as were taken in
the Fourth year of the late King James, until such time as the said Fees shall
be otherwise settled by Authority of Parliament.

Provided always, That no Person or Persons, who after the Four and twentieth
of June, A Proviso for such as paid before the 24. July 1660.
in the year One thousand six hundred and sixty, and before the Four and
twentieth of July in the same year, have paid, received, or collected any
Duties, or Customs, according to the Rates used in April One thousand six
hundred and sixty, shall be molested, or any way Impeached, for or concerning
the payment or Receipt of the said duties, or any other duties by this Act
Imposed.

And it is hereby further Declared, That no person who has shipped any Goods
since the said four and twentieth of June, and before the said four and
twentieth of July, shall be liable to the payment of any duties therefore,
other then such as were used to be paid in the said month of April, One
thousand six hundred and sixty.

Goods which may be exported immediately after the passing this Act.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful for any Person or Persons, immediately from and after the
passing of this Act, to transport, ship, and carry out of this Kingdom, or out
of any Port thereof, by way of Merchandise, any of these Commodities, Goods,
and Merchandises following; That is to say, Iron, Armor, Bandeleers,
Bridle-Bitts, Halbert Heads and Sharps, Holsters, Muskets, Carbines,
Fowling-Peices, Pistols, Pike-Heads, Sword or Rapier-Blades, Saddles, Snaffles,
Styrropes, Calveskins dressed or undressed, Geldings, Oxen, Sheepskins dressed
without the Wool, and all sorts of Manufactures made of Leather, paying the
respective Rates appointed by this Act, and no other, any Law, Statutes,
Prohibitions, and Customs to the contrary notwithstanding.

Goods which may be exported being at certain p^^ses.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, immediately after the passing of this Act, for any person or persons to
ship, carry out, and transport by way of Merchandise, these several sorts of
Goods following, that is to say, Gunpowder, when the same does not exceed the
price of five pounds the Barrel. And Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Malt
and Oats, Beef, Pork, Bacon, Butter, Cheese, Candles, when the same do not
exceed in price at the Ports from whence they are Laden, and at the time of
their Lading, these prises following: That is to say, Wheat the Quarter, Forty
shillings; Rye, Beans and Pease, the Quarter, Twenty four shillings; Barley and
Malt, the Quarter, twenty shillings; Oats the Quarter, Sixteen shillings; Beef
the Barrel, Five pounds; Pork the Barrel, Six pounds ten shillings; Bacon the
pound, Six pence; Butter the Barrel, Four pounds ten shillings; Cheese, the
Hundred, One pound ten shillings; Candles, the dozen pound, Five shillings,
paying the respective Rates appointed by this Act, and no more: Any former Law,
Statute, Prohibition or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

His Majesty by Proclamation may prohibit transporting Gunpowder, Arms, and
Ammunition out of England. 1. Stat. 17. Car. 1. cap. 21.

An additional Subsidy upon Wines over and above the forementioned rates.

Security to be given by the Importer.

The said Subsidy to be repaid upon exportation.


Provided always, That it shall be free and lawful for his Majesty, at any time
when he shall see cause so to do, and for such time as shall be therein
expressed by Proclamation, to prohibit the Transporting of Gunpowder, or any
sort of Arms or Ammunition, into any parts out of this Kingdom: Any thing in
this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That over and above the
Rates herein before mentioned, there shall be paid unto your Majesty of every
Ton of Wine of the Growth of France, Germany, Portugal, or Madera, brought into
the Port of London, or elsewhere, the sum of three pounds of current English
money, within the space of Nine months after the Importing: And of every Ton
of all other Wines brought in as aforesaid, the sum of Four pounds of like
current Money, within the space of Nine months after the Importing thereof: For
the payment of which duties accordingly, the Importer shall give good Security:
And if any of the said Wines for which the additional Duty in this clause
mentioned, is paid, or secured at the Importation, be Exported within twelve
months after their Importation, then the foresaid additional Duty in this
clause mentioned shall be returned, or the security discharged, as to so much
as shall be so Exported: And if at the Importation, the Importer shall pay for
the same ready money, he shall be allowed after the Rate of Ten per Cent. for a
year.

All Wines discharged of Excise.
And be it further Enacted, That from and after the said Four and twentieth day
of July, all manner of Wines whatsoever to be Imported in the Port of London,
or elsewhere, shall be freed and discharged, of and from the Imposition of
Excise.

Prisage wines not to pay any custom or subsidy.
Provided, and it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That the prisage of Wines, or
prise-Wines, ought not to pay Tonnage nor Custom, and shall not be charged
with the payment of any Custom, Subsidy, or sum of money Imposed upon Wines by
this Act, or any thing therein contained. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. V.
For continuing the Excise until the Twentieth of August, 1660. EXP. Stat. 13
Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. VI.
For the present Nominating of Commissioners of Sewers, His Majesty not yet
having constituted any Treasurer of England, or Chief Justice of either Bench,
according to the Stat. of 20 H. 8. EXP. and the said Statute of H. 8. to
continue in force.

CAP. VII.
Marquess of Ormond.
An Act for restoring unto James Marquess of Ormond, All his Honors, Manors,
Lands and Tenements in Ireland, whereof he was in possession on the Three and
twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred forty and one, or at any
time since. PR.

CAP. VIII.
For continuing the Excise till the Five and twentieth Day of December, One
thousand six hundred and sixty. EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. IX.
For the speedy Provision of Money, for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of
this Kingdom both by Land and Sea: by a contribution of all persons according
to their several Ranks and Degrees. EXP.

CAP. X.
Explanations of certain defaults in an Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy
Provision of Money for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom,
both by Land and Sea.

CAP. XI.
The Kings Majesty's most gracious, Free and General Pardon, Indemnity, and
Oblivion.

THe Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into His Gracious and Serious
consideration the long and great Troubles, Discords and Wars, The Causes and
Ends of this Pardon and Indemnity.
that have for many years past been in this Kingdom, and that diverse of His
Subjects are by occasion thereof, and otherwise, fallen into and be obnoxious to
great pains and penalties: Out of a hearty and pious Desire to put an end to
all Suits and Controversies, that by occasion of the late Distractions have
arisen or may arise between all His Subjects; The General Pardon.
And to the intent that no Crime whatsoever committed against His Majesty or
His Royal Father, shall hereafter rise in Judgment, or be brought in Question
against any of them to the least endamagement of them, either in their Lives,
Liberties, Estates, or to the prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach
or Term of Distinction; And to bury all Seeds of future Discords and
remembrance of the former, as well in his own Breast as in the Breasts of His
Subjects one toward another: And in performance of His Royal and Gracious Word
signified by His Letters to the several Houses of Parliament now assembled, and
His Declarations in that behalf published, Is pleased that it may be Enacted,
And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice and
consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, First,
That all and all manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Murders,
Felonies, Offenses, Crimes, Contempts and Misdemeanors, Counseled, Commanded,
Acted or done since the first day of January, in the year of Our Lord, One
thousand six hundred thirty seven, by any person or persons before the Twenty
fourth day of June, in the year of Our Lord, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, other then the persons hereafter by name excepted, in such manner as
they are hereafter excepted, by virtue or color of any command, power,
Authority, Commission, or Warrant or Instructions from his late Majesty, King
Charles, or His Majesty that now is, or from any other person or persons,
deriving or pretending to derive authority, mediately or immediately, from both
or either of their Majesty's, or by virtue or color of any Authority derived
mediately or immediately of or from both Houses, or either House of Parliament,
or of or from any Convention, or Assembly, called or reputed, or taking the
Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of Parliament, Or
by virtue or color of any Writ, Commission, Letters Patents, Instruction or
Instructions of or from any person or persons, Tituled, reputed, or taken to be
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, or Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereto
belonging; or assuming the authority, or reputed to be chief Magistrate of the
Commonwealth, or Commander in chief of the Forces or Armies of this Nation, by
Sea or Land, or by any pretense, Warrant, or Command whatsoever, from them or
any of them, or their or either of their respective Councils or Council, or any
Member of such Council or Councils, or from any person or persons whatsoever,
deriving or pretending to derive Authority from them, or any of them, be
pardoned, Released, Indempnified, discharged, and put in utter Oblivion.

And that all and every the person and persons, Acting, Advising, Assisting,
Abetting, and Counselling the same, they, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, (except as before is excepted) be and are hereby pardoned,
Released, Acquitted, Indempnified, and discharged from the same: And of and
from all pains of Death, and other Pains, Judgments, Indictments, Convictions,
Attainders, Outlawries, Penalties, Escheats and Forfeitures, therefore had or
given, or that might accrue for the same: And that all such Judgments,
Indictments, Convictions, Attainders, Outlawries, Penalties, Escheats and
Forfeitures, and every of them, and all Grants thereupon made, and all Estates
derived under the same, be and are hereby Declared and Enacted to be from
henceforth Null and void: And that all mean profits not yet received by such
Grantees, shall be, and are hereby discharged: And that all and every person
and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, their and every of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Successors, shall be, and are hereby restored to
all and every their Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, and
other things forfeited, which to His Majesty do or shall appertain by reason of
any offense herein before mentioned, and not hereafter in this present Act
Excepted and Foreprised. All Appeals, personal Actions and Suits pardoned.


And be it further Enacted, That all Appeals, and all personal Actions, Suits,
Molestations and Prosecutions whatsoever, for or by reason of any Act of
Hostility, Trespass, Assault, Imprisonment or breach of the Peace, Advised,
Counseled, commanded, Appointed, Happened, Acted or done by reason of the late
troubles, or the late Wars, in his Majesty's Dominions, or relating thereunto,
and Judgments and Executions thereupon had before the first day of May, in the
Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty eight, stand and be from
henceforth discharged; But not to restore to any Person or Persons any sums of
money, mean Profits, or Goods already received or taken upon such Execution, or
to give any account for the same.

And be it likewise Enacted, That all Appeals and all personal Actions and
causes of such Actions, Suits, Molestations and Prosecutions whatsoever, for or
by reason of any Act or thing advised, counseled, commanded, Acted or done by
virtue or color of any Authority or Commission granted by His late Majesty, or
his Majesty that now is, or by virtue or color of any Order or Ordinance of
one or both Houses of Parliament sitting at Westminster; Or by any Act or order
made by any Persons assuming the name of a Parliament, and sitting as a
Parliament at Westminster, after the death of the late King CHARLES the First;
Or by the Authority of the said keepers of the Liberties of England; Or by any
Ordinance by either of the late Protectors and Council; Or by or upon any
Commission, Writ, Process, or Warrant, by them or any of them, or by Authority
derived from them or any of them: And all demands of Arrearages of Rents and
mean Profits of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments heretofore incurred or grown
due, which have been paid, received or disposed by virtue or color of any the
Authorities or pretended Authorities aforesaid, other then such Arrearages or
mean profits as are or shall be otherwise disposed by any Act. or Acts of this
present Session of Parliament, be from henceforth discharged.

And it is further by the Authority aforesaid Enacted in the second place, That
all and every the Subjects of these His Majesty's Realms, of England and
Ireland, the Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Jersey and Garnsey, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, and other His Majesty's Dominions, the Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators of them, and every of them, and all and singular Bodies in
any manner of wise corporated, Cities, Buroughs, Shires, Ridings, Hundreds,
Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Towns, Villages, Hamlets and Tythings, and every of
them, and the Successor and Successors of every of them, shall be and are by
the authority of this present Parliament Acquitted, Pardoned, Released,
Indempnified and Discharged against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and every of them, of and from all manner of Treasons, Misprisions
of Treason, Felonies, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, Entries, Wrongs,
Deceits, Misdemeanors, Forfeitures, penalties and sums of Money, Intrusions,
Mean profits, Wardships, Marriages, Reliefs, Liveries, Ouster le mains, Mean
Rates, Respits of Homage, Fines and Seisures for Alienation without License,
Arrearages of Rents, (other then the Arrearages of Rents due from the late
Farmers, or pretended Farmers of of the Excise or Customs respectively, other
then such Arrearages of Rents, or Mean profits, as are or shall be otherwise
disposed by any Act or Acts of this present Parliament) and of and from all
Arrearages of Tenths and First Fruits, Fines, post-fines, Issues, and
Amerciaments, and all Recognizances, Bonds, or other Securities given for
payment of them, or any of them, concealments of Customs and Excise, Arrearages
of purveyance and of compositions for the same, and of and from all pains of
Death, pains corporal and pecuniary, and generally of and from all other
Things, Causes, Quarrels, Suits, Judgments and Executions, in this present Act
hereafter not Excepted nor Foreprized, which may be or can be by his Majesty in
any wise, or by any means pardoned, before and unto the twenty fourth day of
June, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, to every or
any of his said Subjects, Wardships and Mean Profits unreceived.
Bodies Corporate, Cities, Buroughs, Shires, Ridings, Hundreds Lathes, Rapes,
Wapentakes, Towns, Villages, and Tithings, or any of them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Grants and
Patents since the twenty fifth of March, One thousand six hundred forty one,
touching the Wardship and Custody of the Body and Lands, or touching the
marriage of any Heir within age, and all mean profits yet unreceived, All
things not excepted shall be by the general words of this Act as well as it
particularly named.
and demandable by reason thereof, shall be, and are hereby from henceforth
Discharged.

And also the Kings Majesty is contented, That it be further Enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That this His said Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, shall be as
good and effectual in the Law to every of his said Subjects, Bodies Corporate,
and others before rehearsed, in, for, and against all things which be not
hereafter in this present Act Excepted and Foreprized, as the same Pardon,
Indemnity, and Oblivion, should have been, if all Offices, Contempt,
Forfeitures, Causes, Matters, Suits, Quarrels, Judgments, Executions,
Penalties, and all other things, not hereafter in this present Act Excepted and
Foreprized, had been particularly, singularly, especially and plainly named,
rehearsed, and specified, and also pardoned by proper and express Words and
Names, in their Kinds, Natures and Qualities, by Words and Terms thereunto
requisite to have been put in and expressed in this present Act of Free Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion: And that his said Subjects, nor any of them, nor the
Heirs, Executors or Administrators of any of them, nor the said Bodies
Corporate, and others before named and rehearsed, nor any of them, be, nor
shall be Sued, Vexed or Inquieted, by, or on the behalf of the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, in their Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements,
for any manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanor, Forfeiture, Trespass,
Offense, or any other thing Suffered, Done or committed, before the said twenty
fourth day of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty, against His late
Majesty King Charles, or His Majesty that now is, His Crown, Dignity,
Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, but only for such Matters, Causes and Offenses,
as be Excepted and Foreprized by this present Act out of the same, any Statute
or Statutes, Laws, Customs or Vsages heretofore had, made or used, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding; And that all and every the Kings said
Subjects, and all and singular Bodies Corporate, and others before rehearsed,
may by him or themselves, or by his or their Deputy or Deputies, or by his or
their Attorney or Attorneys, according to the Laws of this Realm, plead and
minister this present Act of Free Pardon, for his or their Discharge, of or for
any thing that is by virtue of this present Act Pardoned, Discharged, Given or
Granted, without any Fee, or other thing, paying to any person or persons for
wriiing or entry of the Judgments or other cause concerning such Plea,
Writing, or Entry, but only sixteen pence to be paid to the Officer or Clerk
that shall enter such Plea, Matter or Judgment for the Parties Discharge in
that behalf, any Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And furthermore, the Kings Majesty is contented and pleased, that it be
Enacted, This Pardon, etc. to be expounded in all Courts most beneficial for
the Subject.
and be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That this His said Free Pardon,
Indemntty and Oblivion, by the general Words, Clauses and Sentences, before
rehearsed, shall be reputed, deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed, and taken in
all manner of Courts of his Highness, and elsewhere, beneficial and available
to all and singular the said Subjects, Bodies Corporate, and others before
rehearsed, and to every of them, in all things not in this present Act excepted
or foreprized, without any ambiguity, question, or other delay whatsoever it
shall be, to be made, pleaded, objected, or alleged by the King our Sovereign
Lord, His Heirs or Successors, or by His or any of their general Attorney, or
Attorneys, or by any person or persons for his Highness, or any of His Heirs or
Successors.

And furthermore, be it Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, The Penalty of
any Officer, etc. that shall go about to disquiet or trouble any person
pardoned by this Act.
and the authority aforesaid, That if any Officer or Clerk of any of His
Highness Courts, commonly called the Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas,
or of his Exchequer, or any other Officer or Clerk of any other of His Highness
Courts within this Realm, at any time of the passing of this present Act, make
out, or write out any manner of Writs, Process, Summons, or other Precepts,
whereby any of the said Subjects, or of the said Bodies Corporate, or others
before rehearsed, or any of them, shall be in any wise arrested, attached,
distrained, summoned, or otherwise vexed, inquieted, or grieved, in his or
their Bodies, Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, or in any of them, for, or
because of any manner of thing pardoned or discharged by virtue of this Act of
Free Pardon. Or if any Sheriff or Escheator, or any of their Deputy or
Deputies, or any Bailiff, or other Officer whatsoever, by color of his or
their Office, or otherwise, after the passing of this present Act, do levy,
receive, take, or withhold of or from any person or persons, any thing pardoned
or discharged by this Act, That then every such person so offending, and
thereof lawfully convicted or condemned by any sufficient testimony, witness,
or proof, shall yield and pay for recompense thereof to the party so grieved or
offended thereby, his or their treble damages, besides all costs of the Suit;
and shall also forfeit and lose to the Kings Majesty for every such default,
ten pounds: And nevertheless all and singular such Writs, Process and Precepts
so to be made for, or upon, any manner of thing pardoned or discharged by this
present Act of Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, shall be utterly void and
of none effect.

Except and always foreprized out of this Free and General Pardon, Exceptions
out of his Pardon.

All Murder not comprised in the first. clause of this Pardon excepted.

Pyracy excepted.

Buggery.

Rapes and wilful taking away any Maid excepted.


all Murders done or committed by any person or persons, other then such which
are pardoned and discharged in the first clause of pardon above mentioned; And
also excepted and always foreprized out of this General and Free Pardon, all
and every the offenses, of Piracy and Robbery upon the Seas, not done in
relation to the Diffrences and Wars aforesaid, and every procuring or abetting
of any such Offenders, and the comforting and receiving of them, or any of
them, or any goods taken by way of such Piracy or Robbery upon the Seas as
aforesaid: And also excepted the detestable and abominable Vice of Buggery
committed with Mankind or Beast: And also excepted all Rapes and carnal
Ravishments of Woman: And also excepted all Ravishments and wilful taking away,
or marrying of any Maid, Widow or Damsel against her will, or without the
assent or agreement of her Parents, or such as then had her in custody; and
also all Offenses of aiding, comforting, procuring and abetting of any such
Ravishment, wilful taking, or Marrying, had, committed or done: And also
excepted all Offenses made Felony by a certain Act made and ordained, Entiuled,
Double Marriages excepted.

Witchcraft excepted.

Accounts of certain Treasurers and Receivers. St. 13. Car. 2. cap. 3.


An Act to restrain all persons from Marriage until their former Wives and
former Husbands be dead: And also except all Offenses of Invocations,
Conjurations, Witchcrafts, Sorceries, Enchantments, and Charms; and all
Offenses of procuring, abetting, or comforting of the same; and all persons now
attainted or convicted of any of the said excepted Offenses: And also excepted
all and singular the accounts of all and every person and persons appointed by
any of the Authorities, or pretended Authorities aforesaid, to be Treasurer,
Receiver, Fermor or Collector, (other then the Sub-collectors of the several
Parishes, Towns, and Hamlets respectively, for and concerning their Receipts
before the four and twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand
six hundred fifty nine) who have received or collected any Subsidy, Custom,
Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, Prize-Goods, Assessments, Sequestration, New
Impost, or Excise, or of any the Rents and Revenues of any Lands or
Hereditaments, of or belonging unto the late King, Queen, or Prince, or King
that now is, or belonging unto the late Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Deans:
or Deans and Chapters, Canons, Prebends, and other Officers belonging to any
Cathedral or Collegiate Church, or Popish Recusants convict, or of persons
Sequestered for their Recusancy, or other Sequestered Estates received or
collected by, or paid unto them since the thirtieth of January, in the year of
our Lord One thousand six hundred forty two; and of all Moneys and other
Duties grown due or contracted upon the Sale or Disposition of them, or any of
them.

Proviso for the Heirs and Lands of Accomptants excepted.
Provided, That the Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Ter-tenants of the
Lands of any Accomptant within this Exception now deceased, shall not be
charged with, nor liable unto any account for the matters in this Exception
mentioned: Except for such sum or sums of Money as remain due upon any of their
accounts already Stated, and Determined, and are not yet paid in, and that no
Accomptant as abovesaid, now living, shall be liable to make account of any sum
or sums of Money, paid or disbursed, or otherwise allowed or discharged, by
virtue or color of any Order, or Ordinance, of both or either House or Houses
of Parliament, or any Convention, or Assembly called, or Reputed, or taking on
them the name of a Parliament, or of Oliver Cromwell, pretended Protector, or of
Richard his Son, while he continued, or was styled, or obeyed as Protector, or
by any persons acting as a Committee, appointed by the said two Houses, or
either of them, or by any such Convention, or Assembly, or any Order or
Direction of such Committee or Committees, or any person or persons acting as a
public Council, though having no legal authority so to do, or by their or any
their Order or Orders, or Direction.

Fees and Salaries, etc. not to be accounted for.
It being further Declared and Enacted, And it is Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That no person or persons shall be charged for any Moneys by him
received for the Fees, Salaries, and Wages then allowed, or for Moneys by him
disbursed upon any public use, or pretense, though the Direction, or Authority
whereby the same Money was issued, was not, or be not Legal and Warrantable in
Law. Military payments not to be accounted for.


And be it further provided, That no Military, or commissioned Officer of the
Armies, or Navies, or Soldier, or Mariner, who before the twenty fifth of
March one thousand six hundred fifty nine, has received any Moneys for his own
pay, or the pay of other Soldiers, or for any other Contingencies of the
Soldiers, or Garrisons under his command, or by way of reward, shall be called
to account therefore. No person to be called to an account after the 24 of June
1662.


And that no person whatsoever shall be called to account for any the matters
in this Exception mentioned, after the four and twentieth day of June, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God one thousand six hundred sixty and two
next ensuing; And that in case any person who stands accomptable for any Moneys
received since the first of January, one thousand six hundred forty two, and
before the thirtieth of January, one thousand six hundred forty eight, have
been-robb'd, or plundered by Soldiers, or others, of the Moneys in their
hands, or any Notes or Books of Receipt, or Acquitances touching their payments
or discharge, Then the Oath or Oaths of such party or parties of the same
respectively, shall be a good discharge for so much of their account. And that
the Oath of every Accomptant in or between the years, one thousand six hundred
forty two, and one thousand six hundred forty eight of what they have paid to
any public use, by, or according to any public or pretended Order or
Authority whatsoever, shall be a good discharge, as to so much of the account
of such person or persons. And except all First Fruits and Tenths in the hands
of any Receiver not having disbursed, Discharges and quietus est given in the
Exchequer.

Accounts of the Revenues of Churches in Wales.

Bribery, Subornation, Forging Debentures, etc. Witnesses.


as in the last Exception is expressed.

Provided, That all and every Judgment of Discharge, or Quietus est, had, or
given at any time upon any account in the public Exchequer, since the year One
thousand six hundred forty eight, be allowed, and shall not be avoided; except
all accounts of the Revenues of Churches and Vicaridges in Wales, and the
County of Monmouth, and all Judgments of Discharge, or Quietus thereupon
obtained; And also Excepted out of this Pardon all offenses of Bribery,
Perjuries, and the Subornation of Perjury, or Witnesses and Offenses of Forging
or Counterfeiting any Deeds, Debentures, Bills of public Faith, Escripts,
Wills, or other Writings whatsoever, or of any Examinations or Testimonies of
any Witness or Witnesses, tending to bring any person or persons in danger of
his Life, Liberty, or Estate, and the giving the same in evidence, and the
compelling or procuring of any such counterfeiting or forging to be had or
made: Imbezeling and purloyning the Kings goods.


And also excepted all offenses in detaining, imbezeling, or purloining any the
Goods, Money, Chattels, or Jewels of the late King, Queen, or Prince, or any of
the Children of the late King and Queen, other then Shipping, Stores, and
Ammunitions of War, and other then such Goods and Chattels as have been sold or
disposed of to any of the Servants or Creditors of his late Majesty, in or
toward satisfaction of their debts or wages.

Issues, fines, and amerciaments Received by Sheriffs.
And also excepted out of this pardon, all Issues, Fines, and Amerciaments,
Rents, and other public Duties being Levied, Received, or Collected by any
Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiff, Minister, or other Officer, to, or for the use
of the late King, the Parliament, or the said Keepers of the Liberty of
England, or any other person stiling himself Protector, or for his Majesty that
now is, and not accounted for, and discharged.

Jesuits, Seminary, and Romish Priests excepted.
And also excepted out of this Pardon, all and every offense and offenses
committed or done by any Jesuit, Seminary, or Romish Priest whatsoever,
contrary to the Tenor or effect of the Statute made in the Seven and twentieth
year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act against
Jesuits, Seminaries, Priests, and other disobedient persons, or of any part
thereof, and all out-lawries, proceedings, Judgments, and executions for the
same offenses, or any of them.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, Writs of Cap.
Utlagat. may be di^^^ed against any person.
That it shall and may be lawful, to, and for all and every Clerk and other
Officer of the Courts at Westminster, to award and make Writs of Capias
Utlagatum, at the suit of the party plaintiff, against such persons outlawed,
as be pardoned by this Act, to the intent to compel the Defendant, or
Defendants, to make answer to the plaintiff or plaintiffs, at whose suit, he or
they were outlawed; And that every person so outlawed, The party outlawed may
sue one a scire fac as against the Plaintiff.
shall sue a Writ of Scire facias against the party or parties at whose Suit he
or they were so outlawed, before this pardon in that behalf shall be allowed
him or them so outlawed.

Provided, and be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid; That this Act of
general pardon shall not in any wise extend to pardon any Out-lawries upon any
Writ of Capias ad Satisfaciendum until such time as the party so outlawed
shall satisfy, Persons outlawed upon capias ad satisfaciendum, etc.
or otherwise agree with the party at whose suit the same person was so
outlawed or condemned.

And also excepted out of this pardon, all informations and other proceedings
depending, concerning any common Highwayes or Bridges, and all issues returned
upon any process, concerning the same, since the Thirtieth day of January,
Informations and proceedings concerning highways, etc excepted.
One thousand six hundred forty eight Except also all Recognizances,
Obligations, and other securities given or entered into, Since the five and
twentieth of March, One thousand six hundred and forty, by any Receiver, Reeve,
Bayliffe, Collector or other accountant in the Court of the public Exchequer,
and their sureties and their acounts respectively.

Provided always, and be it Enacted; that this Act, or any thing therein
Contained, Obligation and recognizance not yet forfeited.
shall not extend, or be construed to Pardon, or discharge any Recognizance,
Obligation or Bond, which is not yet forfeited.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That all Acts of
Hostility and Injuries, All acts of hostility, injuries, etc. between the King
and his Parliament to be put in perpetual oblivion.
whether between the late King and the Lords and Commons then in Parliament
assembled, or between any of the People of this Nation, which did arise upon
any Action, Attempt, Assistance, Counsel or Advice, having Relation unto, or
falling out by reason of the troubles, or in the late Wars, or public
differences between the late King and Parliament, or between His now Majesty,
or any of Subjects, and which are not in this Act excepted; That the same and
whatsoever has ensued thereupon, whether trenching upon the Laws and Liberties
of this Nation, or upon the Honor of His Majesty, or upon the Honor or
Authority of the Parliament, or to the prejudice of any particular or private
Person, shall in no time, from and after the four and twentieth day of June, in
the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and sixty, be called in question,
whatsoever be the quality of the person, or of whatsoever kind or Degree, Civil
or Criminal, the In^ury is supposed to be; And that no mention be made thereof
in time to come, in Judgment, or in Judicial proceedings.

And to the intent and purpose that all names and terms of Distinction may be
likewise put into utter Oblivion, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid; The penalty upon any person that shall within 3. years use any words
of reproach or disgrace tending to revive the memory of the late differences.
That if any person or Persons, within the space of Three years next ensuing,
shall presume maliciously to call or allege of or object against any other
person or persons, any Name or Names, or other Words of Reproach, any way
tending to revive the Memory of the late Differences, or the Occasions thereof;
That then every such person, so as aforesaid Offending, shall forfeit and pay
unto the party grieved, in case such party Offending shall be of the Degree of
a Gentleman or above, Ten pounds; and if under that Degree, The sum of forty
shillings; to be recovered by the party grieved, by Action of Debt, to be
therefore brought in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoin,
protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, or any more then one Imparlance,
so as the same Action be commenced, or prosecuted within six Months next after
the Offense Committed: And if the Jury sworn to try any Issue or Issues that
shall be joined in such Action, shall find for the plaintiff, they shall
likewise give to every such Plaintiff Forty shillings Damages, over and above
the penalty aforesaid.

Provided always, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
Extend, Persons plotting or signing the Irish Rebellion excepted.
or give any benefit unto any person or persons, who have had any hand in the
Plotting, Contriving, or designing, the great and heinous Rebellion in Ireland
mentioned in one Act passed in the Parliament, begun at Westminster the third
day of November, in the sixteenth year of King Charles, entitled, An Act for
the speedy and effectual Reducing of the Rebels in His Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland, to their due obedience to His Majesty and Crown of England, Or in
Aiding, Assisting, or Abetting the same: (Other then such as by another Act
intended hereafter to be passed, shall be therein Named, mentioned, or
Expressed to be pardoned,) nor to Enure to Restore to any person or persons,
bodies politic or corporate, (other then the Marquess of Ormond Lord Steward
of his Majesty's Household, and other the Protestants of Ireland,) and their
Heirs, and such other person and persons, as in, and by an Act intended
hereafter to be passed, shall be therein Named, Mentioned, or Expressed in that
behalf, any Estate, Liberties, Franchises, or Hereditaments in England, or
Ireland, sold, or disposed of by both, or either Houses of Parliament, or any
Convention assuming the Style or Name of a Parliament, or any person or persons
deriving authority from them, or any of them, or which was approved, or
confirmed by them, or any of them; Nor to the Mean Profits, Rents, or
Contingencies of advantage of the same.

Every person pardoned may plead the general Issue.
And it is further provided and Enacted, That every person or persons, hereby
pardoned, may plead the General Issue, without special pleading of this Pardon,
and give this Act of Pardon in evidence for his discharge, and that the same
shall be thereupon allowed, and the advantage thereof had as fully to all
intents and purposes, as if the same had been fully and well pleaded; And in
such manner, as any Justice of the peace, Constable, or other Officer,
questioned for matters acted by them as Officers, or in execution of their
Offices, may have advantage of the matter of their Justification, upon the
General Issue by them pleaded, by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Thefts and Felonies since the fourth of March 16^9. excepted.
Provided also, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend, or
be interpreted to extend to pardon any person or persons whatsoever, for any
Theft or Stealing of any Goods, or other Felonies, since the fourth day of
March in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred fifty and nine, any
thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

This Act not to extend to goods to be restored upon an Act for Repeal of two
Acts for Sequestrations.
Provided also, That neither this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to acquit or discharge any person or persons, from making restitution of
all such Rents, sums of Money, Horses, Cattle, or other Goods, which by a
certain Act, or pretended Act lately made, entitled An Act for Repeal of two
Acts for Sequestrations, are required to be restored to those from whom they
were taken; Nor shall this present Act be construed to Disable, or Bar the
respective Owners, or Proprietors, of, and from their several and respective
Actions, or Suits at Law, or in equity, for, or by reason of the said, or any
other Rents, Moneys, Horses, Cattle, or Goods which since the five and
twentieth day of July, one thousand six hundred fifty and nine, have been by
any person or persons wrongfully received, or taken away, and for which the
said Wrong-doers, are not in any wise Indempnified by the said, or any other
Act of Repeal.

Goods, etc. sequestered and actually paid in to any publicks Treasury.
And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons, who by virtue of any Order or Warrant, mediately or immediately
derived from his late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or by virtue of any
Act, Ordinance, or Order of any or both Houses of Parliament, or any of the
authorities aforesaid, or any Committee or Committees, acting under them or any
of them, have seized, sequestered, levied, advanced, or paid to any public use,
or into any public Treasury within this Kingdom, any Goods, Chattels, Debts,
Rents, sum or sums of money belonging to any person or persons whatsoever, shall
hereafter be sued, molested, or drawn into question for the same, but that they
and every of them shall be discharged against all persons, for so much and no
more of the said Goods, Chattels, Debts, Rents, sum or sums of money, as their
several and respective Orders of discharge or acquittances extend unto.

Persons who have received money privately for his Majesty's supply to account.
Provided also, That nothing herein contained shall extend to discharge any
person or persons, who have been by private order or Instructions employed and
entrusted, or have undertaken the employment to receive any sum or sums of
money for the Kings Majesty's Service or Supply, since the year one thousand
six hundred forty and eight, from making their accounts for the same.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to pardon or discharge from
accounts to the Kings Majesty, any person or persons, for any sum or sums of
money received for that Illegal Tax of Decimation, Moneys received upon
Decimation not pardoned.
or upon the account of any Militia settled or acted in, since one thousand six
hundred forty and eight, and not accounted for or paid over, or discharged to,
or by any that had authority, or pretended authority to discharge the
respective Receivers of the same.

Provided also, That if any person or persons, being His Majesty's Menial
Servant or Servants, or having, or pretended to have received particular
Instructions or Directions from his Majesty, have, during the time of such his
or their relation unto his Majesty, or whilst he or they were acting, or
pretending to Act for His Majesty's Interest, in pursuance of the said
Instructions, or directions, Wilfully, Maliciously, and Traitorously held
Intelligence with any foreign Prince or Princes, Persons that have had
Directions or Instruction from his Majesty and have betrayed their trust, or
his Majesty's Councels, excepted.
State or States, or with any person or persons, usurping Supreme authority in
this Kingdom, or other his Majesty's Dominions, or with their or either of
their Ministers or Agents, and without his Majesty's license, and to the intent
to betray His Majesty's person or Councels; or have received any sum or sums of
money, or pension for such Treachery, that then such person or persons, as to
the offense in this proviso mentioned, shall be, and is hereby excepted out of
this Act, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; so as
such person or persons be outlawed, or otherwise legally convicted of such
offense or offenses, within the space of two years from the five and twentieth
day of April, one thousand six hundred and sixty.

Duties upon Excise and from Farmers thereof excepted.
Provided, That this Act of General Pardon, of any thing therein contained,
shall not extend to the pardoning or discharging of any Debts or Sums of money
due to or for the Excise of any Goods or Merchandise, whereof any Entries have
been made in the Custom-house, which have grown due since the twenty fifth day
of March, one thousand six hundred fifty and eight, or to the pardoning or
discharging of any Debts or Sums of money due to the Farmers, or pretended
Farmers of Excise, since the twenty fifth day of March, one thousand six
hundred fifty and seven.

Persons excepted by name
Provided also, that this Act; nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
pardon, discharge, or give any other benefit whatsoever, unto John Lisle,
William Say Sir Hardress Waller

Valentine Wauton, Tho. Harrison, Edward Whalley Will. Heveningham, Isaac
Penington, Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow, Sir
Michael Livesey, Robert Titchbourn, Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop,
John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner,
John Carew, John Jones, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas
Wogan, Edmond Harvey, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love,
Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyn,
James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas Wait, John Cook, Andrew
Broughton, Edward Dendy, William Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, Daniel
Axtel, nor any of them, nor of those two persons, or either of them, who being
disguised by Frocks and Vizors did appear upon the Scaffold, erected before
Whitehal upon the thirtieth of January, one thousand six hundred forty and
eight: All which persons for their execrable Treason, in sentencing to death,
or signing the Instrument for the horrid Murder, or being instrumental in
taking away the precious Life of our late Sovereign Lord Charles the first of
Glorious Memory, are left to be proceeded against as Traitors to His late
Majesty, according to the Laws of England, and are out of this present Act
wholly excepted and foreprized.

But ingard the said Owen Row, Augustine Garland, Edmond Harvey, Henry Smith,
Persons that appeared and rendered themselves.
Henry Martin, Sir Hardress Waller, Robert Titchbourn, George Fleetwood, James
Temple, Thomas Wait, Simon Meyn, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Peter
Temple, Robert Lilburn, Gilbert Millington, Vincent Potter, Thomas Wogan, and
John Downs, have personally appeared and rendered themselves (according to the
Proclamation bearing Date the sixth day of June, one thousand six hundred and
sixty, to Summon the persons therein named, who gave Judgment and Assisted in
the said Horrid and Detestable Murder of our said late Sovereign, to appear
and render themselves) and do pretend thereby to some favor, upon some
conceived doubtful Words in the said Proclamation;

Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority of the same (upon
the humble desires of the Lord and Commons in Parliament assembled) That if the
said Owen Row, Augustine Garland, Edmond Harvey, Henry Smith, Henry Martin, Sir
Hardress Waller, Robert Titchburn, George Fleetwood, James Temple, Tho. Wait,
Simon Meyn, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Peter Temple, Robert Lilburn,
Gilbert Millington, Vincent Potter, Thomas Wogan, and John Downs or any of
them, shall be legally Attainted for the Horrid Treason and Murder aforesaid;
That then, nevertheless, the Execution of the said person and persons so
Attainted shall be supended, until his Majesty by the Advice and Assent of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, shall order the Execution by Act of Parliament
to be passed for that purpose.

Except also out of this present Act Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton
deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, and Thomas Pride deceased.

Provided, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to discharge the
Lands Tenements, The Lands and Goods of the persons rendering themselves not
excepted. St. 13 Car. 2. ca. 15.
Goods, Chattels, Rights, Trusts, and other the Hereditaments late of the said
O. Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, and Thomas Pride, or of Isaac Ewer
deceased, Sir John Danvers deceased, Sir Thomas Maleverer Baronet deceased,
William Purefoy deceased, John Blackiston deceased, Sir William Constable
Baronet deceased, Richard Dean deceased, Francis Allen deceased, Peregrin
Pelham deceased, John Moor deceased, John Aldred, alias Alured deceased,
Humphry Edwards deceased, Sir Gregory Norton Baronet deceased, John Venn
deceased, Thomas Andrews Alderman deceased, Anthony Stapely deceased, Thomas
Horton deceased John Fry deceased, Thomas Hamond deceased, Sir John Bourchier
deceased, of, and from such pains, penalties, and forfeitures, as by one other
Act of Parliament intended to be hereafter passed for that purpose, shall be
expressed and declared.

And also excepted out of this present Act, William Lord Mounson, James
Challoner, Persons excepted for other penalties, not extending to life. St. 13.
Car. 2. ca. 15.
Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, and Robert Wallop; All
which persons did Act and sit in that Traiterous Assembly, which in the month
of January, one thousand six hundred forty eight, Acted and proceeded against
the Life of our late Sovereign, King Charles the first of blessed Memory; and
are therefore reserved to such pains, penalties and forfeitures, not extending
to Life, as by another Act intended to be passed for that purpose, shall be
imposed on them.

And also except Sir Arthur Hesilrig, for and in respect only of such pains,
penalties and forfeitures, not extending to Life, as by one Act intended to be
hereafter passed for that purpose, shall be inflicted and imposed.

Provided always, That John Hutchinson Esquire, and Francis Lassels, Persons
made incapable of any Offices.
shall be and are hereby made for ever incapable to Execute any Place or Office
of Trust, Civil or Military, within this Kingdom; And that the said Francis
Lassels shall pay unto our Sovereign Lord the King, one full years value of his
Estate, Any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, Sir Henry
Vane. John Lambert, excepted.
shall not extend to the pardoning, or to give any other benefit whatsoever,
unto Sir Henry Vane, John Lambert, or either of them, but that they and either
of them, are and shall be out of this present Act wholly excepted and
foreprized. Penalty of certain persons if they shall after the first of
September 1660. accept any Office.


Provided, That if William Lenthal, William Burton, Oliver Saint-John, John
Ireton Alderman, Colonel William Sydenham, Colonel John Desborow, John Blackwel
of Moreclake Christopher Pack Alderman, Richard Keeble, Charles Fleewood, John
Pyne, Richard Dean, Major Richard Creed, Philip Nigh Clerk, John Goodwyn Clerk,
Sir Gilbert Pickering, Colonel Thomas Lister, and Colonel Ralph Cobbet, shall
after the first day of September, one thousand six hundred and sixty, accept,
or exercise any Office, Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Military, or any other
public employment within this Kingdom of England Dominion of Wales, or Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, that then, such person or persons as do so accept, or
execute as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes in Law, stand as if he
or they had been totally excepted by name in this Act.

Persons that gave Sentence upon any in the illegal High Courts of Justice.
Provided likewise, That all those who since the fifth of December, one thousand
six hundred forty eight, did give sentence of death upon any person or persons,
in any of the late Illegal and Tyrannical High Courts of Justice in England or
Wales, or Signed the Warrant for Execution of any person there Condemned
(except Colonel Richard Ingolsby, and Colonel Matthew Thomlinson) shall be, and
are hereby made incapable of bearing any Office Ecclesiastical, Civil, or
Military, within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, or of serving as
a Member in any Parliament after the first day of September, one thousand six
hundred and sixty.

Provided also, and it is Enacted, That all and every the persons appointed
Trustees, in a late pretended Act or Ordinance made in the year of our Lord,
Persons entrusted by Ordinance 1649. about Tithes shall be accomptable.
one thousand six hundred forty nine, for, and concerning Tithes appropriate,
Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Portions of Tithes appropriate, Offerings,
Fee-farm Rents issuing out of the Tithes therein mentioned, First Fruits and
other things, and Enacted, or mentioned to be Enacted to be vested, settled,
adjudged, or deemed to be in the actual sesin or possession of such person and
persons in the said pretended Act or Ordinance mentioned, and their heirs,
shall account for, and be responsible for all Rents and Profits of the
premises which came to their hands, and have not been by the said Trustees or
their Order disbursed, disposed, or employed for the maintenance of Ministers,
or other uses, according to the said pretended Act or Ordinance, or some other
Act, Order, or Ordinance, made in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred fifty, one thousand six hundred fifty four, and one thousand six
hundred fifty six, by any assembly, called, or reputed a Parliament, or
assuming the power of a Parliament, according to the intention of such Act,
Acts, or Ordinances: And the Agents and Receivers under the Order of the said
Trustees, and the Occupiers and Tenants of the Premises, who have taken the
premises or profits thereof into their hands, without agreement to pay Rent
therefore, and have made no account or satisfaction to the Trustes aforesaid,
or to some other by their Order, and also the persons who have held the same,
or taken the profits thereof, under any agreement to pay Rent or Money for the
same, and have not paid the same, shall respectively account, pay and make
satisfaction for so much of the premises, and profits of the premises, as are
unsatisfied or unaccounted for as aforesaid, and pay such Arrearages of Rents
or Money, as by such agreement remains unpaid by them: all which payments and
accounts shall be made to such persons, and in such manner as in Parliament
shall be directed. Nevertheless, it is not hereby intended, that any Minister,
Schoolmaster, or other person, for whose benefit and maintenance the said
pretended Acts or Ordinances were made, shall be accomptable or liable to make
satisfaction for any Profits, Rents, or Sums of money paid to, or taken by them
respectively, by virtue or color of any Order or Appointment of the said
Trustees, or any of them, or otherwise.

Bonds taken in his Majesty's name before May 1642. for securities of any his
Majesty's Receivers (not pardoned, etc.)
Provided also, That this Act do not extend to pardon any Bond, taken in his
late Majesty's Name, before the month of May, one thousand six hundred forty
two, for securing the proper Debt of any Servant or Receiver of the Revenue of
his said late Majesty, that has not been paid to, or by order of some Lawful
or Pretended authority. And whereas by an Order of the Six and twentieth day of
May, in the year One thausand six hundred forty one, the then House of Commons
in Parliament did accept the sum of One hundred and fifty thousand pounds, as a
Composition from the Farmers of several Customs voted to be illegally taken,
and some of the said Farmers did procure and pay the said whole sum of One
hundred and fifty thousand pounds, at the desire of the said House of Commons,
and upon their Declaration, That such of the said Farmers as did not pay their
Proportions, should not be pardoned, but proceeded against; and out of their
Fines satisfaction should be made to those who had paid the said One hundred
and fifty thousand pounds, and in pursuance thereof, did on the First of June
then next following Resolve, That the Estates of such persons, living or dead,
as have by color of any Patent received moneys from the Subject, under
pretense of such Customs, or have been under-Sharers with the Patentees, ought
to be made liable to restitution.

Payments upon proportions of 150000 l. upon the customs.
It is therefore Provided, That this Act shall not extend, nor be construed to
extend to Pardon or Indempnifie any person or persons, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, who have not paid their Proportions of the said One
hundred and fifty thousand pounds, or ought to have been contributory
thereunto, from, or against misdemeanors or offenses relating to the said
Customs, or from payment of their Proportions: But that the Estates of the
dead, as well as of the living, of such who ought to have been contributory, in
whose possession soever (Purchasers Bona fide, and upon valuable Considerations
only excepted) shall Continue and be charged, and chargeable with the payment
of their Proportions, to all intents and purposes as if this Act had not been
made, any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, or be construed to pardon or discharge any sum or sums of money due,
and Arrear for Excise of Beer, Ale, Arrears of Excise upon Beer and Ale.
or other Native or Inland Commodity, since the twenty fourth day of June, One
thousand six hundred fifty and nine.

Provided also, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to the
pardoning, Moneys due for free quarter.
or discharging of any sum or sums of money due from any Officers, or
Soldiers, to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom, for free quarter, since the
second day of July, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, or to discharge
any moneys borrowed by any Officers, for preventing of free quarter.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Conveyance, Purchasers bona fide of Lands, other then the Kings, etc. to enjoy
their purchases.
Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of Lease, Grants
and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust or Limitation of
any Use or Uses of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, not being the
Lands nor Hereditaments of the late King, Queen, Prince, or of any Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Deans or Chapters, nor being Lands or Hereditaments, sold or
given, or appointed to be sold or given, for the Delinquency, or pretended
delinquency of any person or persons whatsoever, by virtue or pretext of any
Act, Order or Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or Ordinance, since the first
day of January, One thousand six hundred forty and one; Nor any Statute,
Judgment, or Recognizance, had, made, acknowledged, or suffered to any person
or persons, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, before the Nine and twentieth day of
September, One thousand six hundred fifty and Nine, By any of the persons
before in this Act by name excepted, or their Heirs, or by any other person or
persons claiming, by, from, or under them, or any of them, other then the Wife
or Wifes, child, children, heir, and heirs of such person and persons, or any
of them, for money bona fide to them, or any of them, paid or lent, nor any
conveyance, assurance, grant, or estate, made before the Five and twentieth day
of April, One thousand six hundred and sixty, By any person or persons, to any
such person excepted by Name, as aforesaid, in trust and for the benefit of any
other person or persons, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, not excepted by name,
as aforesaid, shall be impeached, defeated, made void, or frustrated hereby, or
by the attainder, or conviction of any such excepted person or persons, but
that the same shall be held and enjoyed by the Purchasers, Grantees, Lessees,
Assigns, Cestuy que use, Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been
made, and as if the said person or persons had not been excepted, attainted or
convicted, Any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, Fabric^
Lands, Church Goods and Vtensils.
shall not extend to Indempnifie any person or persons whatsoever, who have
entered into any Message, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called Fabric
Lands, or possessed themselves of any Rent or Revenues, given for the repair of
any Cathedral or other Church, or who have Sacrilegiously enriched themselves
by converting the Plate or Vtensils, and Materials, of, or belonging to such
Churches, to their own private use and advantage, for or in respect of the said
Crimes only. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XII.
Which Judicial Proceedings shall be good and effectual in Law, and which not.

BE it Enacted, and it is Enacted by His Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Fines, nor
final Concords, Which Acts and Proceedings shall not be avoided.
Chirographs, nor Proclamations of Fines, nor any Recoveries, Verdicts,
Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, nor Inrolments of any Deeds or Wills, or of
any such Fines, Proclamations, Recoveries, Verdicts, Judgments, Statutes, or
Recognizances, nor any Exemplifications of them, nor any of them, nor any
Inquisitions, Indictments, Presentiments, Informations, Decrees, Sentences,
Probats of Wills, nor Letters of Administration, nor any Writs or Actings on,
or Returns of Writs, Orders, or other Proceedings in Law or Equity, had, made,
given, taken, or done, or depending in the Courts of Chancery, King's Bench,
Upper Bench, Common Pleas, and Court of Exchequer, and Courts of
Exchequer-Chamber, or any of them sitting at Westminster, or in the Courts of
the Great Sessions in Wales, the Courts of any Counties Palatine, or Duchy of
Lancaster, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in any other inferior Courts of
Law or Equity; or by any the Judges, Clerks, Officers, Sheriffs, Coroners or
Ministers, or others, Acting in Obedience to them, or any of them, or by any
the Courts of Admiralty, Delegates, Justices of Assize, Nisi Prius, Oyer and
Terminer, Jail-deliver, Justices of the Peace, Commissioners of Sewers,
Bankrupts, or Charitable Uses; nor any Actings, Process, Proceedings, nor
Executions thereupon had, made, given, done, or suffered, in the Kingdom of
England, since the First of May, One thousand six hundred forty two, shall be
avoided for want or defect of any Legal Power in the said Courts, Judges,
Commissioners, Justices, or any of them; or for, or by reason that the
Premises, or any of them, were commenced, prosecuted, had, made, held, or used
in the Name, Style, or Title of the late King, or in the Name, Style, Title, or
Test of Custodes Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti; Or in the Name,
Style, Title, or Test of The Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament; Or in the Name, Style, Title, or Test of Oliver Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; Or of Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging;
Or the Name, Style, Title or Test of Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging; or for, or by reason of any alteration of the said Names, Styles, or
Titles; Or for that the said Fines, Recoveries, Process, Pleadings,
Proceedings, and other things before mentioned; Or the Entry and Enrolment of
them, or any of them, were in the Latin or English; But that all and every
such Fines, Recoveries, and other things above mentioned, and the Actings,
Doings, and Proceedings thereupon, shall be of such, and of no other Force,
Effect, and Virtue, then as if such Courts, Judges, Justices, Commissioners,
Officers and Ministers, had acted by virtue of a True, Just and Legal
Authority, and as if the same, and the Entry and Enrolment thereof were in
Latin, and as if the several Acts and Ordinances, or pretended Acts or
Ordinances made by both or either Houses of Parliament, or any Convention
assembled under the name of a Parliament, or by Oliver Cromwell late styled
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereto belonging, and his Council, Warranting or Directing such
Proceedings, had been Good, True, and Effectual Acts of Parliament.

Fines Levied without Entry of Licentia concordandi.
And whereas, since the death of the late King, several Fines have been Levied
without any Entry, or due Entering of any sum paid pro licentia concordandi,
commonly called the Kings Silver, and without Entry, or due Entry of any sum
given to the party for the Concord: And also whereas in the Term of St. Michael
last past, several Fines were Levied and Recorded in the Court of Common Pleas,
before one Judge only of the said Court:

Be it Enacted, That the said Fines and Proclamations thereupon, and every of
them, shall be good and effectual, notwithstanding the defects aforesaid.

Fines and Recoveries of Lands in Com Palatin. Durham.
And be it also further Enacted, That all Fines, Proclamations of Fines,
Recoveries, and other Judicial proceedings in the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, since the death of His late Majesty King Charles the First, Had,
Levied, or Suffered, of any Lands lying in the County Palatine of Durham, shall
be good and effectual, notwithstanding the said Lands were lying in the said
County Palatine.

The Illegal, Acts and Proceedings of that High Court of Justice not allowed.
Provided, That this Act or any thing there in contained, shall not be
Construed, Deemed, or Adjudged to make good, allow, confirm or countenance any
the Proceedings in the late Illegal and Vn-warranted High Courts of Justice, or
so called, or any of them. And whereas since the first day of May in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty one, and before the Five and
twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, there were diverse persons that Adhered to both Houses of Parliament,
who, for, or in respect of such their adherence, were Indicted, Charged, or
Impeached of Treason: And whereas since the said first Day of May, in the Year
of our Lord, One thousand six Hundred Forty one, and before the said Five and
twentieth day of April, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, diverse persons who adhered to His Majesty, or to the late King, were for
such their adherence Charged, Impeached, or Indicted of High Treason:

Indictments, etc. and all Grants thereupon made void.
Be it further Provided and Enacted, That the said Charges, Impeachments,
Indictments, and all Exigents, Outlawries, Convictions, and Attainders
thereupon, and all Letters Patents and Grants thereupon made, of any Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Escheated or Forfeited by reason of such
Attainder, and all Title to any Measne Profits by reason of such Conviction,
Outlawry, Attainder or Grant, be from henceforth repealed and discharged: And
that all Escheats, Forfeitures and Confiscations by reason of such Outlawries,
Conviction or Attainder, Be and are hereby restored unto such persons so
Outlawed, Convicted or Attainted, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators
respectively, as if no such Attainder had been.

Sales made by Ordinance of Parliament.
Provided Nevertheless, And be it Enacted, That this Act or any thing herein
contained, shall not extend to avoid or confirm any Sales or Estates made by
virtue or pretense of any Act, Order or Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or
Ordinance of Parliament, since the first day of May in the Year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred forty two, nor any Confirmation thereof made, or to be
made thereof in this present Parliament, but that such sales stand and be in
the same plight and condition as they should or might have done if this Act had
not been made.

Recognizances, Obligations, etc. in the names of the late Protector.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Recognizances,
Obligations or other Securities, made or given to the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament, or to Oliver Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, or to Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging;
Or to Richard Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and not
pardoned, or discharged by any Act passed or to be passed this present
Parliament, or otherwise, other then such Recognizances, Obligations and
Securities as have been made and given (to any the pretended power or persons
aforesaid, or to any deriving or pretending to derive Authority from them) by
any person or persons, for or by reason of their adherence to His Majesty, or
His said late Royal Father, or relating to, or arising only upon or in respect
of the late Troubles; All which are hereby declared to be void, and to be
delivered up to be Cancelled, And all Judgments, Extents, Inquisitions,
Executions and Seizures had for the said Keepers or Protectors, or any of them,
and not likewise pardoned or discharged, other then as aforesaid, shall and may
be had and prosecuted in the name and to the use of his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors; and also excepting all Obligations, Bonds, or Recognizances entered
into to the said Keepers or Protectors, or any of them, by any person or
persons, by Order, or Direction of any Council of State, Committee of Safety,
Major Generals, Decimators, or any Officer or other person under them, or any
other Military power; all which Obligations, Bonds and Recognizances are hereby
discharged and declared to be null and void, to all intents and purposes.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, That this Act or any thing therein
contained, Justices, Sergeants, etc. Commissioners of Sewers.
shall not extend to continue, after the Eighth day of May, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, any Justice or Justices of one Bench
or the other, or Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants at Law, Commissions of
Sewers, Commissions of Bankrupts, or of charitable uses, made or constituted,
by or in the Name or Style of any the late pretended powers or authorities.

Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to and for every person and
persons, Writs of Error may be brought.
who shall find themselves grieved or damnified by any Judgment, Fine,
Recovery, Decree or Sentence given, made, levied, granted, or pronounced in any
of the said Courts, to proceed in due form of Law, either by Writ of Error,
Bill of Review, Appeal, or other lawful remedy, for the Reversing, Annulling or
Revoking of the same, in such manner as they might at any time heretofore have
done, if the said Courts had been established by lawful Authority, other then
for those Errors and Defects which are remedied or provided for by this Act.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
Non-claim upon Fines of lands sold by Ordinance of Parliament.
That no Non-claim upon or after any Fine or Fines hereby made good or
confirmed, shall extend or be construed to Bar or Prejudice any person or
persons, their Heirs or Successors, or their Feoffees or Trustees (other then
the parties to the said Fines and their Heirs general and special, and his and
their Trustees) as concerning such Right, Claim and Interest, as they had in or
to any Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, which by color of any Act,
Order or Ordinance of both or either Houses of Parliament, or any Convention
sitting at Westminster, under the Name or Style, or assuming the Name or Style
of a Parliament, since the First day of May, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred forty and two, and before the Five and twentieth day of
April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred and sixty, were Sold,
Conveyed, or Disposed, as then, or late the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments
of the King, Queen, or Prince, or of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, or other Ecclesiastical persons, or as the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments of any other persons, for their Adherency to the late King, or
his Majesty that now is, or for any their Actings relating to, or in respect of
the late Troubles; so always that the said person or persons aforesaid, their
Heirs or Successors, pursue their Title, Claim, or Interest, by way of Action,
or lawful Entry, within five years next after the Nine and twentieth day of
May, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred and sixty.

And although in this Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings, The late Government
declared to be usurped.
it was necessary to mention Diverse pretensed Acts and Ordinances, by the Names
and Styles which those Persons then Usurped, who took upon them to pass the
same, Namely, some by the Style and Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of
England by Authority of Parliament; and others by the Name and Style of
Protectors of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; Yet this present Parliament does
Declare, and it is further Enacted by Authority of the same, That the Names and
Styles aforesaid, and every of them, are most Rebellious, Wicked, Traiterous,
and Abominable Usurpations, Detested by this present Parliament, Recognition of
his Majesty's just title.
as Opposite in the Highest Degree to His Sacred Majesty's most Just and
Undoubted Right, to whom, and to his Heirs and Lawful Successors, the Imperial
Crowns of the Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with their, and every
of their Dominions and Territories do of Right appertain, and as violating and
Infringing the just Rights and privileges of Parliament, and both Houses
thereof now Assembled, or that hereafter shall be called and assembled.

Provided always, and be it enacted, That all and every pretended Indictment
or Indictments, Out-lawries, Inquisitions, and all Proceedings thereon of High
Treason against any Person or Persons whatsoever, for Levying War against the
late Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, the pretended Keepers of the Liberty of England,
or any other Usurped Power, Indictments of Treasons, etc. for levying wars
against Oliver Cromwell, etc. made void.
shall be from henceforth void and of none effect in Law. And that all Grants,
Conveyances, Leases, Devices, Assurances, Statutes, Recognizances, and
Judgments for Debt, Damages heretofore had, made, or suffered by any person, or
his heirs, whose Conviction, Vtlagary, or Attainder is by this Act discharged
or made void, shall be of the same force and effect, as if no such Conviction,
Outlawry, or Attainder had been. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XIII.
None shall take above Six Pounds for the loan of an Hundred Pounds for a Year.

Abatement of interest advantageous to Trade.
FOrasmuch as the Abatement of Interest from Ten in the Hundred in former times,
has been found by notable experience Beneficial to the Advancement of Trade,
and Improvement of Lands by good Husbandry, with many other considerable
advantages to this Nation, especially the reducing of it to a nearer Proportion
with Foreign States with whom We Traffic. And whereas in fresh memory the
like fall from Eight to Six in the Hundred, by a late constant practice has
found the like Success to the general contentment of this Nation, as is visible
by several Improvements. And whereas it is the endeavor of some at present to
reduce it back again in practice to the allowance of the Statute, still in
force, to Eight in the Hundred, to the great discouragement of Ingenuity and
Industry in the Husbandry, Trade, and Commerce of this Nation.

The penalty and forfeiture of taking above six in the hundred.
Be it for the Reasons aforesaid, Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
and the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That no Person
or Persons whatsoever, from and after the Twenty Ninth day of September, in the
Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, upon any Contract, shall
from and after the said Twenty Ninth of September, take directly or indirectly,
for Loan of any Moneys, Wares, Merchandise, or other Commodities whatsoever,
above the value of Six Pounds for the Forbearance of one Hundred Pounds for a
Year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a longer or
shorter time. And that all Bonds, Contracts, and Assurances whatsoever made
after the time aforesaid, for payment of any Principal or money to be lent or
covenanted to be performed upon or for any Usury, whereupon or whereby there
shall be reserved or taken above the Rate of Six pounds in the Hundred, as
aforesaid, shall be utterly void. And that all and every person or persons
whatsoever, which shall after the time aforesaid, upon any Contract to be made,
after the said Twenty Ninth of September, take, accept and receive, by way or
means of any corrupt Bargain, Loan, Exchange, Cheivisaunce, Shift, or Interest
of any Wares, Merchandise, or other thing or things whatsoever, or by any
deceitful way or means, or by any covin, engine, or deceitful conveyance for
the forbearing or giving day of payment for one whole year, of and for their
money, or other thing, above the sum of six pounds for the forbearing of One
hundred pounds for a year, and so after that Rate for a greater or lesser Sum,
or for a longer or shorter Term, shall forfeit and lose for every such offense,
the treble value of the moneys, wares, merchandise, and other things so Lent,
Bargained, Sold, Exchanged, or Shifted.

The Forfeiture of a Scrivener that shall take above five shillings for the
forbearance of an hundred pounds for a year, and above twelve pence for making
a Bond.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Scrivener and Scriveners, Broker and Brokers, Solicitor and Solicitors, Driver
and Drivers of Bargains for Contracts, who shall after the said Twenty ninth
day of September, take or receive, directly or indirectly, any sum or sums of
money, or other reward or thing, for Brokage, Soliciting, Driving or Procuring
the Loan, or forbearing of any sum or sums of money, over and above the Rate or
Value of five shillings for the Loan, or forbearing of one hundred pounds for a
year, and so rateably, or above Twelve pence for making or renewing of the Bond
or Bill for the Loan, or for forbearing thereof, or for any Counter-Bond or
Bill concerning the same, shall forfeit for every such Offense Twenty pounds,
and have Imprisonment for half a year: The one moiety of all which Forfeitures
to be to the King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors; And the other
moiety to him or them that will sue for the same, in the same County where the
several Offenses are committed, and not elsewhere, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, in which no Essoign, Wager of Law, or Protection to be
allowed. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 13.

CAP. XIV.
A Perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving, on the Nine and twentietth day of May,
for His Majesty's Happy Restoration.

The wonderful Power and Goodness of God in the Restauration^ of his Majesty.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God the King of Kings, and sole Disposer of all Earthly
Crowns and Kingdoms, has by his All-swaying Providence and Power miraculously
demonstrated in the view of all the World, his Transcendent Mercy, Love and
Graciousness, toward His most Excellent Majesty, CHARLES the Second, by his
Especial Grace, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the
true Faith, and all his Majesty's Loyal Subjects of this his Kingdom of
England, and the Dominions thereunto annexed, by his Majesty's late most
wonderful, glorious, peaceable and joyful Restoration to the actual possession
and exercise of his undoubted hereditary Sovereign and Regal Authority over
them (after sundry years forced extermination into Foreign parts, The
unanimous and cordial affection of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and
People in general.
by the most Traiterous Conspiracies, and Armed Power of Usurping Tyrants, and
execrable perfidious Traitors) and that without the least opposition, or
effusion of blood, through the unanimous, cordial, Loyal Votes of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and passionate desires of all
other his Majesty's Subjects; which unexpressible Blessing (by Gods own most
wonderful Dispensation) was completed on the Twenty Ninth day of May last
past, being the most memorable Birthday, not only of his Majesty, both as a
Man and Prince, but likewise as an Actual King, and of this and other His
Majesty's Kingdoms, all in a great measure new born and raised from the dead on
this most joyful Day, wherein many Thousands of the Nobility, Gentry, Citizens,
and other his Lieges of this Realm, conducted his Majesty unto His Royal Cities
of London and Westminster, with all possible Expressions of their Joy and Loyal
Affections in far greater Triumph than any of his most Victorious Predecessors
Kings of England, returned thither from their Foreign Conquest; and both his
Majesty's Houses of Parliament, with all Dutiful and Joyful Demonstrations of
their Allegiance publicly received, and cordially congratulated His Majesty's
most happy Arrival, and Investiture in his Royal Throne, at his Palace at
White Hall; Upon all which considerations, this being the Day which the Lord
himself has made and crowned with so many public Blessings and signal
Deliverances, both of his Majesty and his People, The intent of keeping the
said Day.
from all their late most deplorable Confusions, Divisions, Wars, Devastations,
and Oppressions, to the end that it may be kept in perpetual Remembrance in all
Ages to come; and that his Sacred Majesty will with all his Subjects of this
Realm, and the Dominions thereof, and their posterities after them, might
annually celebrate the perpetual memory thereof, by sacrificing their unfeigned
hearty public Thanks thereon to Almighty God, with one heart and voice, in a
most devout and Christian manner, for all these public benefits received and
conferred on them, upon this most joyful Day. Be it therefore Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular Ministers of
Gods Word and Sacraments, in every Church, Chapel, and other usual place of
Divine Service, and public Prayer, which now are, or hereafter shall be within
this Realm of England, and the respective Dominions thereof, and their
Successors shall in all succeeding Ages annually celebrate the Twenty Ninth day
of May, The 29th of May to be annually celebrated.
by rendering their hearty public Praises and Thanksgivings unto Almighty God,
for all the forementioned Extraordinary Mercies, Blessings, and Deliverances
received, and mighty Acts done thereon, and Declare the same to all the people
there assembled, and the Generations yet to come, that so they may for ever
praise the Lord for the same, whose Name alone is Excellent, and his Glory
above the Earth and Heavens. And be it further Enacted, All persons to resort
to some Church, Chapel, or public Place of Thanksgiving the said day.
That all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Kingdom, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, shall upon the said day annually resort with
diligence and devotion to some usual Church, Chapel, or Place where such
public Thanksgivings and Praises to Gods most Divine Majesty shall be rendered,
and there orderly and devoutly abide during the said public Thanksgivings,
Prayers, Preaching, Singing of Psalms, and other Service of God there to be
used and ministered. And to the end that all persons may be put in mind of their
duty thereon, and be the better prepared to discharge the same with that piety
and devotion as becomes them; Be it further Enacted, Notice of this Act to be
given the next Lords Day before.
That every Minister shall give notice to his Parishioners publicly in the
Church at morning Prayer the Lords Day next before every such Twenty Ninth day
of May, for the due observation of the said day, And shall then likewise
publicly and distinctly read this present Act to the people. St. 13 Car. 2.
cap. 11.

CAP. XV.
An Act for the speedy Disbanding of the Army, and Garrisons of this Kingdom,
with Instructions for the same. EXP.

CAP. XVI.
Soldiers of the Army Disbanded, may Exercise Trades.

WHereas there are diverse Officers and Soldiers now in the Kings Majesty's
Service, Soldiers instrumental in His Majesty's Restoration.
under the Command of his Excellency George Duke of Albemarle, Captain General
of His Majesty's Armies, who have been Instrumental, by the Blessing of
Almighty God, to the Happy Restitution and Restoration of his Sacred Majesty
unto His Kingdoms and People, and to His Just Right of Government in the
Kingdom of England, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; some
of which are men that used Trades, others that were Apprentices to Trades, who
had not served out their Times; and others who are Apt and Fit for Trades, many
of which, the Wars being now ended, would willingly Employ themselves in those
Trades they were formerly accustomed unto, or which they are apt and able to
follow and make use of for the getting of their Living by their Labor and
Industry; but are, or may be hindered from exercising those Trades in certain
Cities, Corporations, and other places within this Kingdom, because of certain
by-Lawes and Customs of those places, and of a Statute made in the Fifth year
of the late Queen Elizabeth, Prohibiting the use of certain Trades by any
person that has not served as an Apprentice to such Trade by the space of
seven years; Such as were in Service under General Monk 25. April, 1660. and
instrumental in his Majesty's restitution may exercise Trades.
For remedy whereof, And to the end that those persons who were in Actual
Service under the Command of the said Captain General on the Five and twentieth
day of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and
were Instrumental to the Happy Restitution of the Kings Majesty unto his Just
Right of Government, as aforesaid, may not be deprived of a Means of
Livelihood; May it please your Majesty, that it may be Enacted, and be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That all such
Officers and Soldiers, who were under the Command of the said Captain General
on the Five and twentieth day of April, Such as have deserted the Service, or
refuse the Oath of Allegiance, excepted.
in the said year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, and have not
since deserted the Service, or refused to take the several Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance unto the Kings Majesty that now is, his Heirs and Successors,
and that have heretofore used or exercised any Trade, though they did not serve
out the time of their Apprentiship; or any other person employed as aforesaid
under the Command of the said Captain General at the time aforesaid, that is
apt and able to practice any Trade, may set up and exercise such several and
respective Trades, Mysteries or occupations, whereunto he or they have been
bound Apprentice, and served any Part of his or their time, or any Handicraft
or other Trade exercised about Manufactures, though he was never bound
Apprentice to the same, Apprentices to enjoy all Immunities as it they had
served their Time.
in manner following; (that is to say) Such of them as have been Apprentices,
as aforesaid, may set up and exercise such several and respective Trades
whereunto he or they have been so bound Apprentices, as fully as if they had
served out their respective terms, or times for which they have been bound; and
shall have and enjoy the same Immunities as they should have had and enjoyed,
if they had served out their said terms or times. And all others of the said
Officers and Soldiers, may set up and exercise such Trades as they are apt and
able for, in the several Towns and Places within the several and respective
Counties wherein they were born, without any suit, let, or molestation of any
person or persons whatsoever, for or by reason of the using of such Trade. And
if any such Officer or Officers, Soldier or Soldiers, shall be sued,
impleaded, or indicted in any Court whatsoever, within this Kingdom, for using
or exercising any such Trades as aforesaid; then the said Officer or Officers,
Soldier or Soldiers, making it appear to the same Court where they are so
sued, impleaded or indicted, that they have served the Kings Majesty under the
Command of the said Captain General, as aforesaid; and they they have severally
taken the said Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, The general Issue pleaded
upon this Act.
and have not since deserted the said Service, shall upon the General Issue
pleaded, be found Not guilty in any Plaint, Bill, Information, or Indictment,
exhibited against them; and such persons, who, notwithstanding this Act, shall
prosecute their said Suit by Bill, Plaint, Information, or Indictment, and
shall have a Verdict pass against them, or become Nonsuit therein, or
discontinue their said Suit, such person or persons shall pay unto such Officer
or Officers, Soldier or Soldiers, double costs of Suit to be recovered as any
other Costs at Common Law may be recovered; And all Judges and Jurors, before
whom any such Suit, Information, or Indictment shall be brought, and all other
persons whatsoever, are to take notice of this present Act, and shall conform
themselves thereunto; any Statute, Law, Ordinance, Custom, or Provision to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

How an Officer or Soldier may prove his being in Service within this Act.
Provided, That no Officer or Soldier shall have the benefit of this Act, that
shall not prove his Service as aforesaid, either by a Certificate under the
Hand and Seal of some Field Officer, and two Commission-Officers of the
Regiment wherein he served, or some General-Officer of the Army, certifying his
knowledge of the Service aforesaid; and the said Certificate to be proved by one
Witness at least, to be a true Certificate; or for default of such Certificate,
by the Oaths of two credible Persons at least.

Penalty upon false Certificates.
Provided also, That if any person or persons pretending themselves to have been
Officers or Soldiers within the qualifications aforesaid, shall produce a
false Certificate to the intent to have the benefit of this Act, and thereof be
convicted by Confession, or due proof of Law, shall suffer Imprisonment not
exceeding six months, and to lose the benefit of this Act, Any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Soldiers, Tradesmen, to submit to all Offices and Orders in Corporations and
Companies of their Manufacture.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, That the said Officers and Soldiers in this
Act mentioned, and all other persons exercising, or that shall exercise any
Trade or Profession in any City or Corporation, shall be liable to bear all
Offices in the said respective Cities and Corporations, when by the said Cities
and Corporations they shall be elected thereunto, and shall submit to such
Orders of Corporations and Companies for search of the well and true making of
their Manufacture, as others free of the said Companies or Corporations are
subject unto; any Law, Usage, or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

CAP. XVII.
Ministers confirmed, and restored to their Benefices.

CAP. XVIII.
Shipping and Navigation Encouraged.

FOr the increase of Shipping, and encouragement of the Navigation of this
Nation, wherein, under the good Providence and Protection of God, the Wealth,
Safety, and Strength of this Kingdom is so much concerned, Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, No goods shall be imported from Asia, Africa, or America,
but in English Ships.
and the Authority thereof, That from and after the First day of December, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, and from thenceforward, no Goods or Commodities
whatsoever shall be Imported into, or Exported out of any Lands, Islands,
Plantations, or Territories to His Majesty belonging, or in his possession, or
which may hereafter belong unto, or be in the possession of His Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, in Asia, Africa, or America, in any other Ship or Ships,
Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such Ships or Vessels as do truly and
without fraud belong only to the People of England or Ireland, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or are of the built of, and belonging to
any the said Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories, as the Proprietors
and Right Owners thereof, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners at least are English, Penalty.
under the penalty of the Forfeiture and Loss of all the Goods and Commodities
which shall be Imported into, or Exported out of any the aforesaid places in
any other Ship or Vessel, as also of the Ship or Vessel, with all its Guns,
Furniture, Tackle, Ammunition and Apparel; one Third part thereof to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; one Third part to the Governor of such
Land, Plantation, Island, or Territory, where such default shall be committed,
in case the said Ship or Goods be there seized, or otherwise that third part
also to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and the other third part to him
or them who shall Seize, Inform, or Sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Bill, Information, Plaint, or other Action, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or
Wager of Law shall be allowed; And all Admirals, and other Commanders at Sea of
any the Ships of War, or other Ship, having Commission from his Majesty, or
from his Heirs or Successors, are hereby Authorized and strictly required to
seize and bring in as prize all such Ships or Vessels as shall have offended
contrary hereunto, and deliver them to the Court of Admiralty, there to be
proceeded against; and in case of condemnation, one Moiety of such Forfeitures
shall be to the use of such Admirals or Commanders and their Companies, to be
divided and proportioned amongst them according to the Rules and Orders of the
Sea in case of Ships taken prize; and the other Moiety to the use of his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

And be it Enacted, Aliens shall not exercise the occupation of Merchants or
Factors.
That no Alien or person not born within the Allegiance of our Sovereign Lord
the King, his Heirs and Successors, or Naturalized, or made a free Denizen,
shall from and after the First day of February, which shall be in the year of
our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty one, exercise the Trade or Occupation
of a Merchant or Factor in any the said places, upon pain of the Forfeiture and
Loss of all his Goods and Chattels, or which are in his possession, one third
to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; one third to the Governor of the
Plantation where such person shall so offend; and the other third to him or
them that shall inform or sue for the same in any of his Majesty's Courts in
the Plantation where such offense shall be committed: And all Governors of the
said Lands, Islands, Plantations or Territories, and every of them, are hereby
strictly required and commanded, and all who hereafter shall be made Governors
of any such Islands, Plantations or Territories, by his Majesty, his Heirs or
Suceessors, shall before their entrance into their Government take a Solemn
Oath to do their utmost, that every the aforementioned clauses, and all the
matters and things therein contained, Governors, etc. of Plantations to take an
Oath for the observance of the aforementioned clauses.
shall be punctually and bona fide observed, according to the true intent and
meaning thereof: And upon complaint and proof made before His Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or such as shall be by Him or them thereunto authorized
and appointed, that any the said Governors have been willingly and wittingly
negligent in doing their Duty accordingly, that the said Governor so offending
shall be removed from his Government.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Goods or
Commodities whatsoever of the growth, production, or manufacture of Africa,
Asia, or America, or of any part thereof, or which are described or laid down
in the usual Maps or Cards of those places, be imported into England, Ireland,
or Wales, Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in any
other Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly and
without fraud belong only to the people of England or Ireland, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or of the Lands, Islands, Plantations or
Territories in Asia, Africa, or America, to His Majesty belonging, as the
proprietors and right owners thereof, and whereof the Master and three Fourths
at least of the Mariners are English, under the penalty of the Forfeiture of
all such Goods and Commodities, and of the Ship or Vessel in which they were
Imported, with all her Guns, Tackle, Furniture, Ammunition, and apparel; one
Moiety to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety to him or
them who shall seize, inform, or sue for the same in any Court of Record, by
Bill, Information, Plaint, or other Action, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or
Wager in Law shall be allowed.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No Goods of foreign
grows or manufacture, shall be brought into England, etc. in English Ships,
but only from the places of their said growth, etc.
That no Goods or Commodities that are of foreign Growth, Production, or
Manufacture, and which are to be brought into England, Ireland, Wales, the
Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in English-built
shipping, or other shipping belonging to some of the aforesaid places, and
Navigated by English Mariners as abovesaid, shall be shipped or brought from
any other Place or Places, Country or Countries, but only from those of the
said Growth, Production, or Manufacture, or from those Ports where the said
Goods and Commodities can only, or are, or usually have been first shipped for
transportation, and from none other Places or Countries, under the penalty of
the Forfeiture of all such of the aforesaid Goods, as shall be Imported from
any other Place or Country, contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, as
also of the Ship in which they were Imported, with all her Guns, Furniture,
Ammunition, Tackle and Apparel, one Moiety to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors; and the other moiety to him or them that shall seize, inform, or
sue for the same in any Court of Record, to be recovered as is before expressed.

All ling, stockfish, etc. oil, etc. Whale ^ins, etc. imported not caught in
vessels by the proprietors themselves, etc. shall pay double Aliens custom.
And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That any sort of Ling,
Stockfish, Pilchard, or any other kind of dried or salted fish, usually fished
for and caught by the People of England, Ireland, Wales, Town of Barwick upon
Tweed, or any sort of Codfish or Herring, or any Oil or Blubber made or that
shall be made of any kind of fish whatsoever, or any Whale-fins or Whale-bones,
which shall be imported into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, not having been caught in Vessels truly and properly belonging thereunto
as Proprietors and right Owners thereof, and the said Fish cured, saved and
dried, and the Oil and Blubber aforesaid (which shall be accounted and pay as
oil) not made by the people thereof, and shall be imported into England,
Ireland, or Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall pay double Aliens
custom.

No goods to be ^a^ed or carried from one part of England to another in the
vessel of any Alien not denizend, etc.
And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That from henceforth it
shall not be lawful to any person or persons whatsoever, to Load or cause to
be Laden and carried in any Bottom or Bottoms, Ship or Ships, Vessel or
Vessels whatsoever, whereof any Stranger or Strangers born (unless such as be
Denizens or Naturalized) be Owners, Part-owners, or Master, and whereof three
fourths of the Mariners at least shall not be English, any Fish, Victual,
Wares, Goods, Commodities, or things of what kind or Nature soever the same
shall be, from one Port or Creek of England, Ireland, Wales, Islands of
Guernsey or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, to another Port or Creek of
the same, The penalty.
or of any of them, under penalty for every one that shall offend contrary to
the true meaning of this branch of this present Act, to forfeit all such goods
as shall be laden and carried in any such Ship or Vessel, together with the
Ship or Vessel, and all her Guns, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture and Apparel,
one Moiety to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to
him or them that shall Inform, Ease and abatement in the book of rates to
extend only where three parts of the Mariners be English.
Seize, or Sue for the same in any Court of Record, to be recovered in manner
aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That where any Ease,
Abatement, or Privilege is given in the Book of Rates to goods or Commodities
Imported or Exported in English built Shipping, that is to say, shipping built
in England, Ireland, Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or town of Berwick
upon Tweed, or in any the Lands, Islands, Dominions and Territories to His
Majesty in Africa, Asia, or America, belonging or in his possession, That it is
always to be understood, and Provided that the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners of the said Ships, at least, be also English, And that where it is
required that the Master and three fourths of the Mariners be English, that the
true intent and meaning thereof is, that they should be such during the whole
voyage, unless in case of sickness, Death, or being taken Prisoners in the
Voyage, to be proved by the Oath of the Master or other chief Officer of such
ships.

Goods of the growth or manufacture of Muscovy or Russia.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Goods or
Commodities of the Growth, production or Manufacture of Muscovy or of any the
Countries, Dominions or Territories to the great Duke or Emperor of Muscovy or
Russia, belonging, As also that no sort of Masts, Timber or Boards, no foreign
Salt, pitch, Tar, Rozin, Hemp or Flax, Raisins, Figs, Prunes, Olive Oils, no
sorts of Corn or Grain, Sugar, Potashes, Wines, Vinegar, or Spirits called
Aquavite or Brandy Wine, shall from and after the First day of April, which
shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty one, be
imported into England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in any
Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels whatsoever, but in such as do truly and
without fraud belong to the people thereof, or of some of them as the true
Owners and proprietors thereof, and whereof the Master and Three Fourths of the
Mariners at least are English, Othoman or Turkish Emperor.
and that no Currants nor Commodities of the growth, production, or Manufacture
of any the Countries, Islands, Dominions or Territories to the Othoman or
Turkish Empire belonging, shall from and after the first day of September which
shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty one, be
imported into any the forementioned places in any Ship or Vessel, but which is
of English built, and Navigated as aforesaid, and in no other; Except only such
foreign ships and vessels as are of the built of that Country or place of which
the said Goods are the growth, production or Manufacture respectively, or of
such port where the said Goods can only be, or most usually are first shipped
for transportation, and whereof the Master and Three Fourths of the Mariners at
least are of the said Country or place, under the penalty and Forfeiture of
ship and Goods to be disposed and recovered as in the foregoing clause.

Frauds in concealing Aliens goods how to be prevented.
Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the prevention of the great frauds daily used in coloring and concealing of
Aliens Goods, all Wines of the growth of France or Germany, which from and
after the Twentieth day of October, One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall
be Imported into any the Ports or places aforesaid, in any other Ship or Vessel
then which does truly and without fraud belong to England, Ireland, Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Navigated with the Mariners thereof, as
aforesaid, shall be deemed Aliens goods, and pay all Strangers Customs and
Duties to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as also to the Town or Port
into which they shall be Imported; And that all sorts of Masts, Timber or
Boards, as also all foreign Salt, Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Hemp, Flax, Raisins,
Figs, Prunes, Olive Oils, all sorts of Corn or Grain, Sugar, Potashes,
Spirits, commonly called Brandy Wine or Aqua-vitae, Wines of the growth of
Spain, the Islands of the Canaries or Portugal, Madera or Western Islands, and
all goods of the growth, Production or Manufacture, of Moscovy or Russia, which
from and after the First day of April which shall be in the year of Our Lord
one thousand six hundred sixty one, shall be Imported into any of the aforesaid
places in any other then such shipping, and so Navigated, and all Currants and
Turkey Commodities which from and after the first day of September One thousand
six hundred sixty one, shall be Imported into any the places aforesaid, in any
other then English built shipping, and Navigated as aforesaid shall be deemed
Aliens Goods, and pay accordingly to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and
to the Town or Port into which they shall be Imported.

And for prevention of all frauds which may be used in coloring or buying of
Foreign Ships, How to prevent Frauds in coloring and buying Foreign ships.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is hereby Enacted, That from
and after the first day of April, which shall be in the Year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred sixty one, no Foreign built ship or Vessel whatsoever shall
be deemed or pass as a ship to England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick, or
any of them belonging, or enjoy the benefit or Privilege of such a ship or
Vessel, until such time that he or they claiming the said ship or Vessel to be
theirs, shall make appear to the chief Officer or Officers of the customs in
the Port next to the place of his or their abode, that he or they are not
Aliens, and shall have taken an Oath before such chief Officer or Officers, who
are hereby Authorized to Administer the same, That such Ship or Vessel was bona
fide and without fraud by him or them bought for a valuable consideration,
expressing the sum, as also the time, place, and persons from whom it was
bought, and who are his part Owners (if he have any) all which part-owners
shall be liable to take the said Oath before the chief Officer or Officers of
the Custom-house of the Port next to the place of their abode, and that no
Forreiner directly or indirectly has any part, interest, or share therein, and
that upon such Oath he or they shall receive a Certificate under the Hand and
Seal of the said chief Officer or Officers of the Port where such person or
persons so making Oath do reside, whereby such Ship or Vessel may for the
future pass and be deemed as a Ship belonging to the said Port, and enjoy the
privilege of such a Ship or Vessel; And the said Officer or Officers shall
keep a Register of all such Certificates as he or they shall so give, and
return a Duplicate thereof to the chief Officers of the customs at London for
such as shall be granted in England, Wales, and Berwick, and to the Chief
Officers of the customs at Dublin for such as shall be given in Ireland,
together with the Names of the person or persons from whom such Ship was
bought, and the sum of Money which was paid for her, as also the Names of all
such persons who are part-owners of her, if any such be.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Officers of the custom
not to allow any privilege to any foreign built ship until certificate or
proof, etc.
That if any Officer of the Customs shall from and after the said First day of
April, allow the privilege of being a Ship or Vessel to England, Ireland,
Wales, or Town of Berwick, or any of them belonging, to any Foreign built
Ship, or Vessel, until such Certificate be before them produced, or such Proof
and oath taken before them; or if any Officer of the Customs shall allow the
privilege of an English built ship, or other Ship to any the aforesaid places
belonging, to any English or Forrien built Ship coming into any Port, and
making entry of any Goods, until Examination whether the Master and three
Fourths of the Mariners be English, or shall allow to any Foreign built ship,
bringing in the Commodities of the Growth of the Country where it was built,
the privilege by this Act, to such Ship given, until Examination and Proof
whether it be a ship of the built of that Country, and that the Master and
three Fourths of the Mariners are of that Country; or if any Person who is or
shall be made Governor of any Lands, Islands, Plantations, or Territories in
Africa, Asia, or America, by his Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, shall suffer
any Foreign built Ship or Vessel to load or unload any Goods or Commodities
within the Precincts of their Goverments, until such Certificate be produced
before them or such as shall be by them appointed to view the same, and
Examination whether the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners at least be
English, that for the first offense such Officer of the Customs, and Governors,
shall be put out of their places, Offices or Governments.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, extend not,
Proviso for goods of the Streights or Levant.
or be meant to restrain and prohibit the Importation of any the Commodities
of the Streights, or Levant Seas, laden in English built shipping, and whereof
the Master and three fourths of the Mariners at least are English, from the
usual Ports or places for lading of them heretofore within the said Streights
or Levant Seas, though the said Commodities be not of the very growth of the
said places.

Provided also, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, extend not, or
be meant to restrain the Importing of any East India Commodities, laden in
English built shipping, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the
Mariners at least are English, from the usual place or places for lading of
them in any part of those Seas, to the Southward and Eastward of Cabo bona
speranza, although the Ports be not th^^bery Places of their growth.

Provided also, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any of the people of
England, Ireland, East India Commodities. Proviso for goods imported from
Spain, Portugal, Azores, Madera, or Canary, Islands.
Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, or town of Berwick upon Tweed, in
Vessels or Ships to them belonging, and whereof the Master and three fourths of
the Mariners at least are English, to load and bring in from any of the Ports
of Spain or Portugal, or Western Islands, commonly called Azores, or Madera or
Canary Islands,, all sorts of Goods or Commodities of the Growth, Production,
or Manufacture of the Plantation or Dominions of either of them respectively.

Proviso for Bullion, and goods taken by way of Rep^isal.
Provided, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, extend not to Bullion,
nor yet to any Goods taken, or that shall be bona fide taken by way of Reprisal
by any Ship or Ships belonging to England, Ireland, or Wales, Islands of
Guernsey, or Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and whereof the Master and
three Fourths of the Mariners at feast are English, having Commission from his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors.

Proviso concerning goods of Scotland.
Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend, or be construed to extend to lay Aliens Duties upon any Corn of the
growth of Scotland, or to any Salt made in Scotland, nor to any Fish caught,
saved and cured by the People of Scotland, and Imported directly from Scotland
in Scotch built Ships, Goods of Russia.
and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners are of His Majesty's
Subjects, nor to any Seal Oil of Russia, Imported from thence into England,
Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, in shipping bona fide to some of
the said places belonging, and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the
Mariners at least are English.

The duty payable upon goods in French ships
Provided also, and it is hereby Enacted, That every Ship or Vessel belonging to
any the Subjects of the French King, which from and after the Twentieth day of
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and sixty, shall come
into any Port, Creek, Harbor of Road of England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, and shall there lade or unlade any Goods or Commodities, or
take in or set on Shore any passengers, shall pay to the Collector of His
Majesty's Customs in such Port, Creek, Harbor or Road, for every Tun of which
the said Ship or Vessel is of burden, How long to continue.
to be computed by such Officer of the Customs as shall be thereunto appointed,
the sum of five shillings current money of England: And that no such Ship or
Vessel be suffered to depart out of such Port, Creek, Harbor or Road, until the
said Duty be fully paid: And that this Duty shall continue to be Collected,
Levied, and paid, for such time, as a certain Duty of Fifty Solls per Tun
lately imposed by the French King, or any part thereof, shall continue to be
Collected upon the shipping of England lading in France, and three Months
after, and no longer.

Sugars, tobacco, etc. of the growth of America, Asia, or Africa.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
First day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty one, noe Sugars, Tobacco, Cotton-wooll, Indicoes, Ginger,
Fustick, or other dying wood, of the growth, Production or Manufacture of any
English Plantations in America, Asia, or Africa, shall be shipped, carried,
conveyed or transported from any the said English Plantations to any Land,
Island, Territory, Dominion, Port, or place whatsoever, other then to such
other English Plantations as do belong to His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, or to the Kingdom of England, or Ireland, or Principality of Wales,
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, there to be laid on shore, under the penalty of
the Forfeiture of the said Goods or the full value thereof, as also of the
Ship, with all her Guns, Tackle, Apparel, Ammunition and Furniture, The one
Moiety to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to
him or them that shall seize, inform, or sue for the same in any Court of
Record, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager
of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for every Ship or
Vessel, which from and after the Five and twentieth day of December, Ships of
England, Ireland, or Wales, Sailing to any English plantation of America, Asia,
or Africa, shall be bound with sureties, to bring goods there loaded into
England, etc.
in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and fifty, shall set sail out
of or from England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, for any
English Plantation in America, Asia, or Africa, sufficient bond shall be given
with one surety to the chief Officers of the Custom-house of such Port or place
from whence the said Ship shall set sail, to the value of one thousand pounds,
if the ship be of less burden then one hundred Tuns; and of the sum of two
thousand pounds, if the Ship shall be of greater burden, That in case the said
ship or vessel shall load any of the said Commodities at any of the said English
plantations, that the same Commodities shall be by the said ship brought to
some Port of England, Ireland, Wales, or to the Port or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and shall there unload and put on shore the same, the danger of the Seas
only excepted: And for all ships coming from any other Port or Place to any of
the aforesaid plantations, who by this Act are permitted to trade there, that
the Governor of such English plantations shall before the said ship or Vessel
be permitted to load on board any of the said Commodities, take Bond in manner
and to the value aforesaid for each respective Ship or Vessel, That such Ship
or Vessel shall carry all the aforesaid Goods that be laden on board in the
said ship to some other of His Majesty's English Plantations or to England,
Ships coming from other places to any of those plantations.
Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed: And that every ship or Vessel,
which shall load or take on board any of the aforesaid Goods, until such Bond
given to the said Governor, or Certificate produced from the Officers of any
Custom-house of England, Ireland, Wales, or of the Town of Berwick, that such
bonds have been there ^^ly given, shall be forefeited with all her Guns,
Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, to be employed and recovered in the manner as
aforesaid. And the said Governors and every of them shall twice in every year
after the First day of January, The respective Governors to return the bonds
taken twice yearly to the chief offices of the custom in London.
One thousand six hundred and sixty, return true Copies of all such Bonds by
him so taken, to the chief Officers of the Customs in London. St. 13. Car. 2.
cap. 14.

CAP. XIX.
For preventing Frauds and concealments of Customs, and Subsidies.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That if
any person or persons at any time after the first day of September,, One
thousand six hundred and sixty, Persons which shall convey away any goods
without entry and agreement for the custom
shall cause any Goods for which Custom, Subsidy, or other Duties are due, or
payable by virtue of the Act passed this Parliament, (Entitled, A Subsidy
Granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other sums of money, payable
upon Merchandise Exported and Imported) to be landed or conveyed away without
due entry thereof first made, and the Customer or Collector, or his Deputy
agreed with, That then, and in such case upon Oath thereof made before the Lord
Treasurer, or any of the Barons of the Exchequer, or chief Magistrate of the
Port or place where the offense shall be committed, or the place next adjoining
thereunto, The penalty.
it shall be lawful to and for the Lord Treasurer, or any of the Barons
aforesaid, or chief Magistrate of the Port or place where the offense shall be
committed, or the place next adjoining thereunto, to issue out a Warrant to any
person or persons, thereby enabling him or them, with the assistance of a
Sheriff, Justice of Peace, or Constable to enter into any house in the day time
where such Goods are suspected to be concealed; and in case of resistance, to
break open such houses, and to seize and secure the same goods so concealed:
And all Officers and Ministers of Justice are hereby required to be aiding and
assisting thereunto.

Provided always, That no house shall be entered by virtue of this Act, No
proceeding against any upon this Act unless within one month after the offense
committed.

The continuance of this Act.

Damages and costs against false informers


unless it be within the space of one Month after the offense supposed to be
committed.

Provided also, That this Act shall continue in force unto the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.

Provided also, That if the Information whereupon any house shall come to be
searched, shall prove to be false, that then, and in such case, the party
injured shall recover his full damages and costs against the Informer, by
Action of Trespass to be therefore brought against such Informer. St. 13 Car.
2. cap. 7.

CAP. XX.
For raising Sevenscore thousand pounds, for the complete Disbanding of the
whole Army, and paying off some part of the Navy, by a two Months Assesment of
70000 l. per mensem beginning from the first of November 1660. EXP. Stat. 13
Car. 2. cap. 6.

CAP. XXI.
An Act for the speedy raising of Seventy thousand pounds for the present
supply of His Majesty, EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 6. and cap. 10.

CAP. XXII.
Bay-making in the Dutch Bay-Hall in Colchester regulated.

CAP. XXIII.
Certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, For the Increase of His
Majesty's Revenue during His Life.

THe Commons assembled in Parliament, in gratitude, for an humble
acknowledgment of Your Majesty's great Grace and Favor to us Your Commons,
beyond Example of any Your Royal Progenitors, expressed in many public Acts
and Declarations, to the great rejoicing and general satisfaction of all Your
people, The ra^es given to his Majesty for life.
which they desire to answer with returns suitable and exceeding the Examples
of any of their Ancestors, for the increasing of your Majesty's Revenue during
Your Majesty's Reign, (which God long continue) Do therefore give and grant
unto your most Excellent Majesty, the Rates and Duties, Impositions, Charges,
and sums of Money herein after following: And do beseech your Majesty that it
may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That from and after the twenty fifth day of December, One thousand six hundred
and sixty, there shall be throughout your Majesty's Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, raised, levied, collected,
12 Car. 2. c. 2. ^
and paid unto Your Majesty during Your Life, for Beer, Ale, Sider, and other
Liquors herein after mentioned, The several Rates, Impositions, Duties, and
Charges herein after expressed, and in manner and form following. That is to
say, Beer and Ale above 6 s. the barrel.
For every Barrel of Beer or Ale above six shillings the barrel, brewed by the
Common Brewer, or any other Person or Persons who does or shall sell or tap out
beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the common Brewer, or by such
other person or persons respectively, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser quantity, One shilling three pence. XV. d. Beer and Ale of ^ s. the
barrel.
For every barrel of Six shillings Beer or Ale, or under, brewed by the common
Brewer, or any other person or persons, who does or shall sell or tap out such
Beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the said common Brewer, or by
such other person or persons respectively as aforesaid, and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser quantity, three pence. iij. d. Sider, Perry.
For all Syder and Perry made and sold by retail, upon every Hogshead to be
paid by the Retayler thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser
measure, One shilling three pence. XV. d. Metheglin, Mead.
For all Metheglin or Mead sold, whether by Retail or otherwise, to be paid by
the maker thereof upon every Gallon, One halfpenny. Ob. Vinegar-beer.
For every Barrel of Beer, commonly called Vinegar-Beer, brewed by any common
Brewer, in any common Brew House, six pence. Vi. d. Strong water.
For every Gallon of Strong-water or Aquavitae, made and sold, to be paid by
the maker thereof, One penny. i. d. Beer and Ale Imported.
For every barrel of Beer or Ale Imported from beyond the Seas, Three
Shillings. iij. s. Syder and Perry Imporced.
For every Tun of Syder or Perry Imported from beyond the Seas, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, Five shillings. V. s. Spirits
Imported.
For every gallon of Spirits made of any kind of Wine or Syder Imported, Two
pence. ij. d. Strong-water Imported.
For every gallon of Strong-water perfectly made, Imported from beyond the
Seas, Four pence. iiij. d. Coffee.
For every Gallon of Coffee made and sold, to be paid by the maker, Four pence.
iiij. d. Chocolatte.
For every gallon of Chocolatte, Sherbet and Tea, made and sold, to be paid by
the maker thereof, ^ight pence. Viij. d.


The Excise upon foreign liquors imported, to be paid by the importers in
money upon entries made before landing.

Common brewers to account weekly, and other retailers of beer, ale, etc.
monthly.


And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
several Rates, Duties and Charges of Excise, or New Impost above mentioned,
hereby set or imposed upon all and every the said Foreign Liquors which shall
be Imported or brought into all, or any the Ports of this Kingdom and Dominions
thereof, aforesaid, from and after the five and twentieth day of December next,
shall be from time to time satisfied and paid by the Merchant or Merchants,
Importer or Importers of the same, in ready money, upon his or their Entry or
Entries made, and before the landing thereof.

The penalty for not accounting as aforesaid.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all common Brewers
of Beer and Ale, shall once in every Week: And all Innkeepers, Victuallers,
and other Retaylers of Beer, Ale, Syder, Perry, Metheglin, or Strong-water,
Brewing, Making, or Retailing the same, shall once in every month make true
and particular Entries at the Office of Excise, within the limits of which the
said Commodities and Manufactures are made, of all Beer, Ale, Perry, Syder,
Metheglin, Strong-Water, or other the Liquors aforesaid, which they, or any of
them shall Brew, make, or Retail, in that Week and Month respectively, as
aforesaid.

The penalty for not accounting as aforesaid.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such common
Brewers, who do not once a Week make due and particular Entries, shall forfeit
five pounds: And that every such Innkeeper, who does not make true and
particular Entries once a Month, shall forfeit five pounds. And that every
Alehouse-keeper, Victualler, or other Retailer, who does not once a month make
due and particular Entries, shall forfeit twenty shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Common
Brewer, who shall not pay and clear off within a Week after he made his Entry,
or ought to have made his Entry, as aforesaid, shall pay double the value of
the Duty: And that every Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, Victualler, or other
Retailer, who shall not pay and clear off within a Month after he made his
Entry, or ought to have made his Entry, as aforesaid, shall pay double the
value of the Duty: The said respective forfeitures to be levied upon their
Goods and Chattels, in such manner and form, as hereafter in this Act is
Ordained and directed.

Provided that no such person, as aforesaid, shall be compelled by the
Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, No person to be compelled by the
Commissioners of Excise to go further for making their entries then the next
Market Town.

The Commissioners for execution of this act empowered to appoint gagers.

The power of the gagers.


to travel for the making of the said Entries or payment of the said Duties, or
other cause whatsoever, touching or concerning the same, if he live in a
Market Town, out of the said Town; if he live out of a Market Town, then to no
other place then to the next Market Town to his habitation in the same County,
on the Market Day.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners who shall be appointed by his Majesty for putting this Act in
execution, and their Sub-Commissioners in their respective Circuits, and
Divisions, shall hereby have power to constitute under their Hands and Seals,
such, and so many Gagers as they shall find needful: Which Gagers, and every of
them, shall at all times, as well by night as by day, And if by night, then in
the presence of a Constable, or other lawful Officer, be permitted upon their
request, to enter the house, Brew House, Distilling-house, and all other houses
and places whatsoever, belonging to, or used by any Brewer, Innkeeper,
Victualler, or other retailer of Beer, Brewing, or making the same as
aforesaid, or by any Distiller of Strong Water, or Retailer of other the
Liquors aforesaid, And to Gage all Coppers, Fats and Vessels in the same, And
to take an account of Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Syder, Strong Water, Aquavite,
Metheglin, or other the Liquors aforesaid, in the said Houses, Places, and
Vessels, from time to time, Brewed, or Made, and Distilled; and thereof to make
return or report in Writing to the said Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners of
Excise, under whose office and limits, such Brewer, Retailer, Distiller, or
Makers of the Liquors aforesaid, does dwell and inhabit, Returns made by the
gagers.
leaving a true Copy of such Return in Writing under his hand with such Brewer,
Retailer, Distiller, or Makers of the Liquors aforesaid; And such Reports or
Returns of the said Gagers shall be a Charge upon the said Brewers, Makers, and
Retailers respectively; And if any such Common Brewer or Retailer shall refuse
to permit any such Gager or Gagers to enter his Brew House or any other place
aforementioned, or to gage or take account of his Brewing vessels, or of any
such Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Syder, Strong-water, Aquavite, Metheglin, or
other the Liquours aforesaid, such Brewer, Retailer, or Distiller shall be
forthwith forbidden by the said Gager or Gagers, to sell, carry out, or deliver
to any of his Customers, any Beer, Ale, Strong-water, Aquavite, or other the
Liquors aforesaid; And if any such Brewer, Retailer, or Distiller of any the
liquors aforesaid, after such warning given, shall sell, carry, or deliver out
the same, or any part thereof, not having paid and cleared the duty of Excise,
such person and persons shall besides the forfeiture of double the value,
forfeit and lose the sum of five pounds, as aforesaid, for every offense, to be
levied and recovered upon his or their Goods and Chattels in manner and form as
hereafter in this Act is provided.

And for the avoiding of all incertainty, and dispute, What shall be reckoned a
barrel of beer.
touching the returns made or to be made by the Gagers of any beer or ale so
brewed as aforesaid; Be it Enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That every six and thirty gallons of beer taken by the gage according to the
Standard of the Ale-quart, four whereof shall make the gallon, remaining in the
custody of the Chamberlains of his Majesty's Exchequer, shall be reckoned,
accounted, and returned by the Gager for a barrel of Beer; And every two and
thirty gallons of ale, The barrel of Ale.
taken by the Gage according to the same Standard, shall be in like manner
reckoned, accounted and returned for a Barrel of ale; and all other the Liquors
aforesaid, according to the Wine-gallon.

Provided always, and be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Brewers or Retailers of beer and ale shall take any more in the price
thereof, upon sale of the same, then according to the usual rates and prizes,
Saving that every common Brewer shall and may take and receive of all and every
person and persons to whom he shall sell and deliver any Ale or Beer, the
Excise thereupon due, as aforesaid, over and above the usual Rates and Prizes.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
encouragement of all Common Brewers, and makers of Beer or Ale to make due
entry and payment thereof, according as by this Act is appointed, the said
common Brewer not selling the same by retail, for and in consideration of waste
by fillings and leakage of their Beer and Ale, shall have and be allowed out of
the said Returns made by the Gagers, the several allowances and abatements
hereafter mentioned, Abatements and allowance to be made for waste and leakage.
(that is to say) upon every three and twenty Barrels of Beer, whether strong
or small, returned by the said Gagers, three Barrels; And upon every two and
twenty Barrels of Ale, whether strong or small, returned by the Gagers, two
Barrels; which said Allowances and Abatements the said Commissioners to be
appointed as aforesaid, and their Sub-Commissioners, are hereby authorized to
allow and make accordingly.

Provided always, Forfeiture for false entries.
That where any common Brewer shall wittingly or willingly make a false entry,
and be convicted for the same before the Commissioners to be appointed as
aforesaid, or any two of them, or before such other person or persons as are
hereafter by this Act appointed, in that case such Brewer or Brewers shall
forfeit and lose over and besides the penalties before mentioned, the said
allowance so to be made for six months then next ensuing.

And be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, No Ale or bre^ to
be delivered to the retayler before the rate be paid.
That no Beer or Ale shall be delivered in by such Brewer or Maker thereof to
any Victualler or other Retailer thereof, until the rate which by such
Victualler or Retayler is to be paid over and above the price of the said Beer
or Ale, for or in respect of this Duty, be first paid and satisfied by the
said Victualler or Retayler to the Brewer or Maker thereof. Provided always,
Beer and ale sold in Fair^.
That if any person or persons shall brew and sell by retail any small
quantities of beer or ale in any Fair within this Realm, or Dominions
aforesaid, who is not otherwise any common or usual Brewer, or Retayler
thereof, and shall before any such selling and retailing thereof, well and
truly pay and satisfy the duty due for the same to the Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners within whose Limits or Division the said Fair shall be held,
or to their Officers thereunto appointed; Then such person or persons so
brewing or retailing the same, and for so much, and no more, nor otherwise,
shall be freed and discharged from all penalties and forfeitures in and by this
Act before mentioned and imposed; Any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Commissioners, and Sub-Commissioners respectively, The Commissioners may
compound with any In-keeper, Retailer or Victualler.
to compound for this Duty with any Innkeeper, Victualler, Alehouse-keeper, or
Retailer of Beer, Ale, and other the Liquors aforesaid within their respective
Divisions, from time to time, and in such manner and form as may be most for
the advantage and improvement of the receipts thereof: Any thing in this Act
before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Any the rates in this Act may be farmed for three years.
And it is further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, or such
other person or persons as His Majesty, shall appoint, shall have power, and
are hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to treat, contract,
conclude and agree with any person or persons for or concerning the Farming of
all or any the Rates, Duties and Charges in this Act mentioned upon Beer, Ale,
Perry, Syder, or other the Liquors aforesaid, in any the respective Counties,
Cities or Places of this Realm or Dominions thereof, as may be for the greatest
benefit and advantage of the said Receipt, so as the same exceed not the term
of Three years. And be it further Enacted, That every such Contract, Bargain,
and Agreement of the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury, or other
persons aforesaid, on behalf of His Majesty on the one part, and the person or
persons farming on the other part, shall be good and effectual in Law, to all
intents and purposes.

Provided always, to the end the aforesaid duty may be paid with most ease to
the people; It is hereby further Enacted, Persons contracting that be nominated
by the Justice of the Peace in every County shall have the refusal of any Farm.
That the Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the Treasury, or other persons
aforesaid, shall not within six months after the Commencement of this Act,
treat, conclude, or agree with any person or persons touching the Farming of
this duty upon Beer and Ale in any the respective Counties or Places of this
Realm, or Dominions thereof, other then with such person or persons as by the
Justices of Peace of the said Counties or places, or the major part of them, at
their public Quarter Sessions shall be nominated and appointed in that behalf,
which person or persons is to have the first refusal of any such Farm
respectively, and may take the same; Any thing in this Act to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided, that the said duty shall not be let to any other person or persons,
then to the person or persons recommended by the Justices, under the rate that
it shall be tendered to, and refused by such person or persons so recommended.

Forfeitures and offenses within this Act where determined.
And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
forfeitures and offenses made, done and committed against this Act, or any
clause or article therein contained, shall be heard, adjudged and determined by
such person or persons, and in such manner and form as hereafter in and by this
Act is directed and appointed; that is to say, all such forfeitures and
offenses made and committed within the immediate limits of the chief Office in
London, shall be heard, adjudged and determined, by the said chief
Commissioners and Governors of Excise (appointed by His Majesty) or the major
part of them, or by the Commissioners for Appeals, and regulating of this duty,
or the major part of them in case of Appeal, and not otherwise. And all such
forfeitures and offenses made and committed within all, or any other the
Counties, Cities, Towns or Places within this Kingdom, or Dominions thereof,
shall be heard and determined by any two or more of the Justices of the Peace
residing near to the place where such forfeitures shall be made, or offense
committed: And in case of neglect or refusal of such Justices of the Peace, by
the space of 14 days next after complaint made, and notice thereof given to
the Offender, then the Sub-Commissioners, or the major part of them appointed
for any such City, County, Town, or Place, shall, and are hereby empowered to
hear and determine the same; And if the party find himself aggrieved by the
Judgment given by the said Sub-Commissioners, Appeals by parties grieved.
he shall and may appeal to the Justices of the Peace at the next Quarter
Sessions, who are hereby empowered and authorized to hear and determine the
same, whose Judgment therein shall be final; which said Commissioners for
Appeals and regulating of this duty, and the chief Commissioners for Excise,
and all Justices of Peace, and Sub-Commissioners aforesaid respectively, are
hereby authorized, and strictly enjoined and required upon any complaint or
information exhibited and brought of any such forfeiture made, or offense
committed contrary to this Act, to summon the party accused, and upon his
appearance, or contempt to proceed to the examination of the matter of Fact,
and upon due proof made thereof, either by the voluntary confession of the
party, or by the oath of one or more credible witnesses (which Oath they, or
any two or more of them, have hereby power to administer) to give Judgment or
Sentence, according as in and by this Act is before ordained and directed; And
to award and issue out Warrants under their hands for the levying of such
forfeitures, penalties and fines, as by this Act is imposed, for any such
offense committed, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, and to cause
Sale to be made of the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed
within fourteen days) rendering to the party the overplus (if any be) and for
want of sufficient Distress, to imprison the party offending till satisfaction
be made.

Provided nevertheless, That it shall and may be lawful, Fines and forfeitures
may be mitigated.
to and for the said respective Justices of Peace, Commissioners for Excise, or
any two of them, or their Sub-Commissioners respectively, from time to time,
where they shall see cause to mitigate, compound or lessen such forfeiture,
penalty or fine, as in their discretion they shall think fit; And that every
such mitigation and payment thereupon accordingly made, shall be a sufficient
discharge of the said penalties and forfeitures to the persons so offending, so
as by such mitigation the same be not made less than double the value of the
duty of Excise, which should or ought to have been paid, besides the reasonable
costs and charges of such Officer or Officers, or others, as were employed
therein, to be to them allowed by the said Justices; any thing in this Act to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it is hereby further Enacted and
Ordained, That all Fines, How the fines and forfeitures shall be employed.
Forfeitures and Penalties mentioned in this Act, all necessary charges for the
recovery thereof being first deducted, shall be employed, three fourth parts
thereof to and for the use of the Kings Majesty, and the other 4th part to the
Discoverer or Informer of the same: And for the better managing, collecting,
securing, levying and recovering of all and every the said rates and charges of
Excise hereby imposed, and set upon all or any of the Commodities before
mentioned, to the end, the same may be paid and disposed of according to the
intent of this present Act: Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the authority
aforesaid, and it is hereby Enacted, That one principal Head-Office shall be
erected and continued in the City of London, or within ten miles thereof, from
time to time, as long as his Majesty shall think fit for this duty, unto which
all other Offices for the same within England and Wales, and the Town and Port
of Berwick, shall be subordinate and accomptable: Which said Office shall be
managed by such Officers as shall be appointed by the Kings Majesty as
aforesaid, who, or any two of them, Commissioners and Governors for managing
the Receipts of Excise,
are hereby appointed and constituted Commissioners and Governors for the
management of His Majesty's Receipt of the Excise, and to sit in some
convenient place in the City of London, or within ten miles thereof, from time
to time, as long as his Majesty shall think fit.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons shall
be capable of intermedling with any Office or Employment relating to the
Excise, until he or they shall before two or more Justices of Peace in the
County where his or their employments shall be, or before one of the Barons of
the Exchequer, take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which Oaths they
have hereby power to Administer, together with this Oath following, Mutatis
Mutandis.



And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Certificates at the next
quarter sessions. London, Westminster, Southwark. Officers to be appointed by
his Majesty.
That every such Justice of Peace shall certify the taking of such Oath to the
next Quarter Sessions, there to be Recorded; And it is further Enacted, That
all parts of the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Borough of
Southwark, and the several Suburbs thereof, and Parishes within the weekly
Bills of Mortality shall be under the immediate care, inspection and management
of the said Head-Office, and such, and so many subordinate Commissioners, and
Sub-Commissioners, and other Officers and Ministers for the Execution of the
Premises shall be from time to time nominated and appointed by His Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, in all and every other the Counties, Cities, Towns,
and Places within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port of
Berwick, as from time to time his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall think
fit. And it is hereby further Enacted, That the said Office of Excise in all
places where it shall be appointed, The Excise office to be kept open.
shall be kept open from eight of the Clock in the morning, till twelve of the
Clock at noon; and from two of the Clock in the Afternoon, till five of the
Clock in the Afternoon, for the due execution and performance of all and every
the matters and things in this Act appointed and required. The moneys collected
to be paid into the receipt of the Exchequer.
And it is further hereby Enacted, That the said Chief Commissioners of Excise,
or the major part of them, shall from time to time issue forth and pay such sum
and sums of money, as shall from time to time be received, collected or levied
by virtue of this Act, into his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Persons sued may plead the general issue.
That if any person or persons shall at any time be sued or prosecuted for any
thing by him or them done or executed in pursuance of this Act, he or they
shall and may plead the general issue, and give this Act in evidence for his
defense; and if upon the Trial a Verdict shall pass for the Defendant or
Defendants, or the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be Nonsuit, then such Defendant or
Defendants shall have double costs to him or them awarded against such
Plaintiff or Plaintiffs.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, Writs of Certiorari shall not supersede any
proceedings.
That no Writ or Writs of Certiorari shall supersede Execution or other
Proceedings, upon any Order or Orders made by the Justices aforesaid in
pursuance of this Act, but that Execution and other proceedings shall and may
be had and made thereupon, any such Writ or Writs, or allowance thereof
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, Proviso for Ed. Backwell. for payment of 2^4. ^^.
shall not be prejudicial to Edward Backwell Alderman of London, as to the sum
of twenty eight thousand, four hundred and fifty pounds (or any part thereof)
by him advanced upon the Credit of several Orders of this present Parliament,
and by them charged on the receipt of the Grand Excise: that is to say, the sum
of Five thousand pounds payable to his Majesty's Surveyor-General for the
repair of his Majesty's houses, charged by virtue of an Order of the sixth of
September, 1660. with Interest for the same; the sum of ten thousand pounds
advanced to her Highness the Princes Royal, being charged with Interest by an
Order of the 13th of September, 1660. the sum of ten thousand pounds payable to
her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia, being charged, together with Interest, by an
Order of the 13th of September, 1660. the sum of three thousand four hundred
and fifty pounds payable for Provisions for Dunkirk, by an Order of the 26th of
November, 1660. which sum of twenty eight thousand four hundred and fifty
pounds, together with Interest for the same, according to the tenor of the said
Orders, after the rate of six per Cent. shall be paid to the said Edward
Backwell, or his Assigns, out of the Grand Excise, and the Arrears thereof in
course, as is by the said Orders appointed; and in case the same shall fall
short in payment by the Twenty fifth of December, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, that then the remainder shall continue secured to him out of the whole
Excise in course as aforesaid, and that no other payments be made out of the
Excise, but what is appointed by this present Parliament in course to precede
the same, until the said debt due to the said Edward Backwell, be satisfied;
and that in case any part of the moneys due to Alderman Backwell, be paid out
of that part of the Excise which shall grow due to the Kings Majesty; that then
his Majesty shall be reimbursed the same out of the first moneys that shall
come in of the Arrears of Excise that will be due the said twenty fifth of
December. Stat 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXIV.
The Court of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures in Capite, and by
Knights-Service, and Purveyance, taken away, and a Revenue settled upon His
Majesty in Lieu thereof.

Whereas it has been found by former experience, That the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and Tenures by Knights-service, either of the King or others, or by
Knights-service in Capite, or Soccage in Capite of the King, and the
consequents upon the same have been much more burdensome, The reasons of this
Act.
grievous and prejudicial to the Kingdom, then they have been beneficial to the
King: and whereas since the intermission of the said Court, which has been
from the Four and twentieth day of February, which was in the year of our Lord
One thousand six hundred forty and five, many Persons have by Will and
otherwise made disposal of their Lands held by Knights-service, whereupon
diverse Questions might possibly arise, unless some seasonable remedy be taken
to prevent the same; Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord,
with the assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, and it is hereby Enacted, The Court of Wards and
Liveries, Primer-Seisin, etc. taken away.
That the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries,
Primer-Seisins, and Ouster-le-mains, Values and forfeitures of Marriages, by
reason of any Tenure of the Kings Majesty, or of any other by Knights-service,
and all mean Rates, and all other Gifts, Grants, Charges incident or arising,
for, or by reason of Wardships, Liveries, Primer-Seisins, or Ouster-le-mains,
be taken away and discharged, and are hereby Enacted to be taken away and
discharged, from the said twenty fourth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty five, any Law, Statute, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary hereof
in any wise notwithstanding; Fines for alienations, etc. taken away. 1 Car. 1.
cap. 3.
And that all Fines for Alienations, Seizures, and Pardons for Alienations,
Tenure by Homage and all Charges incident, arising, for or by reason of
Wardship, Livery, Primer-Seisin, or Ouster-le-main, or Tenure by
Knights-service, Escuage, and also Aid pur file marrier, and pur faier fits
Chivalier, and all other Charges incident thereunto, be likewise taken away and
discharged, from the said Twenty fourth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty and five, any Law, Tenures by Knights service, taken away.
Statute, Custom, or Usage to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding:
And that all Tenures by Knights-Service of the King, or of any other person,
and by Knights-Service in Capite, and by Soccage in Capite of the King, and the
Fruits and consequents thereof, happened, or which shall or may hereafter
happen or arise thereupon, or thereby, be taken away and discharged, Any Law,
Statute, Custom or usage to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.
And all Tenures of any Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or
any Estate of Inheritance at the Common Law, held either of the King, or of any
other person or persons, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, are hereby Enacted to
be turned into free and common Soccage, to all intents and purposes, from the
said Twenty fourth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty five, and
shall be so construed, adjudged and deemed to be from the said Twenty fourth
day of February, One thousand six hundred forty five, and for ever thereafter
turned into free and common Soccage, Any Law, Statute, Custom, or usage to the
contrary hereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Tenures by damage, escuage, etc. discharged.
And that the same shall for ever hereafter stand and be discharged of all
Tenure by Homage, Escuage, Voyages-Royal, and charges for the same, Wardships
incident to Tenure by Knights-Service, and values and forfeitures of marriage,
and all other charges incident to tenure by Knights-service, And of and from
Aid pur file marrier, and Aid pur faier fitz Chivalier, any Law, Statute,
Usage, or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that all
Conveyances and Devises of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
made since the said 24th of February, shall be expounded to be of such effect,
as if the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, had been then held
and continued to be holden in free and common Soccage only, any Law, Statute,
Custom, or usage to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further ordained and enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, The Acts of 32 H. 8. cap. 6. and 33 H 8. cap. 22. repealed.
That one act made in the reign of King Henry the 8th. Entitled, An Act for
the establishment of the Court of the Kings Wards; And also one Act of
Parliament made in the 33. year of the reign of the said King Henry the 8th.
concerning the Officers of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and every Clause,
Article and Matter in the said Acts contained, shall from henceforth be
repealed, and utterly void.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, All tenures to be
created by the King hereafter shall be free and common soccage.
That all tenures hereafter to be created by the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, upon any gifts or grants of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, of any Estate of Inheritance at the common law, shall be in free
and common soccage, and shall be adjudged to be in free and common soccage
only, and not by Knights Service, or in Capite, and shall be discharged of all
Wardship, value and forfeiture of marriage, Livery, Primer-Seizin, Ouster le
main, Aid pur faier fits Chivalier, and pur file marrier, any Law, Statute, or
reservation to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That this Act, or any thing therein
contained, Proviso for rents certain, herriots, etc.
shall not take away, nor be construed to take away any Rents certain,
Herriots, or Suits of Court, belonging or incident to any former Tenure now
taken away or altered by virtue of this Act, or other Services incident or
belonging to Tenure in common Soccage due, or to grow due to the King Majesty,
or mean Lords, or other private person, Fines for Alienations due by particular
customs of Manors.
or the fealty and distresses incident thereunto; And that such relief shall be
paid in respect of such Rents as is paid in case of the death of a Tenant in
common Soccage.

Provided always, and be it enacted, That any thing herein contained shall not
take away nor be construed to take away any Fines for Alienation due by
particular customs of particular Manors and places, other then fines for
alienations of lands or Tenem. holden immediately of the K. in Capite.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted, That this Act, or any thing therein
contained, Tenures in Frank Almoigne. Copy of court Roll.
shall not take away, or be construed to take away Tenures in Frank Almoigne,
or to subject them to any greater or other services then now are; nor to alter
or change any Tenure by Copy of Court Roll, or any services incident thereunto,
nor to take away the honorary services of Grand Serjeanty, other then of
Wardship, Marriage, and value of Forfeiture of Marriage, Escuage, Voyages
Royal, and other charges incident to Tenure by Knights Service; Honorary
services.
and other then Aid pur faier fitz Chivalier, and Aid pur file marrier.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That where any person
has, or shall have, Parents may dispose of the custody of children during
their m^nority.
and Child or Children under the age of 21 years, and not married at the time
of his death. That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Father of such
child or children, whether born at the time of the decease of the Father, or at
that time in ventre sa mere; or whether such Father be within the age of 21
years, or of full age, by his Deed executed in his life time, or by his last
Will and Testament in writing, in the presence of two or more credible
witnesses, in such manner, and from time to time as he shall respectively think
fit to dispose of the custody and tuition of such child or children, for, and
during such time as he or they shall respectively remain under the age of 21
years, or any lesser time, to any person or persons in possession or remainder,
other then Popish Recusants: And that such disposition of the custody of such
child or children made since the 24th. of February, Actions of ravishment of
wards.
1645. or hereafter to be made, shall be good and effectual against all and
every person or persons claiming the custody or tuition of such child or
children as Guardian in soccage or otherwise: And that such person or persons
to whom the custody of such child or children has been, or shall be so
disposed or devised as aforesaid, shall and may maintain an action of
Ravishment of Ward, or Trespass, against any person or persons which shall
wrongfully take away or detain such child or children, for the recovery of such
child or children, and shall and may recover damages for the same in the said
Action, for the use and benefit of such child or children.

And be it further Enacted, The sands of children, and the management of their
personal estate by their guardians.
That such Person or Persons to whom the custody of such Child or Children has
been, or shall be, so disposed or devised, shall and may take into his or their
custody to the use of such Child or Children, the profits of all Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of such Child or Children; and also the custody,
tuition and management of the Goods, Chattels, and personal Estate of such
Child or Children, till their respective Age of 21 years, or any lesser time
according to such disposition aforesaid; and may bring such Action or Actions
in relation thereunto, as by Law a Guardian in common soccage might do;
Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to alter or prejudice the custom of the City of London, nor of any other City
or Town Corporate, or of the Town of Berwick on Tweed concerning Orphants; nor
to discharge any Apprentice from his Apprenticeship.

Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, Proviso
touching Titles of honor feodal.
shall infringe or hurt any Title of Honor, Feodal, or other, by which any
person has, or may have right to sit in the Lords House of Parliament, as to
his or their Title of Honor, or sitting in Parliament, and the privilege
belonging to them as Peers; This Act, or any thing therein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas by like experience it has been found, Purveyances and provisions
for the Kings household taken away. Alt. St. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.
that though diverse good strict and wholesome Laws have been made in the times
of sundry his Majesty's most noble Progenitors, some extending so far as to
life, for Redress of the grievances and oppressions committed by the persons
employed for making provisions for the Kings household, Carriages and other
purveyance for his Majesty, and his occasions; Yet diverse oppressions have been
still continued, and several Counties have submitted themselves to sundry Rates
and Taxes, and Compositions, to redeem themselves from such vexations and
oppressions: And forasmuch as the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do
find that the said Remedies are not fully effectual, and that no other remedy
will be so effectual and just, as to take away the occasion thereof, especially
if satisfaction and recompense shall be therefore made to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, which is hereby provided to his Majesty's good liking and
content; His Majesty is graciously pleased, That it may be Enacted, And be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That from
henceforth no sum or sums of Money, or other thing shall be taken, raised,
tared, rated, imposed, paid, or levied, for or in regard of any provision,
Carriages, or purveyance for his Majesty, His Heirs or Successors.

Purveyances for the King, Queen, etc.
And that henceforth no person or persons by any Warrant, Commission, or
Authority under the Great Seal, or otherwise, by color of buying or making
provision or purveyance for his Majesty, or any Queen of England for the time
being, or of any the Children of any King or Queen of England for the time
being, Timber. Carts. Carriages, etc. taken away.
or that shall be, or for his, their, or any of their Household, shall take any
Timber, Fuel, Cattle, Corn, Grain, Malt, Hay, Straw, Victual, Cart, Carriage,
or other thing whatsoever of any the Subjects of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, without the free and full consent of the Owner or Owners thereof,
had and obtained without menace or enforcement; nor shall summon, warn, take,
use, or require any the said Subjects to furnish or find any Horses, Oxen, or
other Cattle, Carts, Ploughs, Wains, or other Carriages, for the use of His
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or of any Queen of England, or of any Child
or Children of any the Kings or Queens of England for the time being, for the
carrying the Goods of His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or the said Queens,
or Children, or any of them, without such full and free consent as aforesaid,
any Law, Statute, Custom, or Usage, to the contrary notwithstanding.

No pre-emption to be allowed or claimed in behalf of the King, etc.
And be it further Enacted, That no pre-emption shall be allowed or claimed in
the behalf of His Majesty, or of any His Heirs or Successors, or of any the
Queens of England, or of any the Children of the Royal Family for the time
being, in Market or out of Market; but that it be for ever hereafter free to
all and every of the Subjects of His Majesty, to sell, dispose, or employ his
said Goods to any other person or persons as himself lists, any pretense of
making provision or purveyance of Victual, Carriages, or other thing for his
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or of the said Queens, or Children, or any
pretense of pre-emption in their, or any of their behalfs notwithstanding. And
if any person or persons shall make provision or purveyance for His Majesty,
His Heirs or Successors, The Penalty.
or any the Queens, or Children aforesaid, or impress or take any such
Carriages, or other things aforesaid, on any pretense or color of any Warrant
aforesaid, under the Great Seal, or otherwise, contrary to the intent hereof;
it shall be be lawful for the Justices of Peace, or such two or one of them as
dwell near, and to the Constables of such parish or Village where such occasion
shall happen, at the request of the party grieved: And they are hereby enjoined
to commit, or cause to be committed the party or parties so doing and offending
to Gaol till the next Sessions, there to be indicted and proceeded against for
the same; and that the Officers and Inhabitants of the Village or Parish where
such offense shall happen, shall be assistant therein; and moreover, the party
grieved shall have his Action or Actions against such offender or offenders,
and therein recover his treble damages and treble costs: In which Action, no
Essoin, Wager of Law, Aid-prayer, Privilege, Protection, Imparlance,
Iniunction, or Order of Restraint, No action upon this Statute to be stayed,
but by Order of the Court where such action depends.
shall be granted or allowed: And if any person or persons shall (after notice
given, that the Action depending is grounded upon this Statute) cause or
procure any Action at the common Law, grounded on this Statute, to be delayed
or stayed before Judgment, by color or means of any Order, Power, Warrant, or
Authority, save only of the Court where such Action shall be brought and
depending, or after Judgment had upon such Action, shall cause or procure
Execution of such Judgment to be stayed or delayed by color or means of any
Order, Warrant, Power, or Authority, save only by Writ of Error, or Attaint,
or Order of such Court where such Writof Error or Attaint shall be depending,
That then the person so offending shall incur the pains, penalties, Praemunire.
and forfeitures ordained and provided by the Statute of Provision and
Praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard the second;
Provided always, That this Act extend not to prejudice any of His Majesty's
Rights, Titles, or Duties of, in, or to, or out of any Tin in the Stannaries
of Devon and Cornwall, Proviso for the Stannaries. Butserage, Prisage.
nor to prejudice the ancient Duties of Butlerage and Prizage of Wines; but
that the same shall be in the same plight that the same were, before the making
of this Act, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding: Recompense to his Majesty for the Court of Wards and
Purveyances.
And now to the intent and purpose that His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
may receive a full and ample Recompense and Satisfaction, as well for the
profits of the said Court of Wards, and the Tenures, Wardships, Liveries,
Primer-Seizins, Ousterlemaines, and other the Premises and Perquisites
incident thereunto; and for all Arrears any way due for the same, as also for
all and all manner of Purveyance and Provisions herein before mentioned, and
intended to be taken away and abolished; and all sums of money due, or
pretended to be due, or payable for, and in respect of any compositions for the
same:

12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Rates of the Excise.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall be paid
unto the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors for ever hereafter, in
recompense as aforesaid, the several Rates Impositions, Duties and Charges
herein after expressed, and in manner and form following (that is to say)

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale above six shillings the barrel, brewed by the
Common Brewer, or any other Person or Persons who does or shall sell or tap out
beer or Ale publicly or privately, to be paid by the common Brewer, or by such
other person or persons respectively, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser quantity, One shilling three pence. XV. d. For every barrel of Six
shillings Beer or Ale, or under, brewed by the common Brewer, or any other
person or persons, who does or shall sell or tap out such Beer or Ale publicly
or privately, to be paid by the said common Brewer, or by such other person or
persons respectively as aforesaid, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser quantity, three pence. iij. d. For all Syder and Perry made and sold by
retail, upon every Hogshead to be paid by the Retayler thereof, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser measure, One shilling three pence. XV.
d. For all Metheglin or Mead sold, whether by Retail or otherwise, to be paid
by the maker thereof upon every Gallon, One halfpenny. Ob. For every Barrel of
Beer, commonly called Vinegar-Beer, brewed by any common Brewer, in any common
Brew House, six pence. Vi. d. For every Gallon of Strong-water or Aquavitae,
made and sold, to be paid by the maker thereof, One penny. i. d. For every
barrel of Beer or Ale Imported from beyond the Seas, Three Shillings. iij. s.
For every Tun of Syder or Perry Imported from beyond the Seas, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, Five shillings. V. s. For
every gallon of Spirits made of any kind of Wine or Syder Imported, Two pence.
ij. d. For every gallon of Strong-water perfectly made, Imported from beyond
the Seas, Four pence. iiij. d. For every Gallon of Coffee made and sold, to be
paid by the maker, Four pence. iiij. d. For every gallon of Chocolatte, Sherbet
and Tea, made and sold, to be paid by the maker thereof, Eight pence. Viij. d.
And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
several Rates, Rates of Excise upon foreign Liquors imported, to be paid in
money before landing.
Duties and Charges of Excise, or New Impost above mentioned, hereby set or
imposed upon all and every the said Foreign Liquors which shall be Imported or
brought into all, or any the Ports of this Kingdom and Dominions thereof,
aforesaid, from and after the five and twentieth day of December next, shall be
from time to time satisfied and paid by the Merchant or Merchants, Importer or
Importers of the same, in ready money, upon his or their Entry or Entries made,
and before the landing thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Entries to be made at
the Office of Excise by Common Brewers, Innkeepers, etc.
That all common Brewers of Beer and Ale, shall once in every Week: And all
Innkeepers, Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, and other Retaylers of Beer, Ale,
Syder, Perry, Metheglin, or Strong-water, Brewing, Making, or Retailing the
same, shall once in every month make true and particular Entries at the Office
of Excise, within the limits of which the said Commodities and Manufactures are
made, of all Beer, Ale, Perry, Syder, Metheglin, Strong-Water, or other the
Liquors aforesaid, which they, or any of them shall Brew, make, or Retail, in
that Week and Month respectively, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all such common
Brewers, The penalty for not making Entries.
who do not once a Week make due and particular Entries, shall forfeit ten
pounds: And that every such Innkeeper, who does not make true and particular
Entries once a Month, shall forfeit five pounds. And that every
Alehouse-keeper, Victualler, or other Retailer, who does not once a month make
due and particular Entries, shall forfeit twenty shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Common
Brewer, The penalty for not paying.
who shall not pay and clear off within a Week after he made his Entry, or
ought to have made his Entry, as aforesaid, shall pay double the value of the
Duty: And that every Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, Victualler, or other
Retailer, who shall not pay and clear off within a Month after he made his
Entry, or ought to have made his Entry, as aforesaid, shall pay double the
value of the Duty: The said respective forfeitures to be levied upon their
Goods and Chattels, in such manner and form, as hereafter in this Act is
Ordained and directed.

Provided that no such person, as aforesaid, shall be compelled by the
Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, In what places Entries shall be
made
to travel for the making of the said Entries, or payment of the said Duties,
or other cause whatsoever, touching or concerning the same, if he live in a
Market Town, out of the said Town; if he live out of a Market Town, then to no
other place, then to the next Market Town to his habitation in the same County
on the Market day.

The powers of the Commiss oners to appoint Gagers.

The powers of the Gagers.


And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners who shall be appointed by his Majesty for putting this Act in
execution, and their Sub-Commissioners in their respective circuits and
divisions, shall hereby have power to constitute under their Hands and Seals
such and so many Gagers as they shall find needful: Which Gagers, and every of
them, shall at all times, as well by Night as by Day, And if by Night, then in
the presence of a Constable, or other lawful Officer, be permitted upon their
request to enter the House, Brew House, Distilling-house, and all other Houses
and Places whatsoever belonging to, or used by any Brewer, Innkeeper,
Victualler, or other Retailer of Beer, Brewing or Making the same as aforesaid,
or by any Distiller of Strong Water, or Retailer of other the Liquors
aforesaid, And to Gage all Coppers, Fats and Vessels in the same, and to take
an account of Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry, Strong Water, Aquavite, Metheglin, or
other the Liquors aforesaid, in the said Houses, Places, and Vessels, from time
to time Brewed, or Made, and Distilled; and thereof to make Return or Report in
Writing to the said Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, under whose
Office and Limits such Brewer, Retailer, Distiller, or Maker of the Liquors
aforesaid, does dwell and inhabit, leaving a true Copy of such Return in
writing under his hand with such Brewer, Retailer, Distiller or Makers of the
Liquors aforesaid; And such Reports or Returns of the said Gagers shall be a
charge upon the said Brewers, Makers and Retailers respectively; And if any
such common Brewer, Maker or Retailer, shall refuse to permit any such Gager or
Gagers to enter his Brew House, or any other places aforementioned, or to gage
or take account of his Brewing-Vessels, or any such Beer, Ale, Worts, Perry,
Syder, Strong-Water, Aquavite, Metheglin, or other the Liquors aforesaid, such
Brewer, Retailer or Distiller, shall be forthwith forbidden by the said Gager
or Gagers to sell, carry out, or deliver to any of his Customers any Beer, Ale,
Strong-Water, Aquavite, or other the Liquors aforesaid; And if any such Brewer,
Penalty for selling, etc. not having cleared the Excise.
Retailer or Distiller of any the Liquors aforesaid after such warning given,
shall sell, carry or deliver out the same, or any part thereof, not having paid
and cleared the duty of Excise, such person and persons shall besides the
forfeiture of double the value, forfeit and lose the sum of Ten pounds as
aforesaid for every offense, to be levied and recovered upon his or their Goods
and Chattels, in manner and form as hereafter in this Act is provided.

Proportions to be observed in returns of Gagers.
And for the avoiding of all Incertainty, and dispute, touching the returns made
or to be made by the Gagers of any Beer or Ale so Brewed as aforesaid; Be it
enacted and declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every six and thirty
Gallons of Beer taken by the Gage according to the Standard of the Ale-quart,
four whereof shall make the Gallon, remaining in the custody of the
Chamberlains of his Majesty's Exchequer, shall be reckoned, accounted, and
returned by the Gager for a Barrel of Beer; And every two and thirty Gallons of
Ale, taken by the Gage according to the same Standard, shall be in like manner
reckoned, accounted, and returned for a Barrel of Ale; And all other the
Liquors aforesaid according to the Wine-gallon.

Brewers and Retailers to observe the usual rates and prizes.
Provided always, and be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That no Brewers or Retailers of Beer and Ale shall take any more in the price
thereof, upon Sale of the same, then according to the usual Rates and Prices,
saving that every common Brewer shall and may take and receive of all and every
person and persons to whom he shall sell and deliver any Beer or Ale, the
Excise thereupon due as aforesaid, over and above the usual Rates and Prizes.

Encouragement to Brewers to make true Entries.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better encouragement
of all common Brewers or Makers of Beer or Ale to make due entry and payment
thereof, according as by this Act is appointed, the said common Brewer not
selling the same by Retail, for and in consideration of waste by fillings and
leakage of their Beer and Ale, shall have and be allowed out of the said
Returns made by the Gagers, Allowance for Waste and Leakage.
the several allowances and abatements hereafter mentioned, (that is to say)
upon every three and twenty Barrels of Beer, whether strong or small, returned
by the said Gagers, three Barrels; And upon every two and twenty Barrels of
Ale, whether strong or small, returned by the Gagers two Barrels; which said
allowances and abatements the said Commissioners to be appointed as aforesaid,
and their Sub-Commissioners are hereby authorized to allow and make accordingly.

Forfeiture for making false Entr^es.
Provided always, That where any common Brewer shall wittingly or willingly
make a false Entry, and be convicted for the same before the Commissioners to
be appointed as aforesaid, or any two of them, or before such other person or
persons as are hereafter by this Act appointed, in that case such Brewer or
Brewers shall forfeit and lose over and besides the penalties before mentioned,
the said allowance so to be made for six months then next ensuing.

No Beer, etc. to be delivered by the Brewer, until the Excise be paid by the
Retailer.
And be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Beer or Ale
shall be delivered in by such Brewer or Maker thereof to any Victualler, or any
Retailer thereof, until the Rate which by such Victualler or Retailer is to be
paid over and above the price of the said Beer or Ale, for or in respect of
this duty, be first paid and satisfied by the said Victualler or Retailer to
the Brewer or Maker thereof. Provided always, That if any person or persons
shall brew and sell by retail any small quantities of beer or ale in any Fair
within this Realm, Proviso for Beer and Ale sold in Fairs.
or Dominions aforesaid, who is not otherwise any common or usual Brewer, or
Retailer thereof, and shall before any such selling and retailing thereof, well
and truly pay and satisfy the duty due for the same to the Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners within whose Limits or Division the said Fair shall be held,
or to their Officers thereunto appointed; Then such person or persons so
brewing or retailing the same, and for so much, and no more, nor otherwise,
shall be freed and discharged from all penalties and forfeitures in and by this
Act before mentioned and imposed; Any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Commissioners, The Commissioners may compound for the Excise in their Divisions.
and Sub-Commissioners respectively, to compound for this Duty with any
Innkeeper, Victualler, Alehouse-keeper, or Retailer of Beer, Ale, and other
the Liquors aforesaid within their respective Divisions, from time to time, and
in such manner and form as may be most for the advantage and improvement of the
receipts thereof: Any thing in this Act before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And it is further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Lord Treasurer, The power of the Lord Treasurer, etc. to contract for farming
any the rates or duties in this Act.
or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, or such other person or
persons as His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, shall appoint, shall have
power, and are hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to treat,
contract, conclude and agree with any person or persons for or concerning the
Farming of all or any the Rates, Duties and Charges in this Act mentioned upon
Beer, Ale, Perry, Syder. or other the Liquors aforesaid, in any the respective
Counties, Cities or Places of this Realm or Dominions thereof, as may be for
the greatest benefit and advantage of the said Receipt, so as the same exceed
not the term of Three years. And be it further Enacted, That every such
Contract, Bargain, and Agreement of the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the
Treasury, or other persons aforesaid, on behalf of His Majesty on the one part,
and the person or persons farming on the other part, shall be good and
effectual in Law, to all intents and purposes.

Provided always, to the end the aforesaid duty may be paid with most ease to
the people; Persons to be approved by the Justices of the Peace, etc. within
six months, to have the refusal of contracting for the Excise in these
respective Counties.
It is hereby further Enacted, That the Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the
Treasury, or other persons aforesaid, shall not within six months after the
Commencement of this Act, treat, conclude, or agree with any person or persons
touching the Farming of this duty upon Beer and Ale in any the respective
Counties or Places of this Realm, or Dominions thereof, other then with such
person or persons as by the Justices of Peace of the said Counties or places,
or the major part of them, at their public Quarter Sessions shall be nominated
and appointed in that behalf, which person or persons is to have the first
refusal of any such Farm respectively, and may take the same; Any thing in this
Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided, that the said duty shall not be let to any person or persons, then
to the person or persons recommended by the Justices, under the rate that it
shall be tendered to, and refused by such person or persons so recommended.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, Forfeiture
and offenses within this Act how to be determined.
That all forfeitures and offenses made, done and committed against this Act,
or any clause or article therein contained, shall be heard, adjudged and
determined by such person or persons, and in such manner and form as hereafter
in and by this Act is directed and appointed; that is to say, all such
forfeitures and offenses made and committed within the immediate limits of the
chief Office in London, shall be heard, London.
adjudged and determined, by the said chief Commissioners and Governors of
Excise (appointed by His Majesty) or the major part of them, or by the
Commissioners for Appeals, and regulating of this duty, or the major part of
them in case of Appeal, and not otherwise. Counties, Cities, etc. within this
Kingdom.
And all such forfeitures and offenses made and committed within all, or any
other the Counties, Cities, Towns or Places within this Kingdom, or Dominions
thereof, shall be heard and determined by any two or more of the Justices of
the Peace residing near to the place where such forfeitures shall be made, or
offense committed: Neglects of the Justices.
And in case of neglect or refusal of such Justices of the Peace, by the space
of fourteen days next after complaint made, and notice thereof given to the
Offender, then the Sub-Commissioners, or the major part appointed for any such
City, County, Town, or Place, shall, and are hereby empowered to hear and
determine the same; And if the party find himself aggrieved by the Judgment
given by the said Sub-Commissioners, he shall and may appeal to the Justices of
the Peace at the next Quarter Sessions, who are hereby empowered and authorized
to hear and determine the same, whose Judgment therein shall be final; which
said Commissioners for Appeals and regulating of this duty, and the chief
Commissioners for Excise, and all Justices of Peace, and Sub-Commissioners
aforesaid respectively, are hereby authorized, and strictly enjoined and
required upon any complaint or information exhibited and brought of any such
forfeiture made, or offense committed contrary to this Act, to summon the party
accused, and upon his appearance, or contempt to proceed to the examination of
the matter of Fact, and upon due proof made thereof, either by the voluntary
confession of the party, or by the oath of one or more credible witnesses
(which Oath they, or any two or more of them, have hereby power to administer)
to give Judgment or Sentence, Levying the forfeitures.
according as in and by this Act is before ordained and directed; And to award
and issue out Warrants under their hands for the levying of such forfeitures,
penalties and fines, as by this Act is imposed, for any such offense committed,
upon the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, and to cause Sale to be made of
the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen
days) rendering to the party the overplus (if any be) and for want of sufficient
Distress, to imprison the party offending till satisfaction be made.

Power to mitigate the forfeitures.
Provided nevertheless, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
respective Justices of Peace, Commissioners for Excise, or any two of them, or
their Sub-Commissioners respectively, from time to time, where they shall see
cause to mitigate, compound or lessen such forfeiture, penalty or fine, as in
their discretion they shall think fit; And that every such mitigation and
payment thereupon accordingly made, shall be a sufficient discharge of the said
penalties and forfeitures to the persons so offending, so as by such mitigation
the same be not made less than double the value of the duty of Excise, which
should or ought to have been paid, besides the reasonable costs and charges of
such Officer or Officers, or others, as were employed therein, to be to them
allowed by the said Justices; any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. How the forfeitures shall be employed.
And it is hereby further Enacted and Ordained, That all Fines, Forfeitures and
Penalties mentioned in this Act, all necessary charges for the recovery thereof
being first deducted, shall be employed three fourth parts thereof to and for
the use of the Kings Majesty, and one fourth part to the Discoverer or Informer
of the same: And for the better managing, collecting, securing, levying and
recovering of all and every the said rates and charges of Excise hereby
imposed, and set upon all or any of the Commodities before mentioned, One
principal Office of Excise erected in London.
to the end, the same may be paid and disposed of according to the intent of
this present Act: Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the authority
aforesaid, and it is hereby Enacted, That one principal Head-Office shall be
erected and continued in the City of London, or within ten miles thereof, from
time to time, as long as his Majesty shall think fit for this duty, unto which
all other Offices for the same within England and Wales, and the Town and Port
of Berwick, shall be subordinate and accomptable: Which said Office shall be
managed by such Officers as shall be appointed by the Kings Majesty as
aforesaid, who, or any two of them, are hereby appointed and constituted
Commissioners and Governors for the management of His Majesty's Receipt of the
Excise, and to sit in some convenient place in the City of London, or within
ten miles thereof, from time to time, as long as his Majesty shall think fit.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons shall
be capable of intermedling with any Office or Employment relating to the
Excise, until he or they shall before two or more Justices of Peace in the
County where his or their employments shall be, or before one of the Barons of
the Exchequer, take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which Oaths they
have hereby power to Administer, together with this Oath following, Mutatis
Mutandis.



London, Westminster, etc. to be under the management of the chief Office.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Justice
of Peace shall certify the taking of such Oath to the next Quarter Sessions,
there to be Recorded; And it is further Enacted, That all parts of the Cities
of London and Westminster, with the Borough of Southwark, and the several
Suburbs thereof, and Parishes within the weekly Bills of Mortality, shall be
under the immediate care, inspection and management of the said Head-Office,
and such, and so many subordinate Commissioners, All Commissioners, etc. to be
nominated by his Majesty.
and Sub-Commissioners, and other Officers and Ministers for the Execution of
the Premises shall be from time to time nominated and appointed by His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, in all and every other the Counties, Cities,
Towns, and Places within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port
of Berwick, as from time to time his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall
think fit. And it is hereby further Enacted, That the said Office of Excise in
all places where it shall be appointed, shall be kept open from eight of the
Clock in the morning, Times in which the Office shall be kept open.
till twelve of the Clock at noon; and from two of the Clock in the Afternoon,
till five of the Clock in the Afternoon, for the due execution and performance
of all and every the matters and things in this Act appointed and required. And
it is further hereby Enacted, That the said Chief Commissioners of Excise, or
the major part of them, shall from time to time issue forth and pay such sum
and sums of money, as shall from time to time be received, collected or levied
by virtue of this Act, into his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer.

The general ^^^ue pleadable in any action upon this Statute.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That if any person or persons shall at any
time be sued or prosecuted for any thing by him or them done or executed in
pursuance of this Act, he or they shall and may plead the general issue, and
give this Act in evidence for his defense; and if upon the Trial a Verdict
shall pass for the Defendant or Defendants, or the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be
Nonsuit, then such Defendant or Defendants shall have double costs to him or
them awarded against such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs.

Writs of Certiorari no supersedeas,
Provided also, and be it Enacted, That no Writ or Writs of Certiorari shall
supersede Execution or other Proceedings, upon any Order or Orders made by the
Justices aforesaid in pursuance of this Act, but that Execution and other
proceedings shall and may be had and made thereupon, any such Writ or Writs, or
allowance thereof notwithstanding.

Proviso as to the Act of General pardon.
Provided, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend, or
be construed to extend in any matter to weaken or invalidate one Act of this
present Parliament, Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity,
and Oblivion, but that every Clause, Article, Matter, and thing therein
mentioned and comprised, shall notwithstanding this Act, or any matter or thing
therein, remain good and valid, and be of the same force, virtue and effect, as
if this Act had never been made.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, Proviso concerning Ed. Backwell.
shall not be prejudicial to Edward Backwell Alderman of London, as to the sum
of twenty eight thousand, four hundred and fifty pounds (or any part thereof)
by him advanced upon the Credit of several Orders of this present Parliament,
and by them charged on the receipt of the Grand Excise that is to say, the sum
of Five thousand pounds payable to his Majesty's Surveyor-General for the
repair of his Majesty's houses, charged by virtue of an Order of the sixth of
September, 1660. with Interest for the same; the sum of ten thousand pounds
advanced to her Highness the Princes Royal, being charged with Interest by an
Order of the 13th of September, 1660. the sum of ten thousand pounds payable to
her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia, being charged, together with Interest, by an
Order of the 13th of September, 1660. the sum of three thousand four hundred
and fifty pounds payable for Provisions for Dunkirk, by Order of the 26th of
November, 1660. which sum of twenty eight thousand four hundred and fifty
pounds, together with Interest for the same, according to the tenor of the said
Orders, after the rate of six per Cent. shall be paid to the said Edward
Backwell, or his Assigns, out of the Grand Excise, and the Arrears thereof in
course, as is by the said Orders appointed; and in case the same shall fall
short in payment by the Twenty fifth of December, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, that then the remainder shall continue secured to him out of the whole
Excise in course as aforesaid, and that no other payments be made out of the
Excise, but what is appointed by this present Parliament in course to precede
the same, until the said debt due to the said Edward Backwell, be satisfied;
and that in case any part of the moneys due to Alderman Backwell, be paid out
of that part of the Excise which shall grow due to the Kings Majesty; that then
his Majesty shall be reimbursed the same out of the first moneys that shall
come in of the Arrears of Excise that will be due the said twenty fifth of
December. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXV.
The Selling of Wines by Retail, and for preventing Abuses in the Mingling, and
Corrupting of Wines, and for setting the Prices thereof.

FOR the better Ordering of Selling of Wines by Retail in Taverns, and other
places, and for the preventing of Abuses therein, Be it Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or
persons whatsoever, from and after the Five and twentieth day of March, one
thousand six hundred sixty one, unless he or they be authorized and enabled in
manner and form as in this present Act is prescribed and appointed, shall sell
or utter by retail, that is, by the Pint, Quart, Pottle or Gallon, or by any
other greater or lesser retail measure, any kind of Wine or Wines to be drunk
or spent within his or their Mansion-houses, or houses, or such other place in
his or their tenure or occupation, or without such Mansion House or houses, or
such other place in his or their tenure or occupation, by any color, craft or
mean whatsoever, The penalty of unlawful uttering wine by retail.
upon pain to forfeit for every such offense the sum of five pounds; the one
moiety of every such penalty to be to our Sovereign Lord the King, the other
moiety to him or them that will sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, or Information, in any of the Kings Courts of Record, in which Action
or Suit, no Essoign, Wager of Law or Protection shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, to and for his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, from time to time,
His Majesty may issue out Commissions to license the uttering wine.
to issue out under His or their Great Seal of England, one or more Commission
or Commissions directed to two or more persons, thereby Authorizing them to
License, and give Authority to such person or persons as they shall think fit,
to sell and utter by retail, all and every, or any kind of Wine or Wines
whatsoever, to be drunk and spent, as well within the house or houses, or other
place in the tenure or occupation of the party so Licensed, as without, in any
City, Town or other place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town and Port of Berwick upon Tweed; and such persons as from time to time, or
at any time hereafter shall be by such Commission or Commissions as aforesaid
in that behalf appointed, shall have power and authority, and hereby have power
and authority to treat and contract for License, authority and dispensations to
be given and granted to any person or persons for the selling and uttering of
Wines by retail in any City, Town or other place as aforesaid, according to the
rules and directions of this present Act, and the true intent and meaning
thereof, and not otherwise, any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, His Majesty's Agents for
granting wine Licenses may grant Licenses not exceeding 21 years, if the person
so long live.

Rent reserved, but no ^ine to be taken.


That such persons as shall be Commissioned and appointed by his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, as aforesaid, shall be, and be called His Majesty's Agents
for granting Licenses for the selling and uttering of Wine by retail; And his
Majesty's said Agents are hereby authorized and enabled under their Seal of
Office, the same to be appointed by his Majesty, to grant License for the
selling and uttering of Wines by retail to any person or persons, and for any
time or term not exceeding 21 years, if such person and persons shall so long
live; and for such yearly rent as they can or shall agree, and think fit, so as
no Fine be taken for the same; But that the rent and sums of money agreed upon
and reserved, be paid and answered half yearly by equal portions during the
whole Term.

Licenses only to such as personally use the Trade.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such License shall
not be given or granted, but to such who shall personally use the Trade of
selling or uttering of Wines by retail, or to the Landlord and owner of the
house where the person using such Trade shall sell and utter Wine by retail;
Wine Licenses not assignable.

The King may appoint Officers as he shall think fit.


nor shall the same be assignable, nor in any wise beneficial or extensive to
indemnify any person against the penalties of this present Act, except the
first taker.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, to and for his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to constitute and
appoint such, and so many other Officers and Ministers, as a Receiver,
Register, Clerk, Controller, Messenger, or the like, for the better carrying on
of this service, Not exceeding six pence in the pound for their salaries. The
Revenue to be paid into the Exchequer and not to be charged with any gift or
Pension.
as He and they shall think fit, so as the Salaries and Wages of all such
Officers to be appointed, together with the Salary or wages of his Majesty's
said Agents, do not exceed six pence in the pound of the Revenue that shall
hence arise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rents,
Revenues, and sums of Money hence arising, except what shall be allowed for the
Wages and Salaries of such Officers and Ministers, which is not to exceed six
pence out of every pound thereof, shall be duly and constantly paid and
answered into his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, and shall not be particularly
charged or chargable, either before it be paid into the Exchequer, or after,
with any gift or Pension. And his Majesty's said Agents are hereby enjoined and
required to return into the Court of Exchequer, The Agents to return into the
Exchequer in Michaelmas and Easter Terms, what Licenses they have granted.
every Michaelmas and Easter Terms, upon their Oaths (which Oaths the Barons of
the Exchequer, or any one of them, are hereby authorized to administer) a Book
fairly written, containing a full and true account of what Licenses have been
granted the preceding half year, and what Rents and sums of money are thereupon
reserved, and have been paid, or are in arrear, together with the securities of
the persons so in arrear, to the end due and speedy process may be made out
according to the course of the Exchequer, for the recovery of the same.

Proviso for the two Universities and their privileges.
Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not in
any wise be prejudicial to the privilege of the two Universities of the Land,
or either of them, nor to the Chancellors or Scholars of the same, or their
Successors; but that they may use and enjoy such privileges as heretofore they
have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Proviso for the Society of the Vintners of London.
Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
or be prejudicial to the Master, Wardens, Freemen and Commonalty of the Mystery
of Vintners of the City of London, or to any other City or Town Corporate, but
that they may use and enjoy such Liberties and Privileges as heretofore they
have lawfully used and enjoyed, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Proviso for the Borough of St. Albans.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, or
any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to debar or hinder
the Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough of St. Albans in the County of
Hertford, or their Successors, from enjoying, using and exercising of all such
Liberties, Powers, and Authorities, to them heretofore granted by several
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, by Queen Elizabeth, and King
James of famous memories, for the erecting, appointing, and Licensing of three
several Wine-Taverns within the Borough aforesaid, for and toward the
maintenance of the Free School there; but that the same Liberties, Powers, and
Authorities shall be, and are hereby established and confirmed, and shall
remain and continue in and to the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
Successors, to and for the charitable use aforesaid, and according to the tenor
of the Letters Patents aforesaid, as though this Act had never been made, any
thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

F^es of the Officers.
Provided also, That it shall not, nor may be lawful to or for any Officer or
Officers to be appointed by his Majesty for the carrying on of this service, to
take, demand, or receive any Fees, Rewards, or sums of money whatsoever, for or
in respect of this Service, other then five shillings for a License, Four pence
for an Acquittance, and six pence for a Bond, under the penalty of ten pounds,
one moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other moiety to the person or
persons who shall sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoign, or Protection shall be allowed,
any thing herein, or any other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

There shall be no mixture of other wines or things.
And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Merchant,
Vintner, Wine-Cooper or other person, selling or retailing any Wine, shall
mingle or utter any Spanish Wine, mingled with any French Wine, or Rhenish
Wine, Syder, Perry, Honey, Sugar, Syrups of Sugar, Molasses, or any other
Syrups whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins, Juice of
Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor nor Ingredients, nor any Clary, or other
herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vintner,
Wine-Cooper, or other person selling or retailing any Wine, shall mingle or
utter any French Wines mingled with any Rhenish Wines or Spanish Wines, Syder,
Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Honey, Sugar, Syrup of Sugar, Molasses, or any
Syrups whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglas, Brimstome, Lime, Raisins, Juice of
Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or Ingredients, nor any Clary or other
herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever; And that no Merchant, Vintner,
Wine-Cooper, or other person selling or retailing any wine, shall mingle or
utter any Rhenish-Wine mingled with any French Wines, or Spanish Wines, Syder,
Perry, Stummed Wine, Vitriol, Honey, Sugar, Syrups of Sugar, Molasses, or any
other Syrups whatsoever, nor put in any Isinglass, Brimstone, Lime, Raisins,
Juice of Raisins, Water, nor any other Liquor or Ingredients, nor any Clary or
other herb, nor any sort of flesh whatsoever: The penalties or mingling or
abusing any Wines.
And that all and every person and persons committing any of the offenses
aforesaid, shall incur the pains and penalties herein, after mentioned; That is
to say, Every Merchant, Wine-Cooper, or other person selling any sort of Wines
in gross, mingled or abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose for every such
offense, one hundred pounds; And that every Vintner or other person selling any
sorts of Wine by retail, mingled or abused as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose
for every such offense, the sum of Forty pounds; of which forfeitures, one
moiety shall go unto the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the other
moiety to the Informer, to be recovered in any Court of Record by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of
Law shall be allowed.

Provided always, And be it Enacted, That from and after the first day of
September, The Prises of Wines.
One thousand six hundred sixty and one, no Canary-Wines, Muskie or Alegant, or
other Spanish or sweet Wines, shall be sold or uttered by any person or persons
within his Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, by retail, for above Eighteen pence the quart; And that no
Gascoigne or French Wines whatsoever, shall be sold by Retail, above eight
pence the quart; And that no Rhenish Wines whatsoever shall be sold by retail,
above Twelve pence the quart; (And according to these rates, The Penalties.
for a greater and lesser quantity, all and every the said Wines shall and may
be sold) upon pain and penalty that every such person or persons, who shall
utter or sell any of the said Wines by retail, that is to say, by Pint, Quart,
Pottle, or Gallon, or any other greater or lesser Retail-measure, at any rate
exceeding the Rates hereby limited, do, and shall forfeit for every such Pint,
Quart, Pottle, Gallon, or other greater or lesser quantity so sold by retail,
the sum of Five pounds; the one moiety of which forfeiture shall be to our
Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him
or them that shall sue for the same, to be recovered in manner and form as
aforesaid.

Provided nevertheless, The Lord Chancellor, etc. may set the Prises of Wines
yearly, or alter the same.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Chancellor of England,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the
two Chief Justices, or Five, Four, or Three of them; And they are hereby
Authorized yearly, and every year between the twentieth of November, and the
last day of December, and no other times, to set the Prises of all and every
the said Wines to be sold by retail as aforesaid, at higher or lower rates then
are herein contained, so that they or any of them cause the Prises by them set
to be written, and open Proclamation thereof to be made in the Kings Court of
Chancery yearly in the Term time, or else in the City, Borough, or Towns
Corporate where any such Wine shall be sold; And that all and every the said
Wines shall and may be sold by retail at such prises as by them, or any Five,
Four, or three of them shall be set as aforesaid, from time to time, for the
space of one whole year, to commence from the first day of February next after
the setting thereof, and no longer, and no greater prises under the pains and
penalties aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid, and afterward: And in
default of such setting of prises by the said Lord Chancellor of England, Lord
Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the two
Chief Justices, or Five, Four, or Three of them, as aforesaid, at the
respective Rates and Prises set by this Act, and under the penalties as
aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXVI.
The levying of the Twelve Months Assessment commencing the 24th of June 1659.
and the six Months Assessment, commencing the Twenty Fifth of December 1659.
EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXVII.
Four hundred and twenty thousand pounds, by an Assessment of Threescore and
ten Thousand pounds by the Month, Granted for Six Months, for Disbanding the
Remainder of the Army, and paying off the Navy, with Rules and Instructions for
the same. EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXVIII.
Further supplying and explaining certain defects in an Act, Entitled, An Act
for the provision of money for Disbanding and paying off the Forces of this
Kingdom, both by Land and Sea. EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXIX.
Seventy thousand pounds to be raised for the further supply of His Majesty.
EXP. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXX.
The Attainder of several persons Guilty of the Horrid Murder of His late
Sacred Majesty King Charles the First.

IN all humble manner show unto Your most Excellent Majesty, Your Majesty's
most dutiful and loyal Subjectts the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
That the Horrid and Execrable Murder of Your Majesty's Royal Father, The
horrid murder of King Charles the first how first contrived and plotted.
our late most Gracious Sovereign Charles the First, of ever blessed and
glorious memory, has been committed by a party of wretched men, desperately
wicked, and hardened in their Impiety, who having first plotted and contrived
the ruin and destruction of this excellent Monarchy, and with it, of the true
Reformed Protestant Religion which had been so long protected by it and
flourished under it, found it necessary in order to the carrying on of their
pernicious and traitorous designs, to throw down all the Bullwarks and Fences
of Law, and to subvert the very being and constitution of Parliament, that so
they might at last make their way open for any further attempts upon the Sacred
Person of his Majesty himself; And that for the more easy effecting thereof,
they did first seduce some part of the then Army into a compliance, and then
kept the rest in subjection to them, partly for hopes of preferment, and
chiefly, for fear of losing their employments and arrears; until by these, and
other more odious arts and devices, they had fully strengthened themselves,
both in power and faction; which being done, they did declare against all
manner of Treaties with the person of the King, even then while a Treaty by
advice of both Houses of Parliament was in being; Remonstrate against the
Houses of Parliament for such proceedings, seize upon his Royal person while
the Commissioners were returned to the House of Parliament with his Answer; and
when his Concessions had been Voted a ground for peace, seize upon the House of
Commons, seclude and imprison some Members, force out others, and there being
left but a small remnant of their own Creatures (not a tenth part of the whole)
did seek to shelter themselves by this weak pretense, under the name and
Authority of a Parliament, and in that name labored to prosecute what was yet
behind and unfinished of their long intended Treason and Conspiracy; To this
purpose they prepared an Ordinance for erecting a prodigious and unheard of
Triennal, which they called An High Court of Justice, for Trial of his Majesty;
and having easily procured it to pass in their House of Commons, as it then
stood molded, ventured to send it up from thence to the Peers then sitting,
who totally rejected it; whereupon their rage and fury increasing, they presume
to pass it alone, as an Act of the Commons, and in the name of the Commons of
England; and having gained the pretense of Law, made by a power of their own
making, pursue it with all possible force and cruelty, until at last, upon the
thirtieth day of January, one thousand six hundred forty and eight, His Sacred
Majesty was brought unto a Scaffold, and there publicly Murdered before the
Gates of his own Royal Palace; And because by this Horrid action the Protestant
Religion has received the greatest wound and reproach, and the people of
England the most insupportable shame and infamy that was possible for the
enemies of God and the King to bring upon us, whilst the Fanatic Rage of a few
Miscreants (who were as far from being true Protestants, as they were from
being true Subjects) stands imputed by our Adversaries to the whole Nation: We
therefore your Majesty's said dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons
in Parliament Assembled, do hereby renounce, abominate, and protest against
that Impious fact, the execrable Murder, and most unparalled Treason
committed against the Sacred person and life of our said late Sovereign, Your
Majesty's most Royal Father, and all proceedings tending thereunto; and do
beseech Your most Excellent Majesty that it may be declared, That by the
undoubted and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this
Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the people
collectively or representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever ever had,
have, has, or ought to have, any Coercive power over the persons of the Kings
of this Realm; And for the better vindication of our selves to posterity, and
as a lasting Monument of our otherwise inexpressible detestation and abhorrency
of this villainous and abominable Fact, We do further beseech Your most
Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted, And be it hereby Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, A yearly Anniversary of Humiliation on the ^0th
of Ian. for ever.
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That every thirtieth day of January, unless it falls out
to be upon the Lords day, and then the day next following, shall be for ever
hereafter set apart to be kept and observed in all the Churches and Chapels of
these Your Majesty's Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, and all other
Your Majesty's Dominions, as an Anniversary day of Fasting and Humiliation, to
implore the Mercy of God, that neither the guilt of that Sacred and Innocent
Blood, nor those other sins by which God was provoked to deliver up both us and
our King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable men, The attainder of the
persons actively instrumental in the Murder of his late Majesty.
may at any time hereafter be visited upon us or our posterity. And whereas
Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, and
Thomas Pride deceased, John Lisle, William Say, Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine
Wauton, Thomas Harrison, Edward Whalley, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington,
Henry Martin, John Barkstead, Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow, Sir Michael
Livesey, Robert Titchbourn, Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, John Okey,
John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, John Carew,
John Jones, Miles Corbet, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Edmond
Harvy, Thomas Scot, William Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter,
Augustine Garland, John Dixwel, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave, Thomas Wait, John Cook, Andrew Broughton,
Edward Dendy, William Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, are
notoriously known to have been wicked and active Instruments in the prosecution
and compassing that Traiterous Murder of his late Majesty, for which the said
Sir Hardress Waller, Thomas Harrison, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington,
Henry Martin, The names of the persons cried and legally attainted.
Gilbert Millington, Robert Titchbourn, Owen Row, Robert Lilbourn, Adrian
Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Edmond Harvy,
Thomas Scot, John Downs, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood,
Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, John Cook, William
Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtel, have already received
their Trial at Law, and by Verdict, or their own Confession, have been
convicted, and by Judgment of Law thereupon had, do now stand duly and legally
attainted; of whom, ten persons, that is to say, Thomas Harrison, Adrian
Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, The ten persons executed.
Gregory Clement, John Cook, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, and Daniel Axtel,
have most deservedly suffered the pains of death, and been executed according
to Law; and the said John Lisle, The persons fled.
William Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow,
Sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland,
Thomas Challoner, Miles Corbet, William Cawley, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell,
Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, and Edward Dendy, are fled from Justice, not
daring to abide a Legal Trial: May it therefore please your Majesty that it may
be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, The
persons dead before they could be brought to trial attainted The persons fled
attainted.
That the said Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton deceased, John Bradshaw,
deceased, and Thomas Pride deceased, shall by virtue of this Act, be adjudged
to be Convicted and Attainted of High Treason, to all intents and purposes, as
if they, and every of them respectively, had been Attainted in their lives: And
also that John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wanton, Edward Whalley, John
Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William
Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawley, Miles Corbet,
Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy,
and every of them, stand and be adjudged, and by Authority of this present Act
Convicted and Attainted of High Treason; Their Lands, Tenements, etc. forfeited
and vested in his Majesty.
And that all and every the Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Remainders, Possessions, Rights, Conditions, Interests, Offices,
Fees, Annuities, and all other the Hereditaments, Leases for years, Chastels
real, and other things of that nature, whatsoever they be, of them the said
Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, John Lisle, William
Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, John Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, Sir
Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goffe, Cornelius Holland,
Thomas Challoner, William Cawley, Miles Corbet, Nicholas Love, John Dixwell,
Daniel Blagrave, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, Thomas Harrison, Adrian
Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Hugh Peter's,
Francis Hacker, John Cook, Daniel Axtel, Sir Hardress Waller, William
Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert
Titchbourn, Owen Row, Robert Lilbourn, Henry Smith, Edmond Harvey, John Downs,
Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, which they, or any of them, or any other person or
persons, to their or any of their uses, or in trust for them, or any of them,
had the Five and twentieth day of March, Whereof they were seized, or any for
them 25 March 1646.
in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or at any
time since, shall stand and be forfeited unto Your Majesty, Your Heirs and
Successors, and shall be deemed, vested, and adjudged to be in the actual and
real possession of your Majesty, without any Office or Inquisition thereof
hereafter to be taken or found: And also, That all and every the Goods, Debts,
and other the Chattels personal whatsoever, of them, the said Oliver Cromwell,
Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, Thomas Pride, whereof at the time of their
respective deaths, they, or any of them, or any other in trust for them, or any
of them, stood possessed in Law or Equity; All their goods and personal estate
forfeited and vested in his Majesty.
and all the Goods, Debts, and other the Chattels personal whatsoever of them
the said John Lisle, William Say, Valentine Wauton, Edward Whalley, John
Barkstead, Edmond Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, John Okey, John Hewson, William
Goffe, Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, William Cawley, Miles Corbet,
Nicholas Love, John Dixwell, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, Thomas Harrison,
Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Hugh
Peter's, Francis Hacker, John Cook, Daniel Axtel, Sir Hardress Waller, William
Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Henry Martin, Gilbert Millington, Robert
Titchbourn, Owen Row, Robert Lilburn, Henry Smith, Edmond Harvey, John Downs,
Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple,
Peter Temple, Thomas Wait, Whereof they were possessed or any for them 11 Feb.
1659.
whereof upon the eleventh day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty
nine, they or any of them, or any other in trust for them, or any of them,
stood possessed either in Law or Equity, shall be deemed and adjudged to be
forfeited unto, and are hereby vested, and put into the actual and real
possession of Your Majesty, without any further Office or Inquisition thereof
hereafter to be taken or found.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Conveyance, Proviso for conveyances by any of the offenders.
Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of Lease, Grants
and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust, or limitation of
any Use or Uses of or out of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
not being the Lands nor Hereditaments of the late King, Queen, or Prince, or of
any Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, nor being Lands or
Hereditaments sold or given for the Delinquency, or pretended Delinquency of
any person or persons whatsoever, by virtue or pretext of any Act, Order,
Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order, or Ordinance since the first day of January,
One thousand six hundred forty one, nor any Statute, Statutes, Judgments, etc.
before the 9th of Sept. 1659.
Judgment or Recognizance had, made, acknowledged or suffered to any person or
persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, before the twenty ninth day of
September, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, by any of the Offenders before
in this Act mentioned, or their Heirs, or by any other person or persons
claiming by, from, or under them or any of them, other then the wife or wives,
For money bona fide lent, etc. Conveyances in trust made before the ^^. of
April 166^. to any the said Offenders.
child or children, heir or heirs of such person or persons, or any of them,
for money bona fide, to them or any of them paid or lent, nor any Conveyance,
Assurance, Grant, or Estate made before the twenty fifth of April, One thousand
six hundred and sixty, by any person or persons to any of the Offenders
aforesaid in Trust; and for the benefit of any other person or persons not
being any of the offenders aforesaid, or in trust for any Bodies Politic or
Corporate, shall be impeached, defeated, made void or frustrated hereby, or by
any of the Convictions and Attainders aforesaid; but that the same shall be
held and enjoyed by the Purchasers, Grantees, Lessees, Assigns, Cestuy que use,
Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their Heirs Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been made, and as if the said
Offenders had not been by this Act, or by any other course or proceedings of
Law, convicted or attainted; so as the said Conveyances, Such conveyances to be
enrolled in the Court of Exchequer before the first of Ian. 1662.
and all and every the Grants and Assurances which by virtue of this Act, are,
and ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the first of
January, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty
two, be entered and enrolled of Record in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and
not otherwise; Any thing in this Act herein before contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for the Marquess of Worcester, etc.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
singular the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, which at any time
heretofore were the Lands and possessions of Henry late Marquess of Worcester,
and Edward now Marquess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir
apparent of the said Edward Marquess of Worcester, or any of them; whereof or
wherein the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons in trust for
him, or to his use, or any other the persons attainted by this Act, or
otherwise, or any person or persons in trust for them or any of them, had or
claimed, or pretended to have any Estate, Right, Title, Possession or Interest,
at any time before or since the decease of the said Oliver Cromwell, shall be,
and hereby are vested and settled in, and shall be held and enjoyed by the said
Marquess of Worcester, and the said Henry Lord Herbert, in such manner and
form, and for such Estate and Estates, with such powers and privileges as they
formerly had in the same respectively; Any thing in this present Act contained,
or any Act, Conveyance or Assurance heretofore made or acknowledged by the said
Edward Marquess of Worcester, and Henry Lord Herbert, or either of them, unto
the said Oliver Cromwell, or any other person or persons, in trust for, or to
the use of the said Oliver Cromwell, or any Act or Conveyance made or done by
the said Oliver Cromwell, or by any in trust for him, to any person whatsoever,
to the contrary notwithstanding. Saving always to all and every person and
persons, Saving.
Bodies Politic, and others, their respective Heirs, Successors, Executors and
Administrators, all such Right, Title and Interest in Law and Equity, which
they or any of them have or ought to have, of, into, or out of any the
Premises, not being in trust for any the said Offenders, nor derived by, from
or under the said Offenders, since the twenty fifth day of March, which was in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty six; And that they the
said person and persons, Bodies Politic, and other their respective Heirs,
Successors, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, in all and every
such case where his and their Entry was lawful, upon such Offender, or
Offenders, or the Heirs or Assigns of such Offender or Offenders, in or upon
the said twenty fifth day of March, one thousand six hundred forty and six, or
at any time since, may without Petition, Monstrans de droyt, Ouster le maine,
or other Suit to his Majesty, enter on the premises in his Majesty's
possession, or in the possession of his Successors and Patentees, their Heirs
or Assigns, in such manner to all intents, as he or they might have done on the
possession of the said Offenders, their Heirs or Assigns, in or upon the said
twenty fifth day of March, or at any time since; Any thing in this Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for such as have received and paid their Rents to the Offenders.
Provided also, That all and every person and persons which have received any of
the Rents or mean profits, of, in, or out of any the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Chattels real, or Possessions of any of the Offender or
Offenders in this Act mentioned, before the Eleventh day of February, One
thousand six hundred fifty and nine, and have paid or accounted for the same
before she said Eleventh day of February, One thousand six hundred fifty and
nine, unto the said Offender or Offenders, or their Assigns, or to any claiming
from or under them, shall be clearly and for ever acquitted and discharged of
and from the same, against the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, any
thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Proviso for Richard Ingoldsby.
Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful to and for Richard Ingoldsby
to retain and keep, or otherwise to sell and dispose all and singular the Goods
and Chattels formerly belonging to Sir Hardress Waller, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, until two thousand pounds, for which the said Richard Ingoldsby in
the year One thousand six hundred fifty eight, stood jointly bound with the
said Sir Hardress Waller, unto James Brooks of the City of York, Alderman, and
was then counter-secured by a Judgment upon his Lands, and since by a Deed of
Bargain and Sale of the said Goods and Chattels in Ireland, be fully paid,
together with the Interest thereof; he the said Richard Ingolsby accounting
for, and paying the full overplus thereof, if any shall be, unto our Sovereign
Lord the King; Any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding, St. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXXI.
Leases and Grants from Colleges and Hospitals Confirmed.

CAP. XXXII.
Exportation of Wool, Woolfells, Fullers Earth, or any kind of Scouring Earth,
Prohibited.

FOR the better preventing and avoiding of such Losses and Inconveniences as
have happened, and daily do and may happen to the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, and to the Kingdom of Ireland, by and through the secret and
subtle exportation and transportation, and by and through the subtle carrying
and conveying away of Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, out, of, and from the
Kingdoms and Dominion aforesaid, and for the better setting on work the poor
people and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Dominion aforesaid; And to the
intent that the full and best use and benefit of the principal native
Commodities of the same Kingdoms and Dominion may come, redound, and be unto
and amongst the Subjects and Inhabitants of the same, and not unto or amongst
the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, or of any Foreign
Realms or States, as the same now of late in some great measure has done, and
is further likely to do, if some severer punishment than heretofore be not
speedily inflicted upon such Offenders as shall be Actors or Assistants in and
to such Exportation and Transportation, and in and to such carrying and
conveying thereof, as aforesaid;

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, No person after the 14. of
Jan. 1660. shall export any Sheep or Wool, Wool-fells, Mortlins, Shorlings,
Yarn, Woolflocks, Fullers, Earth, Fulling Clay.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever, from and after the
fourteenth day of January, One thousand six hundred and threescore, shall
directly or indirectly, Export, Transport, carry or convey, or cause or procure
to be Exported, Transported, carried or conveyed, out of, or from the Kingdom
of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or out of, or
from the Isles of Jersey or Guernsey, with Sarke and Alderney, being under the
Government of Guernsey, aforesaid, or out of, or from any of them, or out of,
or from the Kingdom of Ireland, aforesaid, into any parts or places out of the
Kingdoms, Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, any Sheep or Wool whatsoever, of the
breed or growth of the Kingdoms of England, or Ireland, or Isles, or Dominion
aforesaid; Or any Woolfells, Mortlings or Shorlings, or any Yarn made of Wool,
or any Woolflocks, or any Fullers Earth, or any Fulling Clay whatsoever; nor
shall directly or indirectly pack or load, Nor carry, load, or board any Sheep,
Wool, etc.
or cause to be packed or loaded upon any Horse, Cart, or other Carriage, or
Load, or lay on board, or cause to be laden or laid on board in any Ship or
other Vessel, in any Place or Port within the Kingdoms of England or Ireland,
or Town of Berwick, or Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, any such Sheep, Wool,
Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, or Woolflocks, or any
Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay, to the intent or purpose to export, transport,
carry or convey the same, or to cause the same to be exported, transported,
carried or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Town of
Berwick, Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, or with intent or purpose, that any
other person or persons should so export, transport, carry or convey the same
into any parts or places out of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, Town of
Berwick, Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or any
foreign parts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Wool,
Woolfells, Mortlings, No Wool, Woolfells, etc. after the 14. of Ian. 1660. to
be carried into Wales, Ireland, etc. Except.
Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, or any Fullers Earth, or Fulling
Clay, shall be from and after the fourteenth day of January, in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred and threescore, exported, transported, carried or
conveyed out of the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick, or Kingdom of Ireland, or out of any Port or Place of the said
Kingdoms respectively unto the Isles of Jersey or Guernsey, or to Sarke, or
Alderney, except as in this Act shall be hereafter limited or appointed.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, The Penalties.
That all and every the Offender and Offenders, offense and offenses aforesaid,
shall be subject and liable to the respective pains, penalties and forfeitures
hereafter following, That is to say, The said Sheep, Woolls, Woolfells,
Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woollflocks, Fullers Earth, and
Fulling Clay, so exported, transported, carried, conveyed, packed or laden,
contrary to the true intent of this Act, shall be forfeited, and that every
offender and offenders therein shall forfeit twenty shillings for every such
Sheep, and three shillings for every pound weight of such Wool, Woolfells,
Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woollflocks, Fullers Earth, or
Fulling Clay; And also the Owners of the said Ships or Vessels knowing such
offense, shall forfeit all their Interest in the said Ships or Vessels, with
all their Apparel and Furniture to them and every of them belonging: And that
the Master and Mariners thereof, knowing such offense, and wittingly and
willingly aiding and assisting thereunto, shall forfeit all their Goods and
Chattels, and have Imprisonment for the same three months without Bail or
Main-prise; the one moiety of which said penalties and forfeitures shall be to
the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety to him that
will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record, or before the Justices of Assize, or in the
General Quarter Sessions of the Peace: In which Suit, no Essoyn, protection or
wager of Law shall be allowed.

The penalty upon any Merchant that shall transport woolls, etc.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Merchant, or other person or persons
shall after the said fourteenth day of January transport or cause to be
transported any Sheep, Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Woollen Yarn,
Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay, contrary to the true intent of this
Act, and be thereof lawfully convicted, That then he shall be disabled to
require any Debt or Account of any Factor or others, for or concerning any Debt
or Estate properly belonging to such offender. Proviso.
Provided always, and it is nevertheless declared, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, shall not be construed to take away any greater pains or
penalties inflicted, or to be inflicted for any the offenses aforesaid, by
virtue of any former Act of Parliament now in force.

Offenses against this Act where to be tried.
And be it also further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That every offense
that shall be done or committed contrary to this Act, shall and may be inquired
of and heard, examined, tried and determined in the County where such Sheep,
Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers
Earth, or Fulling Clay respectively shall be so packed, laden, or laid aboard
as aforesaid, contrary to this Act, or else in the County where such Offenders
shall happen to be apprehended, or arrested for such offense, in such manner
and form, and to such effect to all intents and purposes, as if the same
offense had been wholly and altogether done and committed at and in such County.

They to be Prosecuted within a year after the offense committed.

Any person may seize goods contrary to this Act, loaded with intent to be
transported, and shall have the moiety thereof.


Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be impeached for any offense
aforesaid, unless such person or persons shall be prosecuted within the space
of one year next ensuing such offense committed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any person or persons to seize, take and challenge to his or
their own use and behoof, and to the use of the King, His Heirs and Successors,
all and all manner such Sheep, Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn
made of Wool, Woollflocks, Fullers Earth, and Fulling Clay, as he or they
shall happen to see, find, know or discover to be laid aboard in any Ship or
other Vessel or Boat, or to be brought, carried or laid on shore, at or near
the Sea or any Navigable River or Water, to the intent or purpose to be
exported, transported or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of England or Ireland,
Town of Berwick, Isles, or Dominion aforesaid, contrary to the true meaning of
this Act, or to be packed or laden upon any Horse, Cart, or other Carriage, to
the intent or purpose to be conveyed or carried into the Kingdom of Scotland,
aforesaid; and that such person or persons as shall happen so to seize, take or
challenge any such Sheep, Wool, Woolfells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay, as aforesaid, shall have the
full moiety thereof, to all intents and purposes.

Proviso, such person shall not be evidence against the offender.
Provided always, That such Person or Persons as shall make any such Seizure or
challenge aforesaid to his or their own use, shall not be admitted or allowed
to give in Evidence upon his or their Oath or Oaths against any Person or
Persons which shall happen to be indicted, accused or questioned by virtue of
this Act, or any thing therein contained.

Forfeiture of the ship if the owner be an Alien, or not Inhabiting in England.
And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
ship, Vessel, Hulk, Barge or Boat, of what kind soever, whereof any Alien born,
or whereof any natural born Subjects not inhabiting within the Realm of England
shall be owner or part-owner, and wherein any Sheep, Wool, Woolfells,
Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling
Clay, shall happen to be shipped, put, or laid aboard, contrary to the true
meaning of this Act, shall be forfeited to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors.

Provided always, That this Act shall not extend to any Lamb Skin ready dressed,
and prepared fit and useful for Furr or Lynings.

Proviso.
Provided also, That this Act shall not in any wise extend to the transporting,
carrying or conveying away of any such Woolfells or Pelts, with such Wool upon
them, or to any Beds stuffed with Flocks, which shall be carried or employed in
any Ship or other Vessel for necessary use only, of and about the Ordnance or
other thing in or concerning such Ship or Vessel, or only for the necessary use
of any the Persons in such Ship or Vessel passing or being, and which shall not
be sold or uttered in any Foreign parts out of the Kingdoms of England or
Ireland, Ireland. Berwick.
or Town of Berwick, Isles, or Dominion aforesaid; nor to the exporting,
transporting, carrying or conveying of any Wether-sheep, or of the Wool
growing upon any such Wether-sheep, to be carried alive in any Ship or other
Vessel, for and toward the only necessary food or diet, of, or for the Company
or Passengers, or other Persons therein, and for and toward none other purpose.

Proviso. Southampton. Jersey. Guernsey.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That this Act, or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to any such Wool to be exported or
transported out, of, or from the Port of Southampton, only unto the aforesaid
Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, by, or for the only use or behoof of any the
Inhabitants of the said Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, or either of them, or to
any such wool to be shipped or laden aboard in any ship or other vessel, by,
or for the only use or behoof of any the Inhabitants of the said Isles of
Jersey or Guernsey, or either of them, in the Port aforesaid, to be exported
and transported into the said Isles of Jersey or Guernsey, or either of them;
so as such person and persons that shall so ship or lay aboard such wool into
any ship or other Vessel, do before the shipping or laying aboard such wool,
deliver unto the Customer, Comptroller, Surveyor, or Searcher of the Port of
Southampton aforesaid (out of which the same wool is to be exported) a writing
under the Seal or Seals of the respective Governors of the same Isles of Jersey
and Guernsey, unto which the said wool is to be transported, or of his or
their Deputy or Deputies respectively, the which writing shall purport and
express that the party named in such writing is authorized and appointed to
export, or to cause to be exported out of the Port aforesaid so much wool,
expressing the number of the Tods, to the same Isle, to be used or manufactured
in one of the same Isles, or in some of the members or parts of the same, and
that such party so authorized and appointed to export, or cause to be exported
that wool, has before the making and sealing of that writing, entered into
sufficient Bond to his Majesty's use for the landing of the said wool in that
Isle. And to the intent that the quantity of wool to be exported out of the
Port of Southampton aforesaid into the said Isles, or either of them, in any
one year, accompting the year to begin from the first day of January next
ensuing, and so yearly from the first day of January, may not exceed the
quantity hereunder specified; that is to say, unto the Isle of Jersey Two
thousand Tods and no more of unkeamed wool, and unto Guernsey, Alderney, Sarke.
One thousand Tods and no more of unkeamed wool, and unto Alderney, Two
hundred Tods and no more of unkeamed wool; and unto Sarke, One hundred Tods of
unkeamed wool and no more, every Tod not exceeding thirty two pounds.

And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Governor of the said
Isle of Jersey, or his Deputy, for whom he will answer, shall not make to any
Person or Persons any writing or writings such as is above specified, to
authorize or appoint such Person or Persons as aforesaid, to fetch, export or
transport out of the Port of Southampton aforesaid unto the said Isle of
Jersey, in one year, accompting the year from the first day of January, One
thousand six hundred and sixty aforesaid, any greater quantity of wool then
Two thousand Tods in any one year; and that the Governor of the said Isle of
Guernsey, or his Deputy for whom he will answer, shall not make to any Person
or Persons any writing or writings, such as is above specified, to authorize
and appoint such person or persons as aforesaid, to fetch, export, or transport
out of the Port above specified unto the said Isles of Guernsey, with Alderney
and Sarke, in any one year, accompting the year from the first day of January
aforesaid, any greater quantity of wool then one thousand Tods for Guernsey,
Two hundred Tods for Alderney, and one hundred Tods for Sarke, in any one year;
and that the Customer of the Port of Southampton aforesaid, shall keep a true
account of all the said quantity of Woolls so by him permitted to be laden by
virtue of this Act, and shall not permit any greater quantity of Woolls to be
laden then by this Act is prescribed, in any one year, to either of the said
Islands respectively, under any pretense whatsoever, upon the penalty of the
forfeiture of his place, and the sum of One hundred pounds in money, one moiety
whereof to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to
him or them that will sue for the same in any Court of Record, wherein no
Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed. And if any of the
Governors aforesaid, or any of their, or either of their Deputy or Deputies of
the said Isles, or either of them, shall give, grant, or make any License or
Licenses for exporting from Southampton aforesaid, into the said Isles
respectively, of any greater quantity of such Wool then is before by the true
meaning of this Act limited and appointed in that behalf; That then the
respective Governor or Governors of such of the said Isles shall forfeit and
pay to Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, the sum of Twenty pounds of
lawful money of England, for every Tod of Wool which shall be so licensed to
be exported over and above the rate or porportion of Wool in and by this Act,
or the true meaning thereof, limited or appointed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Governors aforesaid, or their respective Deputies, or any their Clerks,
Officers or Servants, for the granting, making, or sealing of every such
writing of License as is aforesaid, and for the entering a Remembrance of the
same into some Book, which they shall have and keep for that purpose, may have
and take the sum of Twelve pence, and no more, upon pain of forfeiting to the
party grieved the sum of Five shillings for every penny which shall be taken
over and above the said sum of twelve pence, in and by this Act allowed to be
taken, and so after that proportion; the said penalty or Forfeiture for the
taking above Twelve pence as aforesaid, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record at Westminster, or elsewhere, wherein no
Injunction, Protection, Privilege, Essoyne or Wager of Law shall be admitted
or allowed, St. 13 Car. 2. cap. 13.

CAP. XXXIII.
The Confirmation of Marriages.

Whereas by virtue or color of certain Ordinances, or certain pretended Acts
or Ordinances, diverse marriages since the beginning of the late troubles have
been had and solemnized in some other manner then has been formerly used and
accustomed: Marriages since the ^. May, 1642. confirmed.
Now for the preventing and avoiding of all doubts and questions touching the
same, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice and
assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of
the same, That all Marriages had or Solemnized in any of his Majesty's
Dominions since the first day of May, in the year of Our Lord, One thousand six
hundred forty and two, before any Justice of Peace, or reputed Justice of
Peace, of England or Wales, or other his Majesty's Dominions, and by such
Justice, or reputed Justice, so pronounced or declared; And all Marriages
within any of His Majesty's Dominions, since the same first day of May, in the
year of Our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty two, had or Solemnized
according to the direction or true intent of any Act or Ordinance, or reputed
Act or Ordinance, of one or both houses of Parliament, or of any Convention
sitting at Westminster, under the Name, Style, or Title of a Parliament, or
assuming that Name, Style or Title, shall be, and shall be adjudged, esteemed,
and taken to be, and to have been of the same, and no other force and effect,
as if such Marriages had been had and solemnized according to the Rites and
Ceremonies established, or used in the Church or Kingdom of England, any Law,
Custom, or Usage to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Issues upon lawfulness of marriages already joined shall be cried by Jury
And be it further Enacted, that where in any Suit commenced, or to be commenced
in any of the Courts of the common Law, any issue has been joined, and not
already tried or determined, or shall be joined upon the point of Bastardy, or
unlawfulness of marriage, for or concerning the marriages had and solemnized,
as aforesaid, the same issues shall be tried by Jury of Twelve Men, according
to the course of Trial of other issues tryable by Jury at the Common Law, and
not otherwise, Bastardy.
any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 11.

CAP. XXXIV.
The Planting, Setting, or Sowing of Tobacco in England and Ireland prohibited.

YOur Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Subjects, The Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, considering of how great concern and importance
it is, That the Colonies and Plantations of this Kingdom in America, be
defended, Protected, Maintained, and kept up, and that all due and possible
encouragement be given unto them; and that not not only in regard great and
considerable Dominions and Countries have been thereby gained, Importance of
the plantations of America.
and added to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; But for that the strength and
welfare of this Kingdom do very much depend upon them, in regard of the
employment of a very considerable part of its Shipping and Seamen, and of the
vent of very great quantities of its Native Commodities and Manufactures; as
also of its supply, with several Commodities which it was wont formerly to have
only from Forraigners, and at far dearer Rates: And forasmuch as Tobacco is one
of the main products of several of those Plantations, and upon which their
Welfare, and Subsistence, and the Navigation of this Kingdom, and vent of its
Commodities thither, do much depend; and in regard it is found by experience,
That the Tobaccoes Planted in these parts are not so good and wholesome for the
Takers thereof; And that by the Planting thereof, your Majesty is deprived of a
considerable part of your Revenue arising by Customs upon Imported Tobacco; Do
most humbly pray, That it may be Enacted by your Majesty: And it is hereby
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, No person after the
1. January, 1660. shall set or plant any Tobacco.
That no Person or Persons whatsoever shall, or do from and after the first day
of January, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, Set,
Plant, improve to grow, make or cure any Tobacco either in Seed, Plant, or
otherwise, in or upon any Ground, Earth, Field, or Place within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, The penalty.
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or in the Kingdom of Ireland, under the penalty
of the Forfeiture of all such Tobacco, or the value thereof, or of the sum of
forty shillings for every Rod or Pole of Ground so Planted, set, or Sown as
aforesaid; and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of Ground,
one Moiety thereof to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; And the other
Moiety to him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered by Bill,
Plaint, or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoigne, Protection,
or wager in Law shall be allowed.

All Sheriffs and other officers may destroy any Tobacco planted contrary to
this Act.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and every of them, upon Information or Complaint
made unto them, or any of them, by any the Officers of the Customs, or by any
other Person or Persons whatsoever, That there is any Tobacco set, sown,
planted, or growing within their Jurisdictions or Precincts, contrary to this
Act, shall within ten days after such Information or Complaint, cause to be
burnt, plucked up, consumed, or utterly destroyed, all such Tobacco so set,
sown, planted or growing.

The penalty of any person resisting this act.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That in case any Person or Persons shall
resist, or make forcible Opposition against any person or persons in the due
and through Execution of this Act, that every such person or persons, for every
such Offense, shall forfeit the sum of five pounds to be divided and recovered
in manner aforesaid. And in case any person or persons shall not pay the sums
of money by them to be paid, by virtue of this Act, That in every such case,
Distress shall be made and Sale thereof, returning the Overplus to the Owners;
And in case no Distress be to be found, That then every such party shall be
committed to the Common Goal in the County where such Offense shall be
committed, there to remain for the space of two months, without bail or
main-prize.

Proviso, for private Gardens.
Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That this Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall extend to the hindering of the planting of Tobacco in
any Physic Garden of either University, or in any other private Garden for
Physic or Surgery, only so as the quantity so planted exceed not one half
of one Pole in any one Place or Garden. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 14.

CAP. XXXV.
A Post Office erected and established.

WHereas for the maintenance of mutual Correspondencies, and prevention of many
Inconveniences happening by private Posts, The well ordering of postage and
letters of great concernment to Trade.
several public Post-Offices have been heretofore erected for carrying and
recarrying of Letters by Posts, to, and from all parts and places within
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and several parts beyond the Seas; the well
Ordering thereof, is a matter of general concernment, and of great advantage,
as well for preservation of Trade and Commerce, as otherwise: To the end
therefore, that the same may be managed so, that speedy and safe dispatches may
be had, which is most likely to be effected, by erecting one general
Post Office for that purpose;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, A Letter-office
erected in London.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That there be from henceforth one general Letter-Office
erected and established in some convenient place within the City of London, A
master of the Office to be appointed by the King. Postmaster General.
from whence all Letters and pacquets whatsoever may be with speed and
expedition sent unto any part of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions, or unto any Kingdom or
Country beyond the Seas, at which said Office all Returns and Answers may be
likewise received; And that one Master of the said General Letter-Office shall
be from time to time appointed by the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
to be made and constituted by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
by the name and Style of his Majesty's Postmaster General; which said Master
of the said Office, and his Deputy and Deputies, by him thereunto sufficiently
authorized, and his and their Servants, and Agents, and no other person or
persons whatsoever, shall from time to time have the receiving, taking up,
ordering, dispatching, sending Post or with speed, and delivering of all
Letters and Pacquets whatsoever, which shall from time to time be sent to and
from all and every the parts and places of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
other his Majesty's Dominions, and to and from all and every the Kingdoms and
Countries beyond the Seas, where he shall settle or cause to be settled posts or
running Messengers for that purpose. Except such Letters as shall be sent by
Coaches, common known Carriers of Goods by Carts, Wagons, or Packhorses, and
shall be carried along with their Carts, Wagons, and Packhorses respectively;
And except Letters of Merchants and Masters which shall be sent by any Masters
of any Ships, Barques, or other Vessel of Merchandise, or by any other person
employed by them for the carriage of such Letters aforesaid, according to the
respective directions; And also except Letters to be sent by any private friend
or friends in their ways of journey or travel, or by any messenger or
messengers sent on purpose, for or concerning the private affairs of any person
or persons: And also except Messengers who carry and recarry Commissions, or
the Return thereof, Affidavits, Writs, Process or Proceedings, or the Returns
thereof, issuing out of any Court.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Postmaster General
and no other to provide horses for riding post.
That such Postmaster General for the time being, as shall from time to time
be made and constituted by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the
respective Deputies, or Substitutes of such Postmaster General, and no other
person or persons whatsoever, shall prepare, and provide Horses and furniture
to let to Hire unto all Through-posts, and persons riding in post by
Commission, or without, to and from all and every the parts and places of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, where any post-roads are, or shall be settled
and established.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for such Postmaster General to be constituted and appointed as
aforesaid, and his Deputy or Deputies by him thereunto sufficiently authorized,
to demand, have, receive and take for the portage and conveyance of all such
Letters which he shall so convey, carry or send Post as aforesaid, and for the
providing and furnishing Horses for Through-Posts, or persons riding in Post as
aforesaid, according to the several Rates and Sums of Lawful English money
hereafter mentioned, Rates for carrying letters.
not to exceed the same (that is to say), For the Port of every Letter not
exceeding one sheet, to or from any place not exceeding fourscore English miles
distant from the place where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; And for
the like port of every Letter not exceeding two sheets, Four pence; And for the
like port of every packet of Letters proportionably unto the said Rates; And
for the like port of every packet of Writs, Deeds, and other things, after the
Rate of Eight pence for every ounce weight; and for the port of every Letter
not exceeding one sheet, above the distance of fourscore English miles from the
place where the same shall be received, Three pence; And for the like port of a
Letter, not exceeding two sheets, Six pence; and proportionably to the same
rates, for the like port of all pacquets of Letters, and for the like port of
every other packet of writs, Deeds, or other things, after the rate of Twelve
pence of English money for every Ounce weight; and for the port of every letter
not exceeding One sheet, from London unto the Town of Berwick, or from thence
to the City of London, Three pence of English money; And for the like port of
every letter not exceeding two sheets, Six pence; and proportionably unto the
same rates, for every packet of letters, and for every other packet of
greater bulk, One shilling and Six pence for every Ounce weight; And for the
port of such letters and pacquets as shall be conveyed or carried from the Town
of Berwick unto any place or places within forty English miles distance from
Berwick, or any other place where such letter shall be received, Two pence; and
for every letter not exceeding Two sheets, Four pence; and proportionably to
the same rates for every packet of letters, and for every other packet or
parcel, Eight pence for every Ounce weight; and for every letter not exceeding
One sheet, to be conveyed or carried a further distance then Forty English
miles, Four pence; And for the like port of every packet of letters, Eight
pence: and proportionably unto the same Rates for the like port of every
packet of letters, and for the like port of every other packet, One shilling
for every Ounce weight; and for the port of every letter not exceeding one
sheet from England unto the City of Dublin in Ireland, or from the City of
Dublin in Ireland unto England, Six pence of English money; and for the like
port of every letter not exceeding two sheets, one shilling, and proportionably
to the same rates for every packet of letters, and for the port of every other
packet of any kind of greater Bulk, Two shillings for every ounce weight; and
for the Port of such Letters or Pacquets as shall be conveyed or carried from
the City of Dublin, unto any other place or places within the Kingdom of
Ireland, or from any other place unto the said City, or to, or from any other
place within the said Kingdom, according to the Rates and sums of English money
hereafter following, viz. For every Letter not exceeding one sheet, to or from
any place within forty English Miles distance from Dublin, or any other place
where such Letter shall be received, Two pence; And for every letter not
exceeding two sheets, Four pence; and proportionably to the same Rates for
every packet of letters, and for every packet of greater Bulk, Eight pence
for every Ounce Weight; and for every letter not exceeding one sheet, to be
carried or conveyed a further distance then forty English miles, Four pence;
and for the like port of every letter not exceeding two sheets, Eight pence;
and proportionably unto the same Rates for the like port of every packet of
letters, and for the like Port of every Packet of greater Bulk, One shilling
for every Ounce weight; and for all and every the Letters, Pacquets, and
parcels of Goods that shall be carried or conveyed to or from any of his
Majesty's said Dominions to or from any other parts or places beyond the Seas,
according to the several and respective Rates that now are, and have been taken
for Letters, Pacquets, and parcels so conveyed, being rated either by the
Letter, or by the Ounce weight,

That is to say, Morlaix, Saint Maloes, Caen, Newhaven, and Places of like
distance, Port paid to Roan is for d Single vi Double xii Treble xviii Ounce
xviii Hamburgh, Colen, Frankfort, Port paid to Antwerp is d Single viii Double
xvi Treble xxiv Ounce xxiv Venice, Geneva, Legorne, Rome, Naples, Messina, and
all other parts of Italy by way of Venice, franct pro Mantua s d Single o ix
Double i vi Treble ii iii Ounce ii viii Marcelia, Smirna, Constantinople,
Aleppo, and all parts of Turkey, port paid to Marcelia s d Single i o Double ii
o 3 qrs. of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix And for Letters brought from the said
places to England. s d Single o viii Double i iv Treble ii o Ounce ii o And for
the port Letters brought into England from Calais, Diepe, Bulloigne, Abbeville,
Amiens, Saint Omers, Montrell. s d Single o iv Double o viii Treble i o Ounce i
o Roven. s d Single o vi Double i o Treble i vi Ounce i vi Genova, Legorn,
Rome, and other parts of Italy, by way of Lions, franct pro Lions. s d Single i
o Double ii o 3 qrs. of an ounce ii ix Ounce iii ix And of Letters sent
outward. To Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nantes, Orleans, Byon, Tours, and places of
like distance, port paid to Paris. s d Single o ix Double i vi Treble ii iii
Ounce ii o And for Letters brought from the same places into England. s d
Single i o Double ii o 3 qrs. of an ounce iii o Ounce iv o Also Letters sent
outward. To Norembourgh, Bremen, Dantswick, Lubeck, Lipswick, and other places
of like distance, Post paid to Hamburgh. s d Single i o Double ii o 3 qrs. of
an ounce iii o Ounce iv o Paris. s d Single o ix Double i vi Treble ii iii
Ounce ii o Dunkirk, Ostend, Lille, Ipre, Courtrey, Gheandt, Bruxells, Bridges,
Antwerp, and all other parts of Flanders. s d Single o viii Double i v Treble
ii o Ounce ii o Slus, Flushing, Middleburgh, Amsterdam, Roterdam, Delph, Hague,
and from all other parts of Holland and Zealand. s d Single o viii Double i iv
Treble ii o Ounce ii o

Provided always, That all Merchants Accounts not exceeding one sheet of
paper, Proviso for Merchants.
and all bills of Exchange, Invoyes, and Bills of Lading, are, and shall hereby
be understood to be allowed without Rate in the Price of the Letters, and
likewise the Covers of Letters not exceeding one fourth part of a sheet of
paper sent to Marseilles, Venice or Legorne, to be sent forward to Turkey, shall
be understood to be allowed to pass without rate or payment for the same; and
according to the same rates and proportions for the Port of Letters, pacquets
and parcels to or from any of the parts or places beyond the Seas, where Posts
have not been heretofore settled, and may hereafter be settled by the said
Postmaster General for the time being, his Executors or Assigns: And it shall
and may be lawful to and for such Postmaster General, and his Deputy and
Deputies, to ask, demand, take and receive of every person that he or they
shall furnish and provide with Horses, Furniture and Guide to ride Post in any
of the Post-roades as aforesaid, Three pence of English money for each Horses,
Hire or Postage for every English mile, and four pence for the Guide for every
Stage. And whereas upon the arrival of Ships from parts beyond the Seas into
several Ports within his Majesty's Dominions, many Letters directed to several
Merchants and others, have been detained long to the great damage of the
Merchants, in want of that speedy advice and intelligence which they might have
had if the same had been forthwith dispatched by the settled Posts; and
sometimes such Letters have been delivered by the Masters or Passengers of such
Ships to ignorant and loose hands, that understand not the way and means of
speedy conveyance and delivery Letters, whereby great prejudice has accrued to
the affairs of Merchants and others, as well by the miscarriage of many Letters
so brought, as oftentimes by the opening of the same to the discovery of the
Correspondencies and secrets of the Merchant.

Be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all Letters and
Pacquets that by any Master of any Ship or Vessel, or any of his Company, or
any Passengers therein, shall or may be brought to any Port-Town within his
Majesty's Dominions, or any of the Members thereof, other then such Letters as
are before excepted. or may be sent by common known Carriers in manner
aforesaid, or by a friend as aforesaid; shall by such Master, Passenger, or
other person be forthwith delivered unto the Deputy or Deputies only of the
said Postmaster General for the time being by him appointed for the said
Port-Town, and him or them to be sent Post unto the said general Post Office to
be delivered according to the several and respective directions of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the aforesaid Authority, That no person or
persons whatsoever, or Body politic or Corporate other then such Postmaster
General as shall from time to time be nominated and appointed by his Majesty,
His Heirs or Successors, and constituted by Letters Patents under the great
Seal of England as aforesaid, and his Deputy and Deputies or Assigns, shall
presume to carry, recarry, and deliver Letters for Hire, other then as before
excepted, or to set up or employ any Foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post, or
pacquet-Boat whatsoever for the conveyance, carrying, Penalties of offending
against this Act
and recarrying of any Lettters or pacquets by Sea or Land within his Majesty's
Dominions, or shall provide and maintain Horses and Furniture for the horsing
of any Thorow-pasts, or persons riding in post with a Guide and Horn, as usual
for Hire, upon pain of Forfeiting the sum of five pounds of English money for
every several offense against the Tenor of this present Act, And also for the
forfeiture of the sum of One hundred pound of like English money for every
weeks time that any Offender against this Act shall employ, maintain, and
continue any such foot-post, Horse-post, Coach-post or pacquet-Boat as
aforesaid: which said several and respective Forfeitures, shall, and may be
sued for, and recovered by Action or Actions of Debt, plaint, or Information in
any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoigne, privilege,
protection or Wager of Law shall be admitted, Proviso where any Postmaster
does not provide.
and the said several and respective forfeitures that shall happen from time to
time to be recovered, shall be and remain the one moiety thereof to his
Majesty, and his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety thereof to such
person or persons who shall or will inform against the Offender or Offenders
against this present Act, and shall or will sue for the said forfeitures upon
the same.

Provided always, That if any Postmaster of any respective place, does not,
or cannot furnish any person or persons riding in Post with sufficient horses
within the space of one half hour after demand, That then such person or
persons are here understood to be left at liberty to provide themselves, as
conveniently they can; And the persons who shall furnish such horses shall not
therefore be liable unto any Penalties or Forfeitures contained in this Act.

Provided always, That if through default or neglect of the Postmaster
General aforesaid, Proviso touching Post-masters that do not sufficiently
provide horses, etc.
any person or persons riding in Post shall fail as aforesaid of being
furnished with a sufficient Horse, or Horses, for his or their use, after
demand as aforesaid; That in every such case, the said Postmaster General
shall forfeit the sum of Five pounds sterling, the one moiety to his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them who shall sue for
the same in any Court of Record, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint, or other
Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protection, or other Wager in Law shall be
admitted.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Proviso.
That nothing herein contained shall be understood to prohibit the carrying or
recarrying of any Letters or pacquets, to or from any Town or place, to or from
the next respective Post-Road, or Stage appointed for that purpose; But that
every person shall have free Liberty to send and employ such persons as they
shall think fit, for to carry the said Letters or Pacquets as aforesaid without
any forfeiture or penalty therefore, Any thing contained in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Proviso against carrying any packet out of England in any foreign vessels.
Provided always, That if the Packet or Maile shall be carried out of England
into any part beyond the Seas in any ship or Vessel which is not of English
built and Navigated with English Seamen, That in every such case, the said
Postmaster General shall forfeit the sum of one hundred pounds Sterling; The
one moiety to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to
him or them who shall sue for the same, in any Court of Record, to be recovered
by Bill, Plaint or other Information, wherein no Essoigne, Protection, or other
Wager in Law shall be allowed.

Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall be capable of having, using, or exercising the Office of
Postmaster General, or any other Employment relating to the said Office,
unless he or they shall first take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
before any two Justices of the peace of the respective Counties wherein such
person or persons are or shall be resident, which said Justices are hereby
Authorized to administer the said oaths accordingly.

Proviso. Truro. Penrin. Kendall. Lancaster. Penrith. Carlisle. Grimsby.
Postmaster to continue constant posts.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Letter or
pacquet-post shall twice every week come by the way of Truro and Penrin to the
Town of Marketiew alias Marhasion in the County of Cornwall; and once a week to
Kendal by the way of Lancaster; and to the Town of Penrith in Cumberland by the
way of Newcastle and Carlisle; and to the City of Lincoln, and the Borough of
Grimsby in the County of Lincoln, Any thing in this Act contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such
postmaster General to be from time to time appointed by his Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors as aforesaid, shall continue constant posts for carriage of
letters to all places, though they lie out of the post-roads, as has been used
for the space of three years last past, at the rates herein before mentioned,
under pain of forfeiture for every omission Five pounds, to be recovered by
Action, Suit, or plaint, in any his Majesty's Courts of Record, the one moiety
to the use of his Majesty, the other moiety to the use of the Informer. And for
the better management of the said Post Office, and that the people of these
Kingdoms may have their intercourse of Commerce and trade the better
maintained, and their Letters and advises conveyed, carried and recarried with
the greatest speed, security, and convenience that may be;

Penalty for every omission. The Postmaster, etc. to observe such orders as
his Majesty shall make.
Be it further Enacted, That the said Postmaster General so nominated,
appointed and constituted as aforesaid, and his Deputies, shall from time to
time observe and follow such orders, rules, directions and instructions for and
concerning the settlement of convenient posts and Stages upon the several roads
in England, Scotland and Ireland, and other his Majesty's Dominions, and the
providing and keeping of a sufficient number of horses at the said several
Stages, as well for the carrying and conveying of the said letters and
pacquets, as for the horsing of all thorow-posts and persons riding in post by
warrant or otherwise as aforesaid, as his Majesty, his heirs and Successors,
shall from time to time in that behalf make, and ordain; And that his Majesty,
his heirs and Successors may grant the said Office of postmaster General, His
Majesty may grant the said office for life or years, not exceeding 25. years.
together with the powers and Authorities thereunto belonging, and the several
rates of portage above mentioned, and all profits, privileges, fees,
perquisites and emoluments thereunto belonging, or to belong, either for life
or term of years, not exceeding one and twenty years, to such person or
persons, and under such Covenants, conditions and yearly rents to his said
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, reserved, as his said Majesty, his heirs and
Successors shall from time to time think fit for the best advantage and benefit
of the Kingdom.

No horses to be seized without consent of the owners.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
shall have power to take, use, or seize any horses for the service mentioned in
this Act, without the consent of the owners thereof; Any usage or pretense, or
any thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Proviso for the rates of all In land letters.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Inland
Letters sent by any Packet Post established by this Act as aforesaid, do and
shall pay the rates and prices before mentioned, at such Stage where they are
last delivered only, unless the party that delivers the Letters desires to pay
elsewhere; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided
always, That all Letters, and other things, may be sent or conveyed to or from
the Two Universities in manner as heretofore has been used; Any thing herein
to the contrary notwithstanding. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 7.

CAP. XXXVI.
The Master of the Rolls for the time being, empowered to make Leases for years,
in order to new build the old Houses belonging to the Rolls. Pr. St. 13 Car. 2.
cap. 6.

CAP. XXXVII.
An Act for making the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial. PR.

Anno Regni Caroli II. Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Decimo
Tertio.
AT the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the Eight day of May, Anno
Dom. 1661. In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign
Lord, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued until
Tuesday the Thirtieth of July, 1661. and from that day the said Parliament was
adjourned unto the Twentieth of November then next following; To the pleasure
of Almighty God, and to the Weal public of this Realm, were Enacted as
follows:

CAP. I.
For Safety of His Majesty's Person and Government, against Treasonable and
Seditious Practices.

THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament deeply weighing and considering
the miseries and calamities of well nigh twenty years, before your Majesty's
happy Return, The grounds and Inducements of this Act.
and withal, reflecting upon the causes and occasions of so great and
deplorable conclusions, do in all humility and thankfulness acknowledge Your
Majesty's incomparable Grace and Goodness to your People, in your Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, by which your Majesty has been
pleased to deliver your Subjects, not only from the punishment, but also from
the reproach of their former miscarriages, which unexampled Piety and Clemency
of Your Majesty has enflamed the hearts of us your Subjects with an ardent
desire to express all possible zeal and duty in the care and preservation of
your Majesty's Person (in whose Honor and Happiness consists the good and
welfare of your People) and in preventing (as much as may be) all Treasonable
and Seditious Practices and Attempts for the time to come. And because the
growth and increase of the late Troubles and Disorders, did in a very great
measure proceed from a multitude of Seditious Sermons, Pamphlets and Speeches,
daily preached, printed and published, Seditious Sermons, Pamphlets and
Speeches.
with a transcendent boldness defaming the Person and Government of Your
Majesty and Your Royal Father, wherein men were too much encouraged, and (above
all) from a wilful mistake of the Supreme and lawful Authority, whilst men were
forward to cry up and maintain those Orders and Ordinances, Oaths and
Covenants, to be Acts Legal and Warrantable, which in themselves had not the
least color of Law or Justice to support them; from which kind of distempers,
as the present age is not yet wholly freed, so posterity may be apt to relapse
into them, if a timely remedy be not provided. We therefore, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, having duly considered the premises, 13 El.
cap. 1.
and remembering that in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of
ever blessed memory, a right good and profitable Law was made for preservation
of her Majesty's Person, Do most humbly beseech your most Excellent Majesty,
that it may be Enacted, What shall be adjudged Treason during the life of the
King.
and be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by Authority of the same, That if any person or persons whatsoever, after the
Four and twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred sixty and one, during the natural life of our most Gracious Sovereign
Lord the King, (whom Almighty God preserve and bless with a long and prosperous
Reign) shall within the Realm, or without, compass, imagine, invent, devise, or
intend death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death or
destruction, maim or wounding, imprisonment, or restraint of the person of the
same our Sovereign Lord the King, or to deprive or depose him from the Style,
Honor, or Kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any other his
Majesty's Dominions or Countries, or to levy War against his Majesty within
this Realm, or without, or to move, or stir any Forreiner or Strangers with
Force to invade this Realm, or any other his Majesty's Dominions or Countries
being under his Majesty's Obeisance: Being declared and proved by two witnesses.
And such compassings, Imaginations, Inventions, Devices, or Intentions, or any
of them, shall express, utter, or declare, by any Printing, Writing, Preaching,
or Malicious and advised speaking, being legally convicted thereof upon the
Oaths of two lawful and credible witnesses, upon trial, Convicted by due course
of Law.
or otherwise convicted or attainted by due course of Law, then every such
person and persons so as aforesaid offending, shall be deemed, declared, and
adjudged to be Traitors, and shall suffer pains of death, and also lose and
forfeit as in cases of High Treason. Offenses (during his Majesty's life) which
disable persons to bear any Office.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons at any time after the Four and twentieth day of June, in the year of
our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, during his Majesty's life,
shall maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic or
a Papist, or that he endeavors to introduce Popery; or shall maliciously and
advisedly, by writing, printing, preaching or other speaking, express, publish,
utter, or declare any words, sentences, or other thing or things, to incite or
stir up the people to hatred or dislike of the Person of his Majesty, or the
established Government, then every such person and persons, being thereof
Legally convicted, shall be disabled to have or enjoy, and is hereby disabled
and made incapable of having, holding, enjoying, or exercising any place,
office, or promotion Ecclesiastical, Peerage.
Civil or Military, or any other employment in Church or State, other then that
of his Peerage, and shall likewise be liable to such further and other
punishments as by the Common Laws or Statutes of this Realm may be inflicted in
such cases. Stat. 17 Car. 1. cap. 7. The Parliament begun 3. of No. 1640. not
in being. Stat. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.
And to the end that no man hereafter may be misled into any seditious or
unquiet demeanor, out of an opinion that the Parliament begun and held at
Westminster, upon the third day of November, in the year of Our Lord, One
thousand six hundred and forty, is yet in being, which is undoubtedly dissolved
and determined, and so is hereby declared and adjudged to be fully dissolved
and determined; or out of an opinion that there lies any obligation upon him
from any Oath, Covenant or Engagement whatsoever, No Legislative power in
either or both Houses of Parliament without the King.
to endeavor a change of Government, either in Church or State; or out of an
Opinion, that both Houses of Parliament, or either of them, have a Legislative
Power without the King; All which Assertions have been seditiously maintained
in some Pamphlets lately Printed, and are daily promoted by the active enemies
of our Peace and Happiness:

Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
or persons, at any time after the Four and twentieth day of June, in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, shall maliciously and
advisedly, by writing, Printing, Preaching, or other speaking, express,
publish, utter, declare or affirm, That the Parliament begun at Westminster
upon the Third day of November, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred and Forty, is not yet dissolved, or is not determined, or that it ought
to be in being, or has yet any continuance or existence, or that there lies
any Obligation upon him, or any other person, from any Oath, Covenant or
Engagement whatsoever, to endeavor a change of Government, either in Church or
State, or that both Houses of Parliament, or either House of Parliament, have,
or has a Legislative Power without the King, Praemunire.
or any other words to the same effect; That then every such person and persons
so as aforesaid offending, shall incur the danger and penalty of a Praemunire
mentioned in a Statute made in the Sixteenth year of the Reign of King Richard
the Second. The Solemn League and Covenant unlawful, and illegally imposed.

Certain Orders and Ordinances of both or either Houses of Parliament declared
void. Proviso, the said Orders, etc. may be made use of according to the Act of
Indemnity. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 11.


And it is hereby also declared, That the Oath usually called the Solemn League
and Covenant, was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects
of this Realm against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, and
that all Orders and Ordinances, or pretended Orders and Ordinances, of both or
either Houses of Parliament, for imposing of Oaths, Covenants or Engagements,
Levying of Taxes, or Raising of Forces and Arms, to which the Royal assent,
either in Person or by Commission, was not expressly had or given, were in their
first creation and making, and still are, and so shall be taken to be, null and
void to all intents and purposes whatsoever. Provided nevertheless, That all
and every person and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, who have been, or
shall at any time hereafter be questioned for any thing acted or done by color
of any the orders or Ordinances herein before mentioned and declared to be null
and void, and are Indempnified by an Act entitled An Act of free and General
Pardon Indemnity and Oblivion, made in the Twelfth year of His Majesty's Reign
that now is, or shall be Indempnified by an^ Act of Parliament, shall and may
make such use of the said Orders and Ordinances for their Indemnity according
to the true intent and meaning of the said Act, and no other, as he or they
might have done if this Act had not been made, any thing in this Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

No person to be prosecuted for any offenses in this Act (other then Treason
(unless by special order from his Majesty: And within six months after the
offense committed.

Treasons and offenses within this Act to be proved by two witnesses viva v^^^


Provided always, That no person be prosecuted for any of the offenses in this
Act mentioned (other then such as are made and declared to be high Treason)
unless it be by Order of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, under his
or their Sign Manual, or by Order of the Council Table of his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, directed unto the Attorney General for the time being, or
some other of the Council learned to his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for
the time being; nor shall any person or persons by virtue of this present Act
incur any of the penalties herein before mentioned, unless he or they be
prosecuted within six months next after the Offense committed, and indicted
thereupon within three months after such prosecution, any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no person or persons shall be
indicted, arraigned, condemned, convicted or attainted for any of the Treasons,
or Offenses aforesaid, unless the same Offender or Offenders be thereof accused
by the Testimony and deposition of two lawful and credible Witnesses upon Oath,
which witnesses at the time of the said Offender or Offenders arraignment,
shall be brought in person before him or them face to face, and shall openly
avow and maintain upon Oath what they have to say against him or them
concerning the Treason or Offenses contained in the said Indictment, unless the
party or parties arraigned shall willingly without violence confess the same.

Proviso, for the Privilege at Debates in Parliament. For repeal or alteration
of Laws, or redressing public Grievances.
Provided likewise, and be it Enacted, That this Act or any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to deprive either of the Houses of Parliament, or
any of their Members, of their just ancient Freedom and Privilege of debating
any matters or business, which shall be propounded or debated in either of the
said Houses, or at any Conferences or Committees of both or either of the said
Houses of Parliament, or touching the repeal or alteration of any old, or
preparing any new Laws, or the redressing of any public Grievance; but that
the said Members of either of the said Houses, and the Assistants of the House
of Peers, and every of them, shall have the same freedom of speech, and all
other Privileges whatsoever, as they had before the making of this Act; any
thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted, Proviso, for Peerage and
Peers.
That no Peer of this Realm shall be tried for any offense against this Act,
but by his Peers; And further, That every Peer who shall be convicted of any
offense against this Act, after such conviction, be disabled during his life to
sit in Parliament, unless his Majesty shall graciously be pleased to pardon
him. And if his Majesty shall grant his pardon to any Peer of this Realm, or
Commoner, convicted of any offense against this Act, after such Pardon granted,
the Peer or Commoner so pardoned shall be restored to all intents and purposes,
as if he had never been convicted; any thing in this Law to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

CAP. II.
An Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for dis-enabling all persons in Holy
Orders to exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, Repealed.

WHereas at the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Third day of November, in
the Sixteenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles of
blessed memory, since deceased, an Act of Parliament was made, Entitled, An
Act for dis-enabling all persons in Holy Orders to exercise any Temporal
Jurisdiction or Authority; Stat. 17 Car. 1. cap. 27. Rep.
Which Act has made several alterations prejudicial to the constitution and
ancient Rights of Parliament, and contrary to the Laws of this Land, and is by
experience found otherwise inconvenient; Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That
the said Act, Entitled, An Act for dis-enabling all persons in holy Orders to
exercise any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority, and every clause, matter and
thing therein contained, shall be, and is hereby from henceforth repealed,
annulled, and made void to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

CAP. III.
All such Moneys, Goods, and other things which were Received, Levied, or
Collected in these late Times, and are remaining in the hands or possession of
any Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors, or others not pardoned by the Act of
Oblivion, declared to be Vested and settled in His Majesty.

WHereas diverse Doubts have been made, whether or no the Moneys, Goods,
Chattels, and other things excepted to be accounted for in the Act of Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, made and passed in the Parliament
begun at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April, in the Twelfth year
of your Majesty's Reign, do belong unto, and of right are in your Majesty; for
that the same were not levied, received, collected, or taken by your Majesty's
Authority, or to your Majesty's use: For remedy, and clearing whereof, Goods
and Moneys levied since the 30. of Ian. 1642. and not pardoned, are vested in
his Majesty.
We the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament humbly beseech your Majesty,
that it may be Enacted, and be it Declared, Enacted, and Ordained by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That all and
every sum and sums of Money, Goods, Plate, Jewels, Horses, Arms, Ammunition,
and other things whatsoever, levied, received, or taken sithence the Thirtieth
of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, by any of the late pretended
Authorities, or by pretense or color of any Power or Authority, derived or
pretended to be derived from them, or any of them, for any public use, which
are not pardoned by the said Act, which are not otherwise vested and settled in
the Kings Majesty, and all Bonds, Obligations, Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 11.
and other Securities entered into for the same, or any part thereof, be and are
hereby vested and settled in the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and
that his Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and
at all times hereafter have, demand, sue for, and recover the same of all, and
every person and persons, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators who are
accountable for the same, or in whose hands or possessions soever the same were
or are, as if the same had been levied, received, collected, or taken in his
Majesty's Name by Authority from his Majesty, or to his Majesty's use, any Law,
or Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
person or persons which have received any the aforesaid sum or sums of money
from any Treasurer or Receiver for any public use, by way of Impressed, to be
accounted for, which are not pardoned or discharged by the aforesaid Act, shall
be liable to account, and called to account in such manner and form, as if they
had received the same out of his Majesty's Exchequer, or any other public
Treasury; The Revenues of the Churches in Wales.
and particularly those persons that have received or collected the Revenues of
any Churches, or Vicarages in Wales, or in the County of Monmouth, since the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty eight; Provided they have all
due allowances in their accounts, as all such persons whose accounts are
excepted in the Act of Oblivion, have or ought to have.

And to the end his Majesty may be the better enabled to discover, Commissions
for discovery.
and sue for all such Moneys, Goods, and other things invested in his Majesty
by this Act; it is further ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, shall and may from time to time
issue forth such, and so many Commissions, to such, and so many persons, as his
Majesty shall think fit, either under the great Seal of England, or the Seal of
his Majesty's Exchequer, for the better discovering, levying, receiving, and
discharging the same.

Persons accountable enabled to sue for and levy all arrears.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all persons
accountable to his Majesty by this Act, shall have full power and Authority,
and are hereby enabled to sue for, Levy, and recover from the parties from whom
the same was, and is due, and for which they are hereby accomptable, all sums
of Money and Arrears, in such manner and form as they might have recovered and
levied the same when they first grew due; Provided this Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to call any person to account, or to
question any person for Goods or other things remaining in his hands which
shall not be called to account, Proviso, none to be questioned but upon some
prosecution begun before the 24 of June 1662.
or some Information against him, either in the Exchequer, or Commissioners to
be appointed as aforesaid, before the four and twentieth of June, which shall
be in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty two; and that the
said Information be prosecuted with effect within twelve months after the
Exhibition thereof.

CAP. IV.
An Act for a free and Voluntary present to his Majesty. EXP.

Proviso, declaring no commissions of this nature but by authority of
Parliament.
ANd be it hereby Declared, That no Commissions or Aids of this nature can be
issued out or levied, but by Authority of Parliament; And that this Act and
supply hereby granted, shall not be drawn into example for the time to come. 1
R. 3. ca. 2.

CAPr V.
For preventing Tumults, and Disorders, upon pretense of preparing or
presenting public Petitions, or other Addresses, to his Majesty, or the
Parliament.

Tumultuous and disorderly preparing petitions a great occasion of the late
wars and calamities.
Whereas it has been found by sad experience, that Tumultuous, and other
Disorderly soliciting, and procuring of Hands by private Persons to Petitions,
Complaints, Remonstrances, and Declarations, and other Addresses to the King,
or to both, or either Houses of Parliament, for alteration of matters
established by Law, redress of pretended grievances in Church or State, or
other public Concernments, have been made use of to serve the ends of Factious
and Seditious persons gotten into power, to the violation of the public Peace,
and have been a great means of the late unhappy Wars, Confusions, and
Calamities in this Nation; for preventing the like mischief for the future;

No person after the 1 Aug. 1661. shall solicit or procure any petition, etc.
for altering any established law in Church or state.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, That no person or persons whatsoever, shall from and after the first of
August, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, Solicit, Labor, or procure
the getting of Hands, or other Consent of any persons above the number of
twenty, or more, to any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, Declaration, or
other Address to the King, or both, or either Houses of Parliament, for
alteration of matters established by Law in Church or State, unless the matter
thereof have been first consented unto, and Ordered by three or more Justices
of the County, or by the Major part of the Grand Jury of the County, or
division of the County where the same matter shall arise at their public
Assizes, or General Quarter Sessions, or if arising in London, by the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled; And that no person or
persons whatsoever shall repair to his Majesty, or both or either of the Houses
of Parliament, upon pretense of presenting, or delivering any Petition,
Complaint, Remonstrance or Declaration, or other Addresses accompanied with
excessive number of People, nor at any one time with above the number of Ten
persons, upon pain of incurring a penalty, not exceeding the sum of one hundred
pounds in money, and three months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize for
every offense, to be prosecuted at the Court of Kings Bench, or at the Assizes,
or General Quarter Sessions within six months after the offense committed, and
proved by two or more credible witnesses.

Proviso.
Provided always, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
construed to extend, to debar or hinder any person or persons, not exceeding
the number of Ten aforesaid, to present any public or private Grievance or
Complaint to any Member or Members of Parliament after this Election, and
during the continuance of the Parliament, or to the Kings Majesty, for any
Remedy to be thereupon had; nor to extend to any Address whatsoever to his
Majesty, by all or any of the Members of both or either Houses of Parliament,
during the sitting of Parliament, but that they may enjoy their freedom of
Access to his Majesty, as heretofore has been used.

CAP. VI.
The Militia declared to be in the King; and for the present Ordering and
Disposing the same.

The command of the Militia by Sea and land, the undoubted right of his Majesty.
FOrasmuch as within all His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole Supreme
Government, Command, and Disposition of the Militia, and all Forces by Sea and
Land, and of all Forts and Places of strength, is, and by the Laws of England
ever was the undoubted Right of His Majesty, and his Royal Predecessors, Kings
and Queens of England; and that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament
cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same; nor can, nor lawfully may raise, or
levy any War Offensive or Defensive against His Majesty, his Heirs or lawful
Successors; and yet the contrary thereof has of late years been practiced
almost to the Ruin and Destruction of this Kingdom; and during the late
usurped Governments, many evil and Rebellious Principles have been distilled
into the minds of the People of this Kingdom, which unless prevented, may break
forth to the disturbance of the Peace and Quiet thereof.

And whereas an Act is under consideration for exercising the Militia, An Act
under consideration touching the Militia.
with most safety and case to the King and his People, which Act cannot as yet
be perfect; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by,
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That the Militia and Landforces of this Kingdgom, and of the
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, now under the Power of
Lieutenants or their Deputies, shall be exercised, ordered, and managed until
the Five and twentieth day of March next ensuing, in such manner as the same
now is actually exercised, ordered, and managed, according to such Commissions
and Instructions as they formerly have, or from time to time shall receive from
his Majesty.

And whereas since the Twenty fourth of June, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, there have been Insurrections, by occasion whereof diverse of his
Majesty's good Subjects have been murdered; and for the securing the Peace of
the Nation, and preventing further disorders, diverse persons suspected to be
Fanatics, Sectaries, or Disturbers of the Peace, have been Assaulted,
Arrested, Detained or Imprisoned, and diverse Arms have been seized, and Houses
searched for Arms, or suspected persons; Be it therefore further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons, who have or shall
have acted, Persons who have Acted by commission of Lieutenancy.
or done any thing in execution of any Commission or Commissions of
Lieutenancy, issued by the Kings Majesty that now is, or by color of them, or
any of them, touching or concerning the same, or any of them, or relating
thereunto, shall be and are hereby saved harmless and indempnified in this
behalf: And also all Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, Officers and Ministers
of Justice, and all persons that have or shall have acted by or under them, or
by their or any of their Commands, since the said Twenty fourth day of June,
One thousand six hundred and sixty, until the twentieth day of July, One
thousand six hundred sixty and one, as to any assaulting, arresting, detaining,
or imprisoning any person suspected to be Fanatic, Sectary, or Disturber of
the Peace, or seizing of Arms, or searching of Houses for Arms, or for
suspected persons, shall be, and are hereby saved harmless, and indempnified in
that behalf.

Provided, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, Proviso.
shall after the Five and twentieth of March next, be prejudicial to any
County, City, or Place within this Kingdom, which are overcharged with Men and
Arms beyond their ancient proportion.

Provided, That neither this Act, nor any matter or thing therein contained,
shall be deemed, construed, or taken to extend to the giving or declaring of
any Power for the transporting of any the Subjects of this Realm, or any way
compelling them to march out of this Kingdom, otherwise then by the Laws of
England ought to be done:

Provided, That no person whatsoever shall be capable of acting as a
Lieutenant, No person may be Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenant that has not
taken the Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy.
or Deputy-Lieutenant, or other Officer or Soldier, by Virtue of this Act, who
has not already taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, since the Return
of his Majesty into England, until he shall take the same according to the Laws
and Statutes of this Kingdom: Which Oaths the Lords of His Privy Council, or
any six of them, are hereby empowered to administer to any Peer of this Realm,
who shall be Commissionated by Virtue of this Act; and the Deputy Lieutenants,
or any two of them, in their respective Counties, to any Commoner. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 3. and 8. 15 Car. 2. cap. 4. Stat. 3.

CAP. VII.
Public Acts Confirmed.

WHereas during the late Difficulties and Exigencies of Affairs in the absence
of His most Excellent Majesty, and in reference to his Return from beyond the
Seas into these His Majesty's Dominions, The Lords and Commons being assembled
at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April, in the Twelfth Year of his
Majesty's Reign, were from thence, and after his Majesty's Return, continued
until the Nine and twentieth day of December, then next following, and now last
past, and then Dissolved by his Majesty: In which time several Acts were Passed
by his Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons
Assembled, as aforesaid, which being of necessary use, are fit to be Continued
and Confirmed, although the manner of the said Assembling enforced by the
Difficulties and Exigencies aforesaid, which then lay upon the Nation, is not
to be drawn into Example; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and the Authority of the same, That all and
singular the Acts, made, or mentioned to be made by His said Majesty, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons upon or since the said
Five and twentieth day of April, herein after particularly mentioned and
expressed, That is to say, One Act Entitled, Stat. 12. Car. 2. cap. 11. Stat.
12. Car. 2. cap. 4. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 5. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 8. Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 9. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 12. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 15. Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 10. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 19. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 20. Stat 12
Car. 2. cap. 23. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 25. Stat. 12
Car. 2. cap. 26. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 27.
An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion: One other Act
Entitled, A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other
Sums of Money payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported: One other Act
Entitled, An Act for continuing the Excise until the Twentieth of August One
thousand six hundred and sixty: One other Act Entitled, An Act for Continuing
the Excise till the Five and twentieth Day of December One thousand six hundred
and sixty: One other Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of Money,
for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea:
One other Act Entitled, An Act for Confirmation of Judicial Proceedings: One
other Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy Disbanding of the Army and Garrisons
of this Kingdom: One other Act Entitled, An Act for Supplying and Explaining
certain Defects in an Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of Money
for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea:
One other Act Entitled, An Act to prevent Frauds and Concealments of His
Majesty's Customs and Subsidies: One other Act entitled, An Act for Raising
Sevenscore Thousand Pounds for the complete Disbanding of the whole Army, and
Paying off some part of the Navy: One other Act entitled, A Grant of certain
Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the Increase of His
Majesty's Revenue during his Life: One other Act entitled, An Act for taking
away the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures in Capite, and by Knights
Service, and Purveyance, and for Settling a Revenue upon his Majesty in lieu
thereof: One other Act entitled, An Act for the better Ordering the Selling of
Wines by Retail, and for preventing Abuses in the mingling, corrupting, and
vitiating of Wines, and for setting and limiting the Prices of the same: One
other Act Entitled, An Act for the Levying of the Arrears of the Twelve
Months Assessment commencing the Four and Twentieth day of June, One Thousand
Six Hundred Fifty and Nine: and the Six Months Assessment commencing the Five
and Twentieth of December, One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty and Nine: One other
Act entitled, An Act for Granting unto the Kings Majesty Four Hundred and
Twenty Thousand Pounds, by an Assessment of Threescore and Ten Thousand Pounds
by the Month, for Six Months, for Disbanding the Remainder of the Army, and
Paying off the Navy: Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 28. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 29. Stat.
12 Car. 2. cap. 30. S^at 12 Car. 2. cap. 35. Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 2.
One other Act entitled, An Act for the further Supplying and Explaining
certain Defects in an Act Entitled, An Act for the speedy Provision of money
for Disbanding and Paying off the Forces of this Kingdom both by Land and Sea:
One other Act entitled, An Act for the Raising of Seventy Thousand Pounds for
the further Supply of His Majesty: One other Act entitled, An Act for the
Attainder of several Persons guilty of the Horrid Murder of his late Sacred
Majesty, King CHARLES the First: One other Act Entitled, An Act for Erecting
and Establishing a Post Office: One other Act entitled, An Act for putting in
Execution an Ordinance mentioned in th^s Act; and all and every the Clauses,
Sentences, and Articles in them, and every of them contained, shall be, and
hereby are Ratified, and Confirmed, and Enacted, and Declared to have the full
Force and Strength of Acts of Parliament according to the tenor or purport
thereof, and so shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever, and as if the same had been made, declared, and Enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament.

CAP. VIII.
Necessary Carriages to be provided for His Majesty in his Royal Progress and
Removals.

Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
WHereas by an Act made in Parliament in the Twelfth year of His Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards, and Liveries, and
Tenures in Capite and by Knights Service, and Purveyance, and for settling a
Revenue upon His Majesty in lieu thereof: It was (amongst other Things) Enacted
for the Reasons and Recompense therein expressed, That from thenceforth no
person or persons, by any Warrant, Commission, or Authority under the Great
Seal, or otherwise, by color of buying, or making Provision, or Purveyance for
his Majesty, or any Queen of England for the time being, or of any the Children
of any King, or Queen of England, that shall be, or for his, their, or any of
their Household, shall take any Cart, Carriage, or other thing whatsoever of any
of the Subjects of His Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, without the free and
full consent of the Owner, or Owners thereof, had, and obtained without Menace,
or enforcement, nor shall summon, warn, take, use, or require any the said
Subjects to furnish or find any Horses, Oxen, or other Cattle, Carts, Ploughs,
Wayns, or other Carriages, for the use of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
or of any Queen of England, or of any Child, or Children of any the Kings, or
Queens of England for the time being, for the Carrying the Goods of his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or the said Queens, or Children, or any of
them, without such full and free consent, as aforesaid, any Law, Statute,
Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding; which Act may prove very
prejudicial and inconvenient to the Kings Majesty in his Royal Progresses upon
his necessary occasions to several parts of this Realm, in case any person or
persons shall obstinately refuse voluntarily to provide sufficient Carriages
for Royal service at ordinary and usual Rates for such Carriages, as are paid
by others of his Subjects in such places, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of the said Act. Clerk or chief Officer of his Maj^sties carriages, by
Warrant from the Greencloath to provide Carts, etc. for his Majesty's use.


Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, That the Clark, or chief Officer of his Majesty's Carriages, shall
three days at least before his Majesty's Arrival, by Warrant from the Green
cloth, give notice in writing to two, or more of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace next adjoining, to provide such a number of Carts and Carriages from the
places next adjacent, as His Majesty shall have present use of, expressing the
certainty of that number, as also the time and place, when and where the said
Carts and Carriages are to attend, which Carriages shall consist of four able
Horses, or six Oxen, or four Oxen, and two Horses; for each of which Cart or
Carriage, Penalty for refusing to furnish his Majesty.
the respective Owners shall receive six pence for each Mile they shall go
laden. And that in case any of his Majesty's Subjects of this Realm shall
refuse to provide and furnish His Majesty that now is, or His Queen that shall
be, or His or Her Household, in their Progress, or removals, with such
sufficient and necessary carriages for their Wardrobe, and other necessaries,
for ready moneys tendered to them; or shall without just and reasonable cause
refuse to make their appearance with such sufficient Carts and Carr^^ges, as
are before expressed; that then upon due proof and conviction of such neglect and
refusal, by the Oath of the Constable or other Officer, or two other credible
Witnesses, before the said Justices of the Peace of the County, or Mayor, or
other chief Officer of the City, or Corporation, where he or they inhabit,
(which Oath they shall have power to administer) the party so refusing shall
for such his refusal and neglect forfeit the sum of Forty shillings to the
King's use, to be forthwith levied by distress and sale of his Goods and
Chattels (rendering to the parties the overplus upon every such sale, if there
shall be any) by Warrant from the said Justices of the Peace, Mayor, or other
chief Officer.

Provided always, That no Horses, Oxen, Cart or Wain, No horses or carriages
to travel above a days journey, nor without pay of ready money.
shall be enforced to travel above one days journey from the place where they
receive their Lading; and that ready payment shall be made in hand for the said
Carriages at the place of Lading, without delay, according to the aforesaid
Rates. And in case any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, chief Officer, or
Constable, shall take any Gift or Reward to spare any person or persons from
making such Carriage; or shall injuriously charge or grieve any person through
envy, hatred, or evil will, who ought not to make such Carriage, or shall
Impress more Carriages then he shall be directed from the Green Cloth to do,
That then upon due proof and conviction thereof, the party so offending shall
forfeit the sum of Ten pounds to the party thereby grieved, or any other who
shall sue for the same, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record; wherein no Protection, Essoin, Penalty for
wrongful charging any person.
or Wager of Law shall be allowed: And in case any person or persons shall
presume to take upon him or them to Impress any horses, Oxen, cart, wain, or
carriages for his Majesty's service, other then the person so empowered, then
he or they so offending, shall, upon due conviction of the said offense, incur
and suffer the punishment contained in the first recited Act.

And whereas of late in his Majesty's Progresses, excessive Rates and Prices
have been exacted from his Majesty's servants for lodging, horse-meat,
stable-room, and other accomodations; Rates for horse-meat and diet for his
Majesty's Servants.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That none of his Majesty's
said Servants shall be compelled to pay above one shilling by the night for
every bed that they shall use for their servants: And that in all such houses
where any of his Majesty's said servants shall pay for their diet, or for hay
and provender for their horses, convenient lodging shall be provided for
themselves and their Servants, without paying any thing for the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Rates and Prices to be
set down by two Justices of the Peace.
that any two or more of the Justices of the Peace near adjoining to the Road
through which his Majesty is to pass, shall immediately after notice in writing
from the said Green Cloth, and Avenor, under their hands and seals set down and
appoint such reasonable Rates and Prices to be paid during his Majesty's abode
there, both for hay and oats, and other accomodations for horses, as they in
their discretion shall think meet; which Rates, one day at the least before his
Majesty's coming to such place, the said Justices shall cause to be proclaimed
in the Market Town next to such place, Penalty for taking more then limited for
lodging, etc.
and in such of the Neighboring Towns and Villages as to them shall seem meet,
to the end that notice may be taken of such Rates and Prices. And if any person
shall take any other sum then what is, or shall be so limited, either for
Lodging, Horse-meat, Stable-room, or other such accomodations, and be thereof
convicted by confession of the party, or by the Oath of one credible witness,
before any one Justice of the Peace (which Oath the said Justice of the Peace
is hereby authorized to administer) That then in such case every person so
offending, shall forfeit, and pay to the party grieved, the sum of Forty
shillings; the same to be levied by distress by Warrant from the said Justice
of the Peace, and sale thereof, returning the overplus to the party (the charge
of the distraining being first deducted:) This Act to have continuance till the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. IX.
Articles and Orders for the regulating and better Government of His Majesty's
Navies, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea.

FOr the regulating and better Government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of
War, and Forces by Sea; wherein under the good Providence and Protection of
God, the Wealth, Safety, and Strength of this Kingdom is so much concerned,
Articles to be observed.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice and consent
of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority thereof, That all and every the Articles and Orders in this Act
mentioned, shall be duly and respectively put in Execution, observed, and
obeyed in manner hereafter mentioned.

I.
The public Worship of God.
THat all Commanders, Captains, and other Officers at Sea, shall cause the
public Worship of Almighty God according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, established by Law, to be solemnly, orderly, and reverently performed
in their respective Ships: And that prayers and preachings by the respective
Chaplains, in holy Orders, of the respective Ships, be performed diligently;
and that the Lords Day be observed according to Law.

II.
Swearing, Drunkenness, etc.
Every person and persons in his Majesty's pay, using unlawful and rash Oaths,
Cursings, Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other Scandalous Actions in
derogation of Gods Honor, and corruption of good manners, shall be punished by
Fine, Imprisonment, or otherwise, as the Court Martial shall think fit.

III.
Holding any foreign Intelligence.
If any Officer, Mariner, Soldier, or other person in the Fleet, shall give,
hold, or entertain Intelligence, to, or with any King, Prince, or State, being
Enemy to, or any persons in Rebellion against his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, without direction or leave from the Kings Majesty, the Lord High
Admiral, Vice Admiral, or Commander in Chief of any Squadron, every such person
or persons so offending, shall be punished with death.

IV.
Letters or Messages from any foreign Prince, etc. Enemy to the King.
If any Letter or Message from any King, Foreign Prince, State, or Potentate,
being an Enemy to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or on their
behalf, be conveyed to any Inferior Officer, Mariner, or Soldier, or other in
the Fleet, and the said Officer, Mariner, Soldier, or other as aforesaid, do
not within twelve hours (having opportunity so to do) acquaint the Superior
Commander with it; or if a Superior Officer, or Mariner, being acquainted
therewith by an Inferior Officer, Mariner, or other, or himself in his own
person, receiving a letter or message from any such Enemy or Rebel, and shall
not in convenient time reveal the same to the Admiral, Vice Admiral, or the
Commander of the Squadron, every such person shall be punished with death, or
such other punishment as the Court Martial shall think fit.

V.
Relieving of any Enemy.
No person or persons of the Fleet shall relieve an Enemy or Rebel, in time of
War, with money, Victuals, Powder, Shot, Arms, Ammunition, or any other
Supplies whatsoever, directly or indirectly, upon pain of death, or such other
punishment as the Court Martial shall think fit to impose.

VI.
Papers, Charter-Parties, etc. taken in any Ship seized as Prize.
All the Papers, Charter-Parties, Bills of Lading, Pasports, and other Writings
whatsoever, that shall be taken, seized, or found aboard any Ship or Ships
which shall be surprised, or seized as Prize, shall be duly preserved, and not
torn, nor made away, but the very Originals sent up entirely, and without
fraud, to the Court of Admiralty, or such other Commissioners as shall be
appointed for that purpose; there to be viewed, made use of, and proceeded upon
according to Law, upon pain of loss of all the shares of the Takers, and such
further punishment to be inflicted upon the Offenders therein, as the quality
of their offense and misdemeanor shall be found to deserve, and the
Court Martial shall impose.

VII.
Prize, Ships or Goods seized for prize.
None in his Majesty's pay shall take out of any Prize, or Ship, or Goods seized
on for Prize, any Money, Plate, Goods, Lading or Tackle, before Judgment
thereof first past in the Admiralty Court, but the full and entire account of
the whole, without imbezelment, shall be brought in, and Judgment past entirely
upon the whole, without fraud, upon pain of such punishment as shall be imposed
by a Court Martial, or the Court of Admiralty; excepting, That it shall be
lawful for all Captains, Seamen, Soldiers, and others, serving as aforesaid,
to take and to have to themselves as Pillage, without further or other account
to be given for the same, all such Goods and Merchandises (other then Arms,
Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture, or Stores of such Ship) as shall be found by
them, or any of them, in any Ship (they shall take in fight or prize) upon or
above the Gun-deck of the said Ship, and not otherwise.

VIII.
Imbezeling any Cables, Anchors, etc.
None shall imbezle, steal, or take away any Cables, Anchors, Sails, or any of
the Ships Furniture, or any of the Powder, or Arms, or Ammunition of the Ship,
upon pain of death, or other punishment, as the quality of the offense shall be
found by a Court Martial to deserve.

IX.
Foreign ships taken as prize not making resistance.
If any Foreign Ship or Vessel shall be taken as prize, that shall not fight or
make resistance, that in that case, none of the Captains, Masters or Mariners,
being Forreiners, shall be stripped of their Clothes, or in any sort pillaged,
beaten, or evil entreated, upon pain, That the person or persons so offending,
shall forfeit double Damages; but the said Foreign Ships, and all the Goods so
taken, shall be preserved entire to receive Judgment in the Admiralty Court,
according to Right and Justice.

X.
Every Captain or Commander, who upon signal or order of fight, or view, The
duty of Captains, etc. upon signal of fight.
or sight of any Ships of the Enemy, Pyrate, or Rebel, or likelihood of
Engagement, shall not put all things in his Ship in a fit posture for fight,
and shall not in his own person, and according to his place, hearten and
encourage the inferior Officers and common men to fight courageously, and not
to behave themselves faintly, shall be cashiered: And if he or they shall yield
to the Enemy, Pyrate, Not to yield or cry for quarter.
or Rebels, or cry for quarter, he or they so doing shall suffer the pains of
death, or such other punishment as the offense shall deserve.

XI.
Every Captain, Commander, and other Officer, Seamen, or Soldier of any Ship,
All Officers shall observe the commands of the Admiral.
Frigot or Vessel of War, shall duly observe the Commands of the Admiral, or
other his Superior or Commander of any Squadron, as well for the Assailing or
Setting upon any Fleet, Squadron, or Ships of the Enemy, Pyrate, or Rebels, or
joining Battle with them, or making defense against them, as all other the
Commands of the Admiral, or other his Superior Commander, upon pain to suffer
death or other punishment as the quality of his neglect or offense shall
deserve.

XII.
Every Captain, and all other Officers, Mariners, and Soldiers of every Ship,
Frigot, Officers that in time of fight shall withdraw, or not fight.
or Vessel of War, that shall in time of any fight or engagement, withdraw or
keep back, or not come into the fight and engage, and do his utmost, to take,
fire, kill, and endamage the Enemy, Pirate, or Rebels, and assist, and relieve
all and every of his Majesty's Ships; shall for such offense of cowardice or
disaffection, be tried and suffer pains of death, or other punishment, as the
circumstances of the offense shall deserve, and the Court-Martiall shall judge
fit.

XIII.
The Captains, Officers, and Seamen of all Ships, Officers and Ships appointed
for Convoy, their duty.
appointed for Convoy and Guard of Merchants Ships, or any other, shall
diligently attend upon that Charge, without delay, according to their
Instructions in that behalf, and whosoever shall be faulty therein, and shall
not faithfully perform the same, and defend the Ships and Goods in their
Convoy, without either diverting to other Parts or Occasions; or refusing or
neglecting to fight in their defense, Penalty for nonperformance.
if they be set upon, or assailed, or running away cowardly, and submitting
those in their, Convoy to hazard and peril, or shall demand and exact any
money, or other Reward from any Merchant or Master, for convoying of any such
Ships or other Vessels belonging to his Majesty's Subjects, shall be condemned
to make reparation of the damage to the Merchants, Owners and others, as the
Court of Admiralty shall adjudge; and also be punished criminally according to
the quality of their offenses, be it by pains of death or other punishment,
according as shall be judged fit by the Court Martial.

XIV.
Whatsoever Person or Persons, in, or belonging to the Fleet, either through
cowardice, The penalty for not chasing an Enemy, or not relievieg a Friend.
negligence, or disaffection, shall forbear to pursue the chase of any Enemy or
Pyrate, or Rebel beaten, or flying, or shall not relieve or assist a known
friend in view, to the utmost of his power, shall be punished with death, or
otherwise, as a Court Martial shall find fit.

XV.
When at any time, service or action shall be commanded, Service commanded
shall not be stopped or discouraged.
no man shall presume to stop or put backward, or discourage the said service
and action, by pretense of Arrears of Wages, or upon any pretense of Wages
whatsoever, upon pain of death.

XVI.
All Sea-Captains, Officers and Seamen, that shall betray their trust, or turn
to the Enemy, None shall betray their trust, nor yield to the Enemy.
Pyrate, or Rebels, and either run away with their Ship or any Ordnance,
Ammunition, or Provision, to the weakening of the Service, or yield the same up
to the Enemy, Pyrate, or Rebels, shall be punished with death.

XVII.
All Sea-Captains, Officers, or Mariners, Deserting the Service, or running
away.
that shall desert the Service or their Employment in the Ships, or shall run
away, or entice any others so to do, shall be punished with death.

XVIII.
All persons whatsoever that shall come, or be found in the nature of Spies,
Spies.
to bring any seducing Letters or Messages from any Enemy or Rebel, or shall
attempt or endeavor to corrupt any Captain, Officer, Mariner, or other of the
Navy or Fleet, to betray his or their Trust, and yield up any Ship or
Ammunition, or turn to the Enemy or Rebel, shall be punished with death.

XIX.
No person in or belonging to the Fleet, shall utter any words of Sedition or
Mutiny, Sedition, mutiny.
nor make or endeavor to make any Mutinous Assemblies upon any pretense
whatsoever, upon pain of death.

XX.
Concealers of traiterous or mutinous practices or words.
No person in or belonging to the Fleet, shall conceal any Traiterous or
Mutinous practices, designs, or words, or any words spoken by any to the
prejudice of his Majesty, or Government, or any words, practices, or designs
tending to the hindrance of the Service, but shall forthwith reveal them to his
Superior, that a meet proceeding may be had thereupon, upon pain of such
punishment as a Court Martial shall find to be just.

XXI.
Quarrelling or striking a Superior Officer.
None shall presume to quarrel with his Superior Officer, upon pain of severe
punishment, nor to strike any such upon pain of death, or otherwise, as a
Court Martial shall find the matter to deserve.

XXII.
Vnwholsomness of Victuals.
If any of the Fleet find cause of Complaint of the unwholsomness of his
Victuals, or upon other just ground, he shall quietly make the same known to
his Superior, or Captain, or Commander in chief, as the occasion may deserve,
that such present remedy may be had as the matter may require, and the said
Superior or Commander is to cause the same to be presently remedied
accordingly; but no person upon any such or other pretense, shall privately
attempt to stir up any disturbance, upon pain of such severe punishment as a
Court Martial shall find meet to inflict.

XXIII.
Quarrelling or provoking speeches.
None shall quarrel or fight in the Ship, nor use reproachful or provoking
Speeches tending to make any quarrel or disturbance, upon pain of Imprisonment,
and such other punishment as the offense shall deserve, and the Court Martial
shall impose.

XXIV.
Wastful expense of Ammunition.
That there be no wastful expense of any Powder, Shot, Ammunition, or other
Stores in the Fleet, nor any imbezelment thereof, but that the Stores and
Provisions be carefully preserved upon such penalties by Fine, Imprisonment, or
otherwise, upon the Offenders, Abetters, Buyers, and Receivers, as shall be by
a Court Martial found just in that behalf.

XXV.
Care of conducting and steering ships.
That care be taken in the Conducting and Steering of the Ships, that through
wilfulness, negligence, or other defaults, none of his Majesty's Ships be
stranded or run upon any Rocks or Sands, or split, or hazarded, upon pain, that
such as shall be found guilty therein, be punished by Fine, Imprisonment, or
otherwise, as the offense by a Court Martial shall be adjudged to deserve.

XXVI.
Burning a Ship.
All persons that shall willingly burn or set fire on any Ship, or Magazine, or
Store of Powder, or Ship, Boat, Ketch, Hoy, or Vessel, or Tackle, or Furniture
thereto belonging, not appertaining to an Enemy or Rebel, shall be punished
with death.

XXVII.
Sleeping upon Watch.
No Man, in, or belonging to the Fleet, shall sleep upon his Watch, or
negligently perform the Duty imposed on him, or forsake his station, upon pain
of death, or other punishment, as the circumstances of the Case shall require.

XXVIII.
Murders.
All Murders and wilful Killing of any persons in the Ship, shall be punished
with death.

XXIX.
Robbery and Theft.
All Robbery and Theft committed by any person, in or belonging to the Fleet,
shall be punished with death, or otherwise, as the Court-Martiall upon
consideration of circumstances shall find meet.

XXX.
Provost-Mar^ial prisoners.
No Provost-Marshal belonging to the Fleet, shall refuse to receive or keep any
Prisoner committed to his charge, nor suffer him to escape, being once in his
custody, nor dismiss him without order, upon pain of being liable to the same
punishment which should have been inflicted upon the party dismissed, or
permitted to escape, or such other punishment as the Court Martial shall think
fit.

XXXI.
Apprehending offenders.
All Captains, Officers, and Seamen, shall do their endeavors to detect,
apprehend, and bring to punishment all offenders, and shall assist the Officers
appointed for that purpose therein, upon pain to be proceeded against, and
punished by the Court Martial at discretion.

XXXII.
Sodomy.
If any person or persons, in or belonging to the Fleet, shall commit the
unnatural and detestable sin of Buggery or Sodomy with Man or Beast, he shall
be punished with death without mercy.

XXXIII.
Misdemeanors, and Disorders at Sea.
All other Faults, Misdemeanors, and Disorders committed at Sea, not mentioned
in this Act, shall be punished according to the Laws and Customs in such Cases
used at Sea.

XXXIV.
And it is hereby further Enacted, The Lord High Admirals power to grant
Commissions to call Court Martialls.
That the Lord High Admiral for the time being shall by virtue of this Act,
have full power and Authority to grant Commissions to inferior Vice-Admirals,
or Commander in chief of any Squadron of Ships, to call and assemble
Court-Martials, consisting of Commanders and Captains; and no Court Martial
where the pains of death shall be inflicted shall consist of less then five
Captains at least, the Admirals Lieutenant to be as to this purpose esteemed as
a Captain; and in no case wherein sentence of Death shall pass by virtue of the
Articles aforesaid, or any of them (except in case of Mutiny) there shall be
execution of such Sentence of Death, without the leave of the Lord High
Admiral, if the offense be committed within the Narrow-Seas: But in case any of
the offenses aforesaid be committed in any Voyage beyond the Narrow-Seas,
whereupon Sentence of death shall be given in pursuance of the aforesaid
Articles, or of any of them; then Execution shall not be done but by Order of
the Commander in chief of that Fleet or Squadron wherein Sentence of death was
passed.

XXXV.
And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the Iudge-Advocate of any Fleet,
Judge Advocate of any fleet to administer an oath for trial of offenses.

Court Martial.


for the time being, shall have full power and Authority to administer an Oath
to any person or witness in order to the Examination or Trial of any of the
offenses aforesaid; and in the absence of a Iudg-Advocate, the Court Martial
shall have full power and Authority to appoint any person to administer an Oath
to the purpose aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Proviso
touching the powers of the Lord Admiral
That this Act or any thing or things therein contained, shall not in any
manner of wise extend to give unto the Lord Admiral of England, for the time
being, or to any his Vice-Admirals, Judge or Judges of the Admiralty, his or
their Deputy or Deputies, or to any other the Officers or Ministers of the
Admiralty, or to any others having or claiming any Admiral Power, Jurisdiction,
or Authority within this Realm and Wales, or any other the Kings Dominions, any
other power, right, Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, or Authority, then he or they,
or any of them, lawfully have, has, or had, or ought to have and enjoy before
the making of this Act, other then for such of the offenses specified in the
several Articles contained in this Act, as hereafter shall be done upon the
main Sea, or in Ships, or Vessels being and hovering in the main Stream of
great Rivers, only beneath the Bridges of the same Rivers, nigh to the Sea,
within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and in none other places whatsoever,
and committed only by such persons as shall be in actual Service and pay in His
Majesty's Fleet, or Ships of War.

CAP. X.
For preventing the unlawful Coursing, Hunting, or Killing of Deer.

For the better preventing of the unlawful Coursing, Hunting, Taking, or
Killing of Deer, Unlawful hunting or killing of Deer.
by many Idle, Loose, and disorderly persons; Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and by the advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person or
persons shall from, and after the first day of August next, unlawfully course,
kill, hunt, or take away any Red or Fallow Deer, in any Forest, Chase,
Purleiw, Paddock, Wood, Park, or other Ground where Deer are, or have been
usually kept within the Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, without the
consent of the Owner, or person chiefly entrusted with the custody thereof, or
shall be aiding or assisting therein, and shall be convicted thereof, by the
confession of the party, or by the Oath of one or more credible witnesses,
before one or more Justices of the Peace (who are hereby empowered to administer
an Oath to that purpose) such person being prosecuted for such offense within
six months after such offense done; that then every person so offending shall
forfeit for every such offense the sum of Twenty pounds to be levied by way of
Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of every such Offender by Warrant under
the Justices hand, before whom such conviction shall be made; The Penalty.
the one moiety of the said Twenty pounds to be given to the Informer, and the
other moiety to the Owner of the Deer; And for want of sufficient Distress, the
Offender shall be committed to the House of Correction for six months, and
there to be put to hard labor, or to the Common-Gaol for one whole year,
without Bail or Main-prize, at the Discretion of the Justices of the Peace
before whom such Conviction shall be (and not to be discharged from thence till
he or they have given sufficient Sureties for their Good-behaviour, for one
whole year next ensuing after his or their enlargement,) Provided, that where
any Offender shall be punished by force of this Act, that he shall not be
prosecuted nor incur the penalty of any other Law or Statute for the same
offense. 19 H. 7. c. 11. 3 Jac. c. 13. 7 Jac. c. 13.

CAP. XI.
The Confirmation of Three Acts therein mentioned.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the advice and
consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
the Authority of the same, That the several Acts herein after mentioned, made,
or mentioned to be made upon or since the Twenty fifth day of April, in the
Twelfth year of his said Majesty's Reign, by his said Majesty, by and with the
advice or consent of the Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster upon the
said 25th of April, and there continued until the 29th day of December then
next following, and then dissolved; which said Acts are herein after
particularly mentioned and expressed by the several and respective Titles
following, St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 29 St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 33. St. 12 Car. 2. ^ap.
14.
That is to say, One Act Entitled, An Act for the raising of Seventy thousand
pounds for the further Supply of his Majesty; And one other Act entitled, An
Act for Confirmation of Marriages; and one other Act entitled, An Act for a
perpetual Anniversary shanksgiving on the Twenty ninth day of May; and all and
every the Clauses, Sentences, and Articles in them, and every of them,
contained, shall be, and hereby are Ratified, and Confirmed, and Enacted, and
Declared, to have the full force and strength of Acts of Parliament, according
to the tenor and purport thereof, and so shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken
to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and as if the same had been made,
declared, and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament.

CAP. XII.
Explanation of a Clause contained in an Act of Parliament made in the
Seventeenth Year of the late King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of a Statute Primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical.

Whereas in an Act of Parliament made in the Seventeenth year of the late King
Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a Branch of a Statute Primo
Elizabethae concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, St. 17 Car. 1.
cap. 11.
it is (amongst other things) Enacted, That no Archbishop, Bishop, nor
Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, nor Commissary of any Archbishop, Bishop,
or Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister of Justice, nor any other person or
persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or
Jurisdiction, by any Grant, License, or Commission of the Kings Majesty, His
Heirs or Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived from the King, His
Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, shall (from and after the first day of
August, which then should be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six
hundred forty one) Award, Impose, or Inflict any Pain, Penalty, Fine,
Amerciament, Imprisonment, or other Corporal punishment upon any of the Kings
Subjects, for any contempt, misdemeanor, crime, offense, matter, or thing
whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance or
Jurisdiction, whereupon some doubt has been made, that all ordinary power of
Coertion and Proceedings in Causes Ecclesiastical were taken away, whereby the
ordinary course of Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical has been obstructed; Be it
therefore declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, The ordinary power of Archbishops, etc. not taken away.
and by the Authority thereof, That neither the said Act, nor any thing therein
contained, does, or shall take away any ordinary Power or Authority from any of
the said Archbishops, Bishops, or any other person or persons named as
aforesaid, but that they and every of them, exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, may proceed, determine, sentence, execute, and exercise all
manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, May use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
and all Censures and Coertions appertaining and belonging to the same, before
the making of the Act before recited, in all causes and matters belonging to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Laws used and practiced in this Realm, in as ample manner and form as they did,
and might lawfully have done before the making of the said Act.

The Stat. 17. Car. 1. cap. 11. Rep. as to all except what concerns the High
Commiss on Court Proviso.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the before recited
Act of Decimo septimo Caroli, and all the Matters and Clauses therein contained
(excepting what concerns the High Commission-Court, or the new erection of some
such like Court by Commission) shall be, and is hereby repealed, to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, Any thing, clause, or sentence in the said Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That neither this Act, nor any
thing herein contained, shall extend, or be construed to revive, or give force
to the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said first year of the Reign
of the said late Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act of Parliament made
in the said seventeenth year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but that
the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said first year of the Reign of
the said Queen Elizabeth, shall stand and be repealed in such sort as if this
Act had never been made.

Provided also, and it is hereby further Enacted, That it shall not be lawful
for any Archbishop, Proviso touching the oath Ex Officio.
Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or any other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister, or any other person, having or
exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to tender or administer
unto any person whatsoever, the Oath usually called the Oath Ex Officio, or any
other Oath whereby such person to whom the same is tendered or administered, may
be charged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or to purge him, or her self of
any criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any censure or
punishment; Any thing in this Statute, or any other Law, Custom, or Usage
heretofore to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. Proviso not to
give any other Jurisdiction to any Archbishop, etc. than they had by law before
the year 1639. The Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters. Canons
Ecclesiastical.


Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be construed to extend to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or other person or persons
aforesaid, any power or authority to exercise, execute, inflict, or determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure, or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before the year of our Lord 1639, nor to abridg or diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, nor to confirm
the Canons made in the year 1640. nor any of them, nor any other Ecclesiastical
Laws or Canons not formerly confirmed, allowed, or Enacted by Parliament, or by
the established Laws of the Land as they stood in the year of the Lord 1639.

CAP. XIII.
The Arrears of the Excise and New Impost vested in His Majesty.

BE it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, All Moneys
owing upon Excise by any Laws or Ordinances vested in his Majesty.
by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That all and every sum and sums of
money any ways due, or owing from, or by any person or persons whatsoever, for
or touching the Imposition or Duty called the Excise, heretofore imposed and
made payable upon Beer, Ale, or any other Commodities, by any Laws, or
pretended Laws or Ordinances; and all Debts therefore owing, whether by
Obligation or upon Account from Farmers of Excise, or any other person or
persons whatsoever, or any of their Securities, and not pardoned by his
Majesty's most Gracious Act of Pardon and Oblivion, be, and are hereby vested
and settled in the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and that his Sacred
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, have, demand, sue for, and recover the same of all and every person
and persons, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, having Assets, who are
any way accomptable for the same, or any part thereof, and from his and their
respective Sureties, and Securities; as if the same Duties of Excise had been
lawfully Assessed, Imposed, and Collected; and as if the several pretended
Acts, Orders, and Ordinances, Assessing and Imposing the same, had been good,
true, legal, and effectual Acts of Parliament, and had in express words given
and granted all and every the said Duties of Excise or new Impost unto his
Majesty; and as if the Obligations and Recognizances entered into by the
respective Sureties and Securities had, at the time of entering into the same,
been taken in his Majesty's Name, according to the form prescribed in the
Statute made in the Three and thirtieth year of the Reign of King Henry the
Eight. 33 H. 8. c. 39.


Provided always, That all and every person and persons accomptable by virtue
of this Act, Proviso for allowances. St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 11.
shall have all such due allowance in his or their accounts, as all such
persons whose accounts are accepted in an Act, Entitled, An Act of Free and
General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion, have, or ought to have.

Provided always, Proviso no person to be questioned, unless he be such before
the 25 of December 1662. All persons accomptable shall have authority to levy
and recover all Arrears.
That no person shall be questioned or molested for any of the Duties herein,
or hereby vested in his Majesty, unless he shall be sued or prosecuted with
effect before the Five and twentieth day of December, which shall be in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty two.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all persons
accomptable to his Majesty by this Act, shall have power and authority, and are
hereby enabled to sue for, levy, and recover from any person or persons who do
stand indebted unto them in any sum of money for the Duty or Impost of Excise,
for which they are hereby accomptable, all sums of money and Arrears
unsatisfied, in as full and ample manner and form as they might have received
and levied the same when they first grew due.

CAP. XIV.
The Confirmation of an Act Entitled, An Act for Encouraging and Increasing of
Shipping, and Navigation, and several other Acts both Public and Private
mentioned therein.

WHereas during the late difficulties and exigencies of affairs in the absence
of his most Excellent Majesty, and in reference to his return from beyond the
Seas into these his Majesty's Dominions; The Lords and Commons being assembled
at Westminster the Five and twentieth day of April, in the twelfth year of his
Majesty's Reign, were from thence, and after his Majesty's return, continued
until the nine and twentieth day of December then next following, and now last
past, and then dissolved by his Majesty; in which time several Acts were passed
by his Majesty; by and with the advice and consent of the said Lords and
Commons assembled as aforesaid, which being of necessary use, are fit to be
continued and confirmed, although the manner of the said assembling, enforced
by the difficulties and exigencies aforesaid, which then lay upon the Nation,
is not to be drawn into example.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular the Acts
made or mentioned to be made by his said Majesty, by and with the advice or
consent of the Lords and Commons, upon or since the said Five and twentieth day
of April, herein after particularly mentioned and expressed (that is to say)
One Act, Entitled, An Act for the encouraging and increasing of Shipping and
Navigation: One other Act, St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 18. St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 32. St.
12 Car. 2. cap. 36. St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 34. St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 13. St. 12 Car.
2. cap. 6.
Entitled, An Act for Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, Wool-fells,
Fullers Earth, or any kind of Scouring Earth. One other Act, Entitled, An Act
Impowring the Master of the Rolls for the time being, for to make Leases for
years, in order to new build the old Houses belonging to the Rolls. One other
Act, Entitled, An Act for prohibiting the Planting, Setting, or Sowing of
Tobacco in England and Ireland. One other Act, Entitled, An Act for
restraining the taking of Excessive Usury. One other Act, Entitled, An Act for
the present nominating of Commissioners of Sewers. One other Act, Entitled, An
Act for the Incorporating of the Master and Wardens of the Company of
Haberdashers, LONDON, to be Governors of the Free School and Almshouses in
Newport in the County of Salop, of the Foundation of William Adams, and for
Settling of Lands and Possessions on them for maintenance thereof, and other
charitable Uses. And all and every the Clauses, Sentences, and Articles in them
and every of them contained, shall be, and hereby are Ratified and Confirmed,
and Enacted and Declared to have the full force and strength of Acts of
Parliament, according to the tenor and purport thereof, and so shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and as if
the same had been Made, Declared and Enacted by Authority of this present
Parliament.

CAP. XV.
The Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures Imposed upon the Estates and Persons of
certain notorious Offenders excepted out of the Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity, and Oblivion.

St. 12 Car. 2. cap. 11. The Lands and Tenements of the persons deceased, not
discharged by the Act of General Pardon.
Whereas in a certain Act passed in the late assembly held at Westminster, in
the Twelfth year of His Majesty's Reign, and confirmed by the Authority of this
present Parliament, Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity,
and Oblivion (amongst other things) it is provided, that nothing therein
contained should extend to discharge the Lands, Tenements, Goods, Chattels,
Rights, Trusts, and other the Hereditaments late of Isaac Ewer deceased, Sir
John Danvers deceased, Sir Thomas Maleverer Baronet deceased, William Purefoy
deceased, John Blakiston deceased, Sir William Constable Baronet deceased,
Richard Dean deceased, Francis Aleyn deceased, Peregrin Pelham deceased, John
Moore deceased, John Aldred, alias Alured deceased, Humphrey Edwards deceased,
Sir Gregory Norton Baronet deceased, John Venn deceased, Thomas Andrews
Alderman deceased, Anthony Stapley deceased, Thomas Horton deceased, John Fry
deceased, Thomas Hammond deceased, and Sir John Bourchier deceased, of and from
such pains, penalties and forfeitures, as by one other Act of Parliament
intended to be afterward passed for that purpose, should be expressed and
declared: All which persons before mentioned, were (whilst they lived)
notoriously known to have been wicked and active Instruments in the prosecution
and compassing of that horrid and Execrable Treason, the Murder of our late
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the First, of ever blessed memory. And whereas
William Lord Mounson, James Challoner, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington,
John Phelps, and Robert Wallop, who in the month of January, One thousand six
hundred forty eight, did act and fit in that Traitorous Assembly which
proceeded against the Person and Life of our said late Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES the First; and Sir Arthur Haslerig, who in his life did commit many
horrid and Traitorous Crimes against the Person, Crown and Dignity of his late
Majesty of glorious memory, and his Majesty that now is, are all of them
excepted out of the said Act, and reserved to future Pains, Penalties and
Forfeitures, not extending to life; since the passing of which Act, so as
aforesaid confirmed, Sir Arthur Haslerig and James Challoner died, and no Act
has yet passed for the inflicting of due Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures
upon the Persons and Estates of the Offenders aforesaid.

We therefore the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembed, do beseech your
Majesty, That it may be enacted,; And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, The Manors, Lands, etc. of the persons named.
and by authority of the same, That all and every the Manors, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Possessions, Rights,
Conditions, Interests, Offices, Fees, Annuities, and all other the
Hereditaments, Leases for years, Chattels Real, and other things of what nature
soever they be of them the said Isaac Ewer, Sir John Danvers, Sir Thomas
Maleverer, William Purefoy, John Blakiston, Sir William Constable, Richard
Dean, Francis Aleyn, Peregrin Pelham, John Moore, John Aldred, alias Alured,
Humphrey Edward, Sir Gregory Norton, John Venn, Thomas Andrews, Of which they
were seized the 20th. of March 1646. or since, forfeited and vested in his
Majesty.

The goods, debts, and Chattels, of which the persons named were possessed at
the time of their death forfeited to his Majesty. The goods, etc. of which
William Lord Mounson, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, and
Rob. Wallop, were possessed the 11. of Feb. 1659. forfeited and vested in his
Majesty.


Anthony Stapley, Thomas Horton, John Fry, Thomas Hammond, Sir John Bourchier,
William Lord Mounson, James Challoner, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington,
John Phelps, Robert Wallop, and Sir Arthur Haslerig, which they, or any of
them, or any other person or persons to their, or any of their uses, or in
trust for them, or any of them had the five and twentieth day of March in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and six, or at any time since,
shall stand, and be forfeited unto your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors; and
shall be deemed, vested, and adjudged to be in the actual and real possession
of Your Majesty, without any Office or Inquisition thereof hereafter to be
taken or found; And also that all and every the Goods, Debts, and other the
Chattels personal whatsoever of them, the said Isaac Ewer, Sir John Danvers,
Sir Thomas Maleverer, William Purefoy, John Blakiston, Sir William Constable,
Richard Dean, Francis Aleyn, Peregrin Pelham, John Moore, John Aldred, alias
Alured, Humphrey Edwards, Sir Gregory Norton, John Venn, Thomas Andrews,
Anthony Stapley, Thomas Horton, John Fry, Thomas Hammond, Sir John Bourchier,
James Challoner, and Sir Arthur Haslerig, whereof they, or any of them, at the
time of their respective deaths, or any other in Trust for them, or any of them
stood possessed or interessed in Law or Equity, and all the Goods, Debts, and
other the Chattels personal whatsoever of them the said William Lord Mounson,
Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, Robert Wallop, whereof
upon the eleventh day of February, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred fifty and nine, they, or any of them, or any other in trust for them,
or any of them stood possessed either in Law or Equity, shall be deemed and
adjudged to be forfeited, and are hereby vested and put into the actual and
real possession of your Majesty, without any further Office or Inquisition
thereof hereafter to be taken or found.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Conveyance, Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of
Lease, Grants, Proviso for conveyances and assurances, etc. made bona fide
before the 29. of September,
and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust or Limitation of
any use or uses, of, or out of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
not being the Lands nor Hereditaments of the late King, Queen or Prince, or of
any Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, nor being Lands or
Hereditaments sold or given for the Delinquency, or pretended Delinquency of
any person or persons whatsoever, by virtue or pretext of some Act, Order,
Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or Ordinance since the First day of January,
one thousand six hundred forty and one, nor any Statute, Judgment or
Recognizance, had, made, acknowledged or suffered to any person or persons,
Bodies politic or Corporate, before the Nine and Twentieth day of September,
one thousand six hundred fifty and nine, by any of the Offenders before in this
Act mentioned, or their Heirs, or by any other person or persons claiming by,
from, or under them, or any of them, other then the Wife or Wives, Child or
Children, Heir or Heirs of such person or persons, or any of them for money
bona fide to them, or any of them paid, or lent, or other valuable
consideration, nor any conveyance, assurance, Conveyances and assurances made
before the 25th. of April. 1660.
grant or Estate made before the five and twentieth day of April, One thousand
six hundred and fifty, by any person or persons to any of the Offenders
aforesaid in trust, and for the benefit of any other person or persons, not
being any of the Offenders aforesaid, or in Trust for any Bodies politic or
Corporate, shall be Impeached, defeated, made void, or frustrated hereby, or
by any of the Convictions and Attainders aforesaid; But that the same shall be
held and enjoyed by the Purchasers, Grantees, Lessees, Assigns, Cestuy que use,
Cestuy que trust, and every of them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns respectively, as if this Act had not been made, so as the said
Conveyances, and all and every the Grants and Assurances, which by virtue of
this Act are, and ought to be held and enjoyed as aforesaid, shall before the
first day of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord, So as they be
enrolled in the Exchequer before the first of Ian. 1662.
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, be entered, and enrolled of Record in
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and not otherwise, any thing in this Act
herein before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That William Lord
Mounson, William Lord Mounson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, Robert
Wallop and John Phelps degraded.
Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, Robert Wallop Esquire, and John
Phelps, and every of them shall be, and are hereby degraded from, and made
incapable of, all and every the Titles of Honor, Dignities and Preheminences
which they or any of them now have, or which at any time hereafter may descend
unto them; And that neither they, nor any of them shall at any time hereafter
have, hear, or use the Name, Style, Addition or Title of Lord, Baronet, Knight,
Esquire, or Gentleman, or any of them, nor shall use, or have any Coats, or
Escutcheons of Arms whatsoever, nor any other legal Title, or addition
whatsoever, but shall be for ever reputed, and are hereby declared to be
Persons of Dishonor and Infamy.

And further, That they the said William Mounson, Henry Mildmay, James
Harrington, William Mounsor, Hen^ Mildmay, James Harrington, Robert Wallop and
John Phelps shall be drawn to Tyburn as persons executed for treason.
Robert Wallop, and John Phelps, and every of them, shall upon the seven and
twentieth day of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred sixty one, or so soon after as they shall be apprehended, carried
to the Tower of London, and from thence drawn upon sledges with Ropes about
their Necks, and according to the manner of persons executed for High Treason,
quite through the streets of London unto the Gallows at Tiburn, and from
thence in like manner be brought back again to the Tower of London; and there,
or in such other Prison as his Majesty shall think fit, continue Prisoners, and
suffer pains of Imprisonment for and during the Term of their Natural Lives.

Provided always, Proviso for executors of the said persons and legacies.
That no Executor or Administrator to any of the dead Persons whose Estate is
forfeited by this Act, shall at any time hereafter be sued or molested for any
Debt or Legacy by them paid as Executor or Administrator to any person or
persons to whom the same was due or bequeathed, and was by the said Executor or
Administrator paid bona fide; but the respective Legatees who have received any
such Legacies from the said Executors, shall be accomptable to the Kings
Majesty for all such Legacies as they have respectively received, and shall pay
the same to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall be construed to forfeit the
Term, Estate, Proviso for Sir William Jews.
or Interest which Sir William Jews of Borden in the County of Southampton
Baronet, had or has in the custody of the Park called East-mean Park in the
aforesaid County, and in the game of Conies therein, for the term of three
years to come, from our Lady Day last, being the remaining years of a greater
term (he the said Sir William being formerly possessed thereof) by an
Assignment made by John Allen Executor of the said Francis Allen, the which
said Park and Premises being part of the Possessions of the Bishop of
Winchester, the said Sir William Jews has surrendered unto the said Bishop,
and has now taken a new Lease thereof for three lives, from the Bishop of
Winchester, the which said Lease for three lives so made by the said Bishop
unto the said Sir William Jews, shall for, and notwithstanding this Act, or
any thing therein contained, remain firm and good unto the said Sir William
Jews, according to the true meaning of his said Lease; saving always to all
and every person and persons, Bodies politic, and others their respective
Heirs, Successors, Executors and Administrators, all such Estate, Right and
Title, and Interest in Law and Equity, which they, or any of them have, or
ought to have of, in, to, or out of any the Premises, not being in Trust for
any the said Offenders, nor derived by, from, or under the said offenses, since
the five and twentieth day of March, one thousand six hundred forty six; saving
always and reserving to Cuthbert Collingwood Esquire, and George Collingwood
Gent. his Son, their, or either of their Heirs and Assigns, and the Farmers and
Tenants of the said Cuthbert and George Collingwood, or either of them, and of
their Heirs and Assigns, all such Right, Title of Entry and Action, Use,
Interest and Possession, which they, or any of them, or any in trust for them,
or any of them, have or had, or ought to have, of, in, to, or out of the
Manors, Townships, Villages, Hamlets and Precincts of Islington, Whitingham,
Barton, Throunton, Fawden, Keynton, West-Brunton, East-Brunton, Dunnington,
Blakedon, alias Blagdon, and Wetslade, or any of them in the County of
Northumberland, and of, in, to, or out of the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
Rights, Members and Appurtenances to them, or any of them belonging or
appertaining, as if this Act had never been made.

Proviso for Rachel Power.
Provided also, that this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall extend to
prejudice the Estate and Interest in Law or Equity of Rachel Power Widow, of,
in, and to one Copyhold Message and Mill thereunto belonging, with their
Appurtenances, Situate, lying and being in Chepmansford in the County of
Southampton, being parcel of the Manor of Husband Priors, which by order and
decree of the High-Court of Chancery of the one and twentieth of June, One
thousand six hundred sixty one, she is to be forthwith restored unto, and put
into possession of, and to quietly hold and enjoy the same during her
Widowhood, with the mean profits thereof taken by the said Mr, Wallop: But that
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Rachel Power to hold and enjoy
the same according to the said Decree.

Proviso for Sir John Bourchier.
Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for Barrington Bourchier Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John
Bourchier, herein before mentioned, to hold and enjoy all and singular the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to him lately granted and conveyed, or
mentioned to be granted and conveyed, in and by certain Letters Patents under
the Great Seal of England, bearing date the Two and twentieth day of March, in
the thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, against His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors for ever, according to the full intent and meaning of the said
Letters Patents; Any thing in this present Act contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Anno XIII. Car. II. Regis.
ACTS made at the second meeting in this present Parliament begun at
Westminster the 8th. day of May, Anno Dom. 1661. And there continued until the
20th. of December, and from that day adjourned unto the seventh of January next
ensuing, as follows.

CAP. I.
An Act for the well Governing and Regulating of Corporations, impowring the
King to issue Commissions for the removing, placing and restoring certain
Officers and Members there.

FOr and within the several Cities, Corporations and Buroughs, and
Cinque Ports, and their Members, and other Port-Towns within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, viz. All Mayors,
Aldermen, Recorders, Bailiffs, Town-Clerks, Common-Councel-men, and other
persons then bearing any Office or Offices of Magistracy, or Places, or Trusts,
or other Employment relating to, or concerning the Government of the said
respective Cities, Corporations and Buroughs, and Cinque Ports, and their
Members, and other Port-Towns, and for tendering to all such the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and this Oath following.

I A. B. do declare and believe, That it is not lawful, upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous
Position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those
that are Commissioned by Him: So help me God.

And also for subscribing this following Declaration.

I A. B. do declare, That I hold that there lies no Obligation upon me, or any
other person, from the Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant;
and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the
Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom.

EXP. 25. March, 1663. as to the Power of the said Commission and
Commissioners. But

None to be chosen any Officer in any Corporation that shall not have taken the
Sacrament within a year next before.
Provided also, and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
expiration of the said Commissions, no person or persons shall for ever
hereafter be placed, elected or chosen, in or to any the Offices or Places
aforesaid, that shall not have within one year next before such Election, or
Choice, taken the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the Rights of the
Church of England; and that every such person and persons so placed, elected or
chosen, shall likewise take the aforesaid three Oaths, and subscribe the said
Declaration at the same time, And shall take the said three Oaths, and
subscribe the said Declaration.
when the Oath for the due execution of the said Places and Offices
respectively shall be administered; And in default hereof, every such placing,
election and choice is hereby Enacted and Declared to be void.

CAP. II.
Vexations and Oppressions by Arrests, and of Delays in Suits of Law prevented.

WHereas by the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Realm, The ancient
fundamental Law in proceeding to arrests upon Suits, to express the true cause
of Action in the Process.
in case where any person is Sued, Impleaded, or Arrested, by any Writ, Bill,
or Process, issuing out of any of His Majesty's Courts of Records at
Westminster, in any Common Plea, at the Suit of an^ Common person, the true
cause of Action ought to be set forth and particularly expressed in such Writ,
Bill, or Process; whereby the Defendant may have certain knowledge of the cause
of the Suit, and the Officer who shall execute such Writ, Bill, or Process, may
know how to take Security for the Appearance of the Defendant to the same, and
the sureties for such Appearances, may rightly understand for what cause they
become engaged; And whereas there is a great Complaint of the People of this
Realm, that for diverse years now last past, very many of His Majesty's good
Subjects have been arrested upon general Writs of Trespass, quare clausum
fregit, Bills of Middlesex, Latitat's, and other like Writs issued out of the
Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, not expressing any particular or
certain cause of Action, and thereupon kept prisoners for a long time for want
of Bail; Bonds with Sureties for Appearances having been demanded in so great
sums, that few or none have dared to be security for the Appearances of such
persons so arrested and imprisoned, although in truth there has been little or
no cause of Action, and often times there are no such persons who were named
Plaintiffs, but those Arrests have been, many times, procured by malicious
persons, to vex and oppress the Defendants, or to force from them unreasonable
and unjust Compositions for obtaining their Liberty; And by such evil
practices, many men have been, and are daily, undone and destroyed in their
Estates, without possibility of having Reparation: The Actors employed in such
practices having been (for the most part) poor and lurking persons, and their
Actings so secret, that it has been found very difficult to make true
discoveries or proof thereof.

For remedy and prevention of which, so great growing evils and mischiefs, and
also for discouraging all frivolous and unjust Suits, and Causeless Arrests for
the future; Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and
after the Twelfth day of February, in the year of our Lord, Persons arrested by
Process out of the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, not expressing the cause of
Action how to be bailed and set to liberty upon their own Bonds for appearance.
One thousand six hundred sixty and one, no person or persons, who shall happen
to be arrested by any Sheriff, Undersheriff; Coronor, Steward, or Bailiff of
any Franchise or Liberty, or by any other Officer, Minister, Vnder-bailiff, or
other person or persons whatsoever within this Realm, having, or pretending to
have, Authority or Warrant in that behalf, by force or color of any Writ,
Bill, or Process issuing, or to be issuing out of His Majesty's said Courts of
Kings Bench, and Common Pleas, or either of them, in which said Writ, Bill, or
Process, the certainty and true cause of Action is not expressed particularly,
and for which the Defendant or Defendants, in such Writ, Bill, or Process
named, is and are bailable by the Statute in that behalf made in the three and
twentieth year of the Reign of the late King Henry the sixth, shall be forced
or compelled to give security, or to enter into Bond with Sureties, 23 H. 6.
ca. 10.
for the Appearances of such person or persons so arrested, at the day and
place in the said Writ, Bill, or Process, specified or contained in any penalty
or sum of money, exceeding the sum of Forty pounds of lawful money of England,
to be conditioned for such Appearances; and that all Sheriffs, and other
Officers and Ministers aforesaid shall let to bail, and deliver out of Prison,
and from their, and every of their Custodies respectively, all and every person
and persons whatsoever, by them, or any of them, arrested; upon any such Writ,
Bill, or Process, wherein the certainty and true cause of Action is not
particularly expressed, upon Security in the sum of Forty pounds, and no more,
given for Appearance of such person or persons so arrested unto the said
Sheriff or Officer aforesaid, according to the said Statute in the said three
and twentieth year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the sixth, in that
behalf made and provided.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon Appearance to
be Entered in the Term, wherein such Writ, Bill, or Process, is retornable with
the respective Officer in that behalf, for the said person or persons, by
Attorney or Attorneys in the said respective Courts, from whence the said Writ,
Bill, or Process issued, unto such Writ, Bill, or Process, the Bond or Bonds so
given for Appearance thereunto, Bonds (given for) discharged upon appearance.
Nonsuit for want of a Declaration before the end of the next term after
appearance, and judgment and costs against the Plaintiff.
be and are hereby satisfied and dischargeed; And that after such Appearance so
entered, no Amerciaments be set or Estreted upon or against any Sheriff or other
Officer aforesaid, or any other person whatsoever, concerning the want of such
Appearance, and unless the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs in any such Writ, Bill, or
Process named, shall put into the Court from whence such Writ, Bill, or Process
did issue, his or their Bill, or Declaration against the person or persons so
Arrested in some personal Action, or Ejectione firmae of Lands or Tenements,
before the end of the Term next following after Appearance, That then a
Nonsuit for want of a Declaration, may be Entered against the said Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs in the said Courts respectively; And that every Defendant in every
such Writ, Bill, or Process named, shall or may have Judgment to recover Costs
against every such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, to be Assessed, Taxed, and Levied
in such manner, and according as it is provided by the Statute for Costs, made
in the three and twentieth year of the Reign of the late King Henry the Eighth,
23 H. 8. ca. 15.
any former or other Act, Statute, Ordinance, Law, Custom, Order, Course, or
Usage of either of the said Courts to the contrary thereof, heretofore had,
made, admitted, or used in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this Act, nor any Clause or thing herein before
specified or contained, shall not extend, Arrests upon Capias utlagatum,
Attachments upon Rescous, Contempts, and of Privilege, excepted.
nor be construed or taken to extend unto any Arrests hereafter to be made,
upon or by Virtue of any Writ of Capias utlagatum, Attachment upon Rescous, or
Attachment upon any Contempt, or of any Attachment of Privilege, at the Suit
of any privileged person, or of any other Attachment for Contempt whatsoever,
issuing, or to be issing out of either of the said Courts, although there be no
particular certainty of the cause of Action expressed or contained in the said
Writs; But that nevertheless no Sheriff, nor Undersheriff, nor any of the
Officers or Ministers aforesaid, shall discharge any person or persons, taken
upon any Writ of Capias utlagatum, out of Custody, without a lawful Supersedeas
first had and received for the same; and that upon the said Writs of
Attachment, such lawful course be taken for Security for Appearance therein, as
has been heretofore used, any thing herein before expressed to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas many persons out of ill intent, to delay their Creditors from
recovering their Just Debts, continue Prisoners in the Fleet, who cannot be
proceeded against in such manner as they might be, if they were at Large: Now
for the better enabling all persons to recover their just Debts and Demands
against such Prisoners: How Persons having cause of action may proceed against
Prisoners in the Fleet.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person or persons
whatsoever, who now has or have, or which at any time hereafter shall have
cause of any personal Action against any person being a Prisoner in the prison
of the Fleet, may Sue forth an Original Writ upon his or their cause of Action,
And that a Writ of Habeas Corpus be granted to every such person or persons,
being Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, desiring the same to be directed to the Warden
of the same Prison, to have the Body of such prisoner before the Justices of
the Common Pleas at some certain day in any Term, to answer the said Plaintiff
or Plaintiffs upon his or their said Cause of Action; And that if the said
Plaintiff or Plaintiffs at the said day put into the said Court his or their
Declaration, according to the said Original Writ against the said prisoner
being present at the Bar, the said prisoner shall be bound to appear in
person, or to put in an Attorney to appear for him in the said Action; And
unless the said Defendant plead upon a Rule given to be out at eight days at
the least after such Appearance, Judgment by Nihil dicit may be entered against
such Defendant as appearing in person, which shall be good and effectual in
Law; And such charge in Court by Declarations, signified by Rule unto the said
Warden, shall be a good cause of detention of such prisoner in his Custody,
from which he shall not be discharged without a lawful Supersedeas or Rule of
Court; And if the said Warden shall do otherwise, he shall be Responsible to
the Court, and to the party grieved for Damages, by Action upon the case to be
brought against him for discharging such prisoner.

Delays in Suites, by reason of 15 days between the Test and Retorn of
writs, remedyed in actions personal.
And whereas very many Suits Commenced by Original Writs, have been protracted
and long delayed from Judgment and Execution, by reason of the necessity of
having fifteen days at the least, between the days of the Test, and the
days of Return of Writs now used in personal Actions, and also in Actions of
Ejectione Firmae, for Lands and Tenements; For remedy thereof, and for the more
easy expediting Trials, and the better and more speedy executing of Judgments
for the time to come; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
all Actions of Debt, and all other personal Actions whatsoever, and also in all
Actions of Ejectione firmae, Ejectione firmae.
for Lands or Tenements now depending, or which at any time hereafter shall be
depending by Original Writ, in either of His Majesty's Courts aforesaid, after
any issue therein joined to be tried by a Jury, and also after any Judgment had
or obtained, or to be had or obtained in either of the Courts aforesaid; Venire
facias, Habeas Corpora Jurator. Distringas Jurator. Fieri fac. Capias ad
satisfaciendum. Capias ad satisfaciendum, where Exigent lies after Judgment,
or to make the Bail appear, excepted. 3. Jac. cap. 8. Touching staying
executions by Supersedeas or Writs of Error, and what actions it may be stayed.
There shall not need to be fifteen days between the Test day and the day of
Retorn of any Writ or Writs of Venire facias, Habeas Corpora Juratorum, or
Distringas Juratores, Writs of Fieri facias, or Writs of Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and that the want of Fifteen days between the Test day and
the day of Retorn of any such Writ shall not be, nor shall be assigned, taken
or adjudged to be any matter or Cause of Error, any Law, Custom, Statute,
Course, or Usage to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall
not Extend, or be construed to Extend, to any Writ of Capias ad Satisfaciendum,
whereon a Writ of Exigent after Judgment is to be awarded, nor to Capias ad
Satisfaciendum against the Defendant, in Order to make any Bail liable, but
that the same continue and be as if this Act had never been made.

And whereas by an Act of Parliament made in the third year of the Reign of our
late Sovereign Lord King James of Blessed Memory, a very good Law was made for
avoiding unnecessary delays of Execution; Whereby it is Enacted, That no
Execution shall be stayed or delayed upon or by any Writ of Error, or
Supersedeas thereupon to be sued for the reversing of any Judgment to be given
in any Action, or Bill of Debt, upon any single Bond for Debt, or upon any
Obligation with Condition for payment of money only, or upon Action, or Bill
of Debt for Rent, or upon any Contract sued in any of His Highness Courts of
Record at Westminster, or in the Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, or
Durham, or in His Highness Courts of Great Sessions in any of the Twelve Shires
of Wales, unless such person or persons in whose name or names such Writ of
Error shall be brought, with two sufficient Sureties, such as the Court wherein
such Judgment is or shall be given, shall allow of, shall first before such
stay made, or Supersedeas to be awarded, be bound to the party for whom any
such Judgment was or should be given, by Recognizance to be acknowledged in the
same Court, in double the sum adjudged to be recovered by the said former
Judgment, to prosecute the said Writ of Error with effect, and also to satisfy
and pay (if the said Judgment shall be affirmed) all and singular the Debts,
Damages, and Costs adjudged, or to be adjudged upon the former Judgment; And
all Costs and Damages to be also awarded for the same delaying of Execution,
which Law has been found by experience to be very good and beneficial to the
Commonwealth; And forasmuch as diverse other Cases within the same mischief, by
delays and staying of Execution by Writs of Error and Supersedeas thereupon,
are not provided for by the said Statute; For further remedy against delays
and staying of Executions in the several Actions hereafter specified.

Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, In what Actions
execution may be stayed (by writ of Error) by this Statute.
That from and after the twentieth day of January in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and one, no Execution shall be stayed in any of the
Courts aforesaid, by any Writ or Writs of Error, or Supersedeas thereupon,
after any Verdict and Judgment thereupon obtained in any Action of Debt,
grounded upon the Statute made in the second year of the Reign of the late King
Edward the sixth, for not setting forth of Tithes, nor in any Action upon the
Case, upon any promise for payment of money, Actions sur Trover, Action of
Covenant, Detinue, and Trespass, unless such Recognizance, and in such manner
as by the said recited former Act is directed, shall be first acknowledged in
the said Court where such Judgment is given.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Defendant to have
double Costs for delays of his Execution by writ of Error.
That if any person or persons after the said day, shall Sue or Prosecute any
Writ or Writs of Error, for Reversal of any Judgment whatsoever given after any
Verdict in any of the Courts aforesaid, and the said Judgment shall afterward
be affirmed, then every such person or persons shall pay unto the Defendant or
Defendants in the said Writ or Writs of Error, his or their double Costs to be
assessed by the Court where such Writ of Error shall be depending, for the
delaying of Execution.

Provided nevertheless, that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, Popular
actions, or upon a penal Law, Indictments, etc. not within this Statute.
shall not extend to any Action Popular, nor unto any other Action, which is,
or hereafter shall be brought upon any penal Law or Statute (except Debt for
not setting out Tithes as aforesaid) nor to any Indictment, Presentment,
Inquisition, Information, or Appeal, any thing herein before expressed to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding.

CAP. III.
An Act for Granting unto the Kings Majesty Twelve hundred and threescore
thousand pounds to be Assessed and Levied by an Assessment of Threescore and
ten thousand pounds by the Month, for Eighteen Months. EXP.

CAP. IV.
For enabling the Kings Majesty to make Leases, Grants, and Copies of Offices,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, parcel of his Highness Duchy of Cornwall,
or annexed to the same; and for Confirmation of Leases and Grants already made.

WHereas a great part of the Lands, part of, and annexed to the Duchy of
Cornwall, Stat. 22 Jac. cap. 29.
have been held by sundry Leases thereof made for years, and for one, two, and
three lives, by means whereof the Tenants have fixed Estates, have been
encouraged to improve and manure the same, and have improved the same, and
therein laid out great sums of Money in Building, and otherwise to the great
advantage of the Public; And whereas for Twenty years and more, now last past,
no such Leases have been legally made; so that it is probable most of the
Tenants Estates will be determined, or near determination ere that there can be
any Estates well and legally renewed, unless remedy therefore be provided; by
means whereof, Waste, Spoil, and Dilapidation are likely to happen, the Lands
worn out and decayed, and great disturbance and impoverishment to the Tenants;

And whereas on the like consideration, King Charles the First was by special
Law enabled to make such Leases; Be it Enacted by our Sovereign Lord the King,
by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same,
That all Leases or Grants already made, Leases by the King of Lands. etc. of
the Duchy of Cornwall made good.
or hereafter to be made within the space of three years now next ensuing by
our said Sovereign Lord the King, by Letters Patents, Indentures, or other
Writings under His Great Seal of England, or Seal of the Court of Exchequer, or
by Copy of Court-Roll, according to the Customs of the respective Manors of
any Offices, Parks, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments (other then Honors,
Lordships, or Manors) parcel of the possessions of the said Duchy of
Cornwall, or annexed to the same, shall be good and effectual in Law, according
to the Purport and Contents of the said Leases, Grants, and Copies, against our
said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and against
all and every person or persons, that shall hereafter have, inherit, or enjoy
the said Dukedom of Cornwall, by force of any Act of Parliament, or other
limitation whatsoever.

Leases for above 31 years or three lives excepted.
Provided always, That every such Lease so to be made of any Parks, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments in Possession, shall be made but for three lives or
fewer, or for one and thirty years or under, or some other term of years
determinable upon one, two, or three lives, and not above; And if such Leases
be made in Reversion, That then the same, together with the Estates in
Possession, do not exceed three lives, or the term of one and thirty years, and
not in any wise dispunishable of Waste, Not to be di^punishable of Waste.

The ancient rent to be reserved.


and so, as upon every such Lease, shall be reserved the ancient or most usual
rent, or more, or such Rent as has been yielded or paid, for the greater part
of twenty years, next before the making of the said Leases, and shall be
reserved due and payable, by, or to him, or her that shall have the
Inheritance, or other Estate of the said Parks, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, and where no such Rent has been reserved or payable, That then
upon every such Lease, there shall be reserved a reasonable Rent, not being
under the fourth part of the clear yearly value of the Parks, Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, contained in such Lease.

Covenants and con^^sions in such leases, grants, or, etc. shall be good.
And be it further Ordained and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
That all Covenants, Conditions, and Reservations, and other Agreements
contained in every Lease, Grant, or Copy heretofore made, or hereafter so to be
made as aforesaid, shall be good and effectual in Law, according to the words
and contents of the same, as well for, and against them, to whom the Reversion
of the same Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments shall come, as for and against
them, to whom the Interest of the said Leases, Grants, or Copies, shall come
respectively, as if our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty at the time of the
making of such Covenants, Conditions, and Reservations, and other agreements
were seized of an absolute Indefeasible Estate in Fee-simple in the same Lands,
Saving of others Rights.
Tenements, or Hereditaments; Saving always to all and every person and
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs and Successors, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, (other then our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, and his Heirs, and all and every person and persons that shall
hereafter have, inherit, or enjoy the said Dukedom of Cornwall, by force of any
Act of Parliament, or other limitation whatsoever) all such Rights, Titles,
Estates, Customs, Interests, Terms, Claims, and demands whatsoever, of what
kind, nature, or quality whatsoever, or in, to, or out of the said Offices,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any of them, as they or any of them had,
or ought to have had before the making of this Act, to all intents and
purposes, and in as large and ample manner and form, as if this Act had never
been had or made; this Act or any thing therein contained, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

ACTS made in the Parliament begun and holden the 8th of May, Anno 13 Caroli
Secundi Regis; And Continued to the 19th of May, 14 Caroli Regis. And thence
Prorogued to the 18th of February then next following.

CAP. I.
Certain Persons called Quakers, and others, refusing to take lawful Oaths.

Whereas of late times certain persons under the names of Quakers, and other
names of Separation, Quakers and seperations denying to take an Oath.
have taken up, and maintained sundry dangerous Opinions and Tenants, and
(amongst others) that the taking of an Oath in any case whatsoever, although
before a lawful Magistrate, is altogether unlawful and contrary to the Word of
God; and the said persons do daily refuse to take an Oath, though lawfully
tendered, whereby it often happens that the truth is wholly suppressed, and the
Administration of Justice much obstructed; And whereas the said Persons under a
pretense of Religious Worship, do often assemble themselves in great numbers in
several parts of this Realm, to the great endangering of the Public Peace and
Safety, and to the terror of the People, by maintaining a secret and strict
correspondence amongst themselves, and in the mean time separating and dividing
themselves from the rest of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects, and from the
Public Congregations, and usual places of Divine Worship.

For the redressing therefore, and better preventing the many Mischiefs and
dangers that do and may arise by such dangerous Tenants, and such unlawful
Assemblies; Be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons Assembled
in Parliament, and by Authority of the same, That if any person or persons who
maintain that the taking of an Oath in any case whatsoever (although before a
lawful Magistrate) is altogether unlawful, The penalty for refusing to 12 ^ a
lawful Oath. 16 Car. 2. c. 4.
and contrary to the Word of God, from and after the four and twentieth day of
March, in this present year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and
one, shall wilfully, and obstinately refuse to take an Oath, where, by the Laws
of the Realm, he or she is, or shall be bound to take the same, being lawfully
and duly tendered, or shall endeavor to persuade any other person, to whom any
such Oath shall in like manner be duly and lawfully tendered, to refuse, and
forbear the taking of the same, or shall by Printing, Writing, or otherwise, go
about to maintain and defend that the taking of an Oath in any case whatsoever,
is altogether unlawful; And if the said persons commonly called Quakers, shall
at any time after the said four and twentieth day of March, depart from the
places of their several habitations, and assemble themselves to the number of
five, or more, of the age of sixteen years or upwards, at any one time, in any
place, under pretense of joining in a Religious worship, not authorized by the
Laws of this Realm, that then in all and every such cases, the party so
offending being thereof lawfully convict, by verdict of twelve men, or by his
own confession, or by the notorious evidence of the fact, shall lose and
forfeit to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for the first offense,
such sum as shall be imposed upon him or her, not exceeding five pounds; And if
any person or persons, being once convicted of any such offense, shall again
offend therein, and shall in form aforesaid, be thereof lawfully convicted,
shall for the second offense forfeit to the King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs
and Successors, The second offense.
such sum as shall be imposed upon him or her, not exceeding ten pounds: The
said respective penalties to be levied by distress and Sale of the parties
goods so convicted, by warrant of the parties before whom they shall be so
convicted, rendering the overplus to the owners, if any be: and for want of such
distress, or non-payment of the said penalty, within one week after such
conviction, that then the said parties so convicted, shall for the first
offense be committed to the Common-Goal, or house of Correction, for the space
of three months; and for the second offense, during six months, without bail
or Mainprize, there to be kept at hard labor: which said monyes so to be
levied, shall be paid to such person or persons, as shall be appointed by those
before whom they shall be convicted, to be employed for the increase of the
stock of the House of Correction, to which they shall be committed, and
providing materials to set them on work. And if any person after he, in form
aforesaid, has been twice convict of any of the said offenses, shall offend
the third time, and be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convict, that then
every person so offending and convict, The third offense.
shall for his or her third offense abjure the Realm, or otherwise it shall and
may be lawful to and for his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to give order,
and to cause him, her, or them, to be transported in any Ship or Ships, to any
of his Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas.

And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Who may hear and
determine the offenses within this Act.
That all and every Justice of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize, and
Jail-delivery, and the Justices of the Peace shall have full Power and
Authority in every of their open and General Sessions, to enquire, hear, and
determine all and every the said Offenses, within the limits of their
Commission, to them directed, and to make Process for the execution of the
same, as they may do against any person being indicted before them of Trespass,
or lawfully convicted thereof.

And be it also Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to, and for any
Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other chief Officer of any Corporation, within
their several Jurisdictions, to commit to the Common Goal, or bind over with
sufficient Sureties to the Quarter Sessions, any person or persons offending in
the Premises, in order to his or their conviction aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it hereby further Enacted, That if any of the said
persons, How persons submitting may be discharged from the penalties.
shall after such conviction as aforesaid, take such Oath or Oaths, for which
he or she stands committed, and also give security, that he or she shall for
the time to come, forbear to meet in any such unlawful Assembly as aforesaid,
that then, and from thenceforth, such person and persons, shall be discharged
from all the penalties aforesaid, any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
Lords of the Parliament.
That all and singular Lords of the Parliament, for every third offense
committed against the tenor of this Act, shall be tried by their Peers, and not
otherwise.

CAP. II.
For repairing the Highways and Sewers, and paving and keeping clean of the
Streets, in and about London and Westminster, and for reforming of Annoyances
and Disorders there; and for the Regulating and Licensing of Hackney Coaches;
and for the enlarging of several strait and inconvenient Streets and Passages.

FOrasmuch as the Common Highways leading unto, and from the Cities of London
and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and other places within the present
Weekly Bills of Mortality, by reason of the multitude of Houses lately built,
and through the stopping and filling up the Ditches and Sewers, and neglect of
timely reparations, are at present, and for some years past have been so miry
and foul, as is not only very noisome, dangerous and inconvenient to the
Inhabitants thereabouts, but to all the Kings Liege People, riding and
traveling to and from the said Cities; May it therefore please Your most
Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
Commissioners to be named by his Majesty under the Great seal for Surveying and
cleansing the Streets and Highways.
and by the Authority of the same, That for the Surveying, Ordering, and
managing of the said Highways, Streets, Allies, and other Passages within the
said Cities and places aforesaid, and all things necessary for the Repairing,
Paving, or keeping clean thereof, there be from henceforward Commissioners to
be nominated by his Majesty, under the Great Seal of England, not exceeding the
number of one and twenty, besides such other Commissioners as are by this Act
nominated and appointed (whereof the Surveyor of his Majesty's Works for the
time being to be always one) that shall have their place of meeting, at the
Office of his Majesty's Works in Scotland-yard, or at some one other place, as
they or the greater number of them at any meeting shall direct from time to
time, as there shall be occasion; which said Commissioners, or any Five or more
of them, at their meeting as aforesaid, shall have full power and authority, to
order and direct the making of any new Vaults or Sewers, or to cut into any
Drein or Sewer already made, or the altering, enlarging, amending, cleansing,
or scowring of any old Vaults, Sinks, or Common-Sewers, or for the making,
amending, or altering of any new or old Pavements, or taking away of cross
gutters or Channels, in all or any of the Streets and places aforesaid, and for
the removing of all kind of Nusances, or any Encroachment by Sheds, Stalls,
Bulks, Stoops, Posts, or Wall beyond the old Foundations into the Streets, in
such places which shall be adjudged inconvenient, and to hinder the Passage;
Provided, that such encroachments as are aforementioned, which are Nusances,
Encroachments that have continued 30 years not to be removed, but upon
satisfaction to the parties.
that have continued above thirty years last past, shall not be removed until
reasonable satisfaction shall be given by the said Commissioners, to the party
or parties that shall suffer thereby. And if any person or persons that own the
said Encroachments, or shall not accept of such reasonable satisfaction as
shall be tendered or offered by the said Commissioners appointed for the
streets, for the pulling down or removing such Nusances or Encroachments as
have been continued before the time aforesaid; The Barons of the Exchequer to
judge of satisfaction it refused upon tender.

Conviction for encroachments upon view, and the penalty.


That then and in such cases of Refusal, the Barons of the Exchequer, upon a
Petition preferred to them by the party grieved, shall have power, and are
required by this Act to adjudg what satisfaction shall be fit for the said
person or persons to receive for the removing or pulling down any such Nusances
or Encroachment.

And to prevent for the future all manner of Timber, and other irregular
Buildings, the said Commissioners, or any five or more of them, are hereby
empowered to take a view of all such Nusances or Encroachments, and irregular
Buildings, which said View shall be a good Conviction in Law; and every person
or persons having notice of the said View or Conviction, and shall not remove
or take down such Nusances or Encroachments within one month after notice,
shall forfeit forty shillings for every month the said Nusances or
Encroachments shall afterward continue.

And whereas the common Highways, and new built streets hereafter mentioned,
are thought fit immediately to be repaired, new-paved, or otherwise amended;
namely, the street or way from the end of Petty-France to St. James House,
Petti-France. St. James. Street. Pall Mall.
and one other street from St. James House up to the Highway, and one other
street in St. James Fields, commonly called the Pall Mall; and also one other
street beginning from the Mews up to Pickadilly, and from thence toward the
Stonebridg, Air-street.
to the furthermost Building near the Bull at the corner of Air-Street: Be it
therefore Enacted, That all and every person and persons, owners or inhabitants
of all and every the houses built upon, or adjoining to the said Ways or
Streets, so adjudged and thought fit to be paved and repaired, shall according
to their several Interests and Estates, and in such proportions as the said
Commissioners, or any five of them shall think fit, before the first day of
May, One thousand six hundred sixty two, pay unto the said Commissioners, or
any five or more of them, so met as aforesaid, which shall be nominated for the
paving of the said ways, or to such person or persons as they shall appoint,
such sum and sums of money toward the paving of the said streets or ways, and
for the buying of new stones and gravel, as shall amount to their several
proportions, after the rate of sixteen pence for every square yard which the
ground shall contain, that lies in front before every dwelling house, yards, or
gardens belonging to the said dwelling house; and in the same breadth,
extending to the middle of the Highway or street which lies before the said
houses, yards, or gardens belonging to the said dwelling houses respectively.

No Hackney-Coaches to be without License.
And for the better preserving of the said streets, and for defraying of the
residue of the charge of the said Pavements. Be it further Enacted, That from
and after the first day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no
person or persons shall presume to drive (excepting Stage-Coaches) or let to
hire by the hour or day, or otherwise any Hackney-Coach or Coach-Horses, within
the Cities of London and Westminster or Suburbs of the same, or within the
Parishes comprised within the Bills of Mortality, without an especial leave or
license from such Commissioners as his Majesty shall appoint under the Great
Seal, for the Licensing and Regulating of Hackney-Coaches, according to the
particular Provisions and Limitations of this Bill; and that no Horse, Gelding,
or Mare, to be used with such Coaches, shall be under the size of fourteen
hands high according to the Standard, and that the number to be licensed, shall
not exceed Four hundred; and that every Coach so licensed, shall have a mark of
distinction by figure or otherwise, as the Commissioners shall think fit, to
the end they may be known, if any complaint shall be made of them. And that no
person shall be licensed to keep more then two Coaches, which Coaches shall
have every of them several Figures or Marks of distinction in the same manner,
as if belonging to several persons; and that no person shall presume to put the
same figure or mark of distinction upon his Coach, that is appointed for any
other Coach, under the forfeiture of five pounds for every such Offense, one
moiety whereof shall be to the Informer, and the other moiety to be paid to the
Commissioners that shall be appointed for the Paving and amending the Streets.

Who may be licensed to keep Hackney-Coaches.
And the said Commissioners for the licensing and regulating of Coaches, are to
take especial care, not to license any person to drive or keep any
Hackney-Coach or Coach-horses, that uses any other Trade or Occupation: and in
the first place to license all such persons, as have been ancient Coachmen, or
such Coachmen as have suffered for their Service and affections to his late
Majesty, or his Majesty that now is, or the Widow or Widows of any of them,
that have Coaches of their own.

And in case the said Commissioners shall license more then the said number of
Four hundred Coaches, every of the said Commissioners so licensing, shall
forfeit the sum of one hundred pounds, Hackney Coaches not to exceed 400 in
number.
for every such Coach so licensed above the said number, whereof twenty pounds
to the Informer, and the residue to be for the Repairing and paving the Ways
and Streets, to be levied by Distress, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of
Five or more of the other Commissioners, that shall be appointed for the Paving
and mending of the Streets and Highways.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Hackney Coachmen
so licensed, The several rates allowed for Hackney Coaches.
shall presume to take for his Hire in or about the Cities of London and
Westminster, above the rate of ten shillings for a day, reckoning twelve hours
to the day, and by the hour not above eighteen pence for the first hour, and
twelve pence for every hour after, and that no Gentleman or other person, shall
pay from any of the Inns of Court or thereabouts to any part of St. James or
City of Westminster, (except beyond Tuttle-street) above Twelve pence, and the
same prizes from the same places to the Inns of Court or places thereabouts,
and from any of the said Inns of Court, or thereabouts, to the Royal Exchange,
twelve pence, and if to the Tower of London, or to Bishops-gate-street, or
Aldgate, or thereabouts, eighteen pence, and so from the same places to the
said Inns of Court as aforesaid, The penalty for exacting more.
and the like rates from and to any place at the like distance with the places
before mentioned. And if any Coachman shall refuse to go at, or shall exact
more for his hire, then the several rates hereby limited, he shall for every
such offense forfeit the sum of ten shillings.

And be it further Enacted, That every Coach so licensed as aforesaid, shall
pay to the Commissioners that shall be appointed for the regulating and
Licensing of Hackney-Coaches, the yearly rent of five pounds, and no more,
whereof fifty shillings shall be paid at or before the twenty sixth day of May,
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, and the sum of five and twenty
shillings at or upon the Feast day of St. Michael the Archangel next coming,
and Twenty five shillings at the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ; and
from henceforward to be paid Quarterly at the four most usual Feasts of the
Year, by equal portions (that is to say) at the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin, St. John the Baptist, St. Michael the Archangel, and the Nativity of
our Lord Christ; which said sum and sums of money, the said Commissioners for
the Hackney-Coaches shall from time to time, pay or cause to be paid to the
Commissioners appointed for the paving and amending of the Streets and
Highways, within this Bill contained, or to such Treasurer or Receiver, as
they shall appoint; and the said Commissioners for Hackney-Coaches, shall
likewise from time to time, certify to the Commissioners appointed for the
paving of the Streets and Highways, the names and dwellings of all such
persons, as they shall license to drive or keep Hackney-Coaches, together with
the several Figures or Marks of distinction, which are appointed to belong, and
be affixed to the several Coaches, to the intent that discovery may the better
be made of any abuses that shall be committed, if any shall presume to affix
the Figure or Mark of distinction to any Coach, which belong of right to
another and whereby the Commissioners for the paving and amending the Streets
and Highways, shall be enabled to call the said Commissioners for the
Hackney-Coaches to a true and due account: And in case any overplus shall be of
the Moneys appointed by this Act to be raised for the Paving and Mending the
Ways and Streets as aforesaid, then such overplus shall be employed toward
the Enlargement of such Streets or places as are to be enlarged by virtue of
this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Load of Hay,
Every load of hay and straw rated toward mending the street.
which from the first day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, shall
be brought and stand to be sold upon any the Ways hereby in this Act
expressed, and adjudged fit to be new paved, shall pay six pence for every
Load; and likewise every Cart of Straw to be sold in the said places, shall
after the said day, pay two pence, which said sums shall be paid to the
Commissioners, which shall be appointed for the Paving and Amending the
Highways and Streets, or such as they shall appoint, for and toward the
Paving of the Streets and Highways.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines, Rents,
How the penalties upon this Act may be levied.
Forfeitures and Penalties, as shall grow due and payable to the said
Commissioners by this Act, shall be levied by Distress upon the Goods and
Chattels of the Offender or Offenders, by Warrant under the hands and Seals of
the Commissioners, or any five or more of them, which shall be appointed by his
Majesty, which shall be sold within fourteen days, and the Overplus returned
to the Owner; and in default of Distress or not payment, the person or persons
so offending, or neglecting to pay, shall lie in Prison without Bail or
Mainprize, till he or they have paid such Rent, Fine, Forfeiture, and Penalty
as was due from him or them.

And the said Commissioners for the Streets and Ways, The Commissioners may
appoint a Treasurer, Clerk, and other Officers for the service.
or any Five or more of them so met as aforesaid, are hereby empowered to
appoint a Treasurer or Collector and Clerk to attend them, or such other
Officer or Officers, as they shall find necessary for the carrying on of the
said Service, with such moderate Allowances as shall be fit: and in case any
person shall propose to carry away the ashes, dirt, and other filth, for all or
any the places aforesaid at less rates then the yearly Raker or Undertaker can
or will perform the same, the said Commissioners shall have power, and are
hereby authorized to contract with such person, and for such term as they shall
think fit; and they are also to require an account from time to time of all
Scavengers within the said places, and all other person or persons that shall
receive or disburse any moneys for the purposes in this Bill contained, And may
hear and determine all differences about paving and cleansing the streets.
as often as they, or any Five or more of them, so met as aforesaid, shall
think fitting and necessary, and shall hear and determine all Disputes and
Differences concerning the Right and Duty of Paving and keeping clean any of
the Streets, Lanes, or Allies, or public yards within the places aforesaid.

The power and duties of Scavengers and Rakers.
Provided always, That the respective Scavengers, Rakers, or other Undertakers,
shall have liberty by the approbation of the said Commissioners, or any five or
more of them, so met as aforesaid, to lodge their Ashes, Dust, Dirt, or other
filth, in such vacant public places, in or near the Streets or Highways, as
shall be thought convenient by the said Commissioners, for the accommodation of
Country Carts returning empty: And the said Scavengers, Rakers, or other
Undertakers, shall have liberty to pass through such Wharfs, Docks, or Yards,
with their Ashes, Dust, Dirt, etc. as shall be judged by the Commissioners to
be most commodious for the carrying the same by Water, they giving satisfaction
to the Owners or Occupiers of such Wharfs or Yards; and in case of unreasonable
Demands, the said Commissioners shall hear, moderate, and determine the same
according to Equity and good Conscience; and in case any person or persons
shall find him or themselves agrieved or prejudiced by such Determination of
the said Commissioners, How persons grieved may appeal.
or by any other the Acts or Proceedings of the said Commissioners, wherein he
or they shall conceive themselves relievable in Justice or Equity; the said
party so agrieved, shall and may have recourse in all cases to the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Barons of the Court of Exchequer,
to set forth his or their Case by Petition, Bill, or Plaint: And the said Court
is hereby empowered in such case of Appeal, to hear and determine all matters to
them complained of, concerning the same; and thereupon to revoke, make void,
alter, or confirm such Acts or Proceedings of the said Commissioners, as shall
be agreeable to Equity and Justice.

The Commissioners to be be called to account in the Exchequer yearly.
And the said Court of Exchequer is hereby also further empowered yearly to call
the said Commissioners to an account, for all Rents, Fines, Penalties,
Contributions, or any other sum or sums of Money, payable, or that shall come
to their or any of their hands for any of the purposes in this Act intended.

And the said Commissioners are hereby required at or before every Trinity
Term, to deliver in a true account before the Barons of the said Court, of all
their Receipts and Disbursments for the Year, ended at Easter then past, and in
default thereof, Process shall of course be made forth against the said
Commissioners, by the Clerk of the Extracts of the said Court, at the
Sealing-day for the said Trinity-Term, every Year respectively.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Decree made at
a Session of Sewers at Westminster Hall, Westminster.
within the City of Westminster, and County of Middlesex, the eighth day of
August, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, holden before John Lord
Roberts, Lord Privy Seal; James Duke of Ormond in the Kingdom of Ireland, Lord
Steward of his Majesty's Household, and Earl of Brecknock; Mountague Earl of
Lindsey; Edward Earl of Manchester, and others the Commissioners of Sewers,
then and there assembled by Authority of his Majesty's Commission of Sewers, to
them and others directed, for the making of two new Sewers, and enlarging and
amending the old Sewers near Charing Cross, for conveying the Water away from
annoying his Majesty's Palace at White Hall, be, and is hereby ratified, and
confirmed, and shall be put in execution according to the true intent and
meaning thereof, with full power to levy all the Arrears, as by a Commission of
Sewers can or may be done: And all and every person and persons employed, or
that have acted therein, be and are hereby indemnified, and saved harmless from
all manner of Suits and Actions that may or shall be brought against any of
them for the same.

And whereas great quantities of Sea-coal-ashes, dust, dirt, and other filth,
of late times have been, and daily are thrown into the Streets, Lanes, and
Allies of the Cities of London and Westminster, and Borough of Southwark, and
other parts adjacent, to the great Annoyance of Your Majesty's good People; Be
it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and
persons inhabiting within the said Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and the Borough of Southwark, or in any of the
said new built streets, Lanes, All streets and lanes to be cleansed every week.
or Allies, shall from the first day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, sweep and cleanse, or cause to be swept and cleansed, all the Streets,
Lanes, Allies, and public places before their respective Houses, Buildings and
Walls, twice every week, that is to say, on every Wednesday, and every Saturday
in the week, and all the soil, dirt and other filth, shall cause to be taken up
into Baskets, Tubbs, or other Vessels ready for the Raker, Scavenger, or other
Officer appointed for that purpose to carry away, The penalties for neglect
thereof.

None to cast any ashes or dust before their houses. The penalty.


upon pain to forfeit three shillings and four pence for every offense or
neglect respectively.

And that no person or persons whatsoever shall throw, cast or lay, or cause,
permit, or suffer to be thrown, cast, or laid, any Sea-coal-ashes, dust, dirt,
or other filth or annoyance in any open Street, Lane or Alley, within the said
Cities or places aforesaid, before or against his, her, or their own dwelling
Houses, Buildings or Walls, on the Penalty of five shillings; and if before the
Houses, Buildings or Walls of any of their Neighbors, or other the Inhabitants
of the Cities or Places aforesaid, or before or against any Church or
Churchyard, or any of his Majesty's Houses, Buildings or Walls, or any other
public Houses, Buildings or places whatsoever, or shall cast, lay or throw, or
cause to be cast, laid or thrown into any common or public Sink, Vault,
Watercourse, common Sewer or Highway, within the said Cities or places
aforesaid, or any other private Vault, or Sink of any of his Neighbors, or
other Inhabitants, any Ashes, Dust, Filth, Ordure, or other noisome thing
whatsoever; but shall keep, or cause the same to be kept in their respective
Houses, Back-sides, or Yards, until such time as the Raker, Scavenger, or
other Officer thereto appointed, of the Ward, Parish, Street, or place where
they dwell, do come by, or near their houses, or doors, with his Cart, Barrow,
or other thing or things used for cleansing the Streets, and carrying away
thereof; and then shall carry, or cause to be carried the said Ashes, Dust, or
other Filth and Annoyance aforesaid, forth of their houses, and deliver it unto
the said Raker, Scavenger, or Officer, or otherwise put the same in his Cart;
Barrow, or other thing as aforesaid, upon pain to forfeit the sum of twenty
shillings for every such Offense.

And be it further Enacted, That the respective Churchwardens, White Hall,
Churchyards and houses of Noblemen.
the Housekeepers of White Hall, and other his Majesty's Houses;
Housekeepers, or Porters of Noble-mens houses; Vshers, Porters or Keepers of
Courts of Justice, and all other Public Houses and Places respectively, shall
be liable to, and shall suffer the like Penalties, Forfeitures, and Punishments
for every the beforementioned Offenses, or Neglects, committed, done, or
suffered to be done before any Church, or Churchyard, or before any of His
Majesty's Houses, Buildings, or Walls, or before any Noblemens Houses,
Buildings, or Walls, or before any other public houses, Buildings, or places
whatsoever respectively.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
first day of May, No Barrels, Timber, coaches or other things to be see or
mended in the streets. The Penalty. The duty of the Scavengers and Rakers
weekly.
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no person or persons shall Hoop, Wash,
or cleanse any Pipes, Barrells, or other Casks or Vessels in any the Streets,
Lanes, or open Passages aforesaid, nor shall set out empty Coaches, to make or
mend, or rough Timber, or Stones to be sawn, or wrought in the Streets, on the
Penalty of twenty shillings for every Offense.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rakers,
Scavengers, or other Officers thereunto appointed, every day in the Week
(except Sundays and other Holidayes) shall bring or cause to be brought,
Carts, Dung-pots, or other fitting Carriages, into all Streets and places
within their respective Wards, Parishes, Charges, and Divisions where such
Carts or Carriages can pass; and at or before their approach, by a Bell, Horn,
Clapper, or otherwise, shall make distinct and loud noise, and give notice to
the Inhabitants of their coming, and make the like noise, and give the like
notice in every Court, Alley, or Place, into which the said Carts cannot pass,
and abide, and stay there a convenient time, in such sort, that all persons
concerned, may bring forth their respective Ashes, Dust, Dirt, Filth, and Soil,
to the respective Carts, or Carriages, so staying as aforesaid; all which, the
said Rakers, Scavengers, or other Officers aforesaid, shall daily carry, or
cause to be carried away, upon pain to forfeit forty shillings for every
offense or neglect respectively.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the open
Streets, All open streets to be paved and so kept by the several householders.
Lanes and Alleyes within the said Cities and Places aforesaid (excepting only
the new Paving of such Streets and Places, for which any of the Inhabitants
have contributed and paid their respective Proportions to the Commissioners
before named, according to the rates aforesaid) shall be forthwith sufficiently
repaired, or Paved, and from time to time hereafter maintained and kept
sufficiently repaired or Paved, at the costs and charges of the Householders in
the same Streets, Lanes and Alleys respectively, in manner following (that is
to say) every of the said Householders to repair and pave, and to keep repaired
and paved, the Streets, Lanes, or Alleys before his house, and so far as his
housing, Walls or Building extend, unto the Channel, or middle of the same
Street, Lane, or Alley, upon pain to forfeit Twenty shillings for every Perch
or Rod, (and after that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity) for every
Default, The penalty for not paving.
and of Twenty shillings a week for every week after, until the same shall be
sufficiently paved and amended.

Provided always, That such ancient Streets, Lanes, and Alleys within the said
Cities, Proviso for the Borough of Southwark
or either of them, the Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Borough of
Southwark, as by custom and usage have been repaired and paved in other manner,
shall be hereafter repaired, paved and maintained in such sort and manner, and
by such person and persons, as have heretofore used to repair, pave and
maintain the same, under the penalties aforesaid. Any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Candles or lights to be
hung out every night from Michaelmas to Lady Day.
That every householder within the said Cities, the Suburbs and Liberties
thereof, and in all other the places aforesaid, whose house adjoyns unto, and
is next the street, from Michaelmas until our Lady Day yearly, shall every
night set or hang out Candles or Lights in Lanthorns, or otherwise, in some
part of his house next the Street, to enlighten the same for Passengers, from
such time as it shall grow dark, until nine of the Clock in the Evening, upon
pain to forfeit the sum of one shilling for every default.

Who may convict persons offending and upon view or otherwise levy the
penalties by this Act.
And for the more speedy Reformation and punishment of all and every the
offenses aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
every one of his Majesty's Justices of either Bench, and Barons of his
Exchequer, and every Justice of Peace of the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and places aforesaid (within their several limits respectively)
shall have power and Authority upon his own knowledge, or view, confession of
the party, or proof of one credible witness upon Oath before him (which oath by
virtue of this Act, such Justice shall have power to administer) to convict any
person or persons of any the offenses aforesaid, whereby such person or persons
so convict, shall incur the Penalties and forfeitures aforesaid, one moiety
whereof shall be disposed and employed for and toward the reparation, paving
and cleansing of the street or place where the offense shall be committed, and
as much, or all of the other moiety as the Justice shall think fit, for him or
them that shall discover and prosecute the same, in case the said conviction be
by such discovery and prosecution; and if the conviction be by the view or
knowledge of such Justices, then the said whole penalty to go and be employed
for and toward the repairing, paving, and cleansing of the said streets, or
place, and shall be levied by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of
the offender, by Warrant under the hand and seal of any such Justice, to be
directed to the Constable, or any other Officer of the same Parish, rendering
the surplusage to the party, and in default of distress, or not payment of the
said penalties, within six days after demand thereof, or notice in writing,
left at the house or dwelling place of the offender, by the said Constable, or
any other Officer, the said offender not being a Peer of this Realm, shall be
committed to the Common Goal of the said County or City respectively, by the
Warrant of any such Justice under his hand and Seal, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprize until payment.

And for the better raising and levying of moneys to defray the charges, and
pay the Wages of the said Scavengers, Rakers, or other Officers employed in
cleansing of the Streets, Lanes, Alleyes, and other places aforesaid, and
carrying of the said ashes, dirt, filth, and soil; Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, Rates and taxes to be made for defraying the charges and
wages of Scavengers and others.
That within the City of London and Liberties thereof, the Scavengers, Rakers,
and such like Officers, shall be elected, and the Rates, Taxes, and Assesments
for Scavengers, Rakers, and such like Officers wages, for cleansing the
Streets, shall be rated, taxed, assessed, raised and paid by the Parishioners
and Inhabitants of every Parish and Precinct respectively, within the said City
and Liberties thereof, according to the ancient Custom and usage of the said
City. And the Receivers of all such moneys shall be accomptable as formerly;
And all new Messuages, Tenements and Houses, within the limits aforesaid, shall
be likewise rated, taxed and assessed, and shall pay proportionably with
others; And that within the City of Westminster, the said Officers shall be
chosen, and the Rates made and paid according to the ancient Custom of the said
City; How and when to elect Scavengers.
And in all other the Parishes and places aforesaid, upon every Tuesday or
Wednesday in Easter-Week, the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers for the
Poor, and Surveyors of the Highways of every of the said Parishes and places
respectively, or the greater number of them, giving notice unto, or calling
together such other Inhabitants of their respective Parishes as have formerly
born the like Offices therein, they or the greater number of them shall make
choice of, and shall nominate and appoint two or more able persons that are
Tradesmen of their Parish, to be Scavengers for the Streets, Lanes, and other
open Passages of each Ward and Division, within the said Parish, for the year
then next following, and until others be chosen and settled in their Places;
which persons so chosen, and being approved, and confirmed under the hands of
any two Justices of Peace within their respective Limits and Jurisdictions,
shall within seven days after their Election and Confirmation, and notice
thereof, take that Office and Duty upon them, upon pain to forfeit Twenty
pounds by every refuser respectively. And in case of refusal by any person or
persons so chosen and confirmed, then other able persons shall be chosen and
confirmed in manner aforesaid, within seven days after such refusal, in the
place of him or them which shall so refuse; and the person or persons so chosen
and confirmed, and having notice thereof, shall undergo the like pain, in case
of refusal, or not taking the said Office and Duty upon him or them within
seven days after he or they shall be chosen and confirmed, and have notice
thereof as aforesaid, The said Penalties to be disposed and employed for, or
toward the mending and repairing of the Streets and Ways of the same Parish,
Ward, or Division, and to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the Offender, by Warrant under the hand and seal of any Justice of
the Peace of any of the places aforesaid, to be directed to the Constables, or
other Officers of the same Parish, or any two or more of them (rendering the
surplusage to the party) and in default of distress, or not payment within six
days after demand thereof or notice left in writing, at the house or dwelling
place of the offender, by the said Constables or officers, the said offender to
be committed to the Goal of the said County or City respectively, by the
Warrant of any such Justice, under his hand and seal, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprize, until payment.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That within twenty days
after the Election and Confirmation of the said Scavengers as aforesaid, the
Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers for the Poor, and of the Highways of
the said Parishes, and places respectively or the greater number of them,
giving notice unto, or calling together such Inhabitants of their respective
Parishes, as have formerly born the like office therein; They or the greater
number of them then present, shall make and settle a Tax, Rate, or Assessment,
Taxes and Assesments to be made yearly by a Pound-rate.
according to a Pound-rate, to be imposed or set upon the Inhabitants of the
said Parish, Ward, or Division, for the year following, for the purposes
aforesaid; which being allowed, and confirmed by any two of the Justices of the
Peace of the places aforesaid respectively, shall be quarterly paid by every
respective Inhabitant, upon demand made thereof by the Beadle of the Parish, or
other officer appointed to gather and collect the same: And in case of refusal
or neglect, shall by Warrant of any two such Justices of the Peace, under their
hands and seals, be levied by distress and sale of the offenders goods; and for
want of distress, by imprisonment of the offender, (he not being a Peer of this
Realm) until payment as aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Actions
brought against any Commissioner or Officer employed by this Act; the Defendant
may plead the General issue.
That if any Action or Suit shall be brought, or prosecuted by any person or
persons, against any Judge, Commissioner, Justice of the Peace, Constable, or
other Officer, or Minister aforesaid, or against any person or persons employed
by them, or any of them, or authorized by this Act to do or perform, as by this
Act is directed, for any matter, cause, or thing, by them or any of them done,
committed, or executed, by virtue or reason of this Act, or any Clause or
Article therein contained; that then in every such case, the Action shall be
laid in the proper County where the fact was done, and not elsewhere; and the
Defendant or Defendants may plead the General Issue, And give the special
matter in Evidence.
and give the special Matter in Evidence at the Trial, That the same was done
in pursuance, and by Authority of this Act: And if upon Examination it shall so
appear to be done, the Jury shall find for the Defendant; and in such case, or
if the Plaintiff shall be Nonsuit, or discontinue his Action after the
Defendant has appeared, the Defendant shall have, and recover his or their
double costs, which he, or they shall sustain, or be put unto, by reason of his
or their wrongful vexation, in defense of the said Action or Suit.

And whereas the several Streets and Passages hereafter mentioned (that is to
say) The Street or Passage at or near the Stocks in London; The enlargement of
Passage in narrow and incommodious streets.
the Street and Passage from Fleet-Conduit to St. Paul's Church in London; the
Passage through the White-Hart-Inn from the Strand into Covent Garden; the
Street and Passage by and near Exeter-House and the Savoy, being obstructed by
a Rail, and the unevenness of the ground thereabouts; the Passage and Street of
St. Martins-Lane out of the Strand; the Passage or Street of Field-Lane,
commonly called Jack-an-apes-lane, going between Chancery Lane and
Lincolns-Inn-Fields; the Passage and Gate House of Cheap Side into St. Paul's
Churchyard; the Passage against St. Dunstans Church in the West (being
obstructed by a Wall) the Street and Passage by and near the West End of the
Poultrey in London, and the Passage at Temple Bar, are so narrow that they are
incommodious to Coaches, Carts and Passengers, and prejudicial to Commerce and
Trading; The Lord Mayor of London and others, Commissioners, may treat with
persons concerned for their Interests in houses obstructing such passage.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Mayor of the City of
London, the Recorder and Aldermen for the time being, together with such other
Commissioners as his Majesty shall appoint under the Great Seal of England, or
any five of them, shall have full Power and Authority, to receive all
Subscriptions and payments of voluntary contributions of money or other
endowments toward the Amendment and Enlargement of the Streets and Places
before-named, or so much of them, or any of them, as the said Commissioners, or
any five or more of them shall judge fit and necessary, And are hereby further
empowered to treat and agree with the Owners and Occupiers of any such Houses,
as they shall judge fit to be removed, rebuilt, or pulled down; or any part of
them, and upon payment of such sum or sums of money so agreed upon, are hereby
authorized to appoint Workmen to pull the said houses down, or cause the said
Owners or Occupiers to rebuild accordingly, and this Act shall be sufficient to
indempnify the said Commissioners, and all persons authorized by them, against
the Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of any the said Owners or
Occupiers, as if the same had been sold by Deed, Feoffment, Bargain and Sale,
or other Assurance in the Law, and done by Fine and Recovery, or any other way
whatsoever; And if there shall be any persons, Bodies Corporate or Collegiate,
that shall wilfully refuse to treat and agree, as aforesaid, or through any
disability by Nonage, Coverture, or a special Entail, or other Impediment
cannot, That in such Cases the said Commissioners are hereby authorized by
virtue of this Act, to issue out Warrant or Warrants to the Sheriffs of London,
who are hereby required accordingly to impannel and return a Jury before the
said Commissioners, or any five of them, which Jury upon their Oaths to be
administered by the said Commissioners, are to enquire and assess such damage
and recompense as they shall judge fit to be awarded to the Owners and
Occupiers, or either of them, of any such houses, or any part thereof, for
their respective Estates and Interests in the same, as by the said
Commissioners shall be adjudged fit to be pulled down for the purposes
aforesaid: and such Verdict of the Jury, and Judgment of the said Commissioners
thereupon, and the legal payment, or tender of the sum or sums of money so
awarded and adjudged, shall be binding to all intents and purposes against the
said Parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and others
claiming any Title or Interest in the said Houses, or in the ground whereupon
they stand, or thereunto belonging, and shall be a full Authority for the said
Commissioners or any five of them, to cause the same to be executed, and the
said Houses accordingly to be removed and pulled down.

And whereas the Houses that shall remain standing on the other side the said
Street or Streets, or behind the said houses that shall be so pulled down as
aforesaid, will receive much advantage in the value of their Rents, by the
liberty of Air, and free recourse for Trade, and other conveniences by such
enlargement; It is also Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That in case of
refusal, or in capacity, What may be done in case of refusal to compound with
the Commissioners.
as aforesaid, of the Owners or Occupiers of the said houses, to agree and
compound with the Commissioners for the same, thereupon a Jury shall and may be
Impanelled in manner and form aforesaid, to Judge and Assess upon the Owners and
Occupiers of such houses, such competent sum or sums of money, or Annual Rent,
in consideration of such Improvement and Melioration, as in reason and good
Conscience they shall judge and think fit; which said sum and sums of money, or
Rent, shall be paid to the Chamberlain of the City of London for the time
being, and such other Treasurer or Treasurers as shall be appointed by the said
Commissioners, or any five or more of them, who are hereby enabled from time to
time, to receive and recover the same by Action at Law, and whose Receipt shall
be a good discharge to the said Owners and Tenants, and who are hereby
appointed to receive and pay, and be accomptable for the same according to such
directions as shall from time to time be given them by the said Commissioners:
and the moneys so raised, or Rents so received, shall be expended upon the
Purchasing or Re-building houses on the other side the Street, and upon Paving
and amending of the Ways and Streets aforesaid, according to the purport of
this Act. And the said Verdict of the Jury, and Judgment of the Commissioners
in the cases aforesaid, shall be sufficient and conclusive in Law, to all
intents and purposes, against the said Owners and Occupiers, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns.

Every Commissioner to take an Oath for the faithful performance of this Act.
Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
person shall be enabled to act as a Commissioner to the intents and purposes
aforesaid, until he shall first have taken his Corporal Oath before the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord High Treasurer of England for the time being, for the due
and impartial execution of the Trusts by this Act committed to him.

Lord Mayor and Aldermen to be commissioners in London.

The Dean, High steward, Deputy-steward and two High Burgesses in Westminster. The
continuance of this Act.


Provided also, That the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen of the City of
London for the time being, shall be, and are hereby authorized to be
Ioynt-Commissioners and to exercise all the Powers of this Act, to all the ends
and purposes thereof, which are to be ordered, done, or executed within the
said City, or the Liberties thereof: And likewise, That the Dean of
Westminster, the High Steward, and his Deputy-Steward, and the two High
Burgesses of the said City of Westminster for the time being, shall be, and are
hereby authorized to be Ioynt-Commissioners, and to exercise all the Powers of
this Act, to all the ends and purposes thereof, which are to be ordered, done,
or executed within the said City of Westminster, or the Liberties thereof, Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. This Act to continue, and be
in force until the end of the First Session of the next Parliament.

Anno XIV. Caroli II. Regis.
CAP. III.
For Ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom.

The sole and supreme power and command of the Militia in the Kings Majesty,
his heirs and Successors. 13 Car. 2. cap. 6.
FOrasmuch as within all His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole and
Supreme Power, Government, Command and Disposition of the Militia, and of all
Forces by Sea and Land, and of all Forts and places of Strength is, and by the
Laws of England, ever was the undoubted Right of His Majesty, and His Royal
Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England; and that both, or either of the
Houses of Parliament, cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same; nor can, nor
lawfully may raise, or levy any War, Offensive or Defensive, against His
Majesty, His Heirs, or lawful Successors; and yet the contrary thereof has of
late years been practiced, almost to the ruin and destruction of this Kingdom;
and during the late usurped Governments, many evil and rebellious principles
have been instilled into the minds of the people of this Kingdom, which may
break forth, unless prevented, to the disturbance of the peace and quiet
thereof;

His Majesty may issue out Commissions of Lieutenancy to such persons as he
shall think fit, for the several counties, cities, etc. The power of the said
Lieutenants. 25 Car. 2. cap. 4. Stat. 3.
Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, shall, and may from
time to time, as occasion shall require, issue forth several Commissions of
Lieutenancy to such persons as his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall
think fit to be his Majesty's Lieutenants for the several and respective
Counties, Cities, and places of England, and Dominion of Wales, and Town of
Berwick upon Tweed; which Lieutenants shall have full power and authority to
call together all such persons at such times, and to arm, and array them in such
manner as is hereafter expressed and declared; and to form them into Companies
Troops, and Regiments; and in case of Insurrection, Rebellion, or Invasion,
them to lead, conduct, and employ, or cause to be led, conducted and employed,
as well within the said several Counties, Cities, and places for which they
shall be Commissionated respectively, as also into any other the Counties and
Places aforesaid, for suppressing of all such Insurrections and Rebellions, and
repelling of Invasions, as may happen to be, according as they shall from time
to time receive directions from His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; And that
the said respective Lieutenants shall have full Power and Authority from time
to time, to constitute, appoint, and give Commissions to such persons as they
shall think fit to be Colonels, Majors, Captains, The Deputy Lieutenants to be
named to and approved of by his Majesty.
and other Commission-Officers of the said persons so to be armed, arrayed and
weaponed, and to present to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the names of
such person and persons as they shall think fit to be Deputy Lieutenants, and
upon His Majesty's approbation of them, shall give them Deputations
accordingly; always understood, That His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors have
power and authority to direct and order otherwise, and accordingly at his and
their pleasure, may appoint and commissionate, or displace such Officers; Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding: And that the said
Lieutenants respectively, and in their absence, out of the Precincts and Limits
of their respective Lieutenancies, or otherwise by their directions, the said
Deputy Lieutenants, The power of the Deputy Lieutenants.
during their said respective Deputations, or any two or more of them, shall
have power from time to time, to train, exercise, and put in readiness; and
also to lead and conduct the persons so to be armed, arrayed and weaponed, by
the directions, and to the intents and purposes, as is hereafter expressed and
declared.

And for the providing Horse and Arms, and Furniture thereunto belonging, for
the Arming and Weaponing the persons aforesaid, and also for the defraying and
paying the necessary charges thereunto belonging, in manner as hereafter
follows; Be it further Enacted, The manner of charging and providing Horse
and Arms, etc.
That the said respective Lieutenants within the several Counties, Cities, and
Places for which they are nominated respectively, and their Deputies, or the
major part of such Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants then present; or in the
absence of the Lieutenant or Lieutenants, the major part of the
Deputy Lieutenants then present, which major part shall be three at the least,
have hereby full Power and Authority to charge any person with Horse, Horseman
and Arms, or with Foot-Souldier and Arms, in the same County, Shire, City,
Borough, or Town-Corporate, where his, her, or their Estates lie, having
respect unto, and not exceeding the limitations and proportions hereafter
mentioned (that is to say), No person shall be charged with finding a Horse,
Horseman and Arms, unless such person or persons have a Revenue of Five
hundred pounds by the year in possession, or have an Estate of Six thousand
pounds in Goods or Money, besides the Furniture of his or their Houses, and so
proportionably for a greater Estate in Lands in possession, or Goods, as the
respective Lieutenants, and their Deputies as aforesaid, in their discretions
shall see cause, and think reasonable; And they are not to charge any person
with finding a Foot-Souldier and Arms, that has not a yearly Revenue of Fifty
pounds in possession, or a personal Estate of Six hundred pounds in Goods or
Moneys (other then the stock upon the ground) and after the aforesaid rate
proportionably for a greater or lesser Revenue or Estate; Nor shall they charge
any person with the finding both of Horse and Foot in the same County.

Provided, That no person chargeable by this Act to find an Horse and Horseman
with Arms, No person charged with or toward an Horse, may be charged also
toward foot-arms.
or to be contributory toward finding an Horse and Horseman with Arms, shall
for the same Estate be chargeable toward finding a Foot-Souldier with Arms, or
contributory thereunto: And it shall be lawful to and for the respective
Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, to impose
the finding and providing of Horse, Horseman and Arms, as aforesaid, by
joining two or three, or more persons together in the Charge, as to their
Judgment shall appear most conducible to the service of this Kingdom.

Provided, That no person that has not One hundred pounds per annum in
possession in Lands, What persons and Estate only chargeable toward finding
Horse-arms.

Lieutenants and Deputies may hear and determine matters relating to this Act.


Tenements, or Hereditaments, Lease-hold or Copyhold, or Twelve hundred pounds
personal Estate, shall be compellable to contribute in finding any Horse and
Horseman with Arms: And the said respective Lieutenants and Deputies, or any
three or more of them shall have power to hear Complaints, and examine
Witnesses upon Oath (which Oath they have hereby power to administer) and to
give redress according to the merits of the cause, in matters relating to the
execution of this Act.

Be it further Enacted, That the said Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or
more of them, in their several Counties and Places respectively, shall require
and direct all persons so charged as aforesaid with Horse, Horsemen and Arms,
Allowance of 2 s. per diem for a Horseman, and 1 s. for a Foot Soldier.
to allow two shillings by the day to the Troopers that serve with their Horse
and Arms, for the maintenance of the Man and Horse, and twelve pence a day for
the Foot-Souldiers (if they serve not in their own persons) for so many days
as they shall be absent from their Dwellings and Callings, by occasion of
Muster or Exercise.

And for furnishing Ammunition and other necessaries, the said respective
Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them, Rules to be made for
furnishing Ammunition.
shall have power to lay fitting Rates upon the respective Counties and Places,
not exceeding in the whole in any one year the proportion of a fourth part of
one months Assessment in each County, after the rate of Seventy thousand
pounds by the month, now or late charged by an Act, entitled, An Act for
Raising of Seventy thousand pounds for the further Supply of His Majesty, which
Moneys are to be Assessed, Collected, and paid by such persons, and according
to such Directions as shall be given from time to time by the said respective
Lieutenants and Deputies, or any Three or more of them, under the like
penalties, and by the like ways and means as are prescribed in the said Act
for the Seventy thousand pounds by the Month; Invasion, In^urrection,
Rebellion.
And in case of Invasions, Insurrections or Rebellions, whereby occasion shall
be to draw out such Soldiers into actual Service, the persons so charged as
aforesaid, shall provide each their Soldier respectively with pay in hand, not
exceeding one months pay, as shall be in that behalf directed by the said
respective Lieutenants, and in their absence, as aforesaid, or otherwise by
their Directions by their Deputies, or any two, or more of them. For repayment
of which said Moneys, and for satisfaction of the Officers for their pay during
such time, not exceeding one month, as aforesaid, as they shall be with their
Soldiers in such said actual service; Provision by his Majesty.
It is hereby Declared, That provision shall be made for the some by His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, out of His or Their Public Treasury or
Revenue. None having advances a months pay, shall be charged again, until he
be re-imbursed the same.
Nevertheless it is hereby further Provided and Enacted, That in case a months
pay shall be provided and advanced as aforesaid; That no person, who shall have
advanced his proportion thereof, shall be charged with any other like months
payment, until he or they shall have been re-imbursed the said months pay,
and so from time to time the months pay by him or them last before provided
and advanced, as aforesaid.

And be it Enacted, That the said Lieutenants and their Deputies, or the chief
Officers upon the place in the respective Counties and Places, How to charge
Carts and Horses for carrying Provisions, and their allowance per mile.
as aforesaid, may charge Carts, Wagons, Wains, and Horses, for the carrying of
Powder, Match, Bullet, and other Materials, allowing six pence a Mile outward
only, to every such Cart, Wagon and Wayn with five Horses, or six Oxen, and so
proportionably; And for every Horse employed out of Wagon or Cart for uses
aforesaid, one penny, so taken upon the marching of any Regiment, Company, or
Troop, upon occasion of Invasion, Insurrection, or Rebellion; And that the said
Lieutenants, or Deputies, or the chief Officers upon the place, Soldiers that
do not their duties, how punished.
shall, and may Imprison Mutineers, and such Soldiers as do not their Duties
as Soldiers at the day of their Musters and Training; and shall and may
Inflict for punishment for every such offense any pecuniary Mulct not exceeding
five shillings, or the penalty of Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise, not
exceeding Twenty days.

The penalties upon persons charged or taxed, refusing or neglecting.
And be it further Enacted, If any Person or Persons so to be assessed or
charged by the said Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them
respectively, shall refuse, or neglect by a reasonable time to be appointed, to
provide and furnish such sufficient Horse and Horseman, Horses and Horsemen,
Arms, and other Furniture, or to pay such sum or sums of money toward the
providing and furnishing, as aforesaid; That then it shall and may be lawful to
and for the respective Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them,
for every such offense, from time to time to inflict a penalty upon such
persons not exceeding 20 l. And also by Warrant under their, or any three or
more of their hands and seals to levy such sum or sums of money, or the value
of such Horse or Horses, Arms and Furniture, and such penalty inflicted by
distress and sale of the goods of the person or persons so neglecting or
refusing, rendering the overplus to the Party so distrained, all necessary
charge in levying thereof being first deducted; And it is declared, that the
same be employed to the same uses, in default whereof the same was imposed. And
be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons so to be armed, Imbezeling
of Arms, Horse, or Furniture, how punished.
arrayed and weaponed, shall detain or imbezel his Horse, Arms, or Furniture
wherewith he ought to serve, or is entrusted, that it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said respective Lieutenants, and in their absence as aforesaid,
or otherwise by their directions, to and for their Deputies, or any two or more
of them, to imprison such person and persons, till he or they have made
satisfaction for the Horse, Arms, or other Furniture so by him detained or
imbezelled; And also, That if any person so to be armed, horsed or weaponed, as
aforesaid, shall not appear, and serve completely furnished with Horse and
Arms, and other Furniture wherewith he is entrusted at the beat of Drum, sound
of Trumpet, or other Summons, that then, and so often, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said respective Lieutenants, and in their absence, as
aforesaid, or otherwise by their directions, to and for their Deputies, or any
two or more of them, if the default be in the person or persons so interested,
to imprison such person or persons for the space of five days, without Bail or
Mainprise, or to inflict the penalty, if a Horseman, not exceeding 20 s. and
if a Footman, not exceeding 10 s. to be paid down without delay or
forbearance: And if any person or persons so assessed or charged, as aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to send in, or deliver his Horse, Arms, or other
Furniture, upon such summons, or other notice, as aforesaid; That then, and so
often, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said respective Lieutenants,
and their Deputies, or any three or more of them, to inflict a penalty not
exeeding 5 l. to be levied by distress and sale of the Goods of such person or
persons so refusing, as aforesaid, rendering the overplus to the Party
distrained, necessary Charges for levying being first deducted.

Ability of persons assessed, how to be discovered.
And for the better discovery of the Ability of the Persons so to be assessed
and charged, and of all Misdemeanors tending to the hinderance of the service
aforesaid, the said respective Lieutenants, and their Deputies, or any three or
more of them, are hereby enabled to examine upon Oath such Person or Persons as
they shall judge necessary or convenient, or shall be produced by the Party
charged or accused, other then the Persons themselves to be assessed and
accused.

And for the better and more speedy execution of the Premises, Be it further
Enacted, That the said respective Lieutenants shall be, Treasurer and Clerks
for receiving and paying moneys by this Act.
and are hereby required to appoint one or more Treasurer or Treasurers, Clerk
or Clerks, for receiving and paying such moneys as shall be levied by virtue
hereof; of all which Receipts and Disbursements thereof, the said Treasurer,
Clerk and Clerks are every six months to give their Accounts in writing, and
upon Oath, to the said Lieutenants and their Deputies, or any three or more of
them, which Oath they have hereby Power to administer: And the said Account so
to be taken, shall be forthwith certified to the Lords of His Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, and a Duplicate thereof shall be certified to the
Justices of Peace at the next General Quarter Sessions.

And be it further Enacted, That the Deputy Lieutenants shall observe and obey
such Orders and Directions as they shall from time to time receive from the
respective Lieutenants, for the putting in execution the Powers given by this
Act.

And for the better securing the Peace of the Kingdom, Be it further Enacted
and Ordained, Who shall be appointed to search for and seize Arms are the
houses of dangerous persons.
that the said respective Lieutenants, or any two or more of their Deputies,
are hereby enabled and authorized from time to time, by warrant under their
hands and seals, to employ such Person or Persons as they shall think fit (of
which a Commissioned Officer, and the Constable, or his Deputy, or the
Tythingman, or in the absence of the Constable, and his Deputy, and Tythingman,
some other person bearing Office within the Parish, where the search shall be,
shall be two) to search for and seize all Arms in the custody or possession of
any Person or Persons, whom the said Lieutenants, or any two or more of their
Deputies, shall judge dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom; and to secure such
Arms for the service aforesaid, and thereof from time to time to give Accounts
to the said respective Lieutenants, and in their absence, as aforesaid, or
otherwise by their directions, to their Deputies, or any two or more of them:
Provided that no such search be made in any house or houses between Sunsetting
and Sunrising, other then in Cities and their Suburbs, and Towns Corporate,
Market Towns, and houses within the Bills of Mortality, where it shall and may
be lawful to search in the nightime, by Warrant, as aforesaid, if the Warrant
shall so direct, and in case of resistance to enter by force; Houses of Peers.
And that no dwelling house of any Peer of this Realm be searched by virtue of
this Act, but by immediate Warrant from his Majesty, under his Sign Manual, or
in the presence of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the same
County or Riding; And that in all places and houses whatsoever, where search is
to be made as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful, in case of resistance to
enter by force; And that the Arms so seized, may be restored to the Owners
again, if the said Lieutenants, or in their absence as aforesaid, their
Deputies, or any two or more of them shall so think fit.

And be it Enacted, That all high Constables, petty Constables, All high
Constables and Officers to be aiding the respective Lieutenants.
and other Officers and Ministers within the said Counties, Cities, Parishes
and places aforesaid, be, and are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to
the said respective Lieutenants, and their Deputies, or any of them in
execution of the premises; And that all and every person and persons who shall
act, or do any thing in execution thereof shall be hereby saved harmless and
indemnified; And also, that all and every person and persons, who have
heretofore acted or done any thing in execution of any Commission, or
Commissions of Lieutenancy issued by the Kings Majesty that now is, or by
color of them, or any of them, or touching, or concerning the same, or any of
them, or relating thereunto since the 7th. day of May, One thousand six hundred
sixty and one, until the 20th. day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, shall be, and are hereby, saved harmless and indemnified in that behalf.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, How persons are to be charged residing
in one County, and having lands in another.
That where any person or persons shall be charged by virtue of this Act to
find a horse and Horseman, horses and Horsemen and Arms, or Foot-souldier and
Arms, in such County, City or place where he or they do not reside, or inhabit,
that then, and in such cases, the respective Lieutenants and Deputies, or any
three or more of them, shall send Notice of every such charge, if such person
have any land in his own occupation, to such person as he does employ as his
Servant in managing the same; And in case all his lands, or other estate be
demised, and to farm let, then to one or two of the most sufficient Tenant or
Tenants, who shall have the same in their occupation, who are hereby required
forthwith with all convenient speed to convey the same to their Master or
Landlord respectively; And within such time as shall be appointed in that
behalf, bring an account of their Master or Landlords answer to the respective
Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or more of them: And upon neglect, or
refusal of the Landlord, to provide such horse and Horseman, horses and
Horsemen and Arms, or Foot-souldier and Arms, as is duly charged upon him,
according to the Rates mentioned in this Act for the yearly Rent, reserved upon
every demise or other grant, and not otherwise within the time limited for that
purpose; Tenants to provide Arms for their Landlords.
That then the said Tenant or Tenants shall provide and do as the Landlord in
that behalf ought to have done. And if the said tenant or tenants shall refuse,
or neglect to provide such horse and Horseman, horses and Horsemen and Arms,
or Foot-souldier and Arms, as are charged upon his or their Landlords within
the time limited; That then and upon every such default, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said respective Lieutenants, and in their absence, as
aforesaid, or otherwise by their directions, to and for their Deputies, or any
two or more of them, by warrant under their hands and seals to levy all such
penalties as are appointed by this Act, by distress and sale of the offenders
Goods, rendering the overplus to the Party distrained.

And it is hereby Ordained and Enacted, And to defalk the charges out of their
next Rent.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Tenant or Tenants to
defalk out of such rent as shall be next due to his or their Landlord, all such
Money as the said Tenant or Tenants shall necessarily lay out or expend in
providing such horse and Horseman, horses and Horsemen and Arms, or
Foot-souldier and Arms, as are charged upon his or their Landlord, or shall
pay, or be levied upon him or them by distress for any default in manner as
aforesaid, any condition, reservation, Covenant or Contract for the payment of
his or their Rent, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: And for so
doing, the said Tenant or Tenants shall be indemnified by Authority of this
Act; The Tenants indemnified for so doing.
unless the Landlord, or Landlords shall make it appear within two months
after such levying such penalties before the respective Lieutenants, and in
their absence as aforesaid, or otherwise by their directions before their
Deputies, or any two or more of them, that the default and penalty was
occasioned by the wilful neglect of the said Tenant or Tenants;

Peers not to act as Lieutenants or Deputies before they take the Oath of
Allegiance, etc.
Provided also, That no person being a Peer of this Realm, shall be capable of
acting or serving as Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant, by virtue of this Act,
unless he or they shall first before six of the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council for the time being, or such other Persons as shall be authorized
by his Majesty to administer the same, take the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and also this Oath following, I A.B. do declare and believe, that it
is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And
this oath.
And that I do abhor that Traitorous Position, That Arms may be taken by his
authority against His Person, or against those that are Commissioned by him in
pursuance of such Military Commissions: So help me God. Which Oaths they have
hereby power to administer.

Persons under the degree of a Peer to take the Oath of Allegiance, etc.
And that no Person being under the degree of a Peer of this Realm, shall be
capable of acting as Lieutenant, Deputy-Lieutenant, Officer or Soldier, by
virtue of this Act, unless he or they shall first take the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and this Oath following, I A. B. do declare and believe, that it
is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King; And
that I do abhor that Traitorous Position, And this oath.
That Arms may be taken by his Authority against His Person, or against those
that are Commissioned by Him in pursuance of such Military Commissions: So help
me God. Which Oaths, any one Justice of Peace of the respective Counties and
Places aforesaid is enabled to administer to such respective Lieutenant as is
not a Peer of this Realm, and the said Lieutenant, or any one Justice of Peace
of the respective Counties and Places aforesaid, is enabled to administer to
the respective Deputy Lieutenants, not being Peers; and the said respective
Lieutenants, and in their absence as aforesaid, or otherwise by their
directions when they are not absent, their Deputies, or any two of them shall
and are hereby Enabled to administer the said Oaths to the said Officers and
Soldiers.

The Trained Bands to continue till the 25. March, 1663. And no longer.
And to the end there may be some convenient time to put in execution the Powers
of this Act, and preparing an Establishment according to the same; Be it hereby
Enacted, That the Trained Bands and Forces now actually raised, and in being,
shall so continue in each respective City and County of England and Wales,
until the five and twentieth day of Match, One thousand six hundred sixty and
three, and no longer, unless an Establishment according to this Act be no
sooner had, any thing in this present Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

The times appointed for training and mustering.
And it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That the Ordinary times for Training,
Exercising, and Mustering the Forces to be raised by virtue of this Act, shall
be these following, (that is to say) the general Muster and Exercise of
Regiments, not above once a year; the Training and Exercising of single
Companies, not above four times a year, unless special Directions be given by
his Majesty, or his Privy Council; And that such single Companies and Troops
shall not at any one time be continued in Exercise above the space of two days;
and that at a General Muster and Exercise of Regiments, What Arms and Provision
every Soldier shall bring.
no Officer or Soldier shall be constrained to stay for above four days
together from their respective habitations; And that at every such Muster and
Exercise, every Musquetier shall bring with him half a pound of Powder at the
charge of such person or persons as provide the said Foot-souldier and Arms,
and every Horseman is to bring with him a quarter of a pound of Powder at the
charge of such person or persons as provide the said horse, Horseman and Arms;
and the Arms Offensive and Defensive, with the Furniture for Horse, are to be
as follows; The Defensive Arms, a Back, Breast and Pott, and the Breast and
Pott to be Pistol-proof; The Offensive Arms, a Sword and a Case of Pistols, the
Barrels whereof are not to be under 14 Inches in length; The furniture for the
Horse to be a great Saddle or Padd with Burrs and Trapps to affix the Houlsters
unto, a Bitt and Bridle with a Pectorel and Crupper; For the Foot, a Musquetier
is to have a Musket, the Barrel whereof is not to be under three foot in
length; And the Gage of the Bore to be for 12 Bullets to the pound, a Collar of
Bandeliers, with a Sword: Provided, that all Muster-Masters shall for the
present admit and allow of any Muskets already made, which will bear a Bullet
of 14 to the pound; But no Muskets which henceforth shall be made, are to be
allowed of, but such as are of the Gage for 12 Bullets to the pound; A Pike-man
is to be armed with a Pike made of Ash, not under 16 foot in length, (the head
and foot included) with a Back, Breast, Headpiece and Sword: Provided, that
all Muster-Masters shall for the present admit and allow of any Pikes already
made that are not under 15 foot in length; But no Pikes which shall be
hereafter made are to be allowed of, that are under 16 foot in length.

The Militia or the Isle of Purbeck.
Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Militia
of the Island of Purbeck shall remain separate from the County of Dorset, as
heretofore has been used; And that his Majesty's Lieutenant of the said
Island, and his Deputies, or any three or more of them for the time being,
shall have power for the Levying, Arraying, Mustering, and conducting of such
number of Foot for the defense of the said Island, in such manner, and by such
ways and means as heretofore has been used; and also to use and execute within
the said Island all and every the powers which by the true intent of this Act,
Power to his Majesty to raise 70000 l. per annum, for three years upon
occasion. EXP.
any of his Majesty's Lieutenants, or his or their Deputies, or any of them,
might in any respective County use or execute.

Provided nevertheless, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
case of apparent danger to the present Government, it shall and may be lawful
for His Majesty at any time or times that the same shall so happen, during the
space of three years, from the five and twentieth day of June, in the year One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, to raise such sum or sums of money for the
defraying of the whole, or such part of the Militia aforesaid, as his Majesty
shall find himself obliged to employ in order to the quiet and security of this
Nation, the said sum not exceeding Seventy thousand pounds in one whole year:
And the same to be raised by his Majesty's Lieutenants, or in their absence, as
aforesaid, by their Deputies in their respective Counties, according to the
rules and directions in an Act in this present Parliament, For the raising of
Eighteen months Assessment after the rate of Seventy thousand pounds per
mensem; as also to continue the space of three years from the aforesaid five
and twentieth day of June, and no longer; Any thing in this Act, or any other
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Be it also Enacted, That all Constables, Tything-men, or other Officer or
Officers, Such as have provided Parish Arms before the 24. of June, 1660. how
to be re-imbursed. EXP.
who since the Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty,
have paid or disbursed, or before the settlement of the Militia to be
established by virtue of this Act, shall pay or disburse any moneys for buying
of Arms, or defraying of Charges of Soldiers, set, or to be set upon their
respective Parishes, shall be re-imbursed the same by those who have refused to
pay their proportions thereof; And in case he or they shall refuse to pay the
same, then to be levied by distress and sale of Goods, rendering the Overplus to
the Owner or Owners by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Lieutenant or
Lieutenants, or in his or their absence, or otherwise by their direction, when
they are not absent, of any two of their Deputies directed to the respective
Constables, Tything-men, or other Officer or Officers aforesaid, of their
respective Parishes.

Provided always, And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, No man
charged shall be forced to serve in person, but may find a sufficient man for
him.
That no person charged with the finding of Horse or Foot, or with contributing
thereunto, as aforesaid, shall be compellable to serve in his or their proper
person, but may according to such proportion as they are or shall respectively
be charged by this Act, find one or more fit or sufficient Man or Men qualified
according to this Act, to be approved by his or their Captain respectively,
subject nevertheless to be altered upon appeal to the Lieutenant, or in his
absence, as aforesaid, to his Deputy Lieutenants, or any two of them, as there
shall be cause; And that every such person or persons so found and provided,
shall, and hereby are required to serve as a Soldier and Soldiers, in such
manner, and under such penalties as are before appointed in this Act; No person
listed may desert the service, or be discharged, or Altered, but by leave, upon
reasonable cause.
And that every person or persons who shall serve in his or their own persons
(who are also to be approved of as aforesaid) or such person or persons as
shall be accepted in his or their stead, shall at the next Muster of such Troop
or Company in which he or they are to serve, give in his or their Christian and
Sir-names, and places of abode unto such person as the Lieutenant, or in his
absence, as aforesaid, or by his direction when he is not absent, any two
Deputy Lieutenants shall appoint, to the end the same may be listed: And that
from thenceforth such person so listed shall not be exchanged, or desert the
said Service, or be discharged thereof, but by the leave and order of the
Lieutenant, or two Deputy Lieutenants, or his Captain, upon reasonable cause
(subject nevertheless upon appeal to be determined, as aforesaid) first
obtained in writing under his or their hands and seals, under pain that such
person departing from the said service without leave, as aforesaid, The penalty.
shall forfeit the sum of 20 l. to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels in
such manner as is by this Act appointed for the levying of other penalties; and
for non-payment or want of distress, then every such person to be committed to
the Common Gaol of the the County for any time not exceeding three months,
without bail or mainprise, any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Proviso for the Tinners of Devon* and
Cornwall.
That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to put any new charge of Arms
upon the Tinners in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, other then the Tax
mentioned in the former Proviso; But that the Lord Warden of the Stannaries for
the time being, in pursuance of his Majesty's Commission in that behalf, and
such as he shall Commissionate and Authorize under him, according to the Rules
and Directions before mentioned in this Act, shall and may have and use the
like Powers and Array, Assess, Arm, Muster, and Exercise the said Tinners
within the said Counties, and either of them, as has been heretofore used; and
according to the ancient Privileges and Customs of the said Stannaries,
observing the Rules and Proportions appointed by this Act; Any thing in this
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Proviso for the
Militia of London.
That his Majesty's Lieutenants that are, or shall be Commissionated for the
Militia of the City of London, may and shall continue to list and levy the
Trained Bands and Auxiliaries of the said City, as to number and quality of the
persons, in such manner as was used in forming the present Forces now raised by
his Majesty's Commission. And in regard of the extraordinary duties which the
Forces of the said City that now are, and formerly were raised in Order to his
Majesty's happy Restoration, have of late, and may again be put to, for the
safety of his Majesty's Person, and for suppressing or preventing of
Insurrections, That it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty's Lieutenants of
the said City, by Warrant from his Majesty, to impose and levy yearly in the
same so much money as they shall find needful for defraying the Arrears of
those first raised for his Majesty's happy Restoration, and the Arrears and
necessary charge of those that now are, and shall be raised, with the
Ammunition and other incident expenses of their Militia, in such manner as the
present Assessment is now levied, and not exceeding in any one year the
proportion of One months Tax, which the said City now pays toward the Tax of
Seventy thousand pounds by the month; And shall be accomptable for the same,
as by this Act is Ordained; Any thing in this Act to the contrary of this
Proviso in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for the Officers of Militia of cities and towns corporate.
Provided always, That no Officer, or Soldier of the Militia, or Trained Bands
belonging to any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, being a County of it self,
or to any other Corporation, or Port-Town, who have used and accustomed to be
Mustered only within their own Precincts, shall be compellable to appear out of
the Precincts or Liberties of the same City, Borough, Town-Corporate, or
Port-Town at any Muster or Exercise only; and every of the said Cities,
Boroughs, Towns-Corporate, and Port-Towns, are hereby chargeable to find their
usual Number of Soldiers, unless the respective Lieutenants find cause to
lessen the same; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Covenants between Landlords and Tenants for providing Arms, not to be avoided
by this Act.
Provided, That this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not extend to
avoid any Covenant or Agreement which has been, or shall be made between any
Landlord and Tenant concerning the finding Horses or Arms, or the bearing, or
paying of any Tares, Rates, or other charges by any Tenant, either by general
or special Covenants, but that the said Taxes, Rates, or other Charges, shall
be born and paid by all respective Tenants, according to the said Covenants and
Agreements; Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Isle of Wight.
Provided, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to
make any alteration in the Isle of Wight, as to the Militia in that place,
either to raise Horse or Foot within the said Island, in any other manner then
has been formerly, and is now used and practiced there.

Militia of the Tower D^vision in Middlesex.
Provided also, And be it Enacted, That whereas the Militia of the
Tower-Division in the County of Middlesex, commonly known by the name of the
Tower-Hamlets, are, and always have been under the Command of his Majesty's
Constable, or Lieutenant of the Tower, for the Service and Preservation of that
his Royal Fort; That it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty's Constable, or
Lieutenant of the Tower, for the time being, to continue to levy the Trained
Bands of the said Division or Hamlets of the Tower, in such manner and form, as
to the number and quality of persons, as was observed in forming the present
Forces thereof; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Proviso touching compelling men to march out of this Kingdom.
Provided, That neither this Act, nor any matter or thing therein contained,
shall be deemed, construed, or taken to extend to the giving or declaring of
any power for the transporting of any the Subjects of this Realm, or any way
compelling them to march out of this Kingdom, otherwise then by the Laws of
England ought to be done.

Peers of the Realm, how to be charged.
Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Peer of
this Realm shall be charged with Horse, Horsemen and Arms, or Foot-souldiers
and Arms, otherwise, or in any other manner then is herein after expressed
(that is to say) that his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall, and may from
time to time issue out Commissions under the great Seal of England to so many
Peers (not fewer then twelve) as his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall
think fit, who, or any five or more of them, shall have power from time to time
to Assess all and every, or any the Peers of this Realm, according to the
Limitations and Proportions in this Act appointed, for the finding of horse,
Horsemen and Arms, or Foot-Souldiers and Arms, and for other the purposes in
this Act mentioned (except the Monthly Taxes which are to be levied, as is
before prescribed in this Act) and shall have power to put in execution all and
every the Powers and Authorities of this Act, as well for laying Assessments,
as imposing of penalties (Imprisonment of the person of any Peer of this Realm
only excepted) which Assessment, or Charge so made, together with such
penalties as shall be so imposed (imprisonment as aforesaid only excepted)
shall be from time to time respectively certified to the respective Lieutenants
of each County, to the intent that the said Charge may be born, and the
penalties (not before excepted) levied according to the intent of this Act: And
that in case there shall be any default in performance of any thing to be done
or paid by any Peer by virtue of this Act, that then it shall be lawful for the
respective Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, or any three of them, to cause
Distresses to be taken for the same in any of the lands of such Defaulter
within their said Counties or Limits respectively; And in case satisfaction
shall not be given within the space of one week after such Distress taken, then
such Distress to be sold for the performance of the said Service, and the
charge incident thereunto, and the Overplus (if any be) to be restored to the
Owner; And if a Tenant of any Peer of this Realm shall be distrained for such
default as aforesaid, the Tenant so distrained, is hereby enabled to deduct the
sum levied out of his next Rent.

CAP. XIV.
There shall be Uniformity of Public Prayers, and administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And of Ordaining and Consecrating
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Church of England.

Whereas in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth, there was one Uniform
Order of Common Service, and Prayer, and of the Administrations of Sacraments,
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England (agreeable to the Word of God,
and usage of the Primitive Church) compiled by the Reverend Bishops and Clergy,
set forth in one Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration
of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, and
enjoined to be used by Act of Parliament, holden in the said first year of the
said late Queen, 2 El. cap. 2.
Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the
Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, very comfortable to all good
people desirous to live in Christian conversation, and most profitable to the
Estate of this Realm, upon the which the Mercy, Favor, and Blessing of
Almighty God is in no wise so readily and plentifully poured, as by Common
Prayers, due using of the Sacraments, and often Preaching of the Gospel, with
Devotion of the Hearers: And yet this notwithstanding, a great number of people
in diverse parts of this Realm, following their own sensuality, and living
without knowledge, and due fear of God, do Wilfully and Schismatically abstain,
and refuse to come to their Parish-Churches, and other public places where
Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and preaching of the Word of
God is used upon the Sundays, and other days ordained and appointed to be kept
and observed as Holy Days. And whereas by the great and scandalous neglect of
Ministers in using the said Order, or Liturgy so set forth, and enjoined, as
aforesaid, great mischiefs and inconveniences, during the times of the late
unhappy Troubles, have arisen and grown; and many people have been led into
Factions and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the Reformed Religion
of the Church of England, and to the hazard of many souls. For prevention
whereof in time to come, for settling the Peace of the Church, and for allaying
the present distempers which the indisposition of the time has contracted; The
Kings Declaration and Commission for reviewing the Book of Common Prayer, and
Alterations to be propounded therein.
The Kings Majesty (according to his Declaration of the Five and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred and sixty) granted his Commission under the
Great Seal of England, to several Bishops, and other Divines, to review the
Book of Common Prayer, and to prepare such Alterations and Additions, as they
thought fit to offer; And afterward the Convocations of both the Provinces of
Canterbury and York, being by His Majesty called, and assembled, (and now
sitting) His Majesty has been pleased to Authorize and require the Presidents
of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops and Clergy of the same, to
re-view the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of the Form and manner of
the Making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons; And that after
mature consideration, they should make such Additions and Alterations in the
said Books respectively, as to them should seem meet and convenient; And should
exhibit and present the same to his Majesty in writing, for his further
allowance, or confirmation; since which time, upon full and mature
deliberation, they the said Presidents, Bishops, and Clergy of both Provinces,
have accordingly re-viewed the said Books, and have made some Alterations which
they think fit to be inserted to the same; and some Additional Prayers to the
said Book of Common Prayer, to be used upon proper and emergent occasions; And
have exhibited and presented the same unto his Majesty in writing in one Book,
Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of
England, together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to
be sung or said in Churches; and the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: All which His Majesty having
duly considered, has fully approved and allowed the same; and recommended to
this present Parliament, that the said Books of Common Prayer, and of the Form
of Ordination and Consecration of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with the
Alterations and Additions which have been so made and presented to His Majesty
by the said Convocations, be the Book which shall be appointed to be used by
all that Officiate in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and
in all Chapels of Colleges and Halls in both the Universities, and the
Colleges of Eaton, and Winchester, and in all Parish-Churches and Chapels,
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and by all that Make, or Consecrate Bishops, Priests or Deacons, in any
of the said places, under such Sanctions and Penalties as the Houses of
Parliament shall think fit.

Now in regard that nothing conduces more to the settling of the Peace of this
Nation (which is desired of all good men) nor to the honor of our Religion,
and the propagation thereof, The Peace, and Honor of Religion much advanced by
Uniform agreement in the Public Worship of God.
then an Universal argreement in the public Worship of Almighty God; and to
the intent that every person within this Realm, may certainly know the rule to
which he is to conform in Public Worship, and Administrations of Sacraments,
and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and the manner how,
and by whom Bishops, Priests and Deacons are, and ought to be Made, Ordained
and Consecrated, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the
Advice and with the Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish Church
or Chapel, or other place of Public Worship within this Realm of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, The Book of Common Prayer
shall be used.
shall be bound to say and use the Morning Prayer, Evening Prayer, Celebration
and Administration of both the Sacraments, and all other the Public, and
Common Prayer, in such order and form as is mentioned in the said Book, annexed
and joined to this present Act, and Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England; together with the Psalter or
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches; and the
form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons: And that the Morning and Evening Prayers therein contained, shall upon
every Lords Day, and upon all other days and occasions, and at the times
therein appointed, be openly and solemnly Read by all and every Minister or
Curate, in every Church, Chapel, or other place of public Worship within
this Realm of England, All Parsons, Vicars and Ministers to read, and declare
their assent to use the same.
and places aforesaid.

And to the end that Uniformity in the public Worship of God (which is so
much desired) may be speedily effected, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That every Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, who now
has, and enjoys any Ecclesiastical Benefit, or Promotion, within this Realm
of England, or places aforesaid, shall in the Church, Chapel, or place of
public Worship belonging to his said Benefice or Promotion, upon some Lords
Day before the Feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, openly, publicly, and
solemnly Read the Morning and Evening Prayer appointed to be Read by, and
according to the said Book of Common Prayer at the times thereby appointed, and
after such reading thereof, shall openly and publicly before the Congregation
there assembled, declare his unfeigned assent, and consent, to the use of all
things in the said Book contained and prescribed, In these words, and no other;
I A. B. Do here declare my unfeigned assent, and consent to all, and every
thing contained, and prescribed in, and by the Book entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung,
or said in Churches; and the Form, or manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.



The Penalty for refusing.
And that all and every such person, who, shall (without some lawful impediment
to be allowed and approved of by the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse
to do the same within the time aforesaid, (or in case of such Impediment)
within one Month after such Impediment removed, shall (ipso facto) be deprived
of all his Spiritual Promotions; And that from thenceforth it shall be lawful
to, and for all Patrons, and Donors of all and singular the said Spiritual
Promotions, or of any of them, according to their respective Rights, and Titles
to present, or collate to the same, as though the person, or persons, so
offending or neglecting were dead.

Every person hereafter to be promoted to any Ecclestiastical Benefice, shall
read the Common Prayer, and declare his assent thereto.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who
shall hereafter be presented, or collated, or put into any Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Promotion within this Realm of England, and places aforesaid, shall
in the Church, Chapel, or place of public worship, belonging to his said
Benefice or Promotion, within two months next after that he shall be in the
actual possession of the said Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion, upon some
Lords Day openly, publicly, and solemnly, Read the Morning and Evening
Prayers, appointed to be Read by, and according to the said Book of Common
Prayer, at the times thereby appointed, and after such reading thereof, shall
openly, and publicly, before the Congregation there assembled, declare his
unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things therein contained and
prescribed, according to the form before appointed. The penalty for not so
doing the same.
And that all and every such person, who shall (without some lawful Impediment
to be allowed, and approved by the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse to
do the same within the time aforesaid; (or in case of such Impediment, within
one month after such Impediment removed) shall (ipso facto) be deprived of all
his said Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions; And that from thenceforth, it
shall and may be lawful to, and for all Patrons, and Donors of all and singular
the said Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions, or any of them (according to
their respective Rights and Titles) to present or collate to the same, as
though the person or persons so offending, or neglecting, were dead.

Incumbents of Livings keeping Curates, shall read the same once every month.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all places where
the proper Incumbent of any Parsonage, or Vicarage, or Benefice with Cure, does
reside on his Living, and keep a Curate, the Incumbent himself in person (not
having some lawful Impediment, to be allowed by the Ordinary of the place)
shall once (at the least) in every month openly and publicly read the Common
Prayers and Service, in, and by the said Book prescribed, and (if there be
occasion) Administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, in
the Parish Church, or Chapel, of, or belonging to the same Parsonage,
Vicarage, or Benefice, in such order, manner and form, The penalty and manner
of conviction for not doing it.
as in, and by the said Book is appointed, upon pain to forfeit the sum of Five
pounds to the use of the poor of the Parish for every offense, upon conviction
by confession, or proof of two credible Witnesses upon Oath, before two
Justices of the Peace of the County, City, or Town Corporate where the offense
shall be committed, (which Oath the said Justices are hereby empowered to
Administer) and in default of payment within ten days, to be levied by
distress, and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, by the Warrant of
the said Justices by the Churchwardens, or Overseers of the poor of the said
Parish, rendering the surplusage to the party.

Deans, Canons, Prebendaries, etc. shall subscribe the Declaration. 15 Car. 2.
cap. 6.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Dean, Canon,
and Prebendary of every Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, and all Masters, and
other Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any College, Hall, House
of Learning, or Hospital, and every public Professor, and Reader in either of
the Universities, and in every College elsewhere, and every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, Lecturer, and every other person in holy Orders, and every
Schoolmaster keeping any public, or private School, and every person
Instructing, or Teaching any Youth in any House or private Family as a Tutor,
or Schoolmaster, who upon the First day of May, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at any time thereafter
shall be Incumbent, or have possession of any Deanery, Canonry, Prebend,
Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors place, or Readers place,
Parsonage, Vicarage, or any other Ecclesiastical Dignity or Promotion, or of
any Curates place, Lecture, or School; or shall instruct or teach any Youth as
Tutor, or Schoolmaster, shall before the Feast Day of St. Bartholomew, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at or
before his, or their respective admission to be Incumbent, or have possession
aforesaid, subscribe the Declaration or Acknowledgment following, Scilicet, A.
B. Do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up
Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position, of taking
Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him; And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established; And I do declare, That I do hold,
there lies no Obligation upon me, or on any other person, from the Oath,
commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change, or
alteration of Government, either in Church, or State; And that the same was in
it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against
the known Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom.



Which said Declaration and Acknowledgment shall be Subscribed by every of the
said Masters, and other Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any
College, Hall, or House of Learning, and by every public Professor and Reader
in either of the Universities, before the Vice Chancellor of the respective
Universities for the time being, or his Deputy; And the said Declaration or
Acknowledgment, shall be Subscribed before the respective Archbishop, Bishop,
or Ordinary of the Diocese, by every other person hereby enjoined the same, The
penalty for not subscribing.
upon pain that all and every of the persons aforesaid failing in such
Subscription, shall lose and forfeit such respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebend,
Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors place, Readers place, Parsonage,
Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion, Curates place, Lecture and
School, and shall be utterly disabled, and (ipso facto) deprived of the same;
And that every such respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship,
Fellowship, Professors place, Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage,
Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Promotion, Curates place, Lecture and School shall
be void, as if such person so failing were naturally dead.

And if any Schoolmaster, or other person Instructing, Schoolmasters in
private houses.
or Teaching Youth in any private House, or Family, as a Tutor, or
Schoolmaster, shall Instruct, or Teach any Youth as a Tutor, or Schoolmaster,
before License obtained from his respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of
the Diocese, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, (for which he
shall pay twelve-pence only) and before such Subscription, and Acknowledgment
made as aforesaid; Then every such Schoolmaster, and other, Instructing and
Teaching as aforesaid, shall for the first offense suffer three months
Imprisonment without bail, or mainprize, and for every second, and other such
offense, shall suffer three months Imprisonment without bail or mainprize, and
also forfeit to his Majesty the sum of Five pounds; And after such Subscription
made, every such Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Lecturer, shall procure a
Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or
Ordinary of the Diocese, (who are hereby enjoined and required upon demand to
make and deliver the same) and shall publicly and openly Read the same,
together with the Declaration, or Acknowledgment aforesaid, upon some Lords Day
within three months then next following, in his Parish Church where he is to
officiate, in the presence of the Congregation there assembled, in the time of
Divine Service; upon pain that every person failing therein, shall lose such
Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curates place, or Lecturers place
respectively, and shall be utterly disabled, and (ipso facto) deprived of the
same; And that the said Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curates place, or
Lecturers place shall be void as if he was naturally dead.

Provided always, That from and after the Twenty fifth day of March, What to
be omitted in the Declaration after the 25. March, 1682.
which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred eighty
two, there shall be omitted in the said Declaration, or Acknowledgment so to be
Subscribed and Read, these words following, Scilicet, ANd I do declare, That I
do hold there lies no Obligation on me, or on any other person from the Oath,
commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change, or
alteration of Government either in Church or State, and that the same was in it
self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the
know Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.



So as none of the persons aforesaid, shall from thenceforth be at all obliged
to Subscribe or Read that part of the said Declaration or Acknowledgment.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That from and after the Feast of St.
Bartholomew, Persons not Ordained Priests or Deacons according to Episcopal
Ordination, shall not hold any Ecclesiastical Promotion.
which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, no person, who now is Incumbent, and in possession of any Parsonage,
Vicarage, or Benefice, and who is not already in Holy Orders by Episcopal
Ordination, or shall not before the said Feast Day of St. Bartholomew, be
Ordained Priest, or Deacon, according to the form of Episcopal Ordination,
shall have, hold, or enjoy the said Parsonage, Vicarage, Benefice with Cure, or
other Ecclesiastical Promotion within this Kingdom of England, or the Dominion
of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; But shall be utterly disabled, and
(ipso facto) deprived of the same; And all his Ecclesiastical Promotions shall
be void, as if he was naturally dead.

Nor shall consecrate or administer the Holy Sacrament, if not Ordained
according to the Book of Common Prayer.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
whatsoever, shall thenceforth be capable to be admitted to any Parsonage,
Vicarage, Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical Promotion, or Dignity whatsoever,
nor shall presume to Consecrate and Administer the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, before such time as he shall be Ordained Priest, according to the form
and manner in and by the said Book prescribed, unless he have formerly been
made Priest by Episcopal Ordination, upon pain to forfeit for every offense,
the sum of One hundred pounds; The Penalty.
One moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other moiety thereof to be
equally divided between the poor of the Parish where the offense shall be
committed, and such person, or persons as shall sue for the same by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record,
wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed; And to be
disabled from taking, or being admitted into the Order of Priest, by the space
of one whole year then next following.

Provided, That the penalties in this Act shall not extend to the Forreiners or
Aliens of the Foreign Reformed Churches allowed, or to be allowed by the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors in England.

Provided always, That no title to confer, or present by lapse, shall accrue
by any avoidance or deprivation (ipso facto) by virtue of this Statute, but
after six months after notice of such voidance, or deprivation given by the
Ordinary to the Patron, or such sentence of deprivation openly and publicly
Read in the Parish Church of the Benefice, Parsonage or Vicarage, becoming
void, or whereof the Incumbent shall be deprived by virtue of this Act.

No other form of Common Prayer to be openly used in any Church or public
place.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Form, or Order of
Common Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies, shall be
openly used in any Church, Chapel, or other public place of, or in any
College, or Hall in either of the Universities, the Colleges of Westminster,
Winchester, or Eaton, or any of them, other then what is prescribed, and
appointed to be used in and by the said Book; And that the present Governor,
or Head of every College, and Hall in the said Universities, and of the said
Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton, within one month after the
Feast of St. Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred sixty and two; And every Governor or Head of any the said
Colleges, or Halls hereafter to be elected, or appointed within one month next
after his Election, or Collation, and Admission into the same Government, or
Headship, shall openly and publicly in the Church, Chapel, or other public
place of the same College, of Hall, and in the presence of the Fellows and
Scholars of the same, Subscription to the 39 Articles mentioned in the Stat. 13
El. cap. 12.
or the greater part of them, then Resident, Subscribe unto the Nine and thirty
Articles of Religion, mentioned in the Statute made in the Thirteenth year of
the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, And unto the said Book, and declare his
unfeigned assent, and consent unto, and approbation of the said Articles, and
of the same Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites, and Ceremonies,
Forms, and Orders in the said Book prescribed, and contained according to the
form aforesaid; And that all such Governors, or Heads, of the said Colleges
and Halls, or any of them as are, or shall be in Holy Orders, shall once (at
least) in every Quarter of the year (not having a lawful Impediment) openly and
publicly Read the morning Prayer and Service in, and by the said Book
appointed to be Read in the Church, Chapel, or other public place of the same
College, or Hall, upon pain to lose, and be suspended of, and from all the
Benefits and Profits belonging to the same Government, or Headship, by the
space of Six months by the Visitor, or Visitors of the same College, or Hall;
And if any Governor or Head of any College, or Hall, Suspended for not
Subscribing unto the said Articles, and Book, or for not Reading of the Morning
Prayer, and Service as aforesaid, shall not at, or before the end of Six months
next after such suspension, Subscribe unto the said Articles and Book, and
declare his consent thereunto as aforesaid, or Read the Morning Prayer, and
Service as aforesaid, then such Government, or Headship, shall be (ipso facto)
void.

Who may use the Service in Latin.
Provided always, That it shall, and may be lawful to use the Morning and
Evening Prayer, and all other Prayers and Service prescribed in and by the said
Book, in the Chapels, or other public places of the respective Colleges, and
Halls in both the Universities, in the Colleges of Westminster, Winchester,
and Eaton, and in the Convocations of the Clergies of either Province in
Latin, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Lecturers.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person shall be,
or be received as a Lecturer, or permitted, suffered, or allowed to preach as a
Lecturer, or to Preach, or Read any Sermon or Lecture in any Church, Chapel,
or other place of Public Worship, within this Realm of England, or the
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, unless he be first approved,
and thereunto Licensed by the Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop of the
Diocese, or (in case the Sea be void) by the Guardian of the Spiritualties,
under his Seal, and shall in the presence of the same Archbishop, or Bishop, or
Guardian, Read the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion mentioned in the
Statute of the Thirteenth year of the late Queen Elizabeth, with declaration of
his unfeigned assent to the same; And that every person, 13 El. cap. 12.
and persons who now is, or hereafter shall be Licensed, Assigned, Appointed,
or Received as a Lecturer, to Preach upon any day of the week in any Church,
Chapel, or place of Public Worship within this Realm of England, or places
aforesaid) the first time he Preaches (before his Sermon) shall openly,
publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers and Service in, and by the said
Book appointed to be read for that time of the day, and then, and there
publicly and openly declare his assent unto, and approbation of the said Book,
and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders
therein contained, and prescribed, according to the form before appointed in
this Act; And also shall upon the first Lecture-day of every month afterward,
so long as he continues Lecturer, or Preacher there, at the place appointed for
his said Lecture or Sermon, before his said Lecture or Sermon, openly,
publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers and Service in, and by the said
Book appointed to be read for that time of the day, at which the said Lecture
or Sermon is to be preached, and after such Reading thereof, shall openly and
publicly, before the Congregation there assembled declare his unfeigned
assent, and consent unto, and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of
all the Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained and
prescribed, according to the form aforesaid; And that all and every such person
and persons who shall neglect, or refuse to do the same, shall from thenceforth
be disabled to preach the said, or any other Lecture or Sermon in the said, or
any other Church, Chapel, or place of public Worship, until such time as he,
and they shall openly, publicly, and solemnly Read the Common Prayers, and
Service appointed by the said Book, and Conform in all points to the things
therein appointed and prescribed, according to the purport, true intent and
meaning of this Act.

Provided always, That if the said Sermon, Lectures in Cathedral or Collegiate
Churches.
or Lecture be to be Preached or Read in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or
Chapel, it shall be sufficient for the said Lecturer openly at the time
aforesaid, to declare his assent and consent to all things contained in the
said Book, according to the form aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The Penalty upon persons
disabled that Preach. 15 Car. 2. cap. 6. in fine.
That if any person who is by this Act disabled to preach any Lecture or
Sermon, shall during the time that he shall continue and remain so disabled,
preach any Sermon, or Lecture; That then for every such offense the person, and
persons so offending, shall suffer Three months Imprisonment in the Common Goal
without bail or mainprise, And that any two Justices of the Peace of any County
of this Kingdom and places aforesaid, and the Mayor or other chief Magistrate
of any City, or Town Corporate, within the same, upon Certificate from the
Ordinary of the place made to him, or them of the offense committed, shall and
are hereby required to commit the person or persons so offending to the Goal of
the same County, City, or Town Corporate accordingly.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Common
Prayer to be read before every Lecture, and the Lecturer to be present.
That at all and every time and times when any Sermon, or Lecture is to be
Preached, the Common Prayers, and Service, in and by the said Book appointed to
be Read for that time of the day, shall be openly, publicly, and solemnly Read
by some Priest or Deacon, in the Church, Chapel, or place of Public Worship,
where the said Sermon, or Lecture is to be Preached, before such Sermon or
Lecture be preached; And that the Lecturer then to Preach shall be present at
the Reading thereof.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not extend to the University
Churches, Proviso for Sermons and Lectures in the Universities.
in the Universities of this Realm, or either of them, when or at such times as
any Sermon or Lecture is Preached or Read in the said Churches, or any of them,
for, or as the public University Sermon, or Lecture; but that the same Sermons
and Lectures may be preached or read in such sort and manner as the same have
been heretofore preached or read, this Act, or any thing herein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several good
Laws, The Laws and Statutes formerly made for Uniformity of Common Prayer
confirmed, and to be executed for punishing offenders against this Law.
and Statutes of this Realm, which have been formerly made, and are now in
force for the Uniformity of Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, within
this Realm of England, and places aforesaid, shall stand in full force and
strength to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the establishing and
confirming of the said Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter, or
Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches, and the
form or manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons herein before mentioned to be joined and annexed to this Act; and shall
be applied, practiced, and put in ure for the punishing of all offenses
contrary to the said Laws, with relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
Letanies and Collects relating to the King, Queen, etc.
That in all those Prayers, Letanies, and Collects, which do any way relate to
the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be altered, and changed from time
to time, and fitted to the present occasion, according to the direction of
lawful Authority.

True printed Copies of the Book of Common Prayer to be prov^ded in all
Parishes and Churches.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a true
Printed Copy of the said Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, together with the Psalter or
Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches, and the
form and manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, shall at the costs and charges of the Parishioners of every
Parish Church and Chappelry, Cathedral Church, College, and Hall, be attained
and gotten before the Feast Day of St. Bartholomew, in the year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon pain of forfeiture of three pounds
by the month, for so long time as they shall then after be unprovided thereof,
by every Parish, or Chappelry, Cathedral Church, College, and Hall, making
default therein.

Proviso for the Bishops of Hereford, St. Davies, Asaph, Bangor, Landaff.
Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Bishops of Hereford, St. Davies, Asaph, Bango^, and Landaff, and their
Successors, shall take such order among themselves, for the souls health of the
Flocks committed to their Charge within Wales, That the Book hereunto annexed
be truly and exactly Translated into the British, or Welsh Tongue, and that
the same so Translated and being by them, or any three of them at the least
viewed, perused, and allowed, be Imprinted to such number at least, so that one
of the said Books so Translated and Imprinted, may be had for every Cathedral,
Collegiate, and Parish Church, and Chapel of Ease, in the said respective
Diocesses and places in Wales, where the Welsh is commonly spoken or used,
before the First day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty five; And that from
and after the Imprinting and publishing of the said Book so Translated, the
whole Divine Service shall be used and said by the Ministers and Curates
throughout all Wales within the said Diocesses where the Welsh Tongue is
commonly used, in the British, or Welsh Tongue, in such manner and form as is
prescribed according to the Book hereunto annexed to be used in the English
Tongue, differing nothing in any order or form from the said English Book, for
which Book, so Translated and Imprinted, the Churchwardens of every the said
Parishes shall pay out of the Parish-money in their hands for the use of the
respective Churches, and be allowed the same on their Account; And that the
said Bishops and their Successors, or any three of them at the least, shall set
and appoint the price, for which the said Book shall be sold; And one other
Book of Common Prayer in the English Tongue, shall be bought and had in every
Church throughout Wales, in which the Book of Common Prayer in Welsh is to be
had, by force of this Act, before the First day of May, One thousand six
hundred sixty and four, and the same Book to remain in such convenient places,
within the said Churches, that such as understand them may resort at all
convenient times, to read and peruse the same, and also such as do not
understand the said Language, may be conferring both Tongues together the
sooner attain to the knowledge of the English Tongue, Any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding, and until Printed Copies of the said Book so to
be Translated, may be had and provided, The Form of Common Prayer established
by Parliament, before the making of this Act, shall be used as formerly in such
parts of Wales, where the English Tongue is not commonly understood.

And to the end that the true and perfect Copies of this Act, and the said Book
hereunto annexed may be safely kept, and perpetually preserved, and for the
avoiding of all disputes for the time to come; True and perfect Copies of this
Act, and the Book of Common Prayer, by whom, and how to be had and kept.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective Deans
and Chapters of Every Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, within England and
Wales, shall at their proper costs and charges, before the Twenty fifth day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty two, obtain under the Great Seal of
England a true and perfect printed Copy of this Act, and of the said Book
annexed hereunto, to be by the said Deans and Chapters, and their Successors
kept and preserved in safety for ever, and to be also produced, and showed
forth in any Court of Record, as often as they shall be thereunto lawfully
required; And also there shall be delivered true and perfect Copies of this
Act, and of the same Book into the respective Courts at Westminster, and into
the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved for ever among the Records of the
said Courts, and the Records of the Tower, to be also produced, and showed
forth in any Court as need shall require; which said Books so to be exemplified
under the Great Seal of England, shall be examined by such persons as the Kings
Majesty shall appoint under the Great Seal of England for that purpose, and
shall be compared with the Original Book hereunto annexed, and shall have power
to correct, and amend in writing, any Error committed by the Printer in the
Printing of the same Book, or of any thing therein contained, and shall
certify in writing under their Hands and Seals, or the hands and seals of any
three of them at the end of the same Book, that they have examined and compared
the same Book, and find it to be a true and perfect Copy; which said Books, and
every one of them so exemplified under the Great Seal of England, as aforesaid,
shall be deemed, taken, adjudged, and expounded to be good, and available in
the Law to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and shall be accounted as good
Records as this Book it self hereunto annexed; Any Law, or Custom to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for the Kings Professor of Law in Oxford.
Provided also, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial or hurtful unto the Kings Professor of the Law within the
University of Oxford, for, or concerning the Prebend of Shipton, within the
Cathedral Church of Sarum, united and annexed unto the place of the same Kings
Professor for the time being, by the late King James of blessed memory.

Provided always, Proviso concerning the 3^th Article agreed in the
Convocation, Anno 1562.
That whereas the Six and thirtieth Article of the Nine and thirty Articles
agreed upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy holden at London, in the year of our Lord, One thousand five hundred
sixty two, for the avoiding of diversities of Opinions, and for establishing of
consent, touching true Religion, is in these words following, viz.

That the Book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and Ordaining of
Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth, and
confirmed at the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such Consecration and Ordaining, neither has it any thing that of
it self is superstitious, and ungodly; And therefore whosoever are Consecrated
or Ordered according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the
aforenamed King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or
Ordered according to the same Rites; We decree all such to be rightly, orderly,
and lawfully Consecrated and Ordered;

It be Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Subscriptions hereafter to be had or made unto the said Articles, by any
Deacon, Priest, or Ecclesiastical person, or other person whatsoever, who by
this Act, or any other Law now in force is required to subscribe unto the said
Articles, shall be construed, and be taken to extend, and shall be applied (for
and touching the said Six and thirtieth Article) unto the Book containing the
form and manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons in this Act mentioned, in such sort and manner as the same did
heretofore extend unto the Book set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth,
mentioned in the said Six and thirtieth Article, Any thing in the said Article,
or in any Statute, Act, or Canon heretofore had or made, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That the Book of Common Prayer, The Common Prayer used by
Authority of Parliament 1. Eliz. to be used until Bartholomew Day, 1662. EXP.
and Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of this
Church of England, together with the form and manner of Ordaining, and
Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons heretofore in use, and respectively
established by Act of Parliament in the First and Eighth years of Queen
Elizabeth, shall be still used and observed in the Church of England, until the
Feast of St. Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two. EXP. as to this last Clause.

CAP. V.
For Regulating the Making of Stuffs in Norfolk and Norwich.

WHereas diverse abuses and deceipts have of late years been had and used in the
making of Worsteds, and other Stuffs commonly called, Norwich Stuffs, and in
the Reeling of Yarnes, whereof the said Stuffs are either wholly, or in part
made, which tends to the debasing of the said Manufacture, unto the prejudice
of the public; which said Trade of Weaving of Stuffs has of late times been
very much increased, and great variety of new sorts of Stuffs have been
invented; 7 E. 4. cap. 1.
so that the Power given by the Statute of the Seventh of Edward the Fourth,
Chapter the First, is not sufficient for the Regulating of the same; And that
the number of the Wardens by the same Act appointed, being but Eight, are too
few for the Governing and Ordering the same Trade, by which means the same
Manufacture will soon be lost, (if not prevented) and carried into foreign
Nations, to the great diminution of His Majesty's Customs, and turning out of
the work many thousands of poor people.

For prevention of which abuses, deceipts and evils, The number of Wardens and
Assistants of Master Weavers in Norwich, how and when to be chosen.
It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice and consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in Parliament, and
by the Authority of the same, That there shall be Twelve Wardens, and Thirty
Assistants, all which are to be Master-Weavers within the County of the City of
Norwich, and County of Norfolk; sir of which said Wardens, and fifteen of the
said Assistants shall be chosen the first Monday after Pentecost, in the year
of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, and from thenceforth
yearly, and every year on the next Monday after Pentecost, at some public
place by the Master-Weavers, or the greater part of them present of the said
City and County of Norwich; And the other six Wardens, and fifteen Assistants
shall be chosen upon the same day yearly within the City of Norwich, or County
of Norfolk, in some public place by the Master-Weavers, or the greater part of
them present of the County of Norfolk. And the said Wardens respectively shall
within fourteen days after they shall be so chosen or elected, and notice
thereof given, take the Oath ensuing, to be administered by the Mayor of the
said City for the time being, or his Deputy, and the Steward of the Duchy of
Lancaster within the the said County for the time being, if it shall happen the
said Steward shall be there present, or else before the said Mayor, or his
Deputy only; which Oath they and every of them are hereby Authorized and
required from time to time to Administer accordingly, Viz. I A. B. Do swear,
The Oath to be taken by them.
That I will well, faithfully, and honestly perform and discharge the Office of
a Warden of the said Trade of Worsted Weavers, according to the best of my
skill, power and knowledge. And that the said Assistants, and every of them,
within the time aforesaid, shall take the like Oath before such person or
persons before whom the Wardens shall be Sworn for the execution of that Office
of an Assistant; and that if it shall happen that any of the said Wardens, who
shall be so chosen, shall refuse to take the said Oath, or after he be sworn,
shall die before the end of the year, That then from time to time, so often as
need shall be, it shall and may be lawful to, and for the Master-Weavers of
the said City, County of the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk,
respectively, as the cause shall require, to choose other Warden, or Wardens in
the place of him, or them so dying, or refusing, who shall be sworn in such
manner as aforesaid.

The powers in this act for Regulation of Trade to be put in execution.
And for the Regulation, and good Government of the said Trade, and Manufacture,
the said Wardens and Assistants, or any thirteen of them, whereof seven to be
Wardens, shall and may from time to time meet and consult together for the
good, and benefit of the said Trade and Manufacture; and for due execution of
the Powers, and Authorities given by this Act, so often as to them shall seem
expedient, or when it shall be desired by eight, or more of the said
Assistants, at the place called Weavers Hall in the said City, Power to make
Bylaws and orders.
or at such other place as they shall think fit: And that any thirteen or more
of the said Wardens, and Assistants, whereof seven at the least to be Wardens,
shall have, and hereby have power and Authority, from time to time, so often as
need shall require, to make and ordain Bylaws, Rules, and Ordinances, for, and
concerning the Regulation of the laid Worsted-Stuffs, and other Stuffs now
made, and which hereafter shall be made within the said City and County of the
City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, and in either of them, both in length,
breadth, and goodness, and of such other particulars as shall by the said
Wardens and Assistants so met, or the greater number of them, from time to time
be adjudged requisite for the better Regulating the said Trade and Manufacture,
and the Artificers of the same in the due execution of this Act (and to make
Seals from time to time for the sealing of the same Stuffs) which Bylaws,
Rules, and Ordinances, being ratified and confirmed by the Mayor, and two
Justices of the Peace of the said City and County of Norwich for the time
being, and three other Justices of Peace of the said County of Norfolk (whereof
one to be of the Quorum) shall be published four times in the year at the
least, To be published at Four assemblies to be held yearly.
at four Public Assemblies for the said Trade and Manufacture, and shall be
obeyed and kept by the several persons within and under the said Regulation.

The penalty upon offenders against such Bylaws and orders.
And the said Wardens and Assistants shall have, and hereby have power to impose
a fine or penalty upon any person or persons under such Regulation, as shall
not conform to such Rules, Orders, and Ordinances so made, and to be made and
confirmed as aforesaid.

Provided that the said Fine or Penalty upon any person for not conforming as
aforesaid, shall not exceed the sum of Ten shillings for any one offense.

Notice of meeting by the City of Norwich, to be g^ven to the Wardens of the
County of Norfolk.
And it is further Enacted, That the Wardens and Assistants of the said City,
and County of the City of Norwich, shall from time to time give Personal notice
unto the Wardens of the said County of Norfolk, or two of them at the least, of
the time when they intend to consider of the making of Bylaws, Rules, and
Ordinances as aforesaid, and shall set it up in writing upon the Door of their
Sealing-Hall, fourteen days at the least before they shall proceed to the
making the same; to the end, that such of the said Country Weavers as are
therein concerned may be there present,

And for the better Regulation and carrying on the work aforesaid, and for
avoiding of all Frauds and Deceipts therein; Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all Yarns called Worsted Yarns, and such other Yarns,
as are commonly used by the Worsted Weavers, shall be made without Fraud, Yarns
called Worsted Yarns how to be made.
and shall be Reeled on a Reel of a full Yard about, and every Reel-staff shall
contain fourteen Leas, and every Lea forty threads, twelve of which Reel-staffs
shall make a dozen, and twelve of those dozens shall make a gross: And in case
any Person or Persons shall sell, or expose to sale, any of the said Yarns made
and Reeled, in any other manner than as is aforesaid, that then every such
Person or Persons, shall forfeit the Moiety of the value of the said Yarns to
the use of the said Trade, and Manufactures, after charges of Suit, and of
Prosecution, first deducted out of the same, which forfeiture shall be
recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Indictment, or Information in any of
the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoyn, or
Protection shall be allowed for the Defendant.

View and search to be made of manufactures in Faires and markets.
And that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the Wardens and Assistants of
the said Trade and Manufactures, or any two of them, from time to time to View
and Search in all Fairs and Markets, and other public places of sale of Yarns,
within the said City of Norwich and County of the same, and County of Norfolk,
and either of them, all Yarns which be there exposed to sale; and such of the
said Yarns, as they shall find defective, contrary to the Rules herein before
set, that then it shall and may be lawful, to, and for the same Wardens, and
Assistants, or any two of them, to seize the same Yarns, and bring the same
within twenty days next after the Seizure thereof to Trial by a Jury, and to be
proceeded in, and fined in such manner and form as in this present Act is
limited and appointed for defective Stuffs; which said Jury shall have, and
hereby have power to set such fine or fines upon the said Yarns, as they shall
in their discrections see cause, the same fines not to exceed the moiety of the
Yarn so found defective, and the same fines to go to the Poor of the same Trade
and Manufacture, as aforesaid.

Provided always, That no person or persons shall be doubly punished for any
one offense touching Yarns (that is to say) by this, and the former clause in
this Act.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That all sorts of Stuffs, whether woven of
Woollen only, All Woollen Stuffs and Weavers to be under the Government of the
said Wardens and Assistant.
or of Wool, and other Materials within the City and County of Norwich, and
the County of Norfolk, and the Makers and Weavers of the same Stuffs, shall be
under the power, Government, and Regulation of the said Wardens and Assistants,
in such manner as by this and other Acts of Parliament, and the Bylaws made,
and to be made by virtue thereof, are or shall be established, (except such
Stuffs as are under the Regulation of the Wardens, and Fellowship of the
mystery of Russel-Sattens, Sattens Reverses, and Fustians of Norwich-making,
within the City of Norwich;) And that all Stuffs made and to be made under the
Regulation aforesaid, before the same shall be offered, or put to sale, shall
be brought to Weavers-Hall, for the time being, Good and sufficient shall be
Sealed.
within the County of the City of Norwich, to be viewed, and searched by the
said Wardens, or any two of them; And if the same shall be found to be well and
sufficiently made, and wrought according to the Rules and Ordinances of the
said Trade, then all such Stuffs shall be by the Wardens, or any two of them,
Sealed, and allowed accordingly, without any sum of money paid, or to be paid
for the same; And if upon search and veiw thereof, any such Stuffs shall be
found, Defective Stuffs shall be s^ized and tried by a Jury.
and appear to be defective, contrary to the Rules and Ordinances of the said
Wardens and Assistants, then all such defective Stuffs shall be seized by the
said Wardens, or any two of them, and tried by a Jury of Twelve Artificers of
the said Regulation of Worsted-weavers, Six whereof to be of the City of
Norwich, and Six to be of the County of Norfolk, who shall be from time to time
Impanelled by a Precept under the Hand and Seal of the Mayor of the City of
Norwich for the time being, or his Deputy; And if any who shall be so
Impanelled shall fail in appearance, the number to be made up either of the
Master-weavers of the City of Norwich, or of the County of Norfolk, by a
Precept from the said Mayor; which Jury so Impanelled or taken, and Sworn
before the Mayor of the said City for the time being, shall try the said
Stuffs, and find whether they be made according to this Act, and the Bylaws
and Ordinances made by virtue thereof, or of any other Act of Parliament, and
shall have power to impose a moderate fine, according to the nature of the
offense, not exceeding the moiety of the value of the defective Stuffs so
seized and tried, the same fines to go to the use of the Trade and Manufacture;
And those Stuffs which shall be found defective, to be detained until the fine
or fines set upon them by the Jury be paid; which if the Owner of the same
Stuffs shall not pay to the said Wardens, or some of them, within forty days
after the Trial, then the same Stuffs to be sold by any two of the said
Wardens, and the overplus of the moneys thereof coming after the fines
deducted, to be restored to the Owner upon demand.

And it is further Enacted, That if any Warden or Wardens shall at any time
seal, The penalty for Sealing defective Stuffs.
or cause to be sealed, any Stuffs made under the said Regulation, which shall
afterward be discovered by any person to be defective, contrary to this
present Act, and the Bylaws, Rules and Ordinances thereupon made, or hereafter
to be made, or any of them, and found so to be by a Jury of the twelve
Artificers of the said Trade, from time to time to be Impanelled and Sworn
before the said Mayor or his Deputy, and the said Steward of the Duchy of
Lancaster for the time being, if he be there present; And if the said Steward
be absent, then before the said Mayor or his Deputy only, of which Jury six
shall be of the said City Weavers, and the other six of the said
Countrey-Weavers, who shall have, and hereby have power to set and impose a
fine upon the Warden or Wardens of the said Trade offending, for every piece of
defective Stuff so sealed, as the same Jury in their discretions shall think
fit, the same fine not exceeding the sum of Forty shillings, which shall be to
the use of the Kings Majesty; And that the same Jury, or any other such like
Jury, from time to time to be Impanelled by, and sworn before the persons
aforesaid, or any of them, shall likewise enquire into all, and every other the
frauds, abuses and miscarriages of the Wardens and Assistants, and every of
them, in the execution of their Offices, and correct and punish them and every
of them for their several offenses, in such manner as is herein before
mentioned to be done against any other offenders, who are under the said
Regulation.

Provided, That if the said Wardens, or any of them, shall be unjustly
molested, Persons unjustly molested to have double damages.
and that if such Stuffs, upon trial, shall be found by the Jury to be good,
and duly made, or that they, or the Assistants, or any of them, are not guilty
of any such frauds, miscarriages, or abuses, as they are complained of for, the
person or persons so causlesly molesting, shall pay to the Wardens or
Assistents, or any of them, so unjustly molested, double the damages they or
any of them, shall or may sustain by any such molestation

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, None may buy Stuffs
unsealed.
That it shall not be lawful for any person or persons to buy any piece or
pieces of Stuffs, before the same be sealed by the Wardens of the said Trade,
saving to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all such right of
Customs, Subsidies and Aulnage of Norfolk and Norwich-Stuffs or Worsteds, or
any of them, as he or they might lawfully have claimed before the making of
this Act: Saving for the Kings Aulnage.
And that if any piece or pieces of Stuffs shall be found in the possession of
any person or persons unsealed, except in the possession of the first Owner or
Maker thereof, the person or persons in whose custody the same shall be found,
shall be adjudged guilty of deceit, and shall forfeit for every such piece of
Stuff, which be so found in his or their possession, unsealed as aforesaid, the
sum of Four shillings; The penalty for buying unsealed Stuffs.
And the Maker and Seller of the same, who shall deliver the same out of his or
their possession before the same be sealed, shall likewise forfeit for every
such piece, other Four shillings, to the use of the Poor of the said Trade and
Manufacture.

And that if any person shall counterfeit any Seal of the said Trade, or shall
seal any piece of Stuff under the Regulation with any counterfeit Seal, The
penalty for counterfeiting any seal of the said Trade.
or shall remove a Seal off one piece, and set it unto another piece which has
not been sealed by the Wardens, every person so offending, and being thereof
convicted by his own confession, or by the Oath of two, or more Witneses, to be
taken before the Mayor of the said City or his Deputy, or any one Justice of
the Peace of the City of Norwich, or County of Norfolk, who respectively have
hereby power to administer an Oath for that purpose, shall forfeit for every
such offense the sum of twenty pounds of lawful English money, to the use of
the Kings Majesty.

None may use the said Trade but such as have been apprentices 7. years.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
shall use or exercise the same Trade as a Weaver, unless he has served to the
same Trade as an Apprentice, by the space of seven years, upon pain of
forfeiting Forty shillings for every month he shall use or exercise the same
Trade, not having served thereunto as aforesaid, the one half thereof to the
Kings Majesty, and the other half thereof to the person or persons who will sue
or prosecute for the same by Action of Debt, The penalty
Bill, Plaint, Indictment, or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record.

Every one shall weave his own mark in his Stuff.
And that every person under the said Regulation shall weave his proper
Stuff-Mark into every piece of Stuff which he shall weave, or cause to be
woven, at the head end of the same piece, upon pain of forfeiting three
shillings for every piece that shall be woven without such Mark, to the use of
the poor of the said Trade and Manufacture.

The Wardens and Assistants may enter houses, Work houses and ware houses to
search for Stuffs.
And the said Wardens and Assistants, or any two or more of them, shall have,
and hereby have power to enter into, and search the Houses and Workhouses of
any Artificers within the City of Norwich, and County of Norfolk, under the
Regulation of the said Wardens and Assistants, and the Shops, House, and
Warehouses of any Merchant, common buyer, dealer in, and retailer of any the
said Stuffs, and into the house and Workhouse of any Dier, Sheer-man,
Callender, or other workmans house and place of sale, and dressing of the said
Stuffs, at all times of the day, and usual times of working, and may there
search and view the Stuffs there found, whether they be ordered and made
according to this present Act, Faulty and defective Stuffs to be seized and
tried.
and the Laws, Orders, and Ordinances of the said Trade; And that if any such
Stuff as aforesaid, shall be found faulty or defective, That then they, or any
two of them, shall seize, take, and carry away the same to be ordered and
brought to Trial, and proceeded against in manner and form, as is before in
this present Act mentioned and appointed for defective Stuffs.

Proviso for poor Iourneymen.
And for the better providing that poor Iourneymen, who have served in the said
Trade, and are not able to set up for themselves may be Employed in work, It is
hereby Enacted, that whatsoever person under the Regulation of the said Trade,
who shall Employ two Apprentices in the said Trade, shall likewise Employ and
set on work two Iourneymen in the said Trade, during the time he imploys two
Apprentices; And that no Master-weaver under the Regulation of the said Trade,
shall at any time have, employ or set on work above two Apprentices, or any
week-boy to weave in a Loom in the said Trade in Worsted-weaving, upon pain
that every person shall forfeit for every month so offending as aforesaid, the
sum of five pounds to the use of the Kings Majesty.

Obedience and conformity to this Act.
And be it further Enacted, That all persons who are or may be concerned in any
thing contained in this present Act, are hereby strictly enjoined and required
to yield due obedience thereunto, according to the true intent and meaning of
this present Act; And that if any person or persons shall refuse, Penalty upon
such as shall refuse or hinder the Execution.
hinder, or will not permit the said Wardens or Assistants, or any two or more
of them to execute their Office according to the Tenor of this Act, That then
every person so offending, being thereof Convicted by the Oath of one or more
credible Witnesses before the Mayor of the said City, or his Deputy, or any one
Justice of Peace of the said City of Norwich, or County of Norfolk
respectively, who are hereby Authorized to administer such Oath, shall forfeit
the sum of Forty shillings to the use of the Kings Majesty.

And if any person lawfully Summoned to appear upon any Jury or Trial,
according to the Tenor of this Act, The penalty for not appearing upon a Jury
or trial.
shall refuse, or neglect to appear and proceed upon the same, every person so
refusing or neglecting, shall forfeit for every such neglect, or refusal, the
sum of Five shillings, to to the use of the Poor of the said Trade and
Manufacture; which said penalties and forfeitures, together with all other
Fines and Penalties, which are appointed to go to the poor of the Trade and
Manufacture, or for the use thereof mentioned in this Act, the means of
Recovery of which is not already otherwise herein provided and set forth, shall
be levied by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels, by warrant
to be granted by the said Mayor, or his Deputy for the time being, or any one
Justice of Peace of the City of Norwich, or County of Norfolk, rendering the
Overplus of such distress to the Owner thereof, if any shall be, and the same
shall be by him demanded, or otherwise to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint, Indictment, or Information in any His Majesty's Courts of Record,
wherein no wager of Law, Essoyn, or Protection shall be allowed to the
Defendant as aforesaid.

And whereas the Custom has been retained time out of mind, and found
expedient, that there should be a cessation of weaving every year in the time
of Harvest, in regard the Spinners of Yarn which the said Weavers do use, No
weaving of Stuffs in time of Harvest.
are at that time chiefly employed in Harvest-work; Be it Enacted, That no
Weaver under the Regulation of the said Trade and Manufacture, shall set any
Loom on work for the weaving of any Stuffs under the said Regulation in the
time of Harvest yearly, from the Fifteenth day of August in every year, until
the Fifteenth day of September then next following, upon pain, of forfeiting to
the Kings Majesty the sum of Forty Shillings for every Loom which shall be used
in work within the said time.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Trut accounts to be made
at the 4 assemblies of all fines and forfeitures.
That a true account shall be made at the four Assemblies (to be held quarterly
as aforesaid) by the Wardens before the Mayor of the City of Norwich for the
time being, and one of the Justices of the Peace of the said City and County of
Norwich, and two Justices of the Peace of the County of Norfolk, of all such
Fines and Forfeitures as shall be received and had, belonging to the said Trade
and Manufacture, and of the necessary Charges and Disbursements touching the
same Trade and Manufacture; and that the Overplus which shall remain after the
said necessary Charges and Disbursments are deducted, shall be divided into two
equal parts, the one Moiety thereof to be disposed of by the Wardens and
Assistants of the said City of Norwich, or the greater part of them, and the
other Moiety thereof by the Wardens and Assistants of the said County of
Norfolk, or the greater part of them, for the use of the Poor of the said Trade
and Manufacture in such manner as the said Mayor and Justices aforesaid
respectively shall order and direct, and no other, any thing in this Act to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And that all Mayors, Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other
Officers, All Mayors, bailiffs etc. to be ayding and assisting.
shall be aiding and assisting to the said Wardens and Assistants, or any of
them, as often as they shall be thereunto required; and in all Actions and
Suits that shall be brought against any person or persons, for Acting in any
thing according to the true intent and meaning of this Act, the person or
persons so sued or molested, shall or may plead the general Issue of not
guilty, In Action the defendant may plead the general issue.
and give the special matter in Evidence, and shall recover double Costs in
every such case, if the Verdict pass for such person or persons, or that the
Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be Nonsuit therein.

Provided always, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, Double costs
shall extend to compel the Weavers of the Towns of Great Yarmouth, and Lyn, in
the said County of Norfolk, to bring their Wares to Notwich to be Sealed, or be
prejudicial to the Weavers of the said Towns, Proviso for the Weavers of Great
Yarmouth and Lyn.
or either of them, to deprive them, or either of them of such Liberties or
Privileges as are granted unto them by an Act of Parliament, made in the
Fourteenth Year of King Henry the Eight, or by any other Act of Parliament, or
Grant, or Charter whatsoever. This Act to begin, and take effect from the
Fifteenth day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and two.

CAP. VI.
For Enlarging and repairing of Common Highways.

Whereas the former Laws and Statutes for the Mending and Repairing of the
Common and public Highways of this Realm have not been found so effectual as
is desired; by means whereof, and the extraordinary Burdens carried upon
Wagons, and other Carriages, diverse of the said Highways are become very
dangerous, and almost unpassable:

For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by,
Surveyors of the Highways to be chosen yearly the Monday or Tuesday in Easter
week.
and with the advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Churchwardens and Constables, or Tything-men of every Parish, Town,
Village, or Hamlet for the time being, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall upon Monday or Tuesday in the
Easter week yearly (whereof notice shall be publicly given the Sunday
foregoing, in the Church, immediately after the end of Morning Prayer,) with
the advice and consent of the major part of the Inhabitants which shall be then
present, choose Two or more sufficient and able persons, residing and
inhabiting within their Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, to be Surveyors of
their Highways for the year next ensuing, and give notice thereof in writing
to the persons chosen; and for default of such choice, so to be made, as
aforesaid, The penalty
the Churchwardens, Constables, or Tything-men, and Inhabitants of every such
Parish, Town, Village, or Hamlet, shall forfeit and lose the sum of Five pounds.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Surveyor and
Surveyors, The duty of the Surveyors
within twenty days next after notice given unto him or them, of his and their
Election as aforesaid, or of the publication of this Act, shall upon the
penalty of Five pounds, Veiw and Survey all the Common and Public Highways
and Bridges within the Parish, Town, Village, or Hamlet wherein he or they are
respective Surveyor or Surveyors, and all Watercourse, Causeys, and Pavements
therein which are to be Repaired and Amended at a Public Charge of the said
Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, and shall consider what reparations shall be
needful to be made, and what sum or sums of money will be requisite to be
raised for the Amending, Repairing and Enlarging of the same, over and above
what will be done by the other Laws made for the Amending of the said
Highways, and thereupon shall together with two or more substantial
Householders of the said Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, called by the
Surveyors to their Assistance within ten days after such Survey made, lay one
or more Assessment or Assessments, How and upon whom to lay Assessment for
mending or Enlarging the Highways.
upon every Inhabitant rated to the Poor, and upon every Occupier of Lands,
Houses, Tithes Impropriate or Appropriat, Portions of Tithes, Coal-mines, and
other Mines saleable, Underwoods, Stock, Goods, or other personal Estate, not
being Household Stuff, within the said said Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, for
the Repairing, Amending and Enlarging of the said public and common Highways,
as they the said Surveyors, and other the substantial Householders, or the Major
part of them shall think fit, meet and necessary; which said Assessment or
Assessments shall not exceed in the whole above the sum of Six pence in the
pound in any one year, according to the real value of the same, and Twenty
pounds in Money, Goods, Stock, or other personal Estate, shall be rated equally
to Twenty shillings a year in Lands; And every such Assessment so made, shall
within Six days after be presented to some Justice of the Peace near adjoining
to the Parish where it is made, to be seen, allowed, and signed by him; And
after such Allowance, every person so Assessed or Taxed, that shall not within
Twenty days after demand made by the Surveyors, or one of them, pay such sum or
sums of Money Assessed on him, or her, or them, unto the Surveyors or one of
them, shall forfeit and pay double so much as he, she, or they are Assessed to
pay; unless (upon complaint made to the said Justice of wrong done to such
person by that Assessment) the said Justice shall think fit to alter the same:
And in case where common Nusances are in Highways, or where Ditches or
Watercourse adjoining unto Highways, are not scoured and dressed, the said
Surveyors shall see the same reformed, and the offenders punished according to
Law, deducting out of the Moneys so to be raised, his reasonable Charges for
prosecution: And for the more effectual Mending the Highways, and
Parish-Bridges, and Streets, the Surveyors aforementioned shall yearly at the
most convenient and fitting time, between the First of May, and the last of
August, hire laborers, Workmen, Carts and Carriages, for Amending the
Highways, Streets, Parish-Bridges aforesaid, and Watercourse, and shall
cause them to be well and sufficiently mended.

The Surveyors may charge Carts and Workmen.
And for the better effecting thereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the said Surveyors, or any of them within their several Limits and
Jurisdictions, may yearly as he shall see cause, and need require, direct and
appoint every person and persons; who by the former Laws and Statutes of this
Realm are chargeable with Wayn or Cart, 2 and 3. Ph. and Mar. ca. 8. 5 El. ca
13. 18 El. ca. 10.
to the amending of the Highways; and every other person and persons
chargeable, to come to labor at the said ways, to send his or her Cart or Wayn
and Team so furnished, as by the Laws is directed, or to come and work for the
amending of the Highways for so many days as by the Laws are appointed, or for
so many of them as the said Surveyors shall think needful and appoint; for
which Teams, work and labor, the said Surveyors shall pay unto such workmen
and Owner of such Teams, Carts and Wayns, according to the usual rate of the
Country, for such work as they shall do over and above what by the other Laws
made for the amending the Highways they are appointed to do: And if any
question shall arise about the value or worth of such work or labor, for Man
or Teams, some Justice of the Peace near adjoining, and not living in the said
Parish, shall determine what is fit to be allowed for such work; Penaly upon
such as refuse or neglect.
And in case any person so charged to send his or her Team to work, as
aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to do so, such person so refusing or
neglecting, shall forfeit ten shillings for every day that he or she shall make
such default, and every Labourer Eighteen pence for such day that he neglects
to work as aforesaid.

Provided, That no person or persons, occupying any Lands, shall be Assessed
and Taxed both for the said Lands and the Stock, which he or they shall use or
employ upon the same.

In what cases Highways may be Enlarged out of men's lands next adjoining.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, to and for the said Surveyors of the Highways for the time being, of
every such Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, within their several Precincts from
time to time, by order from the Quarter Sessions, and upon the view, and by the
allowance or consent of two or more Justices of the Peace of the County,
Authorized thereunto by the Sessions, wherein such Parish, Town, Village or
Hamlet shall lie, under their hands and seals in writing, where any common or
public Highway is not of the breadth of eight yards from the shoars and
brinks of the Ditches on either side, or from the banks and hedges where there
are no Ditches, to assign and lay out so much of any man's several Lands next
adjoining to the said Common and public Highway, where they shall think it
needful, and it may conveniently be done, as shall enlarge the said way to be
the full breadth of eight yards, or so much broader (toward the breadth of eight
yards) then now it is, as conveniently the place will bear from the said
shoars, Ditches, Banks or hedges, by the consent of the Owner or Owners of the
said lands, according to his or their respective interests therein, or
otherwise by order of the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions after a
Writ of Ad quod damnum first issued out, and returned, to assign and lay out a
more new and commodious way in and over the said lands next or near adjoining
to the said common and public Highways, the said Surveyors first giving such
satisfaction for the said ground unto the respective owners of the same,
according to their several and respective Interest in the whole, not exceeding
Twenty years purchase: Provided always, That if any common or public Highway
or ways, shall be so altered and changed, as is aforesaid, that then, and in
such case, the same new Way, or Ways, as also any new Way or ways altered, or
to be altered by a Writ of Ad quod damnum, shall from time to time be repaired
and amended by such Parish or Parishes, Town, Hamlet, or Village, or by such
person and persons, and in such manner and form, as the said old and former
common or public Highway or ways was, or were to be repaired and amended.

Digging for gravel in wastes and Commons.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where there is not
sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders, or Stones, within any Parish, Town,
Village, or Hamlet, to repair their common, and public Highways, it shall be
lawful for the Surveyor and Surveyors, and such person and persons as he or
they shall appoint, upon the allowance and approbation of any two Justices of
Peace within the said County, to digg, take, and carry away Gravel, Chalk,
Sand, Cinders, or Stones, out of the Waste and Common of any Neighboring
Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, or upon the Seacoast, without paying any
thing for the same, for the repairing and amending of the Highways aforesaid,
so as they fill up the place within one month next ensuing, if required by the
Owner of the Soil.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, In what
cases Gravel, Stones, etc. may be dug in men's several grounds.
That where there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Stones, Cinders and Sand, or
other Materials for to repair the Highways, within the Common or Waste grounds
of any Parish, Township, or Hamlet, for to amend and repair the Highways
therein, it shall and may be lawful for the said Surveyor or Surveyors, or such
as they shall appoint, to enter into the several ground (not being an House,
Orchard, Garden, Courtyard, Park with Deer in it, or Meadow) of any person or
persons within the said Parish, Township, or Hamlet near adjoining to the
Highways to be repaired, where any such Materials are or may be found, and to
dig, take and carry away from time to time such quantities thereof, as the said
Surveyor or Surveyors shall judge necessary for the said reparations, without
paying any thing for the said Materials, (except only where they have formerly
been paid for by Custom, or Composition, and at such rates as heretofore were
paid for the same) rendering only such damages to the Occupier or Owner thereof,
as he shall sustain by the digging and carriage thereof, to be assessed by two
Justices of Peace near the said Parish, in cases of difference about the same:
Provided, That the pits and holes so dug, be filled up in such manner, and
under such penalties as are prescribed in the Statute made in the Fifth year of
Queen Elizabeth, concerning the amending of Highways.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What number of Horses or
Oxen may be used in Carts and Carriages upon the Highways.
That from and after the Nine and twentieth day of September, which shall be in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no traveling
Wagon, Wain, Cart or Carriage wherein any Burdens, Goods, or Wares are or
shall be carried or drawn for hire other then such Carts and Carriages as are
employed in and about husbandry and manuring of Lands, and in the carrying of
Hay, Straw, Corn unthreshed, Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shipping, Materials for
Building, Stones of all sorts, or such Ammunition or Artillery as shall be for
His Majesty's Service) shall at any one time travel, be drawn, or go in any
Common or Public Highway, or Road, with above seven Horse-beasts whereof six
shall draw in pairs, and not with above eight Oxen, And what Weight.
or six Oxen and two Horse-beasts; nor shall at any time carry above Twenty
hundred weight, between the first day of October, and the first of May; nor
above Thirty hundred weight between the first of May and the first of October
(except such particulars as aforesaid) nor above five Quarters of Wheat, Meal,
Messine, Rye, Pease, Beans and Tares, nor above eight Quarters of Barley, Malt
or Oats, and after that proportion; nor shall any Wagon, Wayn, No Wheels to be
under 4. inches breadth in the Tire.
Cart or Carriage for the uses aforesaid be employed, the Wheels whereof are
less in breadth then four Inches in the Tire, upon pain that every Owner of
such Wagon, Wayn, Cart, Carriage, Horse-beasts, or Oxen, shall forfeit for
every of the said offenses the sum of Forty shillings, The Penalty, and how to
be disposed.
to be divided into three equal parts, One part thereof to the Surveyors of the
Highways of the Town, Village or Hamlet, where any of the said Offenses shall
be committed, to be employed in the Repairs of the said Highways; One other
part to the Overseers of the poor of the Parish where any of the said Offenses
shall be committed, for the relief of the poor of the said Parish; and the
other part thereof to him that shall discover and prosecute for any of the said
offenses, the said penalty to be levied by distress of all or any of the said
Horse-beasts or Oxen, and to be distributed as aforesaid, by the Constable,
Surveyor or Surveyors of the said Highways, Overseer or Overseers of the poor,
or any of them; And in case the said penalties shall not be paid within three
days after such distress, that then it shall be lawful to and for the said
persons so distraining as aforesaid, to sell the same, and to restore the
overplus to the Owner, the charges of keeping and selling first deducted.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every the said offenses shall be, The
offenses declared common Nusances.

All Suits upon this Act shall be laid in their proper County, and the
Defendant may plead the general Issue.


and are hereby declared and adjudged to be common Nusances.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Suit shall be commenced against any
person, for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, that in every such case
the Action shall be laid in the proper County where the fact was done, and not
elsewhere; and the Defendant may plead the general Issue, and give this Act and
the special matter in evidence at the Trial, and if it shall so appear to be
done, or that it was not done in the County where the said Suit is commenced,
that then the Jury shall find for the Defendant; and in such case, as also if
the Plaintiff shall be nonsuit, or discontinue his Action after the Defendant
has appeared, or if upon Demurrer, Judgment be given against the Plaintiff, or
if upon Trial a Verdict pass for the Defendant, the Defendant shall have his
double Costs, and the like remedy for the same as any Defendant has in any
other case by Law.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, All Moneys raised by
Assessment, Issues forfeited, etc. shall be levied and employed for mending the
Highways.
That all sums of money so rated and assessed as aforesaid, and all charitable
Gifts formerly given, or to be given, for the making, amending and keeping in
repair of any common and public Highways, Pavements and Cawseys, (except as
hereafter is excepted) and all Fines, Penalties, Forfeitures and other sums of
money arising by Assessment, or otherwise by this Act, not otherwise by this
Act disposed of, and all Issues to be forfeited for not appearing to any
Information or Indictment for not repairing any Highways, or removing Nusances
out of the same, and all Fines and Amerciaments to be imposed upon any Parish,
Town, Village or Hamlet, or upon any private person, for not repairing of
common and public Highways, which are not otherwise disposed by this Act,
shall be employed and bestowed by the said Surveyors within the respective
Parishes, Towns, Villages and Hamlets, to which such charitable Gifts are given
and bestowed, and within which such Assessment, Fines, Penalties, Forfeitures,
Issues and Amerciaments are imposed, happened or made, in paying for Materials,
Workmens wages and for such other employments, as are hereby appointed to be
done and performed, and be levied, collected, and gathered by the said
Surveyors, or any of them by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any two
Justices of Peace within the County, City, Riding, Town Corporate, Liberty or
Limit wherein the same lies, by distress and sale of the Goods, as is
aforesaid.

Accounts to be given by the Surveyors yearly of all Money raised for mending
the Highways.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person so
Elected, and taking upon him or them the Office of Surveyor or Surveyors, as
aforesaid, shall within one month next after the expiration of the year
wherein he executed the said Office as Surveyor of the Highways, make and
yield up to the Inhabitants of the Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, at some
public Meeting, to be appointed by the said Inhabitants, a perfect Account in
Writing under his and their Hands, of all the Moneys he or they received or
paid within his or their year, for or by reason of his or their Office; namely
of whom, and what received, and to whom, and what paid, and what Moneys are in
arrear and unpaid, either for Assessments, Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties and
charitable Gifts; and if any overplus be in his or their hands, he or they
shall return and pay the same to the next Surveyors, or one of them, for the
use of the Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet, to be disbursed in and about the
Highways, in the following year: And if the said Surveyor or Surveyors shall
not make such an Account and Payment as before, any two Justices of the Peace,
living near to, or in the said Parish, shall and may upon complaint unto them
made, examine the business upon Oath, and upon default found in the Surveyor or
Surveyors, shall and may commit him or them to the Common-Goal of that County,
City, Riding, Town-Corporate, Liberty or Limit, there to remain until he has
made a true and perfect Account and Payment, as aforesaid.

Who may enquire, hear and determine offenses against this Act.
And be it further Enacted, That all and every Justices of Assise, Oyer and
Terminer, and Justices of the Peace, shall have power and authority, and are
hereby enabled and empowered to inquire after, hear and determine all matters
concerning charitable Gifts, for the making, amending and keeping in repair any
Common Highways, Pavements, Streets and Cawseys within the limits of their
Commission, and to make Orders therein for the due employment of such
charitable gifts, according to the true intent and meaning of the Donors
thereof; Except gifts to the aforesaid uses made to any College, Hall,
Free School or Hospital, which have Visitors of their own, and also to hear and
determine all offenses, defaults and defects in Surveyors or others, concerning
the premises.

Appeal allowed to persons grieved.

43 El. cap. 4. In what cases only a Certiorari may be allowed to remove any
Indictment, etc. upon this Act.


Provided, That if any person be agrieved with such Order, they shall have
liberty to appeal to the Court of Chancery, as in the case of a Decree made
upon the Statute of Charitable Uses.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
First day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no Certiorari shall
be allowed to remove any Information, Indictment, Presentment, Order or other
proceedings in the Quarter Sessions, of, for, or concerning any matter or thing
in this Act, unless the party or parties against whom any such Information,
Indictment, Presentment, Order or other proceedings shall be had by virtue of
this Act, shall before the allowance of such Certioraries, become bound to the
person or persons prosecuting, in the sum of Forty pounds, with such sufficient
sureties as the Justices of Peace at their said Quarter Sessions of the Peace
shall think fit, with condition to pay unto the said prosecutors, within one
month after the conviction of such parties indicted, their full costs and
damages, to be ascertained upon their Oaths, and that in default thereof, it
shall be lawful for the said Justices to proceed to trial of such Indictments,
any such Writs of Certiorari to remove the same Indictments notwithstanding.

Laycock- Bridge in Com. Wilts.
And whereas at a general Quarter Sessions held for the County of Wilts, It was
(at the humble Petition of the Petitioners of Laycock, and other Inhabitants of
the said County) Ordered, That one ancient Bridge called Foot-Bridge, leading
through the said Parish, between London, Bath and Bristol, being more commodious
for all Passengers than on^ other Bridge in the said Parish, called Rey-Bridge,
should be repaired and made passable for all Carts, Wagons and Carriages (with
the Materials of Rey-Bridge) which was thereby Ordered to be taken down, which
Order was accordingly put in execution in the said County and Parish; Be it
therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Parishioners, and
all others employed by them in the pulling down the said Bridge, called
Rey-Bridge, and employing the Materials thereof, as aforesaid, shall be, and
are hereby indemnified from all suits, troubles, and molestations whatsoever,
touching or concerning the same; and that the said Parishioners of Laycock, and
other the aforesaid Inhabitants, shall not hereafter be compelled by
Information or Indictment, or any other way be made chargeable with the
re-building of the said Bridge, called Rey-Bridge, otherwise than for the
maintaining the said Bridge sufficient for Horse and Pack, as it now stands,
any Law or Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Wilds of Surrey, Sussex, Kent.
Provided likewise, and be it Enacted, That this Act shall not extend to exempt
any Owner, Farmer, or Lessee of any Iron work, or other person within the
Wilds of the Counties of Surrey, Sussex, or Kent, for carrying so many load of
Cinder, Gravel, Stones, and other materials, or contributing such sums of money
toward the amending and repairing of the Highways, as they are obliged to by
any former Acts. 14 and 15 H 8. cap. 6. 39 El. ca. 19.


And be it further Provided and Enacted, That where the Justices of the Peace
of any County, at their General Quarter Sessions, or any two of such Justices,
near to any Parish, Township, or Hamlet, shall be fully satisfied that the
Highways and Bridges within the same, may and will be sufficiently amended and
repaired, according to former usage, without the help of this Act, that then,
and in such Cases only, there shall no Assessment be made within the same, for
and toward their reparations, by virtue of this Act.

Provided always, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Justices of Peace of the County of Middlesex, in their public Sessions of
the Peace, shall have power and authority to make Orders for erecting or
setting up a new Bridge of Brick or Stone, fitting for the passage of Carts and
Carriages, in the room and place of a Bridge now only passable for Foot and
Horse, called Stratford-Bridge, in the Parish of Hillingdon, in the said
County, Stratford Bridge. Hillingdon. Middlesex.
or in some other more convenient place near thereunto, at the present charge
of the whole County, for the erecting of the same; but to be upheld, repaired
and maintained, after it be so erected, at the charge of the Lord of the Manor
wherein the said Bridge now stands, proportionable to the charge he is now
at, for maintaining the Horse-Bridge, and the residue of the charge to be born
by the Parishioners of the said Parish; For which purpose, the said Justices of
the Peace at their said public Sessions, are hereby enabled to make respective
rates accordingly, so as the sum to be assessed for the erecting the said
Bridge, exceed not the sum of One hundred pounds; and the said Justices are to
take care that the said Bridge be finished by or before the First day of
August, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and three.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Bridges to have sufficient Walls
or Posts and Rails.
That the said Surveyors do take care that all and every Bridge or Bridges
within their respective limits, shall before the Feast of St. Michael, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, have sufficient walls or posts and rails of
each side thereof, four foot high at the least; and that the said walls, or
posts and pails, be from time to time kept in sufficient repair.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Proviso for
choosing Surveyors for the year 1662. EXP.
That the Surveyors of the Highways, named for the year One thousand six
hundred sixty and two, shall within twenty days after the publication of this
Act, proceed to do and execute all things in this Act for the said year One
thousand six hundred sixty two; And where there are no Surveyors of the
Highways chosen for the said year One thousand six hundred sixty two, they
shall be chosen within twenty days after publication of this Act by such
persons as by this Act is appointed; and being so chosen, they shall hereafter
do and execute all things according to the tenor of this Act.

Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any
Lands are let, Tenants to bear the charges of Assessments for Highways.
the Tenant and Occupier thereof shall pay the Assessment, and bear all charges
for the mending of the Highways, and not the Landlord, except where there is
or shall be any agreement between the said Landlord and the Tenant to the
contrary.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted, The continuance of this Act.
That the power of raising and levying money by virtue of this Act, shall
continue in force for three years only, from the Five and twentieth day of
March, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, and no longer, but that all
other Powers and Clauses in this Act shall continue and stand in force until
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. VII.
Exportation of Leather, and Raw Hides out of the Realm of England, restrained.

WHereas notwithstanding the many good Laws before this time made, and still in
force, 5 E. 6. cap. 15. 6 El. cap. 22. 8 El. cap. 14. 18 El. cap. 9.
prohibiting the Exportation of Leather out of this Realm, and the penalty by
those Acts imposed, by the cunning and subtilty of some persons, and the
neglect of others, who ought to take care thereof, there are such quantities of
Leather daily exported to foreign parts, that the price of Leather is grown to
those excessive Rates, that many Artificers working Leather, cannot furnish
themselves with sufficient store thereof, for the carrying on of their Trades;
and the poor sort of people are not able to buy those things made of Leather,
which of necessity they must make use of:

For redress of which griefs, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That from and
after the First day of May now next ensuing, no person or persons whatsoever
shall carry or transport, or cause to be carried or transported out of England
into Scotland, Ireland, or into any of the Isles belonging to this Kingdom,
What Skins or Hides Tanned may not be transported.
or to any parts beyond the Seas, the Skins or Hides Tanned or Vntanned of any
Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, or Calf, otherwise, or in any other manner, then is by
this present Act directed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That none of the Skins
or Hides aforesaid, which shall happen to be taken from any of the beasts
aforesaid, within any Island whatsoever, belonging to the Kingdom of England
(except Ireland) shall be transported out of that Island to any other place,
but into the Kingdom of England, upon pain of forfeiture for every such offense
double the value of Skins or Hides, The Penalty.
so to be transported out of the said Island, or any of them, to any other
place then into the Kingdom of England; the same forfeiture to be sued for and
disposed as hereafter in this Act is directed.

And for the better preventing of such mischiefs as are intended to be remedied
by this Act, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What Leather must be
bought only in open Fairs or Markets for selling Leather. The Penalty.
That all Red Tanned Leather made of the Hides or Skins of any of the Beasts
aforesaid, of what kind or nature soev^^, shall be bought only in the open and
common Fair or Market used for the putting of Leather to sale, and not in any
House, Tanners Yard, Shop, or other place whatsoever, on pain that such person
or persons that shall not accordingly do the same, shall for every such offense
forfeit the same Leather, or the value thereof, and the contract for the sale
thereof shall be void, and all such Leather shall be Searched and Sealed, by
the Searchers and Sealers thereunto appointed, before the same be put to Sale,
and upon such sale shall be Registered, and a true Entry thereof made, both by
the Buyer and Seller, who are both to be present at such Registring thereof,
and both their names and places of abode entered into the Book of the said
Register, on pain that every such Buyer or Seller that shall not accordingly do
the same, shall for every such offense forfeit the same Leather, or the value
thereof, and the forfeiture shall be recovered and employed in such manner as
hereafter in this Act is directed.

Penalty for Transportation of any Leather or Raw-Hides.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall be found guilty of the Transportation of any Leather, or Raw
Hides of any of the Beasts aforesaid, (excepting such Calve-skins, and
Sheepskins, dressed without the Wool, as by Law may be Transported) contrary
to the provision of this Act, he shall from thenceforth be disabled to Trade,
or Deal in Leather for the future, and shall for every such offense forfeit the
sum of Five hundred pounds, to be sued for, and disposed as hereafter in this
Act is directed.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall
not extend to the Prohibiting the Transportation of any Leather made into
Boots, 5 E. 6. cap. 15. 1 Mar. cap. 8. Parl. 2. Quaere, If those two Statutes
be Repealed by this Proviso.

Who may search and seize Leather or Hides intended to be Transported.


Shoes, or Slippers, but that the same may be Transported, Any thing in this
Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to, and for the respective Masters and Wardens of the Cordweyners,
Sadlers, Girdlers, and Curriers of the City of London, and their Deputies, and
all Customers, Comptrollers, Farmers of Customs, Supervisors, Searchers, and
other Officers belonging to the Customs, and to and for all Justices of the
Peace, Mayors, and chief Officers of Corporations within this Realm, Dominion
of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, from time to time, as well by Land as
Water, to Search for, and seize any Leather, or Raw Hides wrought, or
unwrought, cut or uncut, packed up, or unpacked, intended or purposed to be
Transported by any person or persons into any parts beyond the Seas, or into
Scotland, other then Calves-skins, and Sheepskins, as aforesaid.

Shaving of Leather by Tanners.
And whereas diverse Tanners do shave, cut, and rake their upper-leather Hides
all over, and the necks of their backs, and buts, to the great impairing
thereof, and the extreme prejudice of the Kingdom; Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That every Tanner, who after the Nine and twentieth
day of September, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, The Penalty.
shall commit any such offense, as aforesaid, shall forfeit all the said
Leather, Backs, Buts, or Calve-skins, so shaved, cut or raked, or the value
thereof, and it shall be lawful for the Searchers and Sealers of Leather to
seize the same.

Leaden Hall, London.
And be it further Enacted, That the Market for Leather in Leaden Hall in
London, shall be kept on the Tuesday, as now it is, Any Law, Usage or Custom to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

How the Penalties shall be recovered.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the penalties
and forfeitures, and every sum and sums of money for any offense, or offenses
herein before mentioned, shall be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint,
Information, to be brought for the same in any Court or Courts at Westminster,
or in any Court or Courts of Records in the City, Town, County, or place where
the said offense shall be committed, wherein no Wager of Law, Protection or
Essoign, shall be admitted, neither shall the same be removed out of the said
County, City, or Town-Corporate, the one half of the said forfeitures to be to
the use of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other half
thereof to the use of the Informer or Informers, that shall sue for the same.

Transportation of Leather declared a common Nuisance.

Leather for necessary use of Ships in Voyages.

Artificers dealing in cutting of Leather in London, or within three miles
thereof.


Provided also, and be it Enacted, That all such Exportation, or Transportation
of any Hides or Leather, contrary to this Act, is hereby adjudged, and declared
to be a common and public Nuisance.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not extend, or be construed to
prohibit the carrying or conveying of any such Hides or Leather which shall be
used, or employed for the necessary use, or provision of any Ship or Vessel in
any Voyage beyond the Seas, and which shall not be sold in any foreign parts,
so as the number do not exceed Six Raw Hides, and Three Tanned Hides.

Provided always nevertheless, And be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and every Artificer dealing in cutting of Leather, or other
person or persons whatsoever, which shall hereafter buy any Red Tanned Leather
within the City of London, or three miles thereof, shall before the next
Market Day within the said place for sale of Leather, give Notice thereof to
one or more of the Company of Curryers then exercising and using the Art and
Mystery of a Curryer within the said City of London, and three miles thereof,
and within three weeks after such notice shall deliver, or cause to be
delivered the said Leather so bought, except such part thereof as shall be used
for Soals without being curryed, tallowed, or dressed, unto the said Curryer,
or Curryers, to whom such notice was given, to the intent that the same may be
curryed, tallowed, or otherwise dressed, as is directed and appointed by one
Act made in the First year of King James, 1 Jac. cap. 22.
Chapter twenty second, touching the Duty of Tanners, Curryers. Shoemakers and
others, upon penalty of the forfeiture of Six shillings eight pence for every
Back, But, Hide, or Calves-skin so bought, and not delivered as aforesaid, for
the uses, and to be recovered as aforesaid.

And whereas it is Enacted amongst other things, Leather used in London, or
within three miles, to be searched and allowed by the Wardens of the Curriers
there.

The Penalty.


by the said Act made in the First year of King James, That no person or
persons shall by any means occupy, or put in any Made-wares within the City of
London, or three miles of the same City, any Curryed Leather before the same
shall be searched, and allowed by the Wardens of the Curryers of London for the
time being, or such persons as they shall thereto assign, and be Sealed with a
Seal therefore to be prepared, upon pain that every Shoemaker and other
Artificer, Cutter of Leather offending against that Article, should forfeit for
every Hide, or Skin otherwise curryed or employed as is aforesaid, Six
shillings eight pence, and the value of every such Hide or Skin; Be it
therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master and
Wardens of the Company of Curryers for the time being, or such persons as they
shall thereto assign, shall from time to time, and at all seasonable times in
the day time, enter into any Warehouse, Shop, Celler, or other place within the
said City of London, or three miles of the same City, belonging unto any of the
said Cordwainers, Sadlers, Girdlers, or other person or persons being
Artificers, dealing in cutting Leather, and in the presence of any two or more
of them to search for, and seize all such Leather intended to be Prohibited to
be used by the said Clause, Branch or Article as aforesaid, as also for all
Wares made of such Leather; and if any such person or persons, Artificers or
Dealers as aforesaid shall oppose, Penalties for opposing the Search.
or refuse to permit the said Master and Wardens of the Company of Curriers, or
such persons as they shall thereto assign, to make any such search or seizure
as aforesaid, he or they shall forfeit for every such offense the sum of Twenty
pounds for the uses, and to be recovered as aforesaid; And if any of the said
Artificers and Dealers in cutting of Leather, do refuse to be present with the
said Searchers, whenever the same shall be desired by the said Master and
Wardens of the Company of the Curriers, or such persons thereto assigned by
them, as aforesaid, then for every such default the persons so refusing shall
forfeit the sum of Ten pounds for the uses, and to be recovered as aforesaid.

CAP. VIII.
An Act for Distribution of Threescore thousand pounds amongst the truly Loyal
and Indigent Commission-Officers, and for Assessing of Offices, and
Distributing Moneys thereby raised for their further Supply. EXP.

CAP. IX.
For Relief of Poor and Maimed Officers and Soldiers, who have faithfully
served His Majesty, and His Royal Father in the late Wars.

FOrasmuch as diverse of His Majesty's Loyal and Faithful Subjects, who out of
the sense of their Duty and Allegiance to his Majesty's Royal Father of ever
Blessed and Glorious Memory, and to His Majesty that now is, have during the
late Wars, wherein they have been Employed both by Sea, and Land, as Officers,
Soldiers, and Mariners in the said Service, exposed themselves to the utmost
hazard of their Lives, loss of their Limbs, and utter ruin of their Fortunes;
and for whose Subsistence and Relief there is not yet any competent Provision
made; Nor for the Relief of the Widows and Orphans of such as have died, or
been slain in the said Service.

And to the end that such as have been eminent for their Loyalty, and
Sufferings, The inducement and ground of this Act.
in so good and just a Cause, as the Defense of His Majesty's Royal Person and
Government, may not pass without some Mark of Favor or Reward to be set upon
them; And that others may thereby receive all due Encouragement for the time to
come, to continue Loyal and Faithful to His Majesty's Service, according to
their bounden Duty: Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from the
First day of this present Parliament, every Parish within this Realm of
England, and Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall be
charged weekly to the payment of such sum of Money, as formerly they have been
rated by virtue of a Statute made in the Forty third year of Queen Elizabeth,
Chapter the third, 43 El. cap. 3.
concerning the Relief of Mariners and Soldiers, for and to such end and
purpose; How Parishes may be charged, assessed, and levied.
And likewise such further sum of Money (over and besides the same,) as by His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter Sessions, to be held
after the Feast of Easter next ensuing, or the major part of them, or at any
other Quarter Sessions to be hereafter by them held, shall be adjudged meet to
be Assessed upon every Parish or Chappelry, that has distinct Parochial
Officers, so as the said additional sum exceed not the sum of Two shillings and
six pence, nor be under the sum of Three pence, each week, for each such Parish
or Chappelry, the same to be levied in manner and form by such persons, and
under such penalties, as by the said Statute of Queen Elizabeth is Enacted and
Declared; And to be paid to the Treasurers for the Maimed Soldiers, Treasurer
for Maimed Soldiers.
appointed by the Justices of the County, or Liberty, by virtue of this Act,
and the Statute of Queen Elizabeth aforesaid; Which said Treasurers shall be
ordered to issue out, and account for the same in such manner, and under such
penalties, as by the said Statute is further Enacted and Declared; And be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; ^fficers, ^^^ldiers or ^^^triners
Maimed or indigent, how to be relieved.
That every Officer, Soldier, or Mariner maimed, indigent,, aged or disabled
in body for work in the Service of His said late Majesty, or His Majesty that
now is, during the late Wars, or which are so Impoverished by their Sufferings
under any of the late Usurped Powers, as that they are destitute of any
competent Subsistence, or Livelihood, and have continued Faithful to his Trust,
and not deserted the same by taking up Arms against His said late Majesty, or
His Majesty that now is, or otherwise, shall forthwith repair to the place
where he was last settled, before he took up Arms, with a Certificate of his
Service, and hurts received, under the hand of his Captain, or other
Commissionated Officer; And shall also repair unto the two next Justices of the
Peace in the County where such his Settling was; And the said two Justices, upon
the Examination of the Truth of such Certificate (which the said two Justices
are hereby empowered to take upon Oath of the party, and of such Witnesses as he
shall produce) shall by Warrant unto the Treasurer, assign him Relief until the
next Quarter Sessions to be holden for that County, or Liberty, at which time,
a yearly Pension shall be by the said Justices, or the major part of them
granted in Manner and Form, and with Power of Revocation, or Alteration, as by
the said Statute is further declared, and directed; And in case that the
Captain or Officer appointed to make such Certificate be dead, the said two
Justices shall have Power, upon Request made to them in behalf of the party
maimed, or aged, indigent, or disabled, as aforesaid, by Persons of Credit, to
give such Relief, as in case of Examination as aforesaid.

Widows and Orphans of Soldiers.
And as touching the Widows and Orphans of such as have died, or suffered death
in the said Service; It is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That (over and besides such Relief as they shall gain by their Work and Labor,
and shall be allowed by the Charity and Benevolence of the Parish, Town, or
Hamlet, where they are settled, who are hereby required to have them in special
regard) the Treasurers for the Maimed Soldiers for such County, shall allow
such further Relief from time to time, as shall be adjudged meet by the two
next Justices of the Peace of such County; And the said Relief shall be paid
out of the Surplusage of such Stock of Maintenance, as shall remain in the
hands of the said Treasurers, after such Pensions, and payment of them made,
and of which Surplusage, and Allowance made unto such Widows, and Orphans, the
said Treasurers shall give account from time to time, and the same distribute
in such manner, as by the Justices shall be directed, and according to the
Statute aforesaid.

Treasurers, High-Constables, etc. to be called to Account for Moneys received.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Peace in every County, or Liberty, or any two of them, shall forthwith call all
such Treasurers, High-Constables, Petty-Constables, or other persons which have
formerly been Entrusted with the Receipt, Collecting, or Disposing of any such
sum of Money charged upon any Parish by virtue of the Statute aforesaid, and
whereof no account has been given, and likewise the Executors and
Administrators of such person and persons, unto a strict account concerning
such Levies and Collections made; And such Money as they shall find remaining
in the custody of such persons, to order forthwith to be paid for the intents
and purposes aforesaid, and no other, to the Treasurer appointed by virtue of
the said Statute, or to be appointed by virtue of this present Act, at the next
Quarter Sessions to be holden for such County or Liberty, under such penalty,
as by the said Statute is set forth; Which said Treasurer to be appointed by
this Act, shall continue by virtue hereof, until Easter Sessions following.

The continuance of this Act.
Provided, That no Pension to be given, or assigned by Authority hereof, shall
exceed to any one person the sum of Twenty pounds by the year; This Act to
continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

CAP. X.
An Additional Revenue settled upon His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for
the better support of His and their Crown and Dignity.

The great concernment of proportioning the Public Revenue, to the Charges
and Expenses.
FOrasmuch as nothing conduces more to the Peace and Prosperity of a Nation,
and the Protection of every single person therein, then that the Public
Revenue thereof may be in some measure proportioned to the Public Charges and
Expenses; We therefore Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, the
Commons assembled in Parliament, having duly considered the Premises, do give
and grant unto your most Excellent Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, the
Rates and Duties herein after mentioned, and do most humbly beseech Your
Majesty, that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That from and after the Five and twentieth day of March, in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, every Dwelling, and other
House and Edifice, and all Lodgings, and Chambers in the Inns of Court, Inns of
Chancery, Colleges, and other Societies that are, or hereafter shall be
erected within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed (other then such as in this Act are hereafter excepted and declared)
shall be chargeable, and by this present Act, be and are charged with the
Annual pa^ment to the Kings Majesty, Every Fire-Hearth and Stove charged with
the yearly payment of 2 s. to the King, his Heirs and Successors.
his Heirs and Successors for every Fire-Hearth, and Stove within every such
House, Edifice, Chambers, and Lodging, as aforesaid, the sum of Two shillings
by the year, to be paid yearly, and every year at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and the Feast of the Annuntiation of the Blessed Virgin St. Mary,
by even and equal portions; the First payment thereof to be paid upon the
Feast Day of Saint Michael the Archangel, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two.

And to the intent that a just account may be had and taken of all the said
Hearths and Stoves by this Act intended to be charged; Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, How an Account shall be taken of all Fire-Hearths and
Stoves.
That every Owner or Occupier of every such House, Edifice, Lodgings and
Chambers, shall respectively within six days after notice given unto him or
them; by the respective Constables, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, or other such
Officers, within whose Precinct, the said House, Edifice, Chambers or Lodgings
shall be, or by the respective Treasurers or Officers of Inns of Court, Inns of
Chancery, or other Officers of the respective Colleges, and other Societies
aforesaid, wherein any such Lodgings and Chambers shall be, deliver unto the
said Constables, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, or other such Officers as aforesaid
respectively, a true and just account in writing under the hands of such Owners
or Occupiers as aforesaid, of all the said Hearths and Stoves which are within
their several and respective Houses, Lodgings and Chambers aforesaid.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective Constables,
Headboroughs, How and when the same shall be delivered in.
Tithingmen, or other such Officers, within whose limits any such House or
Edifice charged by this Act as aforesaid, are, and the respective Treasurers,
and other Officers of the respective Inns of Court, Inns of Chancery,
Colleges, and other Societies aforesaid, shall by the last day of May, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, require the several Occupiers of every such
House, Edifice, Lodging and Chamber aforesaid, to deliver in to them
respectively Accounts in writing as aforesaid under their several and
respective hands of all such Hearths and Stoves as aforesaid, as shall be
within their respective Houses, Edifices, Lodgings and Chambers, and upon
receipt of the same, or upon default of such Account in writing, or in case
there be no occupiers, then within six days after notice in writing, fixed to
the door, requiring such Account to be made, the said Constables, or other
Officers respectively, as aforesaid, shall enter into the said respective
Houses in the daytime, and compare such Accounts, and see whether the same be
truly made, or not. And if no such Account be delivered, then shall take
information by their own view, of the number of such Hearths and Stoves, upon
pain that every Constable, Treasurer, and other Officer aforesaid, who shall
neglect to do the same, shall forfeit for every week he or they shall so
neglect, the sum of Five pounds; and for every false return wilfully made
contrary to this Act, he or they shall forfeit and lose for every Hearth and
Stove so falsely returned or omitted, the sum of Forty shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several
Constables, and other Officers, who are hereby authorized to take the account
of the aforesaid Hearths and Stoves within their particular Limits as
aforesaid, shall at the next Quarter Sessions after the said last day of May,
to be holden for their respective Counties, deliver all such Accounts in
writing, as they shall receive, reform, or take by their own view, unto the
Justices of Peace in their respective Quarter Sessions of the said Counties,
together with a true Note of the names of all such persons who shall refuse or
neglect to give unto them an account under their hands of such Hearths and
Stoves within their respective Houses, Edifices, Chambers and Lodgings, as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, How Accounts of Hearths and Stoves shall be
enrolled and duplicates thereof, by the Justices of the Peace.
That the said Justices of Peace shall cause all the said Accounts of the
several Hearths and Stoves within the respective Counties, to be Enrolled by
the Clerk of the Peace of the said respective Counties, Ridings in Yorkshire,
and Divisions in Lincolnshire, and also a Duplicate thereof in Parchment, under
the Hands and Seals of three or more of the Justices of Peace of the respective
Counties and places aforesaid, who are hereby required to sign the same to be
returned into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer within one month next after
such account delivered unto them at their respective Quarter Sessions
aforesaid, upon pain that the Clerk of the Peace of every such County, Riding
or Division respectively offending therein, shall forfeit to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, the sum of Two hundred pounds for the first month; and
for the second month he shall so neglect, every such Clerk of the Peace shall
forfeit and lose his or their place and office, and the same shall become void
accordingly; which forfeiture and penalty shall be recovered and levied as this
Act directs.

And to the intent that the Revenue hereby arising to his Majesty, How the
Moneys arising shall be collected, received and paid into the Exchequer.
may from time to time be paid into his Exchequer with as little charge as may
be; Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective Treasurers,
and other Officers of the Inns of Court, Inns of Chancery, Colleges, and other
Societies aforesaid, within their respective Jurisdictions, and the several
Petty-Constables, Tithing-men, Head-boroughs, and such other Officers within
the respective Limits, Liberties and Jurisdictions, shall every half year,
within Six days after the said duty shall grow due, as aforesaid, collect,
gather, and receive the same from the several Occupiers of the said Hearths and
Stoves, and upon payment thereof; shall give several Acquittances (without
taking any thing for such Acquittances) unto the several persons who shall pay
the same: And that such Acquittances shall be a full and perfect discharge to
every such person who shall pay the same, against His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors; so that no person who shall have such Acquittance, shall be
molested, sued or vexed, or put to any charge in His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer or else where.

Distress and sale of goods in default of payment.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any person
who is hereby charged, or intended to be charged to pay any sum or sums of
money as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to pay the same, that then every
person or persons who is hereby Authorized to collect the same, shall and may
levy the same by distress and sale of the goods of the person and persons so
refusing or neglecting, rendering unto the said person and persons the overplus
of such money as shall remain in their hands by the said sale, after the said
duty and necessary charges of levying the same is discharged as aforesaid.

The duty of Constables, Treasurers, and Officers empowered to Collect the said
duties.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid
Constables, Treasurers, and other Officers, who are hereby Authorized to
collect the aforesaid duties, shall within Twenty days next after the aforesaid
times at which the said duties shall be due to His Majesty, as aforesaid, pay
unto the High Constables of the several Hundreds and respective Limits, all
such money as they shall receive for the aforesaid duties, receiving an
Acquittance without paying any thing for the same, The allowance for Collecting.
and deducting Two pence in the pound for their pains in collecting the same;
And shall also then in writing under his hand, deliver unto the said High
Constable, the names of the persons of whom they receive the same, and also the
names of such persons who ought to have paid the respective duties yearly
charged upon them, and have not paid the same, where no distress can be had.

Within what time the money ought to be paid to the High Sheriff.
And be it further Enacted, That the High Constables of the several hundreds and
respective limits, shall within ten days next after their several receipts from
the said Constables, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, and other Officers, pay unto the
High Sheriffs of every County; all such money as they shall so receive,
deducting a penny in the pound for their pains, and shall also then deliver or
cause to be delivered unto the said High Sheriffs, the several returns which
they received from the Constables, and other Officers aforesaid;

And when the High Sheriff ought to pay the same into the Exchequer.
And the respective Sheriffs shall within thirty days after he or they shall
receive the said moneys from the respective Collectors, return the same,
together with the names of such persons who are defaulters, and had no distress
to be found, into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, deducting Four pence out of
every Twenty shillings, and so after that rate; whereof Three pence to be for
the Sheriffs own use, as a reward of his pains in receiving and returning the
same; and One penny to be paid by the Sheriff to the Clerk of the Peace, for
his pains, to be recovered by the said Clerk of the Peace by Action of Debt.

London. Middlesex.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That the High Sheriff of London and
Middlesex for the time being, for London and so much of the County of Middelsex
as lies within the Bills of Mortality, other then the Inns of Court and
Chancery; and the High Sheriff of Surrey for the time being for the Borough of
Southwark, Surrey. Southwark.
and all other Sheriffs of any other City or Town, being a County of it self,
for such Cities and Towns respectively, shall be, and are hereby made
Collectors of, and for the several duties arising within their several and
respective limits; For which end and purpose, and in those places only, the
Constables, Tithingmen, Headboroughs and other Officers shall deliver unto the
Sheriffs of the Cities and places aforesaid, Duplicates of the same Accounts of
Hearths and Stoves, which the said Constables, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, and
other Officers are appointed by this Act to take from time to time, and to
deliver to the Justices of Peace to be Enrolled as aforesaid; And the said
Sheriffs of the Cities and places last before mentioned, are hereby enabled to
levy the said duties, and required to give Acquittances without any Fees, as
fully and amply to all intents and purposes as in this Act is appointed to be
done by any other Collectors; And the said Sheriffs shall, from time to time
within Forty days after the said Duties shall be payable by virtue of this Act,
make payment of all the moneys levied, into His Majesty's Exchequer, with a
perfect List of the names of such persons as shall make default of payment,
where no distress can be found to be taken; Any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding. And the said Sheriffs shall deduct out of their
payments Four pence in the pound; whereof Three pence to be for themselves, and
One penny for the Clerk of the Peace, to be recovered as aforesaid. Officers of
the Exchequer shall discharge persons who pay the duties, without any Fee.


And that His Majesty's Officers in his said Court of Exchequer, shall
discharge all such persons who paid their respective Duties without taking any
Fees for the same, and shall also issue out Process to levy the said duty upon
such persons who shall fail in payment thereof, where no distress can be found,
to be taken according to this Act.

The said Revenue shall be paid into the Exchequer.

And not charged with any grant or Pension.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Revenue and Sum
of money arising by virtue of this Act, (Except what shall be allowed to the
aforesaid Officers and Ministers for Collecting the same) shall be duly and
constantly paid and answered into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer; and shall
not be particularly charged or chargeable, either before it be paid into the
Exchequer, or after, with any Gift, Grants, or Pension whatsoever; And that all
and every Grants of any such Pensions, and all and every clause of Non obstante
therein contained shall be, and is hereby declared to be utterly void, and all
and every the persons to whom such Grants are passed, shall be, and are hereby
made Accomptants unto His Majesty, Grantees of the same shall be accomptanes.
His Heirs and Successors, and shall pay back all sums of money received by
pretense of such Grant; and the Court of Exchequer shall be, and is hereby
enjoined to Issue out Process accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint, Suit, Persons acting upon this Statute being sued therefore may
plead the general Issue.
or Information shall be Commenced or Prosecuted against any person or persons,
for what he or they shall do in pursuance or execution of this Act, such person
or persons so Sued, shall and may plead the general Issue, Not guilty; And upon
Issue joined may give this Act, and the special matter in Evidence; and if the
Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall become Nonsuit, or suffer discontinuance, or if a
Verdict pass against him, or if upon a Demurrer Judgment pass against him,
Treble Costs to the Defendants.
the Defendant shall recover treble Costs, for which there shall be like remedy
as in any case where Costs by Law are given to the Defendants.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Increases of Hearths or
Stoves which may happen
That where any Increase or Decrease of such Hearths or Stoves shall hereafter
happen, that an account in writing of the same shall be had and made in like
manner as the same is directed to be first taken, returned and enrolled by this
Act; and a Duplicate thereof sent into the Exchequer in such sort as is before
directed; Decreases how discharged.
And from thenceforth the Owner or Occupier of such House, where such Decrease
is, shall be discharged proportionably without any further pleading in the
Exchequer.

Provided always, That no person or persons shall be charged, prosecuted,
Arrerages not to be charged or sued for, but within 2 years next after they
become due.
or brought to account for the Arrerages of any Duty, or Arrerages of Revenue
raised by this Act, unless the said Suit shall commence within two years, and be
brought to a Judgment within four years, and the Duty levied within five years
next after the same shall grow due.

Provided always, That no person who by reason of his poverty, Poor people
exempted.
or the smallness of his Estate is exempted from the usual Tares, Payments and
Contributions, toward the Church and Poor, shall be charged or chargeable with
any the Duties by this Act Imposed, Any thing herein before to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted, That if the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, together with the Minister of the same, or
any two of them (whereof the Minister to be one) shall in writing under their
hands yearly certify their belief, that the house wherein any person does
Inhabit is not of greater value then of Twenty shillings per annum, upon the
full improved Rent; And that neither the person so Inhabiting, nor any other
using the same Message, has, uses, or occupies any Lands or Tenements of
their own or others, of the yearly value of Twenty shillings per annum, nor
has any Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, of the value of Ten pounds in
their own possession, or in the possession of any other in trust for them; That
then in such case, upon such Certificate made to the two next Justices of
Peace, and allowed (for which Certificate and allowance no Fee shall be paid)
the person on whose behalf such Certificate is made, shall not be returned by
the Constable, or other Officer; And the said house is hereby for that year
discharged of, and from all the Duties by this Act imposed; Any thing herein to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons, Further Penalty upon any person that shall accept or procure
any pension, Gift, or grant for years etc.
bodies Politic or Corporate, shall at any time hereafter procure or accept of
from the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors any Pension, Gift, or Grant for
years, life, or any other Estate, or any sum or sums of money, out of the
Revenue arising by virtue of this Act, that then such person or body Politic
or Corporate, procuring or accepting the same, shall forfeit double the value
of such Pension, Gift, or Grant; The one moiety of which forfeiture shall be to
the use of the poor of the Parish or Parishes, where the said Offenders be, or
inhabit, to be recovered by the Churchwardens, the other moiety to him that
will sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information,

Provided that this Act, Blowing houses Stamps Furnaces Kilns Ovens Hospitals.
or any thing herein contained shall not extend to charge any Blowinghouse, and
Stamp, Furnace, or Kiln, or any private Oven within any of the houses hereby
charged, nor any Hearth or Stove within the site of any Hospital or Almshouse
for the relief of poor people, whose Endowment and Revenue does not exceed in
true value the sum of One hundred pounds by the year.

Provided, The payments and duties charged only upon the Occupiers.
That the payments and duties hereby charged shall be charged only on the
Occupier for the time being of such Hearth, or Stove, dwelling in such house,
whereto such Hearth or Stove shall be belonging, his Executors or
Administrators, and not on the Landlord who Let or Demised the same, his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns.

Provided also, That no person or persons Indebted for any the Duties
aforesaid, shall thereby be privileged as a Debtor or Debtors to His Majesty,
His Heirs or Successors, No privilege to sue in the Exchequer. Nor assign a
Debt to the King.
to sue any person or persons in the Court of Exchequer, or to assign any Debt
to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, toward satisfaction of the same, 15
Car. 2. ca. 13. 16 Car. 2. ca. 3.

CAP. XI.
Frauds, and abuses in His Majesty's Customs prevented and Regulated.

12 Car. 2. cap. 19.
FOrasmuch as it appears, that several unlawful and indirect means and devices
are daily put in practice, to Export and Import Goods and merchandises
prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom; as also to defraud the
Kings most Excellent Majesty of His Dues, Customs, and Subsidies, as well by
secret and deceitful designs, as by open force and violence used against the
Kings Majesty's Officers, employed in the Affairs of the Customs;

For the better preventing of which frauds and violences in time to come, It is
Enacted and Ordained by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in
Parliament assembled; and be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority thereof,
That no Ship or Vessel, arriving from the parts beyond the Seas, Ships and
Vessels arriving from beyond the Seas at Grave-end.
shall be above three days coming from Graves-end to the place of her discharge
(within the River of Thames) without touching or staying at any Wharf, Key, or
place adjoining to either Shore between Graves-end and Chesters-Key (unless
apparently hindered by contrary Winds, Draught of Water, or other just
impediment to be allowed by such person or persons as are or shall be appointed
by His Majesty for managing the Customs, the Collectors Inwards, or other
principal Officers of the Customs) and then, or before the Master or Purser
(for that voyage) of such Ship or Vessel, shall make a just and true Entry upon
Oath of the Burden, Contents, and Lading of every such Ship or Vessel, True
Entries of Lading to be made upon Oath.
with the particular Marks, Numbers, Qualities, and Contents of every parcel of
Goods therein Laden, to the best of his knowledge; also where, and in what Port
she took in her Lading, of what Country built, how manned, who was Master
during the Voyage, and who are Owners thereof; and in all Out-Ports or Members,
to come directly up to the place of Vnlading, The Penalty
as the condition of the Port requires, and will admit, and making Entries as
aforesaid, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of One hundred pounds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Captain, Master,
Purser, or any other person or persons taking charge of any Ship or Vessel
bound for the parts beyond the Seas, The duty of Captains, Master and others
taking charge of Ships and Vessels bound for parts beyond the Seas.
or into the Kingdom of Scotland, whether the same Ship or Vessel shall have
Commission from, or belong unto the Kings Majesty that now is, His Heirs or
Successors, or shall belong to, or have Commission from any foreign Prince or
State, or otherwise, shall take in or suffer to be taken into, or laden aboard
any such Ship or Vessel, any English Goods, Wares, or Merchandise, to be
Exported into the parts beyond the Seas, or into the Kingdom of Scotland, until
such Captain, Master, Purser, or other person as aforesaid, shall have entered
such Ship or Ships in the Book of the Commissioners, To take in no English
goods till Entry thereof be made at the Custom-house.
Customer or Collector and Comptroller Outward of such Port where he shall Load
or take in Goods, together with the Name of such Captain or Master, the Burden
of such Ship or Vessel, the Number of Guns and Ammunition she carries, and to
what Port or Place she intends to pass or Sail, and before he or they shall
depart with his or their Ship or Vessel out of such Port or Place, shall bring
and deliver unto the said person or persons, which are or shall be appointed by
His Majesty for managing the Customs, the Customer or Collector and Comptroller
of such Port or Place, a Content in Writing under his or their Hands, of the
Names of every Merchant, and other person or persons that shall have laden and
put on Board any such Ship or Vessel, any such Goods or Merchandise, together
with the Marks and Numbers of such Goods and Merchandise, and shall likewise
publicly in the open Custom-house, upon his Corporal Oath, to the best of his
knowledge, have answered to such question or questions, as shall be demanded of
him by the said person or persons which are or shall be appointed by His Majesty
for managing the Customs, the Customer or Collector and Comptroller, or their
Deputies concerning such Goods and Merchandise as shall be aboard such Ship or
Vessel, upon pain of Forfeiture of One hundred pounds; Ships or Vessels of War
bringing goods.
And that no such Captain, Master, Purser, or other person or persons, taking
charge of any Ship or Vessel of War, as aforesaid, wherein any Goods, Wares or
Merchandises shall have been laden or brought from the Ports beyond the Seas,
or out of the Realm of Scotland, shall unload, or put on board any Lighter,
Boat or Bottom, or lay on land, or suffer to be discharged or put into any
Lighter, Boat or Bottom or to be laid on land out of any Ship or Vessel as
aforesaid, any Goods, Wares or Merchandise whatsoever, before such Captain,
Master, Purser, or other person taking charge of the Ship or Merchants Goods
for that Voyage as aforesaid, shall have signified and declared in writing
under his or their Hands, unto the person or persons which are or shall be
appointed by his Majesty for managing the Customs, the Customer or Collector,
and Comptroller Inwards of the Port where he arriveth, the Names of every
Merchant or Lader of any Goods or Merchandises aboard the said Ship or Vessel,
together with the Number and Marks, and the quantity and quality of every
Parcel of Goods and Merchandises to the best of his knowledge, and shall have
answered upon his or their Corporal Oath, to such Questions concerning such
Goods and Merchandises, as shall be publicly administered unto him in the open
Custom-house by such person or persons which are or shall be appointed for
Managing the Customs, Customer or Collector and Comptroller, or their Deputies,
and shall be liable to all Searches and other Rules which Merchants Ships are
subject unto, by the usage of his Majesty's Custom-house (victualling Bills and
Entering excepted) upon pain to forfeit One hundred pounds, and upon refusal to
make such Entries as aforesaid, as well Outward as Inwards the said person or
persons which are or shall be appointed for managing the Customs, and Officers
of His Majesty's Customs, and their Deputies, shall and may freely enter and go
on board all and every such Ship or Vessel of War, and bring from thence on
shore into His Majesty's Storehouse belonging to the Port where such Ship
shall be, all Goods and Merchandises prohibited or uncustomed, which shall be
found aboard any such Ship as aforesaid.

And be it hereby also Enacted, The power of Officers for managing the Custom
to enter and search Ships and Vessels.
That the said person or persons which are or shall be appointed for managing
the Customs, and Officers of His Majesty's Customs, and their Deputies, are
hereby Authorized and enabled to go and enter aboard any Ship or Vessel, as
well Ships of War as Merchant Ships, and from thence to bring on shore all
Goods prohibited or uncustomed, except Jewels, if they be Outward bound; and
if they be Ships or Vessels Inwards bound, from thence to bring on shore into
His Majesty's Storehouse, as aforesaid, all small Parcels of Fine Goods or
other Goods which shall be found in Cabbins, Chests, Trunks, or other small
Package, or in any private or secret place, in, or out of the Hold of the Ship
or Vessel, which may occasion a just suspicion that they were intended to be
fraudulently conveyed away; And all other sorts of Goods whatsoever, for which
the Duties of Tunnage and Poundage were not paid or Compounded for with in
Twenty days after the first Entry of the Ship, to be put and remain in the
Storehouse aforesaid, until His Majesty's Duties thereupon be justly
satisfied, unless the said person or persons which are or shall be appointed by
His Majesty for managing the Customs, and Officers of the Customs, shall see
just cause to allow a longer time, and that the said person or persons, which
are or shall be so appointed to manage the Customs, and the Officers of the
Customs, and their Deputies, may freely stay and remain aboard until all the
Goods are delivered and discharged out of the said Ships or Vessels; And if any
Master, Purser, or Boat-swain, or other taking charge in any Ship or Vessel, or
any other person whatsoever shall suffer any Truss, Bale, Pack, Fardel, Cask,
or other Package to be opened aboard the said Ship or Vessel, and the Goods
therein to be imbezelled, carried away, or put into any other Form or Package,
after the Ship comes into the Port of her discharge, in every such case the
said Master, Purser, Boat-swain, or others, shall forfeit the sum of one
hundred pounds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case, Goods
concealed in any Ship after clearing.
after the clearing of any Ship or Vessel, by the person or persons which are
or shall be appointed by His Majesty for managing the Customs, or any their
Deputies, and discharging the Watchmen or Tidesmen from attendance thereupon,
there shall be found on board such Ship or Vessel, any Goods, Wares or
Merchandises, which have been concealed from the knowledge of the said person
or persons, which are or shall be so appointed to manage the Customs, and for
which the Custom, Subsidy, and other Duties due upon the Importation thereof,
have not been paid, then the Master, Purser, The Penalty.
or other person taking charge of such Ship or Vessel, shall forfeit the sum of
One hundred pounds. And it shall be lawful to or for any person or persons,
authorized by Writ of Assistance, under the Seal of His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, to take a Constable, Headborough, or other Public Officer
inhabiting near unto the place, and in the day time to enter, and go into any
House, Shop, Cellar, Warehouse or Room, or other place, and in case of
resistance, to break open Doors, Chests, Trunks, and other Package, there to
seize, and from thence to bring any kind of Goods or Merchandise whatsoever,
prohibited and uncustomed, and to put and secure the same in His Majesty's
Storehouse, in the Port next to the place where such seizure shall be made.

And for the better increase of Shipping and Navigation, Be it further Enacted,
An account to be given of all foreign Ships in all Ports of England.
That the Collectors, and other Officers of His Majesty's Customs, in all the
Ports of England, shall forthwith give an account unto the Collectors and
Surveyor in the Port of London (appointed by His Majesty for all Duties and
Matters relating to a late Act Entitled, An Act for increasing and encouraging
of Shipping and Navigation,) of all Foreign built Ships in their Ports, 12
Car. 2. cap. 18.
owned and belonging to the people of England, of what built and burden they
are, for which Certificates have been made according to the said Act, and that
the said Collector and Surveyor shall make a true and perfect list of all such
Ships, attested under their hands, and transmit the same into his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, on, or before the month of December, in the year 1662.
there to remain upon record. And that no Foreign built Ship (that is to say)
not built in any of his Majesty's Dominions of Asia, Africa, or America,
Foreign built Ships not to have the privilege of Ships belonging to England or
Ireland.
or other than such as shall (bona fide) be bought before the First of October
1662. next ensuing, and expressly named in the said List, shall enjoy the
privilege of a Ship belonging to England or Ireland, although owned or manned
by English (except such Ships only as shall be taken at Sea by Letters of Mart
or Reprizal, and condemnation made in the Court of Admiralty, as lawful Prize)
but all such Ships shall be deemed as Aliens Ships, and be liable unto all
Duties that Aliens Ships are liable unto by virtue of the said Act for increase
of Shipping and Navigation. And whereas it is required by the said Act, that in
sundry cases the Master and three fourths of the Mariners are to be English, it
is to be understood, that any of his Majesty's Subjects of England, Ireland,
and his Plantations, are to be accounted English, and no others, and that the
number of Mariners be accounted according to what they shall have been during
the whole Voyage. And whereas of late some of the persons appointed by His
Majesty for managing the Customs, and the Officers of the Customs and their
Deputies, have been hindered, affronted, abused, beaten, and wounded to the
hazard of their lives, in the due execution of their several trusts and
services in their respective places, by armed companies and multitudes of men,
and goods prohibited and uncustomed have by force and violence, as well by Land
as by Water, been forcibly carried and conveyed away, Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That where any Officer or Officers shall be by any person
or persons armed with Club, The punishment for beating or abusing Officers of
the Customs.
or any manner of Weapon, forcibly hindered, affronted, abused, beaten or
wounded, as aforesaid, either on board any Ship or Vessel; or upon the Land or
Water, in the due execution of their Office, all and every person and persons
so resisting, affronting, abusing, beating or wounding the said Officer or
Officers or their Deputies, or such as shall Act in their aid or assistance,
shall by the next Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate, be committed to
Prison, there to remain till the next Quarter Sessions: And the Justices of the
Peace of the said Quarter Sessions, shall, and are hereby empowered to punish
the Offender by Fine, not exceeding One hundred pounds, and the Offender is to
remain in Prison till he be discharged by Order of the Exchequer, both of the
Fine and of the Imprisonment, or discover the person that set him on work, to
the end he may be legally proceeded against.

No goods to be Water-born or landed but in the presence of some Officer of the
Customs.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Wharfinger,
or Keeper of any Wharf, Crane, Key, or their servants or any of them, shall
take up or land, or knowingly suffer to be taken up, or landed, or shall Ship
off or suffer to be Water-born, at or from any of their said Wharfs, Cranes, or
Keys, any Goods, Wares or Merchandise prohibited, or whereof any Custom,
Subsidy, or other Duties are due and payable unto the Kings Majesty, without
the presence of some of the Officers of His Majesty's Customs thereunto
appointed, or at hours and times not appointed by Law (except in the Port of
Hull, 1 Eliz cap. 11.
as in the Statute of the First year of Queen Elizabeth, Chapter the eleventh,
is excepted, and not otherwise) or Goods passing by Certificates,
Waste-Cockquet, The Penalty
or otherwise without the presence or notice given to one or more of His
Majesty's Officers, That in every such case all and every such Wharfinger and
Keeper of such Wharfe, Crane or Key, shall forfeit and pay the sum of One
hundred pounds; And if any Goods or Merchandise shall be Laden or taken in from
the Shore, into any Bark, Hoy, Lighter, Barge, Wherry or Boat, to be carried
aboard any Ship or Vessel Outward bound for the parts beyond the Seas, or
Laden, or taken in, from or out of any Ship or Vessel coming in and arriving
from foreign parts, without a Warrant, and presence of one or more Officers of
the Customs, such Bark, Hoy, Lighter, Barge, Boat or Wherry shall be forfeited
and lost, and the Master, Purser, Boatswain, or other Mariner of any Ship
Inward bound, knowing and consenting thereunto, shall forfeit the value of the
Goods so unshipped; And further, That in case any Car-man, Porter, Water-man,
or other person or persons whatsoever shall assist in the taking up, landing,
shipping off, or carrying away any such Goods, Wares or Merchandises, that then
such Carman, Porter, Water-man or other person or persons so offending being
apprehended by Warrant of any Justice of the Peace for that County, City or
Borough which the said Justices, and every of them are hereby Authorized to
issue, and to examine Witnesses upon Oath concerning such fact, and the same
being proved by the Oath of Two Witnesses, the said Offenders for such first
Offense shall and may by such Justice of the Peace be committed to the next
Gaol, there to remain till he and they find sufficient Surety to be of the good
behavior for so long time, until he and they shall be thereof discharged by
the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, Undertreasurer or Barons of the Exchequer; And
in case he or they so convicted, shall afterward at any time offend in the
like kind, then he and they shall and may by any Justice of the Peace as
aforesaid, be committed to the next Gaol, there to remain for the space of Two
Months without Bail or Mainprize, or until he shall pay unto the Sheriff of
that County the sum of Five pounds for the use of His Majesty, or until he
shall by the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor or Undertreasurer or Court of
Exchequer be thence discharged. Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, shall be shipped or put
on Board to be carried forth to the open Sea from any one Port, Goods carried
from one Port to another in England or Wales.
Creek or Member in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Port, and
Town of Berwick, to be landed at any other place of this Realm, without a
Sufferance or Warrant first had and obtained from the said person or persons,
which are or shall be appointed for managing the Customs, and Officers of his
Majesty's Customs, all such Wares and Merchandises shall be forfeited and lost,
and that the Master of every Ship or Vessel that shall lade or take in any such
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, in any Port, Member or Creek within this Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town and Port of Berwick, to be landed and
discharged in some other Port, Member or Creek of the said Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Town and Port of Berwick, shall before the Ship or Vessel
be removed or carried out of the Port (where he shall take in his lading,) take
out a Cocquet or Cocquets, and become bound to the Kings Majesty with good
Security, in the value of the Goods, Wares and Merchandises aforesaid, for
Delivery and Discharge thereof in the Port or place for which the same shall be
entered as aforesaid, or in some other Port or place within the said Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Port and Town of Berwick, and (the dangers and
accidents of the Seas excepted) to return a Certificate within Six months
after the date of such Cocquet and Cocquets, under the Hands and Seals of the
Kings Majesty's Officers, Signed also by some of the said person or persons,
which are or shall be appointed by His Majesty for managing the Customs, or
their Deputy or Deputies, in every respective Ports, Members, or Creeks where
the same shall be landed and discharged, to His Majesty's Officers of the
Customs to whom such security has been given as aforesaid, that such Goods,
Wares and Merchandises were there landed and discharged accordingly, Officers
of any Port making false certificate.
upon the penalty of the forfeiture of the Bond and Security aforesaid.

And be it hereby further Enacted, That if any Officer of any Port, Member or
Creek, shall grant or make any false Certificate of any Goods or Merchandises
which should have been landed out of any Ship or Vessel, That such Officer
shall lose his Employment, and moreover forfeit the sum of Fifty pounds, The
Penalty.
and suffer one years Imprisonment without bail or mainprize, and be incapable
of serving his Majesty in any place of Trust concerning his Customs, and be
further liable to such Corporal punishment as the Court of Exchequer shall
think fit; Counterfeiting Cocquets, Certificates, etc. The penalty.
And if any person whatsoever shall Counterfeit Raze, or Falsify any Cocquet,
Certificate or Return, Transire, Let-pass, or any other Custom-house Warrant,
he shall forfeit One hundred pounds, and the Cocquet, Certificate, or Return
shall be invalid and of none effect; and if any Goods, Wares or Merchandises
brought or coming into any Port, Haven, or Creek within the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, or Port and Town of Berwick, from any other Port, Haven, or
Creek within the Kingdom of England, or Dominions aforesaid, by Port, Cocquet,
Transire, Let-pass, or Certificate, in Ships or Vessels shall be landed or put
on shore before such Cocquet, Transire, Let-pass, or Certificate shall be
delivered to such Person or Persons, which are or shall be appointed by his
Majesty for manageing his Customs, the Customer or Collector, and Comptroller
of the Port or Place of their Arrival, or to their Deputy or Deputies, and a
Warrant or Sufferance made and given from such person or persons, Customer, or
Collector and Comptroller, or their Deputy and Deputies aforesaid, for the
landing and discharging thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Goods,
Wares, Goods secretly conveyed beyond Sea uncustomed, and undiscovered by the
officers.
or Merchandises, for which the Duties of Subsidy or Custom are due and payable
to the Kings Majesty, shall be secretly conveyed on Board any Ship or Vessel
before the Custom and Subsidy thereof be duly answered and paid, and shall
escape the discovery thereof by the Officers of the Customs, or others, and be
carried into the parts beyond the Seas; in such case the Owners or Proprietors
of such Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, or other person or persons who shall
have so shipped or caused the same to be shipped and transported, shall forfeit
the double value of the Goods, The penalty.
computed according to the Book of Rates, Except for Coal, which so secretly
Exported as aforesaid, shall pay double the Custom and Duty, to be Collected
and Levied in such manner as by the Act of Tunnage and Poundage is directed and
appointed.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, For preventing frauds in
louring strangers goods.
That for preventing of frauds in coloring of strangers Goods, and otherwise,
every Merchant or other, passing any Goods, Wares or Merchandises, Inwards or
Outward, shall by himself, or his known servant, Factor or Agent, subscribe
one of his Bills of every Entry, with the mark, number, and contents of every
parcel of such Goods as are rated to pay by the piece or measure, and weight of
the whole parcel of such Goods as are rated to pay by the weight, without
which, the Officers of the Customs shall not suffer any Entry to pass; And that
no children of aliens under the age of Twenty one years be permitted to be
Traders, or any Goods or Merchandises to be entered in their names.

Be it also hereby Enacted, That upon any Actions, There shall be no party Jury
in actions or suits concerning customs.
Suits and Informations that shall be brought, commenced, or entered upon any
Law or Statute concerning the Kings Majesty's Subsidies of Tunnage and
Poundage, or Ships or Goods to be forfeited by reason of unlawful Importation
or Exportation, there shall not be any Party Jury, but such only as are the
natural and freeborn Subjects of the King, his Heirs or Successors.

And whereas allowances given to Merchants and others for defects and damages
upon Goods, Allowances for defects and damages in goods, how to be made.
and Five per centum generally upon all Goods Imported, and Twelve per centum
upon Wines, every Merchant or others having the aforesaid allowances inwards,
shall in person upon Oath by himself, or by his known Servant or Factor, demand
and receive the moneys due upon Debenturs for such foreign Goods Exported by
such Certificate, with such abatements and allowances as were made and given to
him upon the Importation; and if he be found fraudulently to ship out less in
quantity or value then is expressed in his Certificate, the Goods therein
mentioned, or the value thereof shall be forfeited; and the Owner or Merchant
shall lose the benefit of receiving back any part of the Subsidy for those
Goods; and if any Goods shipped out by Certificate as aforesaid, shall be
landed again in the same, or any other Port or Place within the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick, (unless in case of
Distress to save the Goods from perishing, which shall be presenly made known
to the Person or Persons which are or shall be appointed by His Majesty to
manage His Customs, and Principal Officers of the Port) no allowance shall be
demanded or made for those Goods, and the said Goods, or value thereof, shall
be forfeited and lost.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Goods, Goods
brought from, or carried into Scotland by land, shall pass through Barwick or
Carli^e.
Wares or Merchandise that shall be brought out of, or carried into the Kingdom
of Scotland by Land, into, or out of the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
or Port and Town of Berwick, shall pass and be carried by and through some of
the Towns and Passages hereafter named (that is to say) by and through Berwick
or Carlisle, and then, and there pay the Custom and Subsidy granted and due to
the Kings Majesty, by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, 12 Car. 2.
cap. 4.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, and other Sums of Money
payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported; And if any Goods, Wares or
Merchandise prohibited or uncustomed, coming out of Scotland into England, or
going out of England into Scotland, shall pass by, or beyond the Towns, Ports
and Places aforenamed without due entry and payment of the Customs, That then
all such Goods, Wares and Merchandise, or the value thereof shall be forfeited
and lost.

And whereas in and by an Act of Parliament in the First year of Queen
Elizabeth, 1 El. cap. 11. When and where Merchandise shall be landed and custom
paid.
of famous memory, directing when and where Merchandise shall be landed, and
Customs paid; it is amongst diverse other things Enacted and Ordained, That no
Goods, Wares or Merchandise shall be shipped or laden aboard any Ship or
Vessel, or landed or discharged out of, or from any Ship or Vessel, but in or
upon some such open Place, Key, or Wharf, Places, Keys, or Wharfs, (Except the
Port of Hull) as her Highness, her Heirs and Successors should therefore assign
or appoint by virtue of her Highness Commission or Commissions, within the Port
of London, and in all Ports, Creeks, Havens, or Roads, as in and by the said
Act does, and may at large appear. And whereas, notwithstanding the aforesaid
Act, there are some Ports, Creeks, and places where Customers, Collectors, and
Comptrollers and Searchers, and their servants had then, time out of mind, been
resident, to which no such Commissions were sent, nor places, keys, nor wharfs
appointed, as by the said Act was directed; And whereas also since that time,
by reason of the alteration of Rivers, Streams, Channels and Sands, some places
then appointed are become unfit and useless, and others much more convenient
and commodious, as well for Traffic and Commerce, as for Landing and
Discharging, Lading and Shipping of Goods, Wares, and Merchandise; It is
Enacted and Ordained, and be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Kings Majesty may from time to time by his Highness
Commission, or Commissions out of his Court of Exchequer, assign and appoint
all such further Places, Ports, Members and Creeks (except the Town of Hull) as
shall be lawful for the landing and discharging, lading or shipping of any
Goods, Wares or Merchandise, within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
or Port or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and to what ancient and head-Ports
respectively such Places, Members or Creeks shall belong and appertain; And
where any such Member, Creek, or Place shall be so (as aforesaid) appointed by
virtue of the said Commission or Commissions, the Customer, Collector,
Comptroller and Searcher of the head-Port, shall by themselves, or their
sufficient Deputy or Deputies, servant or servants, reside and inhabit, for the
entering, clearing, and passing, shipping and discharging of Ships, Goods and
Merchandise; And by virtue of the aforesaid Commission or Commissions, may
likewise set down and appoint the extents, bounds, and limits of every Port,
Haven, or Creek within his Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town and Port of Berwick, whereby the extents, limits and privileges of every
Port, Haven and Creek, may be ascertained and known; And it shall not be lawful
for any Person or Persons whatsoever, to lade, or put, or cause to be laden or
put off, or from any Key, Wharf, or other place on the Land, into any Ship,
Vessel, Lighter, Boat or Bottom, any Goods, Wares, or Merchandise whatsoever,
(Fish taken by his Majesty's Subjects, Sea-coal, Stone and Bestials only
excepted) to be Transported into any place of the parts beyond the Seas, or
carried by land into the Realm of Scotland, or to take up, discharge, or lay on
land, or cause, or procure to be taken up, discharged, and laid on land out of
any Boat, Lighter, Ship, Vessel or Bottom (being not in Leak or Wreck) any
Goods, Wares, or Merchandise whatsoever (Fish taken by his Majesty's Subjests,
Bestials and Salt only excepted) to be brought from any of the parts beyond the
Seas, or by land from the Realm of Scotland, by way of Merchandise, but only
upon such open Place, Key or Wharf, Places, Keys or Wharfs, as his Majesty
shall from time to time assign and appoint by virtue of such Commission and
Commissions as aforesaid, in his Majesty's Port of London, and the Members and
Liberties thereof, in any other Port, Place, Member or Creek within his
Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick,
without special sufferance and leave first had from the Commissioners and
Officers of his Majesty's Customs, upon the penalty of the forfeiture of all
such Goods, Wares and Merchandise.

For avoiding Practices between Owners of goods and Informers, to avoid payment
of customs.

None to seize any goods but officers of the customs.


And forasmuch as it does appear by daily experience, That there are great
Practices and Combinations between the Importers and Owners of Goods and
Merchandises, and the Seizers and Informers, with design and intent to defraud
the force of the Law, and his Majesty of his Duties and Customs; Be it Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That no Ship or Ships, Goods, Wares, or
Merchandise, shall be seized as forfeited, for or by reason of unlawful
Importation or Exportation, into, or out of this Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, or Port and Town of Berwick, or any the Ports, members or Creeks
thereunto belonging, or for not payment of any Customs or Subsidies now due, or
hereafter to be due and payable to his Majesty, but by the person or persons
who are or shall be appointed by his Majesty to manage his Customs, or Officers
of his Majesty's Customs for the time being, or such other person or persons as
shall be deputed and authorized thereunto by Warrant from the Lord-Treasurer,
or Undertreasurer, or by special Commission from his Majesty under the Great
or Privy Seal; And if any Seizure shall hereafter be made by any other Person
or Persons whatsoever for any the Causes aforesaid, such seizure shall be void
and of none effect, any Statute, Law, Act, or Provision to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

In any suit against persons employed about the customs, the Defendant may
plead the general issue. 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in every Action,
Suit, Indictment, Information or Prosecution, wherein or whereby the person or
persons which are or shall be appointed by his Majesty for managing his
Customs, or the Officers of his Majesty's Customs, or any Officer or Officers,
Person or Persons authorized by his Majesty to put in execution the Act of
Parliament, For increasing and encouraging of Navigation, their Deputies or
Servants, or any others acting in aid of them, have been, are, or shall be
sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested, it shall be lawful for all and every
the said Persons, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to plead the
general Issue, And to give this for other acts relating to customs or
Navigation in evidence.
and to give this or the aforesaid Acts of Parliament, relating to the Customs
and Navigation in evidence, in any of his Majesty's Courts of Justice, or other
Courts where the said matter shall be depending; And the Judges of the said
Courts are hereby strictly enjoined and required to admit the same, and to
acquit and indemnifie them, and every of them, of, and from all such Suits,
Indictments, Informations, or Prosecutions, for or concerning any matter or
thing acted or done in the due and necessary performance and execution of their
respective Trusts and Employments therein.

Be it hereby also Enacted for avoiding of fraudulent Compositions, That if any
Seizer. For avoiding fraudulent compositions by Informers.
Informer or Officer as aforesaid, shall not prosecute to effect for the
bringing to Trial and Condemnation the Ships, Goods and Merchandise by them
Seized or Informed against, That then, and in every such case, it shall be
lawful to or for any of the person or persons which are or shall be appointed
by his Majesty for managing his Customs, or the Officers of the Customs, or
other person or persons deputed by them, or thereunto Authorized by the
Lord-Treasurer, or Undertreasurer to make seizure of, or inform against such
Goods and Merchandise, or bring his Action for the same by way of Devenerunt,
and that they shall be esteemed and adjudged in Law as the true first Informers
and Seizers, and have the benefit of such Informers or Seizers; Any Law,
Statute, Act or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that no Informer or Officer be suffered to compound under one Third of the
appraised value upon loss of his Office;

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No person employed about
managing the customs, may take any bride or reward to connive at any Entry.
That if any of the Kings Majesty's Officers, or other persons appointed to
manage His Majesty's Customs, Searchers, Waiters, or other person or persons
whatsoever deputed and appointed by and under them, or any of them, or any
other Authority whatsoever, and employed in or about the Affairs of the Kings
Customs and Subsidies, shall directly or indirectly take or receive any bribe,
recompense or reward, in any kind whatsoever, or connive at any false Entry of
any Goods or Merchandises, whereby the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors,
shall be defrauded or hindered, in, or of His Customs and Subsidies, or other
Sums of money or Goods prohibited by the Law to be Imported or Exported into or
out of the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, Town and Port of Berwick, be
suffered to pass either by way of Importation or Exportation, the person or
persons therein offending, shall forfeit the sum of One hundred pounds, The
Penalty.
and be for ever afterward incapable of any Office or Employment under the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or any Authority derived from them, as
also the Merchant, Mariner, or other person or persons whatsoever, who shall
give or pay any such Bribe, Recompense or Reward as aforesaid, shall forfeit
the sum of Fifty pounds.

Provided nevertheless, that if any person or persons offending as aforesaid,
Persons revealing their own offenses within two months to be acquitted.
shall reveal and make known such his or their Offense in Two months time to
the Treasurer of England, the Chancellor, Undertreasurer, or Barons of the
Exchequer, he shall for that Offense be clearly acquitted and discharged.

And be it further Enacted, Foreign goods, where to be landed, and how weighed
and numbered.
That all foreign Goods and Merchandise which by the person or persons which
are or shall be appointed by his Majesty for the managing of the Customs, and
the Customer, Collector and Comptroller, shall be permitted to be landed and
taken up by Bills at sight, Bills at view or sufferance, shall be landed at the
most convenient Keys or Wharfs where the said person or persons so to be
appointed, Customer, or Collector or Comptroller, shall appoint, and not
elsewhere, and there or in his Majesty's Storehouse of the respective Ports,
at the Election of the said person or persons so to be appointed and Officers,
shall be measured, weighed and numbered, by and in the presence of the Officers,
to be thereunto particularly appointed; which said Officers so appointed, shall
perfect the Entry, and thereunto shall subscribe their Names, and the next day
following shall give Account, and make report of every respective Entry so
perfected as aforesaid, to the said person or persons which are or shall be
appointed to manage his Majesty's Customs, Customer, or Collector and
Comptroller aforesaid, without reasonable cause to be allowed by the said
person or persons, or Officers aforesaid, or in default thereof, shall forfeit
the sum of One hundred pounds.

Be it also Enacted, That no Ship, Vessel, or Boat, Vessels appointed for
carrying Letters, may not import nor export Merchandise.
appointed and employed ordinarily for the Carriage of Letters and Pacquets
shall (unless it be in such Cases as shall be allowed by the said person or
persons which are or shall be appointed to manage his Majesty's Customs, or
Officers aforesaid) Import or Export any Goods or Merchandise into or out of
the parts beyond the Seas, upon the Penalty of the forfeiture of One hundred
pounds to be paid by the Master of the said Vessel or Boat, with the loss of
his place; and all Goods and Merchandise that shall be found on Board any such
Ship, Vessel, or Boat shall be forfeited and lost.

And whereas some Doubts and Disputes have arisen concerning the said late Act
For encresing and encouraging of Shipping and Navigation, An Explanation of 12
Car. 2. cap. 18. of goods prohibited to be brought from Holland.
about some of the Goods therein prohibited to be brought from Holland, and the
Parts and Ports thereabouts; Be it Enacted and Declared, That no sort of Wines
(other then Rhenish) no sort of Spicery, Grocery, Tobacco, Potashes, Pitch,
Tarr, Salt, Rozen, Deal-Boards, Firr, Timber, or Olive-Oyl, shall be imported
into England, Wales or Berwick, from the Netherlands or Germany, upon any
pretense whatsoever in any sort of Ships or Vessels whatsoever, upon penalty of
the loss of all the said Goods, as also of the Ships and furniture.

And whereas also by the said Acts For encouraging and increasing of Shipping
and Navigation, 12 Car. 2. c. 18. Imposition of 5 s. per Tun upon French
Vessels.
an Imposition of Five shillings per Tun is laid upon all Ships or Vessels
belonging to any Subjects of the French King, which shall come into any Port,
Harbor, Creek, or Road of England, Ireland, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and shall there lade or unlade any Goods, or take in or set on shore any
Passengers, Yet notwithstanding there is great difficulty in recovering the
said Duty, because small Shallops come not into Harbors where Officers are,
but either put their Goods and Passengers on shore, or Boats come out of
Harbors, which privately convey them on shore, there being no penalty in the
Act against such Offenders; Be it therefore Enacted, How to be recovered, and
the penalty.
That any such Ship or Vessel upon which the abovesaid Imposition of Five
shillings per Tun is due and payable, which shall either put on shore, or put
over into any Boat any Goods or Passengers without payment of Custom and
Imposition of Tunnage, at any time returning into any Harbor, Port, or Creek
of England or Ireland, shall not only pay the Duties formerly due, but forfeit
the sum of Ten pounds; And whatsoever Pilot, Water-man, or Boat-man, which
shall from any Harbor, Port or Creek go out and bring any Goods from on board
such Vessel, shall not only be liable to pay the Duty of Tunnage which the said
Vessel should have paid, but forfeit the sum of Forty pounds.

Be it also hereby Enacted, That Vinegar, Perry, Rape, Cider, and Cider-eager,
of any sort or kind whatsoever, Tunnage upon V negar, Perry, Rape, Cider and
Cider eager.
Imported from and after the four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six
hundred sixty and two, from Foreign Parts, is hereby Rated to pay to the Kings
Majesty a Subsidy of Tunnage of Four pounds Ten shillings per Tun Imported by
English, and Six pounds Imported by Stangers, according to the Rate already
imposed and set upon French Wines, to be Collected and Levied for such time and
in such manner as by the Act of Tunnage and Poundage is directed and appointed;
And the same are by virtue of this Act exonerated and discharged of all further
and other Sums heretofore set or charged upon those Commodities, by or under
the name of Subsidy or Poundage; And in case of Exportation, there shall be
repaid and allowed to the Englishman Exporter, the sum of Three pounds Ten
shillings per Tun, and to the Alien Four pounds Fifteen shillings per Tun, to
be repaid according to the Rules of the Book of Rates now established.

And whereas the Ingenious Industry of these times has taught the Dyers of
England the Art of fixing the Colors made of Logwood, Logwood or Blockwood.
alias Blockwood, so as that by experience they are found as lasting and
serviceable as the Colors made with any other sort of Dying-wood whatsoever;
23 El. cap. 9.
And whereas by a Statute made in the three and twentieth year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory, Entitled, Logwood and Blockwood shall not be
used in Dying of Cloth, 39 El. cap. 11.
etc. And by another Statute made in the Nine and thirtieth year of the
aforesaid Queen Elizabeth (Entitled, The Penalty for mixing or using of
Logwood in Dying Cloth or other Stuff) all Logwood, alias Blockwood, that shall
be found within this Kingdom shall be forfeited, and openly burned, with diverse
other Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures upon such as shall use the same in
Dying-Cloth or other Commodities, as by the said several Acts aforesaid may and
does appear: Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
aforesaid Statutes, and either of them, be and are hereby Repealed and made
void as to all Clauses, Articles, Provisions and Penalties in any wise relating
to the prohibition or use of Logwood, alias Blockwood; And that from and after
the first day of February, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, It shall and
may be lawful to and for any person or persons, freely to import into this
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick upon Tweed,
any quantities of Logwood, alias Blockwood, and freely to use the same in Dying
or Coloring any sort of Goods or Manufacture whatsoever, the aforesaid two
Statutes, or any other Law, Statute, Usage, Custom, Patent of privilege,
Proclamation, or other Restraint, Matter or Thing to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

Imposition upon Logwood imported. 12 Car. 2. cap. 18.
Provided, That such Importation be according to the Rules prescribed and
enjoined in the late Act, Entitled, An Act for encouraging and increasing of
Shipping and Navigation, and paying a Subsidy to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors for every Tun of the said Logwood, alias Blockwood, so to be
Imported after the rate of Five pounds, and after that rate for any greater or
lesser quantity according to such Rules, and under such Penalties as are
provided for all other Imported Goods in a late Act, Entitled, An Act of
Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage, 12 Car. 2. ca. 4.
and other Sums of Money payable upon Merchandise Exported and Imported:
Excepting only that for all of the said Commodities Exported according to the
Rules of the Book of Rates, there shall be repaid to the Exporter the Sum of
Four pounds per Tun; the said Rate for Logwood, alias Blockwood, to be
Collected and Levied for such time, and in such manner as by the Act of Tunnage
and Poundage is directed and appointed.

And be it further Enacted, That all Actions, Suits and Informations to be had
and commenced upon the Act For encouraging and increasing of Shipping and
Navigation, or any Clause or Article therein, may be entered and prosecuted in
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Westminster, That upon all such Suits and
Informations to be brought upon the Act of Tunnage and Poundage, and the Act
aforesaid, or any other Act or Statute concerning the Importation of Goods or
Merchandise from the parts beyond the Seas, Onus probandi of property of goods
claimed to lie upon the Owner or Claimer.
if the property thereof be claimed by any person or persons as the Importer
thereof; in such case Onus Probandi shall lie upon the Owner or Claimer
thereof. Provided that in case the seizure or Information shall be made upon
any Clause or Thing contained in the late Act, Entitled, An Act for the
encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navigation, Commission and time to
examine witnesses beyond the Sea.
that then the Defendant or Defendants shall on his or their request have a
Commission out of the High Court of Chancery to examine Witnesses beyond the
Seas, and have a competent time allowed for the return thereof before any trial
shall be had upon the Case, according to the distance of place where such
Commission or Commissions are to be executed; and that the Examination of
Witnesses so returned shall be admitted for evidence in Law at the Trial, as if
it had been given Viva voce by the Examinate in Court; Any Law, Statute or
Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it also Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, In what cases
Writs of delivery may be granted.
That no Writ of Delivery shall be granted out of the Court of Exchequer for
Goods Seized, but upon good Security; and that for Goods perishable only, or
in cases where the Informer shall deferor delay his coming to as speedy a Trial
as the Course of that Court will permit, and shall be thereby Ordered and
Directed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one Moiety of all
the Forfeitures before in this Act mentioned and appointed, shall be to the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other Moiety to such person or
persons as shall Seize or Sue for the same by Bill, Plaint, or Information in
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, or any other his Majesty's Courts of Record,
wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That all Officers belonging to the
Admiralty, All Officers and persons to be aiding the Officers and persons for
management of the Customs.
Captains and Commanders of Ships, Forts, Castles and Block-houses, as also all
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and Headboroughs,
and all the Kings Majesty's Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever whom it
may concern, shall be aiding and assisting to all and every person and persons
which are or shall be appointed by his Majesty to manage his Customs, and the
Officers of his Majesty's Customs, and their Respective Deputies in the due
Execution of all and every Act and Thing in and by this present Act required
and enjoined; And all such who shall be aiding and assisting unto them in the
due execution hereof, shall be defended and saved harmless by virtue of this
Act.

And be it hereby also Enacted, That all Deputies, Clerks and Servants about
the Customs to be sworn for their truth and faithfulness therein.
Clerks and Servants which now have any place or Office in or about the Customs
and Subsidies by and under the Commissioners, or other the Kings Officers
thereof, shall before the First day of June next, take their respective
Corporal Oath and Oaths for the true and faithful execution and discharge, to
the best of their knowledge and power, of their several Trusts and Employments
committed to their charge and inspection; And that no person or persons shall
hereafter be employed or put in trust in the business of the Customs, until he
shall first have taken his Oath as aforesaid; And the Commissioners and
principal Officers in the Port of London, and the principal Officers in all
other the outports, or any two of them, are hereby authorized to administer,
and give to all and every person or persons such Oath and Oaths as aforesaid,
and to cause the same to be Entered and Registered in the Custom-house of every
respective Port where the person so taking the Oath as aforesaid, shall have
his residence and employment.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Persons employed
about the Customs, shall demand nor take any more then the fees due by Law.
That if any person employed in his Majesty's Customs, shall demand or take any
other or greater sum of money then by Law is now due, or hereafter shall become
due, or shall put any Merchant or other person out of his turn without express
order before, or immediate approbation after, from the person or persons who
are or shall be appointed by his Majesty to manage his Customs, or the superior
Officers for the Customs, or shall illegally detain the goods of any person, or
shall neglect or refuse to make re-payments and allowances which are or shall
be due since the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, or shall not after notice given, give out and execute his Warrant, shall
be liable to double Costs and Damages.

And for the better increase of good and serviceable shipping, Of what sise and
burden Merchants Ships shall be, and what men and ammunition they shall carry.
and securing the public Trade and Commerce; Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That all and every Merchant or other person that shall after the
Nine and twentieth day of September, One thousand six hundred sixty and two,
Export any Goods or Merchandises from any Port of this Kingdom, capable of a
Ship or Vessel of two hundred Tun upon an ordinary full Sea, to any part or
place of the Mediterranean Sea beyond the port of Malaga, or Import any Goods
or Merchandise from the ports or places aforesaid, to any port of this said
Kingdom, in any Ship or Vessel that has not two Decks, and does carry less
then sixteen pieces of Ordnances mounted together, with two men for each Gun,
and other Ammunition proportionable, shall pay to our Sovereign Lord the King
for all and every the Wares and Merchandises so Exported or imported, One per
centum over and above the Rates and Duties of Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage
otherwise due and payable for the same, Any thing in this Act before contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, Proviso for Ships exporting Fish.
that it shall and may be lawful to export from any of his Majesty's Dominions,
Fish, into any of the Ports of the Mediterranean Sea aforesaid, in any English
Ship or Vessel whatsoever, Provided that one moiety of her full lading be Fish
only, and in such case to Import any Wares or Merchandise in the same Ship for
that Voyage, without paying any other Rates or Duties of Tonnage or Poundage
for the same, then were heretofore accustomed.

And for the better encouragement of building good and Defensible Ships; Be it
Enacted, Encouragemen^ for Building good and defensible Ships.
That all and every person or persons that shall within the space of Seven
years, from and after the Five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six
hundred sixty two, build, or cause to be built within any of his Majesty's
Dominions, any Ship or Vessel of Three Decks, or Two Decks and a half, with a
Fore-Castle, and Five foot between each Deck, mounted with thirty pieces of
Ordnance at least, and other Ammunition proportionable, shall for the first two
Voyages which the said Ship or Ships make from his Majesty's Dominions to any
foreign parts, have and receive to his and their own proper use and benefit
one Tenth part of the Customs that shall be paid to His Majesty for all such
Goods or Merchandises as shall be Exported or Imported on the said Ship or
Ships, to and from this Kingdom; And the Commissioners and Officers of His
Majesty's Customs are hereby empowered and required to pay the same to the
Owner or Owners of the said Ship or Ships accordingly.

Salt brought out of Scotland to pay ob. a Gallon.
Provided always, and be it hereby Declared and Enacted, That from and after
the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred sixty two, All
Salt which shall be brought out of the Kingdom of Scotland into this Kingdom,
the Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall yield and pay, and
is hereby made chargeable to yield and pay unto the Kings Majesty, One half
penny upon every Gallon of such imported Salt of Winchester measure, at the
landing thereof; Any thing in this present Act, or any former or other Law,
Statute, or Order to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. XII.
For the better Relief of the Poor of this Kingdom.

The occasion of increase of Poor.
WHereas the necessity, number and continual increase of the Poor, not only
within the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Liberties of each of
them, but also through the whole Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, is
very great, and exceeding burdensome, being occasioned by reason of some
defects in the Law concerning the settling of the Poor, and for want of a due
provision of the regulations of relief and employment in such parishes or
places where they are legally settled, which does enforce many to turn
incorrigible Rogues, and others to perish for want, together with the neglect
of the faithful execution of such Laws and Statutes as have formerly been made
for the apprehending of Rogues and Vagabonds, and for the good of the Poor: For
remedy whereof, and for the preventing the perishing of any the Poor, whether
young or old, for want of such supplies as are necessary; May it please your
most Excellent Majesty that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Poor people going from one Parish to another.
and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of
the same, That whereas by reason of some defects in the Law, poor people are
not restrained from going from one Parish to another, and therefore do
endeavor to settle themselves in those Parishes where there is the best Stock,
the largest Commons, or Wastes to build Cottages, and the most Woods for them
to burn and destroy, and when they have consumed it, then to another Parish,
and at last become Rogues and Vagabonds, to the great discouragement of
Parishes to provide Stocks, where it is liable to be devoured by strangers; Be
it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful, How to be settled, coming to any Tenement under ten pounds yearly value.
upon complaint made by the Churchwardens, or Overseers of the poor of any
Parish to any Justice of Peace, within Forty days after any such person or
persons coming so to settle as aforesaid in any Tenement under the yearly value
of Ten pounds, for any two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the
Quorum of the Division where any person or persons that are likely to be
chargeable to the Parish, shall come to inhabit, by their Warrant to remove and
convey such person or persons to such Parish where he or they were last legally
settled, either as a native Householder, Sojourner, Apprentice or Servant, for
the space of forty days at the least, unless he or they give sufficient
security for the discharge of the said Parish to be allowed by the said
Justices.

Persons grieved, may appeal to the Quarter Sessions.
Provided always, That all such persons who think themselves agrieved by any
such Judgment of the said two Justices, may appeal to the Justices of the
Peace of the said County at their next Quarter Sessions, who are hereby
required to do them justice according to the merits of their Cause.

Persons going to work in harvest.
Provided also, That (this Act notwithstanding) it shall and may be lawful for
any person or persons to go into any County, Parish or place to work in time of
Harvest, or at any time to work at any other work, so that he or they carry
with him or them, a Certificate from the Minister of the parish, and one of the
Churchwardens, and one of the Overseers for the poor for the said year, that he
or they have a dwelling house, or place in which he or they inhabit, and has
left wife and children, or some of them there, (or otherwise as the condition
of the person shall require) and is declared an Inhabitant, or Inhabitants
there: And in such case, if the person or persons shall not return to the place
aforesaid, when his or their work is finished, or shall fall sick or impotent,
whilst he or they are in the said work, it shall not be accounted a Settlement
in the cases abovesaid, but that it shall and may be lawful for two Justices of
the Peace to convey the said person or persons to the place of his or their
habitation, as aforesaid, under the pains and penalties in this Act prescribed:
And if such person or persons shall refuse to go, or shall not remain in such
parish where they ought to be settled, as aforesaid, but shall return of his own
accord to the parish from whence he was removed; it shall and may be lawful for
any Justice of the Peace of the City, County or Town-Corporate where the said
Offense shall be committed, to send such person or persons offending to the
House of Correction, there to be punished as a Vagabond, or to a public
Workhouse in this present Act hereafter mentioned, there to be employed in
work or labor; And if the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish, to which he or they shall be removed, refuse to receive such person or
persons, and to provide work for them, as other Inhabitants of the Parish, any
Justice of Peace of that Division may and shall thereupon bind any such Officer
or Officers, in whom there shall be default, to the Assizes or Sessions, there
to be Indicted for his or their Contempt in that behalf.

And for the further redress of the mischiefs intended to be hereby remedied,
Corporations or work houses in the Cities of London and Westminster. Middlesex.
Surrey.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from thenceforth there be, and
shall be, one or more Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse or Workhouses
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and within the Buroughs, Towns
and places of the County of Middlesex and Surrey, situate, lying and being
within the Parishes mentioned in the Weekly Bills of Mortality, consisting of a
President, a Deputy to the President, and a Treasurer; And that the Lord Mayor
of the City of London for the time being be President of the Corporation or
Corporations, Workhouse or Workhouses within the said City, and the
Assistants to be the Aldermen of the said City of London for the time being,
and fifty two other Citizens to be chosen by the Common Council of the said
City; And that the said President and Assistants, or the major part of them,
shall and may elect a Deputy-President and Treasurer, and all other necessary
Officers hereby constituted and authorized to execute the powers and Offices by
this Act appointed: And that upon the vacancy by death or otherwise of any
Assistant, the power to elect in their rooms be in the said Common Council, and
the Election of the Deputy-President, or Treasurer, and all other Officers, in
the said President and major part of the Assistants, as aforesaid: And that a
President, a Deputy-President, a Treasurer and Assistants be nominated and
appointed by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England
for the time being, out of the most fit persons inhabiting in the City of
Westminster, or the Liberties thereof, for the Corporation or Corporations,
Workhouse or Workhouses within the same.

And for the said places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality in the said
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey respectively, President, Deputy-president,
Treasurer and Assistants for Middlesex and Surrey, how to be elected.
there shall be elected and chosen by the major part of the Justices of the
Peace for the said Counties in their respective Quarter Sessions assembled, out
of the most able and honest Inhabitants and Freeholders of every of the said
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey respectively, a President, a Deputy-President,
a Treasurer and Assistants for the Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse or
Workhouses of the places aforesaid in Middlesex and Surrey; And that upon the
vacancy by death, or otherwise of any of the Presidents, Deputy-Presidents,
Treasurers or Assistants in the City of Westminster, and places aforesaid in
Middlesex and Surrey, City of Westminster.
the power to elect others in their rooms be in the major part of the
respective Justices of Peace, who in their General Quarter Sessions from time
to time shall accordingly supply such vacant places; And that at every
Quarter Sessions they shall require and take an account in writing of all the
Receipts, Charges, and Disbursements of the Officers and Treasurer of such
Corporation or Corporations, Workhouse or Workhouses, how many Poor people
have been employed and set to work in the year last past, and what stock there
was, and is remaining; which President, Deputy-President, and Treasurer for the
time being respectively, shall for ever hereafter in name and fact, be Bodies
Politic and Corporate in Law, to all intents and purposes, and shall have a
perpetual Succession, and may Sue or Plead, or be Sued and Impleaded by the
name of the President and Governors for the Poor of the respective places
aforementioned, in all Courts and places of Judicature within this Kingdom, and
the Dominion of Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed; and by that Name
every of the said Corporations shall and may without License in Mortmain,
purchase or receive any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, not exceeding the
yearly value of Three thousand pounds per annum, of the Gift, Alienation or
Devise of any person or persons, who are hereby without further License enabled
to give the same, and any Goods, Chattels, or sums of Money whatsoever, to the
use, intent and purposes hereafter limited and appointed; And the each
respective Corporation, or any Seven of them, shall have hereby Power and
Authority from time to time to meet and keep Courts for the ends and purposes
in this Act expressed, at such time and place as shall be appointed by the said
President, his Deputy, or the Treasurer, who are hereby required upon the
desire of any Four of the said Corporation, at any time to cause a Court to be
warned accordingly; And shall have hereby Authority from time to time to make
and appoint a Common-Seal for the use of the said Corporation.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The powers of the said
President and Governors of the said Corporations.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President, and Governors
of the said Corporations for the time being, or any two of them, or to, or for
any person authorized and appointed by them or any two of them, from time to
time to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, any Rogues, Vagrants, Sturdy
Beggars, or Idle or disorderly persons within the said Cities and Liberties,
Places, Divisions and Precincts, and to cause them to be kept and set to work
in the several and respective Corporations or Workhouses; and it shall and may
be lawful for the major part of the Justices of Peace in their
Quarter Sessions, to signify unto his Majesty's Privy Council, the names of
such Rogues, Vagabonds, Idle and Disorderly persons, and Sturdy Beggars as they
shall think fit to be Transported to the English Plantations; and upon the
approbation of his Majesty's Privy Council to the said Justices of Peace
signified, which persons shall be Transported, it shall and may be lawful for
any two or more of the Justices of the Peace, them to Transport, or cause to be
Transported from time to time, during the space of three years, next ensuing
the end of this present Session of Parliament, to any of the English
Plantations beyond the Seas, there to be disposed in the usual way of Servants,
for a term not exceeding Seven years.

A stock for supply of the work, how to be provided in London, Westminster,
Middlesex, Surrey.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the President and
Governors of any of the said Corporations shall certify under their common
Seal, their want and defect either of a present stock for the Foundation of the
Work, or for supply thereof for the future, and what sum or sums of Money they
shall think fit for the same, to the Common Council of the said City of London,
and the Burgesses and Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions of the said
City of Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, or the Justices of the
respective Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, assembled in either
Quarter Sessions, That thereupon the Common Council of the said City of London,
the Burgesses of the said City of Westminster, and the Justices of Peace of the
said Cities and Counties in their Quarter Sessions assembled, are hereby
required from time to time to set down and ascertain such competent sum and
sums of money for the purposes aforesaid, not exceeding one years rate from
time to time usually set upon any person, for, or toward the relief of the
Poor, and the same to proportion out upon the several Wards, Precincts,
Counties, Divisions, Hundreds, and Parishes, as they shall think fit; And
thereupon the Aldermen, Deputies, and Common-Council-men of every Ward in the
City of London, and Burgesses and Justices of the Peace of the City of
Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and Justices of the Peace of the said
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, shall have power and Authority, and are
hereby required equally and indifferently, according to the proportions
appointed as aforesaid, for the several Wards, Precincts, Cities and Parishes
as aforesaid, to tax and rate the several Inhabitants within the said
respective Wards, Precincts and Parishes, as well within Liberties as without;
with which Tax, if any person or persons find him or themselves agrieved,
supposing the same to be unequal, he or they shall and may make their complaint
known to the Justices of the Peace at the next open Sessions, who shall take
such final order therein, as in like cases is already by the Law provided.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any Alderman of the City of London, or his Deputy, or the
Burgesses and Justices of Peace of the City of Westminster, and the Liberties
thereof, or any two or more of them, or any two Justices of Peace of the
respective Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, by their Warrant under their Hands
and Seals, to authorize the Churchwardens or Overseers for the Poor within the
places and Parishes aforesaid, to demand, gather and receive of every person
and persons, such sum and sums of money as shall be Assessed upon them by
virtue of the Taxations and Contributions aforesaid; And for default of payment
within ten days after demand thereof made, or notice in writing left at the
dwelling house or lodging of every person so Assessed, to levy the same by
distress and sale of the goods of every such person, and after satisfaction
made, to restore the surplusage to the party so distrained.

Stocks formerly in London for relief of the poor, how to be paid
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Stocks raised for the
relief and employment of the Poor, in the City of London and Liberties thereof,
which was in the hands of a Corporation heretofore appointed in the said City
for that service, or in the hands of any other person or persons whatsoever,
before the Nine and twentieth day of September, which was in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty, commonly called the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel, or at any time since, together with all the Arrears of
money formerly alloted for that Service, or Legacies given to the same end,
shall be payable to the Treasurer of the Corporation or Corporations,
Workhouse or Workhouses to be established by this present Act, who are hereby
authorized and empowered by themselves, or their Officers thereunto by them
deputed, to collect, gather, receive and recover the said money and Legacies,
which shall be due and in arrear, as aforesaid; with which said Arrears, and
every part and parcel thereof, the Corporation or Corporations aforesaid by
this Act made, constituted and established, is, and shall be hereby invested,
and interessed for the execution of the service hereby enjoined them; and all
those that have had, or now have any of the said Stocks in their or any of
their hands, shall be accountable to the said Treasurer, or to those that shall
be appointed by the said Corporation or Corporations, or any seven or more of
them to take the said account.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there
shall be a full allowance of all just and necessary expenses which have been
laid out by the said former Corporation for the relief of the said poor, and
the carrying on of the said Service since the time before expressed.

Power to make Orders and Bylaws.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
President and Governors, or any Seven of them shall have power from time to
time to make and constitute Orders and Bylaws for the better relieving,
regulating, and setting the poor to work, and the apprehending and punishing of
Rogues, Vagabonds, and Beggars within the Cities, Liberties, and places
aforesaid, that have not wherewith to maintain themselves, and for other the
matters aforesaid.

Provided the said Orders and Bylaws shall from time to time be presented to
the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions assembled, to be allowed by the
major part of them, and confirmed by order of the said Court.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Power to choose and
entertain officers
That the President and Governors of any of the said Corporation or
Corporations, Workhouse, or Workhouses, or any fourteen or more of them being
assembled together, shall have hereby power to choose and entertain all such
Officers, and other as shall be needful to be employed in and about the
premises; and them, or any of them from time to time to remove as they shall
see cause; and upon the death or removal of them, or any of them, to choose
others in their places for the carrying on of the work, and to make and give
such reasonable allowances unto them, or any of them out of the Stock and
Revenue belonging to the said Corporation or Workhouse, as they shall think
fit.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables, All Sheriffs, etc. to be assisting the said Corporation
and their officers.
and all other Officers and Ministers of Justice shall be aiding and assisting
to the said Corporation or Corporations, and to all such Officers as shall be
employed by them, or any of them, in the execution or performance of the said
Service.

And whereas the Laws and Statutes for the apprehending of Rogues and
Vagabonds, have not been duly executed, sometimes for want of Officers, by
reason Lords of Manors do not keep Court Leets every year for the making of
them; Constables how made in default of holding Court-Leets.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any
Constable, Headborough, or Tithingmen shall dye, or go out of the Parish, any
two Justices of the Peace may make and swear a new Constable, Headborough, or
Tithingman, until the said Lord shall hold a Court, or until next
Quarter Sessions, who shall approve of the said Officers so made and sworn as
aforesaid, or appoint others as they shall think fit: And if any Officer shall
continue above a year in his or their Office, That then in such case, the
Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions may discharge such Officers, and
may put another fit person in his or their place, until the Lord of the said
Manor shall hold a Court as aforesaid.

And whereas for want of some encouragement to such person or persons as shall
apprehend Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, 39 El. cap. 17. 1 Jac. cap. 7.
Apprehending Rogues and Vagabonds.
the Statutes made in the Nine and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, and first
year of King James, in which Statutes the Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman
of every Parish that shall not apprehend such Rogues, Vagabonds, and Sturdy
Beggars, which shall pass through, or be found in their said Parish
unapprehended, such Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman shall forfeit as in
the said Statutes is expressed, are not duly executed; Be it therefore Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, How rewarded
That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace to whom
any Rogue, Vagabond, or Sturdy Beggars so apprehended shall be brought, to
reward any person or persons that shall apprehend any Rogue, Vagabond, or
Sturdy Beggar, by granting unto such person or persons an Order or Warrant
under his hand and Seal to the Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman of such
Parish where such Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy Beggar passed through
unapprehended, requiring him to pay such person or persons the sum of two
shillings for every Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy Beggar, which shall be so
apprehended: And if such Constable, Headborough, or Tithingmen, refuse or
neglect to pay the two shillings as aforesaid, that then the said Justices of
Peace, or any other Justice or Justices of Peace, shall proceed against any
such Constable, Headborough or Tithingman, according to the said Statutes; and
to compel him to pay such sum of money as he has forfeited by the Statute of
the first year of King James aforesaid, and to allow out of the said Forfeiture
the said two shillings, and such reasonable means and allowance for loss of
time, as they shall think fit.

And if any person or persons shall apprehend any Rogue, Vagabond, or sturdy
Beggar, Rogues and Vagabonds apprehended at the contines of any county, how to
be dealt withal.
at the confines of any County, which passed through any Parish of another
County unapprehended, it shall be lawful for such person or persons to go to
some Justice of Peace of that County, through which such Rogue, Vagabond, or
sturdy Beggar passed unapprehended, who is hereby required (upon a Certificate
under the hand of some Justice of Peace of the County where such Rogue,
Vagabond, or sturdy Beggar was so apprehended) to grant his Order, or Warrant,
under his hand and Seal, requiring the said Constable, Headborough, or
Tithingman, to pay unto such person or persons, as aforesaid, the sum of two
shillings, which if he shall refuse, or neglect to do, then such Justice is
hereby required to proceed against such Constable, Headborough, or Tithingman,
and to cause him to pay ten shillings, or so much thereof for his expenses and
loss of time, as the said Justice of Peace shall think fit, to such person or
persons, which he has forfeited by the Statute aforesaid, made in the nine and
thirtieth year of the Queen.

And whereas Constables, Headboroughs, or Tithingmen are or may be at great
charge in relieving, conveying with Passes, and in carrying Rogues, Vagabonds,
and sturdy Beggars to Houses of Correction, or the Workhouses herein
mentioned, and as yet have no power by Law to make Rates to reimburse
themselves; Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Constables, Headboroughs, and Tithingmen so out of purse, as aforesaid,
together with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor, and other
Inhabitants of the said Parish shall hereby have power and Authority to make an
indifferent Rate, Power to make rates.
and to tax all the Occupiers of Lands, and Inhabitants, and all other persons
chargeable by the Statute of the three and fortieth of Elizabeth concerning the
Office and Duty of Overseers for the poor within the said Parish, which Rate
being confirmed under the hands and Seals of any two Justices of Peace, 43 El.
cap. 2.
as aforesaid, the said Constable, Headborough, or Tithingmen shall have power
by Warrant under the hands and Seals of two Justices of Peace, to levy by
distress and sale of the goods of any person or persons refusing to pay the
same, rendering the overplus to the Owner, if any shall be.

Putative fathers of Bastard-children, running away how to be proceeded against.
And whereas the putative Fathers and lewd Mothers of Bastard-Children run away
out of the Parish, and sometimes out of the County, and leave the said Bastard
children upon the charge of the Parish where they are born, although such
putative Father and Mother have Estates sufficient to discharge such Parish; Be
it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for the Churchwardens and Overseers for the poor of such Parish, where
any Bastard-Child shall be born, to take and seize so much of the Goods and
Chattels, and to receive so much of the Annual Rents or profits of the Lands of
such putative father, or lewd mother, as shall be ordered by any two Justices
of Peace as aforesaid, for, or toward the discharge of the Parish, to be
confirmed at the Sessions, for the bringing up and providing for such
Bastard-Child; And thereupon it shall be lawful for the Sessions to make an
Order for the Churchwardens or Overseers for the poor of such Parish, to
dispose of the goods by Sale, or otherwise, or so much of them for the purposes
aforesaid, as the Court shall think fit, and to receive the rents and profits,
or so much of them, as shall be ordered by the Sessions as aforesaid, of his,
or her Lands.

Persons sued for matters in this Act, may plead the General Issue.
And if any person or persons shall be sued for any matter or thing which he
shall do in execution of this Act, he may plead the General Issue, and give the
special matter in Evidence; And if the Verdict shall pass for the Defendant, or
if the Plaintiff be Nonsuited or Discontinue his Suit, the Defendant shall
recover treble Damages.

Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland.
43 El. cap. 2.
Whereas the Inhabitants of the Counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire,
Yorkshire, Northumberland, the Bishopric of Durham, Cumberland, and
Westmerland, and many other Counties in England and Wales, by reason of the
largeness of the Parishes within the same, have not, nor cannot reap the
benefit of the Act of Parliament, made in the three and fortieth year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, for relief of the poor; Therefore be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the poor, needy,
impotent, and lame person and persons within every Township or Village, within
the several Counties aforesaid, shall from and after the passing of this Act,
be maintained, kept, provided for, and set on work within the several and
respective Township and Village, wherein he, she, or they shall inhabit, or
wherein he, she, or they was or were last lawfully settled, according to the
intent and meaning of this Act, and that there shall be yearly chosen and
appointed, according to the rules and directions in the said Act of the three
and fortieth year of Queen Elizabeth mentioned, two or more Overseers of the
poor within every of the said Townships or Villages, who shall from time to
time do, perform and execute all and every the Acts, powers and authorities for
the necessary relief of the poor within the said Township or Village, and shall
lose, forfeit, and suffer all such pains and penalties for nonperformance
thereof as is limited, mentioned and appointed in and by the said
in-part-recited Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Peace within the said Counties shall have and enjoy such and the like powers
and authorities, to raise and levy moneys, and to do and execute all and every
such other Act and thing whatsoever, within every Township or Village within
the said County where they are Justices, as is given, limited and appointed
unto, and for them to do and execute within any Parish or Parishes in and by
the said Act made in the said three and fortieth year of the said late Queen
Elizabeth, under such and the like pains and penalties for the nonperformance
of their Duties, to be levied and disposed of as is nominated and expressed in
the said Act.

Power of the Justices to transport rogues and vagabonds.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful for the Justices of Peace in any of the Counties of England
and Wales, in their Quarter Sessions Assembled, or the major part of them to
Transport, or cause to be Transported such Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars, as shall be duly convicted, and adjudged to be incorrigible, to any of
the English plantations beyond the Seas.

Proviso for the Dean and chapter of Westminster.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to be, or be construed, expounded, or taken to the prejudice or
infringement of any the franchises, rights, liberties, or privileges
heretofore granted by the Kings and Queens of this Realm, his Majesty's Royal
Predecessors, to the Dean and Chapter of the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in
Westminster.

The continuance of diverse parts of this Act.
Provided always, That this Act, as to all the matters therein contained
(excepting what relates unto the Corporations mentioned and constituted
thereby) shall extend, and be in force until the nine and twentieth day of
May, One thousand six hundred sixty five, and the end of the first Session of
the next Parliament, then next ensuing, and no longer.

CAP. XIII.
Importation of Foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings,
Buttons, and Needle Work prohibited.

Whereas great numbers of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom are employed in the
making of Bonelace, Band-strings, Buttons, Needlework, Fringe, and
Imbroideries, who by their industry and labor have attained and gained so
great skill and dexterity in the making thereof, that they make as good of all
sorts thereof, as is made in any Foreign parts, by reason whereof, they have
been heretofore able to relieve their poor Neighbors, and maintained their
Families, and also enabled to set on work many poor children, and other persons
who have very small means, or maintenance of living, other then by their
labors and endeavors in the said Art: And whereas the persons so employed in
the said Mystery have heretofore served most parts of this Kingdom with
Bonelace, Band-strings, Buttons, Needlework, and Imbroidery: And for the
carrying on, and managing of the said Trade, they have procured great
quantities of Thread and Silk to be brought into the Kingdom from Foreign
parts, whereby his Majesty's Customs and Revenues have been much advanced,
until of late, that great quantities of Foreign Bonelace, Band-strings,
Needlework, Cut-work, Fringe, Silk, Bonelace, Buttons, and Imbroidery were
brought into this Kingdom by Foreigners and Inhabitants of this Kingdom, and
sold to Shopkeepers, and others, Dealers in the said Commodity, as well by
Wholesale as Retail, without ever entering of the same in any of his Majesty's
Custom-houses, or paying any Duty or Custom for the same; by means whereof, the
said Trade and calling is of late very much decayed, those employed in the said
Calling very much impoverished, the Manufacture much decreased, and great
quantities thereof already made, left on their hands that make it, His Majesty
defrauded and deceived in his Customs, and many thousand poor people formerly
kept on work in the said Art, like to perish for want of employment; there
being daily great sums of money exported out of this Kingdom, for the buying
and fetching in of the said Commodity, to the great impoverishment of the
Nation by the Consumption of the Bullion and Treasure thereof, and contrary to
several Statutes made in the first of King Richard the Third; 1 R. 3. cap. 12.
3 E. 4. cap. 4. 19 H. 7. cap. 21 5 Eliz. cap. 7.
in the third of King Edward the fourth; in the nineteenth of King Henry the
Seventh, and the fifth of Queen Elizabeth; and to a late Proclamation made by
his Majesty that now is, dated the twentieth day of November last, for the
putting the said Laws in execution.

For redress whereof, and prevention of the like mischiefs for the future, and
the better relief, comfort, and subsistence of those employed in the said Art
and Manufacture; And for the quickening, reviving, explaining, amending, and
more effectual execution of the said Statutes, Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by, and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever shall, from and
after the Twenty fourth day of June, One thousand six hundred sixty two, sell,
or cause to be sold, or offer to sale, within the Kingdom of England, or
Dominion of Wales, or export any Foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Foreign bonelace,
cutwork, imbroidery, fringe, band-strings, prohibited to be sold or imported
from beyond Sea.
Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework made of Thread, Silk,
or any, or either of them in parts beyond the Seas, or Import, bring in, send,
or convey, or cause to be brought in, sent, or conveyed into the Kingdom of
England, or Dominion of Wales, any such Foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Fringe,
Imbroidery, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework made of Thread, Silk, or any,
or either of them beyond the Seas, after the first day of May, which shall be
in the said year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon
pain, that all and every person or persons, who shall sell, or cause to be
sold, or offer to sale any such Foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe,
Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework, shall forfeit and lose for every offense
by him committed contrary to this Act, the sum of Fifty pounds, and the whole
Bonelace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework so
sold, or caused to be sold, or offered to sale; And upon further pain, That all
and every person or persons who shall Import, bring in, send, or convey, or
cause to be brought in, sent, or conveyed into this Kingdom of England, or
Dominion of Wales, any such Bonelace, Cut-work, The penalty.
Imbroidery, Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework, shall forfeit and
lose for every offense by him committed contrary to this Act, the sum of One
hundred pounds, and the whole Bonelace, Cut-work, Imbroidery, Fringe,
Band-strings, Buttons, or Needle Work so Imported, brought in, sent, or
conveyed, or caused to be Imported, brought in, sent, or conveyed contrary to
the form and effect of this present Act as aforesaid; One moiety to the King,
the other to the prosecutor.
The Moyeties of all which Forfeitures to be to the use of our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and the other Moiety to him, or
them that shall sue for the same in any of the Kings Courts of Record, by Bill,
Plaint, Action of Debt, Information, or otherwise; wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, at every time, and as often as
any person shall be found to offend in selling, importing, conveying, or
bringing in as aforesaid. Every Justice of Peace may grant Warrants to search
for Manufactures prohibited by this Act


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the preventing
of the Importing of the said Manufactures as aforesaid, upon complaint and
Information given to the Justices of the Peace, or any, or either of them
within their respective Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, at times
reasonable, he or they are hereby authorized and required to issue forth his or
their Warrants to the Constables of their respective Counties, Cities, and
Towns Corporate, to enter and search for such Manufactures in the Shops being
open, or Warehouses, and dwelling-houses of such person or persons as shall be
suspected to have any such Foreign Bonelaces, Imbroidery, Cut-work, Fringe,
Band-strings, Buttons, or Needlework within their respective Counties, Cities,
and Towns-Corporate, and to seize the same, any Act, Statute, or Ordinance to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

The time limited for actions upon this Act.
Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted and Declared, That all Informations,
Actions, and Suits that shall be commenced for any offense committed against
this Law, shall be brought and commenced within twelve Months after the
discovery of such offense, Any former Act, or Law to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CAP. XIV.
Direction for Prosecution of such as are Accountable for Prize-Goods.

12 Car. 2. c. 11
Whereas in the Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, made
in the Twelfth Year of your Majesty's Reign, and since confirmed by another
Act, Entitled, An Act for confirming Public Acts, 13 Car. 2. c. 7.
made in the thirteenth year of your Majesty's Reign, there is (amongst other
exceptions) excepted all and singular the Accounts of all Prize-Goods, and of
all moneys and other Duties grown due, or contracted upon the sale or
disposition of them or any of them; By virtue whereof, and of another Act made
in the said thirteenth year of your Majesty's Reign, 13 Car. 2. c. 3.
Entitled, An Act for the Declaring, Vesting, and Settling of all such Moneys,
Goods, and other things in his Majesty, which were received, levied, or
collected in these late times, and are remaining in the hands or possession of
any Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors, or others not Pardoned by the Act of
Oblivion, all and singular Prizes and Ships, and Goods whatsoever seized or
taken for Prize (since the thirtieth of January, in the year, One thousand six
hundred forty two) by color, or pretense of any of the late pretended
Authorities, or by pretense or color of any Power or Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from, or under them or any of them, or otherwise for,
or upon any pretense of any public use; And all Captures and Seisures of
Prizes and Tenths of Prizes to, or under pretense of any public use; And all
the moneys arising, or due, or contracted for, upon the Sales and Dispositions
of them, or any of them yet unpaid, or unaccounted for, in whose hands soever
the same be, or by whomsoever owing, are rightly vested in your Majesty; And
all the Buyers and Receivers and Injoyers thereof, not having yet truly
accounted for, or paid for the same, stand chargeable to your Majesty.

Now for that as well by a pretended Act made in the year one thousand six
hundred forty nine, the Buyers of Ships and goods taken, Pretended Act. 1649.
The reason for suing for prize-goods in the Court of Admiralty.
or seized, and sold for Prize, were in case of any failer of performing their
contract, to be convented in the Court of Admiralty, and in case they were
condemned, there to pay the money by them contracted for, then the same to be
levied by execution of the said Court; And for that by reason of other
pretended Acts and Ordinances made in those times, all the matters touching
Prize and Captures, and Seisures, and Tenths of Prizes, were referred to the
said Court of Admiralty, and all the Processes, Exhibites, Writings,
Examinations, Depositions, Proceedings, Passages, Condemnations, Sentences,
Decrees, and Orders, touching and concerning Prizes and Captures, and Seisures
of Prizes, and tenths of Prizes, of what sort soever were had, taken, made, and
done in the said Court of Admiralty, and do all, or most of them there remain;
So that the said Court of Admiralty being thereof possessed, and best
acquainted therewith, and with all the passages thereof, It will be the
readiest and quickest way for your Majesty to Sue for the same in that Court,
which being there Sued for, may probably amount to considerable sums of money.

May it therefore please your Majesty, that it may be Enacted; And be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and every Collectors and
Treasurers, Sub-Collectors and Vnder-Treasurers of Prize-goods, Commissioners
and Sub-Commissioners of Prize-goods, and all and every their Casheers,
Officers, Rep. 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 6.
Deputies and Receivers, and all and every Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains of
Ships, Officers and Mariners, and all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, to whom such Prizes were delivered, or to whose hands they came at
any time since the said thirtieth of January, One thousand six hundred forty
and two, and before the nine and twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, or that did surprise or receive to or for the public use, or by
pretense thereof any Ships, Plate, Jewels, Bullion, Money, Silver, Gold, Arms,
Ammunition, Wares, Merchandises or any manner of Goods whatsoever seized or
taken for Prize within the times aforesaid, and that have not yet truly
accounted for, and paid in the same, or the just provenues and values thereof,
and all and every person and persons by whom, or to, or for whose use the same
or any of them were sold, or who had and enjoyed the same, or any part thereof,
and are still behind, and have not paid the moneys contracted for, and arising
or due upon such sales, or any of them; and all Securities by them or any of
them given for their just dealing in their Offices or Places, or any thing
concerning the said Prizes or any of them, shall be chargeable to your Majesty
for the said premises and all the Dependencies thereof respectively in the
said Court of Admiralty, and shall and may be by your Majesty's Advocate and by
such other of your Majesty's Council in that Court, as Your Majesty shall
please particularly to nominate, and commit that affair unto, and by special
Warrant under your Sign Manual to appoint to sue for the same in your Majesty's
Name, and to and for your Majesty's use to be sued and convened in the said
Court of Admiralty, and either called to account or otherwise by such suit and
in such manner as may be most available for your Majesty, be there proceeded
against, sued and prosecuted in due course according to their respective cases
for all and every the said Prizes, Ships, Goods, Moneys and Premises received
or had by them and still in arrear, and wherewith they are as aforesaid
chargeable; The Court of Admiralty empowered to proceed upon suits for
prize-goods taken at any time since Ian. 30. 1642. and before 29 May 1660. and
not accounted for.
And the said Court of Admiralty is hereby enabled and authorized to proceed
thereupon according to the Laws and course of that Court, and to do and
minister right and Justice therein, with all things thereto requisite; And to
give sentences and final Decrees and condemnations therein as by the rules of
Justice ought to be, and that in the most speedy manner, and to put in
execution and finally to execute and levy all and every sum and sums, and
whatever shall be adjudged, sentenced or condemned by and according to the
rules and course of Executions in the said Court, and that without any manner
of Let, Disturbance, Hinderance, Obstruction or Impediment whatsoever, that
your Majesty may be for the same satisfied and paid according to right and
Justice.

Provided always, and be it further hereby Enacted and Declared by the
Authority aforesaid, Proviso for the saving all Rights of the Lord High Admiral.
That all such Rights as during the Reign of your Majesty's Royal Father of
Blessed memory, or your Majesty's Reign belonged and appertained unto the Lord
High Admiral of England, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports for the time being,
by virtue of the said Office, and have been at any time since the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and eight, usurped, possessed or seized by
any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, and not having accounted
for the same to any Authority or pretended Authority, Usurping the Government
of this Nation, and not pardoned by the Act of Oblivion, That all such person
or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, shall account and pay the same to his
Royal Highness, James Duke of York, your Majesty's only Brother, Lord High
Admiral of England, or Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, upon suit for the same
in the High Court of Admiralty; Any thing in this Act (the absence of the Lord
High Admiral during these late troubles, or the persons not having been
employed or authorized by the said Lord High Admiral) to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, How in defect
of Jurisdiction in the Admiralty, suit may be in the Exchequer.
That in case of defect of Jurisdiction in the Court of Admiralty for the
recovering and levying of any such Prizes, Goods, matters and things aforesaid;
That then in such case upon Certificate thereof from the said Court of
Admiralty made into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, speedy proceedings shall
be had in the said Court of Exchequer for the recovering and levying of the
Prizes, Goods, matters and things aforesaid, according to Law and Justice.

CAP. XV.
The Trade of Silk-throwing regulated.

Whereas the Company of Silk-throwers within the City of London and Liberties,
The Silk-throwers of London incorporated by Patent. 5 Car. 1.
and all their Servants and Apprentices within four Miles thereof were quinto
Caroli primi Incorporated and made one Body Politic, and are known by the name
of the Master, Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty of the Trade, Art or Mystery
of Silk-throwers of the City of London; And whereas the said Trade is of
singular use, and very advantageous to this Commonwealth, by employing the
poor, there being employed by the said Company in and about the City of London
(as is expressed in their Petition) above forty thousand men, women, and
children, who otherwise would unavoidably be burdensome to the places of their
abode; And whereas the present Governors of the said Company by their
Petition, pray an enlargement of their Charter, whereby they may be the better
enabled to avoid the many deceits and inconveniences they daily meet withal by
Intruders, who have not been brought up Apprentices to the said Trade, and
others who settle themselves beyond the limits of their said Charter, on
purpose to avoid the Searchers and Supervision of the said Governors, by which
means they are at liberty to make and vend what Wares they please, to the
disparagement of the said Trade, and discouraging of the Petitioners, and all
others of the said Trade that have duly served Apprentice thereunto, according
to the known Laws of this Nation.

For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same,
None shall use the trade of a silk-thrower but such as have served as
apprentices seven years.
That from and after the twenty fifth day of December, which shall be in the
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no person or persons
whatsoever, shall directly or indirectly use, exercise, continue or set up the
said Trade, Art of Mystery of a Silk-thrower within this Realm of England,
unless such as are or shall be Apprentices to the said Trade, or shall have
served seven years Apprentiship thereunto at the least, upon pain that every
person so offending contrary to this Act, shall pay, The penalty.
forfeit and lose the sum of forty shillings for every month the said person
shall use or exercise the said Trade, the one moiety thereof to the use of his
said Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety thereof to such
person or persons as shall sue for the same in any of the Courts of Record
within this Realm of England, Before whom to be recovered.
or before any the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or the Justices of the Peace
at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, or by any other lawful ways or means whatsoever, wherein no
Protection, Wager of Law or Essoign shall be allowed.

And for the better enabling of the said Master, Wardens, Assistants, and
Commonalty of Silk-throwers and their Successors in their Government; Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and
persons whatsoever, now using or exercising as Masters the said Art, Every
person using the trade in London and Westminster shall enter himself of the
said corporation.

And be subject to the laws and orders thereof. The penalty.


Trade or Mystery, or such as have served as Apprentices to the said Trade by
the space of seven years at the least, within the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and the several Suburbs thereof, or within twenty miles compass of
them or either of them, shall before the twenty fifth day of December, which
shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and two, be
admitted, and are hereby enjoined to enter themselves into the said Society or
Corporation, and to perform, and be subject and obedient to all such Statutes,
Laws, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions as are or shall be made or ordained
for, or concerning the Exercise, Regulation or Government of the said Art,
Trade or Mystery, or of any person or persons using or exercising the same,
upon pain of forfeiture of the sum of forty shillings for every month he or
they shall use or exercise the said Trade, after the said twenty fifth day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty and two; the one moiety thereof to the
use of his said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety thereof
to such person and persons as shall sue for the same in any the Courts of
Record within this Realm of England, or before any the Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, or the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, or by any other lawful ways or
means whatsoever, wherein no Protection, Wager of Law or Essoin shall be
allowed.

Provided, That such Laws, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions so made, or
which shall be made, be not contrary, but agreeable with the Laws and Statutes
of this said Realm, and the Customs of the said City of London.

The power of the masters, wardens and assistants.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Masters,
Wardens, Assistants and Commonalty, and their Successors shall, and may have
and enjoy, and that it shall and may be lawful to and for them, from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, to do, perform and execute, within the said
Cities of London and Westminster, and the several Suburbs thereof, or within
twenty miles compass of them or either of them, all such grants, powers,
privileges and authorities as by this present Act, or in or by the said
Letters Patents of Incorporation are given or granted, or mentioned to be given
or granted, for or concerning the regulation, exercise or government of the
said Trade, Art or Mystery, or any matter or thing relating thereunto, or of
such person or persons as do, or shall exercise the same; Any thing in the said
Letters Patents, or any Act, Statute or other matter or thing to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas there is a necessity lying upon the Silk-throwers, to deliver
their Winders or Doublers, considerable quantities of silk, which being of a
good value, is by evil disposed persons many times unjustly, deceitfully and
falsely purloined, imbezeled, pawned, sold and detained, to the great damage,
and sometimes the utter undoing of the Thrower who employs the said persons: Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every such Silk-winder and
doubler, The punishment of silk-winders that imbezel goods delivered to them.
who shall at any time hereafter, unjustly or deceitfully and falsely, purloin,
imbezel, pawn, sell or detain any part of Silk delivered or to be delivered by
any Silk-thrower, or other person, to them or any of them, to wind or double,
that in every such case and cases, as well the Winder or Iourneyman so
offending, as the Buyer and Buyers, Receiver and Receivers of such Silk, being
thereof lawfully convicted, by confession of the party or parties so offending,
or by one witness upon Oath before one or more of the Justices of Peace of the
County or Liberty where the same offense or offenses shall be committed; or if
it be within any City or Town-Corporate, before the Mayor, Bailiff or chief
Officer of the said City or Town-Corporate, who by force of this Act are
empowered and authorized to minister the same Oath, and finally to hear and
determine all and every the Offenses aforesaid, and to give and make to the
party and parties grieved such recompense and Satisfaction for such their
Damage and Loss and Charges thereabouts, as by the said Justice or Justices,
or Chief Officers shall be Ordered and Appointed.

Provided that no more damage be given or awarded then the party grieved shall
prove he is damnified, and has expended in looking after the same; And if the
party or parties so offending shall not be able or sufficient to make
recompense or satisfaction for the said Offense, nor do make Recompense or
Satisfaction for the same Offense or Offenses within fourteen days next after
such conviction in such manner and form, as by the Justice or Justices or Chief
Officers shall be ordered and appointed as aforesaid, then the party or parties
so offending, for the first Offense shall be apprehended and Whipped, or set in
the Stocks in the place where the Offense is committed, or in some Market Town
in the said County near unto the place where the Offense or Offenses aforesaid
shall be committed, as shall be limited and appointed by the said Justice or
Justices of the Peace or Chief Officers, and for the second Offense, to incur
the like, or such further punishment by whipping or being put in the stocks, as
the said Justice or Justices of the Peace, or chief officers shall in their
discretion think fit and convenient.

And be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Persons receiving such
imbezeled goods, how to be punished.
That all and every Receiver and Receivers, Buyer and Buyers of any silk, or
such as take to pawn any silk imbezeled or purloined, contrary to the meaning
of this Act (matter of fact being proved) shall make satisfaction within the
time aforesaid, or else shall be subject to like punishment as by this Act is
inflicted, or provided to be inflicted upon such person so imbezeling or
purloyning any such Silk as aforesaid.

Provided always, What persons may be employed not having served as apprentices.
that it shall and may be lawful to and for any Freeman of the said Company of
Silk-throwers, to set on work and employ any person or persons, being native
Subjects to his Majesty and no others, whether they be men, women or children,
to turn the Mill, tie threads, double silk and wind silk as formerly they have
used to do, although such person or persons who shall be so set on work, and
employed in the works and services aforesaid, shall not have served or been
bred up as Apprentices to the trade of Silk-throwing by the space of seven
years, and that all and every the said person and persons who shall be set so
on work, and employed by any Freeman of the said Company in the works and
services aforesaid, shall and may be employed by any Freeman of the said
Company in the works and services aforesaid, or any of them, without any let or
molestation, Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, The said Corporation may not set rates upon their workmen.
and be it Enacted that the said Corporation of Silk-throwers shall not by
virtue of this Act, nor any thing therein contained, make any Orders,
Ordinances or Bylaws, to set any rates or prizes whatsoever upon the Throwing
of Silk, to bind or enforce their members to work at; but that their respective
members shall be left at liberty to contract with their respective Imployers,
and also with the persons that they employ at such rates, as they and their
imployers, and the persons employed shall agree upon, any thing in this Act to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. XVI.
For the more speedy and effectual bringing those persons to Account, whose
Accounts are excepted in the Act of Oblivion.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and every
person and persons who are accountable to the Kings Majesty, and their Accounts
are not pardoned, but excepted by the late Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion, 12 Car. 2. c. 11 The penalty against such persons as
shall not within a certain time perfect their Accounts. 33 H. 8. c. 39.
and against whom there is any charge now remaining in his Majesty's Exchequer,
and shall through their default not perfect his or their Account before the end
of Trinity Term in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and
two, That then the charge against all and every such person or persons shall be
taken as a Debt by Writing Obligatory or Recognizance taken or acknowledged to
the Kings Majesty according to the Statute of the three and thirtieth of King
Henry the Eighth, Chapter 39. And that all and every other person or persons
whose Accounts are excepted in the said Act of Oblivion, and have or shall have
a Charge or Information against them in his Majesty's Exchequer before the four
and twentieth of June, one thousand six hundred sixty and two, and have or
shall have notice thereof by Process out of the Court of Exchequer or otherwise
served upon his person, or left at his house or last known place of Habitation
before the nine and twentieth of September, one thousand six hundred sixty and
two, and shall not before the first day of Easter Term then next ensuing,
perfect their Accounts touching the said Charge, that then the Charge against
all and every such person or persons shall be taken as a Debt by Writing
Obligatory or Recognizance taken and acknowledged to the Kings Majesty,
according to the Statute aforesaid; and that in both the said Cases, Process
shall be awarded as is used for recovery of debts due to his Majesty, according
to the Statute as aforesaid, against him or them, and against all and every
their Sureties not pardoned or discharged by the said Act of Oblivion, and his
and their respective Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, and Debts; and the
said Charge to continue in force only until the Accounts shall be perfected,
and the Accountants discharge them thereof in due manner in the said Court of
Exchequer, with such allowances as are given by the said Act of Oblivion, and
until payment made unto his Majesty of all such sums of money as shall be
found due upon the determination of his or their Accounts.

CAP. XVII.
Relief of Collectors of Public Moneys, and their Assistants and Deputies.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament now
assembled, and by Authority of the same, Collectors and others employed in
levying money by virtue of any Act of Parliament being sued, may plead the
general issue.
That all Collectors and other Persons who have levied or Collected, or shall
Levy or Collect any sum or sums of money, or other act done, or shall do in
order to the same, by virtue of any Act of Parliament now in force, or of any
other Act, Order, or Ordinance allowed to be put in Execution by any such Act
of Parliament as aforesaid; and who is, or shall be sued for, or concerning the
same, by any other then the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, he, and
they may plead the General Issue, and thereon give the special matter in
evidence for his excuse and justification: And that all and every person or
persons already sued or impleaded for any the Causes aforesaid, may
notwithstanding any plea, or demurrer already made by any such Defendant, have
liberty to change such his Plea, and to plead the General Issue, if he shall
think fit so to do.

Provided always, that neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend, or be construed to extend to authorize the levying or collecting of any
sum or sums of money, which are pardoned by the late Act, 12 Car. 2. c. 11
Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon, Indemnity, and Oblivion.

CAP. XVIII.
Exporting of Sheep, Wool, Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool,
Wool-flocks, Fullers-Earth, Fulling-Clay, and Tobacco-pipe-Clay; Prohibited.

WHereas against the Laws of this Kingdom great number of Sheep, and great
quantities of Wool, Wool-fels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool,
Wool-flocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling-Clay, are secretly Exported,
Transported, carried and conveyed out of the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Kingdom of Ireland into the Kingdom
of Scotland, and into Foreign parts, to the great decay of the Woollen
Manufactures, the ruin of many Families, and the destruction of the Navigation
and Commerce of the Kingdoms, Town, and Dominion aforesaid, which is like daily
to increase if some further remedy be not provided, and further penalties
imposed upon the Offenders therein.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any
person or persons shall from and after the first day of August, Exporting or
carrying of sheep, wool, woolfels, mortlings shorlings, yarn woolflocks,
Fullers earth, Fulling clay, out of England, Wales or Ireland.
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, directly, or indirectly, Export,
Transport, Carry, or Convey, or shall cause to be Exported, Transported,
Carried, or Conveyed out of, or from the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or after the first day of January, One thousand
six hundred sixty and two, out of the Kingdom of Ireland, into any parts or
places out of the Kingdoms, or Dominion aforesaid, or into the Kingdom of
Scotland any Sheep or Wool whatsoever, of the breed or growth of the Kingdoms
or Dominion aforesaid, or any Wool-fells, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
Wool, Wool-flocks, or any Fullers Earth, or Fulling-Clay whatsoever, or shall
directly, or indirectly pack or load, or cause to be packed or laden upon any
horse, Cart, or other Carriage, or shall load or lay on board, or cause to be
laden or laid on board in any Ship or other Vessel, in any place within the
Kingdoms of England or Ireland, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed aforesaid, any such Sheep, Wool, Wool-fels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn
made of Wool, Wool-flocks, Fullers Earth, or Fulling Clay, to the intent or
purpose to Export, Transport, Carry, or convey the same, or to cause the same
to be Exported, Transported, Carried, or conveyed out of the Kingdoms of
England or Ireland, the Dominion of Wales or Town of Berwick upon Tweed
aforesaid, into the Kingdom of Scotland, or into any Foreign parts, that then
every such offense shall be adjudged Felony, Made Felony
and the Offender or Offenders being duly Convicted, shall suffer and forfeit
as in case of Felony.

Aiders and assisters therein shall be adjudged Felons.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Owner of any
such Ship or other Vessel, and every owner of every horse, Cart, or Carriage,
upon which any Sheep, Wool, Wool-fels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of
Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay, shall be so Exported,
Transported, carried, or conveyed as aforesaid, or to any such intent or
purpose as aforesaid, knowing thereof, and being wittingly and willingly
aiding, assisting, or consenting thereunto, and also every Master and Mariner
of or in such Ship or other Vessel, wherein any such Sheep, Wool, Wool-fels,
Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Woolflocks, Fullers Earth or Fulling
Clay, shall be so exported, transported, carried or conveyed, or laden or laid
on Board as aforesaid, to any such intent or purpose as aforesaid, knowing
thereof and being wittingly and willingly aiding, assisting, or consenting
thereunto, and also every Factor or servant, or other person whatsoever, and
every Customer, Comptroller, Waiter, Searcher, Surveyor, or other Officer or
person whatsoever knowing thereof, and being wittingly or willingly aiding,
assisting, or consenting thereunto, shall be, and shall be adjudged and taken
to be a felon, and every Offender and Offenders therein, being duly convicted,
shall suffer and forfeit as in case of felony.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every offense,
Offenses against this Act where to be examined and tried.
which shall be done or committed contrary to this Act, shall and may be
enquired of, and heard, examined, tried, and determined in the County where
such Sheep, Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool,
Woolflocks, Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay respectively shall be so Packed,
laden, or laid on board as aforesaid, or else in the County where such Offender
shall happen to be apprehended or arrested for such offense, in such manner and
form and to such effect to all intents and purposes, as if the same offense had
been wholly done and committed in the same County.

Provided also, that every Baron and other Peer of this Realm, Peers.
which shall be indicted or accused as principal, or accessory in or to any
offense made felony by this Act, shall have his, her, or their Trial, by his,
her, or their Peers, as in cases of felony at the Common Law.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, None to be
impeached, unless within one year next after the offense committed.
That no person or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be impeached
for any offense made felony by this Act, unless such person or persons shall be
thereof indicted within the space of one year next ensuing such offense
committed.

And forasmuch as great quantities of Wool, Woollen yarn, and Wool-flocks are
close packed and pressed together with serves, and other unlawful engines into
Butts, Pipes, Hogsheads, Chests and other Cask and Vessels, and into Sacks,
Baggs and other wrappers made of Wool, or Linen, and under color of Bales,
Sacks, Baggs, Packs, and Casks of other Goods, and otherwise, great quantities
of the same are daily laden on board of Ships or other Vessels, and so are
carried, conveyed, exported and transported out of the Kingdoms, Town of
Berwick, and Dominion aforesaid; and also great quantities are daily carried
and laid at, or near the Coasts of the Sea, or some Navigable Rivers, into
Storehouses and Barns, and by night are laid on board of Shallops and other
Vessels belonging to Aliens, and so carried and exported out of the Kingdoms,
Town of Berwick, and Dominion aforesaid; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That from and after the said first day of August, Scrues
and unlawful Engines for pressing together of wool, not to be used.
no person or persons shall press together with any Scrues, Presses or other
Engines, into any Sack, Pack, Bag or other wrapper, or shall put, press, pack
or stean any Wool whatsoever, or any Yarn made of Wool, into any Butt, Pipe,
Hogshead, Chest or any other Cask or Vessel, upon any pretense whatsoever, or
shall carry or lay, or cause to be carried or laid at or near the Shore or
Coasts of the Sea, or of any Navigable River, or into any house or place near
adjoining thereunto, any such Wool, Wool-flocks, or Yarn made of Wool, with
intention to export, transport, carry or convey the same out of the Kingdoms of
England or Ireland, Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or Dominion of Wales, into the
Kingdom of Scotland, or into any Foreign parts, under the penalty of the loss
and forfeiture of all such Wool, The penalty.
Wool-flocks, and Yarn made of Wool, as shall be so packed or pressed, or put
or laid into Cask, or carried and laid near to the Sea-shoar, or to any
Navigable River as aforesaid, or the value thereof.

And whereas great quantities of Fullers Earth or Fulling Clay, Fulling clay,
Tobacco-pipe clay not to be exported.
are daily carried and exported under the color of Tobacco-pipe Clay, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Tobacco-pipe Clay shall
from and after the first day of August, One thousand six hundred sixty and two,
be exported, transported, carried or conveyed out of or from the Kingdom of
England, Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or after the first day of January, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, out of or from the Kingdom of Ireland, or
the Dominion of Wales, The penalty.
into the Kingdom of Scotland, or into any Foreign parts, or into any Port or
place out of the Kingdoms or Dominion aforesaid, under the penalty of three
shillings for every pound of Tobacco-pipe Clay which shall be exported or
transported contrary to this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
first day of August, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no Packs, Sacks,
Bags, or Cask of any Wool, Packs of wool woolfels etc. shall not be carried but
in the day time.
Wool-fels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn made of Wool, Wool-flocks, Fullers
Earth, Fulling Clay or Tobacco-pipe Clay, shall be laid or laden on any horse,
cart or other carriage whatsoever, or shall be carried or conveyed by land to
or from any place or places within the Kingdom of England, Town of Berwick, or
Dominion aforesaid, nor after the first day of January, One thousand six
hundred sixty two in the Kingdom of Ireland, but in the day time, and at
seasonable hours, (that is to say) from and after the first day of March to the
nine and twentieth day of September yearly, between the hours of four of the
clock in the morning, and eight of the clock in the evening, and from the nine
and twentieth day of September, to the first day of March yearly, between the
hours of seven of the clock in the morning, and five of the clock in the
evening, The penalty.
under the penalty of the loss and forfeiture of all such goods or the value
thereof, the one moiety of all which forfeitures mentioned in this Act, to be
to the use of the King, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him
or them that will sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record, in which no Essoign, Protection or Wager
of Law shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided nevertheless, Proviso concerning the Act.
That this Act or any thing therein contained shall not extend or be construed
to extend to repeal, disanul and make void any the Penalties, Clauses, or
Provisoes mentioned in one Act of this present Session of Parliament, made
against the transportation of Wool, Wool-fels, Fullers Earth, or any kind of
Scouring Earth, 12 Car. 2. c. 32 13 Car. 2. c. 14
or to the prohibiting of the loading on board of any Ship or Vessel, of any
Weather-sheep, Wool, Wool-flocks or other goods mentioned in this Act, that by
the aforesaid Act is permitted to be laden on board of any Ship or Vessel, for
the necessary use or provision of such ship or vessel as aforesaid, Any thing
in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for owners of ships that have offended and shall first discover the
same.
Provided always, That if any Owner of any Ship or Vessel, or any Master or
Mariner knowing of such transportation of such sheep, wool, woolfels,
mortlings, shorlings, yarn made of wool, wool-flocks, Fullers earth, Fulling
clay, or Tobacco-pipe clay, shall within three months next after the knowledge
thereof, or after his return into the Kingdom of England or Ireland, or into
the said Town of Berwick, or Dominion of Wales aforesaid, give the first
information bona fide before any of the Barons of either of the Courts of the
Exchequer in England or Ireland for the time being, or before the head Officer
of any Port where he shall first arrive, upon his or their Oath, of the number
and quantity of the goods mentioned in this Act, so carried, conveyed, and
transported, and by whom, where, and in what ship or vessel, and afterward
shall be ready upon reasonable warning by Process to justify and prove the
same, that then such Owner and Owners, Master, Mariner and Mariners shall not
be punished for felony by virtue of this Act, but shall nevertheless be subject
to all other penalties and forfeitures in this or any other Act contained, for
the Offense aforesaid; and all such Exportation, Transportation, carrying or
conveying of any the goods, Common nuisance.

Who may hear and determine the said offenses.


wares or commodities in this Act mentioned, is hereby declared and adjudged to
be a common and public Nuisance.

And for the better execution of this Act, be it further Enacted, that all
Justices of Assize, Justices of Jail-delivery, and Justices of Peace shall
enquire of all the premises in their General Quarter Sessions, and hear and
determine the same; and that all Mayors, Bailiffs, and other head Officers of
Cities, Buroughs, and Towns, not having Jurisdiction to try felony, shall
enquire of all and every Offense within this Act not made felony, and hear and
determine the same.

CAP. XIX.
Importing of Foreign Wool-cards, Card-wire, or Iron-wire, prohibited.

WHereas by the Acts of Parliament made in the third year of King Edward the
fourth, and the nine and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, 3 E. 4. ca. 4. ^9
El. c. 14.
and several other Statutes before that time made; It is Enacted (amongst other
things therein contained) that no Cards for wool, nor Iron thread (commonly
called white wire) shall be Imported, sent or conveyed into this Realm of
England, wherein the best Iron thread, or wire for making wool-cards is made,
and by the said manufacture of making, and drawing of wire, and wool-cards,
very many poor people of this Kingdom and their families have been employed and
maintained, and the wool-cards made thereof are of great concernment to this
Kingdom for the good making of woollen Cloth; And whereas contrary to the said
Statutes, not only much Foreign Card-wire, but also Foreign wool-cards have
been in these late times Imported into this Kingdom, and also within the same
many old wool-cards are by ill disposed persons (for their private lucre)
bought up, and the old Iron-wire of the said old wool-cards (being very weak,
and insufficient for the well carding of wool) is put into new leather and new
boards, and so uttered and sold to ignorant people for new wool-cards, to their
great detriment and the indamaging of their work, carding of wool, and the
cloth made thereof; By all which, very great inconveniences have been found by
experience of Clothiers in their making of English Cloth, which is lately much
debased and decayed, and wherein this Nation is greatly concerned to uphold and
encourage the well making thereof in and by all ways and means in any wise
conducible thereunto; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament; No Foreign wool-cards,
card-wire or iron wire for wool-cards may be imported.
And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Foreign
wool-cards or Foreign Card-wire, or Iron-wire, for making of wool-cards be
Imported into this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or any parts thereof,
nor used within the same, nor any Card-wire taken out of old Cards be from
henceforth put into new leather and new Card-boards, nor any such wool-cards
made thereof be put to sale, upon the pains, penalties, and forfeitures
hereafter following (that is to say) Every person or persons who shall import,
or bring any Foreign wool-cards, or Foreign Card-wire, or Iron-wire, for making
of wool-cards into this Kingdom of England, The penalty.
Dominion of Wales, or any parts thereof, or make any wool-cards of any such
old Card-wire as aforesaid, or put the same to sale, shall forfeit the said
wool-cards and Card-wire or Iron wire for making wool-cards or the value
thereof, if the same be not seized, the one half part thereof to the Kings
Majesty, and the other half part thereof to such person or persons who shall
first seize or sue for the same by Action of Debt, Plaint, Bill, Information,
or Indictment in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or
within the County, City, Borough or Town Corporate where such offense shall be
committed, wherein no Essoign, Protection, Wager of Law or Injunction shall be
allowed or admitted.

Proviso for amending of old wool-cards.
Provided always, That this Act shall not extend to hinder the Owners of any
wool-cards, to cause them to be amended for their own use, or to transport or
sell (for Transportation only) any their old overworn wool-cards, in any parts
beyond the Seas out of his Majesty's Dominions.

CAP. XX.
Provision of Carriage by Land, and by Water, for the use of His Majesty's Navy
and Ordnance.

WHereas by an Act Entitled, An Act for taking away the Court of Wards and
Liveries, 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
and Tenures in Capite, and by Knights Service, and Purveyance, and for settling
a Revenue upon His Majesty in lieu thereof, It was amongst other things
Enacted, for the reasons and recompense therein expressed, That from
thenceforth no Person or Persons by any Warrant, Commission, or Authority under
the Great Seal, or otherwise, by color of buying, or making provision or
purveyance for his Majesty, or any Queen of England for the time being, or of
any the Children of any King or Queen of England that shall be, or for his,
their, or any of their Household, shall take any Cart, Carriage or other thing
whatsoever of any the Subjects of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, without
the free and full consent of the Owner or Owners thereof, had and obtained,
without Menace or Enforcement, nor shall summon, warn, take, use or require any
of the said Subjects to furnish or find any Horses, Oxen, or other Cattle,
Carts, Ploughs, Wayns, or other Carriages, for the use of his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or of any Queen of England, or of any Child or Children of
any of the Kings or Queens of England for the time being, for the carrying the
Goods of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or the said Queens, or children,
or any of them, without such full and free consent as aforesaid, Any Law,
Statute, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding: Be it
notwithstanding Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and
after the Four and twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord, How
carriages shall be provided for his Majesty's Navy and Ordnance.
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, as often as the Service of his
Majesty's Navy, or Ordnance, shall require any Carriages by Land within the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, upon
notice given in writing by Warrant under the hand and seal of the Lord High
Admiral of England for the time being, or under the hands and seals of two or
more of the principal Officers or Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, or under
the hand and seal of the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance for the time being,
or under the hand and seal of the Lieutenants of his Majesty's Ordnance, for
the providing of Carriages for the respective service of the Navy or Ordnance,
unto two or more Justices of the Peace dwelling near unto the place where the
said Justices of the Peace may, and shall immediately issue forth their
Warrants to such of the adjacent Parishes, Hundreds or Divisions, as they shall
judge fit within their respective Counties and Divisions, not being above
Twelve Miles distant from the place of lading, for the sending to a certain
place, and at certain times (to be specified and appointed in the said
Warrants) such numbers of Carriages with Horses or Oxen sufficient for the said
service, as by the Lord high Admiral of England for the time being, or by the
Master or Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ordnance for the time being, or by the
principal Officers or Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy respectively as
abovesaid, shall be by writing under their hands and seals required; the Owners
of which Carriages, or their Servants, The rates allowed for carriages.
shall receive for every Load of Timber per mile, one shilling, for every
reputed mile which they shall go laden; and for other Provisions, the sum of
eight pence per mile for every Tun they shall carry.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it may and shall be
lawful for the Lord High Admiral of England for the time being, by Warrant
under his hand and seal, and also for the principal Officers and Commissioners
of his Majesty's Navy, by Warrants under the hands and seals of any two or more
of them, as also for the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance for the time being,
by Warrant under his hand and seal, and also for the Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Ordnance, by Warrants under the hands and seals of either of them, as
often as the service of his Majesty's Navy or Ordnance respectively shall
require any Carriage by Water, Impressing of persons, ships, vessels for
carriages.
to appoint such person or persons as they shall judge fitting, to Impress and
take up such Ships, Hoys, Lighters, Boats, or any other Vessel whatsoever, as
shall be necessary for the Accommodation of his Majesty's said service; the
Owners of which said Ships, Hoys, Lighters, Boats, or other Water-Carriage
aforesaid, or such as they shall appoint, shall receive for the hire of every
such Ship, Hoy, Lighter, Boat, or other Vessel per Tun, according to the Rates
usually paid by Merchants from time to time; And in case his Majesty's
Officers, and the Owners of such Ships, Hoys, Lighters, Boats, or other
Vessels, shall not agree on the said rates, then the rate to be settled by the
Brotherhood of Trinity-house of Deptford-Strand.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Penalty upon such as
neglect or refuse.
That in case any of his Majesty's Subjects of this Realm shall refuse, or
wilfully neglect, after reasonable notice, to make their appearance with such
sufficient carriages by Land, or to fit, provide and furnish their Ships, Hoys,
Lighters, Boats or other Vessels, for the service of his Majesty's Navy or
Ordnance, as is before expressed; or shall, after they have undertaken such
service, neglect or delay the same, that then upon due proof and conviction of
such refusal or neglect by the Oath of the Constable or other Officer, or two
other credible witnesses before the said Justices of Peace of the County, or
Mayor, or other chief Officer of the City or Corporation, where he or they
inhabit (which Oath they shall have power to administer) for the
Land-Carriages; and for the Water-Carriages, by the Oath of such person as
shall be appointed by the Lord High Admiral, the principal Officers or
Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance, or
the Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ordnance, as aforesaid, or other two credible
witnesses, before the principal Officers or Commissioners of his Majesty's
Navy, or Master or Lieutenant of his Majesty's Ordnance respectively, (which
Oath they shall have likewise power to administer) the Party so refusing or
neglecting, shall for every such refusal or neglect, forfeit the sum of Twenty
shillings for the Land-carriage, and for Carriage by Water, treble the freight
of such Ship or Vessel, not exceeding Fifty pounds in the whole, to the Kings
Majesty's use, to be forthwith levied in default of payment upon demand, by
distress and sale of his Goods and Chattels by Warrant from the said Justices
of the Peace, Mayor, or other chief Officer, or from the principal Officers or
Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, or Master or Lieutenant of his Majesty's
Ordnance respectively, (rendering to the Parties the overplus) upon every such
Sale (if there shall be any) the charge of distraining being first deducted.

The time of continuance in the service.
Provided always, that no Horses, Oxen, Cart, Wayn, or other Land-Carriage shall
be enforced to Travail more days Journey from the place where they receive
their lading, or be compelled to continue longer in the employment, then shall
be appointed by the Order of the said Justices of the Peace, and that ready
payment shall be made in hand for the said Carriages at the place of lading
without delay, Present payment to be made.
according to the aforesaid Rates.

Provided always, That in case any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, chief Officer,
or Constable, or any person or persons, which shall be appointed by the Lord
High Admiral, the principal Officers, or Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy,
the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance, or the Lieutenant of his Majesty's
Ordnance, as aforesaid, respectively, shall take any gift or reward to spare
any person or persons, No gifts or rewards may be taken by Justices of the
Peace to spare any person.
from making such carriage by Land, or by Water, or shall injuriously charge or
grieve any person or persons through envy, hatred, or evil will, who ought not
to make such carriage, or shall impress more carriages then the necessity of
the service shall require, or then he shall be commanded to impress by his
Superiors, That then upon due proof and conviction thereof, the party so
offending, shall forfeit the sum of Ten pounds to the party thereby grieved,
The penalty, and how to be recovered.
who may sue for the same to be recovered by Action of Debt, in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall be allowed: And in case any person or persons shall presume to take upon
him or them to impress any Horses, None may impress other then persons
empowered as aforesaid. The penalty.
Oxen, Wayns, or Carriages for Land; or any Ships, Hoys, Lighters, Boats, or
other Vessel, for the service of his Majesty's Navy or Ordnance, other then the
Persons so empowered as aforesaid, then he or they so offending, shall upon due
conviction of the said offense incur and suffer the punishment in the first
recited Act.

Ships and vessels fraighted by charter-party exempted.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no Ship, Hoy, Barque, or any other
Vessel whatsoever, that shall be really, and bona fide, fraighted by
Charter-Party, if there be other Vessels in the Port fitting for the Service,
nor any Vessel quarter laden with any Goods, Wares or Merchandises outward
bound, shall be liable to be Impressed for any the Services aforesaid; Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

The continuance of this Act.
Provided, That this Act, and the Powers therein contained, shall continue and
be in force, until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and no
longer; Any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Inhabitants of the new Forest of Southampton.
Provided nevertheless, That in regard of the more then ordinary charge and
burden which the Inhabitants of New-Forest in the County of Southampton, will
be liable unto, by reason of the great quantities of Timber usually felled and
carried thence for the use of His Majesty's Navy; It shall and may be lawful
for the Justices of the Peace, who shall by Warrant summon the Carts and
Carriages within the Division of the New-Forest in the County of Southampton
aforesaid, to have power (as to the Carriage of Timber only) to allow as
aforesaid to the several Owners of such Carts and Carriages, not exceeding Four
pence per mile, for so many miles as any Cart or Carriage so summoned shall go
empty to the place of its lading; Any thing in this Act contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. XXI.
For preventing the unnecessary Charge of Sheriffs, and for ease in passing
their Accounts.

WHereas the Office of Sheriff as well by reason of the great and unnecessary
Charges in the time of Assizes, and other public meetings, as by the tedious
attendance and charge of Sheriffs in passing of their Accounts in the
Exchequer, has of late years been very burdensome to the Gentry of this Your
Realm, who in the late times of Tyranny and Oppression have been great
Sufferers, and thereby much Impoverished in their Estates and Fortunes, for
remedy wherein Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses assembled in Parliament, do most humbly beseech Your most Excellent
Majesty, that it may be Declared and Enacted, And be it Declared and Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Person or Persons being
duly sworn into the Office of Sheriff, for any County or Shire within this Your
Majesty's Realm, shall from and after the First day of February next ensuing,
Sheriffs at the Assizes may keep no tables for others then of their own Family
and Retinue.

Nor make no present or gift to any Judge of Assise.

The number of Servants with Liveries in England. Wales.

Penalty of 200 l.


in the time of the Assizes held for the said County or Shire during his or
their Sherifalty, keep, or maintain, or cause to be kept or maintained one or
more Table or Tables, for Receipt or entertainment of any person or persons
resorting to the said Assizes, other then those that shall be of his own Family
or Retinue; nor shall make, or send in any Present to any Judge, or Judges of
Assise for his, or their provision, nor give any gratuity to his or their
Officers or Servants, or any of them; And also that no Sheriff shall after the
said first day of February have more then Forty Menservants with Liveries,
attending upon him in the time of the said Assizes, nor under the number of
Twenty Menservants in any County whatsoever within the Kingdom of England, nor
under the number of Twelve Menservants in any County within the Dominion of
Wales, upon pain that every Sheriff offending in any of the premises contrary
to the true meaning hereof, shall forfeit for every default the sum of two
hundred pounds.

Provided that nothing before in this Act contained shall in any wise extend
unto, Proviso for Sheriffs of London, Middlesex, Westmerland, and Cities and
Counties.
or any ways concern the Sheriffs of the City of London and Middlesex, and the
Sheriff of Westmerland, or either of them, or any of the Sheriffs of or
belonging to any City and County, or Town and County within this Realm; but
that the same Sheriff or Sheriffs shall, or may do as heretofore has been used
or accustomed within the said County of Middlesex, and Cities of London and
Westminster, and such other Cities and Counties, or Towns and Counties
aforesaid; Any thing herein before contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. How Sheriffs shall be eased in passing their accounts in the
Exchequer.


And to the end that Sheriffs may for the time future be eased of the great
charge and trouble which they heretofore have been put to in passing their
Accounts in the Exchequer, occasioned partly in regard that diverse sums of
money have stood charged upon them in gross, without expressing from what
persons, for what cause, or out of what Lands or Tenements the same are to be
particularly levied, or out of what particulars the said sums in gross do arise
(whereby it comes to pass that the said Sheriffs do still stand charged in
gross with diverse sums of money, which were heretofore payable by Abbots,
Priors, persons attainted, and such other persons, whose Estates have since
come to the Crown, or are otherwise discharged or illeviable) and partly by the
Account of Seizures or Foreign Account, and by the exaction of undue Fees of
Sheriffs upon their apposal concerning the same.

For the preventing whereof, and for the future ease of Sheriffs in passing
their Accounts; Seizures of Lands remaining charged Michaelmas, 1660.
Be it Enacted and Declared, That from henceforth every Seizure for or
concerning any Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments now remaining charged in the
Foreign account of any Sheriff or Sheriffs within the Kingdom of England for
the year ended at Michaelmas, One thousand six hundred and sixty, shall be from
the said Foreign account charged particularly in the great Roll of the
Exchequer; And that the several Remembrancers of the said Court, or their
respective Deputies do in their respective Officers forthwith, Seizures
hereafter taken or returned.
and so from time to time for the future write, and make true and perfect
Copies of all and every such other Seizure, and Inquisition as already are, or
hereafter shall be certified into their respective Offices, without certifying
the Copy of the Writ, or Commission at large upon which such Seizure or
Inquisition is, or shall be so taken or returned, mentioning only in brief the
Date of the said Writ or Commission, and shall deliver the said Copies well and
truly examined and attested under his or their Hands, to the Engrosser of the
said great Roll; And that all such of the said Seizures and Inquisitions as now
are returned into any of their respective Offices shall be delivered before the
first day of February next coming: And that all such other seizures as shall
hereafter be returned, or certified into their respective Offices shall be
delivered so examined and attested as aforesaid to the said Engrosser before
the first day of the next Term, after the said Remembrancers shall have
received the same, so as the same may be charged in the great Roll; To the end
that the Process of the Court may from thence issue for levying the Issues and
Profits thereof to the use of the Crown, unto which said Remembrancers or their
Deputies shall be from time to time paid for every Sheet which they, or their
respective Clerks shall so write and deliver, the sum of eight pence, Fees to
the Remembrancers.
the same to be paid unto them by the aforesaid respective Sheriffs, who shall
be allowed the same by the Barons upon their respective Accounts out of the
Issues and Profits arising out of the Premises so seized; and no Sheriff or
Sheriffs for this persent year, One thousand six hundred sixty and one,
Sheriffs shall not answer illeviable seizures, Farm, Rents, etc.
nor any Sheriff or Sheriffs to be hereafter made or appointed within this
Kingdom of England shall be charged in account to answer any illeviable
Seizure, Farm, Rent, or Debt, or other Seizure, Farm, Rent, Debt, matter, or
thing whatsoever which was not writ in Process to him or them to be levied;
wherein the persons of whom, or the Lands or Tenements out of which, together
with the cause for which the same shall be so levied, shall be plainly and
particularly expressed, but shall be thereof wholly discharged without
Petition, Plea, or other trouble, or charge whatsoever.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, Seizures before 1 Jac. and
diverse others to be left out of the Sheriffs account.
That all Seizures heretofore made before the first Year of the Reign of the
late King James of ever blessed memory, now remaining in the Accounts of the
Sheriffs, and all Seizures and Debts which are pardoned shall be, and are
hereby fully discharged; And that the same and every of them shall hereafter be
left out of Sheriffs accounts without further Order, Plea, Petition, or other
Charge to any Sheriff or Sheriffs whatsoever; And that no Process shall from
henceforth be written forth to any Sheriff for the levying of the same, or any
of them, nor for any other Rent or Farm, which cannot be explained by setting
forth the particulars thereof, or which have been unanswered by the space of
forty years last past; And that all other dead Farms and Seizures, and all
desperate, illeviable, and unintelligible Debts shall be removed out of the
Annual Roll, and Sheriffs Charge, into the Exannual Roll, there to remain,
until by Commission they shall be revived and made answerable.

Process for Debts to be sent forth in convenient time.
And to the end, that all new Debts arising and coming into the Exchequer for
the future may be sent forth in Process within convenient time; Be it also
Enacted and Declared, That the aforesaid several Remembrancers do forthwith
inrol and certify to the said Ingrosser of the great Roll, all such Debts as
any Sheriff or Sheriffs of this Realm are, or hereafter shall be charged
withal, either by virtue of their respective Retorns made to the Barons of the
said Exchequer upon his Majesty's Writs of Fieri facias, Levari facias, Capias,
or other Process; and also of all Fines and Amerciaments which are or shall be
set and imposed by the Court of Exchequer upon any Sheriff or Sheriffs for his
or their contempts or neglects (that is to say) That all and every such Debts,
Fines, and Amerciaments as now are returned, set, or imposed in any of the said
Offices, shall be delivered as aforesaid, before the First day of February next
ensuing: And all such Debts, Fines and Amerciaments as shall hereafter be
returned, set, or imposed in any of the respective Offices shall be also
delivered by the First day of the next Term, after such Retorns made, The
penalty upon officers for doing any thing against this Act.
or such Fines or Amerciaments so set, or imposed, that so they may be all
charged in the Sheriffs Accounts respectively, and comprehended within his or
their Quietus est, upon pain that every Officer or Officers in the said
Exchequer, who shall in any thing offend contrary to this present Act, shall
forfeit the sum of Forty pounds for every such offense, whereof one moiety
shall be to the King, his Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety to the
party or parties who shall be thereby agrieved, to be recovered by Action of
Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of his Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Privilege or Wager of Law shall be
allowed or admitted.

9 E. 2. St. Lincoln. 4 E. 3. cap. 9. 5 E. 3. cap. 4.
And it is hereby further Provided and Ordained, That no person shall be
assigned to be Sheriff of any County within this Realm, except such as have
Lands within the same County sufficient to answer the King and his people.

And whereas by an Act made in the One and twentieth year of the Reign of our
late Sovereign Lord King James over England; 21 Jac. cap. 5.
It was provided, That whenever any Sheriff upon passing his Accounts, A
Quietus est to be a sufficient discharge for a Sheriff, if not questioned
within four years after grant thereof.
should have his Quietus est, that he should be thereby absolutely discharged
of all sums of Money by him Levied and Received, and pretended not to be
accounted for within the said Account, whereupon he had his Quietus est, unless
such Sheriff should be called in question for such sums of Money so pretended
to be Levied, and not Accounted for within four years after the time of such
Account, and Quietus est; which Act notwithstanding, diverse Sheriffs and their
Heirs, upon such pretenses, have been molested and troubled many years after
their Accounts and Quietus est, and have had Process sent out against them,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said Act; It is hereby further
Provided and Enacted, That when any Sheriff or Sheriffs within the Kingdom of
England, or Dominion of Wales, upon passing their Accounts, shall have their
Quietus est, that then such Sheriff and Sheriffs, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels shall be thereby
absolutely discharged of all manner of sum or sums of Money whatsoever by them
Levied and Received, notwithstanding any such pretense that the same were not
accounted for, or other pretense whatsoever, unless such Sheriff or Sheriffs
shall be called in question, and that Judgment shall be given against him or
them for the same, within four years next after such Account, or Quietus est;
and that every Officer or Minister by whom, or by whose default any Writ or
Process contrary to this Act shall be sent out, shall incur the like
Forfeitures and Penalties to be recovered and inflicted by such persons, and in
such manner, as by the aforesaid Act is provided.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the Counties of Chester, Chester, Lancaster, Durham, Wales.
Lancaster, Durham, or the Counties in Wales, being County-Palatines, as to
their manner of accompting; but that the Sheriffs therein shall account as
formerly before the respective Auditors only, and not elsewhere.

Proviso touching the Kings Remembrancer.

Lord Treasurers, Remembrancer.


Provided, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to
enjoin His Majesty's Remembrancer, or the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, to
transcribe and deliver to the Ingrosser of the great Roll, any Inquisitions or
Seisures, but such as have been formerly charged in the Foreign Accounts of the
Sheriffs; but for all Inquisitions upon Attainders, or other Forfeitures to the
Crown, the same shall be put in charge as heretofore they have been, according
to the constant usage and Decree of the Court of Exchequer: Nor shall this Act,
or any thing therein contained, extend to exclude His Majesty's said
Remembrancer, of, or from the writing forth Process for, or upon any His
Majesty's Debts, Duties, Outlawries, or other charge whatsoever, or Process of
Levari facias, at the prosecution of any person or persons, to levy the Issues
or Profits of any Lands or Tenements seized, or to be seized into the Kings
hands, or Process of Venditioni exponas for Goods seized, or to be seized upon
any Debt to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or upon any Outlawry, or to
alter or change the Pleadings, or other Proceedings heretofore used and
accustomed in the said Office upon any Pleadings, touching the said Debts,
Duties and Seisures, or any of them whatsoever; And that no Debt, Duty, Fine,
Amerciament or Seizure whatsoever, which shall be charged in the said great
Roll of the Pipe upon any person whatsoever, by, or from any Record, Process or
Proceeding had, made, filed, or recorded in the Office of His Majesty's
Remembrancer of his Exchequer, nor any Process or Proceeding thereupon to be
had or made, by virtue of this Act, shall be respited, stayed, mitigated,
extenuated, compounded, or otherwise discharged, but by Order, Warrant or
Judgment made, filed or entered in the said Office of His Majesty's
Remembrancer, where the original of such Debt, Duty or Charge, as aforesaid,
is, and remains; And that in case any Process of Summons of the Pipe have
been, or shall be awarded for, or upon any such Debt, Duty, Fine, Amerciament,
or Seizure whatsoever, and the same Debt, Duty, Fine, Amerciament, or Seizure
shall not, upon such Summons of the Pipe, be levied or answered unto His
Majesty, That then the Clerk of the Pipe, or Engrosser of the Great Roll, shall
the next Term after the return of such Summons, certify the same in a Schedule
into the Office of His Majesty's Remembrancer aforesaid, to the end, that
further Process may be from thence written forth, for the Levying and Answering
thereof; And that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
unto, nor be construed to be prejudicial to His Majesty's Remembrancer in His
Exchequer, in any just, ancient and lawful Fees by him claimed, or belonging,
or incident to His Office, and usually had and received by him or his
Predecessors; Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. The conttnuance.


This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament,
and no longer.

CAP. XXII.
For Preventing of Theft and Rapine upon the Northern Borders of England.

Whereas a great number of Lewd, Disorderly, and Lawless Persons, being
Thieves and Robbers, who are commonly called Moss-Troopers, have successively
for many and sundry years last past been bred, resided in and frequented the
borders of the two respective Counties of Northumberland and Cumberland, and
the next adjacent parts of Scotland, and they taking the opportunity of the
large waste Grounds, Heaths and Mosses, and the many intricate and dangerous
Ways and Bypath in those parts, do usually, after the most notorious Crimes
committed by them, escape over from the one Kingdom into the other
respectively, and so avoid the hand of Justice, in regard the Offenses done and
perpetrated in the one Kingdom cannot be punished in the other.

And whereas since the time of the late unhappy distractions, such Offenses and
Offenders as aforesaid, have exceedingly more increased and abounded, and the
several Inhabitants of the said respective Counties have been for diverse years
last past necessitated at their own free and voluntary charge to maintain
several Parties of Horse for the necessary defense of their Persons, Families,
and Goods, and to the end the aforesaid evil and pernicious members might be
apprehended and brought to Judgment; And whereas the most part of the
Inhabitants of the said Counties being more remote from the Borders then other
parts, and consequently not so much exposed to imminent dangers as others, are
therefore unwilling to contribute their proportionable parts of the aforesaid
Charge, and yet notwithstanding it cannot probably or possibly be avoided, but
that those Inhabitants of the respective Counties who hold themselves most
secure, must certainly sustain much damage and detriment in their Goods and
Estates, in case the aforesaid Moss-Troopers be not timely suppressed, but
suffered to grow numerous, strong and potent, which they must needs do in case
there be no restraint upon them; Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority
thereof, that from and after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, for,
and during the term of Five years next ensuing the date of this present Act, it
shall and may be lawful for the respective Justices of Peace of the said
respective Counties, or the major part of them at any General Sessions of the
Peace to be holden for the said Counties respectively on the behalf of the said
Counties, or either of them from time to time, as they shall see occasion, to
make an Order in open Court of Sessions for charging, according to their
several Proportions, all, and every the several Inhabitants of the said
respective Counties for the safeguard and securing of the said several
Counties and Inhabitants thereof from all injury, violence, spoil, and rapine
of the Moss-Troopers aforesaid.

Provided, That the said County of Northumberland be not by force of this Act
at any time charged above the sum of Five hundred pounds in the year; nor the
said County of Cumberland charged above the sum of two hundred pounds in the
year: And for this end and purpose, the said several Justices of Peace of the
respective Counties aforesaid, are hereby empowered and authorized at any their
General Quarter Sessions aforesaid to appoint and employ from time to time, if
occasion require, any person or persons to have the Conduct and Command of a
certain number of men, not exceeding the number of Thirty men in the County of
Northumberland, and Twelve in the County of Cumberland, whereby the Malefactors
aforesaid may be searched out, discovered, pursued, apprehended, and brought to
trial of the Law. And all and every the said Justices of Peace of the
respective Counties aforesaid, or the major part of them at any General
Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said Counties, or either of them
respectively, are hereby further empowered and authorized by force of this
present Act, to make, and issue forth their respective Warrants under their
hands for the levying and collecting any sum or sums of money ordered to be
paid for, and toward the safeguard and securing of the said Counties
respectively as aforesaid; and to give full power to the several Constables and
other Officers, to raise, levy, and collect the said money, and all and every
the Inhabitants of the said several Counties, according to their respective
proportionable Estates in Lands or Goods, by Distress and Sale of Goods,
rendering the overplus, if there be any, to the respective Owner or Owners: And
the said Justices of Peace in the said several Counties, or any one of them
respectively, are hereby also authorized to examine any Complaint made against
the Collectors and Constables, or any other Officers or Ministers of Justice
whatsoever, or any of them, or any other refractory person or persons
whatsoever, that at any time hereafter shall refuse, neglect or fail to give
obedience to this Act, or shall do any act or acts in disturbance or
obstruction thereof, and to bind over such person or persons to the next
Quarter Sessions, according to the known Laws of the Land; to the end such
person or persons may be proceeded withal according to Justice.

And the said respective Justices of Peace, as aforesaid, are hereby further
Empowered and Authorized on behalf of the said several Counties respectively, to
appoint a Treasurer to receive from the said Collectors the Moneys by them
Collected, and to pay over the same according to the Orders they shall receive
from the said Justices at the General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for
the said respective Counties: And the said Justices are also Empowered to agree
and article with such person or persons yearly, as they shall think fit to
employ in the said Service, and to take sufficient Security of them for the
faithful and most effectual performance thereof, for the best safeguard,
advantage and benefit of the people, according to the true intent and meaning
of this Act.

And in case any person or persons shall in pursuance of this Act be employed
in the Border-Service, and shall at any time hereafter wilfully and corruptly,
or for any sinister respect whatsoever, neglect or forbear to Discover or
Apprehend, or to bring to Trial any of the said persons called Moss-Troopers as
aforesaid, and shall be convicted thereof according to Law, he or they shall
from thenceforth be disabled, and made incapable for ever after to manage or
take upon him or them the said Employment, and to suffer such Fine and
Imprisonment, according to the quality of his or their offense, as the Justices
of Peace at their General Sessions shall think fit to inflict.

Provided nevertheless, and be it hereby Declared, That it shall be lawful for
the Justices of Peace of either of the said Counties as aforesaid respectively,
at any time hereafter, to moderate or lessen the said charge, if they see cause.

Provided that this Act shall continue and be in force for five years, and no
longer.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That for
better suppression and punishment of the said Moss-Troopers flying out of
England into Scotland, or out of Scotland into England, 4 Jac. cap. 1. 7 Jac.
cap. 1.
the Statutes made in the several Sessions of Parliament, in the Fourth and
Seventh years of King James, shall be revived and put in execution according to
their true intent, 18 Car. 2. cap. 3. Continued for Seven years from the
expiration of this Act.

CAP. XXIII.
An Additionall Act concerning matter of Assurance used amongst Merchants.

WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in the Three and fortieth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth of happy memory, 43 El. cap. 12.
Entitled, An Act concerning matters of Assurances used amongst Merchants:
Encouragement of Merchants and Trade.
The Parliament then taking into Consideration, by all good means to comfort
and encourage the Merchants of this Kingdom, thereby to advance and increase
the Wealth of this Realm, her Majesty's Customs, and the strength of shipping,
and for preventing of diverse mischiefs in the said Act mentioned; It was
Enacted, That it should and might be lawful for the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, for the time being, to award forth under
the Great Seal of England, one general or standing Commission to be renewed
yearly at the least, and otherwise so often, as unto the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper should seem meet, for the hearing and determining of Causes arising
on Policies of Assurance, such as then were, or then after should be entered
within the Office of Assurance of the City of London; which Commissions should
be directed to the Judge of the Admiralty for the time being, the Recorder of
London for the time being, Two Doctors of the Civil Law, Two Common Lawyers,
and eight grave or discreet Merchants, or any five of them, which
Commissioners, or the greater part of them which should sit and meet, should
have full Power and Authority to Hear, Examine, Order and Decree all and every
such Cause and Causes, in a brief and summary course without formalities of
pleadings or proceedings, with Power to warn Parties to come before them, and
to examine upon Oath any Witnesses that should be produced, and to commit to
Prison any Person that should wilfully disobey their final Orders and Decrees;
And the Commissioners to sit once weekly upon the Execution of the said
Commission, with a liberty in the said Act for any person grieved by any such
Sentence or Decree, to exhibit his Bill in Chancery for the re-examination of
such Sentence or Decree, as by the said Act, relation being thereunto had, more
at large may appear: But forasmuch as by the said recited Act, without five
Commissioners there cannot be a Court, and without there be a Court, they
cannot proceed in the execution of their Commission, so much as to summon
Parties or Witnesses to appear; And in case of neglect or refusal of any Party
or Witness to appear, they have no power to punish the delay or contempt with
Costs, or otherwise. And it is provided by the said Act, That not any
Commissioner, other then the Judge of the Admiralty, or the Recorder of London,
shall proceed in the execution of such Commission, before he has taken his
Oath before the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, to proceed uprightly and
indifferently between party and party, which upon the renewing of the said
Commission, often proves a great delay, there being so many Commissioners to be
Sworn, and the Court of Aldermen not sitting at sometimes in the year, when the
said Commissions have happened to be renewed; And although the said
Commissioners upon their final Sentence have power to commit to Prison any
person that shall wilfully disobey their said Sentences, or Decrees, yet they
have no power to make any Order against the Ship or Goods, which commonly are
the things assured, by which Omissions, for want of Power, given by the said
Act, the benefits intended by the said Act of Parliament are much retarded, and
the mischiefs by the Act endeavored to be prevented, much increased.

For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted and Ordained, And it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled; That from and after the Four and twentieth day of June,
which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two,
it shall and may be lawful, to and for the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal of England for the time being, Three Commissioners empowered to
act.
to issue out yearly (or oftener if need require) one standing Commission under
the Great Seal of England, thereby impowring and authorizing the said
Commissioners, or any three of them (whereof a Doctor of the Civil Law, or a
Barrister at Law of five years standing at the least, to be always one) to meet
and sit, and make a Court, and proceed in all things in the execution of the
said Commission, as before by the said Act any Five might have done; And that
the said Commissioners, or any such three of them as aforesaid, be and hereby
are empowered to Summon Parties and Witnesses to appear, and in case of contempt
or wilful delay in the Witnesses, upon the first Summons and tender of
reasonable Charges, and in the Parties upon their second Summons, Costs.
to punish the Offenders by Imprisonment or Costs for such time, and in such
manner, as shall be reasonable, and according to the nature and quality of
their offenses; And that it shall and may be lawful to and for every such
Commissioner, to proceed in the execution of the said Commission, Lord Mayor of
London may administer the Oath.
having first taken an Oath before the Lord Mayor of the City of London for the
time being only, to proceed uprightly and indifferently between party and
party; And the said Lord Mayor is hereby Authorized to give such Oath, Any
thing in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding; And that no person shall
proceed in Execution of the said Commission, before he be first Sworn before
the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, to proceed uprightly and
indifferently between party and party, as formerly he should have been before
the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen.

Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case the said
Commissioners, Commissions out of the Admiralty Court to examine Witnesses
beyond Sea.
or any such three of them as aforesaid, shall find cause to examine Witnesses
beyond the Seas, or any remote parts of his Majesty's Dominions, for the
clearing of any doubt or matter before them depending, that in such case by
direction of the said Commissioners, or any such three of them, like
Commissions or Process shall issue out of the Court of Admiralty, as have
formerly been for the purposes aforesaid, returnable before the said
Commissioners; And that the said Commissioners, or any such three of them,
shall have also power to give and pass their final Sentence, Decree, and
Executions, as well against the body of the party evicted, or his goods, as
also against the Executors and Administrators of such party so evicted; And to
Assesse Costs of Suit upon such person or persons, as shall be condemned by the
Decree of the said Court as to them shall seem Just.

And forasmuch as many Witnesses (as Seamen and others) come and speedily go
again to Sea, Witnesses going to see how to be examined before.
before a Court can be summoned, by which means the Assured, and Assurers, are
many times much damnified; For the preventing of which mischief, Be it also
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for
any one of the said Commissioners to Administer an Oath to any Witness legally
summoned to give testimony, (timely notice being thereof given to the Adverse
party, and set up in the Office before such examination) to the end such
Witness or Witnesses may be cross-examined.

Provided always, That the said Commissioners shall in no case proceed both
against person and goods, for one and the same debt; And provided also, Appeal
to the Chancery.
That any thing in this Act contained shall not in any wise extend to prejudice
the appeal to the High Court of Chancery, given or allowed in the said former
Act of Parliament.

CAP. XXIV.
An Act Declaratory concerning Bankrupts.

WHereas diverse Noblemen, Gentlemen, and persons of quality, no ways bred up to
Trade or Merchandise, do oftentimes put in great stocks of money into the
East India Company, or Guiney Company, and the Fishing Trade, and such other
public Societies, and receive the proceed of those Stocks sometimes in ready
moneys, sometimes in Commodities, which they usually sell for money, or
exchange again, by which means the Trade of those Companies is much encouraged,
Fishing, and Navigation increased, and the public good of the whole Kingdom
very much advanced.

34 H. 8. cap. 4. 13 El. cap. 7. 1 Jac. cap. 15. 21 Jac. ca. 19.
Notwithstanding which great advantage to the public, there has been lately
some opinion conceived that such persons may, and ought to be made subject to
the Statutes provided against Bankrupts;

For the better declaring and explaining the Law therein, and to the end such
persons may not be discouraged in those Honorable endeavors for promoting
public undertakings: Be it declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, with the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, No persons for putting in money to the East India or Guiney Company, or
the Fishing Trade, shall be esteemed a Trader within the Statute of Bankrupts.
That no person or persons whatsoever, who have adventured, or put in, or who
hereafter shall adventure, or put in any sum or sums of money, in the said
East India Company, or Guiney Company, or into any joint stock, or stocks of
money by them or either of them, made or raised, or to be made and raised, for
and toward the maintaining and carrying on the Trade by the said East India
Company, or Guiney Company, managed, or to be managed, or who have formerly, or
shall hereafter adventure or put in any sum or sums of momey into any stock or
stocks of money, for the managing and carrying on of the said Fishing Trade, or
the Trade now called the Royal fishing Trade, and shall receive and take his
or their part, or dividend of Fish, Goods or Merchandises in specie, and shall
sell, or exchange the same, shall for or by reason only of such adventure of
moneys so put into the said East India Company, or Guiney Company, or into any
Stock or Stocks, for and toward the said Fishing Trade, or for, or by reason
only of the receiving and taking such Fish, Goods, and Merchandises in Specie,
or selling for money, or exchanging the same again, be Adjudged, Taken,
Esteemed or Reputed a Merchant or Trader within any Statute or Statutes for
Bankrupts, or be liable to the same. Proviso for other Trading.


Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, That every person or persons who
shall Trade, Traffic, or Merchandise in any other way or manner, then in the
said Royal Fishing Trade, or the Trade managed by the said East India Company,
or the Guiney Company as aforesaid, shall for and by reason of his and their
Trading, Traffiquing, and Merchandising, be liable to Commission and
Commissions against Bankrupts, as fully to all intents and purposes, and not
otherwise, as if this Act had never been made, Any thing in Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Judgment concerning Sir John Wolstenholme made void.
And be it further Enacted, That a Verdict and Judgment in Replevin heretofore
had, or given in the Term of Easter, in the Year One thousand six hundred fifty
three, in the Kings Bench, betwixt Phineas Andrews Plaintiff, Richard Woolward,
and William Meggs Defendants, whereby Sir John Wolstenholme Knight, an
Adventurer in the said East India Company, was adjudged, and found liable to a
Commission of Bankrupts only, for and by reason of a share he had in the
Ioynt-Stock of the said Company, and a pretended selling for money part of the
return which he had in Specie for his said Adventure shall be, and is hereby
declared contrary to Law, and is hereby reversed, Proviso for Purchasors in the
Case of Sir John Wolstenholme.
and made void and null.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no Act, Sale, or Disposition of any
the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Debts, or Credits of the
said Sir John Wolstenholme, or any distribution of the same, or of any money
heretofore made or done by the Commissioners of Bankrupts, or any claiming
under them, or any of them by virtue or color of any Commission or Commissions
taken out against the said Sir John Wolstenholme; and whereof any person or
persons is by virtue or color of, or under any such Act, Sale, or Disposition
actually seized or possessed, shall be hereby impeached, or frustrated, but
that the same be enjoyed for and toward satisfaction of the Debts, for which
the same have been disposed or distributed.

CAP. XXV.
For Restoring of all such Advowsons, Rectories, Impropriate Gleeb-Lands and
Tithes to his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, as were taken from them, and making
void certain charges imposed on them upon their Compositions for Delinquency,
by the late Usurped Powers.

Whereas many Loyal Subjects of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles the
First, and of the Kings Majesty that now is, were upon pretense of Delinquency
for adhering unto, and faithfully serving their said Majesty's according to
their Duty and Allegiance, enforced and constrained by the pretended power of
the Long Parliament, not only to part with great sums of money in satisfaction
of the said supposed Delinquency, but likewise to settle all, or part of such
Advowsons, Rectories, Gleeb-Land and Tithes, Estates and Terms, as they, or any
in trust for them were then seized or possessed of, and to make Grants and
Assurances of Rents and Annuities to and upon such Trustees as were appointed
by the said Long Parliament, as well for the augmentation of certain Vicarages,
as for the use and maintenance of Preaching Ministers and Lecturers, without
any valuable consideration given for the same, other then some abatement of
those excessive Fines imposed upon them for their pretended Delinquency, and
exacted from them by those arbitrary powers, to the impoverishing and undoing
of many of the Kings most Loyal Subjects; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by Authority of the same, That all Grants, All Estates made by pretended
Delinquents of Advowsons, Rectories, etc. for Compositions, made void.
Feoffments, Bargains and Sales, Releases, Confirmations, and other Conveyances
and Assurances in the Law, of any higher or lower nature whatsoever had, or
made by any such pretended Delinquents, their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, or by any person having any Estate or Interest in Law or Equity
in Trust for them, or by any other person or persons, having any Estate or
Interest jointly, or in common with them, or in Reversion or Remainder after
them, to any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate of any such
Advowsons, Rectories Impropriate, Gleeb-Lands, Tithes, Estates, Terms,
Annuities and Rents, as aforesaid, to, or for the uses aforesaid, as part or in
full of their Compositions for such pretended Delinquency as aforesaid, and all
Securities touching or concerning the same only, Saving other Rights.
be and are hereby adjudged from henceforth null and void in Law to all intents
and purposes whatsoever; Saving to all persons other than the said Trustees,
and their Heirs, and all claiming under them, all right to the said Rectories
and Premises as has accrued unto them before the Nineteenth day of May, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Tenants,
Lessees, How Tenants and Lessees under such Estates shall pay their Rents.
and Occupiers of all such Advowsons, Rectories Impropriate, Gleeb-Lands,
Tithes, and premises so granted, or settled, to or upon such Trustees as
aforesaid, for the uses or purposes aforesaid, shall pay all such Rents as
shall hereafter grow due and payable to such persons only unto whom the right,
and interest of and in the same Advowsons, Rectories, Gleeb-Lands, Tithes and
premises before the said Conveyances or Assurances (intended to be annulled
and made void by this present Act) did, or should of right belong or appertain.

And whereas the said Conveyances and Assurances in and by this Act intended to
be made void, were some of them of Estates in Fee-simple, and some of them long
Terms for years made to Trustees, Rents and sums appointed for augmentation of
certain Vicarages.
who redemiled the same at and under such yearly Rents and Sums of Money as
were then appointed to be the Augmentation of certain Vicarages, or maintenance
for preaching Ministers, since which time, many of the Rectories and Lands so
Conveyed and Leased have been absolutely sold, and the Redemises thereof
granted and assigned by the Owners thereof, for the benefit of such purchasers;
Be it further Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the
Authority of the same, That the said Purchasers, their Heirs and Assigns shall
pay, and the said former Owners of the said Lands and Rectories, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall have, hold, and enjoy the said
Rents and sums of Money so reserved (for the Augmentation of the said
Vicarages, and maintenance for Preaching Ministers) upon the said several
Redemises, and shall have the same, and the like remedies by Distress, or by
Action of Debt for the recovery thereof, as the said Trustees who Redemised the
same should, or might have had, if this Act had not been made.

CAP. XXVI.
Abuses committed in the Weight and false Packing of Butter, Reformed.

FOrasmuch as Butter is one of the principal Commodities of the product of this
Kingdom, and is not only of an universal use and Expense at home, The Contents
of a Kilderkin of Butter.
but very great quantities thereof are Transported beyond the Seas; And
whereas, by Custom time out of mind used, every Kilderkin of Butter ought to
weigh One hundred thirty and two pounds gross at the least, that is to say, One
hundred and twelve pounds of Neat Butter, and the Cask Twenty pounds; The
Firkin.
The Firkin of Butter ought to weigh Sixty and four pounds, viz. Fifty and Six
pounds of good and Merchantable Butter Neat, and the Cask Eight pounds; And the
Pot of Butter ought to weigh Twenty pounds, The Pot.
viz. Fourteen pounds of good and Merchantable Butter Neat, and the Pot Six
pounds: And whereas great Complaint has been made by the Traders in Butter and
Cheese, That by the Fraudulent dealing and practice of several Farmers, Owners,
and Packers of Butter, and by their irregular manner of weighing with Stones,
Iron Wedges, Bricks, and other unwarrantable Weights, the same quantities of
Butter are not put up into the respective Cask and Pots aforesaid, and the
Kilderkin is Commonly made to weigh Six and twenty pounds, and sometimes Eight
and twenty pounds, and the Firkin to weigh Ten pounds or Twelve pounds, and
sometimes Thirteen or fourteen pounds weight, and the Pots are made generally
to weigh Seven pounds, and some of them Eight pounds or Nine pounds weight, and
much bad and decayed Butter is mixed and Packed up into Kilderkins, Firkins,
and other Cask, and Pots, with sound and Good Butter, and immoderate quantities
of Salt intermixed to the spoil of the same, and to the great wrong and abuse
of his Majesty in the Victualling of His Navy, of Merchants in the Victualling
of their Ships, and of all Traders in the said Commodity, and of all
Householders who buy the same for their expense, and to the great dishonor of
the English Nation, in the parts beyond the Seas, and to the bringing of the
said Commodity into great disrepute abroad, whereby it yields not that price,
nor is vented there, in such quantities, as otherwise it would.

For remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, A Kilderkin of
Butter shall contain 112, l. besides the Cask.
and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That from and after the
First day of June, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred sixty and two, every Kilderkin of Butter do and shall contain One
hundred and twelve pounds Neat, or above, every pound containing sixteen Ounces
besides the Tax of the Cask, The Firkin 56. l.
and not less, of good and Merchantable Butter: Every Firkin and Butter do and
shall contain Fifty six pounds Neat or above, besides the weight of the Cask,
of good and Merchantable Butter; and every Pot of Butter do and shall contain
fourteen pounds Neat, or above, besides the weight of the Pot, The Pot 14. l.
of good and Merchantable Butter: And that no Butter which is Old or Corrupt
shall be mixed or packed up into any Kilderkin, Firkin, or other Cask, Vessel
or Pot whatsoever with any Butter which is New and Sound, No old Butter shall
be mixed with new.
nor any Whay-Butter shall be packed or mixed with any Butter that is made of
Cream, but that the said respective sorts of Butter shall be packed up
severally and apart by themselves, and shall not be mixed one with another, and
that every Cask or Pot of Butter shall be of one sort and goodness throughout
such Cask and Pot, Nor Whay-butter.
and that no Butter shall be salted with any great Salt, but that all Butter
shall be salted and saved with small Salt, nor more Salt shall be intermixed
with it, then shall be needful for its preservation, The penalty.
upon pain and penalty that every Owner, Farmer or Packer of Butter not putting
up in each Kilderkin, Firkin and Pot of Butter to be sold, or to be exposed to
sale respectively, such quantities as aforesaid, or offending in false packing
as aforesaid, for every such offense shall forfeit the value of all the Butter
so false packed, and for every offense where any Kilderkin, Firkin or Pot shall
be found to contain a lesser quantity of Butter, then by this Act is appointed,
six times the value of every pound of Butter, that shall be wanting in any such
Cask or Pot.

And to the intent that the benefit intended by this Act may be extended with
full effect to all persons who do either cut out Butter by Retail, or expend
it, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Cheese-monger
or other person whatsoever which shall sell to any person or persons any
Kilderkin or Kilderkins, Firkin or Firkins, Pot or Pots, or other Cask of
Butter made after the said First day of June, Cheese-mongers and all sellers of
butter by the Kilderkin or etc. shall deliver the full quantity to the Retailer.
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and Two,
shall deliver in every such Kilderkin, Firkin, and other Cask and Pot
respectively the full quantity and due quality appointed by this Act, and not
less, or in default thereof shall be liable to make satisfaction to him or them
that buy the same for what shall be wanting, according to the price for which
the same was sold.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said First day of June, None shall repack butter.
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and two
no Cheese-monger or other person or persons whatsoever, shall repack for sale
any Butter in any Kilderkin, Firkin, The penalty.
or other Cask or Pot whatsoever, upon pain and penalty that every
Cheese-monger or other person whatsoever which shall repack any Butter into any
Kilderkin or Kilderkins, Firkin or Firkins, Cask or Casks, Pot or Pots, to sell
the same again, shall for every Firkin, Cask or Pot so packed, forfeit the sum
of Double the value of all such Butter.

And for the better discovery of all frauds and abuses which shall be committed
against this Act, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Farmer and other person and persons, packing up Butter in Kilderkins, Firkins
or any other Cask whatsoever for sale, do from and after the said First day of
June, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty two
pack up his Butter into good and sufficient Cask, Farmers and other sellers
shall set their marks of the weight upon good and sufficient Casks.
made of sound, dry and well-seasoned Timber, and shall set upon every Firkin
and Cask whatsoever, when the same is thoroughly and fully seasoned in water, a
continuing visible mark of the just Weight of the empty Cask, and do likewise
set upon every Kilderkin, Firkin and Cask, when the same is filled with Butter,
the first Letter of his or their Christian name, and his or their Surname at
length, with an Iron brand, upon pain and penalty that every Farmer or other
person or persons whatsoever offending in not putting on the Mark of such
Weight of Kilderkin, And their names.
Firkin or other Cask, after seasoning, or not setting the first Letter of his
or their Christian name, and his or their Surname at length, on every Firkin
and Cask as aforesaid, shall for every such offense respectively forfeit the
sum of Ten shillings for every Hundred weight of Butter, and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser quantity that shall be in every such Cask.

Potters shall set their weight of every pot burnt, and their names.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Potter shall
set upon every Pot which he shall sell for packing up of Butter, the just
weight which shall be of every such Pot when it is burnt, together with the
first Letter of his or their Christian name, and his or their Surname at
length, upon pain and penalty that every Potter which shall not so do, shall
forfeit and pay for every Pot which he shall expose to sale for the use
aforesaid, whereupon he shall not have first set the just Weight, and the first
Letter of his Christian name, and his Surname at length as aforesaid, the sum
of One shilling; and that no Farmer or other person whatsoever shall expose to
sale any Butter packed up in any other Pot than such as shall be marked by the
Potter as aforesaid, upon penalty of Two shillings for every Pot of Butter
which he shall expose to sale as is not so marked; all and every of which said
Offenses are to be enquired of, sued for, heard and determined in the Sessions
of Peace for the County, City, Borough, Town or Liberty, or in the Court of
Record of the City, Borough, Town or Liberty wherein such offense shall be
committed, by Action of Debt, Indictment, Information, or Presentment, How to
be disposed.
wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed to the
Defendant; and the one half of all such Forfeitures shall be to the use of the
poor people inhabiting within the Parish where such offense shall be from time
to time committed, to be paid to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor
of and in such Parish, and the other half to him or them that will sue for the
same, Double Costs
besides his double Costs thereby expended.

Provided, That every Suit and Information which shall be brought upon this
Act, Within what made suit must be begun upon this Act.
shall be commenced within four months after the sale of such Butter.

CAP. XXVII.
For Repairing of Dover-Harbour.

WHereas it is found by long experience, that Dover-Harbour is and has been of
very great use and benefit to the Merchants of this Realm, and others passing
through the Narrow Seas, whereunto they have, and do enter, to avoid imminent
danger of Tempests, Pirates, or the Common Enemy in time of War; And whereas the
said Harbor of late by Tempests, and the violence of the Sea has been much
broken, ruined and decayed, and in great danger of being lost, unless timely
prevented by repairing thereof, which cannot be without great charges and
expenses, as well in the present repair, as in the future maintenance of the
same: whereof his Majesty being Informed, and minding the good and safety of
Merchants and Seafaring men, has of late of his Majesty's goodness and
liberality, bestowed a great sum of money in, and about the repairing of the
said Harbor, which yet is not sufficient to carry on that work, and to secure
it for the future.

And to the end that the same may be from time to time maintained and kept in
good repair for the use and benefit of Merchants, and Seafaring men; And that
such provision for the maintenance thereof may now be made, 1 Jac. cap. 32.
as by an Act of Parliament made in the First year of his Majesty's
Grandfather King James of ever blessed memory, has been formerly done and
provided for: Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from
and after the Four and twentieth day of June next ensuing, during the space of
seven years thence next following, there shall be paid by the Master, Duties
payable at and toward the Repair of Dover-Harbour.
or Owner of every Ship, Vessel or Crayer, whereof any of his Majesty's
Subjects of England shall be Owners, or Part-owners, of the burden of Twenty
Tuns or upwards, and not exceeding the burden of Two hundred and fifty Tun,
for every Voyage, Loading, or Discharging within this Realm, or to, or from any
Foreign Country beyond the Seas, and passing to, or from London, or for, from,
to, or by Dover, or coming into the Harbor there, not having a Cocquet
testifying his payment before for the Voyage toward the Repair of
Dover-Harbour, the sum of Three pence for every Tun of the burden of every
such Ship, Vessel, or Crayer (except Vessels laden with Sea-Coals, or
Grind-stones, or Purbeck, or Portland-stone) and for every Chauldron of
Sea-coals, or Tun of Grind-stones penny halfpenny, the same to be paid to the
Customer, or Collector of Customs, or Subsidies, or their Deputies within this
Realm, in such Port, from whence such Ship, Vessel, or Crayer shall set forth,
or where such Ship, Vessel, or Crayer shall arrive, before they load or unload
the Goods therein, The Account of the number of the said number of the said
Tuns to be made according to the Entry of Goods in every Ship, Vessel or Crayer
in the Custom-house, and no Entry thereof to be allowed in any Office of
Customs or Subsidies, without true information before made by oath of the
Master, Owner, or Shipper of such Ship, Vessel or Crayer concerning the burden
thereof, and payment by him made of the sums aforesaid, of which payment the
Master, Owner, or Shipper paying the same, shall have allowance of the
Merchants, according to the rate of the Goods in the same Ship, Vessel or
Crayer by way of Average; And the Customer or Collector, or his Deputy
receiving the sums aforesaid, or any of them, shall disburse and pay the same
from time to time to the Treasurer of the said Harbor for the time being, or
such person or persons as he shall assign to receive the same, to be expended
in and about the repair of the said Harbor; And every Customer or Comptroller,
or their Deputies, that shall make any Entries of Customs or Subsidies of any
Goods in the said Ships, Vessels or Crayers, before such Information as
aforesaid concerning the burden thereof shall be made, or before payment made
of the sums before limited to be paid by this Act, or shall make any wilful
default in not collecting the said sums, or any of them, or not paying the same
over from time to time to the Treasurer of the said Harbor for the time being,
or such person or persons as he shall assign to receive the same as aforesaid,
shall forfeit to the use of the Reparations of the said Harbor, Ten pounds for
every such default, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of Record,
by the Warden and Assistants of the said Harbor for the time being; in which
Suit no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Who shall inspect and oversee the Repairs.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Master and Wardens of the Trinity-House of
London for the time being, to appoint such person or persons as they shall
think fit to inspect and oversee the repairs and works to be made for the
security of the said Harbor; And that they may once every year, during the
term of seven years aforesaid, require an account of the respective Collectors
of the Duties aforesaid, and the Treasurer for the said Harbor for the time
being, of the moneys by them respectively received by virtue of this Act, and
of the disbursments thereof: And if the said Collectors and Treasurer shall not
within six weeks next after demand of such Account, give in the same
accordingly; or if thereupon it shall appear that the said money shall not be
duly disbursed in and about the said Repair and the Works, for the securing and
maintenance of the said Harbor, according to the intent of this Act; or if the
said Harbor shall within the time aforesaid be sufficiently repaired and
secured, That then the said Master and Wardens shall inform the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council thereof, who shall and may thereupon, and to that
purpose are hereby empowered to suspend, or cause all and every further payments
by virtue of this Act to cease and determine, if they shall see cause.

Proviso for Ships belonging to Weymouth, Melcomb-Regis, Lime Regis.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Ships
and Vessels belonging to the Ports of Weymouth and Melcombe-Regis, and
Lime-Regis in the County of Dorset, having a Peire and Cob of their own, (which
by reason of their poverty at present they are not able to maintain) shall be
exempt from contributing or paying any thing to the Harbor of Dover mentioned
in this Act; Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; so as
they shall bring Certificate made upon Oath before the Mayor, and under the
Common Seal of the said respective Corporations, That the said Ships and
Vessels do properly belong thereunto; And that the Inhabitants of the said
respective Corporations are Owners of the major part of the said Vessels.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted, That this Act or any thing herein
contained, shall not extend to Authorize the Collection of more then the sum of
Twenty two thousand pounds in the whole; And then the said Collection to cease.

CAP. XXVIII.
Pilchard Fishing in the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, Regulated.

Fishery of great concernment to this Nation.
WHereas the Public Honor, Wealth and Safety of this Realm, as well in the the
maintenance of Trade and support of Navigation, as in many other respects, does
in an high degree depend upon the improvement and encouragement of the Fishery.

And forasmuch as of late years there have diverse pernicious disorders and
abuses, by the licentiousness of the times crept in, and yet continue evidently
destructive to that Trade, for prevention and redress whereof there is no Law
hitherto particularly provided, in the growing evils occasioned by
Driving-Nets, and other fraudulent and injurious practices to the extreme
damage of the Fishery: Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament assembled, Times prohibited to Fish in
Cornwall and Devon.
and it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the Five and
twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, no person or
persons shall in any year from the First day of June, till the last of
November, presume to take Fish in the high Sea, or in any Bay, Port, Creek, or
Coast of or belonging to Cornwall or Devon with any Drift-Net, Trammel, or
Stream-Net or Nets, or any other Nets of that sort or kind, Penalty.
unless it be at the distance of one League and an half at least from the
respective shores, upon the penalty of forfeiture of the said Nets so employed,
or the full value thereof, and one months Imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize. Pilchards and Fumathoes to be bought of the Owners and Adventurers
in Fishing.


And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons being neither Owners, Partners, or Adventurers in the Craft of Fishery,
and in the Boats and Saynes thereunto belonging, or shall presume from and
after the day before limited, to make, or cause to be made any Pilchards or
Fumathoes in Cask to be Sold or Transported, except he or they shall openly buy
the aforesaid Fish of the respective Owners, Partners, and Adventurers in the
said Pilchard Craft, or with their express allowance, leave and consent, that
they shall in such case forfeit all and singular such Pilchards and Fumathoes
so made, and every Cask thereof, or their full value; the one half to the King,
and the other half to him or them that shall so sue for the same by Bill,
Plaint, or other Information, and upon Legal proof recover the same.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Owner, Partner, or Company, or any
other person or persons whatsoever, shall fraudulently purloyn, imbezel, hide,
convey, carry away, or dispose by sale or otherwise, or cause to be purloyned,
imbezelled, hidden, conveyed, carried away, or disposed out of the Nets, Boats,
or Cellars, any Pilchard Fish without the express leave, consent and allowance
of the proper Owner, and major part of the Company respectively, that then
every such person and persons that shall offend therein upon legal evidence,
shall pay treble the value in satisfaction to the parties so wronged, and be
sent to the House of Correction for three months.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Idle and suspicious
flocking about Pilchard Boats to depart upon warning.
That if any idle or suspicious person or persons shall in the night assemble
and flock together about the Boats, Nets or Sellars belonging to any
Pilchard-Craft, upon any the Coasts of Cornwall or Devon, having no business
there to do, and being warned by the Company or Owner of such Boats or Sellars
to be gone, that then upon complaint made unto any one Justice of the Peace,
every such person or persons refusing so to do, shall pay Five shillings to the
poor of the Parish where such offense was committed, or shall be set in the
Stocks for the space of Five hours.

CAP. XXIX.
An Act for the Reversing of the Earl of Strafford his Attainder.

WHereas Thomas late Earl of Strafford was Impeached of High Treason, The
Reasons and Grounds of Repealing the Attainder.
upon pretense of endeavoring to Subvert the Fundamental Laws, and called to a
public and solemn Arraignment and Trial before the Peers in Parliament, where
he made a particular Defense to every Article objected against him; insomuch
that the Turbulent party then seeing no hopes to effect their unjust designs by
any ordinary way and method of proceedings, did at last resolve to attempt the
destruction and Attainder of the said Earl by an Act of Parliament, to be
therefore purposely made to Condemn him upon accumulative Treason, none of the
pretended Crimes being Treason apart, and so could not be in the whole if they
had been proved, as they were not, and also adjudged him guilty of constructive
Treason (that is) of levying War against the King, though it was only the
commanding an Order of the Council Board in Ireland, to be executed by a
Sergeant at Arms and Three or Four Soldiers, which was the constant practice
of the Deputies there for a long time; To which end they having first presented
a Bill for this intent to the House of Commons, and finding there more
opposition then they expected, they caused a multitude of Tumultuous persons to
come down to Westminster Armed with Swords and Staves, and to fill both the
Palace-Yards, and all the Approaches to both Houses of Parliament with fury and
clamor, and to require Justice, speedy Justice against the Earl of Strafford;
And having by these and other undue practices obtained that Bill to pass in the
House of Commons, they caused the Names of those resolute Gentlemen, who in a
case of innocent blood had freely discharged their consciences, being Nine and
fifty, to be posted up in several places about the Cities of London and
Westminster, and styled them Straffordians and Enemies to their Country,
hoping thereby to deliver them up to the fury of the people whom they had
endeavored to incense against them, and then procured the said Bill to be sent
up to the House of Peers, where it having sometime rested under great
deliberation, at last in a time when a great part of the Peers were absent by
reason of the Tumults, and many of those who were present protested against it,
the said Bill passed in the House of Peers; And at length his late Majesty King
Charles the First of Glorious memory, granted a Commission for giving his Royal
assent thereunto, which nevertheless was done by his said Majesty with
exceeding great sorrow then, and ever remembered by him with unexpressible grief
of heart, and out of His Majesty's great Piety he did pulickly express it when
his own Sacred life was taken away by the most detestable Traitors that ever
were.

For all which causes, Be it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the Act
Entitled, An Act for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford of High
Treason, and all and every Clause, Article and thing therein contained, being
obtained as aforesaid, is now hereby repealed, revoked, and reversed.

And to the end that right be done to the memory of the deceased Earl of
Strafford aforesaid; Be it further Enacted, That all Records, and proceedings
of Parliament relating to the said Attainder, be wholly cancelled, and taken
off the File, or otherwise defaced and obliterated, to the intent the same may
not be visible in after-ages, or brought into example to the prejudice of any
person whatsoever.

Provided, That this Act shall not extend to the future questioning of any
person or persons however concerned in this business, or who had any hand in
the Tumults, or disorderly procuring the Act aforesaid; Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

CAP. XXX.
Madder shall be Imported pure and unmixed. REP. 15 Car. 2. cap. 16.

CAP. XXXI.
The Inconvenience by Melting the Silver Coin of this Realm, prevented.

9 E. 3. cap. 3.
WHereas by an Act made in the Ninth year of King Edward the Third it is
Enacted, That no sterling Halfpenny or Farthing shall be moulten to make
Vessel, or any other thing by Goldsmiths, or any other, upon pain of forfeiture
of the moneys so moulten; 17 R. 2. cap. 1.
Whereas by one other Statute made in the Seventeenth year of King Richard the
Second, it was further Enacted, That no Groats or Half-groats shall be moulten
by any man to make Vessel, or other thing thereof upon the same pain; And
whereas diverse persons do elude the said Statutes, as well Goldsmiths as
others, by melting Silver-Coyns of this Realm, above the value of Groats, to
the great diminishing of the Silver-Coyn of this Realm, and the hindrance of
the Commerce of the same: Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever shall after the
Twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty two, None shall melt
current Silver Money. The Penalty.
wilfully melt, or cause to be melted any of the current Silver-money of this
Realm, upon pain not only of forfeiture of the same, but also of the double
value of any such Coin so melted; the one half to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, the other half to the Informers, who shall sue for the same upon
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster; in which no Essoign, Wager of Law, or Protection shall be allowed;
And moreover, That the said person or persons offending contrary to the Tenor
of this Act (if he or they be a Freeman, or Freemen, or privileged person or
persons of any City or Corporation within this Kingdom of England) shall upon
legal conviction for the same, be forthwith disfranchised and made incapable of
exercising the Trade of a Goldsmith, or any other Mystery by virtue of the
Privileges of the City or Corporation of which he or they are members; And if
the said person or persons offending, and convict as aforesaid, shall not be a
Freeman or Freemen, or privileged person or persons of any City or Corporation
as aforesaid, then he or they shall suffer imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize for the space of Six months next ensuing his or their Conviction as
aforesaid.

CAP. XXXII.
The Manufacture of Broad Woollen Cloth, within the West Riding of the County
of York, Regulated.

WHereas diverse abuses and deceits have of late years been had, and used in the
Manufacture of Broad Woollen Cloth, made within the West Riding of the County
of York. and the spinning and deceitful working thereof, which tends to the
great debasing and undervaluation of the said Manufacture, both at home, and
also in Foreign parts where the same is usually vended.

For prevention of all which abuses and deceipts; It is Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That from and after the next
Monday after Easter, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand
six hundred sixty and two, there be, and shall be, a Corporation to continue
for ever within the said West Riding of the County of York, consisting of all
the Justices of the Peace of the said West Riding for the time being, A
Corporation of Clothiers in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Two Masters, Ten Wardens, Twelve Assistants, and Commonalty; All which said
Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, are to be of the ablest and best experienced
Clothiers within the said West Riding and such as have served, and been brought
up in the Trade and Mystery of Clothing, by the space of seven years, according
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; One of which said Masters, Five of
which said Wardens, and Six of which said Assistants, shall be chosen the first
Monday after Pentecost then next following, and from thenceforth to be yearly,
and every year chosen upon the next Monday after Pentecost, at some public
place, by the Free Clothiers of the said West Riding, inhabiting within the
Parish of Leeds in the said County of York, the greater part of them present at
such Election; and the other Master, Five Wardens, and Six Assistants shall be
chosen upon the same days at some public place, by the Free Clothiers
inhabiting out of the said Town and Parish of Leeds, or the greater part of
them present at the said Election, of the parts adjacent within the said
West Riding; And in case any of the said Masters, Wardens, and Assistants,
after their said respective Elections do happen to die, that then it shall and
may be lawful; at any Court to be holden next after such Decease, to Elect
others in their respective places; And the said Wardens, Masters, and
Assistants respectively, shall within eight days after their first Choice and
Election, take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which any two Justices of
the Peace within the West Riding, whereof one to be of the Quorum, have hereby
power to Administer, and also the ensuing Oath, (Viz.) I A. B. do swear, The
Oath to be taken by the Master, Wardens and Assistants.
That I will well, faithfully and honestly perform and discharge the Office of
a Master of the Corporation of the Free Clothiers, according to the best of my
Skill, Power, and Knowledge; So help me God. And the like Oath, and Oaths, to
be Administered to the Wardens and Assistants respectively, mutatis mutandis;
And for ever after, the said Justices of the Peace, Masters, Wardens, and
Assistants, and their Successors, or any Thirteen of them, shall and have
hereby power to Administer the like Oath or Oaths to such Officer or Officers,
faithfully and honestly to perform and discharge his and their said Office and
Offices, to which he or they are and shall be so chosen by this Act, at any
Court to be by them holden in manner hereafter declared.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices
of the Peace, Who shall be of the said Corporation for ever and how called.
Masters, Wardens, and Assistants for the time being, together with the said
Free Clothiers of the said West Riding, shall for ever hereafter, in name and
in fact, be one Body Politic and Corporate in Law to all intents and
purposes, and shall have a perpetual Succession, and be called by the name of
the Supervisors, Masters, Wardens, Assistants, and Commonalty of the Trade or
Mystery of Clothiers, for the well making of Broad Woollen Cloth, within the
West Riding of the County of York; and that they shall be enabled to Plead and
Sue, and to be Sued and Impleaded by that name, in all Courts and Places of
Judicature within this Kingdom; And by that name, shall and may without License
in Mortmain, purchase, take or receive any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditameats,
of the Gift, Alienation or Demise of any person or persons, who are hereby
without further License enabled to transfer the same, and any Goods and
Chattels whatsoever, for the use and benefit of the Corporation aforesaid (not
exceeding the yearly value of Two hundred pounds:) And for the better
Regulation of the said Government of the said Trade and Manufacture, the said
Justices of the Peace, Masters, Wardens, and Assistants for the time being, or
any Thirteen of them, whereof there shall be One of the said Justices, or One
of the said Masters at the least always present, shall have, Times and places
of their meeting.
and hereby have Power and Authority from time to time to meet, and keep Court
upon the first Saturday in every month in every year, for the ends in this Act
mentioned, within the said Town of Leeds, at the place commonly called or known
by the name of the Sessions House, or Common Hall in Leeds aforesaid; And also
at such other time and place of the said West Riding, as shall from time to
time be appointed, by the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, or
any Thirteen of them, upon eight days notice, or warning to be given of such
meeting, and Court to be held: And in case that the Masters, Wardens, and
Assistants, or the major part of them, shall refuse or neglect to appear, so as
a Court cannot be holden accordingly, as is before directed, That then such
Master, Warden, or Assistant so refusing or neglecting, shall forfeit the sum
of Twenty shillings, the one moyetie to the use of the Poor of such respective
Town where the person so refusing or neglecting shall live, the other moyetie
to the use of the Corporation: And the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, and
Assistants, or any Thirteen of them, are hereby empowered to summon to appear
at the said Courts to be held as aforesaid, so many of the said Clothiers, as
they shall in their discretions think meet for the better ordering the Affairs
of the said Trade, who are hereby required to appear upon such Summons; the
number of which Persons so Summoned, shall not be under Eight and forty; And in
case of neglect or refusal, are to forfeit to the use of the said Corporation,
the sum of Ten Groats, for every default of not appearing, to be levied as is
hereafter directed.

And the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, or any Thirteen of
them (whereof One of the said Justices, or One of the said Masters to be
present as aforesaid) shall have, Power to appoint a Common Seal and to make
orders and Bylaws.
and hereby have Power and Authority from time to time, to make and appoint a
Common Seal for the use of the said Corporation, and to Make and Ordain
Bylaws, Rules, and Ordinances, for and concerning the better Spinning,
Working, Making, Fulling, and Milling of Woollen Cloth, as in their Judgments
and Discretions, may tend to the good, Credit and Advancement of the said Trade
and Manufacture, (the same not being contrary to Law) which Bylaws, Rules, and
Ordinances, being Ratified and Confirmed by the Justices of Assize to be holden
for the County of York, shall be Published Four times in the year at the least,
at Four public meetings or Courts, (viz) Upon the first Saturday in June, the
first Saturday in September, the first Saturday, in December, and the first
Saturday in March; and shall be obeyed and kept by the several persons within
and under the said Regulation or Corporation. Penalty for not Conforming to
Bylaws.
And the said Courts constituted as aforesaid shall have, and hereby have power
to impose a Fine and Penalty upon any person or persons of the said Corporation
or Regulation, being a Clothier, that shall not conform to such Rules, Orders
and Ordinances, so made as aforesaid.

Provided, That the said Fine or Penalty of any person for not conforming as
aforesaid, exceed not the sum of Twenty shillings for one offense; the full
moiety, or one half of the said Fines and Penalties to go to the use of the
said Corporation, and the other half or moyetie to the use of the Poor of the
Parish where such person so offending may be dwelling and inhabiting.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices,
Masters, Power to appoint searchers of Cloth.
Wardens and Assistants, or any thirteen of them, shall have power to nominate
and choose Searchers of Cloth in the several places of the said West Riding,
who shall be sworn before them, or any thirteen of them in manner aforesaid,
for the true searching of Cloth, that it be of a due weight, length and
breadth, according to the Statute.

And in regard the nature of Cloth is much changed in these late years, and
that the new Drapery is now most in use, for which sort of Cloth there is no
certain Standard for length, weight, The new Drapery most in use.
and breadth, appointed by any Statute; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the length, weight and breadth of the said new
Draperies of broad Woollen Cloth made within the said West Riding, be, and
shall be, as is hereby limited and appointed, (viz) That every Cloth called by
the name of an End, or half Cloth, shall be betwixt fifteen yards, and eighteen
yards in length in the water, and not to exceed; and one yard and an half in
breadth at the least within the Lists. And every Cloth Commonly called a Short
Cloth, between twenty four yards, and twenty eight yards in length in the
water, and not to exceed; and one yard and an half in breadth at the least
within the Lists. And every Long Cloth so called, betwixt thirty yards, and
thirty six yards in length in the water, and not to exceed; and a yard and an
half in breadth at the least within the Lists. And that every yard of such
Cloth shall weigh respectively two pounds and a quarter, accounting sixteen
Ounces to the pound, being well thicked, scoured, misled and fully dried, And
that the said Searcher shall according to his Oath, duly try and examine by
weight or by water all broad Woollen Cloths of what sort soever, made within
the said West Riding, and shall affix thereunto a Seal of Lead, expressing the
true length and weight thereof. And in case any of the said Cloths be found
faulty upon trial and examination, the said Justices, Masters, Wardens and
Assistants, or any thirteen of them, shall have power to impose such Fine and
Penalty upon the Offenders as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that
behalf are, or ought to be imposed upon them for such defaults; the one third
part of all such Fines and Penalties to be disposed of to the use of such
Searcher or Searchers, certifying the said Default of Length, Weight or
Breadth, and the other two parts to the Poor of the Parish where such offense
shall be committed, to be recovered in such manner as is limited and appointed
by the Statute made in the One and twentieth Year of the late King James, Chapter
18. And that all and every such Searcher and Searchers, so chosen as aforesaid,
21 Jac. cap. 18.
shall before he or they enter upon the execution of the said Office, take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and also the Oath ensuing, which Oath the
Justices, Masters, Wardens and Assistants, or any thirteen of them as
aforesaid, have power to Administer as follows; The Oath to be taken by
Searchers.
I A. B. do swear that I shall well and truly execute the Office of Searcher of
Broad Woollen Cloth within the West Riding of the County of York, according to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and according to the best of my Skill and
Knowledge; So help me God.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Searcher shall fail in the due
Execution of his Office contrary to his Oath, and Laws and Statutes in that
case made and provided, every such Searcher shall forfeit and lose for such
Fault, or not setting to such Seal of Lead as aforesaid, Five pounds; Penalty
upon Searchers.
And that it shall and may be lawful to and for any other Searcher in the
West Riding (taking with him one of the said Wardens of the said Corporation)
to research any of the said Clothes, Any thing in any former Statute to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

The Authority and power of the Searchers.
And it is further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for all and
every such Searcher and Searchers from time to time, so often as occasion shall
require, to enter into any Shop, house, Warehouse, or any other place in the
daytime, of any Clothiers, Drapers, Cloth-Workers, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, where any of the said Cloths shall be, within the said
West Riding, to search for all suspected Cloth. And in case of resistance, the
party so resisting shall forfeit the sum of Ten pounds, the one half thereof to
His Majesty, the other half to the use of the said Corporation: And if upon
such Search, any Broad-Cloth shall be found made of, or mixed with Flocks,
Thrums, Goats hair, or other deceitful Wool, the said Cloth shall be, and is
hereby Declared, and Enacted to be forfeited: And that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, or any
thirteen of them, at any Court to be by them held as aforesaid, to dispose
thereof in such manner as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm the same ought
to be disposed.

None may make broad Cloth but such as have served as apprentizes so Clothiers
for 7. years or have been exercised in the Trade for that time. The Penalty.
Householders and houswifes may not make Cloth to sell not being free of the said
Trade. The Penalty.
And be it further Enacted, That no person or persons within the said
West Riding, who has not served as an Apprentice to the Trade of Clothier for
the space of Seven years, or have not been exercised therein by the like space
of seven years before, shall make any Broad-Cloth to sell, under the penalty of
five pounds for every Month that he, she, or they shall continue to exercise
the said Trade, (excepting such persons only as now be in the actual use and
exercise of the said Trade) That one moyetie thereof to be paid to the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; and the other moyetie to the use of the said
Corporation; And that no Householder or Houswife within the said West Riding, or
elsewhere within the said County, not being free of the said Trade of
Clothiers, or not having been exercised therein as aforesaid, or not being the
widow of any such person as aforesaid, shall from the Feast of Pentecost next
ensuing, make or cause to be made any Woollen Cloth whatsoever, unless it be to
the use of themselves, their Children and Families, but not to sell, upon pain
to forfeit double the value for every Piece of Cloth so made, and exposed to
sale; one moyetie thereof to His Majesty, the other moyetie to any person who
shall sue for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no
Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Power to appoint a Clerk, Register, Treasurer and other Officers.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices,
Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, or any thirteen of them, are hereby empowered
to nominate and appoint a Clerk, a Register, and Treasurer, and such other
Officer and Officers to see the due execution of the several Powers given by
this Act, as they in their Discretions shall think meet, and to give them an
Oath or Oaths for the due execution of their several places as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines, How the
fines and forfeitures shall be levied.
Forfeitures and Penalties imposed or to be levied by virtue of this Act (the
means and recovery whereof is not otherwise herein provided for and set forth,)
shall be levied by distress and sale of the offender or offenders Goods and
Chattels by Warrant from the said Justices, Masters, Wardens, and Assistants,
or any thirteen of them, rendering the overplus to the Owner thereof upon demand.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Counterfeiting the Seal
of the Corporation.
That if any person or persons whatsoever shall counterfeit the Seal of the
said Corporation, he or they so offending shall forfeit the sum of Twenty
pounds, of often as such person or persons shall upon due proof be found guilty
of the same; which said forfeiture is to be levied by distress and sale of the
Offenders Goods, The Penalty.
rendering the overplus to the Owner thereof upon demand; and for want of such
distress, such person and persons to be committed to the Common Goal of the
County, where he, or they shall be found, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
any one of the Justices of the Peace of the said County, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize for the space of six months, or until such person or
persons shall have paid the Fine as aforesaid.

And be it Enacted, That all and every Article, All clauses in any other
Statute contrary to this Act concerning Clothing Repealed.
Clause and Sentence in any Act of Parliament heretofore made touching and
concerning the said abuses of Broad Woollen Clothes in this Act mentioned, and
being repugnant or contrary to any Article and Sentence in this Act, shall as
touching the said Clothes, only made within the said West Riding, from and
after the Feast of St. John Baptist, which shall be in the year of our Lord
God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, be utterly void to all intents and
purposes whatsoever; And in all Actions and Suits that shall be brought against
any person or persons, for Acting in any thing according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act, the person or persons so sued or molested, Persons sued
for executing this Act may plead the general Issue.
shall or may plead the general Issue of Not guilty, and give the special
matter in evidence, and shall recover double Costs in every such case, if the
Verdict pass for such person or persons, or that the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be
Nonsuit therein.

Provided always, That nothing herein contained, The eights and duties of
Aulnage saved.
shall extend or be construed to extend to take away any of the Rights, Duties
or Customs, of, or belonging to the Office and Place of his Majesty's Aulnager,
or his Deputy or Deputies within the said West Riding; But that he or they
shall or may from time to time do and perform all and every matter and thing to
him or them belonging, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And
also receive all Fees due and accustomed, to the said Office belonging, in as
large and ample manner, as he or they might or ought to have done, before the
making of this present Act; Any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
neither the said Supervisers,, Masters, Wardens and Assistants, nor any of
them, Proviso that Rates of wages of workmen may not be set by color of this
Act.
nor any other person or persons, free of the said Corporation of Broad Woollen
Clothiers, shall by any Authority derived from this Act, or by color thereof,
set or impose any other or lesser Rates or Wages upon any inferior Workmen,
Servants or Laborers, to be employed by them or any of them in the said
Manufacture, then such as shall be from time to time allowed and approved of by
the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions, according to the Laws and
Statutes touching Laborers in that case made and provided.

Provided also, That this Act continue to the end of the First Session of the
next Parliament, The Continuance of this Act.
and no longer.

CAP. XXXIII.
For preventing Abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable, and Unlicensed Books
and Pamphlets; and for Regulating of Printing and Printing-Presses.

WHereas the well-government and Regulating of Printers and Printing-Presses,
is matter of Public care, and of great Concernment; especially considering,
Regulating of Printing of great Concirnment.
that by the general Licentiousness of the late Times, many evil-disposed
persons have been encouraged to Print and Sell Heretical, Schismatical,
Blasphemous, Seditious, and Treasonable Books, Pamphlets, and Papers, and still
do continue such their unlawful and exorbitant practice, to the high dishonor
of Almighty God, the endangering the peace of these Kingdoms, and raising a
disaffection to His most Excellent Majesty, and His Government: For prevention
whereof, no surer means can be advised, then by reducing and limiting the
number of Printing-Presses, and by ordering and settling the said Art or Mystery
of Printing, by Act of Parliament, in manner as herein after is expressed.

The Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Consent and Advice of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
Pamphlets and Books prohibited to be printed, published or sold.
does therefore Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons whatsover shall presume to Print
or cause to be Printed, either within this Realm of England, or any other His
Majesty's Dominions, or in the parts beyond the Seas, any Heretical, Seditious,
Schismatical, or offensive Books or Pamphlets, wherein any Doctrine or Opinion
shall be asserted or maintained which is contrary to Christian Faith, or the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England, or which shall or may tend, or
be to the scandal of Religion, or the Church, or the Government or Governors of
the Church, State, or Commonwealth, or of any Corporation, or particular
person or persons whatsoever; nor shall Import, Publish, Sell or dispose any
such Book or Books, or Pamphlets, nor shall cause or procure any such to be
Published or put to Sale, or to be Bound, Stitched, or Sewed together.

And be it further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
private person or persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter Print, or
cause to be Printed any Book, or Pamphlet whatsoever, unless the same Book and
Pamphlet, together with all and every the Titles, Epistles, Prefaces, Proems,
Preambles, Introductions, Tables, Dedications, and other matters and things
thereunto annexed, Entry of printed Books with the Register of the Company of
Stationers, London.
be first Entered in the Book of the Register of the Company of Stationers of
London, Except Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, and such other Books and
Papers as shall be appointed to be Printed by virtue of any Warrant under the
Kings Majesty's Sign Manual, or under the hand of one or both of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State; and unless the same Book and Pamphlet, and also
all and every the said Titles, Epistles, Prefaces, Proems, Preambles,
Introductions, Tables, Dedications, and other matters and things whatsoever
thereunto annexed, or therewith to be Imprinted, shall be first lawfully
Licensed and Authorized to be Printed by such person and persons only as shall
be constituted and appointed to License the same, according to the direction
and true meaning of this present Act herein after expressed, Who may License
Books concerning the Common Laws to be-Printed.
and by no other; (that is to say) That all Books concerning the Common Laws of
this Realm shall be Printed by the special allowance of the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time being, the Lords Chief
Justices, and Lord Chief Baron for the time being, or one or more of them, or
by their, or one or more of their appointments; And that all Books of History
concerning the State of this Realm, or other Books concerning any Affairs of
State, Books of History, and Affairs of State. Concerning Heraldry.
shall be Licensed by the Principal Secretaries of State for the time being, or
one of them, or by their, or one of their appointments; And that all Books to
be Imprinted concerning Heraldry, Titles of Honor, and Arms, or otherwise
concerning the Office of Earl Marshal, shall be Licensed by the Earl Marshal
for the time being, or by his appointment, or in case there shall not then be
an Earl Marshal, shall be Licensed by the Three Kings of Arms, Garter,
Clarencieux, and Norroy, or any two of them, whereof Garter, Principal King of
Arms to be one; Divinity, Physic, Philosophy, or other Science.
And that all other Books to be Imprinted or Reprinted, whether of Divinity,
Physic, Philosophy, or whatsoever other Science or Art, shall be first
Licensed and allowed by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop of
London for the time being, or one of them, or by their or one of their
appointments, or by either one of the Chancellors, or Vice-Chancellors of
either of the Universities of this Realm for the time being; Provided always,
that the said Chancellors, or Vice-Chancellors of either of the said
Universities shall only License such Books as are to be Imprinted or Reprinted
within the limits of the said Universities respectively, but not in London or
elsewhere, not meddling either with Books of the Common Laws, or matters of
State or Government, Books belonging to particular persons.
nor any Book or Books, the right of Printing whereof does solely and properly
belong to any particular person or persons, without his or their Consent first
obtained in that behalf.

Every Licenser shall have a written copy of the Book licenced.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person and persons who
by virtue of this present Act are, or shall be appointed, or authorized to
License the Imprinting of Books, or Reprinting thereof with any Additions or
Amendments as aforesaid, shall have one written Copy of the same Book or Books,
which shall be so Licensed, to be Imprinted or Reprinted with the Titles,
Epistles, Prefaces, Tables, Dedications, and all other things whatsoever
thereunto annexed, How and where the said Copy shall be kept.
which said Copy shall be delivered by such Licenser or Licensers to the
Printer or Owner for the Imprinting thereof, and shall be solely and entirely
returned by such Printer or owner after the Imprinting thereof, unto such
Licenser or Licensers, to be kept in the public Registries of the said Lord
Archbishop, or Lord Bishop of London respectively, or in the Office of the
Chancellor or Vice Chancellor of either the said Universities, or with the said
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the great Seal for the time being, English
Books how to be Licensed.
or Lords Chief Justices, or Chief Baron, or one of them, or the said Principal
Secretaries of State, or with the Earl Marshal, or the said Kings of Arms, or
one of them, of all such Books as shall be Licensed by them respectively; And
if such Book so to be Licensed shall be an English Book, or of the English
Tongue, there shall be two Written Copies thereof delivered to the Licenser or
Licensers (if he or they shall so require) one Copy whereof so Licensed shall
be delivered back to the said Printer or Owner, and the other Copy shall be
reserved and kept as is aforesaid, to the end such Licenser or Licensers may be
secured, that the Copy so Licensed shall not be altered without his or their
privity; And upon the said Copy Licensed to be Imprinted, he or they who shall
so License the same, shall Testify under his, or their hand or hands, That
there is not any thing in the same contained that is contrary to the Christian
Faith, or the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England, or against the
State or Government of this Realm, or contrary to good life, or good manners,
or otherwise as the nature and subject of the Work shall require; which License
or Approbation shall be Printed in the beginning of the same Book, with the
Name or Names of him or them that shall Authorize or License the same, All
Books from beyond Sea shall be brought to the Port of London only.
for a Testimony of the allowance thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Merchant of
Books, and person and persons whatsoever, who does or hereafter shall Import or
bring any Book or Books into this Realm from any parts beyond the Seas, shall
Import the same in the Port of London only, and not elsewhere, without the
special License of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London for the
time being, or one of them, who are hereby authorized to grant Licenses for
that purpose, and shall before such time as the same Book or Books, or any of
them be delivered forth, or out of his or their hand or hands, or exposed to
Sale, give and present a true Note or Catalogue in writing of all and every
such Book or Books, unto the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Bishop of
London for the time being, or to one of them; and no Merchant or other person
or persons whatsoever which shall import or bring any Book or Books into the
Port of London aforesaid, from any parts beyond the Seas, shall presume to open
any Dry-Fats, Bales, And not to be opened or uttered until viewed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London, or some other by one of them
appointed.
Packs, Maunds, or other Fardles of Books, or wherein Books are, nor shall any
Searcher, Waiter, or other Officer, belonging to the Custom-house, upon pain of
losing his or their place or places, suffer the same to pass, or to be
delivered out of his or their hands or Custody, before such time as the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Bishop of London for the time being, or
one of them, shall have appointed some Scholar or learned man, with one or more
of the said Company of Stationers, and such others as they shall call to their
Assistance, to be present at the opening thereof, and to view the same; And if
there shall happen to be found any Heretical, Seditious, Scandalous,
Schismatical, or other dangerous or offensive Book or Books, or any part of
such Book or Books Printed in English, they shall forthwith be brought to the
said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop of London for the time
being, or to one of them, or to some public place to be assigned and chosen by
the said Lord Archbishop, Heretical, Seditious or dangerous Books Imprinted
upon. ported, how to be proceeded upon.
and Lord Bishop for the time being, to the end the person and persons which
Imports or causes the said Offensive Books to be Imported, may be proceeded
against as an offender against this present Act; And also that such further
course may be taken concerning the same offensive Book or Books, as by the said
Lord Archbishop and Bishop for the time being shall be thought fitting for the
suppressing thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall within this Kingdom, or elsewhere, Imprint or cause to be
Imprinted, nor shall Import or bring in, or cause to be Imported or brought
into this Kingdom from or out of any other His Majesty's Dominions, nor from
any other parts beyond the Seas, any Copy or Copies, Book or Books, or part of
any Book or Books, or Forms of blank Bills or Indentures for any His Majesty's
Islands, Printed beyond the Seas, or elsewhere, Copies of Books, Forms of blank
Bills or Indenturs, whereof any have Letters Patents for sole Printing.
which any person or persons by force or virtue of any Letters Patents granted
or assigned, or which shall hereafter be granted or assigned to him or them, or
(where the same are not granted by any Letters Patents) by force or virtue of
any Entry or Entries thereof duly made or to be made in the Register Book of
the said Company of Stationers, or in the Register Book of either of the
Universities respectively, have or shall have the right Privilege, Authority or
Allowance, solely to Print, without the consent of the Owner or Owners of such
Book or Books, Copy or Copies, Form or Forms of such blank Bills nor shall
Bind, Stitch, or put to Sale any such Book or Books, or part of any Book or
Books, Form or Forms, without the like consent, upon pain of loss and
forfeiture of the same, The Penalty.
and of being proceeded against as an Offender against this present Act, and
upon the further penalty and forfeiture of Six shillings eight pence for every
such Book or Books, or part of such Book or Books, Copy or Copies, or Form or
Forms of any such blank Bills or Indentures so Imprinted or Imported, Bound,
Stitched, or put to Sale; The Moiety of which said forfeiture and forfeitures
shall be to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors,
and the other Moiety to the use of the Owner or Owners Proprietors of such Copy
or Copies, Book or Books, or Form of such blank Bills or Indentures, if he or
they shall sue for the same within Six months next after such Imprinting,
Importing, Binding, Stitching, or putting to Sale; And in default of such Suit
by the Owner or Owners, Proprietor or Proprietors, commenced within the said
Six months, Then the same Moiety shall be to the use and behoof of such other
person or persons as within the space of one year next after the said Offense
committed, shall sue for the same, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record held at
Westminster, called the Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or Exchequer, wherein no
Essoign, Wager of Law, or Protection shall be allowed to the Defendant or
Defendants.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, Printers of Books etc. shall put to
their Names.
That every person and persons that shall hereafter Print, or cause to be
Printed any Book, Ballad, Chart, Pourtraiture, or any other thing or things
whatsoever, shall thereunto, or thereon, Print and set his or their own Name or
Names, and also shall declare the Name of the Author thereof, if he be
thereunto required by the Licenser, under whole Approbation the Licensing of
the said Book, Ballad, Chart, or Pourtraiture shall be Authorized, and by and
for whom any such Book or other thing is or shall be Printed, upon pain of
Forfeiture of all such Books, Ballads, Charts, Penalty.
Pourtraitures and other thing or things Printed contrary to the Tenor hereof;
And the Presses, Letters, and other Instruments for Printing, wherewith such
Book, Ballads, Pourtraiture, or other thing or things shall be so Imprinted or
Set, or prepared for the Printing thereof, to be defaced and made
unserviceable; And that no person or persons shall hereafter Print or cause to
be Imprinted, nor shall forge, put or counterfeit in or upon any Book or
Pamphlet the Name, Title, Mark or Vinnet of any other person or persons which
has or shall have lawful Privilege, Authority or Allowance of sole Printing
the same without the free consent of the person and persons so privileged
first had and obtained, upon pain that every person and persons so offending
shall forfeit and lose all such Books and Pamphlets upon which such counterfeit
Name or Mark shall be Imprinted, and shall further be proceeded against as an
Offender against this present Act.

Who only may buy, barter and sell books in London and market Towns.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Haberdasher of
Small-Wares, Iron-monger, Chandler, Shopkeeper, or other person or persons
whatsoever, not being Licensed in that behalf by the Lord Bishop of the Diocese
wherein such Book or Books shall be, nor having been Seven years Apprentice to
the Trade of Bookseller, Printer, or Book-binder, nor being a Freeman of the
City of London by Patrimonial Right, as Son of a Bookseller, Printer, or
Book-binder, nor being a Member of the said Company of Stationers, shall within
the City or Suburbs of London, or any other Market Town, or elsewhere, receive,
take, or buy, to barter, sell again, change, or do away any Bibles, Testaments,
Psalm-books, Common-Prayer-books, Primers, Abcees, Licensed Almanacks, Grammar,
School-books, or other Book or Books whatsoever, upon pain of forfeiture of the
same.

Printing an Art and Manufacture.
And for that Printing is, and for many years has been an Art and Manufacture
of this Kingdom, Therefore for the better encouraging thereof, and the
prevention of diverse Libels, Pamphlets, and Seditious Books Printed beyond the
Seas in English, and thence Transported into this Realm; Be it further Enacted
and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Merchant, Bookseller, No
English books may be imprinted, or imported from beyond Sea.
or other person or persons whatsoever, shall Imprint or cause to be Imprinted
beyond the Seas, nor shall Import or bring, nor knowingly assist or consent to
the Importation or bringing from beyond the Seas into this Realm, any English
Book or Books, or part of any Book which is or shall be, or the greater part
thereof is or shall be English, or of the English Tongue, whether the same
Book, Books, or part of such Book have been here formerly Printed or not, upon
pain of forfeiture of all such English Books so Imprinted or Imported contrary
to the tenor hereof: And that no Alien or Foreigner whatsoever shall hereafter
bring in, or be suffered to vend here within this Realm, The Penalty.
any Book or Books Printed beyond the Seas in any Language whatsoever, either
by himself or his Factor or Factors, except such only as be Free-Printers or
Stationers of London, or such as have been brought up in that Profession,
without the special License of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of
London for the time being, or one of them, who are hereby authorized to grant
Licenses for that purpose, upon like pain of forfeiture of all such Books as
shall be so Imprinted or Vended contrary to the purport and true intent hereof.

Presses and Printing in and about London not to be set up, but upon notice to
the Company of Stationers.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons
within the City of London, or the Liberties thereof, or elsewhere, shall erect
or cause to be erected any Press or Printing House, nor shall knowingly demise
or let, or willingly suffer to be held or used any House, Vault, Cellar, or
other Room whatsoever, to or by any person or persons for a Printing House, or
place to Print in, unless he or they who erect such Press, or shall so
knowingly demise or let such House, Cellar, Vault, or Room, or willingly suffer
the same to be used, shall first give notice to the Master or Wardens of the
said Company of Stationers for the time being of the erecting of such Press, or
of such demise or suffering to work or Print in such House, Vault, Cellar, or
Room: And that no Ioyner, Carpenter, or other person shall make any
Printing-Press, no Smith shall forge any Iron-work for a Printing-Press, no
Founder shall cast any Letters which maybe used for Printing, for any person or
persons whatsoever; neither shall any person or persons bring, or cause to be
brought in from any parts beyond the Seas, any Letters Founded or Cast, nor
shall buy any such Letters for Printing, Printing-Presses, or other Materials
belonging unto Printing unless he or they respectively shall first acquaint the
said Master and Wardens of the said Company of Stationers for the time being,
or some or one of them, for whom the same Presses, Iron-work, or Letters are to
be made, forged, cast, brought or imported, upon pain that every person who
shall erect any such Printing-Press, or shall demise or let any House or Room, or
suffer the same to be held or used, and every person who shall make any
Printing-Press, or any Iron-work for a Printing-Press, or shall make, import,
or buy any Letters for Printing, without giving notice as aforesaid, shall
forfeit for every such offense the sum of Five pounds, the one Moiety whereof
shall be to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs and Successors,
and the other Moiety to the use of such person or persons as shall sue for the
same.

Who and how many shall be Master Printers.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the time to come
no man shall be admitted to be a Master-Printer, until they who are now
actually Master-Printers shall be by death or otherwise reduced to the number
of Twenty, and from thenceforth the number of Twenty Master-Printers shall be
continued, and no more, besides the Kings Printers, and the Printers allowed
for the Universities, to have the use and exercise of Printing of Books at one
time, and but Four Master Founders of Letters for Printing; The which said
Master-Printers, and Four Master Founders of Letters for Printing, shall be
nominated, appointed and allowed by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord
Bishop of London for the time being; And in case of Death of any one of the
said Four Master Founders of Letters, or of the said Master Printers, or of
Forfeiture, or avoidance of any of their places and privileges to Print by
virtue of this Act, Master Founders of letters for Printing.
for any Offense contrary to the same or otherwise, That then the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop London for the time being, or one of
them shall nominate and appoint such other fit person or persons to succeed and
supply the place of such Master Printer or Founder of Letters as shall be void
by Death, Forfeiture or otherwise as aforesaid; And every person and persons
which shall hereafter be allowed or permitted to have the use of a
Printing-Press or Printing House, upon or before such his allowance obtained,
shall become bound with Sureties to his Majesty in the Court of King's Bench, or
before some one or more of the Justices of Assize, or the Justices of the Peace
at their several Quarter Sessions, in the sum of Three hundred pounds, not to
print or suffer to be printed in his house or press any Book or Books
whatsoever, but such as shall from time to time be lawfully Licensed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Who only may keep above
two Printing-Presses.
That none of the said Master Printers so to be allowed from time to time as
aforesaid, shall keep above Two Printing-Presses at once, unless he has been
Master or Vpper-Warden of the Company, who are hereby allowed to keep Three
Presses, and no more, unless for some great and special occasion for the
Public he or they have for a time leave of the said Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, or Lord Bishop of London for the time being, or to have or use one
or more above the aforesaid Number, as their Lordships, or either of them shall
think fit.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What number of Apprentices
they may retain.
That no Printer or Printers (Except the Kings Printers) nor Founder or
Founders of Letters for printing, shall take or retain any more or greater
number of Apprentices, then is herein after limited and appointed, (that is to
say) Every Master Printer, and Master Founder of Letters for Printing, that is
or has been Master or Upper Warden of his Company, may have three Apprentices
at one time and no more; And every Master Printer, and Master Founder of
Letters for Printing, that is of the Livery of his Company, may have two
Apprentices at one time and no more; And every Master Printer, and Master
Founder of Letters for printing, of the Yeomanry of his Company, may have one
Apprentice at one time and no more, neither by Copartnership, binding at the
Scriveners, nor any other way whatsoever; Neither shall it be lawful for any
Master Printer or Master Founder of Letters, when any Apprentice or Apprentices
shall run or be put away, to take another Apprentice or other Apprentices in
his or their place or places, unless the name or names of him or them so gone
away be rased out of the Hall-Book, and never admitted again.

And because a great part of the secret printing in corners has been caused
for want of Orderly Employment for Iourneymen-Printers, The said several Master
Printers, Iourney-men Printers, and Founders of Letters to be employed.
and Master Founders of Letters for printing so to be allowed as aforesaid, are
hereby required to take special Care, that all Iourney-men-Printers, and
Iourney-men-Founders of Letters for printing, who are lawfully Free of the said
respective Mysteries, be set to Work, and Employed in their respective Trades;
And if any such Iourney-man-Printer, or Iourney-man-Founder of Letters, being
of honest and good behavior, and able in his Trade, do want Employment; he
shall repair to any of the said Master Printers, or Master Founders of Letters
respectively for the time being, who thereupon shall receive him or them into
Work, If such Master Printer, or Master Founder of Letters have not a
Iourney-man already, although such Master Printer, or Master Founder of Letters
respectively, with his Apprentice or Apprentices be able without the help of
the said Iourney-man to discharge his own Work, upon pain that every Master
Printer, and Master Founder of Letters respectively, refusing to receive such
Iourney-man repairing to him as aforesaid, shall forfeit Five pounds to be
recovered by Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no
Essoign, Wager at Law, Privilege or Protection shall be admitted; the Moiety
of which Forfeiture shall go to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and the other Moiety to the Informer who shall sue for the same within six
months next after the said offense committed; And if any Iourney-man, or
Iourney-men Printers, or Founders of Letters for printing shall refuse
employment being offered to him or them by any Master Printer, or Master
Founder of Letters respectively, or neglect it when he or they have undertaken
it, he or they so refusing or neglecting, shall suffer Three months
Imprisonment at the least, without Bail or Mainprize, upon Conviction of such
his said refusal or neglect by two Witnesses, before any one or more Justice or
Justices of the Peace, who are hereby empowered to hear and examine the said
Offense, and to commit the said Offender and Offenders to the Common Gaol of
the County where he or they shall be apprehended: And no Master Printer, or
Master Founder of Letters for Printing, shall from henceforth employ either to
work at the Case or Press or otherwise about his Printing, any other person or
persons then such only as are Englishmen and Freemen, or the Sons of Freemen,
or Apprentices to the said Trades or Mysteries of Printing, or Founding of
Letters for Printing respectively.

And for the better discovering of Printing in Corners without License, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one or more of the Messengers
of his Majesty's Chamber, Who may search houses and Shops for suspected Books
and Papers.
by Warrant under his Majesty's Sign Manual, or under the Hand of one or more
of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, or the Master and Wardens of
the said Company of Stationers, or any one of them, shall have power and
authority with a Constable to take unto them such assistance as they shall
think needful, and at what time they shall think fit, to search all Houses and
Shops, where they shall know, or upon some probable reason suspect any Books or
Papers to be printed, bound, or stitched, especially Printing-Houses,
Booksellers Shops, and Warehouses, and Book-binders Houses and Shops, and to
view there what is imprinting, binding or stitching, and to examine whether the
same be Licensed, and to demand a sight of the said License; and if the said
Book so imprinting, binding or stitching, shall not be Licensed, then to Seize
upon so much thereof as shall be found imprinted, together with the several
Offenders, and to bring them before one or more Justices of the Peace, who are
hereby authorized and required to commit such Offenders to prison, there to
remain until they shall be tried and acquitted, or convicted and punished for
the said Offenses. And in case the said Searchers shall upon their said Search,
find any Book or Books, or part of Books unlicensed, which they shall suspect
to contain matters therein contrary to the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church
of England, or against the State and Government; Then upon such suspicion to
seize upon such Book or Books or part of Book or Books, and to bring the same
unto the said Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Bishop of London for the
time being, or one of them, or to the Secretaries of State, or one of them
respectively, who shall take such further course for the suppressing thereof,
as to them or any of them shall seem fit.

And be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Printer and Printers of Books, Founder and Founders of Letters for Printing,
and all and every other person and persons working in or for the said Trades,
Offenders against this Act how to be punished.
who from and after the Tenth day of June, in in the year One thousand six
hundred sixty and two, shall offend against this present Act, or any Article,
Clause, or Thing herein contained, and shall be thereof Convicted by Verdict,
Confession, or otherwise, shall for the first offense be dis-enabled from
exercising his respective Trade for the space of three years, and for the
second offense shall for ever thence-after be disabled to use or exercise the
Art or Mystery of Printing or of Founding Letters for Printing, and shall also
have and receive such further punishment by Fine, Imprisonment, or other
Corporal Punishment, not extending to Life or Limb, as by the Justices of the
Court of Kings Bench, or Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of Assize
in their several Circuits, or Justices of the Peace in their several Quarter
Sessions shall be thought fit to be inflicted. The which said Justices of the
Peace in their several Quarter Sessions shall have full power and authority to
hear and determine all and every offense and offenses that shall be committed
against this Act, or against any branch thereof, upon Indictment or Information
by any person or persons to be taken before them in their Sessions of Peace
respectively, and shall yearly certify into the Court of Exchequer, as in
other like Cases they are bound to do, the Fines by them imposed for any the
offenses aforesaid, and shall and may also by virtue hereof award process, and
execution for the taking or punishing such Offenders as in any other Case they
lawfully may do by any the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

Printed Copies to be sent to his Majesty's Library and the two Universities.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Printer shall
reserve three printed Copies of the best and largest Paper of every Book new
printed, or reprinted by him with Additions; and shall before any public
Vending of the said Book bring them to the Master of the Company of Stationers,
and deliver them to him; one whereof shall be delivered to the Keeper of His
Majesty's Library, and the other two to be sent to the Vice-Chancellors of the
two Universities respectively, for the use of the public Libraries of the said
Universities.

Proviso for the privileges of the two Universities.
Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to
extend to the prejudice or infringing of any the just Rights and Privileges of
either of the two Universities of this Realm, touching and concerning the
Licensing or Printing of Books in either of the said Universities.

Peers Houses.
Provided always, That no Search shall be at any time made in the House or
Houses of any the Peers of this Realm or of any other person or persons not
being free of, or using any of the Trades in this Act before mentioned, but by
special Warrant from the Kings Majesty, under His Sign Manual, or under the
Hand of one or both of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, or for any
other Books then such as are in printing, or shall be printed after the Tenth of
June, 1662. And thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Proviso for Booksellers and Stationers London.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to prohibit any Bookseller, who has served seven years, and is free of
the Company of Stationers London, from importing or bringing into this Realm
any Books ready bound not formerly prohibited, which have been printed ten
years before the said Importation; Any thing in this or any other Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Persons selling books in Westminster Hall.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained shall be construed to
prohibit any person or persons to Sell Books or Papers, who have sold Books or
Papers within Westminster Hall, the Palace of Westminster, or in any Shop or
Shops within Twenty yards of the great Gate of Westminster Hall aforesaid,
before the Twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred sixty and one;
but they and every of them may sell Books and Papers, as they have or did
before the said Twentieth day of November, One thousand six hundred sixty one,
within the said Hall, Palace, and Twenty yards aforesaid, but not elsewhere;
Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for the rights and Privileges of printing granted to any persons by
the King.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained shall
extend to prejudice the just Rights or Privileges granted by His Majesty, or
any of His Royal Predecessors to any any person or persons under His Majesty's
Great Seal or otherwise, but that such person or persons may exercise and use
such Rights and Privileges as aforesaid, according to their respective Grants;
Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Proviso for John Streater Stationer.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained shall
extend to prohibit John Streater Stationer from printing Books and Papers, but
that he may still follow the Art and Mystery of Printing, as if this Act had
never been made; Any thing therein to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to restrain the keeping and using of a Printing-Press in the City of
York; Proviso for the City of York.
so as all Books of Divinity there printed, be first Licensed by the Archbishop
of York for the time being, or such person or persons whom he shall appoint,
and all other Books whatsoever there Printed, be first Licensed by such persons
respectively to whom the Licensing thereof does or shall appertain by the Rules
herein before mentioned, and so as no Bibles be there printed, nor any other
Book, whereof the Original Copy is or shall be belonging to the Company of
Stationers in London, or any Member thereof; and so as the Archbishop or Lord
Mayor of York for the time being, do execute within the said City (which they
are hereby empowered to do) all the Powers and Rules in this Act concerning
Searchers for unlicensed Books, and impose and levy the said penalties in the
like cases; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and be in force for two years, The
continuance of this Act.
to commence from the Tenth of June, One thousand six hundred sixty and two,
and no longer. Continued 16 Car. 2. cap. 8.

Anno XV. Caroli II. Regis.
CAP. I.
For Repairing the Highways within the Counties of Hertford, Cambridge, and
Huntington.

WHereas the ancient Highway and Post-Road leading from London to York, The
Highway from London to York and Scotland. Hertford. Cambridge. Huntington.
and so into Scotland, and likewise from London into Lincolnshire, lies for
many miles in the Counties of Hertford, Cambridge and Huntington, in many of
which places, the Road, by reason of the great and many Loads which are weekly
drawn in Wagons through the said places, as well by reason of the great Trade
of Barley and Malt that comes to Ware, and so is conveyed by water to the
City of London, as other Carriages both from the North parts, as also from the
City of Norwich, Saint Edmunds-Bury, and the Town of Cambridge to London, is
very ruinous, and become almost impassible, insomuch that it is become very
dangerous to all His Majesty's Liege people that pass that way; And for that
the ordinary course appointed by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm is not
sufficient for the effectual repairing and amending of the same, neither are
the Inhabitants through which the said Road does lie, of ability to Repair the
same, without some other provision of moneys to be raised toward the putting
the same into good and sufficient Repair: For remedy whereof, and to the intent
the said Highways, at or in the Counties aforesaid, may be forthwith
effectually repaired and amended, and from time to time hereafter kept in good
repair; May it please your Majesty that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That for the Surveying, Ordering,
Repairing, and keeping in Repair of the said Highway in the Counties
aforesaid, Four Justices of the Peace for each of the said several and
respective Counties dwelling next to the said Highways respectively, or any
two of them, for the year One thousand six hundred sixty three, and until the
Quarter Sessions then next ensuing; and from thenceforth the Justices of Peace
at the Sessions to be holden next after Easter every year, for the said
respective Counties, from time to time shall and are hereby empowered to
nominate and appoint Nine sufficient and able persons residing and inhabiting
within the said several and respective Counties, Who may appoint Surveyors of
the Highways for Hartfordshire yearly. Cambridg-shire. Huntington-shire.
to be Surveyors of the several places in the said Highway for the year from
thence next ensuing: The Justices of the Peace for the County of Hertford, to
appoint Surveyors for the Highway lying in the said several Towns and Parishes
of the said County; and the Justices of the Peace in the County of Cambridge to
appoint Surveyors for the several Towns and Parishes within their said County
of Cambridge; And the Justices of Peace for the County of Huntington to appoint
Surveyors for the several Towns and Parishes of the said County: And that the
said Justices or Surveyors aforesaid shall not act or do any thing toward The
power of the Justices of the Peace in their several Counties.
And that the said Justices in their several Counties shall cause notice to be
given to the several Surveyors so chosen, in writing, of their said choice;
which said Surveyors and every of them having no lawful impediment to be
allowed by the said Justices by whom they shall be chosen in manner as
aforesaid, within one week next after such notice to them given of their
Election, shall, and are hereby required to meet and assemble themselves
together, (that is to say) the Surveyors for the County of Hertford, in some
convenient place within the County of Hertford; Hertford. Cambridge. Huntington.
And the Surveyors chosen for the County of Cambridge, in some convenient place
within their County; and the Surveyors chosen for the County of Huntington, in
some convenient place within their said County, to be appointed by the several
Justices of the said Counties, at their several Quarter Sessions, to the intent
to view and Survey the said Highway and places aforesaid, The Power of the
Surveyors in the said several Counties.

To appoint Receivers and Collectors of Toll and other needful Officers.


and shall consider what Reparations shall be needful for Repairing of the
several Highways and places aforesaid; and the said several Surveyors in their
respective Counties shall provide Stones, Gravel, and other materials and
necessaries to be used for and toward the Repairing and amending the said
Highway at the places aforesaid; And the said Surveyors, or three, or more of
them in their respective Counties being so met and assembled, are hereby
authorized to appoint a Receiver or Collector of Toll, and such other Officer
and Officers as they shall find necessary in their respective Counties for
carrying on the said Work (with such moderate allowance as shall be thought
fit) to be approved of by any two or more Justices of the Peace for the said
respective County for which such Officer is so chosen, living near to the said
Highway or places aforesaid, or otherwise to be removed, and other fit person
or persons to be chosen in his or their places by the said Justices in the said
several and respective Counties. And for the better effecting thereof, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Surveyors, or any three or
more of them in their several Counties, Charging of Carts and Carriages.
shall from time to time, as they shall see cause, appoint and require all and
every person and persons inhabiting within three miles of the places aforesaid,
being within their several and respective Counties, who by any Law or Statute
of this Realm now in force is or are chargeable to find any Wayn, or Cart for
the amending of the Highways, and every other person and persons chargeable to
labor in the Highways, upon reasonable notice, to send his or their Cart, or
Wain, and Team, or to come to labor in the said Highway at any the places
aforesaid within their respective Counties, so furnished as by the Laws and
Statutes of this Allowance of wages to laborers and owners.
or any three or more of them shall think needful and appoint; for which the
said Surveyors shall pay unto such Laborers, and to the owners of such Teams,
Carts and Wayns, according to the usual rate of the Country. And in case any
person so charged to send his, her, or their Team to work as aforesaid, shall
refuse or neglect so to do, such persons so refusing or neglecting, The Penalty
for refusing.
shall forfeit Ten shillings for every day that he or they shall make such
default; and every Labourer Eighteen pence for every day he shall neglect or
refuse to work as aforesaid.

How far and often Carts and carriages may be charged.
Provided, That no person or persons by virtue of this Act be compelled or
compellable to labor, or to send his or their Team, Cart or Wagon for the
mending of the said Highway, to any of the said places being above Three miles
distant from his Dwelling House, or not in the same County, nor to labor or
send his or their Team, Cart or Wagon for amending of the said Highway above
Three days in any one week, nor at any time in Seed-time, Hay or Cornharvest:
Who may determine differences about carriages and laborers Wages.
And in case that any question shall happen to arise touching the hire to be
given by the said Surveyors for such Team, Cart or Wagon, or concerning the
wages of such Laborers employed in mending the said Highways, That then the
said Justices of the Peace in the County where such difference arises, or any
Two or more of them, shall and may determine and set down what hire for such
Team, Cart or Wagon, and also what wages to such Labourer shall be paid or
allowed by the said Surveyors, and such Order in that behalf to be made shall
conclude all parties.

And be further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where there is not
sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, or Stones within any Parish, Town, Village or
Hamlet, wherein the said Highway, How gravel, Chalk Stones etc. may be taken.
or places aforesaid, or any of them do lie, to repair the said Highway at any
of the places aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful for the said Surveyors in
their several and respective Counties, or any three or more of them, and such
person and persons as they shall appoint, to dig, take and carry away Gravel,
Chalk, Sand or Stones out of the Waste or Common of any neighboring Parish,
Town, Village or Hamlet (without paying any thing for the same) for the
repairing or amending of the said Highway at any the places aforesaid; or
where there is not sufficient of such materials in any Common or Waste Ground
thereunto near adjoining, to dig in the several grounds of any person or
persons, not being an House, Garden, Orchard, Yard, or Park stored with Deer,
being within any Parish chargeable toward the repairs of the said Highway and
places so to be repaired, where any such materials are or may be found: And
from time to time to carry away such and so much thereof as the said Surveyors,
or any three or more of them in their respective Counties shall adjudge
necessary for the said Reparations, without paying any thing for such
materials, saving only such reasonable satisfaction to the Owner or Occupier of
the

Be it further Enacted, That from and after the choice of the Surveyors
aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Surveyors for the
time being, with such consent and approbation as is aforesaid, Who may appoint
the taking of Toll or Custom of all carriages and passengers.
of the said Justices of the several Counties, within their own Counties, and
not elsewhere, to choose and appoint one or more fit person or persons to
receive or take such sum or sums of money in the name of Toll or Custom to be
paid for all such Horses, Carts, Coaches, Wagons, Droves and Gangs of Cattle
as in time to come shall pass, be led, or droven in or through the said way or
places aforesaid, as are hereafter by this Act limited and appointed, (that is
to say) for every Horse one penny, for every Coach six pence, for every Wagon
one shilling, for every Cart eight pence, for every score of Sheep or Lambs one
halfpeny, and so proportionably for greater numbers: For every score of Oxen,
or Neat Cattle five pence, and so for every greater or lesser number
proportionably: For every score of Hoggs two pence, and so for every greater or
lesser number proportionably, not being under five. And that from and after the
passing of this Act, all and every person or persons who shall travel with
Horse, Coach, Cart or Wagon, or shall lead or drive any Oxen, Sheep, Horses or
other Cattle aforementioned, in and through the Highway and places aforesaid,
shall and are hereby required to pay unto the respective Collectors and
Receivers of Toll in the several Counties aforesaid in that behalf to be
appointed, after the rates aforesaid: Places for taking of Toll in
Hertfordshire. Cambridgshire. Huntingtonshire. Power to distrain for Toll
refused to be paid.
The places for Collecting of the said Toll to be, for the County of Hertford,
at Wades-Mill; and for the County of Cambridge, at Caxton within the said
County of Cambridge; and for the County of Huntington, at Stilton in the said
County of Huntington, and at no other place or places within the said Counties:
And in case any person or persons upon demand made of Toll aforesaid by the
Collector or Receiver in that behalf to be appointed, shall neglect or refuse
to pay the same, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Collector or Receiver appointed for the Receipt of the said Toll, upon such
refusal, to Distrain and detain such Horse, Cart, Coach, Wagon, Oxen, or other
Cattle aforementioned, or any of them, until the said Toll shall be satisfied
and paid according to the tenor of this present Act, together with such damages
as the party so distraining shall sustain by keeping The Toll received to be
accounted for and paid to the Surveyors.
the said Collector or Receiver of Toll so to be appointed in the several
Counties, shall from time to time render true Accounts, and shall pay the money
so by them received, unto the said Surveyors of their several and respective
Counties, or to any three or more of them, or unto such Treasurers as they
shall appoint, when, and as often as they shall be thereunto required by the
said Surveyors, or any three or more of them, by them to be laid out and
expended for and toward the necessary Repairs, and amending of the several
places aforementioned, and not elsewhere within their said several and
respective Counties.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Surveyors, To
whom the said Surveyors shall account for moneys received.
and every of them in their several and respective Counties, at the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the said County, to be holden next after
Easter in every year, shall make and yield up unto the Justices of the Peace
there to be assembled, a perfect Account in writing under their hands, of all
the money which they or any of them shall have received from the said Collector
or Receiver of Toll in their said County, and likewise of all their
disbursments in and about the said Highway, or otherwise by reason of their
Offices; And in case of any overplus of money so received, remaining in their
hands, shall pay the same to the Surveyors to be chosen for the year ensuing,
or to the Treasurer or Receiver by them to be appointed, to be disbursed and
laid out in the several places aforesaid, within such County wherein the
overplus does remain, and not elsewhere, in the year ensuing; which said
Justices to whom such Account shall be given, shall out of the benefit of the
said Toll, make such allowance unto the said Surveyors, for and in
consideration of their care and pains taken in the execution of their said
Offices as to them shall seem good: And in case the Collector or Receiver of
the aforesaid Toll for the respective Counties so to be paid as aforesaid,
shall not upon request duly pay the same unto the said Surveyors of the said
County for the time being, or the Treasurer or Receiver by them appointed; or
in case the said Surveyors or any of them shall not make such Account and
payment as aforesaid, That then the said Justices for the several and
respective Counties, at any Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the
said County, in case of such default of Account or Payment, shall and may make
enquiry concerning such default, as well by the confession of the parties
themselves, as by testimony of two, or more credible Witnesses upon Oath; and
in case of such default to be found and adjudged by the said Justices in their
said respective Counties, either in their said Receiver or Collector of the
said Toll, or in their said Surveyors, or any of them; The said Justices upon
such their conviction shall commit the party or parties so convict, to the
common Gaol for the said County, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize,
until he or they shall have made a true and perfect Account and Payment as
aforesaid.

And forasmuch as the moneys so to be Collected by such receipt of the said
Toll, will not at present raise such a Stock or Sum of Money as may be
sufficient for the speedy Repairing of the Hertford, Cambridge, and Huntington,
It is hereby further Enacted, How the Toll Profits may he engaged for advance
of Money.
and the said Surveyors are hereby enabled by and with the like consent of the
said Justices, for their several and respective Counties, without further
License, severally to engage the profits arising of their said Toll in their
several Counties, for such sum or sums of money by them to be borrowed for that
purpose, and by Indenture under the hands and seals of the said respective
Surveyors for the time being, to transfer the said profits of the said Toll,
and to grant and convey the same for any time or term, not exceeding Nine
years, unto any person or persons that shall or will upon that Security advance
any present sum or sums of money for and toward the present Repairing and
amending of the said Highway in the respective places and Counties aforesaid,
for the repayment of such principal sum or sums of money so lent with Interest
for the same: Or in case such sum or sums of money cannot be borrowed upon the
Security aforesaid, for the Repair of the said Ways, That then it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said Justices in their said several and respective
Counties, In what cases a Rate may be m^de upon the several Parishes.
at their several Quarter Sessions, when they shall see cause, to make a Rate
not to extend to any other County but their own, nor to Repair any other then
the places aforesaid, in that particular County where such Rate is made,
whereby they shall have power for their several Counties to raise upon the
Parishes that lie in or near the said Road (and so will have a benefit
therefrom) such sum or sums of money as they shall see fit and convenient for
the speedy effecting of the said Repairs before mentioned; which said sum and
sums so to be rated as aforesaid, shall be paid to the Surveyors for the
respective County where such Rate is made, or to their Receiver or Collector,
to be employed for the repairing of the said Ways and places aforementioned,
and not otherwise: And in case any person shall refuse to pay such rate so to
be made, That it shall and may be lawful for the said Surveyors, or their said
Receivers and Collectors to distrain for such sum or sums of money, and the
distress to sell, rendering the overplus to the Owners.

Provided always, and it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
money so advanced by the said several Towns in the said respective Counties,
shall again be repayed with Interest by the several Surveyors for the several
Counties, as it does arise out of the said Toll, every County paying for what
is so borrowed within its own County, and no further.

The Penalty for refusing to take the Office of Surveyor.
shall neglect or refuse to take upon him or them the said Office of Surveyor,
being thereunto nominated and chosen according as by this Act is appointed, or
to do or perform his or their duty in the due and speedy execution of this
present Act, the said Justices of the Peace for the several and respective
Counties where such Surveyor or Surveyors dwell, at their Quarter Sessions
shall and may hereby have power to impose on such person or persons so refusing
or neglecting, such Fine or Fines (not exceeding Ten pounds upon each person so
refusing or neglecting) as to them shall seem meet, and to cause the same to be
levied by distress and sale of his or their Goods, rendering to the party so
distrained the overplus, if any shall be.

Fines and Forfeitures upon this Act how to be paid and disposed.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines or
Forfeitures to be imposed or incurred by virtue of this Act, shall be paid to
the Surveyors for the time being, or any three of them, or the Treasurers of
the said Surveyors for the said respective Counties, for and toward the
repairing of the said Highways, and places aforesaid: And in case of refusal,
or if any person or persons so chosen to take upon him or them the said Office,
shall happen to die, or shall for any lawful impediment be discharged from the
said Office, that then some other fit person or persons within that County
shall be appointed by two or more Justices in the said County, living near the
said Highway and places aforesaid, in the place of him or them that shall so
refuse, die, or be discharged; and the person or persons so chosen, shall and
are hereby required upon notice thereof to him or them given under the hands
and seals of the said Justices by whom he or they shall be so chosen, to take
upon him or them the said Office of Surveyor, and to execute the same in such
manner, and under such and the like penalties, as if he or they had been chosen
by the Justices at their Sessions of the Peace in manner as aforesaid.

Suits upon this Act shall be laid in the proper County.

And the Defendant may plead the general Issue.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Suit shall be
commenced against any person for any thing done in pursuance of this present
Act, That in every such case the Action shall be laid in the said respective
Counties where the Cause does arise, and not elsewhere; and the Defendant in
such Action so to be brought, may plead the general Issue, and give this Act,
and the special matter in evidence at any Trial to be had thereupon, and that
the same was done in pursuance, and by Authority of the said Act: And if it
shall so appear to be done, and that such Action shall be brought in any other
County, That then the Jury Double Costs.
and have the like remedy for the same, as any Defendant has in any other case
by Law.

Toll not to be paid twice in the same day.
Provided always, That no person or persons having occasion to pass any place
where the Toll is taken, and return the same day with the same Horse, Coach,
Wagon, or other Carriage, or with Cattle, shall be compelled in the same day
to pay the said Toll a second time; Any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, That all and every person and persons who by Law are chargeable
toward the repairing of the said Highways and places aforesaid, shall still
remain so chargeable; Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

The continuance of this Act for 11. years only. Proviso for exempting certain
persons and things from paying any Toll.
Provided also, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to any further time, or be of force any longer then the term of Eleven
years, to be accounted from the passing of this Act; Any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That all and every person and persons passing through the
respective places appointed for the receiving of Toll as aforesaid, (viz.) at
Wades-Mill for the County of Hertford, at Caxton for the County of Cambridge,
and at Stilton for the County of Huntington; and coming immediately and
primarily to, and from the several Parishes of Standen, Thundridge, Ware and
Bengeo, adjacent to Wades-Mill in the said County of Hertford, and Stowe, great
Papworth, little Papworth, Borne and Elsley adjacent to Caxton in the said
County of Cambridge, and Yaxley, Washingley, Glatton, Cunington, Waddon, and
Stibbington, adjacent to Stilton in the said County of Huntington, shall have a
liberty to carry any quantity or quantities of Stones, Sand, Stones, Gravel,
etc.
Lime, or Gravel, Dung, Mould, and Compost of any nature or kind whatsoever,
Brick, Chalk, or Wood; And that they, and all Carts with Hay, or Corn in the
Straw, at Hay-time, Hay, Corn in Harvest (...) P^^ugh (...) Imp^ of H^*
or Harvest, Ploughs, Harrows, and other Implements of Husbandry, and all other
things whatsoever employed in the Husbanding, Stocking, and Manuring of their
several and respective Lands in the said several and respective Parishes, shall
pass to and fro through the said respective places where such Toll is to be
received as aforesaid, without paying any thing for their respective passing
through the same; Any thing in this present Act to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, And be it Enacted, Proviso touching money received overplus and
remaining at the end of 11. years.
That if it shall happen that at the end and expiration of the term of the
Eleven years aforesaid, that the Receiver or Receivers, Collector or Collectors
then in being, or any of them, of the aforesaid Tolls, or any part thereof, in
all and every of the said Counties, made and to be made, shall upon their or
any of their accounts, made and to be made for the several and respective
Receipts of the Tolls aforesaid, have any sum or sums of money in their or any
of their hands, more then they or any of them have expended as aforesaid, That
then such Receiver and Receivers, Collector and Collectors, and every of them,
shall bring in all and

Provided also, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
Huntington.
That if the Justices of the Peace for the County of Huntington, or any four of
them dwelling next to the said High Road, Stilton.
shall adjudge some other place more convenient then Stilton for receiving the
Toll for the said County, That then it shall and may be lawful for the said
Justices of Peace as aforesaid, to appoint some other place upon the High Road
within their said County, to receive the aforesaid Toll instead of Stilton; Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that it shall and may be lawful for all and every Soldier and Soldiers
upon their March, Soldiers in Marching, and Posts exempted.
and all persons riding Post, to pass through any the places in this Act
mentioned, without paying any Toll,

Provided also, That if at any time before the expiration of the Eleven years
aforesaid, Proviso, for cealing the Toll within the 11. years.
the said Highways shall be well and sufficiently amended and repaired, and so
adjudged by the Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions for their several
and respective Counties aforesaid, That then from and after such Adjudication
made, and Re-payment of such moneys as shall have been borrowed, the aforesaid
Toll in the said County shall cease and determine; Any thing aforesaid to the
contrary notwithstanding. Continued 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 10.

CAP. II.
Unlawful Cutting or Stealing, or Spoiling of Wood, and Under-woods and
Destroyers of young Timber Trees, punished.

WHereas in one Act of Parliament made in the Three and fortieth year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, 43 El. cap. 7.
An Act to avoid and prevent diverse misdemeanors in idle and lewd persons,
among other things it is Enacted, The punishment for cutting and spoiling any
Woods.
That all and every such lewd person and persons that shall cut or spoil any
Woods, or Underwoods, Poles, or Trees standing, and their Procurer or
Procurers, Receiver or Receivers knowing the same, and being thereof lawfully
Convicted by his or their own confession, or by the testimony of one sufficient
Witness, upon Oath before some one Justice of Peace, or other Head-Officer of
the County or place where such offense was committed, shall give the party or
parties satisfaction for his or their Damages for the first fault: And if such
Offender or Offenders shall by such Justice of Peace or Head-Officer be thought
not able or sufficient, or if such Offender or Offenders do not make such
satisfaction as aforesaid, That then the said Justice of Peace, or Head-Officer
shall commit the said Offender or Offenders to the Constable, or other inferior
Officer, to receive the punishment of Whipping, as in the said Act more fully
does appear,

And whereas it is found by daily experience, especially in and about London,
and other great Towns where a great number of such idle and lewd persons do
shelter themselves, that this Act has not sufficiently prevented the said
mischief of cutting and spoiling of Woods and Underwoods, as was intended, as
well because the said offenses are committed in such a close and clandestine
manner, that there is none Witnesses to them, but such as are partakers to the
offense; as also because the said punishment is too small for so great a fault,
which is not only prejudicial and hurtful to the Owners of the said Woods, but
very mischievous and damageable to the Commonwealth: Be it therefore Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the Four and
twentieth day of June next ensuing, Who may apprehend Wood-stealers.
every Constable, Headborough, or any other person in every County, City,
Town-Corporate, or other place where they shall be Officers or Inhabitants,
shall and may by virtue of this present Act have full Power and Authority to
apprehend, or cause to be apprehended all and every person or persons they
shall suspect having, or carrying or any ways Search in Houses of suspected
persons.
and by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace
directed to any Officer, such Officer shall have power to enter into, and
search the Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the
Houses of all and every person or persons they shall suspect to have any kind
of Wood, Underwoods, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark, or Bast of any Trees, or
any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze; and
wheresoever they find any such, to apprehend and cause to be apprehended all
and every person and persons suspected for the cutting and taking of the same,
and them, and every of them, as well those apprehended carrying, or any ways
conveying any kind of Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark, or Bast
of any Trees, or any Eats, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood, Broom,
or Furze; as also those in whose Houses or other places belonging to them, any
such Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark, or Bast of any Trees, or
any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedgwood, Broom, or Furze, shall be
found, to carry before one Justice of the Peace of the same County, City, or
Town-Corporate; And if the said person and persons so suspected, apprehended,
and carried before the said Justices, do not then and there give a good account
how he and they came by such Wood, or Underwood, Poles or young Trees, or Bark
or Bast of any Trees, or Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood,
Broom or Furze, by the consent of the Owner, such as shall satisfy the said
Justice, or else shall not within some convenient time to be set them by the
said Justice, produce the party or parties of whom they bought the same wood,
Underwood, Poles or young Trees, or Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles,
Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood, Broom or Furze, or some other credible
witness to depose upon Oath such sale of the said Wood, Underwood, Poles or
young Trees, or Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or
Hedgwood, Broom or Furze, (which Oath the said Justice has hereby power to
administer) That then the said person or persons so suspected, and not giving
such good account, nor producing any such witness upon Oath to testify the
said Sale as aforesaid, shall be deemed and adjudged as convicted of the said
offense of cutting and spoiling of the same Woods, Underwoods, Poles or young
Trees, or Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or
Hedge-wood, Broom, 43 Eliz. cap. 7.
or Furze within the meaning of the said Statute of Queen Elizabeth, and shall
be liable to the punishment therein contained, and to such other proceedings
and punishments as by this present Act shall be further constituted and
appointed on that behalf.

The punishment for the first offense.
and within such time as the said Justice shall appoint, and over and above pay
down presently unto the Overseers, for the use of the poor of the Parish where
the said offense or offenses were committed, such sum of money (not exceeding
Ten shillings) as the said Justices shall think meet; and if such offender or
offenders do not make recompense or satisfaction to the said Owner or Owners,
and also pay the said sum to the Poor in manner and form aforesaid, then the
said Justice shall commit the said offender or offenders to the House of
Correction for such time as the said Justice shall think fit, not exceeding one
month, or to be whipped by the Constable, The second offense.
or other Officer, as in his Judgment shall seem expedient: And if such person
or persons shall again commit the said offense, and be thereof convicted as
before, that then they and every of them so offending the second time, and
thereof so convicted, shall be sent to the House of Correction for one month,
and be there kept to hard labor. And if such person or persons shall again
commit the said offense, and be thereof convicted as before, That then they and
every of them so offending the third time, and thereof so convicted, shall be
taken, adjudged and deemed as Incorrigible Rogues.

Buyers of stolen Wood, how to be dealt withal.
Provided always, And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
whosoever shall buy any Burdens of Wood, or any Poles or Sticks of Wood, or
any other the Premises particularly mentioned in this Bill, which may be
justly suspected to have been stolen, or unlawfully come by, That it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and
Head-Officers, or any one of them within their respective Jurisdictions, upon
complaint to them thereof made, to examine the said matter upon Oath, which
they and every of them respectively are hereby authorized to administer: And if
they shall find that the same was bought of a person who might justly be
suspected to have stolen or unlawfully come by the same, and that the same was
stolen, or unlawfully come by, That in such case the said Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers, or any one of them respectively,
shall and may award the party who bought the same, to pay treble the value of
the same to the party from whom the same was stolen, or unlawfully taken; And in
default of present payment thereof, to issue forth their respective Warrants to
levy the same by distress and sale of the offenders Goods, rendering the
overplus to the party: And in default of such distress, to commit the party to
the Gaol at his own charge, there to remain one month without Bail.

Provided always, Within what time offenders must be questioned within this Act.
That no person or persons shall be questioned for any offense upon this Law,
that has been punished for the same offense by any former Law, nor shall be
punished by this Law, unless he be questioned within Six weeks after the
offense committed.

CAP. III.
An Act to explain and supply a former Act for distribution of Threescore
thousand pounds amongst the truly Loyal and Indigent Commission-Officers, and
for Assessing of Offices, and distributing the moneys thereby raised, for their
further supply. 14 Car. 2. cap. 8. EXP.

CAP. IV.
An Additional Act for the better Ordering the Forces in the several Counties
of this Kingdom.

FOr the better Ordering of the Forces in the several Counties and places of
England, and the Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and for the
supplying and explaining the late Act, Entitled, 14 Car. 2. cap. 3.
An Act for Ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom, Be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Power of the
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants to Train and Exercise.
That the several Lieutenants of the several Counties, Cities and places
nominated by his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors respectively, and in their
absence out of the limits of their respective Lieutenancies, or by their
directions when they are not absent, their Deputy Lieutenants during their
respective Deputation, or any two or more of them shall have power from time to
time, to Lead, Train, Exercise and put in readiness, or by Warrant under their
hands and seals, to cause to be Led, Trained, Exercised, or put in readiness,
all or any of the persons Raised, Arrayed, or Weaponed, according to the said
Act, to the intents and purposes, and by the directions of the said Act, and of
this present Act.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every person or persons, charged, 13
Car. 2. cap. 6. 14 Car. 2. cap. 3. Allowance of pay to Troopers 2 s. 6 d. per
diem. Foot-Souldiers 1 s. per diem.
or to be charged by virtue of either of the said Acts, with Horse, Horseman
and Arms, or Foot-Souldier and Arms, shall under the penalty of forfeiting five
shillings, pay and allow upon demand, two shillings six pence by the day, to
each respective Trooper that serves with such Horse and Arms, for maintenance
of the man and horse; and shall under the penalty of two shillings, pay and
allow upon demand, one shilling by the day to each respective Foot-Souldier,
for so many days as they or any of them shall be absent from their dwellings or
callings by occasion of Muster or Exercise, according to the Rules of the said
Acts: which said penalty is to be Levied, as is hereafter expressed, unless
some certain agreement be made to the contrary before good witness; and the
said penalty is to be paid to such Trooper or Foot-Souldier, to whom his said
pay was denied; The respective penalties to be demanded within six weeks after
each respective default, or at or before the next succeeding Muster, Exercise
or Training, and not afterward.

And be it further Enacted, Penalty upon refusers to find Arms.
That if any person or persons assessed or charged according to the said Acts,
or either of them, shall refuse or neglect by a reasonable time to be
appointed, to provide and furnish such sufficient Foot-Souldier and Arms, or
Foot-Souldiers and Arms, as are accordingly charged upon him or them, That then
it shall and may be lawful to and for the respective Lieutenants and
Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them, for every such offense from
time to time to inflict a penalty upon such person or persons, not exceeding
Five pounds, to be levied in manner following, and to be employed to the same
uses in default whereof the same was imposed.

Be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for the respective
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them* from time to
time, Constables required to charge persons with Foot-Arms.
to appoint and require the Constable or Constables of any Parish or place
within this Kingdom, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede, to
provide and furnish (at a reasonable time and place to be appointed, upon a
penalty to be imposed, not exceeding Forty shillings for every such omission)
so many sufficient Foot Arms (with Wages and other incident charges) as the
said Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them shall
assess or charge according to the Rules and Proportions of the said Acts, upon
Revenues under Fifty pounds per annum, or upon personal Estates less then Six
hundred pounds, lying or being within any such respective Parish or place.

And in order thereunto, if any person or persons of, or belonging to any such
Parish or place, shall upon demand refuse or neglect to provide a Foot-Souldier
or Foot-Souldiers, The Penalty for not providing or paying Foot-Arms.
according to the proportion aforesaid, or to pay any sum of money whereat he
or they shall be taxed or assessed by a Pound Rate, according to a List Signed
by the respective-Lieutenants, or any three or more of them, for and toward
the defraying and satisfying the necessary Charge and Expense disburst in
providing and furnishing such sufficient Arms as aforesaid, That then it shall
and may be lawful to and for such Constable or Constables, by Warrant for that
purpose, to Levy such Sum so Rated or Assessed by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of such person or persons so refusing or neglecting to pay, and shall
restore the overplus, (if any) the charge of Distraining being first deducted:
And the Tenant of any House, Land, or Revenue, Rated or Assessed as aforesaid,
is hereby authorized and required to make payment of such Sum of money so Rated
or Assessed and to deduct so much as shall be charged upon the Landlords Rent,
out of the next Rent payable to the Landlord, and in default hereof, the goods
of every such Tenant is also liable to be distrained and sold in manner
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That once in every year hereafter, each Soldier
Listed or Raised by virtue of the said Acts, What shall be paid to the
Muster-Masters.
or either of them, shall pay to his respective Muster-Master such Sum (not
exceeding one shilling for a Horseman, and six pence for a Footman) as the
respective Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them
shall under their Hands and Seals direct; who have power hereby to Levy the
same by Distress and Sale, in case of default of payment, upon the Goods and
Chattels of such person or persons as are charged with the finding of the
respective Horseman or Foot-Souldier, so making default, unless the default be
by the neglect of such Horseman or Foot-Souldier, who in that case are hereby
to be accomptable for the same; and every such Muster-Master shall be an
Inhabitant of the respective County. What Provision every Musquetier shall
bring with him.


And it is hereby further Provided and Enacted, That at every Muster, Training
and Exercise, every Musquetier shall bring with him half a pound of Powder, and
half a pound of Bullets; and every Musquetier that serves with a Match-lock,
shall bring with him three yards of Match, both which are to be found
accordingly at the Charge of such person or persons as provide the said
Foot-Souldier and Arms; And every Horseman is to bring with him a quarter of a
pound of Powder, and a quarter of a pound of Bullets, at the Charge of such
person or persons as provide the said Horseman and Arms, The Penalty.
who are hereby required to find and bear the same, upon pain of forfeiting
Five shillings for every omission thereof. And for the better Discipling and
Instructing the said Militia in their Duties, as also for easing them of often
and frequent Meetings at several times, and for the better security of the
Peace of the Kingdom, Be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful
for the said several Lieutenants, and in their absence, or by their Directions,
for any two or more of their Deputies within their respective Counties and
Precincts for which they are Commissioned, at any time or times, during the
space of three years, from the Twenty fourth day of July, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and three, to Summon and Continue together
so many of the said Trained Forces within their respective Counties and
Precincts, 14 Car. 2. cap. 3.
and so long as they shall judge convenient, in lieu of certain days appointed
for Exercise and Musters by the said Act, Entitled, An Act for Ordering the
Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom. No Troop to be kept upon duty
above 14 days.


Provided always, And be it Enacted, That any Troop, Company or Soldiers may
be so kept upon such Duty by virtue hereof fourteen days, and no longer in any
one year.

Commissioned Foot-Officers discharged from finding Arms.
Provided always, And be it Enacted, That every Commissioned Foot-Officer in the
Train-Bands, or Militia of this Kingdom (settled according to Act of Parliament)
shall be and is hereby exempted and excused from finding and contributing
toward the finding and contributing toward the finding any Horse, Horseman
or Arms, or Foot-Souldier and Arms for his whole Estate, if at any time it is
charged, but for one Horse, or a less charge, or for such part of his Estate as
is, or shall be charged with one Horse, if his whole Estate be charged with a
greater charge then one Horse in the County or Lieutenancy where he so serves
as a Foot-Officer, in respect of the expense which the said Employment does
necessarily engage him in; Any thing in the said Acts to the contrary
notwithstanding. The Duty of Constables in executing Warrants of the
Lieutenants or Deputies.


Be it also Enacted and Ordained, That each Constable, Tything-man, or other
Officer of any Parish or place, under the penalty for every neglect of
forfeiting Forty shillings, shall, and do by virtue of a Warrant directed to
him from the respective Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or
more of them, Levy all arrears and proportions of money unpaid, that were set
or charged for the Raising, Training and Arraying the Trained Bands and Forces,
actually raised and in being before the passing of the said mentioned Act, by
the Distress and sale of the Goods of any person or persons refusing to pay the
same, rendering back the overplus (if any) the charge of Distress and Sale being
first deducted. Troopers and Soldiers shall be subject to Exercise and Duty.


Be it also Enacted, That every Trooper or Foot-Souldier at any time raised by
virtue, or according to the directions of this present Act, shall be subject to
such Exercise and Duty, as others charged or raised by the said mentioned Act,
and shall accordingly upon like pains and penalties observe

And whereas the fourth part of one months Assessment in each County, A fourth
part or a months assesment how to be disposed.
after the rate of Seventy thousand pounds by the month, is by the said Act
yearly appointed for furnishing Munition and other necessaries, Be it Enacted
and delared by the Authority aforesaid, That the said respective Lieutenants
and Deputies or any three or more of them, shall from time to time have power
to dispose of so much of the said fourth part to the inferior Officers
employed in or about the said respective Forces, for their pains and
encouragement, as to them the said Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or
more of them shall seem expedient.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Persons sued for matters done by this Act
may plead the general issue.
That it shall be lawful to every person and persons that shall have any Action
or Suit brought against him or them, for any thing done in execution of this or
the said Act, to plead the General Issue, and to give the special matter in
Evidence, and if Judgment shall be given for the Defendant, or if the Plaintiff
shall become Nonsuit or discontinue his Suit, then he shall recover double
Costs.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, Double costs to the Defendant.
That no Action or Suit shall be brought against any person for any thing done
in execution, or by pretense of the execution of this or the said Act, unless
the said Action or Suit be laid in the proper County, and commenced within six
months next after such cause of Action.

Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one
Clause contained in a certain Act, Entitled, (An Act declaring the sole right
of the Militia to be in the King, 13 Car. 2. c. 6
and for the present Ordering and disposing of the same;) and made for the
Indempnifying of all persons acting in the Militia, from the four and twentieth
of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty, to the twentieth of July, One
thousand six hundred sixty and one, as touching the Assaulting, Detaining or
Imprisoning any person suspected to be a Fanatic, Sectary or Disturber of the
Peace, Fanatic, Sectaries.
or seizing of Arms, or searching of houses for Arms, or for suspected persons,
shall be construed to Commence and take effect, and shall be good and effectual
in Law for the Indempnifying of all persons whatsoever acting in the Militia of
this Kingdom for any the matters aforesaid, betwixt the second day of February,
One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and the four and twentieth of June, One
thousand six hundred and sixty inclusive, by virtue or color of any Authority
or Command whatsoever, any thing in the said Act, or in any other Act to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several
forfeitures, How the forfeitures and penalties upon this Act may be levied.
Penalties and payments by this present Act Imposed, Set or Directed, (not
otherwise by this present Act provided to be Levied, Sued for or Recovered)
shall or may, in case of default, be Levied or Recovered by Warrant under the
hands and Seals of the respective Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, or any
three or more of them, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, and by Sale
of the same, rendering the party the overplus, if any be; And if sufficient of
the Goods and Chattels of such Offender cannot be found or had, whereof to levy
such forfeiture, payment or penalty, then the said respective Lieutenants and
Deputy Lieutenants, or any three or more of them shall have power, and are
hereby authorized by like Warrant under their hands and seals to commit such
Offender to Prison until he shall make satisfaction, according to the said
forfeiture, payment or penalty.

And it is further Declared and Enacted, That all and every person and persons
which since the five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty
and two, have acted or done any

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, How persons
may be charged with arms and for what estates.
That no person who has an Estate of the yearly value of two hundred pounds,
or personal Estate of the value of two thousand four hundred pounds, chargeable
by the said Act, shall be charged with or toward the finding any Foot; and it
shall be lawful for the respective Lieutenants and Deputies, or any three or
more of them to charge according to the proportions in the said Act, any person
who has an Estate of the yearly value of one hundred pounds, and under the
yearly value of two hundred pounds, or who has a personal Estate of twelve
hundred pounds, and under the value of two thousand four hundred pounds,
chargeable by the said Act, with, or toward the finding of Foot, or toward the
finding of Horse, as to their judgment shall seem most expedient for his
Majesty's Service. Yet nevertheless, this shall not be construed to extend to
make any alterations in the provisions in the said or this Act, concerning the
Forces to be charged or raised in Cities, Corporations and Port-Towns.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports to ancient Towns and their Members, and in his
absence, The Cinque Ports.
his Lieutenant or Lieutenants, shall and may put in execution within the said
Ports, Towns and Members, all the Powers and Authorities given and granted by
this and the said former Act, and to execute and perform all and every the
things therein contained in the like manner, as the respective Lieutenants of
the Counties and their Deputies may do, and may keep up and continue the usual
numbers of Soldiers in the said Ports, Towns and Members unless they find
cause to lessen the same: And that the Inhabitants of the said Ports, Towns and
Members, being in regard of their situation on the Seacoasts charged with a
greater proportion of Arms and Armed men, then other parts of the Kingdom,
shall not be charged with Arms or Armed men in the Counties adjacent for their
Estates there lying, save only for such proportion as they are liable unto, and
either are not or shall not be charged with, within the said Ports, Towns and
Members; Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

St. Martins Parish in Stamford Baron in Lincolnshire.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Inhabitants and Revenues of, or in the Parish of Saint Martin, called Stamford
Baron, in the Suburbs of the Borough and Town of Stamford, on the South Side of
the Waters there called Welland, may be Assessed and Charged to find and serve
in the Trained Bands of the County of Lincoln as formerly, according to the
said mentioned Act, and this present Act, by the Lieutenant and
Deputy Lieutenants for the County of Lincoln for the time being, in such manner
as any persons or estates within the said County of Lincoln may be by them
assessed and charged to the purposes aforesaid: And they of Saint Martin
aforesaid, are hereby declared to be well and legally assessed and charged by
the said Lieutenant and Deputy Lieutenants respectively.

CAP. V.
For Regulating Select Vestries.

FOr prevention of the evils which may arise from Vestry-men, not Conforming to
the Government and Discipline of the Church of England, as it now is by Law
established;

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice, and with the
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That all and every person who now is a Vestry-man or
member of any Vestry within any Parish in the Cities of London and Westminster,
Borough of Southwark and weekly Bills of Mortality, and in all other Cities,
Boroughs and Towns Corporate, where Select Vestries are used, in the Kingdom of
England, All Vestry-men shall take and subscribe the Declaration in 14 Car. 2.
c. 4.
on or before the Nine and twentieth day of September next; And all and every
person, who at any time hereafter shall be elected to be a Vestry-man, or
member of any Vestry within any Parish in any the places aforesaid, within one
month after such his Election, shall before the respective Archbishop, Bishop
or Ordinary, Vicar General or Chancellor of the Diocese, make and subscribe the
Declaration and Acknowledgment enjoined in the late wholesome good Act,
Entitled, (An Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, and for establishing the Form of
Making, Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church
of England) in these words following,

I A. B. Do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take
up Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position, of
taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him; And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established; And I do declare, That I do hold,
there lies no Obligation upon me, or on any other person, from the Oath,
commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change, or
alteration of Government, either in Church, or State; And that the same was in
it self an unlawful Oath, and Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against
the known Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom.

The penalty.
And that all and every such person, who shall neglect or refuse to do the same
within the respective times aforesaid, shall (ipso facto) be deprived of such
his place of Vestry-man, and of being a Member of such Vestry, to all intents
and purposes, And such place shall be actually void, as if such person were
naturally dead, Any Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding: And that
from and after such neglect or refusal, it shall be lawful for all persons, who
shall have right of Election or nomination of such Vestry-man, or member of
such Vestry, to proceed to election or nomination of some other discreet person
of the respective Parish, in the room of such person so neglecting or refusing
as aforesaid. And if such person so to be elected in the room of such person so
neglecting or refusing as aforesaid, shall also neglect or refuse to make and
subscribe the said Declaration and Acknowledgment, in manner and time
aforesaid, whereby such place shall again become void; or if such persons who
shall have right of Election or nomination as aforesaid, shall not proceed to
Election within one month after such vacancy, then it shall be lawful to and
for the respective Archbishop, Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, under his
hand and Seal to Elect and nominate a discreet person of the respective Parish
in such vacant room; which person so to be elected and nominated, after his
making and subscription in manner and time aforesaid, shall be, and shall to
all intents and purposes be reputed, deemed and taken to be a Vestry-man, or
member of such Vestry in like manner as if he had been chosen by the respective
Electors; Any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective Archbishop,
Bishop or Ordinary, Vicar General or Chancellor of the Diocese, shall upon
request to him made by any Vestry-man, so making and subscribing the said
Declaration and Acknowledgment aforesaid, deliver a Certificate of his so
doing, for which no Fee shall be paid.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall be construed to give any new
power to any Select Vestry-man, or to confirm any usurped power heretofore
exercised by any Select Vestry-man, which before the making of this Act is not
Warranted by the Law of the Land.

Provided also, The continuance of this Act.
That this Act shall continue in force to the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. VI.
An Act for Relief of such Persons, as by Sickness or other Impediment were
disabled from Subscribing the Declaration in the Act of Uniformity, and
Explanation of part of the said Act.

Whereas by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
Uniformity of Public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other
Rites and Ceremonies, 14 Car. 2. c. 4.
and for establishing the Form of Making, Ordaining and consecrating Bishops,
Priests and Deacons in the Church of England, It was Enacted, That every Dean,
Canon and Prebendary of every Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all Masters
and Fellows of any College, Hall, House of Learning or Hospital, and every
Parson, Vicar, Curate, and every other person in Holy Orders, who upon the
first day of May, which should be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six
hundred sixty and two, or at any time thereafter should be Incumbent or have
possession of any Deanery, Canonry, Prebendry, Mastership, Fellowship,
Parsonage, Vicarage or any other Ecclesiastical Dignity or Promotion, should
before the Feast day of Saint Bartholomew, which should be in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and two, subscribe the Declaration or
acknowledgment in the said Act mentioned and expressed, before their respective
Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries or Vice-Chancellors of the respective
Universities; upon pain that all and every of the persons aforesaid, failing in
such subscription, should lose and forfeit such respective Deanery, Canonry,
Prebendry, Mastership, Fellowship, Parsonage, Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity
or Promotion, and should be utterly disabled, and ipso facto deprived of the
same; And that every such respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebendry, Mastership,
Fellowship, Parsonage, Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity or Promotion should be
void, as if such person so failing were naturally dead. And that after such
subscription made, every such Parson, Vicar, Curate and Lecturer, should
procure a Certificate under the hand and Seal of the respective Archbishop,
Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, and should publicly and openly read the
same, together with the Declaration or acknowledgment aforesaid, upon some
Lord's Day within three months then next following, in his Parish Church where
he was to officiate, in the presence of the Congregation there assembled in the
time of Divine-Service; upon pain that every person failing therein, should
lose such Parsonage, Vicarage or Benefice respectively, and should be utterly
disabled, and ipso facto deprived of the same; And that the said Parsonage,
Vicarage or Benefice should be void, as if he were naturally dead.

And whereas diverse persons of eminent Loyalty to his Majesty, and of known
affection to the Liturgy of the Church of England, who by the said Act were
required to subscribe the said Declaration or Acknowledgment, at the time of
the passing of the said Act were out of this Realm, in Ireland or other parts
beyond the Seas upon lawful and justifiable occasions, and had no knowledge or
notice thereof until their return into England, being after the said Feast of
St. Bartholomew; And diverse other of the said Loyal and well-affected persons,
by reason of sickness, imprisonment, disability of body or otherwise, could not
or did not resort unto their respective Archbishops, Bishops or Ordinaries, or
Vice-Chancellors of the respective Universities before whom such subscription
was appointed by the said Act to be made: All which said persons are by force
of the said Act utterly disabled, and ipso facto deprived of their respective
Deanries, Canonries, Prebendries, Masterships, Fellowships, Parsonages,
Vicarages or other Ecclesiastical Benefices or Promotions, by reason of such
their omission:

For remedy whereof, and for the relief of such persons, Be it Enacted by the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by Authority of the same, That all Deans, Canons, Prebendaries, Masters and
Fellows of any Colleges, Halls or other Houses of Learning; and all Parsons,
Vicars and other Ecclesiastical persons aforesaid, who at the time of the
passing of the said Act being in Ireland or any the parts beyond the Seas, did
not return into this Kingdom before the said Feast of Saint Bartholomew, One
thousand six hundred sixty and England, by Imprisonment, Sickness, Disability
of Body or otherwise, did not resort unto their respective Archbishop, Bishop,
Ordinary or Vice Chancellor of the said respective Universities, to subscribe
the said Declaration and Acknowledgment, before the said Feast in the year of
our Lord aforesaid, shall be, and are hereby declared to be restored unto, and
preserved in their respective Deanries, Canonries, Prebendries, Masterships,
Fellowships, Parsonages, Vicarages and other Ecclesiastical Benefices and
Promotions, whereunto no other person or persons before the first day of August
in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and three, were or
shall be lawfully Instituted, Inducted, Collated or placed: And shall and may
hold and enjoy the same according to his and their former right; The aforesaid
Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That every such Dean, Canon, Prebendary, Master and Fellow of any
College, Hall or House of Learning, and all Parsons, Vicars and Curates, and
other Ecclesiastical persons, who are or shall by virtue of this Act be
restored to, or preserved in their said several and respective Promotions,
shall before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord next ensuing, if he be in
England, or if beyond the Seas, within forty days after his return into
England, subscribe the said Declaration or Acknowledgment before the respective
Archbishop, Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese, or Vice Chancellor aforesaid
respectively; And that every such Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer shall
procure a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the respective Archbishop,
Bishop or Ordinary of the Diocese (who are hereby required and enjoined upon
demand, to make and deliver such Certificate,) And shall publicly and openly
read the same, together with the Declaration or acknowledgment aforesaid, upon
some Lords day within three months then next following such subscription in
his Parish Church where he is to officiate, in the presence of the Congregation
then assembled in the time of Divine Service.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every
subscription already made or hereafter to be made before any Vicar General or
Chancellor to any Archbishop or Bishop, or Commissary to the Archbishop of
Canterbury or any other Bishop, is and shall be as effectual and beneficial in
Law to all intents and purposes to every person and persons which have or shall
make such subscription as aforesaid, as if the same had been made before the
Archbishop or Bishop of the Province or Diocese respectively, Any thing in the
aforesaid Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That every person who shall have benefit by this Act, shall
make such allowance for serving the Cure since the 24th of August 1662. as
shall be judged fit by the Ordinary of the place, and shall pay and discharge
all Tenths, Pensions and other Charges, wherewith the Benefice to which he is
by this Act restored, has been or might be legally charged since the day
aforesaid.

Persons prohibited to Preach. 14 Car. 2. c. 4.
And whereas some doubt has arisen, whether persons prohibited to preach by the
said Act, are in the same plight as to punishment, with persons disabled by the
said Act to preach; Be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the penalties by the said Act to be inflicted upon any person disabled by the
said Act to preach for any offense against the said Act, shall in like manner
be inflicted upon every person so offending, that is prohibited by the said Act
to preach, Any thing, doubt or ambiguity in the said Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CAP. VII.
Trade Encouraged.

Tillage.
FOrasmuch as the encouraging of Tillage ought to be in an especial manner
regarded and endeavored; and the surest and effectuallest means of promoting
and advancing any Trade, Occupation or Mystery, being by rendering it profitable
to the Users thereof; And great quantities of Land within this Kingdom for the
present lying in a manner waste, and yielding little, which might thereby be
improved to considerable profit and advantage (if sufficient Encouragement were
given for the laying out of Cost and labor on the same) and thereby much more
Corn produced, greater numbers of people, horses and cattle employed, and other
Land also rendered more Valuable.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority thereof; And it is hereby Enacted, That from
and after the first day of September, in the year of our Lord, 1663. and from
thence forward, when the prizes of Corn and Grain Winchester measure, Corn not
exceeding certain rates, may be transported.
do not exceed the rates hereafter following, at the Havens or places where the
same shall be shipped or laden, (viz,) The Quarter of Wheat, Eight and forty
shillings; The Quarter of Barley or Malt, Eight and twenty shillings; The
Quarter of Buck-wheat, Eight and twenty shillings; The Quarter of Oats,
Thirteen shillings and four pence; The Quarter of Rye, Two and thirty
shillings; The Quarter of Pease or Beans, Two and thirty shillings current
English money; That then it shall be lawful for all and every person and
persons to ship, load, carry and transport any of the said Corns or Grains from
the Havens or places where they shall be of such prizes, unto any parts beyond
the Seas as Merchandise, Any Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding, paying such Rates for the same, and none other, as are to be
paid when the same might have been Transported by one Act passed this present
Parliament, Entitled, 12 Car. 2. c 4.
A Subsidy granted to the King of Tunnage and Poundage.

When corn may be imported, and what custom to be paid.
And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the
prizes of the aforesaid Corns and Grains do not exceed the Rates above
mentioned respectively Winchester-measure, at the Haven or place into which any
of them shall be imported from any part beyond the

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when the
prizes of Corn or Grain Winchester-measure, do not exceed the rates following
at the Markets, Havens or Places where the same shall be bought, (viz.) The
Quarter of Wheat, Eight and forty shillings; the Quarter of Rye, two and thirty
shillings; the Quarter of Barley or Malt, eight and twenty shillings; the
Quarter of Buck-wheat, eight and twenty shillings; the Quarter of Oats,
thirteen shillings and four pence; the Quarter of Pease or Beans, two and
thirty shillings; That then it shall be lawful for all and every person and
persons (not Forestalling nor Selling the same in the same Market within three
months after the buying thereof) to buy in open Market, and to lay up and keep
in his or their Granaries or Houses, and to sell again such Corn or Grain of
the kinds aforesaid, as without fraud or coven shall have been bought at or
under the prices before expressed, without incurring any penalty; Any Law,
Statute or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And in regard his Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas are inhabited and
peopled by his Subjects of this his Kingdom of England; Plantations beyond the
Sea.
For the maintaining a greater correspondence and kindness between them, and
keeping them in a firmer dependence upon it, and rendering them yet more
beneficial and advantageous unto it in the further employment and increase of
English Shipping and Seamen, Vent of English Woollen, and other Manufactures
and Commodities, rendering the Navigation to and from the same more safe and
cheap, and making this Kingdom a Staple, not only of the Commodities of those
Plantations, but also of the Commodities of other Countries and Places, for the
supplying of them; and it being the usage of other Nations to keep their
Plantations Trade to themselves.

Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted, Commodities of the growth and
manufacture of Europe, how to be imported in English built shipping.
That from and after the five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six
hundred sixty four, no Commodity of the Growth, Production or Manufacture of
Europe, shall be Imported into any Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory
or Place to his Majesty belonging, or which shall belong hereafter unto, or be
in the Possession of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, in Asia, Africa or
America, (Tangier only excepted) but what shall be bona fide, and without
fraud, Laden and Shipped in England, Wales or the Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
and in English built Shipping, or which were bona fide bought before October,
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, and had such Certificate thereof, as is
directed in one Act passed the last Sessions of this present Parliament,
Entitled, 14 Car. 2. c. 11
An Act for preventing Frauds, and regulating Abuses in His Majesty's Customs;
and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners at least are English,
and which shall be carried directly thence to the said Lands, Islands,
Plantations, Colonies, Territories or Places, and from no other place or places
whatsoever; Any Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding, The
penalty.
under the Penalty of the loss of all such Commodities of the Growth,
Production or Manufacture of Europe, as shall be imported into any of them from
any other place whatsoever, by Land or Water; And if by water, of the ship or
vessel also in which they were Imported, with all her Guns, Tackle, Furniture,
Ammunition and Apparel, one third part to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, one third part to the Governor of such Land, Island, Plantation,
Colony, Territory or place into which such Goods were Imported, if the said
ship, vessel or goods be there seized or informed against and sued for; Or
otherwise, That third part also to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and
the other third part to him or them who shall seize, inform or sue for the same
in any of his Majesty's Courts in such of the said Lands, Islands, Colonies,
Plantations, Territories or Places where the Offense was committed, or in any
Court of Record in England, by Bill, Information, Plaint or other Action,
wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall and may be lawful to ship and lade in such ships, and so navigated as in
the foregoing Clause is set down and expressed in any part of Europe, Salt for
the Fisheries of New England and New Foundland, Salt for Fisheries.
and to ship and lade in the Madera's, Wines of the growth thereof; and to ship
and lade in the Western Islands or Azores, Wines of the growth of the said
Islands; and to ship and take in Servants or Horses in Scotland or Ireland, and
to ship or lade in Scotland all sorts of Victual of the Scotland, and to ship
or lade in Ireland all sorts of Victual of the Growth or Production of Ireland,
and the same to Transport into any of the said Lands, Islands, Plantations,
Colonies, Territories or places; Any thing in the foregoing Clause to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And for the better prevention of Frauds, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted, Prevention of frauds.
That from and after the five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six
hundred sixty and four, every person or persons importing by Land any Goods or
Commodities whatsoever, into any the said Lands, Islands, Plantations,
Colonies, Territories or Places, shall deliver to the Governor of such Land,
Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory or Place, or to such person or Officer as
shall be by him thereunto authorized and appointed, within four and twenty
hours after such Importation, his and their Names and Sirnames, and a true
Inventory and particular of all such Goods or Commodities; And no Ship or
Vessel coming to any such Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory or Place,
shall lade or unlade any Goods or Commodities whatsoever, until the Master or
Commander of such Ship or Vessel shall first have made known to the Governor
of such Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, Territory or Place, or such other
person or Officer as shall be by him thereunto authorized and appointed, the
arrival of the said Ship or Vessel, with her Name, and the Name and Surname of
her Master or Commander, and have shown to him that she is an English-built
Ship, or made good by producing such Certificate as abovesaid, that she is a
Ship or Vessel bona fide belonging to England, Wales or the Town of Berwick,
and navigated with an English Master, and three fourth parts of the Mariners at
least Englishmen, and have delivered to such Governor or other person or
Officer, a true and perfect Inventory or Invoyce of her Lading, together with
the place or places in which the said Goods were laden or taken into the said
Ship or Vessel, under the pain of the loss of the Ship or Vessel, with all her
Guns, Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture and Apparel, and of all such Goods of the
growth, Production or Manufacture of Europe as were not bona fide laden and
taken in, in England, Wales or the Town of Berwick, to be recovered and divided
in manner aforesaid; And all such as are Tangier only excepted) shall before
the Five and twentieth day of March, One thousand six hundred sixty and four,
and all such as shall hereafter be made Governors or Commanders of any of
them, shall before their entrance upon the Execution of such trust or charge,
take a solemn Oath before such person or persons as shall be authorized by his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors to administer the same, to do their utmost
within their respective Governments or Commands, to cause to be well and truly
observed, what is in this Act Enacted, in relation to the Trade of such Lands,
Islands, Plantations, Colonies, Territories and Places, under the penalty of
being removed out of their respective Governments and Commands. And if any of
them shall be found after the taking of such Oath, to have wittingly and
willingly offended contrary to what is by this Act required of them, That they
shall for such offense be turned out of their Governments, and be incapable of
the Government of any other Land, Island, Plantation or Colony; and moreover,
forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds of lawful money of England, the one
moiety to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or
them that shall inform or sue for the same in any of his Majesty's Courts in
any of the said Plantations, or in any Court of Record in England, wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed.

Penalty upon Officers of the Customs.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That if any Officer of the Customs in
England, Wales or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall give any Warrant for, or
suffer any Sugar, Tobacco, Ginger, Cotton-wool, Indico, Speckle-wood or Jamaica
Wood, Fustick or other Dying Wood of the growth of any of the said Lands,
Islands, Colonies, Plantations, Territories or Places, to be carried into any
other Country or place whatsoever, until they have been first unladen bona
fide, and put on shore in some Port or Haven in England or Wales, or in the
Town of Berwick, That every such Officer for such offense shall forfeit his
place, and the value of such of the said goods as he shall give Warrant for, or
suffer to pass into any other Country or place, the one moiety to his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or them that shall inform
or sue for the same in any Court of Record in England or Wales, wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed.

Encouragement of Plantations, and increase of Shipping.
And for the better encouragement of the said Plantations, and the increase of
the Shipping and Navigation of this Kingdom, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the five and twentieth
day of March, one thousand six hundred sixty and England or Wales, or out of
the Town of Berwick, Sea-coals.
to ship and lade Sea-coals for any part of them, paying for the Chalder.
Newcastle measure, one shilling eight pence, and for the Chalder,
London-measure, one shilling and no more, in full of all Custom and Poundage
for the same, Any Law, Statute or Prohibition to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided, That such Sea-coals be shipped in such shipping, and so Navigated as
abovesaid; And that good security be given to the Officers of the Customs in
such Port in which they are shipped, for the landing them in the said
Plantations, and not elsewhere.

And forasmuch as several considerable and advantageous Trades cannot be
conveniently driven and carried on without the Species of Money or Bullion, and
that it is found by experience, that they are carried in greatest abundance (as
to a common Market) to such places as give free liberty for exporting the same,
and the better to keep in and increase the current Coins of this Kingdom, Be it
Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted, That from and after the first day of August,
one thousand six hundred sixty and three, it shall and may be lawful to and for
any person or persons whatsoever, to Export out of any Port of England or
Wales, in which there is a Customer or Collector, or out of the Town of
Berwick, all sorts of Foreign Coin or Bullion of Gold or Silver, Foreign coin
or bullion may be exported.
first making entry thereof in such Custom-house respectively, without paying
any Duty, Custom, Poundage or Fee for the same, Any Law, Statute or Usage to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And lastly, Whereas a very great part of the richest and best Land of this
Kingdom, is, and cannot so well be otherwise employed and made use of as in the
Feeding and Fattening of Cattle; And that by the coming in of late of vast
numbers of Cattle already fatted, such Lands are Scotland) that shall be
imported or brought into England, Penalties upon importation of Foreign cattle
at certain times.
Wales or the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, after the first day of July, and
before the twentieth day of December in any year; And for every head of great
Cattle of the breed of Scotland that shall be imported or brought into England,
Wales or the Town of Berwick, after the four and twentieth day of August, and
before the twentieth day of December in any year, there shall be paid to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors the sum of twenty shillings; And the sum of
ten shillings to him or them that shall inform or seize the same; And the sum
of ten shillings to the Poor of the Parish where such Seizure or Information
shall be made, to be recovered and levied by Bill, Plaint, or other Action,
wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed.

And moreover, That there shall be paid to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for every Sheep which shall be Imported into England, Wales, or the
Town of Berwick aforesaid, after the First day of August, and before the
Twentieth day of December in any year, the sum of Ten shillings of lawful money
of England, to be recovered and levied in manner aforesaid.

Provided always, That this Act, in so far as it relates to great Cattle or
Sheep, The continuance of this Act as to importation of cattle. Encouragement
of Herring Fisheries
shall not take place till the First day of July, One thousand six hundred
sixty and four, nor continue longer then the end of the First Session of the
next Parliament.

And for the encouragement of the Herring and North-Sea Island, and Westmony
Fisheries, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the authority aforesaid,
That from and after the First day of August, which shall be in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and four, no Fresh Herring, Fresh Cood or
Haddock, Coal-fish or Gull-fish, shall be Imported into England, Wales, or the
Town of Berwick, but in English-built Ships or Vessels, or in Ships or Vessels
bona fide belonging to England, Wales, or the Town of Berwick, and having such
Certificate thereof as is abovesaid, and whereof the Master and three Fourths
at the least of the Mariners

And be it further Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, Duties to be paid upon importation of salted or dried Fish.
That for the following sorts or kinds of salted or dried Fish, which from and
after the said First day of August shall be imported into England, Wales, or
the Town of Berwick, in any other Ship or Vessel then what is English-built, or
belonging to England, Wales, or Town of Berwick, and having such Certificate
thereof as abovesaid, and whereof the Master and three fourths of the Mariners
at least are English, and not having been fished and caught in such Ships or
Vessels, and so navigated, there shall be paid by way of Custom and Impost the
several sums of money herein after particularly mentioned, (that is to say) for
Cod-fish, the Barrel Five shillings; for Cod-fish, the last containing twelve
Barrels, Three pounds; for Cod-fish, the hundred containing sixscore, Ten
shillings; for Coal-fish, the hundred containing sixscore, Five shillings; for
Lings, the hundred containing sixscore, One pound; for White Herrings, the Last
containing twelve Barrels, One pound sixteen shillings; for Haddocks, the
Barrel, Two shillings; for Gull-fish, the Barrel, Two shillings.

And forasmuch as planting and making Tobacco within this Kingdom of England
does continue An Act for prohibiting the Planting, Setting, 12 Car. 2. cap. 34.
The further penalty for planting Tobacco in England.
or Sowing of Tobacco in England and Ireland. And forasmuch as it is found by
experience, that the reason why the said planting and making of Tobacco does
continue, is, That the penalties prescribed and appointed by that Law are so
little, as have neither power or effect over the transgressors thereof: For
remedy therefore of so great an evil, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the person or persons whatsoever, that do, or shall at any
time hereafter Set, Plant, or Sow any Tobacco in Seed, Plant, or otherwise, in
or upon any ground, field, earth, or place within the Kindom of England,
Dominion of Wales, Islands of Guernsey and Jersey, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, or Kingdom of Ireland, shall over and above the penalty of the said Act
for that purpose ordained, for every such offense forfeit and pay, the sum of
Ten pounds for every Rod or Pole of ground that he or they shall so Plant, Set
or Sow with Tobacco, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity of
ground; one third part thereof to the Kings Majesty, one other third part
thereof to the use of the poor of such respective Parish or Parishes wherein
such Tobacco shall be so Planted, Set or Sowed; and the other third part
thereof to him or them that shall sue for the same, to be recovered by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of his said Majesty's Courts of
Record at Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That in case any person or persons shall
resist or make forceable opposition against any person or persons in the due
and through Execution of the said Act of the Twelfth of his said Majesty's
Reign, that he, she, or they so resisting and making forceable opposition,
shall over and above the penalties therein mentioned for such Offenses, be
committed to the Common Gaol of the County where such offense shall be
committed, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until he, she, or they
have entered into a Recognizance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, with
two sufficient Sureties of Ten pounds penalty, not to do or commit the like
offense again.

Proviso for Tobacco planted in Physic Gardens.
Provided always, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the hindrance or prejudice of Planting Tobacco in any Physick-Garden
of either of the Universities, or any other private Garden for Surgery, so
as the quantity so planted exceed not the half of one Pole in any one place or
Garden.

Cattle imported from the Isle of Man.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to import
Cattle of the breed of the Isle of Man, not exceeding six hundred in any one
year; And Corn of the growth of that Island out of that Island into England; so
as the said Cattle be landed at Chester, Liverpool or Wirewater; Any thing in
this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. VIII.
Butchers may not sell live fat Cattle.

3 and 4 E. 6. cap. 19.
Whereas by an Act made in the Third and Fourth years of the Reign of King
Edward the Sixth, It is Enacted, That no Person using the Craft or Mystery of a
Butcher, should buy any fat Oxen, Steers, Runts, Kine, Heisers, Calves, or
Sheep, and sell the same again alive, upon pain of forfeiture of the Cattle so
sold; which Law has not wrought such effectual Reformation as was intended, by
reason of the difficulty in the proof of such Buying and Selling, being for the
most part at places far distant, if not in several Counties, by means whereof
the Parties so offending have escaped unpunished.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assem^led, and by Authority of the same, That no Person
using the Trade of a Butcher shall at any time from and after the Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel next ensuing, Sell, Offer or Expose to sale in any
Market, or elsewhere, either by himself, or any Servant or Agent whatsoever,
any fat Oxen, Steers, Runts, Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep, or Lambs alive, upon
pain to forfeit the double Value of the Cattle so Sold or Offered, Penalty upon
Butchers for selling live fat cattle.
or Exposed to Sale as aforesaid; The one moiety of which forfeiture shall be
to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety to him or
them that will sue for the same in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, by
Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed.

CAP. IX.
Four entire Subsidies granted to His Majesty by the Temporalty. EXP.

CAP. X.
An Act for Confirming of Four Subsidies, Granted by the Clergy. EXP.

CAP. XI.
An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of Excise,
and preventing the Abuses therein.

12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
FOr the preventing of the Frauds and Deceits of Brewers, and other persons who
make Beer and Ale, and other Exciseable Liquors to sell, and of the abuses
committed by the Officers, Collectors, and Managers of the Excise, to the great
decay of his Majesty's Revenue of Excise, and obstruction of the due and
orderly Collecting of the same, and for supply and amendment of certain defects
in the Laws and Statutes relating to the Duty of Excise, as well for the
support and advance of the said Revenue, as for the ease of the People; Be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this Parliament Assembled,
and by Authority of the same, That no common Brewer, Innkeeper, Victualler, or
other Retailer of Beer or Ale, shall at any time after the First day of
September, Notice to be geven of all brewing Vessels.
One thousand six hundred sixty three, without giving notice thereof at the
next Office of Excise, or to the Commissioners, Farmers, or Sub-Commissioners
of Excise, or one of them, within the Limits and Jurisdiction of whose Office
he or they do or shall Inhabit, Erect, Set up, Alter, or Enlarge any Tun, Fat,
Back, Cooler or Copper, and shall make use of any of them for the Brewing or
making any Beer or Ale, or Worts, or shall make use of, or keep any private and
concealed Storehouse, Cellar, or other place for the laying of any Beer or
Ale, or Worts in Cask, other then such as are already openly set up, erected
and made use of in his common and usual Brew House, and now openly discovered
and known, upon pain to forfeit the sum of Fifty pounds for every Tun, The
Penalty.
Fat, Back, Copper and Cooler set up and made use of without such notice given
as aforesaid, and contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof; And that all
and every other person or persons, in whose occupation any House, Message,
Out-house, or other place whatsoever is or shall be, where any such private and
concealed Tun, Back, Cooler or Storehouse shall be found and discovered, shall
also forfeit and lose the sum of Fifty pounds, to be levied and recovered in
manner and form as in by this present Act is hereafter Directed and Ordained.
And moreover, every such private and concealed Tun, Fat, Back, Copper or Cooler
so discovered and found as aforesaid, or altered or enlarged, together with all
Beer, Ale or Worts therein being, shall and may be taken up, seized, carried
away, and delivered to the Overseers for the Poor, to be sold for the use of
the Poor, or distributed amongst them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Eighth day of November, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty
and five, Commissioners for regulating may not Farm the Excise. 12 Car. 2. cap.
23.
no person or persons whatsoever nominated by his Majesty to be in Commission
for the Regulating of his Majesty's Revenue of Excise, or for the exercise of
any the Powers or Authorities mentioned in an Act, Entitled, A Grant of
certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the increase of His
Majesty's Revenue during His life; Or one other Act, Entitled, An Act for
taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Tenures in Capite by Knights
Service and Purveyance, and or in this present Act, 12 Car. 2. cap. 24.
shall presume to Farm the said Revenue of his Majesty, either directly or
indirectly, by obtaining Letters Patents to him or themselves thereof, or any
person or persons whatsoever entrusted for him or them, or to or for his or
their use, benefit or behoof; Nor that any person or persons whatsoever, being
a Farmer of the said Revenue, shall be any way capable to be nominated a
Commissioner for the Regulating his Majesty's said Revenue of Excise, or
exercising any Powers or Authorities concerning the same: But if any person or
persons who stands thus disabled as aforesaid, to be nominated a Commissioner,
shall become a Farmer, and shall in either of the said cases nevertheless
presume directly or indirectly to act as a Commissioner, Farmer, or
Sub-Commissioner, to execute the Powers and Authorities aforesaid, either
alone, or jointly with other persons that are Farmers, or else with any other
who are not Farmers, shall from and after such his acting, lose the benefit of
his said Farm, The Penalty.
and be thenceforth totally for ever disabled to be either Farmer of the said
Revenue, or Commissioner for the regulating thereof, and exercizing the Powers
aforesaid; And that all and every act and acts done by any Commissioner or
Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners, being Farmer or Farmers, by him or
themselves, or jointly with others who are not Farmers, shall be void in Law,
and of none effect; And that all and every person or persons any way molested
or troubled by the command and authority of such Commissioner or Commissioners
acting by him or themselves, or together with others who are not Farmers or
Commissioners, may bring his Action at Law for the same in any of his Majesty's
Courts at Westminster, and thereby recover his Damages against any such
Commissioner or Commissioners, any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And that all and every Letters Patents to be made from and after the Tenth day
of April, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and three,
enabling any Farmer or Farmers of the Excise to be Commissioner or
Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners, shall be utterly void and of none effect;
Any thing in any of the said Acts to the contrary notwithstanding.

And that if any Commissioner or Sub-Commissioner, Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners, who by color or virtue of any Letters Patents are now both
Commissioners or Sub-Commissioners for regulating the said Revenue, and
likewise Farmers of the said Revenue, The penalty for giving any false and
corrupt judgment to the Brewers damage.
shall give any false and corrupt Judgment in advancement of the benefit of his
or their said Farm, to the Brewers damage, contrary to Law, he or they shall
forfeit for every such Judgment so falsely and corruptly given, double Costs to
the Party so injured by the said corrupt and false Judgment: And in case any
person shall unjustly complain of any Judgment of the Commissioners or
Sub-missioners

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
First day of September, The duty of Gagers in making Entries.
all and every Gager or Gagers of the Excise, who shall take an account of any
Beer or Ale brewed or made by any common Brewer, shall weekly after such common
Brewer has made, or ought to have made his Entry at the Office of Excise, and
not otherwise, make and deliver to such common Brewer at his house, or to some
of his servants in his behalf, a true Copy under his or their hand, of such
Return or Report as he or they have made thereof to the Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners of Excise respectively, upon pain to forfeit for every
neglect or refusal the sum of Forty shillings.

Provided nevertheless, That no such common Brewer or Brewers shall be sued or
prosecuted for any penalty or forfeiture by him or them incurred, for or by
reason of any mis-entry, or short Entry, if he or they shall within the space
of one week after the delivery of such Copy as aforesaid, certify his or their
Entry according to the said Return, or otherwise discharge himself.

Be it Enacted, That from and after the said First day of September, One
thousand six hundred sixty three, and as often as there shall be occasion, Two
able Artists shall be appointed, Skilful Gagers to be made, and to take an oath.
one of them by His Majesty's Commissioners, Farmers or Sub-Commissioners for
Excise, and the other by the Brewers of any City or place; which said Artists
shall take an Oath, which Oath any one Justice has hereby power to administer,
to take and compute the just Contents and Gage of all Coppers, Fats, Tuns,
Backs and Coolers, and all other Brewing-Vessels of that nature, belonging to
all or any Brewer or Brewers of Beer or Ale to sell, and to deliver, and give
under their hands, one Copy of the particular Contents of all such Vessels to
the aforesaid Commissioners, Farmers, and Sub-Commissioners, and another true
Copy thereof to each and every such respective Brewer; which Computation by the
Artists aforesaid, shall answer and be according to the measures and
proportions expressed in the said former Acts for Excise.

Commissioners or Farmers not to act as Iusticesces of the peace in matters
touching the Excise.
And be it further Enacted, That no Commissioner, Farmer or Sub-Commissioner for
the Excise, or Common Brewer of Ale or Beer to sell, or Innkeeper whatsoever,
shall from and after the said First day of September, have power to act in, or
execute as a Justice of the Peace, any of Powers, Clauses, or things contained
in any of the Laws made for and concerning the Excise, or in this present Act;
And if any of the said persons shall presume to act or execute any thing
contrary hereunto, It is hereby further Declared, That all such things so acted
or executed by any of them, are and shall be utterly void and null to all
intents and purposes.

And whereas by the said recited Acts it is Enacted, That no person shall be
compelled by the Commissioners or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, to Travel for
the making of his Entries, or Payment of the Duties of Excise, or other Clause
whatsoever touching or concerning the same, if he live in a Market Town, Market
Towns.
out of the said Town; and if he live out of a Market Town, then to no other
place then to the next Market Town to his habitation in the same County on the
Market Day; And nevertheless the Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners, or their
Officers have England and Wales, whereby such Entries and Payments for the
Duties of Excise might be had and made, and yet do take and levy the Penalties
and Forfeitures in the said Acts mentioned, for non-Entry and Payment of the
Duty, and do otherwise thereupon grieve and vex His Majesty's Subjects,
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said Acts;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
said First day of September, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
sixty and three, the Commissioners, Farmers or Sub-Commissioners in each County
within England and Wales, shall constitute and appoint, Officers to attend in
Market Towns touching receipts and duties of Excise.
or depute under their hands and seals, such person or persons as they shall
think needful in each respective Market Town, to be there upon every
Market Day, in some known and public place, for the receiving of the said
Entries and Duties of Excise, and for performing all other matters and things
touching the said Duty, according to the said Acts, and this present Act: which
said person and persons so constituted or deputed (and the place where they
intend to hold or keep such Office, being on the next Market Day after such
Constitution or Deputation published in full and open Market) shall attend at
such Office on every Market Day, in such Market Town, and shall keep the said
Office open from Nine of the Clock in the morning, until Twelve of the Clock at
Noon; and from Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, until Five of the Clock in
the Afternoon. And in case such Office shall not be so kept and attended in
each Market Town respectively, the Commissioners, Farmers, Sub-Commissioners,
or other person or persons so neglecting or refusing to do the same, shall for
every Market Day forfeit Ten pounds, the one half to the Kings Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, and the other half to him or them that will Inform and
Sue for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law
shall be admitted or allowed; And such person as shall come to such Market Town
to make such Entry or Payment of the Duties, The Penalty.
and shall tender the same according to the said Acts, and be able to prove
such Tender by the Oath of one or more sufficient Witnesses, shall not be
liable to any Penalty or Forfeiture imposed by the said Acts, for such weekly
or monthly Entries or Payments as should have been made or paid on such
Market Day; any Article, Clause or Thing in any or either of the said Acts, or
this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

September, At what times only Brewers may carry out their deer.
No common Brewer of Beer or Ale, shall Sell, Deliver or Carry out any Beer or
Ale to any his Customers, either in whole Cask, or by the Gallon, in any City,
Town-Corporate, or Market Town, before notice given to an Officer of Excise,
but between the hours of the day hereafter mentioned (That is to say) From the
Twenty fifth day of March, to the Twenty ninth day of September yearly, between
the hours of Three of the Clock in the morning, and Nine of the Clock in the
evening; and from the Nine and twentieth day of September, to the Five and
twentieth day of March yearly, between the hours of Five of the Clock in the
morning, and Seven of the Clock in the evening, upon pain that every Brewer
doing contrary hereunto, shall for every such Offense forfeit and lose the sum
of Twenty shillings for every Barrel of Beer or Ale that shall be so carried
out contrary to the true meaning of this Act, to be Levied and Recovered as in
and by this present Act is hereafter enacted and appointed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if any common
Brewer, Innkeeper, Victualler, or other Retailer of Beer or Ale, shall at any
time after the First day of September, after an account has been taken by the
said Gager or Gagers, of the quantity and quality of the Beer, Mingling of
strong and small worts.
Ale or Worts found in his Tun, and other Brewing Vessels, convert any part of
his small Beer or small Worts so taken account of, into strong Beer or Ale, by
mingling, letting down, or striking over any such strong Ale, or strong Worts,
into which, or amongst any such small Beer, or small Worts, and shall sell,
deliver out, or retail the same, or any part thereof, without giving notice to
the same Gager or Gagers of the quality so mingled and converted as aforesaid;
or if any such Brewer or Retailer as aforesaid, shall after the said time,
hide, conceal, or convey any Beer, Ale or Worts not Gaged, from the sight or
view of the Gager or Gagers appointed to take account of the same, whereby the
Kings Majesty, or His Commissioners or Farmers shall or may be defrauded in any
manner of wise, of the Duties due for the same, or any part thereof, every such
common Brewer, Victualler and Retailer, for every Barrel of Beer or Ale by him
or them so mingled, converted, sold, delivered, hid, concealed or conveyed
away, contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, shall forfeit and lose
the sum of Twenty shillings, to be levied and recovered in manner and form as
in and by this present Act is hereafter Ordained and appointed.

And be it further Declared and Enacted, That all and every the
Brewing-Vessels, Brewing-Vessels and Vtensils subject to the debts and
penalties of Excise.
and Vtensils for Brewing, into whose hands soever the same shall come, and by
what Conveyance or Title soever the same be claimed, shall be liable and
subject unto, and are hereby charged with all and singular the Debts and Duties
of Excise in arrear, and owing by any person or persons for any Beer or Ale
made within the said Brew House, and shall also be subject to all Penalties and
Forfeitures incurred

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That after the first day of
September, Brewers that brew for other Brewers.
no common Brewer of Beer or Ale, nor any other person whatsoever, who has or
shall compound for the Duties of Excise for Beer or Ale by him brewed, or to be
brewed, shall during the term of such Composition, Brew, or make, or suffer, or
permit any Beer or Ale to be brewed or made within his Brew House, for any
other common Brewer whatsoever, without first giving notice, as well of every
particular brewing, as of the quantity and quality of the Beer and Ale at every
such Brewing intended to be brewed and made, unto the respective Commissioners,
Farmers or Sub-Commissioners of Excise, within the Districts of whose Office
such common Brewer does or shall inhabit, and forthwith paying down unto the
said respective Commissioners, Farmers or Sub-Commissioners, the full Excise of
all the said Beer and Ale, upon pain that as well the Brewer who shall brew the
same, as the Brewer for whom the said Beer or Ale shall be brewed, shall
forfeit and lose for every Barrel the sum of Five pounds, the one moiety to the
Kings Majesty, and the other moiety to the Informer that shall sue for the same
in any Court of Record.

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That from and after the said
first day of September, no person or persons shall be permitted to sell or
retail any Coffee, Chocolate, Coffee, Chocolate, Sherbet, Tea.
Sherbet or Tea, without License first obtained and had by Order of the General
Sessions of the Peace in the several and respective Counties, Certificate being
first showed that they have given good Security for the due payment of their
dues to the King, or the chief Magistrate of the place in whose Jurisdiction he
or they do or shall inhabit or dwell, for the Selling or Retailing of the same;
Nor shall any License be granted to any Retailer, until Security first given by
Recognizance or otherwise: For which License, Recognizance and Security, Twelve
pence shall be given, and no more, for the payment of the Excise. And every
person or persons Selling or Retailing any of the said Liquors without License
had, and Security given as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose the sum of Five
pounds for every month he or they shall continue Selling or Retailing the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Gagers may take no
bribes nor rewards, to make false returns.
That from and after the said first day of September, no Brewer or other person
whatsoever shall Bribe or Corrupt, or give any Money, Fee, or other Reward
whatsoever to any Gager or Gagers, or other Officer whatsoever, to make any
false Return or Report into the Office of Excise, of any Beer, Ale, or other
Liquors Exciseable, made or brewed, or to be made or brewed, within his or
their Charge, Division or Walk, or to forbear or omit the doing or executing of
his or their Places or Employments, upon penalty of Ten pounds for every such
Offense; And that no Sworn Gager or Gagers, or other Officer

And for the better Levying and Collecting the Duties of Excise upon all
Foreign or Imported Liquors; Be it Enacted by Authority aforesaid, Foreign
Liquors imported to be duly entered.
That no such Foreign or Imported Liquors shall be landed or put on shore out
of any Ship or Vessel from beyond the Seas, before due Entry be first made
thereof, with the Officer and Collector appointed for the Excise, in the Port
or Place where the same shall be Imported, or before the Duty of Excise due and
payable for the same be fully satisfied and paid; And that every Warrant for
the landing or delivering of any such Foreign Liquors shall be Signed by the
hand of the said Officer or Collector of the Excise, in the said Port or Place
respectively; upon pain that all such Foreign Liquors as shall be landed, put
on shore or delivered, contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, or
without the presence of an Officer or Waiter for the Excise, or the value
thereof, shall be forfeited and lost, the one moiety to the Kings Majesty, and
the other moiety to him or them who shall or will Seize, Inform or Sue for the
same, to be recovered of the Importer or Proprietor thereof.

And that no person or persons whatsoever bringing any Exciseable Liquors
(except Beer, Ale, Sider, Perry and Metheglin) into any part or place of this
Realm, by Coast, Cocquet, Transire or Certificate, nor any person or persons to
whom the same, or any of them shall be consigned, shall land, or cause any such
Exciseable Liquors (except before excepted) to be landed or put on shore,
without making or causing due Entry to be made of the same, with the Officer or
Officers of the Excise for the time being, appointed to receive and take such
Entries within the Port or Place where the same shall be landed, upon pain in
every such case as aforesaid, to forfeit double the value of the said Liquors
landed or put on shore contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof.

Appeals in causes of Excise.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted and Ordained by Authority aforesaid,
That no Appeal in any Cause of Excise whatsoever shall be admitted, until the
Party Appellant shall have first Deposited and laid down the single Duty of
Excise in the hands of the Commissioners, Farmers or Sub-Commissioners of
Excise within whose Jurisdiction or Division the said Cause was originally
heard and determined, and have given Security to the Commissioners of Appeal,
or Justice of the Peace respectively where such Cause is to be finally
Adjudged, for all such Fine, Forfeiture and Penalty, as upon such hearing and
determination was Adjudged against him; And that if upon the hearing and
determining of any such Appeal, the said Original Judgment shall happen to be
reversed and made null, then, and in every such case, the said Commissioners,
Farmers, or Sub-Commissioners of Excise in whose hands the said single Duty of
Excise was deposited, shall restore and deliver back the same, or as much
thereof as shall be adjudged by the Commissioners of Appeals, or Justices of
the Peace respectively to the said Appellant, and the party originally
prosecuted, shall pay him double Costs. But in case the first Judgment shall be
affirmed, the party Appealing shall pay the like Costs unto the Commissioner or
Commissioners complained of; Any thing in this Act, or any other Act or Statute
whatsoever to the contrary thereof contained in any wise notwithstanding.

Excise upon Vinegar-beer.
And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That all and every person or
persons whatsoever, Brewing or Making any Beer, whether in a common Brew House,
or otherwise for sale, or to convert into Vinegar for sale, shall pay for every
Barrel of such Vinegar-Beer so made and brewed, the several and respective sums
already imposed and set by any the Acts of Excise above mentioned, upon
Vinegar-Beer brewed by any common Brewer in any common Brew House; Any thing in
the said Acts, or either of them, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Colleges and Halls in the University.
And is it hereby further Declared, That every College and Hall in either of
the Universities, which before the Duty of Excise was imposed, did brew their
own Beer and Ale within their own Precincts, and size it out to their
respective Members within their own Precincts only, are not liable to the
payment of any Duty of Excise for the same, either by this or any the
forementioned Acts.

Complaints to be determined in the proper counties.
in order to the payment of the Duty of Excise, shall be heard and determined
in the proper County, or in the several Ridings and Divisions of Yorkshire and
Lincolnshire, where they shall arise, and not elsewhere.

Commissioners or Farmers may take no Fees.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Farmer,
Commissioner, Sub-Commissioner, or other Officer of Excise, shall directly or
indirectly take or receive any Money, Fee or Reward, for or concerning the
taking of any Bond, or giving any Receipt or Note in Writing, relating to the
Excise, to or from any person or persons whatsoever, upon pain that every such
person so offending shall for every such offense forfeit the sum of Ten
shillings.

Who may hear and determine matters upon this Act.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
Peace, or any two or more of them, or Chief Magistrates in the several
Counties, Cities, Divisions and Places within England and Wales respectively,
shall meet once in every month in their respective Divisions, or oftener if
there shall be occasion, to hear, determine, and to adjudge all matters and
offenses against this or the aforesaid Acts.

How the penalties upon this Act shall be disposed and recovered.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That one third part of
all Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures not herein otherwise disposed, shall be to
the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and one other third part to the
poor of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed, and the other third
part to him that shall inform and sue for the same; And that all Fines,
Penalties and Forfeitures for which no remedy is Ordained for recovery thereof
by this Act, shall be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Informations
in any Court of Record within such County, City or Corporation where the
Offense shall be committed, or by such other ways and means, and in such manner
as by the said former Act is directed and appointed.

Appeals for matters in London, and the limits thereof.
Provided always, That after the said Third day of September, no Appeal in any
Matter or Cause of Excise within the immediate Limits of the Chief Office of
London, nor within the Limits of the present Farm of London, during the
continuance of such Farm, shall be admitted, unless the same be brought within
Two Months next after the first Judgment, and notice thereof given or left at
the Dwelling House of the party or parties concerned therein; nor shall any
Appeal in any Matter or Cause of Excise in any other County, City, Town or
Place, be admitted, unless the same be brought within Four Months after the
first Judgment, and notice given as aforesaid; Any thing in this Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, And it is hereby Enacted, That no Commissioner, Farmer,
No Commissioner or other may act until he have taken the Oath in the Act of. 12
Car. 2. cap. 23.
Sub-Commissioner or other person employed, or to be employed in the Farming,
Collecting or taking Accounts for the Duty of Excise, do after the First day of
September next, take upon him or them any such Office, or proceed in execution
of any such Employment, until he or they have first taken the Oaths appointed
to be taken by the Act of Parliament, Entitled, A Grant of certain Impositions
on Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for the increase of His Majesty's Revenue
during His life, before the respective persons appointed in the said Act of
Parliament, and have Entered his Certificate for taking the said Oaths, with the
Auditor for Excise, under the penalty of Fifty pounds for every Month he or
they shall so neglect to take the same.

CAP. XII.
An Explanatory Act, for Recovery of the Arrears of Excise.

BE it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons
in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That where
any Commissioner, Sub-Commissioner, Treasurer, In what cases Sureties for
Excise shall be answerable for the arrears. 12 Car. 2. cap. 11.
and all other Officers which were heretofore employed in the Receipt of the
Excise, Farmer or Collector of Excise, which are and stands charged with, or
accomptable for any Duties of Excise by him or them received, farmed or
detained, or any ways due from the persons before named, or any of them, and
not pardoned by the late Act, Entitled, An Act of Free and General Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion; That there, and in such case, all and every the
Sureties of such person and persons charged or chargeable as aforesaid, shall
be deemed and taken to be liable and answerable according to the nature of
their respective Securities; Any doubt or question made touching the
Construction of the said late Act of Free and General Pardon to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where
the Commissioners of Excise for the time being, or the major part of them have
Issued out any Summons or Warning, which has been left at the house, or usual
place of residence, or with the Wife, Child, or menial Servant of any the
aforesaid person or persons Chargeable or Accomptable as aforesaid, The same
shall be deemed and adjudged a good and sufficient Summons, and as legal and
effectual a notice as if the same had been actually delivered to the proper
hands of such person or persons to whom the same was directed; Any doubt or
question thereof made to the contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. XIII.
An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Revenue arising
by Hearth-Money.

Whereas the Revenue Settled on His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, by a
late Act, 14 Car. 2. cap. 10.
Entitled (An Act for Establishing an Additional Revenue upon His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, for the better support of His and their Crown and
Dignity) has been much obstructed for want of true and just Accounts under the
hands of the respective Occupiers of Houses, Edifices, Lodgings and Chambers,
as by the said Act is required, and by the negligence of Constables and other
Officers entrusted with the Taking and Reforming such Accounts: Be it therefore
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Justices of the Peace of
the respective Counties, How the Justices of the Peace shall cause accounts to
be taken of the number of Hearths.
Corporations, Places and Limits within their respective Jurisdictions, at the
next Sessions to be held after the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next
ensuing, or the major part of them then present, shall issue out Warrants under
their Hands and Seals to the respective High Constables, or other like next
Officer, who shall issue the like Warrants unto the Petty Constables,
Head-boroughs and Tythingmen, requiring them on the next Sunday, after
Morning-Service ended, to give public notice in the Church or Chapel
generally to all the Inhabitants, and also to give notice publicly in the
Church, and particularly as aforesaid to every Inhabitant within their
respective Precincts, that shall then be Occupier of any House, Edifice,
Lodging or Chamber, That within Ten days next after such notice, he give a true
and just account in writing under his hand, of all Hearths and Stoves in such
respective House, Edifice, Lodging and Chamber, unto such respective Constable,
Head-borough and Tythingman; who upon receipt of such Account, shall with Two
other substantial Inhabitants of the said respective Precinct, whom they are
hereby Authorized to Charge for that purpose, in the daytime enter into the
respective House, Edifice, Lodging and Chamber, and upon his own view compare
such Account, and see whether the same be truly made or not, and endorse the
same Account accordingly to what he finds upon his view; which Account so
received and endorsed, shall be by him transmitted within twenty days after
such Receipt to the respective High-Constable, or other like Officer as
aforesaid, together with a Book or Roll fairly written, wherein shall be Two
Columes, The one containing the Names of the persons, and number of Hearths and
Stoves in their respective Possessions, that are chargeable by the said Act;
and the other the Names of the persons, and number of Hearths and Stoves in
their respective possessions, which are not chargeable by the said Act: Which
being so received by such respective High Constable, or other like Officer as
aforesaid, and compared together, shall within six days after such Receipt be
transmitted to the two next respective Justices of the Peace, who are hereby
empowered

Penalty for omitting any Hearth.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Occupier of any House, Edifice, Lodging or Chamber, shall not make, or cause to
be made an Account, or shall omit in his Account required to be made by this
Act, any Hearth or Stove; he shall for every such Hearth or Stove he shall so
omit, forfeit the sum of Forty shillings.

Penalty upon Constables for neglect.
Provided also, That if any Petty Constable, Headborough or Tythingman to whom
such Accounts as aforesaid shall come, shall neglect to transmit the same,
together with a Book or Roll in manner and time aforesaid, to the respective
High Constable, or other like Officer as aforesaid, or shall make default in
giving such notice as aforesaid, or in comparing the Account with two
substantial Inhabitants as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such offense, the
sum of Five pounds.

High-Constables.
Provided also, That if any High-Constable, or other like Officer as aforesaid,
shall neglect to compare the said Original Accounts and the said Book or Roll,
or to transmit the same in manner and time aforesaid, he shall for every such
Offense forfeit the sum of Ten pounds. All which before mentioned Forfeitures
and Penalties shall be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, the one half to the use
of his Majesty, the other half to the use of him or them that shall sue for the
same.

Prejudice by charge of annual officers remedied.
And whereas His Majesty's said Revenue settled by the aforesaid Act, has been
much prejudiced by Annual changing of Petty Constables, Headboroughs,
Tythingmen, High-Constables and Sheriffs, to whom the Collecting and Receipt of
His Majesty's said Revenue is thereby entrusted; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the changing of such Annual Officers, or leaving of
their said Offices, shall not excuse or disable any person who shall be
Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, High-Constable or Sheriff at the time that
any Revenue or Duty shall grow due or payable by the said Act, from Collecting,
Distraining and Receiving respectively such Revenue or Duty so grown due; but
that every such person in such case is hereby

Penalty for neglecting to distrain, receive, or pay over the said duty.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
who by the said, or this Act, ought to Collect, Distrain for, Receive or Pay
over any the said Revenue, shall neglect or refuse to do his duty therein, for
every week he shall neglect or refuse, he shall forfeit the sum of Twenty
shillings, to be recovered in manner, and by such person or persons as the
aforesaid Forfeitures by this Act are to be recovered.

All persons may be called in aid to distrain.
Provided also, and be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
in all cases which by this or the aforesaid Act, any Petty Constable,
Headborough or Tythingman may enter into the house of any person, or he may
distrain the Goods of any person, he may call to his aid any two sufficient
Inhabitants of the respective Townships or Precincts, who are hereby enjoined
to assist him therein.

Sheriffs appointed Collectors, may make their Deputies.
Provided also, and be it Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
where any Sheriff is by the aforesaid Act appointed to be Collector of any part
of the said Revenue, that such Sheriff may execute the said place of Collector,
by such Deputy or Deputies as to him shall seem meet, being thereunto appointed
under the Great Seal of his Office, or under his own hand and seal; Any thing
in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Treasurers and Officers of the Inns of Court, Chancery, Colleges, etc.
Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
respective Treasurers, and other Officers of the respective Inns of Court, Inns
of Chancery, Colleges, and other Societies chargeable by the aforesaid Act for
their Hearths and Stoves, shall do all things as the respective Constables by
this Act are enjoined to do, under the like Penalties, though without any
Warrant from the respective Justices of the Peace; And that every Occupier of
any House, Edifice, Lodging or Chamber within any the respective Inns of Court,
Inns of Chancery, Colleges and Societies aforesaid, shall do all things, and
under the like Penalties as are required by this Act of any Occupier of any
House, Edifice, Lodging or Chamber elsewhere.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Westminster.
That the High Bailiff of Westminster for the time being, or his or their
Deputy or Deputies, may within the City and Liberties of Westminster, from and
after the Eight and twentieth day of September next, Collect and Levy the said
Duty, and put in execution all the Powers of the said former Act, and this
present Act, as amply as any Sheriffs who by the said former Act are made
Collectors, may do within their respective Limits and Jurisdictions appointed
to them by the said Act: And the said Bailiff for the time being shall be
subject to the same Penalties and Duties as the said Sheriffs are, and shall
receive the same reward; and the Sheriff of Middlesex for the time being is
discharged from putting in execution the Trust aforesaid in the said City and
Liberty of Westminster, from the said Eight and twentieth day of September,
saving only for the Collecting of such arrears as then shall happen to be: And
the Constables and Headboroughs, and other Officers within the said City and
Liberty of Westminster, shall deliver unto the said Bailiff, Duplicates of all
Accounts of Hearths and Stoves, and do all other things in such manner as by
the said Act they ought to have done unto the said Sheriffs; any thing in the
said, or this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Bailiff of the Borough Southwark for the time being, his Deputy or Deputies
may within the said Borough, Southwark.
and other Liberties of Southwark, from and after the Eight and twentieth day
of September next, Collect and Levy the said Duty, and put in execution all the
Powers of the said former Act, and this present Act, as amply as any Sheriffs
who by the said former Act are made Collectors may do within their respective
Limits and Jurisdictions appointed to them by the said Act; and the said
Bailiff for the time being shall be subject to the same Penalties and Duties,
as the said Sheriffs are, and shall receive the same reward; and the Sheriff of
Surrey for the time being is discharged from putting in execution the trust
aforesaid in the said Borough and Liberties of Southwarke, from the said Eight
and twentieth day of September; And the Constables and other Officers within
the said Borough and Liberties, shall deliver unto the said Bailiff,
Duplicates of all Accounts of Hearths and Stoves, and do all other things in
such manner as by the said Acts they ought to have done unto the said Sheriffs;
Any thing in the said former or this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the Lord High Treasurer of England, Allowance to
Clerks of the the Peace of the several Counties.
and the Chancellor of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, or either of them, to
give and make such further allowance unto the Clerks of the Peace of the
respective Counties of this Kingdom (for their labor and pains in and about
the Writing, Engrossing and Returning into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
the Duplicates and Returns of the several Constables, in Parchment, over and
besides what is allowed by the said first recited Act) as the said Lord High
Treasurer and Chancellor, or either of them shall think meet and convenient,
the same allowance not exceeding One penny in the pound by the year; Any thing
in the said former, or in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. XIV.
The Profits of the Post Office, and Power of Granting Wine-Licenses settled on
His Royal Highness the Duke of York, and the Heirs Males of his Body.

WHereas the Lords and Commons being assembled at Westminster the Five and
twentieth day of April, Anno Domini One thousand six hundred and sixty, in the
Twelfth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. were there continued until the Nine and twentieth
day of December next following, and then Dissolved; In which time a certain Act
was made, Entitled, 12 Car. 2. cap. 25.
An Act for the better Ordering the selling of Wines by Retail, and for
preventing Abuses in the mingling, corrupting, and vitiating of Wines, and for
settling and limiting the prices of the same: Whereby it was Enacted, That no
person or persons whatsoever, from and after the Five and twentieth day of
March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and one, unless
he or they should be authorized and enabled in manner and form as by the said
Act is appointed, shall sell or utter by Retail any kind of Wine or Wines to be
spent in his or their Mansion House or Houses, or other place by any means
whatsoever, upon pain of forfeiting for every such offense, the Sum of Five
pounds, the one moiety thereof to the King, and the other moiety to him or them
that will sue for the same.

And it was further thereby Enacted, That it should be lawful for His Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, from time to time to issue out under his or their
Great Seal of England One or more Commission or Commissions directed to two or
more persons, thereby authorizing them to license, and give authority to such
person or persons as they should think fit, to sell and utter by Retail, all or
other place in the Tenure or Occupation of the party so Licensed, as without,
in any City, Town or other place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; and such Commissioners are to Contract
for selling and uttering of Wines by Retail in any City or other place, as
aforesaid, in such manner and form, and under such Provisoes as in the said Act
is mentioned. And it is further provided by the said Act, That the Rents,
Revenues, and Sums of money arising by the said Act should be duly and
constantly paid, and answered into His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, and not
be charged or chargeable, either before it be paid into the Exchequer, or
after, with any Gift or Pension; as by the said Act, amongst diverse other
Provisoes and Clauses may more at large appear.

And also one other Act was at the same time made, Entitled, An Act for
Erecting and Establishing a Post Office: 12 Car. 2. cap. 34.
Whereby it is Enacted, That from thenceforth there should be one general
Letter-Office erected and established in some convenient place within the City
of London, from whence all Letters and Pacquets may be sent into any part of
the Kingdom of England, Scotland and Ireland, or other of His Majesty's
Dominions, or unto any Kingdom or Country beyond the Seas: And that one Master
of the said General Letter-Office, shall be from time to time appointed by the
Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, by His or their Letters Patents, under
the Great Seal of England, The Office of Postmaster General.
by the name and style of His Majesty's Post-Master-General; which said
Postmaster and his Deputy and Deputies, by him thereunto sufficiently
authorized, and his and their Servants and Agents, and no other person shall
have the receiving, ordering or sending Post of all Letters, and Pacquets
whatsoever, to be sent to and from the places aforesaid (except as therein and
thereby is excepted) And it was thereby provided, That such
Post-Master-General, and his Deputy and Deputies may demand, have, receive and
take for the Portage

Now forasmuch as the Kings most Excellent Majesty is graciously pleased out of
His Princely care, and great love and affection to His most entirely beloved
Brother James Duke of York, for and toward the Maintenance and Support of the
said Duke his State and Dignity, to Grant and Assign all and every the Power
and Powers, Authority and Authorities of giving License to any person or
persons to Sell or Utter by Retail, all and every, or any kind of Wine or Wines
whatsoever, with all Rents, Sum or Sums of Money, Revenues, Profits and
Emoluments whatsoever, that shall or may arise from, or out, or by reason of
such power of Licensing the Retailing of Wines, or Forfeitures for Retailing of
Wines without such Licenses, unto the said James Duke of York, and to the Heirs
males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten: And also all the Rents, Sum and
Sums of money, and Revenues that shall arise, grow, and become due of, or from
the said General Letter-Office, or Post Office, or Office of
Post-Master-General, unto the said James Duke of York, and the Heirs males of
his Body begotten, or to be begotten.

The Powers of granting Wine Licenses entailed upon the Duke of York.
and by the Authority of the same, That the said James Duke of York, and the
Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, shall have all and every
the Powers and Authorities aforesaid, to give and grant Licenses to such person
or persons as he or they shall think fit, to Sell and Utter by Retail, all and
every, or any kind of Wine or Wines whatsoever to be drunk and spent, as well
within the house and houses, or other place in the Tenure or Occupation of the
party so Licensed, as without in any City, Town, or other place whatsoever
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town and Port of Berwick
upon Tweed, Together with all Benefits and Profits thereof. And also that the
said Duke, and the Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, shall
have that moiety of the Forfeitures and Penalties, which by the said recited
Act is given to his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors.

And it is hereby further Declared, That all and every other person or persons,
which from time to time, or at any times hereafter shall be by the said James
Duke of York, and the Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten,
appointed, authorized or deputed Agent or Agents, Commissioner or Commissioners
to Treat and Contract for giving Licenses and Dispensations to any person or
persons for the Selling and Uttering Wines by Retail in any City or Town, or
other place, as aforesaid, shall have the full and sole power and authority to
Treat and Contract for giving Licenses to any person or persons for the Selling
and Uttering Wines by Retail in any City, Town or other place, as aforesaid,
any Law, Statute, Grant, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, in as full and ample manner as the Kings Agents or
Commissioners might do by virtue of the said recited Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such person or or
persons as shall James Duke of York, or the Heirs males of his body begotten,
or to be begotten, under his or their Hand and Seal, for granting Licenses for
Selling and Uttering Wines by Retail, are hereby enabled under such Seal as the
said Duke, or the Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, shall
appoint, to grant Licenses for the Selling and Uttering Wines by Retail to any
person or persons, or for any time or times, not exceeding One and Twenty
years, if such persons shall so long live, and for such Yearly Rents, and under
such Conditions as they shall think fit, so as no Fine be taken for the same,
but that the Rents or Sums of money so agreed for and reserved, shall be duly
paid at the times and places agreed for the payment thereof; for which Rents so
reserved, in case the same shall not be paid, the said Duke, and the Heirs
males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, shall and may have power by this
Act to sue for the same by Bill, Plaint, or Action of Debt in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or elsewhere, in his own Name; or to
sue for the same in His Majesty's Name in the Court of the Exchequer, at the
Election of the said Duke, and the Heirs males of his body begotten, or to be
begotten: And that the discharge of the said James Duke of York, and of the
Heirs males of his body begotten, or to be begotten, or of his or their
Receiver General for the time being, shall be a full and effectual discharge to
all intents and purposes, for all such moneys as have, or shall be received by
virtue of the Act for Wine-Licenses.

Provided always, That the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, shall not
during the continuance of the said Estate Tail, by himself or Agents, grant any
Commission or Commissions, License or Licenses, for the Selling or Uttering of
any Wines by Retail.

And also Provided, That nothing in this Act contained, shall make void any
Contracts, Leases

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the yearly
Rents, Rents and profits arising by the Letter-Office.
Sum or Sums of money, Revenues, Issues and Profits whatsoever that shall grow
due, accrue, or be payable unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for or
by reason of the said general Letter-Office or Post-ffice, or Office of
Postmaster General, or annexed, incident or belonging to the said Post Office,
or general Letter-Office, or Office of Post-Master-General, or Issuing out of
the same, or accrewing or growing due for, or by reason of the same, shall be,
and hereby are vested and settled by virtue of this Act upon the said James Duke
of York, and the Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, with full
and sole power from time to time for the said Duke, and the Heirs males of his
Body begotten, or to be begotten, his and their Receivers-General to receive
all and every the said Rents, Issues and Profits accrewing for, or issuing out
of the said Office; and from time to time to give Discharges for the money so
received.

Provided always, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Not to be paid
into the Exchequer.
That none of the said yearly Rents, Issues and Profits arising, growing due,
accrewing or issuing out of the said general Letter-Office, or Post Office, or
Office of Post-Master-General, shall for, and during the said Estate Tail, be
paid into the Exchequer, but only to the said Duke, and to the Heirs males of
his Body begotten, or to begotten, his or their Receiver-General for the time
being: And also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Duke, and
for the Heirs males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten, in the name of His
Majesty, How to be recovered.
his Heirs or Successors, or in his or their own name to sue for the same, by
Bill, Plaint, Information, Action of Debt, or otherwise, in any Court or Courts
of Law or Equity, wherein no Protection, Wager

Provided also, Proviso for Daniel Oneale, Esquire. EXP.
That nothing herein contained shall make void the Grant made by His Majesty to
Daniel Oneale Esquire, of the Office of Post-Master-General, or general
Letter-Office, or Post Office, for four years, and one quarter of a year, from
the said Five and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred sixty and three, under the yearly Rent of One and twenty thousand
five hundred pounds for all the said Term (Except the last Quarter, which is
paid aforehand) so as the said Rents be paid unto his said Highness James Duke
of York, and to the Heirs Males of his Body begotten, or to be begotten.

Provided also, And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, That it shall
and may be lawful for the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, at any time
or times, during the said Estate Tail, by Warrant under His Privy Seal to
charge any Sum, or several Sums of Money, not exceeding in the whole the Sum of
Five thousand three hundred fourscore and two pounds ten shillings, to be paid
out of the profits of the Office of Post-Master-General; to the which said Sum
of Five thousand three hundred fourscore and two pounds ten shillings, the
several Sums and Payments now already charged thereupon, do in the whole
amount, (the Grant of which Sums are not to be avoided by this Act) And which
said Sums of Money, not exceeding the said Sum of Five thousand three hundred
fourscore and two pounds ten shillings, to be granted by His Majesty as
aforesaid, are and shall be by Authority of this Act confirmed and made in full
force.

His Majesty may nominate the Post-Master-General.
Provided further, That the Kings most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors shall have the nomination of the Post-Master-General of the said
Post Office, and shall from time to time nominate and appoint such person and
persons as he or they shall please, to be Post-Master-General of the said
Office, and may grant the same Office with the Power and Authority thereunto
belonging, and the said Rates of Portage in the said Act mentioned, either for
site, or term of years, not exceeding One and Twenty years to such person or
persons, as he or they shall think fit, under the most improved yearly Rent
that can be reasonably

The Duke may jointure any wife in a third part of the Profits.
Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, That it shall and may be lawful,
to, and for the said James Duke of York, and the Heirs males of his Body
begotten, and to be begotten, to settle any part of the said Premises, not
exceeding a Third part of the clear yearly value, over and above all Charges
and Reprises, for a Ioynture for his or their Wife or Wives; and also to Lease
any other part of the said Premises for any number of years, not exceeding One
and Twenty years, and not exceeding one other third part of the clear yearly
value of the Premises, over and above all other Charges and Reprises, in order
to raise Portions for his or their younger Children.

Proviso for the Universities.
Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any
wise be prejudicial to the Privilege of the two Universities of this Land, or
either of them, or to the Chancellor or Scholars of the same, or their
Successors, but that they may use and enjoy such Privileges as heretofore they
have lawfully used and enjoyed; Any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Proviso for the company of Vintners of London.
Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend,
or be prejudidicial to the Master, Wardens, and Freemen and Commonalty of the
Mystery of Vintners of the City of London, or to any other City or Town
Corporate, but that they may use and enjoy such Liberties and Privileges, as
heretofore they have lawfully used and enjoyed; Any thing herein contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act, or
any thing therein contained, Proviso for the Borough of St. Albans.
shall not in any wise extend to debar or hinder the Mayor and Burgesses of the
Borough of Saint Albans in the County of Hertford, or their Successors, from
enjoying, using, and exercising of all such Liberties, Powers and Authorities
to them heretofore granted by several Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of
England by Queen Elizabeth and King James, of famous Memories, for the
Erecting, Appointing, and Licensing of Three several Wine-Taverns within the
Borough aforesaid, for and toward the maintenance of the Free School there;
but that the same Liberties, Powers and Authorities shall be, and are hereby
established and confirmed, and shall remain, and continue in, and to the said
Mayor and Burgesses and their Successors, to and for the Charitable use
aforesaid, and according to the tenor of the Letters Patents aforesaid, as
though this Act had never been made; Any thing herein contained to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

Proviso for the University Letters.
Provided always, That all Letters and other things may be sent or conveyed to
or from the two Universities, in manner as heretofore has been used; Any thing
herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. XV.
The Manufactures of making Linen Cloth and Tapistry encouraged.

The inconvenience by importing foreign materials of Linen and Tapistry
Hangings.
Whereas vast quantities of Linen Cloth, and other Manufactures of Hemp and
Flax, and of Tapistry Hangings are daily Imported into this Kingdom from
Foreign parts, to the great Detriment and Impoverishment thereof, the Moneys
and quick-stock of this Kingdom being thereby daily exhausted and diminished,
and the poor thereof unimployed, while the Materials for the making of such
Hangings are here more plentiful, and better and cheaper then in those places
from whence they are Imported; And Flax and Hemp might be had here in great
abundance, and very good, if by setting up the Manufactures of such Commodities
as are made thereof, it would be taken off the hands of such as sow and plant
the same;

Encouragement of English Manufactures.
For the Encouragement therefore of those Manufactures, Be it Enacted, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That from and after the
first day of October next ensuing, It shall and may be lawful for any person or
persons whatsoever, Native or Foreigner, freely and without paying any
Acknowledgement, Fee, or other Gratuity for the same in any place of England
and Wales, In the occupation of dressing and ustng of Hemp and Flax.
privileged or unpriviledged, Corporate or not Corporate, to set up and
exercise the Trade, Occupation or Mystery of breaking, hickling or dressing of
Hemp or Flax; as also for making and whitening of Thread; as also of Spinning,
Weaving, Making, Whitening or Bleching of any sort of Cloth whatsoever made of
Hemp or Flax only: As also the Trade, Occupation or Mystery of making of Twine
or Nets for Fishery, or of Stoving of Cordage: As also the Trade, Making of
tapestry hanginge. Foreigners may use those trades and enjoy all privileges as
natura born subjects. Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.
Occupation or Mystery of making any sort of Tapistry-Hangings; Any Law,
Statute or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And all Foreigners that shall really, and bona fide set up and use any of the
Trades and Manufactures aforesaid, by the space of three years in this Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall from
thenceforth, taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before two Justices
of the Peace near unto their dwellings, who are hereby authorized to administer
the same, enjoy all Privileges whatsoever as the Natural born Subjects of this
Kingdom.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared, That such Foreigners as shall exercise
any of the Trades aforesaid by virtue of this Act shall not at any time be
liable to any other or greater Taxes, Payments or Impositions then such as are
or shall be paid by his Majesty's Natural born Subjects, unless in case they
shall use and exercise Merchandise into, and from Foreign parts, in which case
they shall be liable to pay such Customs as have usually been paid by Aliens
during the space of Five years next ensuing, and no longer.

CAP. XVI.
Herring and other Fisheries Regulated; And a Repeal of the Act concerning
Madder.

FOr the prevention of abuses in the packing and ordering of Herrings, and
bringing that Commodity into Credit in Foreign parts beyond the Seas, Be it
Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That from and after the first day of August, One thousand six hundred sixty
four, No white or red Herrings of English catching, shall be put to sale in
England, Wales, How herrings shall be packed
or in the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, but what shall be packed in lawful
Barrels or Vessels, and which shall be well, truly and justly laid and packed;
And shall be of one time of Taking, Salting, Saving or Drying, and equally well
packed in the midst, and every part of the Barrel or Vessel, and by a sworn
Packer; And the Barrel or Vessel marked or branded by such sworn Packer, with a
mark or brand denoting the gage of the Barrel or Vessel, and the quantity,
quality and condition of the Herrings packed therein, and the Town or place
where they were packed; And the Bailiffs of Great Yarmouth for the time being,
and the Mayor, Bailiffs or other Head-Officer for the time being of every Port,
Haven or Creek out of which any vessels or ships do proceed to fish for
Herrings, are hereby authorized and required before the first day of July, Able
packers to be appointed and sworn.
in the year One thousand six hundred sixty four, and before the first day of
July in every year after, to appoint for their respective Haven, Port or Creek,
a competent number of able and experienced Packers, to view and pack all such
white or red Herrings of English catching, as shall be brought into their Port,
Haven or Creek, and well and truly to mark and brand the Barrels or Vessels
into which they shall be packed, with such mark or brand as is above directed,
and to administer to them yearly an Oath, (which Oath they are hereby
authorized and appointed to give to them) for the well and true doing thereof
according to this Act. Penalty for not appointing and swearing packers.
And in case the said Bailiffs of Great Yarmouth, or the Mayor, Bailiffs or
other Head-Officer for the time being of any such Port, Haven or Creek, shall
not appoint and swear such Packers before such time in every year as is by this
Act required, they shall for every default forfeit the sum of One hundred
pounds of lawful money of England; one moiety to his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors, and the other moiety to him or them that shall inform or sue for
the same in any Court of Record, by Bill, Plaint or other Action, wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed: And for the better
regulating of the Island, and Westmony Fisheries, We^y, Island.
and Preservation of the Spawn of fish there, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the five and twentieth
day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty three, no ship or vessel shall
proceed upon a Fishing-Voyage for Island or Westmony out of any Port, Haven or
Creek in England or Wales, or out of the Port of Berwick upon Tweed, until the
tenth day of March in any year, upon the pain of the forfeiture of every such
ship or vessel, with all her Furniture, Tackle and Apparel, and of all the fish
caught in such ship or vessel. And it is hereby further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons whatsoever, do collect, levy or
take, or cause to be collected, levied or taken in New Foundland any Toll,
New Foundland.
or other duty of or for any Cod or Poor John, or other fish of English
catching, under pain of the loss of double the value of what shall be by them
levied, collected or taken, or caused to be collected, levied or taken; And
that no Planter or other person or persons whatsoever do cast or lay any Seem
or other Net, in or near any Harbor in New Foundland, whereby to take the
spawn or young Fry of the Poor John, or for any other use or uses, except for
the taking of Bait only, upon pain of the loss of all such Semes or Nets, and
of the fish taken in them, or of the value thereof, to be recovered in any of
his Majejesties Courts in New Foundland, or in any Court of Record in England
or Wales, by Bill, Plaint or other Action; wherein no Essoign, Protection or
Wager in Law shall be allowed.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Planter
or other person or persons whatsoever, None may destroy houses or spoil nets,
etc. for fishing in New Foundland. The penalty.
shall burn, destroy or steal any Boat, Cask, Salt, Nets or other Vtensils for
Fishing or making of Oil, or other goods or Merchandise left in any Harbor in
New Foundland, or Greenland by English; or burn, pull down or destroy any
house built by English in New Foundland or Greenland, to live in during the
Fishing season, or Stage built by them in either of the said places for the
saving or ordering of Fish, or making of Oil, upon pain of the loss of double
the value of what shall be by them stolen, burnt or destroyed, to be recovered
in any of his Majesty's Courts in New Foundland or Greenland respectively, or
in any Court of Record in England, by Bill, Plaint or other Action, wherein no
Essoign, Protection or Wager in Law shall be allowed.

A repeal of the Statute concerning Madder. 14 Car. 2. c. 30
And whereas upon the humble Petition and complaint of the Merchants and Salters
of the City of London, it does appear, That some sorts of Madder very useful
for Dying cannot be Imported so pure and clean, as by one Act passed the last
Session of this present Parliament, (Entitled, An Act for the Importation of
Madder pure and unmixed) is directed and appointed; Be it Enacted, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Act, and every Clause
and Thing therein contained be from henceforth utterly void and repealed to all
intents, purposes and Constructions whatsoever.

CAP. XVII.
An Act for settling the Dreining of the Great Level of the Fenns, called
Bedford Level.

Whereas certain Moors, Marshes, Fenny and Low surrounded Grounds within the
Counties of Northampton, Norfolk, Suffolk, Lincoln, Cambridg and Huntington,
and the Isle of Ely, were called the Great Level of the Fenns; And after
several fruitless undertakings for Dreining the same, were upon the Desires of
many persons of Worth and Interessed in the same, declared to be a Great and
Noble Work, and of much Concernment to the whole Country, and at their earnest
desire undertaken to be Dreined by Francis late Earl of Bedford, according to a
Law of Sewers made at Kings Lynne in the sixth year of the Reign of the late
King Charles of glorious memory; which said Level is bounded as follows,
(viz.) Eastward from the Bridge and Cawsey of Stoake, unto Brandon-Bridg upon
the Vplands of Northold, Methold, Feltwell, Hockwold, and Wilton in the County
of Norfolk; and from Brandon-Bridg unto the end of Worlington-Load upon
Mildenhall River, The great level of the fens, how bounded.
upon the Vplands of Brandon, the Low grounds of Wainsford excluding the same;
the Vplands of Sakingheath, the Low grounds of Earsewell excluding the same:
And the Vplands of Mildenhall in the County of Suffolk Southward from
Worlington-Load, unto Burwell Block upon the Vplands of Freckingham, Istham,
Fordham, Soham, and Wickin in the County of Cambridg, and excluding the Low
grounds of Burwell, Landward, and other places lying Eastward from Burwell
Block aforesaid, and from thence unto the Mill near Anglisey Abbey upon the
Vplands of Burwell Reach, Swaffham Pryor, Swaffham Bulbeck, and Botsham in the
County of Cambridg; and from thence unto the Ferry-place at Clayhith upon the
Vplands called Quyhall, the Low Ground called Low-Fenne, and the Vplands of
Hormingsey and Clayhith in the said County, excluding the Low grounds called
Low Fenne and Offenne; and from the said Ferry-place unto Over-Load upon the
Vplands of Water-Beach, Cottenham, Rampton, Winelingham and Over in the said
County of Cambridg, and upon the Low grounds of Swacy in the said County,
excluding the same Westward from Erith, unto the Dam lately made upon the River
Neane near Standground upon the Vplands of Somersham and the Soake thereof,
Warbois, Wistow Berry, Ramsey, Upwood, Raveley, Wood-walton, Sawtrey,
Connington, Glatton, and Holme Caldecott, Denton, Stilton, Yaxley, Fasset, and
Standground in the County of Huntington, excluding the Low grounds lying on the
North side of the River of Owse above Erith; and from the said Dam unto
Peterborough Bridge upon the said River of Neane; and from thence unto the
Ferry-place near Waldron Hall upon the Vplands of Peterborough, and the Soake
thereof in the County of Northampton; and Northward from the said Ferry-place
near Waldron Hall unto Crowland Bridge upon the River of Welland; and from
thence to Dowsedale upon the Bank of Great Porland; and from thence unto
Guyhurne upon the Southea Bank; and from thence unto Tilnehurne upon the Bank
of the Fenne Ground called Waldersea; and from thence unto Elm Leame at
Grangers House upon the Bank of the Fenne Ground called Coldham; and from
thence unto the River of Neane near Thurlings in Upwell upon the Bank of
Needham called Bishops Dike; and from thence unto Weil Creek, at the North-west
corner of Wassingham Fenne upon the Bank of the Grounds in Upwell and Outwell
called Playfield and Churchfield, excluding the aforesaid Fennes and Grounds
called Waldersea, Coldham, Needham, Playfield and Churchfield; and from thence
unto Salters-Load upon the New Podyke Bank, and from thence unto the mouth of
the River Wissey upon the River Owse, and from thence unto Helgey Bridge upon
the River Wissey, and from thence unto the Vplands at the end of the Bank of
the Grounds late of Edmond Skipwith Stoake Bridge upon the Vplands of Roxham,
Deereham, Weereham, Wretton and Stoake in the said County of Norfolk; Except
the imbanked Grounds late of Edmond Skipwith Esquire, lying on the North side
of the River of Owse; And whereas the said Francis late Earl of Bedford was to
have for his recompense of effecting that difficult work, only Ninety five
thousand Acres of the said Grounds, with convenient Highways and Passages to
the same; And the New River Cutts and Dreynes to be made by the said Earl and
his Assigns, and the Banks of the same, and the Forelands in the inside of the
said Banks not to exceed Sixty foot in breadth: Which was a work of so Great
and Public Concernment, that his said late Majesty gave great Encouragement to
the said Francis late Earl of Bedford and others, whom he had taken in to be
Adventurers and Participants with him therein, upon the Covenants, Conditions
and Agreements contained and specified in and by a certain Indenture of
Fourteen parts, bearing date the seven and twentieth day of February, in the
seventh year of the Reign of his said late Majesty, and his Royal Assurance to
further it by his Concurrence to an Act of Parliament for establishing thereof,
and did by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England Incorporate the said
late Earl, his Adventurers and Participants, to have Succession for ever; and
in order to the effecting thereof, the said late Earl and his Adventurers and
Participants bestowed great sums of money for perfecting the same, and after
his death and some interruptions, William now Earl of Bedford, son and heir to
the said Earl Francis, with diverse of his Adventurers and Participants, by
color of a pretended Act of Parliament of the nine and twentieth day of May,
in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, proceeded in
the completing and finishing the said Works; And the Commissioners appointed
by that pretended Act, did adjudg the same Dreyned, but the same cannot be
preserved without a perpetual constant care, great charge and Orderly
Government, which being represented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty that
now is, He has been graciously pleased to declare more then an ordinary
willingness to promote and countenance a Work of so Public Concernment, and
many ways advantageous to this his Kingdom. To the end therefore that a work of
this Nature may receive a Public Support and Encouragement.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and Assent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of William Earl of Bedford, son and heir of the said
Francis Earl of Bedford, The Earl of Bedford and Adventurers made a Corporation
for the Fens.
and the Adventurers and Participants of the said Earl Francis and Earl William
or either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, in such manner as is herein
contained, shall be a Body Politic and Corporate in Deed and Name, and have
Succession for ever, by the Name of the Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty of
the Company of Conservators of the Great Level of the Fens; which Corporation
shall consist of one Governor, six Bailiffs, twenty Conservators and
Commonalty, and shall have and use a Common Seal to be appointed by themselves,
and assemble and meet together, when, where, and as often as they please, and
appoint a Register, Receiver, one or more Sergeants at Mace and other Officers,
and allow them Salaries, and remove them, and make new at their pleasure. And
the said William Earl of Bedford is to be the first Governor; The Earl of
Bedford Governor. The Bailiffs.
Richard Lord Gorges, Sir Richard Onslow Knight, Sir William Terringham Knight
of the Bath, Samuel Sandys, Thomas Chichely and Samuel Fortrey, Esquires; the
six first Bailiffs. Sir Gilbert Gerhard junior, Knight, William Denton, William
Crane, Edmond Berry-Godfrey, Arthur Evelin, Samuel Smith, Roger Jenings, Robert
Castle, Robert Hampson, Joseph Ayloffe, Esquires; Thomas Lord Culpepper, Sir
John Hewett Baronet, Arthur Onslow, Robert Phillips, Anthony St. John,
Esquires, Sir Oliver St. John, Sir Charles Harbord, Knights; Francis Hoblyn,
Samuel Sandys junior, Conservators.
and Robert Terringham, Esquires, the first Conservators. And the said
Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators to continue until Wednesday in
Whitsun-week, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and four,
and from thenceforth until new Elections by the said Corporation, or the major
part which shall be then present; And shall be capable to sue and be sued, and
without License of Mortmain to purchase Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Their power and authority.
not exceeding two hundred pounds per annum, and Goods and Chattels, and to
dispose thereof in the name, and to the use of the said Corporation, and the
said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators, or any

And whereas by the said Law of Sewers, twelve thousand Acres, parcel of the
said ninety five thousand Acres, was designed and intended to his said late
Majesty, and were set forth and allotted by bounds in severalty, and his said
late Majesty was in possession thereof, and granted, assigned, allotted and set
out by bounds two thousand Acres, parcel of the said twelve thousand Acres, by
Letters Patents unto Jerome Earl of Portland, his Heirs and Assigns, Earl of
Portlands 2000 Acres.
of which said two thousand Acres, the said Earl of Portland has sold away
about One thousand five hundred Acres in several parcels to several persons,
their Heirs and Assigns, for valuable considerations, and the residue thereof
being about five hundred Acres, has granted and conveyed unto his Brother
Benjamin Weston Esquire and his Heirs, upon several Trusts, agreed upon between
the said Earl of Portland and Benjamin Weston by writing for that purpose:

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said two thousand
Acres, or such other Lands of equal value as shall be set forth in Exchange of
the same, in case the aforementioned two thousand Acres or any part thereof,
shall hereafter be adjudged to have been unduly set out, shall be, and hereby
are vested, settled and established in the said several and respective persons,
(to whom the said Earl of Portland has so conveyed or mentioned to convey the
same) their Heirs and Assigns respectively, to each person his Heirs and
Assigns, his and their several and respective Share and Shares that was so
respectively to each of them conveyed or mentioned to be Portland, to be held
and enjoyed by them and each of them, his Heirs and Assigns, his and their own
Share and Part only in severalty, according to the intent of the said
Conveyances thereof to them respectively made by the said Earl of Portland,
upon the same Trusts nevertheless for and concerning the said five hundred
Acres granted or mentioned to be granted to the said Benjamin Weston, which the
said Earl of Portland and Benjamin Weston had declared and agreed upon between
them as aforesaid; Which said two thousand Acres shall be holden of the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors of the Manor of East Greenwich by Fealty
only in Free and Common Soccage, and not otherwise, and subject nevertheless
with the

The 83000. Acres settled and vested in the Governor, etc.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Eighty three
thousand Acres remainder of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, with the said
Ways, Passages, new Rivers, Cutts, Dreyns, Banks and Forelands, over and above
the said ten thousand Acres residue of the said twelve thousand Acres which
were allotted in severalty, and of which his said late Majesty was in
possession as aforesaid, are hereby vested and settled in the said Governor,
Bailiffs and Commonalty of the Company of Conservators of the said Great Level
of the Fens, and their Successors: In trust nevertheless for the said William
Earl of Bedford, and the Adventures and Participants of the said Earl Francis
and Earl William or either of them, The Trust.
their Heirs and Assigns, in such manner and wise as is herein after more
particularly and especially limited and provided; and according to such parts
and proportions as they respectively now hold and enjoy, or by virtue and
provision of this Act ought to hold and enjoy, subject and liable likewise to
the payment of all Taxes and Charges as aforesaid, to be holden of the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, of the Manor of East Greenwich, by Fealty
only in free and common Soccage, and not otherwise: And the said ten thousand
Acres, residue of the said twelve thousand Acres (whereof his said late Majesty
was in possession as aforesaid) are hereby vested and settled in his Majesty
that now is, The 10000 Acres belonging to the King.
and his Assigns, subject and liable with the residue of the said Ninety five
thousand Acres to the same Taxes and Charges before specified. And because the
said Great Level of the Fens extends into the said Six Counties besides the
Isle of Ely, and forasmuch as Commissioners of Sewers cannot legally proceed in
Execution of their Commission, but by a several Jury of every County to enquire
of the matters within their Commission in that County, which has heretofore
enforced the said Earl, his Participants and Adventurers, Commissioners and
Countries, to very great trouble, loss and expense both of money and time: For
avoiding which Inconveniences, The Authority of the said Corporation as
Commissioners of Sewers.
It is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators of the said Corporation for the time
being, or any five or more of them, whereof the said Governor or Bailiffs for
the time being, or their Successors or any of them to be two, for maintenance
and preservation of the said Great County of it self: And the said Governor,
Bailiffs and Conservators, or any five or more of them, whereof the said
Governor or Bailiffs or any of them to be two, shall have further power, as
well for the maintenance of the said Great Level, as for laying and levying of
Taxes upon the said Ninety five thousand Acres, to use and exercise within the
said Great Level such and the like Laws and Customs, and Constitute and Appoint
such and the like Officers from time to time, as are or lawfully may be used in
Rumney Marsh in the County of Kent; they who exercise the said Power of
Commissioners of Sewers, first taking the Oath which Commissioners of Sewers
are by the Law to take; the which Oath the said Governor and Bailiffs or any
of them, are hereby Empowered to Administer from time to time, without any
further Commission.

And because the Metes and Boundaries of the said Grounds within the said Great
Level, as to the Counties and Parishes, are very uncertain and hard to be
distinguished, The metes and boundaries of grounds.
Be it therefore further Enacted, That every Writ, Bill, Plaint, Count,
Declaration, Information, Presentment and Indictment, of, for or concerning the
said Grounds within the said Great Level of the Fens, or any part or parcel of
the same, or any Trespass, Offense or Wrong done, acted or committed within the
said Great Level, and proceedings thereupon, shall be good and sufficient in
Law, though the County, Parish, Town or Place, or any of them, in such Writ,
Bill, Plaint, Count, Declaration, Information, Presentment or Indictment be not
rightly named, so as there be such other certainty or description of the place
whereby the same is or may be commonly known. No other Commissioners of Sewers
to meddle in the said Level.


And be it further Enacted, That no other Commissioners of Sewers shall
intermeddle within the said Great Level, or with any the Works made or to be
made for Support, Maintenance or Preservation of the said Great Level, within
or without the said Great Level as aforesaid, otherwise then hereafter in this
Act shall be provided.

And be it further Enacted, Conveyances by Indenture entered with the Register.
That all Conveyances by Indenture of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, or
any part thereof, entered with the said Register, in a Book to be kept for that
purpose, shall be of equal force to convey the Freehold and Inheritance of the
said Ninety five thousand Acres, or any part thereof, as if the same
Conveyances by Indenture were for valuable considerations Westminster; And no
Lease, Grant or Conveyance of, or charge out of, or upon the said Ninety five
thousand Acres, or any part thereof, except Leases for seven years or under in
possession, shall be of force but from the time it shall be entered with the
said Register as aforesaid; the Entry whereof being endorsed by the said
Register upon such Lease, Grant, Conveyance or Charge, shall be as good and
effectual in the Law, as if the Original Book of Entries were produced at any
Trial at Law, or otherwise.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty
shall Execute Estates according to the aforesaid Trust under their Common Seal,
the Taxes and Penalties then in Arrear being first paid, which for non-payment,
are by virtue of this Act to be levied by Sale of the Lands.

And be it further Enacted, Levying of taxes and penalties.
That for the Levying such Taxes and Penalties as are now in Arrear, or at any
time since the Thirtieth day of September, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred fifty and eight (other then such as are hereby otherwise
directed to be Levied) or which shall be set and imposed upon the said Ninety
five thousand Acres by virtue of this Act, and shall be in Arrear upon the
respective parts and proportions of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, the
said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators of the said Corporation, and their
Successors for the time being, or any five or more of them, whereof the said
Governor and Bailiffs for the time being, and their Successors, or any of them
to be two, for levying such Taxes and Penalties, which now are, or shall be so
in arrear, upon the respective parts and proportions of the said Ninety five
thousand Acres, shall on Wednesday and Thursday in Whitsun-week, or either of
them every year at the Shire-House in Ely aforesaid in the said Isle of Ely,
have power only to sell so much of such parts and proportions of the said
Ninety five thousand Acres, upon which any Tax shall be in Arrear, or penalties
in such proportion as the said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators of the said
Corporation or their Successors, or any five or more of them, whereof the said
Governor and Bailiffs or any of them to be two, shall judge to be sufficient to
raise such Taxes and penalties,

Provided, That by any color of any sale for non-payment of Taxes, Proviso for
tenants at will or by leases.
any Tenant or Tenants at will, or by Lease, Indented upon improved Rent of any
part of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, shall not be removed from his or
their possession, until he or they shall have taken his or their Crop from off
the Premises so sold, paying reasonable Rent proportionable to the time that
such possession shall from and after such Sales be continued; And such Tenant
or Tenants as shall hold any part of the said Ninety five Thousand Acres by
Lease as aforesaid, shall and may, if he or they shall think meet, continue out
their respective terms, paying their Rent to such Purchaser in proportion, to
the quantity of Acres so purchased; Any thing herein contained to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding: Provided, That the said Corporation, nor their
Successors shall not sell any part or proportion of the said Ninety five
thousand Acres for any Tax or Penalty in arrear, which Tax or Penalties shall
not be in arrear by the space of four months next before the Sale, nor any
more Lands then only for the raising of such Taxes and Penalties.

Public notice to be given of lands charged with arrears of taxes or penalties
Provided also, That the said Corporation shall give public notice from time to
time of the parts and proportions of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, for
which any Tax or Penalties is or shall be in arrear, by affixing openly at the
Shire-House or Marketplace in Ely aforesaid, a Schedule in Parchment under the
Seal of the said Corporation, containing such parts and proportions of the said
Ninety five thousand Acres, for which any Tax or Penalty is or shall be in
arrear, with the name and names of the respective Owner or Owners, entered upon
the Tax-Roll, with the said Corporation of the said parts and proportions of
the said Ninety five thousand Acres so in arrear.

New works may be made.
or without the said great Level, for conveying the Waters of the said great
Level by convenient Out-falls to the Sea; so always, that if they cut any
several grounds, they give full recompense and satisfaction for the same, in
such manner as shall be hereafter in this Act provided. The penalty for
throwing down any works.
And if any person or persons shall cut, throw down or destroy any of the said
Works, made or to be made as aforesaid, the parties offending shall answer
treble damages to the said Corporation, and Costs of Suit to be recovered in an
Action of Trespass, to be brought by the said Corporation, in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Record; And if such cutting, throwing down or destroying,
shall be maliciously done, the same shall be punished, as for the cutting the
Podyke in Marsh-Land.

The oath to be taken by the Governor, Bailiffs, and Conservators.
And be it further Enacted, That the said William Earl of Bedford, nominated to
be Governor, and every other from time to time into that Office chosen, shall
(before he take upon him or them, the exercise of that Office) take an Oath,
That he will well and truly execute that Office in all things; the which Oath
shall and may be administered by the said Bailiffs or any one of them: And the
said Bailiffs, Conservators, Register, Receiver or other Officer nominated as
aforesaid, and every other from time to time, into any of the respective
Offices to be chosen, shall (before he or they take upon him or them the
exercise of the said respective Offices) take the like Oath for the true
executing their respective Offices; the which Oath shall be administered by the
said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators, or any two or more of them, without
any Commission or further warrant.

The Governor Bailiffs and Conservators to be elected yearly.
And for the continuance of the said Corporation in Succession for ever, Be it
further Enacted, That the said Governor, Bailiffs, Conservators and Commonalty
upon Wednesday in Whitsun week yearly, shall at a public meeting to be holden
for the said Corporation, by the greater number then present, (whereof the said
Governor or one of the Bailiffs to be one) elect a new Governor, Bailiffs and
Conservators respectively: Provided, That none be capable to be, or continue
Governor or Bailiffs, That has not four hundred Acres or more of the said
Ninety five thousand Acres, nor to be a Conservator that has not two hundred
Acres or more of the said Ninety Accounts to be made by all Officers and Agents
employed.
And the said Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty also shall have further power
to have, demand and receive an Account from all and every the Officers, Agents
and Servants, their Executors and Administrators heretofore employed, or
hereafter to be employed for the receiving and paying of money, for or in
relation to the carrying on of the Works of the Dreining of the said great
Level, and shall and may sue for and recover the same; and that all Arrears of
Rent already incurred upon, or out of any part of the said Ninety five thousand
Acres upon any Contract or Lease of the said Premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall be received and recovered, as if the said pretended Act had been
a good and effectual Act: And if any Suit be commenced against the said
Corporation, In Suits against any employed by this Act, the defendant may plead
the general issue.
or any person for any matter or thing done in pursuance of this Act, then he
or they shall or may plead the General Issue, and give the special matter in
Evidence upon any Trial to be had touching the same, which shall be as good and
effectual in Law, as if the same had been specially pleaded, and the Jury upon
the Trial to give a Verdict accordingly.

Lands of persons attainted, and titles under them, vested in the King.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That as
touching and concerning such part and parcel of the said Eighty three thousand
Acres, whereof any person or persons attainted, or that shall be attainted, was
or were in possession, at any time since the Nine and twentieth day of May, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, under pretended
Sales thereof respectively made by color of the said pretended Act, or under
any Lyn, do belong and appertain to the said Samuel Sandys the elder or his
Trustees, Sir William Terringham, Sir Richard Onslow, and other the Assignees
and Trustees of Henry late Earl of Arundel and Surrey deceased, Arthur Earl of
Anglesey, Thomas Lord Culpeper, Robert Phillips, Robert Scawen, and to diverse
other persons the Participants of the said Earl Francis, and Parties of the
said Indenture, or their respective Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, are now possessed and enjoyed by diverse persons, who took, contracted
for, or accepted of, or by such who claim and derive their interest and title
from and under such persons as did take, contract for or accept of pretended
Estates or Conveyances of the same, made, or pretended to be made by certain
persons mentioned in and by the said pretended Act of the Nine and Twentieth
day of May, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, to have Authority to sell
the Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions of such of the Adventurers and
Participants of the said Earl Francis, and of their respective Heirs and
Assigns, as should refuse or make default of payment of such Taxes, as should
by color and in pursuance of the said pretended Act be imposed upon them
respectively, in respect of their Shares and Lots, in or out of the said Ninety
five thousand Acres;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Governor,
Bailiffs and Commonalty of the said Company of Conservators of the said Great
Level of the Fenns, and their Successors, shall Actually stand seized and
possessed of all and every the Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions last
mentioned, in trust nevertheless to and for the use and behoof of the said
Samuel the Elder, or his Trustees, in trust for him, Sir William Terringham,
Sir Richard Onslow, and others the said Assignees and Trustees of Henry late
Earl of Arundel and Surrey deceased, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Thomas Lord
Culpepper, Robert Phillips, Robert Scawen, and of their respective Heirs and
Assigns, and to and for the respective uses and behoofs of the said other
persons, the Participants of the said Earl Francis, and Parties to the the said
Indenture of Fourteen parts, and of their respective Heirs and Assigns now out
of possession, of their respective Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions of the
said Ninety five thousand acres, as heretofore in or about the Month of
October, in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of the late King Charles of ever
blessed memory, were respectively allotted, severed, set forth or divided, for
or as the respective Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions of such of the
Adventurers, the Participants of the said Earl Francis, and Parties to the said
Indenture of Fourteen parts, their respective Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from and under whom the said Samuel Sandys, the Elder, or his
Trustees, Sir William Terringham, Sir Richard Onslow, and others the Assignees
and Trustees of Henry late Earl of Arundel and Surrey deceased, Arthur Earl of
Anglesey, Thomas Lord Culpepper, Robert Phillips, Robert Scawen, and the said
other persons, the Participants of the said Earl Francis, and their respective
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, now out of possessions of their
respective Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions, do respectively claim and
derive their said Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions; And the said Governor,
Bailiffs and Commonalty of the Company of Conservators, are hereby authorized
and required to execute respective Estates, Francis and his Participants, and
for and toward their erection of new and necessary works, for the better and
more effectual Dreyning of the said Great Level, and for building upon the said
Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions, more moneys then the clear rents, issues
and profits of the said Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions have amounted to
since the said respective pretended Estates and Conveyances were first taken,
contracted for, and accepted as aforesaid;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, And it is hereby Enacted,
That the Chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, the Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, The Chief Justice of the Kings bench and others made a
Judicature to hear and determine differences.
the Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, and the Justices of the said Court
of Common Pleas for the time being, or any two or more of them, are hereby
constituted, appointed, and erected a Judicature,, or Commissioners to Hear,
Order, Judge, Decree and Determine upon Bills and Answers, to be Exhibited, or
otherwise as they shall think fit, between the said persons who are now in the
Possession of the said respective Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions, and the
respective Heirs and Assigns of the said persons now in possession as
aforesaid; And the said Sir Richard Onslow, Henry late Earl of Arundel and
Surrey deceased, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Thomas Lord Culpepper, the said
Samuel Sandys the elder, or his Trustees, Sir William Terringham, Robert
Phillips, Robert Scawen, and the said other persons Participants of the said
Earl Francis, and their respective Heirs and Assigns, who are now out of the
possession of the said Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions respectively, and to
whom respective Estates are by virtue of this Act to be executed of the same as
aforesaid; And the said Judicature or Commissioners, or any two or more of them
are hereby authorized out of the said Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions, to
Order, Adjudge, Decree, and Determine to either of the said Parties
respectively, such recompense and allowance as they the said Judicature or
Commissioners, or any two or more of them shall see cause: And for the better
enabling the said Judicature or Commissioners to proceed to the hearing,
ordering, adjudging, decreeing and determining, and for putting in due and
speedy execution such Order, Judgment, Decree, and Determination, as they or
any two or more of them shall make between the said parties.

It is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That they the said
Judicature or Commissioners, or any two or more of them, shall have such and
the like power and authority, as the High Court of Chancery has in cases
before the said Court depending, and for putting in execution the Decrees of
the said Court. The power and authority of the said Judicature.
And to the end that the said Judicature may be the better enabled to Judge of
the Rights and Pretensions of either party,

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in every Decree or
Determination which they shall make by virtue and in pursuance of this Act,
they shall have regard to the sum and Directions for their decrees and
proceedings.
and in the preservation and reparation of the same; and also to the respective
Times of such Disbursements and expense, defalking thereout such sum and sums
of money as have been received by either party, their Tenants or Assigns, for
the Rents, Issues and Profits of the same, and abating out of the Interest of
the Money disbursed by either party, so much as the Interest of the Money
received by such party for the Rents, Issues and Profits of the same does
amount unto. And to the intent that the persons who by the true intent and
meaning of this Act are to be put into possession of any part of the said
Eighty three thousand acres, may not by undue delays, or by any other means or
pretensions be kept out of the possession of the same;

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at any time or times
after the expiration of Six months after the Passing of this Act, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Samuel Sandys the elder, and his Trustees for
him, Sir Richard Onslow, and others the Assignees and Trustees of Henry late
Earl of Arundel and Surrey deceased, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Thomas Lord
Culpepper, Sir William Terringham, Robert Phillips, and Robert Scawen, their
and every of their respective Heirs and Assigns, and to and for the
Participants of the said Earl Francis, Parties to the said Indenture of
Fourteen parts, their and every of their respective heirs and assigns, whose
Lands, Shares, Lots, Parts and Proportions of and in the said Ninety five
thousand acres, were sold, or pretended to be sold, for non-payment of Taxes,
by virtue of the said pretended Act of the Nine and twentieth day of May, in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and nine, to bring their
respective Action or Actions of Trespass, or Trespass and Ejectment in His
Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, or Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
against any person or persons Francis Earl of Bedford, parties to the said
Indenture of Fourteen parts, or as the respective Heirs or Assigns of the said
respective Participants parties to the said Indenture of Fourteen parts, as if
the said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators had duly executed respective
Estates of such respective Lands, Shares, Lots, parts and Proportions of the
said Ninety five thousand acres, according to the true intent and meaning of
this Act: And such person or persons, his and their respective Heirs and
Assigns shall have and hold the same Lands, Shares, Lots, parts and
proportions, as fully and effectually as if the said Governor, Bailiffs and
Conservators had executed respective Estates thereof, subject nevertheless to
such Decree as the said Judicature or Commissioners before nominated and
appointed shall make touching or concerning the Premises and also subject to
the payment of all Taxes, to be laid and imposed by virtue of this Act, and no
other. And whereas there are several sums of money, amounting to Four thousand
pounds or thereabouts, in arrear for Taxes, laid and imposed since the Nine and
twentieth day of September, 4000 l. in arrear for Taxes upon whom to be laid.
in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty and eight, upon
several parts of the said Ninety five thousand acres, subjected by this Act to
the Judicature aforesaid; and for Penalties incurred for non-payment of the
same, by virtue or color of some Act or authority, or pretended Act or
authority;

Be it therefore Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners or Iudicatory, or any two of them aforesaid, shall have Power and
authority, and are hereby required in such adjudication as they shall make,
touching the Lands subjected to their Judicature as aforesaid, to Direct, Order
and Decree, upon what Persons or Lands, the said Sums of Money so in Arrear for
Taxes and Penalties as aforesaid shall be charged, and the said Taxes and
Penalties shall be accordingly levied upon such Persons or Lands, and in such
manner, and by such ways and means

Complaints by particular persons and Parishes.
And whereas particular persons and Parishes do conceive and allege, That the
Dreining of one place has Drowned and made worse the Lands in other places:
And whereas diverse persons likewise do allege and complain, That the said
Ninety five thousand acres in many places are not indifferently set out, or
allotted, according to the Law made at Lyn, in the Sixth year of the late King
Charles, nor according to Agreement made with the Country; But in many places
greater quantities have been taken from the Owners, Commoners, and Townships
then ought to have been; And that some Lands have been taken, as belonging to
one Parish and County, which in truth did belong to another. And in many places
the allotments have been taken very inconvenient for the Townships, which ought
not to have been by the said Agreement. And whereas the Dreining aforesaid, and
future maintenance of the said Great Level ought to be without prejudice to
Navigation: And because all Complaints which have been made, and all prejudices
which have been or shall be done to particular Persons, Parishes and Places,
cannot by this Act be sufficiently provided for and remedied;

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Sir John Tracy Knight,
Commissioners hearing the said Complaints and Differences.
Sir Charles Mordant, Sir Nicholas L' Strange, Baronets, Sir William Hovel
Knight, Edward Pepis, Humphrey Beddingfield, Nicholas Stileman, Esquires, for
the County of Norfolk.

Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight of the Bath, Sir Lyonel Tolimach Baronet, Sir John
Duncombe Knight, Sir Edmond Pooley Knight, Sir George Reve Knight and Baronet,
Sir George Weneve Knight, Thomas Waldegrave Esquire, for the County of Suffolk.

Sir Dudley North, Sir Thomas Wendy; Knights of the Bath; Levinus Bennet Esquire
Robert King, John Pepis, Doctors of the Law, Thomas Crouch, Francis North,
Esquires, for the County of Cambridge.

Sir Thomas Sclater Baronet, L' Strange Colthrop, John Millecent, Thomas Hall,
John Sotheby, Esquires; John Bing Esquire, and William Wren Esquire, for the
Isle of Ely.

Sir Francis Compton Knight, Robert Appreece, Sutton Ashfield, Esquires;
Anthony South Doctor of the Law, Robert Pain, Richard Nayler, (...) Ferrers of
Gedding, Esquires, for the County of Huntington.

Sir William Dudley, Knight and Baronet; Maurice Tresham, Francis Kirkham,
Lewis Palmer, Christopher Thursby, Francis Lane, George Tresham, Esquires, for
the County of Northampton.

Sir Charles Hussy, Sir John Newton, Baronets, Sir Thomas Meeres, Sir Anthony
Irby, Knights, Sir Anthony Oldfield Baronet, Richard Brownlow, Daniel Rhodes,
Esquires, for the Lincoln, shall be and are hereby made and constituted the
present Commissioners for the purpose herein mentioned.

And for the supplying the number of the Commissioners of the said respective
Counties, in case of death or other avoidance, or incapacity: Be it also
Enacted, That within Three months after such death, or Notice of such
avoidance or incapacity of the remaining Commissioners of each respective
County, of which such Commissioners who died, or became incapable were, or the
major part of them shall from time to time nominate and appoint by Deed under
their Hands and Seals to be enrolled in Chancery some other person or persons
residing within the said County, of which the said Commissioners who died, or
became incapable, The Power and Authority of the said Commissioners.
were to be Commissioners in the place and stead of him or them so dying, or
becoming incapable, which said Commissioners hereby constituted, or hereafter
to be constituted in manner aforesaid, or any seven or more of them be, are and
shall be hereby Authorized and Empowered from time to time to hear and determine
such Complaints, Controversies, Differences and Grievances as are in this Act
expressed (relating to, or concerning, or occasioned by the Dreining and
Maintaining the said Great Level) of any Parish or Township, or of any person
or persons, as well within or without the said Level, in such manner as is
herein after expressed: And that the said Commissioners hereby constituted, or
hereafter to be constituted in manner aforesaid, or any seven or more of them,
shall from time to time have power and authority, and are hereby required, at
or before the Eight and twentieth day of September, which shall be in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and six, to give or make
satisfaction out of the said Ninety five thousand Acres to such Parish or
Township, Person or Persons, whose Lands or Interest therein, either within, or
without the said Level, shall after the First day of May, One thousand six
hundred sixty and three be made worse in quality or condition by the aforesaid
Dreining or Works, then they were before the Undertaking the Dreining of the
said Level in the Sixth year of the Reign of our late King Charles of blessed
memory, and proportionable to the Losses the owners of or persons interessed in
such Lands shall hereafter receive by reason of their Lands being made worse in
Quality or Condition by any such Works and Dreining as aforesaid, and shall
also have power at any time within Four June, in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and three, to alter, change and restore such parts
and parcels of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, as shall upon Complaint be
found and adjudged by the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, to
be unequally, unduly or inconveniently set forth, by reason of any allotting,
either of greater quantities, or as belonging to other Counties, Parishes, or
Manors, or in more inconvenient places then they were formerly allotted and set
out by a Law of Sewers made at Saint Ives the Twelfth day of October, in the
Thirteenth year of King Charles the First, notwithstanding any vesting of the
said Ninety five thousand Acres or any part thereof in the Kings Majesty, or in
the said Governor, Bailiffs and Commonalty, or in any other persons before
mentioned, or any Estates executed by them, or any of them. Ravely, Upwood,
Sothery, Wicken, Cowfenn, Beezling.


Provided, and be it Enacted, That Ninety three Acres in Ravely and Upwood,
Seventy six Acres in Sothery, Forty four Acres and one Rood in Wicken, Eighty
eight Acres in Cowfenn, Two hundred eighty two Acres in Beezling, and Thirty
seven Acres in Upwell, set out to be enjoyed as part of the said Ninety five
thousand Acres since the making the said Law of St. Ives, in lieu of like
Proportions altered and restored to the Country, shall be held and enjoyed by
the said Corporation, subject nevertheless to the trust in and by this Act
declared, as to the said Eighty three thousand Acres residue of the said Ninety
five thousand Acres; and shall be set forth to the said Corporation in trust
for the Participants or Adventurers, whose proportion shall be so altered or
exchanged, in lieu of such part as shall be so altered, exchanged or restored,
such other proportions in such other places within the said Level, as to the
said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, that any of the proportions
of the said Ninety five thousand Acres heretofore set Francis Earl of Bedford,
his then Participants and Assigns, do fall short in the quantity of Acres, for
which the same were set forth and allotted, according to the said Laws of Lynne
and St. Ives, the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, shall
within the said term of Four years aforesaid, appoint the same to be supplied
and made up, out of the grounds where the same was so allotted to be set forth,
to make up the said proportion of Ninety five thousand Acres. And in case the
said Earl of Bedford and his Participants, or the said Corporation, shall
through or by reason of their undertaking or Dreyning aforesaid, in the sixth
year of His late Majesty's Reign of ever blessed Memory, have done, or
hereafter shall do any Act or Acts to the prejudice of Navigation, and whereby
Navigation in the said Rivers of Owse and Grant, and all other Rivers now
Navigable passing through the said Level, and the River of Westwater, being a
branch of the River of Owse, if it be consistent with the Dreyning, or in any
of them, or such Drove ways or Bridges within and without the said Level, as
have been made or caused to be made by the Adventurers, and have been by them
maintained, unless there be some agreement to the contrary, be or hereafter
shall be interrupted, obstructed and made worse, that then the said
Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, whereof the Vice Chancellor for
the University of Cambridge, the Mayor of the Town of Cambridge, and the Mayor
of the Town of Kings Lynne, for the time being, to be three; if they upon
notice left at their respective Habitations shall think fit to be present, from
time to time, shall and may decree the same to be made good and amended, at the
proper Costs and Charges of the said Corporation, within a convenient time, as
to their Judgments shall seem meet: And in case it shall happen and so fall
out, that the said Corporation shall neglect or refuse Charles the First; which
said Sum or Sums of money so to be Assessed or Taxed by the Commissioners
aforesaid, shall within Twenty days next after notice thereof given to the
Governor or Treasurer of the said Corporation, be paid unto such person and
persons as the said Commissioners shall nominate and appoint to receive the
same. And in case the said Governor or Treasurer of the said Corporation,
after notice so given as aforesaid, shall refuse or neglect to pay the said Sum
or Sums, as aforesaid, That then the said Commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, shall have full power and Authority to empower the said person or
persons to levy the said Sum or Sums of money by Distress or Distresses to be
taken upon the said Ninety five thousand Acres, or any part thereof, and make
sale of the said Distress or Distresses so taken, and sell the same, and render
the overplus unto the said Governor or Treasurer, deducting the reasonable
charges for their labor and pains therein: All which said Sum or Sums of money
so to be taxed and levied by the Authority aforesaid, shall be expended and
laid out in preserving and keeping the said Navigation as aforesaid, and
maintaining the same according to the true intent and meaning of this Statute,
and not otherwise. And the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more of them,
are also hereby Empowered and Authorized within the space of Four years, from
the Four and twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty and three, to ascertain and divide the Precincts and Boundaries
of such parts of the said respective Counties, Lordships, Manors and Parishes
within the said Level, as have been by and since the undertaking, defaced and
made obscure, or by some other means remain uncertain and hard to be found out,
and shall set down such Bounds and Divisions in writing, by such Marks,
Boundaries and Descriptions as to them shall seem

How lands may be sold for non-payment of Taxes or penalties.
And for default of payment of the said Taxes or Sums of money and penalties, Be
it Enacted, That the Lot and Share of such Participant or Adventurer of and
within the said Ninety five thousand Acres, as shall be in arrear for the said
Tax, sum of money, or penalty, and unpaid by the space of two months next
after the day appointed for payment by the said Commissioners, or any seven or
more of them, or so much thereof as they shall think fit, shall be Sequestered
by the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, for or toward the
payment of such Tax, sum of money, or penalty so in arrear, restoring the
overplus of the money for which such Lot or Share, or any part thereof shall be
Sequestered, if any be: Which Sequestration shall be made in writing under the
hands and seals of the said Commissioners for the time being, or any seven or
more of them.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case
the said Governor, Bailiffs and Corporation constituted by this Act shall
neglect or refuse to pay such Tax or Taxes and penalties, sum or sums of money
as shall from time to time hereafter be taxed and imposed by the said
Commissioners before named, or to be named by virtue of this Act, or any seven
or more of

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said
Governor, Bailiffs and Corporation shall not within six months next after
demand made by such person or persons, his and their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, whose own, or Tenant or Tenants, Goods and Chattels shall be
distrained or sold, or Lands sequestered as aforesaid, pay and satisfy unto him
or them such sum and sums of money, and damages, as he or they, and his and
their respective Tenant or Tenants have respectively paid, born and sustained,
That then, and from thenceforth such person and persons, his and their Heirs
and Assigns, shall and may bring his and their Action or Actions of Debt in any
of the Kings Majesty's Courts at Westminster, against the said Governor,
Bailiffs and Corporation, for the recovery thereof, and by virtue of this Act
shall recover the same, and be allowed Costs of Suit expended therein.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
so constituted or to be hereafter constituted as aforesaid, or any seven or
more of them, for the better execution of the Powers hereby given, shall and
may inform themselves by examining Witnesses upon Oath, which The Commissioners
to take an Oath.


Provided always, That the said Commi^^ioners and every of them, before he or
they take upon him or them the execution of any the Powers or Authorities
hereby given them, other then the administering the Oath following to one
another, which they shall have authority by this present Act to administer to
one another, shall take the Oath following, (viz.)

I A. B. shall and will without favor or affection, hatred or malice, truly
and impartially, according to the best of my skill and knowledge, execute and
perform all and every the Powers and Authorities established by this Act of
Parliament.

Which Oath any one of the said Commissioners are hereby authorized to
administer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Judgments,
Orders, Decrees, Determinations, Alterations, Changes, Restaurations, and other
Acts done by the said Commissioners hereby constituted, or hereafter to be
constituted as aforesaid, or of any seven or more of them respectively,
pursuant to the Powers and Authorities by this Act given, shall be final; And
that the first time and place of their Meeting shall be at or before the Two
and twentieth day of September, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred sixty and three, at Ely.

And that afterward the usual places where the said Commissioners shall sit to
Hear, Order, The Places where the Commissioners shall sit.
and Determine the Matters to them referred by this Act, shall from the 29th of
September, to the 26th day of March in every year, be at the Town of
Huntington; and from the 25th day of March, till the 30th day of September in
every year, be at Ely, unless the said Commissioners hereby constituted, or
hereafter to be constituted as aforesaid, or any seven or more of them shall
appoint some other place or places, being a Market Town or Towns; And the said
Commissioners, or any seven or more of them shall by Warrant under their hands
and seals declare the places and times of their after-meeting, which Warrant
shall be published in the open Market of such respective places where they last
sat, between the hours of Twelve and Two upon some Market day, one month at
the least before the said time or times of meeting, To the end all persons
concerned may have sufficient time and notice to make their appearance before
them upon any cause of complaint, or other occasion; And shall have power and
authority by Warrant under the hands and seals

Provided, That none of the said Commissioners hereby constituted, or hereafter
to be constituted as aforesaid, shall Vote or give his Judgment or
Determination in any matter or thing which concerns the Division and Bounds of
the County, of or for which he is appointed Commissioner.

Provided also, That no person who has any Part, Share, or Interest in
Possession or Reversion of or in any Manors or Lands within the said Level,
shall be a Commissioner.

And in case of Descent, Gift, Devise, or Purchase of any such Part, Share or
Interest to, or by any of the said Commissioners, It is hereby Declared and
Enacted, That immediately after such Descent, Gift, Devise or Purchase to or by
any such Commissioner, The said Descent, Gift, Devise or Purchase shall be an
avoidance of his being a Commissioner; and shall make him be incapable of being
again nominated, or appointed a Commissioner whilst his Interest does remain.

Provided also, and the said Commissioners for the time being, or any seven or
more of them shall from time to time, and at all times have power and authority
to give and make satisfaction out of the Ninety five thousand Acres, to such
person or persons, whose Lands or Interest therein (by any New Works, hereafter
to be made by the said Corporation without the said Level for conveying of the
Waters of the said Level by convenient Outfals to the Sea) shall be made worse
in quality, condition or value, then they were before the said Undertaking in
the said Sixth year of the said late King Charles, proportionable to the loss
and damage the Parties shall receive thereby.

Owners of Wastes and Commons may improve.
And to the end that the Owners of the Commons and Wastes in the said Level, and
other Towns, Parishes and places, unto which the Works aforesaid, or any of
them do extend, may improve the same by making Divisions and Enclosures, Be it
Provided and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for any person or persons. Body Politic or Corporate whatsoever; their
Heirs and Successors, that are or shall be Lords of Manors, or have or shall
have right of Common in the said Wastes, to Improve, Set out, Enclose, Divide
and Sever such Proportion or Proportions, as to them shall or may severally or
respectively belong or appertain, or be adjudged and allotted out of the said
Commons and Wastes within the said Level, or within any Town, Parish or place
into which the Works aforesaid, or any of them do extend. And to hold such
proportion in severalty at all times of the year; and all Differences that
shall arise concerning the Boundaries of the Wastes, Rights of Common,
Approvements, Allotments, Divisions and Enclosures, shall from time to time,
and at all times be Determined, Adjudged, and finally ended by the said
Commissioners for the time being, or any seven or more of them upon their View
or Examination of Witnesses upon Oath, which they are hereby Authorized

Sutton, North and South Meadland in the said Isle of Ely, Sutton, Meadland.
set out by the said Law of St. Ives as a Recompense for Dreining the whole
North and South Meadlands, containing about One thousand Acres, their Heirs or
Assigns, to sue and implead before the said Commissioners, or any seven or more
of them, the Owners and Occupiers of the said North and South Meadlands, or
elsewhere within the said Great Level, to draw them into Contribution for their
several and respective Proportions of the said North and South Meadlands,
toward the said One hundred seventy five Acres. And the said Commissioners, or
any seven or more of them, shall thereupon Adjudge and Decree unto the said
Owners of the said One hundred seventy five Acres, or such of them as they
shall think fit, and to their Heirs and Assigns, such recompense and
satisfaction, either in ready Money, yearly Rent, or Land, out of the residue
of the said North and South Meadlands, as to the said Commissioners, or any
seven or more of them shall seem meet, to be held and enjoyed by the said
Owners of the said One hundred seventy five Acres, their Heirs and Assigns.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
Sir John Watts, Knight, and others, who derive any interest under the Dreyners
of that Fenn called Londoners Fenn, his and their Heirs and Assigns, to sue and
implead all and every person and persons, their Executors and Administrators,
that have taken and received the rents and profits of his or their share and
proportion of Londoners Fenn, Londoners Fenn.
remaining from the share and proportion allotted and set out by the said Law
of St. Ives, since the said Level was adjudged Dreined, and to sue for and
recover the same in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster; and also that
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir John Watts and the
Participants aforesaid, his and their Heirs and Assigns, heretofore Owners of
the several proportions in Londoners Fenn, set out by St. Ives Law for the
Adventurers recompense for Dreyning the low Grounds in Upwell, Upwell, Outwell,
Welney.
Outwell, and Welney, to pursue and prosecute before the said Commissioners, or
any seven or more of them, their claim, and sue for relief against the owners
or occupiers of the Fenny and low surrounded Grounds lying in Upwell, Outwell,
and Welney aforesaid, whose Grounds did not all contribute, or not in equal
proportion to the said Ninety five thousand Acres, to draw them into
Contribution, in ease of the said Sir John Watts and the Participants
aforesaid, and thereupon the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them,
are hereby empowered to adjudge and decree unto the said Sir John Watts, and the
Participants aforesaid, his and their Heirs and Assigns, such proportion out of
the said Grounds, which have not equally contributed as aforesaid, as to the
said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them shall seem meet.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for the
Kings Majesty and Dousedale Bank, being on the south side of His Majesty's
Demean Lands, Dousedale Bank.
called Port sand, belonging to their Manor of Crowland, being part thereof,
and to have such ancient Passages and Currents as of right have been used and
accustomed, for the avoidance of water through the same into the River South
Eae, as if this Act had never been made.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, How and for
what time Archbishops Bishops etc. may make leases.
That it shall and may be lawful to and for every Archbishop, Bishop, Dean and
Chapter, and all Colleges and Halls in either University, and all Bodies
Politic and Corporate, who are or shall be Lords of Manors or have, or shall
have, right of Soil or Common in the Wastes within this said Level, or within
such other Towns, Parishes and Places into which the Works of the Dreyning
aforesaid do or shall extend, and who are by this Act empowered to improve, set
out, enclose, divide, and sever such proportion or proportions as to them shall
or may respectively belong or appertain, out of the said Commons and Wastes
within the said Level, to demise by Indenture all and every the said such
proportion or proportions as to them shall or may respectively belong or
appertain, out of the said Commons or Wastes within the said Level which have
not by express Words and under any particular Rent been at any time formerly
demised for any Term or Number of Years, not exceeding One and twenty Years, so
as upon every such Demise or Lease be reserved the fourth part of the true
Yearly value to be ascertained by the Commissioners aforesaid, or any seven of
them, due and payable Yearly during the said Term to him or them, and his and
their Successors.

Provided always, and be it Declared by and with the consent of all Parties
concerned, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend
or be construed to extend to alter the Thomas Chicheley Esquire, of or from Six
hundred seventy one acres, parcel of the Lot now claimed to belong to the said
Trustees of Henry late Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and Two hundred thirty one
acres, Parcel of the Lot now cliamed to belong to the said Sir William
Terringham, or from any part thereof, by him the said Thomas Chicheley now
enjoyed under Purchasers by Sales for non-payment of Taxes upon the dispute
between the old and new Adventurers; But that the said Corporation shall
execute Conveyances of the said respective proportion unto the said Thomas
Chicheley, his Heirs and Assigns, Any thing herein contained to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That all such Right or Rights as any Lord
or Lords of any Manor or Manors, Liberties, Hundred or half hundred, have
heretofore had within their respective Manor or Manors, Liberties, Hundred or
half hundred within or without the said Level, to Waifes, Strayes, Felons
Goods, Privileges of Arrests, Escheats, and all other Royalties not
prejudicial to the Dreining, be hereby saved to them, their Heirs, Successors
and Assigns severally and respectively; Any thing in this Act to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
interpreted to infringe, or any way to weaken an Act made the Fourth year of
the Reign of King James, 4 Jac. cap. 13.
Entitled, An Act for the Dreining of certain Fenns and Low Grounds within the
Isle of Ely, subject to hurt by Surrounding, containing about Six thousand
acres, compassed about with certain Banks, commonly called and named, The Ring
of Waltersea and Coldham; but the said Act shall stand in full force and
virtue; Any thing in this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That whereas diverse Lands in and near adjoining unto the said
Great Level, 95. thousand Acres, and to Distrain thereupon for the payment of
such Rate or Tax, and the Distress taken thereupon to sell or dispose as they
shall think fit, (rendering the overplus (if any be) to the Owners) for the
payment and satisfaction of such moneys, and damages as shall be so Awarded;
Any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, That in case the Judicature hereby established, The
Barons of the Exchequer empowered to hear and determine differences between
parties.
shall not within Twelve months from the First day of August next, hear and
determine all the matters by this Act to them referred, concerning the said
95000. acres, all and every such person and persons whose Complaints shall be
then undetermined, may make their applications to the Barons of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, who are hereby established a Court of Judicature, and
sufficiently authorized to hear and determine all such controversies and
differences between the said parties, in as large and ample manner, to all
intents and purposes, as the Judicature hereby established might have done, and
such Judgment, Order or Decree of the said Court of Exchequer, shall be in all
things observed, and be effectual as if the said Barons had been made the only
Judicature by this Act.

Lessees of the King.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lessees
of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors of the said Ten thousand Acres,
or of any part thereof, and the Assigns of such Lessees, and every or any of
them, shall be capable to be elected and chosen into the Office or Place,
Offices or Places of Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators aforesaid, and to vote
in such elections and choice, and in all other matters, as fully to all intents
and purposes as any other Members of the Corporation, Owners of any part of the
said Ninety five thousand acres, may be elected and chosen, vote in such
election and choice, or in any other matter, so as such Lessees and their
Assignees respectively have and be Lessees or Owners of double the quantity or
number of Acres, parcel of the said Ten thousand Acres, as by virtue of this
Act is required, to qualify any person to be elected and chosen into the
Office or Place of Governor, Bailiff or Conservator respectively, and to vote
in such elections and choice, or in any other matter touching the said Level,
and so as such Leases or Assignments they claim by, be entered with the
Register; Any thing before in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

David Offley Gentleman conditioned for his quiet enjoyment of a certain parcel
of Land purchased by him in the said Level, but that the said David Offley may
sue and prosecute his several Action or Actions upon the said Obligation, as if
he had been evicted or removed from his Estate therein by due course of Law.

How Breaches shall be made good.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Breaches
happen in any of the Banks, Sasses, Sluices, Tunnels, or other Works within the
said Great Level, or in any the Works made without the said Great Level, for
carrying the waters of the said Great Level to their Out-fall at Sea, by reason
of some inevitable accidents, the same shall be repaired and made good in
convenient time, by and at the Charges of the said Corporation and their
Successors; but no other Charge shall be laid upon the said Corporation or
their Successors, for or in respect of such Breaches, nor for or in respect of
any Breaches that have happened heretofore in any of the said Banks, Sasses,
Sluices or other Works; nor shall the said Corporation be enforced to give to
any other person any recompense for any loss or damage which has or shall
happen, by reason of their making necessary and sufficient Banks for the
defending of the said Level from being overflown, and for the leading of the
waters of the said Level in their Channels as now they run, unto their Out-fall
at Sea.

Proviso for persons that have exchanged their Lands.
Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That where any Participant under
Francis Earl of Bedford, or the Heirs or Assigns of any such Participant, has
exchanged his or their Share or Lot of the said Ninety five thousand Acres, or
any part thereof, for any other Lands, parcel of the said Ninety five thousand
acres, which were claimed and held under such pretended Sales, for non-payment
of Taxes, since One thousand six hundred forty and nine, It shall and may be
lawful to and for such Participant and Participants, and his and their Heirs
and Assigns, to enter again upon the same Lands so given in exchange, and to
have and retain the same in his and their possession, Any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding: Subject nevertheless in all things to such
Judgment and Determination, as the Judicature hereby construed shall make
concerning the same.



Commons and Wastes in Bedford Level enclosed.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any person or persons having right of Common in any of the Manors, Wastes,
Commons or Lands within the said Great Level of the Fenns, called Bedford
Level, or any other person or persons whatsoever, at any time after such
Division or Enclosure made, or set out as aforesaid, shall break, throw down,
disturb, obstruct, or by any means hinder, or lay open the said Improvements
and Enclosures, at, in or after the making thereof, or the Hedges, Ditches or
Fences of the same, or any part thereof shall destroy, and shall be thereof
convicted by two credible Witnesses upon Oath before two Justices of the Peace
of the County where such Disturbance or Destruction shall be made; Every such
person or persons so convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such
offense the sum of twenty pounds, to be levied by Distress upon the Goods and
Chattels of every such offender or offenders, by Warrant under the hands and
seals of the said Justices of the Peace, before whom such conviction shall be
made, the one moiety to the Informer, and the other moiety to such person or
persons against whom the said Offense is or shall be committed; or for want of
such sufficient distress, the Offender shall be committed to the House of
Correction or Common Goal, for three Months without Bail or Mainprise, at the
said Justices Discretion.

August, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty
and eight, no Tax or Taxes exceeding Two shillings the Acre in any one year
shall be assessed, After the year 1668. Taxes shall not exceed 2 s. in the
pound.
laid or levied upon the said Ten thousand Acres by this Act vested in the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, or upon any part thereof, or
upon the Two thousand Acres hereby vested in the Assigns of the said Earl of
Portland; but in case the Taxes to be assessed upon the said Eighty three
thousand Acres hereby vested in the said Corporation, shall not amount unto so
much in proportion as Two shillings an Acre, according to the proportion for
each acre; Then a proportionable abatement shall be made out of the said Two
shillings per Acre, which shall be charged yearly by an equal Rate upon every
acre of the said Ten thousand acres; and the said Two thousand acres according
to the Rate imposed upon every acre of the said Eighty three thousand acres,
whether the same shall be assessed by an Acre-Tax, or a Pound-Rate, or by any
other way; Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Declared, That the Assessing, Laying and Levying of Taxes
upon the said Ten thousand acres, or upon the said Two thousand acres, or any
part thereof, after the said First day of August, which shall be in the said
year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and eight, by the way of an
Acre-taxe, shall not extend nor be interpreted or construed to extend to compel
or conclude the said Corporation, to Assess, Lay or Levy any Tax or Taxes upon
the said Eighty three thousand acres, hereby vested in the said Corporation, or
upon any part thereof by the way of an Acre-Tax.

Anno XVI. Caroli II. Regis.
CAP. I.
Parliaments shall be held once in Three years at the least; And an Act for the
preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments,
Repealed.

WHereas the Act made in the Parliament begun at Westminster the Third day of
November in the Sixteenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King
Charles of blessed memory, Entitled, 16 Car. 1. cap. 1.
An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission
of Parliaments, is in derogation of his Majesty's just Rights, and Prerogative
inherent to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, for the Calling and Assembling of
Parliaments; And may be an occasion of manifold mischiefs and inconveniences,
and much endanger the Peace and Safety of his Majesty, and all his Liege People
of this Realm.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said
Act, entitled, A Repeal of the said Act.
An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission
of Parliaments, And all and every the Articles, Clauses and Things therein
contained, is, shall be, and are hereby wholly Repealed, Annulled, and utterly
made Void, And are hereby declared to be Null and Void to all intents and
purposes whatsoever, as if the said Act had never been had, or made; Any thing
in the said Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, 4 E. 3. cap. 14.
36 E. 3. cap. 10.
made in the Reign of King Edward the Third, Parliaments are to be held very
often, Your Majesty's humble and Loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, most humbly do
beseech Your most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Declared and Enacted, And
be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That hereafter the
sitting and holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued
above Three years at the most; but that within Three years from and after the
determination of this present Parliament, and so from time to time within Three
years after the determination of any other Parliament or Parliaments, or if
there be occasion, more oftener, Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors do
issue out Your Writs for calling, assembling and holding of another Parliament,
to the end there may be a frequent calling, assembling, and holding of
Parliaments once in Three years at the least.

CAP. II.
An Act for preventing of Abatements of Writs of Error upon Judgments in the
Exchequer.

WHereas by a Statute made in the One and thirtieth year of the Reign of the
late Queen Elizabeth, It is Enacted, That the not coming of the Lord
Chancellor, 31 El. cap. 1.
and Lord Treasurer, or either of them, at the day of Adjournment, in any Suit
of Error depending, 31 E 3. cap. 12.
by virtue of the Statute of the One and thirtieth year of the Reign of King
Edward the Third, therein mentioned, concerning Error made in the Exchequer,
shall not be any Discontinuance of any such Writ of Error: But if both the
Chief Justices of either Bench, or any one of the said great Officers, the Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Treasurer shall come to the Exchequer-Chamber, and there be
present at the day of Adjournment in such Suit of Error, It shall be no
Discontinuance, but the Suit shall proceed in Law to all intents and purposes,
as if both the Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer had come, and been present at
the day and place of Adjournment. Which Statute does not provide a Remedy, in
case the said Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer, or either of them shall not
be present at the Days and Times of the Returns of such Writs of Error,
although it be within the same mischief, Justice being delayed* And the parties
in such Cases being put to begin new Suits, to their great Charges and
prejudice, by reason of the absence and not coming of the said great Officers;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, The not com^ing of the Lord
Chancellor or Lord Treasurer.
That the not coming of the Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer, or either of
them, at the day of Return of any Writ of Error, to be sued forth by virtue of
the said Statute made in the said One and thirtieth year of the Reign of the
said King Edward the Third, shall not cause any Abatement or Discontinuance of
any such Writ of Error. But if both the Chief Justices of either Bench, or
either of them, or any one of the said great Officers, the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Treasurer, shall come to the Exchequer-Chamber, and there be present at
the day of Return of any such Writ of Error, it shall be no Abatement or
Discontinuance; But the Suit shall proceed in Law to all intents and purposes,
as if both the Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer had come, and been present at
the day and place of Return of such Writ.

Provided always, That no Judgment shall be given in any such Suit, or Writ of
Error, unless both the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Treasurer shall be present
thereat.

CAP. III.
For Collecting the Duty arising by Hearth-Money, by Officers to be appointed
by His Majesty.

14 Car. 2. cap. 10.
WHereas by an Act made in the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of
May, in the Thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign that now is, Entitled, An
Act for Establishing an Additional Revenue upon His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for the better Support of His and their Crown and Dignity; And by
another Act made in the second Session of the said Parliament, 15 Car. 2. cap.
14.
in the Fifteenth year of the Reign of his said Majesty, Entitled, An
Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Revenue arising by
Hearth-money, It was Enacted and Ordained, That from and after the Five and
twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty
and two, every Dwelling, and other House and Edifice, and all Lodgings in Inns
of Court, Inns of Chancery, Colleges, and other Societies that are, or
hereafter shall be erected within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed (other then such as are therein excepted) shall
be, and are charged with the Annual payment to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for every Fire-Hearth and Stove within every such House, Edifice,
Chambers and Lodgings, the sum of Two shillings by the year, to be paid yearly
at the Feasts of Saint Michael the Archangel, and of the Annuntiation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions; an exact and just Account of
the numbers of all which Fire-Hearths and Stoves is thereby Enacted to be taken
and returned into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer; And the Moneys and Revenues
due and payable for the same, to be collected, levied and paid to his Majesty,
by such persons and Officers, in manner and form as by the said Acts is
prescribed.

Nevertheless, by reason of some defects in the said Act, and great negligence
of the said Officers and other persons, in not returning the exact numbers of
the said Fire-Hearths and Stoves, and not duly Collecting, Levying and paying
into his Masties Exchequer, the full Revenue due for the numbers returned at
the times appointed, and by sundry fraudulent practices to elude the said Acts,
the said Revenue is much diminished, and not duly answered.

For remedy thereof, and for the better ascertaining and collecting the said
Revenue for the future, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by,
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, from, and after the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand
six hundred sixty four, from time to time, by, and with the Advice of the Lord
High Treasurer, Chancellor, Undertreasurer, and Barons of the Court of
Exchequer for the time being, or any three of them, whereof the Lord High
Treasurer, or Chancellor of the Exchequer to be one, to constitute and appoint
such person or persons as his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall think
meet, to be the Officer or Officers for the receiving and collecting, and
answering the duty arising by the said Fire-Hearths and Stoves, by virtue of
the said several Acts, and for viewing and numbering of the several
Chimney-hearths and Stoves mentioned in the said Acts; and for the inspecting
and examining the several Rolls, Certificates and Returns thereof made, and to
be made from time to time into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, in pursuance
of the said Acts, or any other thing belonging to the same: which Officers, or
any of them shall have full power to examine and supervise the Rolls and
Numbers of Fire-hearths and Stoves already returned into the said Court of
Exchequer; And being accompanied with the Constable, or the Tithing-man,
Treasurer, Undertreasurer, or other public or proper Officer of the place,
(who are hereby required to attend and assist upon this occasion) and in all
Parishes and places where there are no Constables, Tithingmen, or other public
Officer as aforesaid, there, without any such Assistance to enter in the day
time into any dwelling or other House, Edifice, Lodgings and Chambers
aforesaid, And to search and examine whether there be any more Fire-hearths and
Stoves in the same then were formerly returned or certified, and what
Fire-hearths or Stoves are increased, or decreased since the former
Certificate. After which search and examination, the said Officer, with a
Constable, or Tythingman, or Officers as aforesaid, shall have liberty to make
the like search and examination once every year: And if they shall find any
variance in the number returned, both the Officer or Officers appointed by his
Majesty, and the Constable or Tythingman, or other Officer as aforesaid, to
certify the same under his and their hands to the Clerk of the Peace, which
Certificate they are hereby enjoined to make: And after approbation thereof by
the Justices of the Peace at their Sessions, the same to be certified to his
Majesty's Remembrancer in the Exchequer; and the Officer or Officers so
appointed by his Majesty unto the same, shall from and after the said Four and
twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred sixty four, have power to
collect and levy the Revenue and Duties so given to his Majesty as aforesaid,
and all arrears of the same.

And be it further Enacted, That the said Duty shall from time to time be paid
after the Feast days of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the Annuntiation of
the Virgin Mary yearly, unto such Officer as shall be appointed by virtue of
this present Act to receive the same upon demand thereof made by such Officer,
or his Deputy, at the House, Chamber, or place where the same Duty shall arise
or grow due: And that in case of refusal, or default of such payment thereof,
by the space of one hour after such demand, the said Officer or his Deputy may
at any time, with the assistance of a Constable, Tythingman, or other Officer,
as aforesaid, in the day time, levy the said Duty, and all the Arrearages
thereof, by distress and sale of the goods of the party or parties so refusing,
or making default; restoring to the party or parties the overplus of the value
of such goods, over and above the Duty and Arrearages thereof then behind, and
over and above the necessary charges of taking such Distress, which Charges
shall in no case exceed the one moiety of the Duty and Arrearages thereof so
levied.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no Owners, Proprietors, or Occupiers
of the said Fire-hearths or Stoves, shall be charged, distrained, or molested
for the said Duty, or any Arrearages thereof, at any time after the space of
two years next after the Duty hereafter shall become due to his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors; Nor for any arrearages of the said Duty already incurred,
after the space of two years, from the Four and twentieth day of June, One
thousand six hundred sixty and four. And in case of violent opposition, or
injury done by any person or persons to any such Officer or his Deputy, in the
due execution of this Act; and the same proved by Oath before any one Justice
of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate or Magistrates of the City, Town, or place,
dwelling near unto the place, who are hereby authorized to administer the said
Oath; It shall and may be lawful to, and for such Justice of the Peaee,
Magistrate or Magistrates to punish such offender or offenders, if he shall
find cause, by Imprisonment in the common Goal, for any time not exceeding the
space of one month. And from and after the said Four and twentieth day of
June, One thousand six hundred sixty four, all Officers formerly appointed to
collect the said Duty, shall be discharged from the future collecting and
levying the same, otherwise then as they are directed by this Act: And the said
Officer and Officers so appointed by his Majesty to collect this Duty, shall
pay the same into his Majesty's Exchequer, to the ends in the said former Acts
mentioned.

Provided, That no person or persons shall be employed as aforesaid, unless he
and they shall first give in sufficient Security to his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for the due collecting, levying and paying in of the said Revenue,
or such part thereof as shall be committed to their respective Trusts, and
shall likewise take a Corporal Oath before one or more of the Barons of the
Exchequer, or before such persons as shall be authorized to take such Security
and Oath by Commission from the said Court of Exchequer, for the due and
faithful execution thereof, according to the Laws Enacted to that purpose; And
that they shall not exact or demand any Fee, or sum of money for execution
thereof, from any Subject, but only from the Kings Majesty, under pain of
being disabled to execute the said Office or Employment; And upon legal
Conviction of any such Crime, to render treble damage to the party grieved: And
shall sign and deliver Acquittances for moneys by them received, without any
Fee or Reward whatsoever; And every such Acquittance shall be a final
Discharge, as in the said first Act is provided.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
occupying any Hearth or Stove chargeable to his Majesty, shall leave or
relinquish any House, Edifice, Lodging or Chamber, before any of the
half-yearly Feasts whereon the same is appointed to be paid to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors; In every such case, the next Occupier thereof shall be
chargeable with the same for the said half year: And if any person shall
fraudulently stop up, deface, cover or conceal any Chimney-Hearth, or Stove
chargeable by the said Act, and the same be proved, either by confession of the
party, or upon Oath before one Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate, or by
their view, he shall for such offense pay double the value of the Duty for the
same, to be levied as aforesaid.

And be it likewise Enacted, That if any person within one year last past has,
or hereafter shall let the Lands, Gardens, Orchards or Outhouses formerly
belonging to any Dwelling House or Cottage apart from the same, or shall divide
any house into several dwellings, or let out the same to any such persons, who
by reason of their poverty may pretend to be exempted from payment of the said
Duty, by any Clause or Clauses in the former Acts, That in every such case,
such person shall pay the said Duty in as ample manner as they ought to have
done before that time. And that no person or persons inhabiting any
Dwelling House (not being an Almshouse exempted by the former Act) within any
City, Borough, Corporation, Market Town, or Parish which has, or shall have
in it more than two Chimneys, Fire-hearths or Stoves, shall be exempted from
payment of the Duties thereon imposed, by color of any exemption or pretext
whatsoever.

And if any question or difference shall arise about the taking any Distress,
or levying any money by virtue of this Act, the same shall be heard and finally
determined by one or more of the Justices of the Peace near adjoining, or chief
Magistrate of the place respectively, upon complaint in that behalf.

And be it further Enacted, That every Collector who shall be authorized and
appointed by virtue of this Act to receive any of the said Duties, shall truly
answer and pay all such moneys as he shall receive for the said Duties, into
his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, half-yearly, within Three months after the
Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, or the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, happening next after the time the same moneys grew due to his
Majesty by virtue of the said Acts, and under the penalty of the loss of his
Office: And the Justices of Peace, and chief Magistrates, Constables, and other
his Majesty's Officers within their several Limits and Jurisdictions, are
hereby authorized and required to give assistance from time to time, to such
Officers as shall be appointed by his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for
the collecting of the said Duty according to the true meaning of the said
former Acts, and this present Act.

Provided, That no person or persons shall be questioned for any arrears due on
or before our Lady day, One thousand six hundred sixty four, who shall produce
to the Collector a Certificate approved or to be approved of by the two next
Justices of Peace, for their exemption from the said Duty for that time,
according to the Rules prescribed in the said first recited Act; nor any person
who has truly paid the said Duty, and shall, if it be required, make proof
thereof before any one Justice of Peace, or other chief Magistrate of the
place; Any thing therein contained, or any Return made into his Majesty's
Exchequer to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every such Officer or Officers as shall be at any time appointed by his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for the collecting, gathering and receiving
of the several sums of money now or hereafter to grow due unto his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, for or in respect of the said Duty arising upon the
Fire-hearths and Stoves, shall satisfy and pay unto the respective
Petty-Constables and Clerks of the Peace of this Kingdom, all such allowances
as are by any former Act or Acts given and allowed unto them, as well for their
pains and labor heretofore, as hereafter to be taken by them, as in and by the
former Acts concerning Fire-hearths and Stoves are limited and appointed; Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. IV.
Seditious Conventicles suppressed.

WHereas an Act made in the Five and thirtieth year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act to retain the Queens
Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, 35 El. cap. 1. declared to be in
force.
has not been put in due Execution, by reason of some doubt of late made,
whether the said Act be still in force; although it be very clear and evident,
And it is hereby Declared, That the said Act is still in force, and ought to be
put in due execution,

For providing therefore of further and more speedy remedies against the
growing and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, Further remedy against
Seditious Sectaries.
and other disloyal persons, who under pretense of Tender Consciences, do at
their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late Experience has showed.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person of
the age of Sixteen years or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time
after the first day of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and four, shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle, or Meeting, Unlawful Conventicles and Meetings under pretense of
exercise of Religion forbidden.
under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion, in other manner then is
allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, in any place
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, At which Conventicle, Meeting, or Assembly, there shall be five persons
or more assembled together, over and above those of the same Household; Then it
shall and may be lawful to, and for any two Justices of the Peace of the
County, The punishment and manner of proceeding against them for the first
offense.
Limit, Division or Liberty wherein the Offense aforesaid shall be committed,
or for the Chief Magistrate of the place where such Offense aforesaid shall be
committed, (if it be within a Corporation where there are not two Justices of
the Peace) And they are hereby required and enjoined upon proof to them or him
respectively made of such offense, either by confession of the party, or oath
of Witness, or notorious evidence of the Fact: (which Oath the said Justices of
the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, are hereby empowered and required
to administer) to make a Record of every such offense and offenses under their
hands and seals respectively; which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all
intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect
Conviction of every such Offender for such offense: And thereupon the said
Justices and Chief Magistrate respectively, shall commit every such Offender so
convicted as aforesaid to the Gaol, or house of Correction, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprise, for any time not exceeding the space of three
Months, unless such Offender shall pay down to the said Justices, or Chief
Magistrate such sum of money not exceeding five pounds, as the said Justices,
or Chief Magistrate (who are hereby thereunto authorized and required) shall
Fine the said Offender at, for his or her said offense; which money shall be
paid to the Churchwardens for the relief of the Poor of the Parish where such
Offender did last inhabit.

And be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, The second offense.
That if such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again
commit the like offense contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner
aforesaid convicted, Then such Offender so convict of such second offense,
shall incur the penalty of Imprisonment in the Gaol, or house of Correction,
for any time not exceeding six months, without Bail or Mainprise, unless such
offender shall pay down to the said Justices or Chief Magistrate such sum of
money, not exceeding Ten pounds, as the said Justices or Chief Magistrate (who
are thereunto authorized and required as aforesaid) shall Fine the said
Offender at, for his or her said second offense, the said Fine to be disposed
in manner aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, The third offense.
That if any such Offender so convict of a second offense, contrary to this Act
in manner aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like offense contrary
to this Act, Then any two Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate as
aforesaid respectively, shall commit every such Offender to the Gaol, or house
of Correction, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise until the next General
Quarter Sessions, Assizes, Jail-deliver, great Sessions, or sitting of any
Commission of Oyer and Terminer in the respective County, Limit, Division or
Liberty which shall first happen; when, and where every such Offender shall be
proceeded against by Indictment for such offense, and shall forthwith be
arraigned upon such Indictment, and shall then plead the General Issue of not
guilty, and give any special matter in Evidence, or confess the Indictment. And
if such Offender proceeded against, shall be lawfully convict of such Offense,
either by Confession or Verdict, or if such Offender shall refuse to Plead the
General Issue, or to confess the Indictment, then the respective Justices of
the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions, Judges of Assize and Jail-deliver
at the Assizes and Jail-deliver, Justices of the great Sessions at the great
Sessions, and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, at their sitting, are hereby
enabled and required to cause Judgment to be entered against such Offender,
That such Offender shall be Transported beyond the Seas to any of His Majesty's
Foreign Plantations ( Virginia and New England only excepted) there to remain
Seven years; And shall forthwith under their Hands and Seals make out Warrants
to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the same County where such Conviction or Refusal
to Plead or to Confess as aforesaid, shall be, safely to convey such Offender
to some Port or Haven nearest or most commodious to be appointed by them
respectively; And from thence to Embarque such Offender to be safely
Transported to any of his Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas, as shall be
also by them respectively appointed ( Virginia and New England only excepted:)
Whereupon the said Sheriff shall safely Convey and Embarque, or cause to be
Conveyed and Embarked such Offender, to be Transported as aforesaid, under
pain of forfeiting for default of so Transporting every such Offender, the sum
of forty pounds of lawful money, the one Moiety thereof to the King, and the
other Moiety to him or them that shall Sue for the same in any of the Kings
Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt, or Information; In any of
which, no Wager of Law, Essoign or Protection shall be admitted. And the said
respective Court shall then also make out Warrants to the several Constables,
Headboroughs, or Tythingmen of the respective places where the Estate real or
personal of such offender so to be Transported shall happen to be, commanding
them thereby to Sequester into their hands the profits of the Lands, and to
distrain and sell the Goods of the offender so to be Transported, for the
reimbursing of the said Sheriff all such reasonable charges as he shall be at,
and shall be allowed him by the said respective Court for such Conveying and
Embarquing of such offender so to be Transported, rendering to the party, or his
or her Assigns, the overplus of the same, if any be; unless such offender, or
some other on the behalf of such offender so to be Transported, shall give the
Sheriff such Security as he shall approve of for the paying all the said
Charges unto him.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, How Seditious Sectaries
convicted may be transported.
That in default of defraying such Charges by the parties so to be Transported,
or some other in their behalf; or in default of Security given to the Sheriff
as aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful for every such Sheriff to Contract
with any Master of a Ship, Merchant, or other person, for the Transporting of
such offender at the best rate he can. And that in every such case it shall and
may be lawful for such persons so Contracting with any Sheriff for Transporting
such offender as aforesaid, to detain and employ every such offender so by them
Transported, as a Labourer to them or their Assigns for the space of Five
years, to all intents and purposes, as if he or she were bound by Indentures,
to such person for that purpose: And that the respective Sheriffs shall be
allowed or paid from the King, upon their respective Accounts in the Exchequer,
all such charges by them expended, for Conveying, Embarquing and Transporting
of such persons which shall be allowed by the said respective Courts from
whence they received their respective Warrants, and which shall not have been
by any of the ways aforementioned paid, secured, or reimbursed unto them as
aforesaid.

How the offender may be discharged upon payment of 100 l.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That in case the offender so
Indicted and Convicted for the said Third offense, shall pay into the hands of
the Register or Clerk of the Court or Sessions where he shall be Convicted
(before the said Court or Sessions shall be ended) the sum of One hundred
pounds, That then the said offender shall be discharged from Imprisonment and
Transportation, and the Judgment for the same.

Punishment of offenders after the third offense.
And be it further Enacted, That the like Imprisonment, Indictment, Arraignment
and Proceedings shall be against every such offender, as often as he shall
again offend after such Third offense; Nevertheless is dischargeable and
discharged by the payment of the like sum as was paid by such offender for his
or her said offense next before committed, together with the additional and
increased sum of One hundred pounds more upon every new offense committed; the
said respective sums to be paid as aforesaid, and to be disposed of as
follows, (viz) The one Moiety for the Repair of the Parish Church or
Churches, How the said penalty of 100 l. shall be disposed.
Chapel or Chapels of such Parish within which such Conventicle, Assembly or
Meeting shall be held; and the other Moiety to the Repair of the Highways of
the said Parish or Parishes (if need require) or otherwise for the amendment of
such Highways as the Justices of the Peace at their respective
Quarter Sessions shall direct and appoint. And if any Constable, Headborough or
Tythingman shall neglect to execute any the said Warrants made unto them for
Sequestring, Distraining and Selling any of the Goods and Chattels of any
offender against this Act, for the Levying such sums of money as shall be
imposed for the first or second offense, he shall forfeit for every such
neglect the sum of Five pounds of lawful money of England, the one moyetie
thereof to the King, and the other moyetie to him that will sue for the same in
any of the Kings Courts of Record, as is aforesaid. And if any person be at any
time Sued for putting in Execution any of the powers contained in this Act,
Persons sued for executing this Act may plead the General issue and recover
treble Costs.
such person shall and may plead the general Issue, and give the special matter
in evidence. And if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the
Defendant thereupon, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon
Demurrer, Judgment be given for the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have
his or their treble Costs.

Felony to escape after conviction, or to return after Transportation.
And be it further Enacted, That if any person against whom Judgment of
Transportation shall be given in manner aforesaid, shall make escape before
Transportation; or being Transported; as aforesaid shall return unto this Realm
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, without the
special License of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, in that behalf first
had and obtained: That the party so escaping or returning shall be adjudged a
Felon, and shall suffer death as in case of Felony, without benefit of Clergy;
and shall forfeit and lose to His Majesty, all his or her Goods and Chattels
for ever; and shall further lose to His Majesty all his or her Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments for and during the life only of such offender and no longer.
And that the wife of any such offender by force of this Act shall not lose her
Dower, nor shall any Corruption of blood grow, or be by reason of any such
offense mentioned in this Act: But that the heir of every such offender by
force of this Act, shall and may after the death of such offender have and
enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such offenders, as if this Act
had not been made.

Seditious and Tumultuous Meetings, and Conventicles.
And for better preventing of the mischiefs which may grow by such Seditious and
Tumultuous Meetings under pretense of Religious Worship, Be it further Enacted
by the authority aforesaid, That the Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants, or any
Commissioned Officers of the Militia, or any other of His Majesty's Forces,
with such Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot; And also the Sheriffs and
Justices of Peace and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of
them jointly or severally within any of the Counties or Places within this
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such
other assistance as they shall think meet or can get in readiness with the
soonest, on Certificate made to them respectively under the hand and seal of
any one Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, of his
particular Information or knowledge of such unlawful Meetings or Conventicles
held or to be held in their respective Counties or places, And that he (with
such assistance as he can get together is not able to suppress or dissolve the
same) shall and may, and are hereby required and enjoined to repair unto the
place where they are so held, or to be held, and by the best means they can to
dissolve and dissipate or prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into
their custody such of those persons so unlawfully assembled as they shall judge
to be the Leaders and Seducers of the rest, and such others as they shall think
fit to be proceeded against according to Law for such their Offenses.

The penalty of suffering Conventicles in private houses.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who shall
wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, unlawful Assembly or
Meeting aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn or Room,
Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds, shall incur the same penalties and
forfeitures as any other Offender against this Act ought to incur, and be
proceeded against in all points, in such manner as any other offender against
this Act ought to be proceeded against. Gaolers may not let priso-committed
upon this Act to go at large.


Provided also, And be it Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
Keeper of any Gaol or House of Correction shall suffer any person committed to
his custody for any offense against this Act, to go at large, contrary to the
Warrant of his Commitment according to this Act, or shall permit any person who
is at large to join with any person committed to his Custody by virtue of this
Act, in the exercise of Religion, differing from the Rites of the Church of
England; then every such Keeper of a Gaol or House of Correction shall for
every such offense forfeit the sum of Ten pounds, to be Levied, Raised and
Disposed by such persons, The Penalty.
and in such manner as the penalties for the first and second offenses against
this Act are to be Levied, Raised and Disposed.

Provided always, That no person shall be punished for any offense against this
Act, Within what time offenders must be prosecuted.
unless such Offender be prosecuted for the same within Three months after the
offense committed: And that no person who shall be punished for any offense by
virtue of this Act, shall be punished for the same offense by virtue of any
other Act or Law whatsoever.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, Married women how to be punished.
That Judgment of Transportation shall not be given against any Feme-Covert,
unless her husband be at the same time under the like Judgment, and not
discharged by the payment of money as aforesaid; but that instead thereof she
shall by the respective Court be committed to the Goal or House of Correction,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, for any time not exceeding, Twelve
months, unless her Husband shall pay down such sum, not exceeding Forty
pounds, to redeem her from Imprisonment, as shall be imposed by the said Court,
the said sum to be disposed by such persons, and in such manner as the
Penalties for the first and second offense against this Act are to be disposed.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices
of the Peace, How Justices of the Peace may enter into houses suspected for
Conventicles.
and chief Magistrate respectively Empowered as aforesaid to put this Act in
execution, shall and may, with what aid, force and assistance they shall think
fit, for the better execution of this Act, after refusal or denial, Enter into
any House, or other place where they shall be informed and such Conventicle as
aforesaid is, or shall be held.

Provided, That no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm, The houses of
Peers.
whilst he or his Wife shall be there resident, shall be searched by virtue of
this Act, but by immediate Warrant from His Majesty under His Sign Manual, or
in the presence of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy Lieutenants, or two
Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or
Riding. Nor shall any other Dwelling House of any Peer or other person
whatsoever be entered into with force, by virtue of this Act, but in the
presence of one Justice of the Peace, or chief Magistrate respectively, except
within the City of London, where it shall be lawful for any such other
Dwelling House to be entered into as aforesaid, in the presence of one Justice
of the Peace Alderman, Deputy-Alderman, or any one Commissioner of the
Lieutenancy for the City of London,

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, What persons may
be not committed to the house of Correction.
That no person shall by virtue of this Act be committed to the house of
Correction, that shall satisfy the said Justices of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate respectively, That he or she (and in case of a Feme-Covert, that her
Husband) has an Estate of Freehold, or Copyhold to the value of Five pounds
per annum, or personal estate to the value of Fifty pounds; Any thing in this
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And in regard a certain Sect called Quakers, and other Sectaries, Persons
served with Process refusing to take an Oath 14 Car. 2. cap. 1.
are found not only to offend in the matters provided against by this Act, but
also to obstruct the proceeding of Justice by their obstinate refusal to take
Oaths lawfully tendered unto them in the ordinary course of Law; Therefore be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or person
being duly and legally served with Process or other Summons to appear in any
Court of Record, except Courts-Leet, as a Witness, or returned to serve of any
Jury, or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, or being present in Court
shall refuse to take any Judicial Oath legally tendered to him by the Judge or
Judges of the same Court, having no legal Plea to justify or excuse the
refusal of the same Oath; or if any person or persons being duly served with
Process, to answer any Bill exhibited against him or them in any Court of
Equity, or any Suit in any Court Ecclesiastical, shall refuse to answer such
Bill or Suit upon his or their Corporal Oath, in cases where the Law requires
such answer to be put in upon Oath; or being summoned to be a Witness in any
such Court, or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, shall for any cause
or reason, not allowed by Law, refuse to take such Oath, as in such cases is
required by Law; That then, and in such case, the several and respective Courts
wherein such refusal shall be made, shall be, The Penalty.
and are hereby enabled to Record, Enter, or Register such refusal, which
Record or Entry shall be, and is hereby made a Conviction of such offense. And
all and every person and persons so as aforesaid offending, shall for every
such offense incur the Judgment and Punishment of Transportation in such
manner as is appointed by this Act for other offenses.

Provided always, That if any the person or persons aforesaid shall come into
such Court, How such persons may be acquitted.
and take his or their Oath in these words;

I do swear, that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawful, nor
refuse to take a^ Oath on that account.

Which Oath the respective Court and Courts aforesaid are hereby authorized and
required forthwith to tender, administer, and register before the Entry of the
Conviction aforesaid, or shall take such Oath before some Justice of the Peace,
who is hereby authorized and required to administer the same, to be returned
into such Court; such Oath so made shall acquit him or them from such
punishment; Any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That every person convicted as aforesaid in any Courts
aforesaid (other then His Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, or before the
Justices of Assize, or General Jail-deliver) shall by Warrant containing a
Certificate of such Conviction under the hand and seal of the respective Judge
or Judges before whom such Conviction shall be had, be sent to some one of His
Majesty's Gaols in the same County where such Conviction was had, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next Assizes, or General
Jail-deliver; where, if such person so convicted shall refuse to take the Oath
aforesaid, being tendered unto him by the Justice or Justices of Assize or
Jail-deliver; then such Justice or Justices shall cause Judgment of
Transportation to be executed, in such manner as Judgment of Transportation by
this Act is to be executed. But in case such person shall take the said Oath,
then he shall thereupon be discharged.

Peers offending how to be proceeded against.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Peer
of this Realm shall offend against this Act, he shall pay Ten pounds for the
first offense, and Twenty pounds for the second offense, to be levied upon his
Goods and Chattels by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate of the Place or Division where such Peer shall dwell; and that every
Peer for the third, and every further offense against the tenor of this Act,
shall be tried by his Peers, and not otherwise.

The continuance of this Act.
Provided also, and be further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act
shall continue in force for Three years after the end of this present Session
of Parliament; and from thenceforward, to the end of the next Session of
Parliament after the said Three years, and no longer.

CAP. V.
Against Disturbances of Seamen and others, and to preserve the Stores
belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal.

WHereas diverse fightings, quarrellings and disturbances do often happen in and
about His Majesty's Offices, Yards and Stores for His Majesty's Royal Navy, and
frequent differences and disorders are occasioned in the Office of His
Majesty's Treasury of the Navy on Pay-days, in London, Portsmouth, and other
places of meeting for the service of the said Navy; and that either by the
unreasonable turbulency of Seamen and others, attending on, or relating to
that Service, or their Creditors, or by the rudeness of the Officers entrusted
with His Majesty's Stores on Land, or in his Royal Ships, when they are
questioned by the principal Officers and Commissioners of the said Navy, either
for neglect or imbezelment of His Majesty's Provisions, Ammunitions, or other
Equipage of the Navy under their charge; And that not only to the disturbance
of the Peace, but sometimes to the danger and hindrance of His Majesty's
Service, both in point of Husbanding His Majesty's Revenue, and also in
dispatch of the Ships, on which the honor and safety of His Majesty and
Kingdom so much depends: which Inconveniences require a speedier Remedy then
the ordinary attendance on the Sessions of the Peace can give, the parties
accused or offending being many times bound to Sea; And the principal Officers
and Commissioners for want of authority to suppress such Insolences, and
determine such Cases, being necessitated to pass by many offenses, in which His
Majesty might be righted, if their necessary attendance on that Important
Service would permit the prosecution of the Offenders before other ordinary
Iudicatures.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the advice
and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the Treasurer, Comptroller,
Surveyour, Clerk of the Acts, and the Commissioners of the Navy for the time
being, Who may punish disturbances by Seamen and others relating to the Navy
Office.
or any two or more of them have power and Authority to examine and punish all
such person and persons, whom they upon their enquiry, examination, or on view
in their presence shall find hereafter to make, or have made any disturbance,
fighting, or quarrelling in the Yards, Stores, or Offices aforesaid at
Pay-days, or on other occasions relating to the Naval Services, in such manner
as follows, that is to say, That they or any two or more of them may punish
any the said offenses by Fine, Imprisonment, or either of them; the Fine not
exceeding twenty shillings, and the Imprisonment not exceeding one week; and
have power in such cases to commit such persons to the next Gaol or to the
custody of the Messenger or Messengers for the time being attendant on them,
who respectively are to receive and detain such person so offending.

And that the said principal Officers and Commissioners, or the greater number
of them then present, have power to discharge such Fine or Imprisonment, if
they so think fit: And for non-payment of the Fine so Imposed, and not
remitted, to imprison the party offending until payment thereof; which said
Fines shall be paid to the Clerk of the Chest, for the use of the maimed
Seamen; and that the examination of witnesses be upon oath before them, which
they, any two or more of them are accordingly empowered to administer.

And it is further by the Authority aforesaid Enacted, That the said Officers
and Commissioners, or any two or more of them (in Cases where greater example
or punishment is needful) may also bind the person and persons offending to
their good behavior, with, or without Securities, as occasion shall be.

Imbezilling of Stores and Ammunition.
And whereas diverse of His Majesty's Stores and Ammunition, pertaining to his
Navy and Shipping, or service thereof, are Imbezelled and Filched away;

It is by like Authority Enacted, That the said principal Officers and
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, by warrant under their hands and
seals have power in like manner to enquire and search for the same in all
places, as Justices of the Peace may do in case of Felony, and punish the
Offenders by such Fine and Imprisonment as aforesaid, and cause the Goods to be
brought in again. And if the offense be of such nature as does require a higher
and severer punishment, Then that they, or any two or more of them may commit
such offenders to the next Gaol, or to the custody of their Messenger or
Messengers aforesaid, till he or they so offending enter into Recognizance with
Surety or Sureties according to the nature of the offense, to appear and answer
to the same in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, or other Court where his
Majesty shall question him or them for the same within one year following, on
process duly served for that purpose on such offender or offenders.

And it is Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That they the said
principal Officers and Commissioners, or any two or more of them may put in use
the said powers on the Offenders, as aforesaid, in all places where they hold
an Office for his Majesty, as well within Liberties as without, Any Law,
Statute, Ordinance, Charter, or Privilege to the contrary notwithstanding.
This Act to continue for two years, from the First day of June, The continuance
of this Act. 19 Car. 2. cap. 7.
One thousand six hundred sixty and four: And from thence to the end of the
next Session of Parliament.

CAP. VI.
To prevent the delivering up of Merchants Ships.

WHereas it often happens that Masters and Commanders of Merchants Ships do
suffer their Ships to be boarded, and the goods to be taken out by Pirates and
Sea-Rovers, notwithstanding they have sufficient force to defend themselves,
whereby not only the Merchants are much prejudiced, but the honor of the
English Navigation is thereby much diminished, and Merchants discouraged from
lading their goods on board English Ships, to the decay of Shipping; In the
preservation whereof, the wealth, honor and safety of this Nation is so much
concerned: To which the said Masters are encouraged by a practice used toward
them by the Turks and others, who after they have taken out the goods, as an
encouragement to Masters of Ships to yield, do not only restore the Ship with
such goods as are claimed by the Masters or Seamen, but many times pay unto
the Masters all, or some part of the Freight, which has many times caused
suspicion of treachery in the said Masters, to the great dishonor of the
English Nation.

For the prevention thereof for the future, and for the better encouragement to
Merchants, as well Foreigners as English, to Freight and use English Ships, Be
it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, and by Authority of the same, English Ships not to be yielded up to
Turks or Pirates.
That where any Goods or Merchandises shall be laden on board any English Ship,
which Ship shall be of the burden of Two hundred Tuns or upwards, and mounted
with sixteen Guns or more; if the Master or Commander shall yield up the said
Goods to any Turkish Ships or Vessels, or to any Pirates or Sea-Rovers
whatsoever without fighting, That then and in such case the Master shall (upon
proof thereof made in the high Court of Admiralty) be from thenceforth
incapable of taking charge of any English Ship or Vessel as Master or Commander
thereof. The Penalty.
And if he shall at any time thereafter presume to take upon him to Command any
English Ship or Vessel, he shall suffer Imprisonment by warrant from the said
Court, during the space of six months for every offense: And in case the
persons so taking the said Goods, shall release, give back, or let pass the
Ship, or shall pay unto the said Master any sum or sums of money, or any goods
in lieu of money for freight or other reward or gift, That in all or any such
cases the said goods or money so given, or the value thereof, as also the
Masters part of such Ship, her Tackle, Apparel and Furniture so released, given
back, or let pass, out of which the said goods were taken, shall be liable to
repair the persons whose Goods were so delivered or taken, by Action in the
High Court of Admiralty; And in case the Commanders or Masters part of the
Ship, Tackle, Apparel and Furniture, together with such money and goods given
as aforesaid, shall not be sufficient to repair all the damages sustained, then
the Reparations to be recovered on the Masters or Commanders part of the Ship
to be divided pro Rata amongst the persons prosecuting and proving their
damages; and the persons damaged to have their Action against the Master for
the remainder.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Masters of Ships.
That no Master of any such English Ship as aforesaid, being at Sea, and having
discovered any Ship to be a Turkish Ship, Pyrat, or Sea-Rover, shall depart out
of his Ship upon any pretense whatsoever, lest by his detention on board any
such Ship, the safety of his own Ship be hazarded.

And be it further Enacted, That if the Master of any English Ship or Vessel,
though not of the Burden of Two hundred Tuns, or mounted with Sixteen Guns, as
aforesaid, shall yield his said Ship unto any Turkish Ship, Pyrat, or Sea-Rover
(not having at the least double his number of Guns) without fighting; Every
such Master shall be liable to all and every the penalties in this Act
contained.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Process out of the Court
of Admiralty.
That upon Process made out of the High Court of Admiralty, It shall and may be
lawful to and for all Commanders of his Majesty's Ships of War, or the
Commanders of any other English Ships, to seize such Ships or Masters so
offending, according to the said Process in such case to be issued, and the
same to bring or send in custody into any Ports of His Majesty's Dominions,
there to be proceeded against according to the intent and meaning of this Act.

Provided that none be hereby encouraged to violate the Rights o^ the Ports of
any Foreign Prince or State in amity with the Kings Majesty.

Mariners or inferior officers declining to fight.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Mariners or
inferior Officers of any English Ship laden with Goods and Merchandises as
aforesaid, shall decline or refuse to fight and defend the Ship, when they
shall be thereunto commanded by the Master or Commander thereof, or shall utter
any words to discourage the other Mariners from defending the Ship; The Penalty.
That every Mariner, who shall be found guilty of declining or refusing as
aforesaid, shall lose all his wages due to him, together with such goods as he
has in the Ship, and suffer Imprisonment, not exceeding the space of Six
months, and shall during such time, be kept to hard labor for his or their
maintenance.

Provided always, That if any Ship shall have been yielded as aforesaid,
contrary to the will and endeavor of the Master or Commander, by the
disobedience of his Mariners, testified by their having laid violent hands on
him, That in such case the Master or Commander shall not be liable to the
sentence of Incapacity as aforesaid, nor to any Action for the losses sustained
by the Merchants, unless he shall have received back from the takers thereof,
his Ship, or some recompense, gift or reward as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Mariner who
shall have laid violent hands on his Commander, whereby to hinder him from
fighting in defense of his Ship and Goods committed to his trust, shall suffer
death as a Felon.

And for the better encouragement to Captains, Masters, Officers and Sea men to
defend their Ships, Encouragement to Captains and S^amen to defend their Ships.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when any English Ship shall
have been defended by fight, and brought to her designed Port, in which fight
any of the Officers or Sea men shall have been wounded, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Judge of His Majesty's High Court of Admiralty, or his
Surrogate, or the Judge of the Vice-Admiralty within which the Ship shall
arrive at her return, upon Petition of the Master or Seamen of such Ship so
defended as aforesaid, to call unto him such and so many as he shall be
informed to be Adventurers or Owners of the Ship and Goods so defended, and by
advice with them, to raise and levy upon the respective Owners and Adventurers,
by Process out of the said Court, such sum or sums of money as himself, with
the Major part of the Adventurers or Owners then present shall judge
reasonable, not exceeding the value of Two per cent. of the Ship and Goods so
defended, according to the first cost of the Goods, to be made appear by the
Envoyce (which the Owner or his Factor, or Correspondent, is hereby required to
produce) or by the Oath of the said Owner, Factor, or Correspondent, if
thereunto required; which money, so raised, shall be paid unto the Register of
the said Court, who shall receive for the same Three pence in each pound and no
more, thence to be distributed amongst the Captain, Master, Officers and Seamen
of the said Ship, or Widows and Children of the slain, according to the
direction of the Judge of the said Court, with the approbation of Three or more
of the Owners or Adventurers aforesaid, who shall proportion the same according
to their best Judgments unto the Ships Company, as aforesaid, having especial
regard unto the Widows and Children of such as shall have been slain in that
Service, and to such as shall have been wounded or maimed.

And in case the Company belonging to any English Merchant-ship, shall happen
to take any ship, Ships which (...) o^ taken (...) English
which ship shall first have assaulted them, the respective Officers and
Mariners belonging to the same, shall after Condemnation of such ship and
Goods, have and receive to their own proper use and benefit, such part and
share thereof as is usually practiced in Private men of War.

^mary.
And whereas it often happens, that Masters and Mariners of ships having
ensured or taken upon Botomary greater sums of money then the value of their
Adventure, do wilfully cast away, burn, or otherwise destroy the ships under
their charge, to Merchants and Owners great loss; For the prevention thereof
for the future, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Captain,
Master, Mariner, or other Officer belonging to any ship, shall wilfully cast
away, burn, or otherwise destroy the ship unto which he belongs, or procure
the same to be done, he shall suffer death as a Felon.

The continuance of this Act.
Provided that this Act shall continue for Three years, and from thence to the
end of the next Session of Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. VII.
Deceitful, disorderly, and excessive Gaming prevented.

The inconvenience of immoderate and unlawful use of gaming.
WHereas all Lawful Games and Exercises should not be otherwise used, then as
Innocent and Moderate Recreations, and not as constant Trades or Callings to
gain a Living, or make unlawful Advantage thereby; And whereas by the
immoderate use of them, many mischiefs and inconveniences do arise, and are
daily found, to the maintaining and encouraging of sundry idle, loose, and
disorderly persons in their dishonest, lewd, and dissolute course of life, And
to the circumventing, deceiving, cousening, and debauching of many of the
younger sort, both of the Nobility and Gentry, and others, to the loss of their
precious time, and the utter ruin of their Estates and Fortunes, and
withdrawing them from Noble and Laudable Employments and Exercises:

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any
person or persons of any Degree or Quality whatsoever, at any time or times
after the Nine and twentieth day of September, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and four, do, or shall by any
fraud, shift, cousenage, circumvention, deceit, or unlawful device, or ill
practice whatsoever, Deceits and Cosenages in Gaming.
in playing at or with Cards, Dice, Tables, Tennis, Bowls, Kittles,
Shovelboard; or in or by Cock-fightings, Horse-races, Dog-matches, or
Foot-races, or other Pastimes, Game, or Games whatsoever, or in, or by bearing
a share, or part in the Stakes, Wagers, or Adventures, or in, or by betting on
the Sides or Hands of such as do, or shall Play, Act, Ride, or Run as
aforesaid, win, obtain, or acquire to him or themselves, or to any other or
others any sum or sums of money, or other valuable thing or things whatsoever,
The penalty.
That then every person and persons so offending as aforesaid, shall ipso facto
forfeit and lose treble the sum or value of money, or other thing or things so
won, gained, obtained or acquired; The one moiety thereof to our Sovereign Lord
the King, his Heirs and Successors, and the other moiety thereof unto the
person or persons grieved, or who shall lose the money, or other thing or
things so gained; so as every such loser and person grieved in that behalf, do,
or shall prosecute and sue for the same within six Calendar Months next after
such Play. And in default of such prosecution, the same other moiety to such
person or persons as shall or will prosecute or sue for the same within one
year next after the said six months expired; And that the said Forfeitures
shall, or may be sued for, or recovered by Action of Debt, How to be sued for
and recovered.
Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of his Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed. And that all
and every such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, Informer or Informers, shall in every
such Suit and Prosecution have and recover his and their treble Costs against
the person offending and forfeiting as aforesaid; Any Law, Statute, Custom, or
Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And for the better avoiding and preventing of all excessive and immoderate
Playing and Gaming for the time to come, Be it further Ordained and Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, Prevention of excessive and immoderate gaming.
That if any person or persons shall at any time or times after the Nine and
twentieth day of September aforesaid, play at any of the said Games, or any
other Pastime, Game or Games whatsoever (other then with and for ready money)
or shall Bett on the Sides or hands of such as do, or shall play thereat, and
shall lose any sum or sums of money, or other thing or things so played for,
exceeding the sum of One hundred pounds at any one time or meeting, upon Ticket
or Credit or otherwise, and shall not pay down the same at the time when he or
they shall so lose the same, The party and parties who loses or shall lose the
said moneys, or other thing or things so played or to be played for, above the
said sum of One hundred pounds, shall not in that case be bound, or compellable
to pay or make good the same; but the Contract and Contracts for the same, and
for every part thereof, and all and singular Judgments, Statutes,
Recognizances, Mortgages, Conveyances, Assurances, Bonds, Bills, Specialties,
Promises, Covenants, Agreements and other Acts, Deeds and Securities
whatsoever, which shall be obtained, made, given, acknowledged or entered into
for security or satisfaction, of, or for the same, or any part thereof, shall
be utterly void and of none effect: And that the person or persons so winning
the said moneys, or other things, The Penalty.
shall forfeit and lose treble the value of all such sum and sums of money, or
other thing and things which he shall so win, gain, obtain, or acquire, above
the said sum of One hundred pounds, the one moiety thereof to our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors; and the other moiety thereof
to such person or persons as shall prosecute, or sue for the same within one
year next after the time of such offense committed; And to be sued for by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of
Record at Westminster, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed. And that every such Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, Informer or Informers
shall, in every such suit and prosecution, have and receive his treble Costs
against the person and persons offending and forfeiting as aforesaid; Any Law,
Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. VIII.
A former Act for Regulating the Press, Continued.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That an Act made in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of
Our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, entitled, An Act for preventing the
frequent abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable, 14 Car. 2 cap. 3.
and unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and for Regulating of Printing, and
Printing-Presses, shall be continued and remain in force until the end of the
next Session of Parliament. 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 7.

Anno XVI. and XVII. Caroli II. Regis.
CAP. I.
A Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty, of Twenty four hundred threescore and
seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, to be Raised, Levied and Paid in
the space of Three years.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, taking into consideration the great and apparent Dangers which now
threaten this Kingdom; and that for prevention thereof, Your Majesty has found
Your Self obliged to Equip and Set out to Sea a Royal Navy for the preservation
of Your Majesty's ancient and undoubted Sovereignty and Dominion in the Seas,
and the Trade of Your Majesty's Subjects; And having duly weighed and
considered the several ways and means by which Your Majesty has been enforced
to make these Preparations at so vast an Expense; And acknowledging with all
humility and thankfulness Your Majesty's abundant Care for our preservation;
and being deeply sensible of that extraordinary Charge and Expense with which
Your Majesty's present Engagement ought to be supported; and of those
inconveniences which must needs befall the Nation, if we should be wanting to
our selves in this so weighty and important occasion; Have cheerfully and
unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant unto Your most
Excellent Majesty, the Sum of Twenty four hundred threescore and seventeen
thousand and five hundred pounds, to be raised and levied in manner following.

And do humbly beseech Your Majesty, That it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted
by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That for the Righting of Your Majesty
and Your Majesty's Subjects against the Dutch, the Sum of Twenty four hundred
threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds shall be raised,
levied and paid unto Your Majesty within the space of three years in manner
following, that is to say, the sum of Threescore and eight thousand eight
hundred and nineteen pounds and nine shillings by the Month, for thirty six
Months, beginning from the Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand
six hundred sixty four, shall be assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by
twelve quarterly payments, in the several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns
and places within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
according to the several rules and proportions, and in such manner as is
hereafter expressed: That is to say, For every Month of the said Thirty six
Months,

For the County of Bedford, the sum of Eight hundred ninety six pounds
seventeen shillings and nine pence.

The County of Berks, the sum of One thousand One hundred thirty two pounds six
shillings and seven pence.

The County of Bucks, the sum of One thousand three hundred and fifteen pounds
six shillings and five pence.

Cambridge, the sum of One thousand and twenty pounds.

The Isle of Ely, the sum of Three hundred forty nine pounds seventeen
shillings and eleven pence.

The County of Chester, with the City and County of the City of Chester, the
sum of Eight hundred and one pounds five shillings and six pence.

The County of Cornwall, the sum of One thousand five hundred and forty pounds
eighteen shillings and three pence.

The County of Cumberland, the sum of One hundred sixty eight pounds six
shillings and a penny.

The County of Derby, the sum of Eight hundred sixty two pounds eight shillings
and four pence.

The County of Devon, the sum of Three thousand two hundred twenty nine pounds
nineteen shillings and two pence.

The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of One hundred and sixteen
pounds seven shillings and four pence.

The County of Dorset, the sum of One thousand three hundred forty four pounds
ten shillings and five pence.

The Town and County of Pool, the sum of Ten pounds nineteen shillings and
eight pence.

The County of Durham, the sum of Three hundred twenty three pounds sixteen
shillings and nine pence.

The County of York, with the City and County of the City of York, and Town and
County of Kingstone upon Hull, the sum of One thousand four hundred sixty nine
pounds five shillings and two pence.

The County of Essex, the sum of Three thousand ninety eight pounds eight
shillings and ten pence.

The County of Gloucester, the sum of One thousand eight hundred and eight
pounds ten shillings and three pence.

The City and County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of Thirty nine pounds
eight shillings.

The County of Hereford, the sum of One thousand one hundred thirty one pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence.

The County of Hertford, the sum of One thousand three hundred forty five
pounds sixteen shillings and three pence.

The County of Huntington, the sum of Six hundred thirty three pounds fourteen
shillings and two pence.

The County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the
sum of Three thousand three hundred twenty six pounds eighteen shillings and
eight pence.

The County of Lancaster, the sum of One thousand and six pounds thirteen
shillings and six pence.

The County of Leicester, the sum of One thousand eighty four pounds fourteen
shillings and three pence.

The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
sum of Two thousand five hundred seventy five pounds two shillings.

The City of London, with the Liberty of S. Martins le grand, the sum of Five
thousand ninety one pounds eleven shillings and four pence.

The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum of
Two thousand two hundred and forty pounds ten shillings.

The County of Monmouth, the sum of Three hundred and ninety pounds.

The County of Northampton, the sum of One thousand four hundred and thirteen
pounds eighteen shillings and two pence.

The County of Nottingham, with the Town and County of the Town of Nottingham,
the sum of Eight hundred seventy three pounds eight shillings.

The County of Norfolk, the sum of Three thousand three hundred seventy pounds
twelve shillings.

The City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of One hundred and eighty
pounds.

The County of Northumberland, with the Towns of Newcastle and Berwick upon
Tweed, the sum of Three hundred seventy two pounds fifteen shillings and eight
pence.

The County of Oxon, the sum of Eleven hundred thirty five pounds ten shillings
and eight pence.

The County of Rutland, the sum of Two hundred and forty pounds eight shillings
and eleven pence.

The County of Salop, the sum of One thousand two hundred and three pounds
fourteen shillings and two pence.

The County of Stafford, the sum of Eight hundred fifty two pounds eleven
shillings and eight pence.

The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the sum of Thirteen pounds.

The County of Somerset, the sum of Two thousand seven hundred seventy one
pound ten shillings and eight pence.

The City and County of the City of Bristol, the sum of One hundred ninety nine
pounds eight shillings and four pence.

The County of Southampton, with the Town and County of Southampton, and Isle
of VVight, the sum of Two thousand one hundred eighty nine pounds eight
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Suffolk, the sum of Three thousand two hundred ninety eight
pounds ten shillings and eight pence.

The County of Surry, with the Borough of Southwark, the sum of One thousand
five hundred ninety seven pound and two pence.

The County of Sussex, the sum of One thousand eight hundred twenty one pounds
seven shillings and nine pence.

The County of Warwick, with the City and County of the City of Coventry, the
sum of One thousand one hundred ninety two pounds eight shillings and nine
pence.

The County of Worcester, the sum of One thousand fifty three pounds and
nineteen shillings.

The City and County of the City of Worcester, the sum of Fifty five pounds
nine shillings and six pence.

The County of Wilts, the sum of One thousand nine hundred sixty six pounds
seventeen shillings and seven pence.

The County of Westmerland the sum of One hundred and sixteen pounds.

The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of One hundred twenty five pounds thirteen
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Brecknock, the sum of Two hundred eighty two pounds ten
shillings and five pence halfpenny.

The County of Cardigan, the sum of One hundred and five pounds fifteen
shillings and nine pence halfpenny.

The County of Carmarthen the sum of Two hundred seventy two pounds six
shillings and eight pence.

The County of Carnarvan the sum of One hundred forty six pounds twelve
shillings and two pence.

The County of Denbigh the sum of Two hundred twenty three pounds ten shillings
and seven pence.

The County of Flint the sum of One hundred and eighteen pounds seventeen
shillings and four pence.

The County of Glamorgan the sum of Three hundred seventy eight pounds
seventeen shillings and ten pence.

The County of Merioneth the sum of One hundred pounds sixteen shillings and a
penny.

The County of Mountgomery the sum of Two hundred seventy six pounds twelve
shillings and two pence.

The County of Pembrook the sum of Three hundred twenty six pounds and ten
shillings.

The County of Radnor the sum of One hundred seventy four pounds six shillings
and eight pence.

The Town of Haverford West the sum of Fifteen pounds three shillings and five
pence.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
persons hereafter named shall be Commissioners of and for the several and
respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places hereafter named; that
is to say,

Bedford. For the County of Bedford, William Russel Esquire, Sir Beauchampe St.
John Knight, Sir Samuel Brown Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
Sir John Keeling Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir John
Cotton, Sir Lodowick Dyer, Sir John Napler, Sir Roger Burgoine, Sir Thomas
Alstone, Sir Humphrey Winch, Sir Humphrey Monox, Sir St. John Charnock,
Baronets, Sir Henry Chester Knight of the Bath, Sir Will. Fleetwood, Sir Will.
Palmer of Warden-street, Sir Will. Palmer of Hill, Sir John Duncombe, Sir
William Beecher, Sir Edward Cater, Sir George Blundel, sir Clement Armiger, sir
John Huxley, Knights; Pawlet St. John, Richard Tailor, Stephen Anderson, Will.
Spencer, Oliver Luke, Francis Crawley, St. John Thompson, Thomas Snagg, William
Boteler, John Keeling, John Osbourne, John Vaux, John Alston, John Coppen,
Francis Wingate, William Gerey, Walter Carey, Francis Dive, William Franklin,
George Wyan, Gaius Squire, James Mountague, Samuel Cotton, John Neale, John
Cockane, Thomas Cheyne, John Ventris, Robert Crompton, Thomas Rolt, Robert
Audley, Matthew Denton, Simon Gray, Matthew Dennis, William Foster, Richard
Orlibee the elder, Thomas Cobb, Jasper Edwards, Samuel Bedford, Esquires.

For the Town of Bedford. The Mayor of Bedford for the time being, William
Russel Esquire, Sir Humphrey Winch, Sir John Napier, Baronets; Pawlet St. John,
Richard Tailor, William Foster, John Gardener, Esquires; Thomas Cristy, William
Risely, Simon Becket, Robert Beverley, William Scot, John Beaumont, Thomas
Fitzhugh, Alderman Crawley, Richard Elmes, John Cobb and John Spencer the
elder, Gentlemen.

Berks. For the County of Berks, Charles Earl of Ancram in the Kingdom of
Scotland, Sir George Cartwright, Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain to his Majesty; John
Lovelace, Esquire; Sir George Stonehouse, Sir George Prat, Sir Richard Braham,
Sir Thomas Draper, Sir Thomas Rich, Sir Henry Winchcombe, Sir William
Backhouse, Sir Anthony Craven, Sir Caesar Colclough, Sir John Fettyplace, Sir
Thomas Clergys, Baronets; Sir Richard Powle Knight of the Bath, Sir Edmond
Sawyer, Sir Robert Pie, Sir William Armorer, Sir Thomas Dolman, Sir John Davis,
Sir Richard Bishop, Knights; Richard Nevil, Humphrey Hyde, Richard Harrison,
William Barker, George Purifoy, Peregrin Hobby, Robert Packer, Richard
Aldworth, Thomas Fettiplace, George Fettiplace, John Harrison, Anthony Barker,
Henry Procter, John Blagrave, Francis Piggot, Hungerford Dunch, William
Trumbal, William Dormar, John Elwes, Thomas Garret, John Southby, William
Wilmot, William James, William Barker of Hurst, Edward Keale, William Nelson,
Hartgell Baron, Richard Jones, William Tailor, Edward Dalby, Paul Calton,
Thomas Sanders, Charles Whitacre, Humphrey Hide senior of Hurst, Humphrey Hide
junior of Kingston, Edward Hobby, Richard Palmer, John Hartsey, Esquires;
William Offley Doctor in Laws, Francis Hungerford Doctor of Physic, William
Hamersley, George Blagrave, John Kendrick, John Allen, Robert Leigh, Nicholas
Hide, Peregrin Wilcox, Thomas Southby, William Langton, John Due, Francis
Peacock, Michael Mallet, Henry Murrey, Esquires; John Peacock, Robert Goston,
James Heron, Philip Weston, Henry Barker, John Powney, Roger Draper, Richard
Lovelace, William Hussy, Roger Knight, Charles Pierce, Richard Punt Gentleman,
the Mayor of Reading for the time being; the Mayor of Abington for the time
being, the Mayor of Newbury for the time being; the Mayor of Windsor for the
time being; the Mayor of Wallingford for the time being.

Bucks. For the County of Bucks, Charles Earl of Ancram in the Kingdom of
Scotland, Philip Lord Wainman Viscount Tuam in the Kingdom of Ireland, James
Herbert Esquire, Sir Thomas Tirrel one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, Sir
Richard Temple Knight of the Bath and Baronet, Sir Toby Tyrrel, Sir John
Burlace, Sir Anthony Chester, Sir Thomas Proby, Sir William Bowyer, sir William
Smith, sir Ralph Varney, sir William Drake, sir Thomas Hampson, sir Henry
Andrews, sir John Croke Baronets; Sir William Tyrringham, sir Richard
Ingoldsby, sir Robert Gayer Knights of the Bath; Sir Edmond Pie Knight and
Baronet, sir Thomas Lee, sir Richard Napper, sir Richard Pigget, sir Henry
Herbert, sir John Dormer, sir Thomas Cleyton, sir Robert Croke, Sir Thomas
Clergies, Sir George Tash, Knights; William Fleetwood, Charles Cheyne, Edmond
Waller senior, Edmond Waller junior, William Penn, Edmond West, Brett Norton,
Thomas Duncombe, Thomas Hackett, William Lane, John Eglestone, Richard
Barringer, Edward Nicholas, Thomas Farrers senior, Caesar Cranmore, Thomas
Risley, Roger Price, Peter Dorrel, Thomas Saunders, Francis Ingoldsby, Edmond
Dorrel, George Russel, Richard Winwood, Richard Greenvile, Robert Scawen, Bud
Wase, Thomas Tirrel, Robert Napper, Edmond Hampden, John Clark, Robert Croke,
Richard Hampden, William Burlace, Bazil Brent, William Hill, Thomas Farrer
junior, Ambrose Bennet, James Low, Thomas Stafford, Robert Levet, Charles Do,
Robert Tompkins, Bernard Tourney, Thomas Egleton, Robert Dormer, Francis
Tyrringham, George Wyan, William Cleaver, William Abraham, Captain Robert
Style, John Grubbe, Esquires; John Green, Henry Allnot, James Perrat, George
Gosnal Gentlemen, the Bailiff of Buckingham for the time being, John Risley,
Roger Price, Peter Dorrel junior, Esquires; John Smith, William Lambert, and
John Tournour, Gentlemen.

Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, William Lord Allington of the Kingdom
of Ireland, Sir Dudley North Knight of the Bath, Sir Thomas Hatton, Sir John
Cotton, Sir Thomas Willis, Sir John Cutts, Sir George Downeing Baronets; Sir
Thomas Wendy Knight of the Bath, Sir Thomas Dayrel, Sir Isaac Thornton, Sir
Robert Cotton Knights, Thomas Chichley, Levinus Bennet, and William Legate,
Esquires.

For the University and Town of Cambridge, the Vice Chancellor, the Mayor for
the time being, William Lord Allington of the Kingdom of Ireland, Theophilus
Dillingham, James Fleetwood, Richard Minshal, Doctors of Divinity, Robert King
Doctor of the Laws, Thomas Crouch, Clement Nevile Esquires; Roger Pepis
Esquire, Recorder, Samuel Spalding, John Ewen, William Wells, John Herring
Aldermen, Sir Thomas Slater Baronet, Robert Eade, Edward Stoyte, Doctors of
Physic, and Nicholas Jacob Esquire.

Isle of Ely. For the Isle of Ely, Richard Lord Gorges of the Kingdom of
Ireland, William Colvile, Thomas March, Matthew Wren, Charles Wren, Edward
Partherich, William Fisher, Thomas Steward, Robert Steward, Henry Hitch Doctor
of Law, Robert Balam, Thomas Castle, Laurence Oxborough, John Towers, Anthony
Backworth, John Child junior, William Balam, Thomas Edwards, William March,
Michael Holman, Matthew Tailor, Roger Jenings, and John Delavall Esquires.

Chester. For the County of Chester, Robert Lord Cholmundeley of the Kingdom of
Ireland, William Lord Brereton of the Kingdom of Ireland, Sir Thomas Delves,
Sir Willoughby Aston, Sir Thomas Powel, Sir George Warberton, Sir Peter
Leicester, Sir Thomas Manwaring, Sir Thomas Smith junior, Sir John Bellet, Sir
Peter Pindor, Sir Richard Brooks, Sir William Stanley Baronets, Sir John Booth,
Sir Philip Egerton, Sir Peter Brooks, Sir John Ardern, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir
Foulk Lucy, Sir Jeoffrey Shakerley Knights, Peter Venables Baron of Kinderton,
Thomas Needham, Thomas Cholmundeley, George Vernon, Robert Patton, Henry
Bunbury, Henry Leigh, Thomas Leigh of Adlington, Richard Leigh of Lyme, John
Crew of Crew, Thomas Marbury, Edward Warren, Edward Leigh, Edward Hyde, John
Crew of Utkinton, Roger Wilbraham, Nathaniel Booth, Peter Dutton, John Daniel,
Randel Dodd, John Leech, Richard Wathal, Edward Glegg, Roger King, John
Davenport of Widford, Thomas Glasier, Somerford Oldfeild, Edward Swettenham,
Peers Legh, John Ward, Ralph Wilbraham, William Brock, John Hulstone, John
Shalcrosse, Edward Downs of Worth, Ralph Baskerfeild of Winnington, and Thomas
Ley Esquires.

City of Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, The Mayor for
the time being, Sir Thomas Baronet, Sir Thomas Smith Knight, Richard Leiveing
Esquire, Recorder of Chester, John Radcliff Esquire, Thomas Throppe, William
Crumpton, Thomas Cook Cowper, William Street and (...) Ince Aldermen.

Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, Sir William Morice Principal Secretary
of State, Robert Robertes, Hender Robertes, Esquires; Sir Chichester Wrey, Sir
John Trelawney Knights and Baronets; Sir John Carew Baronet, Sir Edward Vivian
Knight and Baronet, Sir John Coryton, Sir William Godolphin, Baronets; Sir
Francis Godolphin, Sir Richard Edgecombe, Sir Nicholas Slanning, Knights of the
Bath; Sir Peter Killigrew, Sir Peter Courtney, Sir John Arundle, Sir Samuel
Coswarth, Sir James Smith, Sir Walter Moyle, Knights; Henry Seymour, Jonathan
Trelawney, Richard Arundle, Pearce Edgecombe, Hugh Boscawen, Francis Buller,
Charles Trevanion, Charles Roscarrock, John Specket, John Elliot, John Tanner,
Francis Edgecombe, Nathaniel Moyle, Bernard Greenvile, John Trelawney, William
Pendarvis, William Scawen, William Trevisa, William Bond, Edward Boscawen,
Christopher Cook, Nicholas Glyn, Thomas Herle, Viol Vivian, James Praed, John
Jonock, Samuel Trelawnye, John St. Aubin, John Nichols of Trewane, John Nicoll
of Littlewood, Arthur Fortescue, John Vivian, Oliver Saul, William Mohun,
Hanibal Bugins, Lewis Tremane, Richard Hawks, Colan Blewett, John Bleigh,
Henry Spoure senior, Jonathan Rashley senior, Jonathan Rashley junior, John
Rashley, Robert Hoblin, Christopher Bond, Thomas Burell, Thomas Robinson, John
Thomas, Richard Erisey, Christopher Harris, Francis Grigger, Humphrey Courtney,
John Buller, Charles Boscawen, Robert Scawen, Thomas Waddon, Tristram Arscott,
William Cotton, Edward Nosworthy, George Heal, John Polwheele, Digory
Polwheele, Nicholas Arundle, John Arundle of Sythney, Hugh Jones, John Penrose,
Edmond Prideaux, Joseph Tredinnam, James Bond, William Godolphin, Edward
Elliot, Richard Hoblyn, Richard Pendarvis, Hugh Trevanion junior, Nathaniel
Trevanion, Francis Penrose, John Fowel, Ezekiel Arundle, Richard Rouse, Walter
Kendall, John Kendall, Walter Langdon senior, Walter Langdon junior, John
Battersbye, Henry Spoure senior, Joseph Nicholls, Charles Grills, Arthur Sprye,
John Vacye, William Sprye, Francis Calmadie, Humphry Noye, John Harris, Edward
Harris, Nicholas Courtney, Thomas Achim, William Painter, Thomas Hawkey, Andrew
Corye, Michael Hill of Wendron, John Carnesewe, Samuel Ennis, John Kestell,
Thomas Trefrie, Michael Vivian, Anthony Chinoweth, Francis Burges, Richard
Carter, John Sylly, Richard Tippet, Thomas Carew, Christopher Billet, Chamon
Greenvile, Samuel Langford, Reynald Hawkey, Walter Vincent, James Robins,
Humphrey Burlace, Francis Lutterel and James Eresy, Esquires; the Mayor of
Truro for the time being, Martin Madrin, Gent.

Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, Edward Lord Morpeth, Son and Heir
apparent to Charles Earl of Carlisle, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir William Dalston,
Sir George Fletcher, Sir John Lowther senior, Sir John Lowther junior, Sir
Edward Musgrave Baronets, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir William Hudlestone, Sir
Wilfred Lawson, Sir William Carleton, Sir Philip Howard, Sir Francis Salkeld,
Sir John Dalston Knights, John Lamplough, Richard Skeleton, William Musgrave,
William Layton, Christopher Musgrave, John Agleonby, Robert Scawen, George
Denton, Thomas Denton, Richard Towlson, Andrew Hudleston, Robert Highmour,
George Towry, and the Mayor of Carlisle for the time being, Daniel Fleming,
Edward Stanley, William Pennington, Wrightington Senhouse, Esquires.

Derby. For the County of Derby, Henry Viscount Mansfield, Son and heir
apparent to William Marquis of Newcastle; William Lord Cavendish, son and heir
apparent to William Earl of Devonshire, Anchitell Gray, George Pierpoint,
Esquires; Sir Thomas Gresley, Sir Francis Burdet, Sir John Harper, Sir John
Curson, Sir Edward Cook, Sir Henry Every, Sir William Boothby Baronets, Sir
John Harper, Sir Samuel Sleigh Knights, John Frechveille, German Poole, John
Ferrers, George Vernon, Charles Agard, John Monday, Richard Cook, John Milward,
William Fitzherbert, Charles Cotton, Walter Horton, Gilbert Hacker, Henry
Gilbert, Robert Air, William Revel, Godfrey Clark, William Bullock, William
Woolly, Nicholas Wilmot, John Shalcross, Ravel Ashenhurst, Francis Mennel,
Thomas Milward, George Sitwel, Henry Wigfall, James Abnye Esquires; George
Tailor, John Spaleman, William Wright, Francis Barker Gentleman; the Mayor of
Derby for the time being, Roger Allestre, John Dalton, Simon Degg, Hugh
Bateman, Esquires; John Shore Doctor of Physic; Thomas Freeman Gent. Mr.
Charles Agard of Foston, and John Daundridge Alderman.

Devon. For the County of Devon, Arthur Earl of Donegal in the Kingdom of
Ireland, Sir Hugh Pollard Baronet, Comptroller of his Majesty's Household, Sir
George Carteret Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, Sir William Morice
Principal Secretary of State, Sir William Courtney Baronet, John Ashburnham
Esquire, Sir Edward Seymour, Sir George Chudleigh, Sir Peter Prideaux, Sir
Thomas Hele, Sir Chichester Wrey, Sir Courtney Pool, Sir Coplestone Bampfield,
Sir John Norcote, Sir John Chichester, Sir Edmund Fowel, Sir William Morice,
Sir John Drake, Sir Thomas Carew, Sir John Davy, Sir Walter Young, Sir Edmund
Fortescue, Baronets; Sir Edward Wise, Sir John Roll, Sir Edward Hungerford,
Sir Nicholas Slaning Knights of the Bath; Sir John Chichester, Sir Henry Carew,
Sir Richard Prideaux, Sir Peter Ball, Sir James Smith, Sir Robert Carry, Sir
William Strode, Sir Thomas Clifford, Sir Thomas Higgons, Sir John Skeleton,
Knights; Edward Seymour, Peter Prideaux, John Fowel, Pierce Edgecomb, Arthur
Basset, Thomas Fulford, Francis Drew, Robert Fortescue, John Carew of Studly,
Edmund Tremain, John Harris, John Gifford of Brightly, George Yeo, Thomas Carew
of Bowghill, John Bury, John Pollarde, Richard Cabel, John Arscott, Nicholas
Duck, George Howard, Jonathan Spark, Henry Ford, Robert Duke, Matthew Hele,
John Hale, William Bastard, William Martin, Samuel Trelawny, George Reynalds,
Henry Northleigh, Nicholas Dennis, Josias Calmady, Richard Coffin, Edmund
Waldrond, Thomas Bear, William Walrond, John Davy of Ruxford, John Young of
Coalbrook, Samuel Sainthil, Henry Stevens, Henry Newt, John Tanner, John
Willoughby, John Tuckfield, Peter Fortescue, Christopher Clobery, Shilston
Calmady, John Kelland, Thomas Reynolds, Thomas Gibbons, Balthazar Bear, James
Clifford, John Fownes, William Bogan, James Rod, Esquires; the High Sheriff
of Devon for the time being, and the Mayors of Totnes, Barnstable, Plymouth,
Dartmouth and Tiverton for the time being.

City of Exon. For the City and County of the City of Exon, Allen Senny Mayor,
the Mayor for the time being, Sir Peter Ball Recorder, Sir James Smith Knight,
Robert Walker Esquire; John Martin, Christopher Lethbridge, Henry Gaudy, John
Butler, Anthony Salter, Aldermen; the Sheriff for the time being, Nicholas
Isaacke, John Acland, Thomas Walker, Stephen Oliphue, John Gibbons Merchants;
John Bidgood Doctor of Physic; Henry Walker, Thomas Shapcot, Samuel Isaacke
Gentlemen; and the Receiver of the City for the time being.

Dorset. For the County of Dorset, John Lord Digby, Son and Heir apparent to
George Earl of Bristol; Sir Edward Nicholas one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Sir William Portman Knight and Baronet, Sir John
Morton, Sir Gerard Naper Baronets; Sir Richard Strode, Sir John Strangwayes;
Sir Walter Earl, sir Ralph B^ncks, sir Francis Hollis, Knights; sir John
Nicholas Knight of the Bath, sir John Fitz-James, sir John Rogers, sir
Nathaniel Napper, Knights; Giles Strangwayes Esquire, sir John Strode, sir John
Lowe^, sir Winston Churchil, Knights; Hugh Wyndham Sergeant at Law, Thomas
Freak of Shroton, John Strangwayes, John Tregonwel of Milton, John Tregonwel of
Anderson, Thomas Trenchard, Thomas Fownes, Humphrey Bishop, John Rives of
Damree, John Churchill, James Gould, Henry Witaker, Bullen Reymes, Henry Henly,
Robert Swayne Sheriff, Robert Coker, Edward Hooper, George Fulford, Robert
Lawrence, Thomas Baynard, Henry Egers, Henry Hastings, Esquires; Colonel
Francis Wyndham, Matthew Davis, John Rieves, William Thomas, John Hoskins,
George Hussy, Robert Naper, William Ogden, Henry Butler, George Savage, John
Saintlow, George Gray, Robert Seymour, Maximilian Mohun, George Brown, Wolley
Miller, Anthony Etricke, Michael Harvey, George Trenchard, Robert Tyderligh,
William Floyer, John Ironside, John Gould of Upway, John and John Runnet,
Esquires.

Poole. For the Town and County of Pool, sir John Morton Baronet, sir John
Fitz-James Knight, Anthony Etrick Esquire, Recorder; Peter Hall, Major William
Skut, Robert Lewen, Gentlemen; Robert Cleeves, Peter Hily, Edward Man, and
Samuel Bramble.

Durham. For the County Palatine of Durham, sir Thomas Davison, High Sheriff of
the County; sir Francis Goodrick, Temporal Chancellor of the County Palatine;
Doctor Burwell, Chancellor of the Diocese of Durham; sir Christopher Conyers,
sir Nicholas Cole, sir Gilbert Gerard, Knights and Baronets; sir James
Clavering Baronet, sir Francis Anderson, sir William Blakiston, Knights; John
Heath, John Swinburn, John Tempest, Ralph Carr, Esquires; Baron Hilton, Henry
Lambton Esquire, James Darcy, John Eden, Colonel Anthony Bierley, Ralph
Davison, Ralph Cole, Major Bellasis, Samuel Davison, Cuthbert Carr, William
Blakiston, Thomas Shalforth, Charles Gerrard, Thomas Fetherstonhaugh, Lodowick
Hall, Esquires, The Mayor of the City of Durham for the time being; Thomas
Swinburne Esquire, Gabriel Iackson, John Morland, John Arden, Miles Stapleton,
Gentleman, and Captain Henry Barnes, Thomas Haggerston, Esquire, and John Gray
of Moreton Gent. for Norham and Islandshire.

Essex. For the County of Essex, Sir Edward Turner Knight, Speaker of the House
of Commons, Sir Harbotle Grimstone Baronet, Master of the Rolls, Robert Lord
Willoughby of Earsby, Son and Heir apparent to Mountague Earl of Lindsey, Lord
Great Chamberlain of England, Robert B^tie, Edward Russel, Bannestre Maynard,
Esquires; Sir John Barrington Knight and Baronet, Sir Henry Appleton, Sir
William Ailoffe, Sir William Hicks, Sir Andrew Jennour, Sir William Wiseman,
Sir Richard Everard, Baronets; Sir Capel Luckin Knight and Baronet, Sir Martin
Lumley Baronet, Sir Thomas Abdy, Sir Robert Abdy, Sir William Wiseman, Knights
and Baronets, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir Thomas Cambel Baronets, Sir James Altham,
Sir John Bramstone Knigh^s of the Bath; Sir John Tyrel, Sir Erasmus
Delafontain, Sir Thomas Bows, Sir Cranmer Herris, Sir Henry Clarke, Sir Edmond
Pierce one of the Masters of the Chancery, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Richard
Wiseman, Sir William Battin, Sir John Shaw, Sir Robert Brook, sir Richard
Everard, sir Thomas Littleton, sir Robert Barington, sir Thomas Gardner, sir
Moundeford Br^mstone, sir William Glascock, two of the Masters of the Chancery,
sir Thomas Fanshaw, sir Thomas Bide, sir William Hicks, sir Edward Beaucock
Knights; John Bendish, Charles Fytche, Gamaliel Capel, Richard Samms, Thomas
Meade, Peter Soame, John Tyrrel, Thomas Arg^l, Oliver Reymond, John Atwood,
Henry Woolaston, Henry Pert, John Eldred senior, John Eldred junior, John
Paschall, John Godbolt, Robert Joselyn, William Glascock, Tristram Conyers,
Thomas Luther, William Umphrevil, Thomas Roberts, John James, George Pert,
William Colecroft, William Webb, Robert Leigh, William Appleton, John Berners,
Robert of Lee, James Norfolk, Cutbert Martin, Thomas Talcot, Esquires; Philip
Eldred, Henry Ailoff, George James, Thomas King, William Harris, John
Thorowgood, William Palmer, Richard Stanss, Alexander Prescot, Thomas Legate,
John Sorrel, Edward Glascock, William Ashley Gentlemen, Thomas Wharton, Anthony
Maxie and Thomas Garret Esquires, Anthony Knightbridge of Writtle, Gent.
Captain Richard Stams, sir Richard Brown Knight and Baronet, and Jeremy Lacy.

Colchester. For the Town of Colchester, the Mayor for the time being, sir John
Shaw Knight, Recorder, Sir Edmond Pierce Knight, Gilbert Pierce, Thomas Talcot
Esquires, Thomas Reynalds, Andrew Fromanteel, Henry Lamb, Robert Leg, William
Moore Aldermen, John Robinson, George Sandford, James Norfolk Esquires, and
Thomas Creffeild Alderman.

Maldon. For the Town of Maldon, The Bailiffs for the time being, Reuben
Robinson, Samuel Plumbe, Francis Gourney, James Starling, John Heart Aldermen,
and Bartholomew Brickwood.

Harwich. For the Town of Harwich, The Mayor for the time being, Sir Capel
Luckin Baronet, George Colman, Richard Fuller, Henry Wright, Aldermen, (...)
Gerard, Daniel Smith, Thomas King, Anthony Woolward, Samuel Newton and Miles
Hobart Gentlemen.

Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland, son
and heir apparent to Edward Marquis of Wo^cester, James Earl of Newburgh in the
Kingdom of Scotland, John Viscount Scudamore of the Kingdom of Ireland, John
Viscount Tracy of the Kingdom of Ireland, Sir Matthew Hal^ Knight, Lord Chief
Baron of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Sir Henry Capell Knight of the Bath,
sir Bainham Throckmorton Knight and Baronet, sir Henry Frederick Thynne, sir
William Ducy, sir Richard Ashfeild, sir Edward Bathurst, sir Robert Jenkinson,
sir John How, sir Christopher Guise, sir Edward Fulse, sir William Keyte, sir
Richard Cox, Baronets; sir William Moreton Knight, one of His Majesty's
Sergeants at Law, sir Robert Po^^^, sir Robert Atkins Knights of the Bath, sir
William Catchmay, sir Edward Bray, sir Edward Mas^ey, sir Thomas Stephens, Sir
Thomas Overbury, Sir Gabriel Low, sir John Newton, sir Humphrey Hook, sir
Thomas How Knights, John Grubham How Esquire, Evan Seyes Sergeant at Law,
Francis Baber Doctor of Law, George Mountague, William Dutton, William Cook,
John Chamberlain, John Stephens, William Cope, John Codrington, Richard
Atkins, Henry Powle, William Selwyn, Duncombe Cholcester, Hen-Benedicte Hall,
Thomas Masters, Thomas Escourt, John George, John Smith, Richard Stephens,
William Morgan, Edward Rich, Andrew Barker, Richard Whitemore, William
Stafford, John Winter, Fleetwood Dormer, Samuel Codrington, Thomas Chester,
Henry Syms, Philip Shepard, Richard Sackevil, Giles Fettiplace, Thomas Jones,
Robert Oldsworth, Richard Baugh, John Robins, Thomas Marriott, Esquires; Thomas
Rich, William Hinson, William Lawrence, William Dowdeswell, Henry Brown,
Robert Heydon, Nicholas Veale, John Wyniat, Thomas Wall, William Thorpe, John
Driver, Conway Whitterne, William Winter, Richard Machen, John Coals, Thomas
Ayleway, James Hawkins, Christopher Woodward, and the Bailiffs of Tewkesbury
for the time being, Anthony Sambich, William Batson, Sir John Baker Knight,
William Stafford junior.

City of Gloucester. For the City and County of the City of Gloucester, Henry
Lord Herbert of Ragland, Son and Heir apparent of Edward Marquis of Worcester,
Robert Feilding the present Mayor, and the Mayor for the time being; Sir
William Morton Knight, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, Recorder of the
said City; Sir Edward Massey Knight, Evan Seys Sergeant at Law, John
Grubham-Howe, Edward Nurse, Thomas Williams, Esquires; Henry Cugley, James
Stephens, William Russel, John Powel, Thomas Yate, Thomas Price, John Woodward,
Anthony Arnold, Henry Ockold, John Wagstaffe, and Henry Fowler, Aldermen.

Hereford. For the County of Hereford, Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland, son and
heir apparent to Edward Marquis of Worcester, John Lord Viscount Scudamore, of
the Kingdom of Ireland; James Scudamore, Wallop Brabazon, Esquires; Sir James
Bridges, Sir John Kerle, Sir William Powell, Sir Thomas Morgan, Baronets; Sir
Thomas Hanbury Knight, Sir Edward Harley, Knight of the Bath; Sir John
Scudamore Baronet, Sir Herbert Perrot Knight, Sir Edward Hopton, Sir Thomas
Tomkins, Sir Job Charleton, Knights; Fitz-William Coninsby, Thomas Cornwall,
Thomas Whitney, Herbert Aubrey senior, John Price senior, Thomas Price, Walter
Pie, Roger Vaughan, Herbert Westfaling, Herbert Aubrey junior, John Scudamore
senior, Humphrey Cornwall, John Scudamore junior, John Barnaby de Canon Pyon,
Reynald Graham, Thomas Cox, Edward Cornwall, John Skippe, Bennet Hoskins,
Richard Hopton, Giles Bridges, Thomas Geers, Thomas Carpenter, John Hoskins de
Harewood, Humphrey Howorth, William Gregory, Francis Unett, John Hanford,
Humphrey Baskervill, John Birch, John Barnaby de Brockhampton, Esquires; the
Bailiff for the Borough of Leominster for the time being, John Tomkins, Richard
Rodd de Rodd, Edward Rodd, Thomas Blaney, Edward Freeman, Thomas French and
Thomas Duppa de Earsley, Esquires.

City of Hereford. For the City of Hereford, Robert Simonds Esquire, the
present Mayor, and the Mayor for the time being; John Lord Viscount Scudamore,
in the Kingdom of Ireland, Roger Vaughan, Herbert Westfaling, Thomas Price,
Esquires; William Gregory, Richard Philpots, William Philips, James Lawrence,
Thomas Homes, Thomas Painard, Thomas Bond, William Edwin, Aldermen, Edward
Alderne Doctor of Laws, Edward Rodd, Nicholas Philpots, John Smith Mercer, Hugh
Rodd, Thomas Symmonds, Roger Bouleot and John Barnes, Gentlemen.

Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Sir Edward Turnor, Speaker of the House
of Commons, Thomas Lord Viscount Fanshaw, of the Kingdom of Ireland, Sir
Thomas Fanshaw Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, William Cecil,
Algernon Cecil, William Willoughby Esquires; Sir Harbotle Grimstone Baronet,
Master of the Rolls; Sir Edward Atkins, one of the Barons of His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer; Sir Thomas Leventhorp, Sir Brocket Spencer, Sir Jonathan
Keat, Sir Erasmus Harby, Sir Thomas Allen, Baronets; Sir Richard Atkins, Sir
Richard Francklyne, Sir Richard Lucy, Knights and Baronets; Sir Philip Boteler
Knight of the Bath; Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir John Harrison, Sir Francis Boteler,
Sir Henry Caesar, sir William Godbold, sir Rowland Litton, sir John Gore, sir
Harry Coninsby, sir John Watts, sir Henry Blunt, sir Humphrey Gore, sir John
Hale, sir William Glascocke, sir Robert Josceline, sir Richard Comb, sir Walter
Walker, Knights; Thomas Docwra, James VVillimot, Richard Goulstone, Thomas
Dacres, Edward VVingate, John Copping, Arthur Bolter, Thomas Stanley, John
Heydon, Robert Ashton, William Glascocke, William Hale, Arthur Sparks, John
Fotherly, (...) Crafts of Nerthall, John Halsey, William Harbord, John Jesson,
Edward Atkins, William Cotton, Albon Cox, John Briscoe, Ralph Freeman senior,
Robert Hobotham, Richard Jennings, Edmond Smith, Robert Sadler, Henry Chancy,
Ralph Freeman junior, Humphrey Shalcross, Henry Guy, William Nuce, Thomas
Offley, Henry Dunstar, Alexander Meade, Richard Gammon Esquires; Edward Cason,
George Needham, Ralph Gore, Henry Becher, Marmaduke Royden, Edward Briscoe,
George Bromely, John Ellis, Edmond Field, William Greenhill, Edward Crosby,
Alexander Weild, Gentlemen; Captain William Minoes, Thomas Arris, Robert Dean,
Doctors of Physic, and the Mayor of Hertford for the time being.

St. Albans. For the Borough of St. Albans, Algernon Cecil, Esquire; Sir
Harbotle Grimstone Master of the Rolls, Sir Richard Francklin, Sir Harry
Conisby, Sir Richard Comb, Sir John VVhittwrong, Knights; the Mayor for the
time being, John Simpson Esquire, Recorder; Robert Rohotham, Edmond Smith,
Thomas Docwra, Robert Sadler, Richard Jenings, William Cotton, John Jesson,
Alban Cox, Esquires, Thomas Arris, Doctor of Physic; Thomas Cowley senior,
Thomas Cowley junior, William Marston, Thomas Oxton, Edward Eames, John Gape,
John New, and Robert New Aldermen.

Huntington. For the County of Huntington, Charles Lord Le de Spencer, son and
heir apparent to Mildmay Earl of Westermland, Robert Viscount Mandevil, Son and
Heir apparent to Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Household; Sir Francis Compton Knight, George Mountague, Esquire; Sir John
Cotton, Sir John Hewet, Sir Thomas Proby, Sir Robert Bernard, Baronets; Stephen
Anderson, John Stone, John Bernard, Henry Williams, Robert Appreece, Lyonel
Walden, Nicholas Johnson, Sutton Ashfeild, Nicholas Peadley, Lawrence
Torkinton, John Heron, Robert Pain, Anthony South, Richard Elmes, Thomas Rouse,
Richard Nailer, Jasper Trice, Gerrard Cater, John Ferrer, Richard Wyn Esquires;
Thomas Colestone, Thomas Shepherd, William Sparrow, Gentleman; and Thomas
Walwin Mayor of Huntington.

Town of Huntington. For the Town of Huntington, The Mayor for the time being,
Robert Viscount Mandevil, son and heir apparent to Edward Earl of Manchester,
Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household; Sir John Cotton, Baronet, Sir
Robert Bernard, Henry Williams, Lyonel Walden, Nicholas Pedley Esquires,
Richard Astre, Lawrence Torkington, John Barnard, Richard Weaver, Thomas Judson
and James Faireside Aldermen.

Kent. For the County of Kent, Charles Lord Buckhurst, son and heir apparent to
Richard Earl of Dorset, Philip Viscount Strangford in the Kingdom of Ireland,
James Herbert, John Tufton, Richard Tufton Esquires, Sir Thomas Twisden, One of
the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir Heneage Finch, His Majesty's Solicitor
General, Sir Thomas Peyton, Sir Roger Twisden, Sir Edward Hales, Sir Edward
Monins, Sir Henry Palmer, Sir John Rivers, sir John Sidley, Sir William
Meredith, Sir Edward Deering, Sir Thomas Style, Sir Oliver Botteler, Sir Norton
Knatchbull, Sir Peter Heyman, sir John Tufton, Sir John Raney, Sir Richard
Hardres, Sir Henry Wood, Sir Robert Hales, Sir Bazil Dixwell, Sir William
Ducy, sir Marmaduke Gresham, sir William Wild, sir Stephen Leonard, sir
Humphrey Miller, sir Edward Honywood, sir John Marsham, sir John Banckes, sir
Robert Barnham Baronets; sir Nathaniel Powell, sir Robert Austen, sir John sir
John Wroth, sir Jonathan Keate Baronets; Sir George Sonds, Knight of the Bath,
sir John Men's, Comptroller of His Majesty's Navy; sir Robert Honywood, sir
Anthony Aucher, sir Isaac Sydley, sir William Man, sir Thomas Godfrey, sir
Richard Sandys, sir Thomas Engham, sir Arnold Braems, sir Henry Oxinden, sir
Edward Master, sir George Juxon, sir William Brodnax, sir John Darrel, sir
Thomas Scot, sir Francis Clerk, sir Edward Filmore, sir Thomas Culpeper, sir
Theophilus Biddolph, sir Richard Betenson, sir William Leech, sir Edmond
Pierce, sir William Boreman, sir Bernard Hyde, sir William Swan, sir Anthony
Bateman, sir Walter Vane, sir John Heath, Attorney of the Duchy; sir Thomas
Lee, sir William Hugeson, sir William de Laune, Knights; sir William Cage,
Knight, Thomas Broom, Sergeant at Law, Silas Titus, Groom of His Majesty's
Bedchamber, Thomas Hardres, Recorder of the City of Canterbury, Captain John
Stroude, Lieutenant of Dover Castle, John Boys of Fredvil, Richard Master,
Thomas Culpeper of Hackington, Thomas Peke, Thomas Crispe of Queux, Walter
Braems, Thomas Brodnax, Edward Master, Thomas Turner, William Rooke, John Boys
of Hoade, John Best, John Cason, Henry Oxinden of Brook, Richard Aldworth,
Esquire; Doctor John Sabin, Herbert Randolph, Gentleman; Nicholas Took, Henry
Thornehill, John Knatchbull, James Brockman, Maurice Diggs, Henry Deering,
Edward Hales, Richard Hulse, John Nayler, Esquires; Robert Lewkenor, Peter
Heymon, John Moyle, Zouch Brockman, John Nowrs, Gentlemen, Thomas Fludd,
William Cage, Francis Barneham, Maximilian Dallison, Ferdinando Marsham,
Demetrius James, George Curteis, Thomas Knatchbul, Richard Wilkinson, John Mum,
Ralph Bufkin, Walter Franklin, Richard Marsh, Thomas English, Robert Oliver,
John Smith, Thomas Harlakenden, Henry Haughton, Alabaster Fludd, Francis
Twisden, Captain John Clerk, Thomas Lake, Recorder of Maidstone, Richard Duke,
William Maddox, Esquires; The Mayor of Rochester for the time being, Richard
Allen Recorder of Rochester, George Newman, Richard Manley, George May, Richard
Head, Charles Bickerstaffe, Robert Fowler, Francis Barrel, Esquire; Stephen
Alcocke senior, Thomas Manley Gentleman, Laurence Book, Thomas Brewer, Robert
Masters, Samuel Boys, William Boys, Thomas Culpeper of Bedgbury, Edward Finch,
John Horsemanden, Anthony Foul, Robert Foul, John Hugeson, John Bunce, Thomas
Lambert, David Polhill, Philip Packer, George Polhill, Henry Gilburn; William
Hooker, John Scott, Mark Cottle, John Hyde, Norton Curteys, Robert Heath,
Francis Heath, John Austin, John Evelin, William Swan, John Seyliard, Nicholas
Took senior, James Fortrey, Nicholas Took junior, William Boothby,
Christopher Allanson, (...) Bevin, Thomas Manning, (...) Petley, John Bridger,
(...) Farnaby, Edward Badby, John Sedley, Esquires; James Thurban Gentleman,
and George Bowerman, Esquire; Sir John Henden Knight, William Campion, William
Hammon, John Andrews, Edward Gulstone, Reynald Peckham Esquires; The Mayor of
Sandwich for the time being, Tobias Clear, Phineas Elwood, John Verrier,
Valentine Jekin, Jeoffrey Wells, Jeoffrey Saket, The Mayor of Dover for the
time being, Richard Jacob, Nicholas Eaton, William Eaton, John Watson, John
Loome, Richard Barley, Walter Brames, Esquires; The Mayor of Rumney for the
time being, Robert Winill, Jeremy Stanford, Stephen Brett, Thomas Chalcross,
The Mayor of Heith for the time being, John Finch, James Pashlie, The Mayor of
Feversham for the time being, John Trouts Esquire, John Upton, Robert Watson,
Thomas Southouse, The Mayor of Tenderden for the time being, Edward Finch
Esquire, Captain Plomer, Thomas Short, The Bailiff of Lydd for the time being,
John Bateman, Thomas Bedingfield, Michael Childwicke, The Mayor of Folkeston
for the time being, The Mayor of Fordwitch for the time being, Thomas Bigg,
William Norton senior, Thomas Norton junior, Esquires; and John Luckin.

Canterbury. For the City of Canterbury, The Mayor for the time being, Sir
William Man, Sir Edward Master Knights, Thomas Hardresse Esquire, Recorder of
the said City, John Best, Edward Master, Squire Beverton Esquires, William
Stanley, Henry Twyman, Avery Hills and Leonard Brown Alderman.

Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, Charles Earl of Ancram in the Kingdom
of Scotland, William Esquires; Sir Richard Houghton, Sir George Midleton, Sir
Robert Binloss, Sir Edward Stanley, Sir Edward Mosley, Sir Ralph Ashton of
Whaley, Sir Ralph Ashton of Midleton Baronets; Sir Gilbert Ireland, Sir Roger
Bradsheigh, Sir Henry Slater, Sir Jeoffery Shakerley, Sir John Heath Knights;
John Mollineux, Richard Kirkby, Roger Nowell, Edward Fleetwood, Henry Bainstre,
William Farrington, Robert Holt, Laurence Rawstorne, Hugh Dickenson, William
Radley, Nicholas Townley, John Parker, Nathaniel West, Thomas Preston, John
Girlington, Daniel Fleming, Robert Rawlinson, Jeoffrey Rishton, Alexander
Osbaldeston, Alexander Rigby of Middleton, John Lightbonne, Edward Rigby,
Francis Lindley, Thomas Bradill, Christopher Parker, Thomas Norres, Richard
Legh, Richard Penington, Richard Fleetwood of Rossall, Thomas Butler, Nicholas
Mosley, John Halsted of Banckhouse, Major John Byrom, Robert Heywood, James
Duckenfeild, Matthew Richardson, Peers Legh, John Entwisley, John Risley,
Cuthbert Ogle, Henry Houghton, John Birch of Ordsdall, Bartholomew Hesketh,
Captain Byrom, Thomas Ashton, George Hilton, Henry Porter, Thomas Caruss,
William Fife, Thomas Greenehalgh, Thomas Holt junior, Roger Ke^non, William
Daniel, Peter Adlington, Ambrose Ludsay, Thomas Ashurst, William Kirkby,
William Banckes junior, Richard Leigh, Esquires; John Aynsworth, Thomas Leigh,
Nicholas Fezackerly, Captain Brabin, Captain Longworth, Nicholas Pennington,
William Wall, Seth Blackhurst, James Hodgkinson, Joseph Rigby, Luke Hodgkinson,
Ralph Mercer, Alexander Woodward, of Layton, John Tatlock Gentleman; Edward
Dobson Esquire; The Mayor of Wiggan for the time being, The Mayor of Lancaster
for the time being, The Mayor of Leverpoole for the time being, The Mayor of
Preston for the time being, John Chandler Gent.

Leicester. For the County of Leicester, Thomas Lord Beaumont of the Kingdom of
Ireland, John Lord Roos, son and heir apparent to John Earl of Rutland, Bennet
Lord Sherard of the Kingdom of Ireland, John Gray Esquire; Sir George Villiers,
Sir Erasmus de la Fountain, Sir Tho. Halford, Sir Thomas Cave, Sir Jeoffry
Palmer, Sir Woolstan Dixie, Sir Henry Hudson, sir George Prettyman, Baronets;
sir William Hartop, sir John Heath Knights; John Crew, Philip Sherard, Henry
Neville, George Faunt, Tho. Menye, Matthew Babington, William Noell, William
Boothby, Samuel Jarvis, John Fountain, Walter Rudings, Thomas Armstone, Roger
Roe, William Whalley, Richard Brudenell, William Roberts, Captain Burton,
William Hartop, Richard Orton, John Needham of Osbaston, John Morton, Thomas
Bradgate, Richard Bradgate, William Street, William Halford, John Turvile,
William Belgrave, John Needham, William Skevington, John Hackett, Thomas
Stavely, George Ashby, Richard Verney, John Cave, Stanhope Whalley, William
Leake, John Danvers, Thomas Bennet, William Bent, Roger Smith, William Trimnel,
Henry Farneham, Francis Chamberlain, Robert Barnard, John Barwel, Henry
Bigland, Neale Hewett, William Cole, Esquires.

Leicester. For the Borough of Leicester, William Callis Mayor of Leicester,
Sir John Prittiman Baronet, Sir William Hartopp Knight, Walter Rudeings
Esquire, Richard Palmer, Richard Lincoln, Alexander Coats, Thomas Freeman,
Thomas Overing, Thomas Brown, Daniel Abney, John Franks, Francis Noble, Gent.
and Thomas Stavely Esquire.

Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, and City and County of the City of
Lincoln, George Lord Viscount Castleton of the Kingdom of Ireland, Robert Lord
Willoughby of Earsby, Son and Heir apparent to Mountague Earl of Lindsey, Lord
Great Chamberlain of England, William Mountague, William Pierpoint, Esquires;
Sir Philip Tyrwhitt, Sir Edward Barkham, Sir Humphry Winch, Sir Henry
Massingbord, Baronets, Sir Francis Goodrick, Sir John Moreton, Sir Francis
Dallison Knights; Philip Tyrwhit, Henry Fines, William Metham, Willam Marwood,
George Sanderson, John Ogle, Edward Merberry Esquires; William Willoughby
Esquire, Sir John Mounson senior, Sir John Bolles, Sir William Hickman, Sir
Robert Dallison, Sir Edward Lake, Sir John Anderson, Baronets; Sir John Mounson
junior, Knight of the Bath, Sir Thomas Meres Knight, Charles Pelham senior,
Edward Tourney senior, Cycil Turwhitt; William Godfrey; William Brownlow,
George Healey, William Anderson, John Farmary of Northrop, Edward Tourney
junior, John Stow, Esquires; Sir Henry Bellasis Knight of the Bath, Sir Thomas
Bernardiston, Sir William Wray, Sir George Win Baronets; Sir Edward Aiscough,
Knights; Charles Pelham junior, Jervas Hollis Master of Requests, William
Wentworth, William Broxholme, Marmaduke Dorrel junior, William Bard, Alexander
Emerson, John Nelthrop, John Boswel, Charles Newcomen Esquires; Sir Thomas
Ellis Baronet, Sir Adrian Scroop Knight of the Bath, Sir Martin Lister, Sir
Robert Christopher, Knights; John South, John Bolles, William Fitz-William,
John Hanby, Isaac Knight, Charles Radley, William Woley, William Ballet senior,
Robert Long, Thomas Ely, Dymocke Walpoole, George Osney, Henry Midlemore
Esquires, Sir Francis Fane Knight of the Bath, George Sherard Esquire; Sir
Thomas Hussy, Sir William Thorold, Sir John Newton, Sir Richard Rothwel,
Baronets; Sir John Walpoole, Knight; Charles Dymocke, Lewis Palmer, Anthony
Thorold, Molleneux Disney, Christopher Nevil, Richard Brownlow, Thomas Ellis,
William Lister, John Hobson, Richard Ryley, Thomas Petchel, Stephen Rothwel,
John Wilson, Henry Stone, Anthony Williams, William Thornton, William Rivett,
Esquires; Robert Laming, John Colthurst, John Trafford, Gentlemen; Sir Michael
Armin, Sir John Brownlow, Sir Robert Markham, Sir William Brownlow, Sir
William Trollop, Sir John Bucke, Baronets; Sir Thomas Orpe, sir Christopher
Clapham Knights, Thomas Hatcher, William Stafford, Erasmus De Ligne, John
Hatcher, Thomas Harrington, William Blyth, John Saunders, William Savile,
Edward Skipwith, Francis Wingfield, Thomas Trollop, Adam Cleypoole, Philip
Dalloe, Thomas Skipwith, William Hyde, William Trollop, William VVelby, Lister
Teigh, Esquires, Gentleman; Thomas Grantham, Peregrine Berley, sir Anthony
Oldfield, Baronet, sir Henry Heron, Knight of the Bath, sir Anthony Irby, sir
Robert Carr, Knights; sir William Humble Baronet; sir John Brown Knight,
Thomas Thory, Thomas Hall, John Jay, Charles Skipwith, John Lockton, Esquires;
Thomas Brown, Gentleman; Matthew VVoolmer, Anthony Oldefield, Esquires; John
Empson Esquire, Joseph VVhiting, Charles Rushworth, Samuel Jackson, Anthony
Hall, Doctor Sturton, Richard Balder, Robert Bisle, William Dickinson,
Gentlemen; Adlard VVelby, David Bonnel, Esquires; John Jelson, Daniel Rhodes,
George Caverne, Henry Morley, Israel Jackson, Gentlemen; Thomas Marham, Doctor
Richer, Robert Melish, Esquires; Richard Milner Gentleman, the Mayor of the
City of Lincoln for the time being, and the four senior Aldermen, viz. William
Bishop, Edward Blow, Richard Wetherel, Robert Wrose; the Mayor and the three
senior Aldermen of Boston, viz. John Ellis, George Slay, Samuel Beeston; the
Mayors of Stamford, and Great Grimsby, and the Alderman of Grantham for the
time being; Doctor Thomas Saunderson, William Perkins and Richard Leemine,
Daniel Thorowgood, Richard Butcher, George Hill, Gentlemen; John Humphreys
Esquire, Charles Bawds, Stephen Mason Esquire, Samuel Burton, John VVimberly,
Gent.

London. For the City of London, sir John Lawrence, Knight, Lord Mayor, and the
Lord Mayor for the time being; sir Thomas Adams, sir Richard Brown, sir Thomas
Alleyn, sir John Robinson, sir William VVild Recorder, Knights and Baronets;
sir Richard Chiverton, sir John Frederick, sir Anthony Bateman, sir Thomas
Soame, sir Thomas Bludworth, sir William Bolton, sir William Peake, sir
William Turner, sir Richard Ford, sir Richard Reeves, sir William Thompson,
sir Theophilus Biddulph, sir John Shaw, sir VVil. VVale, Knights; Francis
Meynel, Samuel Sterling, Robert Hanson, William Hooker, Thomas Bonfoy, Roger
Hatton, Nicholas Bonfoy, John Bence, Richard Shelbury, Aldermen; and the
Aldermen and Recorder of the said City for the time being; George Waterman,
Charles Do, Sheriffs; and the Sheriffs for the time being; John Jones, John
Jolliffe, Thomas Thurgis, Henry Dunstar, Walter Lap, Esquires, James Abernoite.

Middlesex. Sir Edward Turnor Knight, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons, sir Thomas Ingram, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Hugh Lord
Colrain in the Kingdom of Ireland; sir Orlando Bridgman, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Henry Lord Cornebury, son and heir apparent to Edward Earl of
Clarendon Lord Chancellor of England; Edward Russel, George Mountague,
Christopher Hatton, Thomas Coventry, William Mountague, Robert Spencer, Henry
Seymour, Esquires; sir Henry Bennet, Principal Secretary of State, John
Ashburnham esquire, one of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Edward Progers esquire,
one of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Thomas Elliot esquire, one of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet, Master of the Rolls, sir Heneage
Finch Knight and Baronet, his Majesty's Solicitor General, sir Gilbert Gerard,
sir Thomas Fisher, sir Henry Wood, sir John Robinson, sir Jeremy Whichcot, sir
William Waller, sir Richard Franklin, sir Joseph Ash, sir Reginold Foster, sir
William Roberts, sir Hugh Smithson, Baronets; sir John Brampston, sir Robert
Atkins, sir John Bennet, Knights of the Bath; sir Henry Herbert, sir Thomas
Allen, sir Nicholas Crisp, sir Thomas Roe, sir William Bateman, sir Lancelot
Lake, sir Henry Wroth, sir Francis Gerard, sir John Glyn, sir John Maynard, sir
John Heath, Attorney of the Duchy; sir Winston Churchil, sir John Cropley, sir
Charles Harbord, sir Robert Hyde, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, sir
Edmond Boyer, sir Thomas Clergies, sir James Smith, sir Ellis Leighton, sir
Thomas Player junior, sir Thomas Bide, sir William Rider, sir Clifford Clifton,
sir Gilbert Gerard of Harrow, sir Gilbert Gerard of St. James, sir John
Nicholas, sir Philip Warwick, sir Christopher Eyres, sir John Birkenhead, one
of his Majesty's Masters of Requests; sir Cycil Which, sir Robert Car, sir
Edmond Barker, sir John Colliton, sir Edmond Pierce, sir Justinian Lewin, sir
Thomas Escourt, sir Edward Wingfield, sir Henry Wernon, sir Paul Painter,
Knights; William Ashburnham, Cofferer of his Majesty's Household; Sergeant
Wynham, Sergeant Waller, Charles Cornwallis, Humphrey Weld, Francis Crawley,
Edmond Waller, George Pit, Sydney Bear, John Carey, Henry Barker, John Brown,
Edwin Rich, Francis Bloomer, Joseph Ayloffe, Thomas Swallow, Richard Peacock,
Charles Cheyne, John Trevor, Francis Philips, Robert Jacob, William Hill, John
Heydon, George Day, George Marsh, William Page, Andrew Ellis, John Page,
William Meggs, Thomas Collet, Ralph Hawtry, Thomas Povey, Giles Hungerford,
Thomas Lake, Richard Dunton, James Hawley, Erasmus Moise, Charles Pitfield,
Thomas Kendal, Thomas Harrison, Thomas Wharton, John Jones, Henry Osborn, John
Smith, William Goldsborough, Richard Abel, John Wilford, David Walter, Richard
Cheney, Richard Procter, James Norfolk, John James, John Fetherley, William
Northrey, John Philips Auditor, Edmund Warcup, Roger Jennings, Robert Child,
William Marshall, Thomas Ardin, Jasper Churchil, Daniel Procter, John Baldwin,
William Bowls, Walter B^othby, Nicholas Ranton, John Gouldsmith, Henry
Murrey, John Hutchinson, Edward Rich, Robert Peyton, Pawlet St. John, William
Dormer, Edmond Draper, Doctor William Quarterman, esquires; sir Thomas Bird,
one of the Masters of Chancery, sir Frederick Hyde Sergeant at Law; Robert
Hanson, Lestrange Colthrop, esquires; sir Charles Cotterel, sir John
Birkenhead, Richard Atkins, James Hambleton, one of his Majesty's Bedchamber,
Edward Trussel, Maximilian Bard, William Harpham, esquires; Mr. Bathurst of
Edmonton, John Layney, John Pawlet, Mr. VVood of Littleton, Mr. Roberts of
Hayes, John Walker, Mr. Thomas Diconson of Hillingdon, Robert Hampton, Robert
Shoredith, Gentlemen; Captain Harrington of Staynes, Major John Bill, Michael
Holman, Henry Row, esquires; Mr. Leigh of Greenford, Mr. Claxton of Sudbury,
Mr. Brigginshal of Hayes, Mr. Chute of VVilsdon, Thomas Nevet, Mr. Farrington
of South-mims, William Bockenham, John Thorp, John Norwood, John Lloyd,
Gentlemen; sir Richard Napier, Robert Napier, Tho. Henshaw, Griffith Bodurda,
esquires; sir Thomas Thorowgood Knight, Frederick Cornwallis, Francis
Cornwallis, and Henry Murrey, Esquires.

Westminster. For the City of Westminster, Thomas Lord Richardson, Baron
Cramond in the Kingdom of Scotland, sir William Morris Knight, Principal
Secretary of State, sir Henry Bennet, Principal Edward Nicholas Knight, one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, George Mountague esquire, sir
Heneage Finch, Knight and Baronet, his Majesty's Solicitor-General; sir
William Plaiters Baronet, sir Robert Long, sir Lancelot Lake, sir Robert Pie,
sir Charles Harbord, sir Cycil Which, Knights; sir Edmond Pie Knight and
Baronet, sir John Cotton Baronet, sir Henry Herbert, sir John Nicholas Knight
of the Bath, sir Philip Warwick, sir Richard Everard, sir Edward Filmer, sir
Allen Apsley, sir Henry VVood, sir Thomas M^res, sir John Talbot, sir Charles
Cotterel, sir Thomas Higgons, Knights; sir Thomas Littleton Baronet, sir
William Poultney Knight; sir John Bennet, Knight of the Bath, sir William
Wheeler, Baronet; sir Thomas Clergies, Knight; sir John Birkenhead, one of his
Majesty's Masters of Requests, sir William Clerk, sir Anthony I^by, sir
Robert Howard, Knights; sir Edward Greavers Baronet, sir John Baber Knight, sir
John Collaton Knight and Baronet, sir Edward Broughton Baronet, John
Ashburnham, Bernard Greenvile, Stephen Fox, Cecil Tufton, John Trevor, sir
Richard Oately, Reignald Graham, Doctor William Quarterman, esquires; sir
Theodore le Vaux, sir Hugh Carteret, Knights; Colonel VVhitley, George Pitts,
Richard Newman, Mr. Dolbin, Steward of Westminster, Robert Scawen, John
Brown, Thomas Povey, Richard Atkins, Richard Mason, Thomas Coppin, William
Glascock, Bulleyn Reymes, Edmond-Bury Godfrey, Francis Lucy, Thomas Morris,
Robert Filmer, Matthew Lock, Thomas Russel, Edmond VVarcup, John Sibley, Thomas
Russel, Thomas Bayles, William Harbord, Richard Aldworth, Simon Smith, George
Farewell, James Norfolk, Humphrey Wyrley, Francis Dorrington, Charles Potts,
Butler Kinhead, William Hammond, Henry Peck, Francis Cornwallis, Anthony Cogan,
Edward Fauconbridg, William Gape, Emery Hill, Roger Higgs, Peter Salmon Doctor
of Physic; George Meryfield, Job Williams, Gentlemen; Frederick Cornwallis,
Charles Cornwallis esquires; sir Thomas Byrd Knight, and John Clarke Doctor of
Physic in the Strand; Andrew Ellis Esquire.

Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland, Son and
Heir apparent to Edward Marquess of Worcester, William Lord Herbert of Cardiff,
Son and heir apparent to Philip Earl of Pembrooke and Mountgomery, sir Bainham
Throckmorton Knight and Baronet; sir Edward Morton, sir Trevor Williams, sir
Thomas Morgan Baronets; sir George Probert Knight; William Morgan of Tredgar,
William Jones of Treowen, Thomas Lewis of St. Peer, George Probert, Edward
Proger, Edmond Morgan, Charles Van, Thomas Hughes, Charles Hughes, James
Herbert, Charles-Proger Herbert, Henry Morgan, William Morgan of Pencrike,
William Morgan of Grays Inn, Thomas Morgan of Penrose, Thomas Morgan of
Lawromney, Herbert Evans, William Herbert, Charles Price, Walter Rumsey,
William Jones of Abergeny, Henry Baker, Philip Cecil, Roger Williams, Thomas
Williams, John Walter of Perfield, Roger Oats, Walter Prichard, John Parry,
Nicholas Kemois, James Prichard, Thomas Prichard, John Grenuffe, Edmond Jones,
John Arnold, Esquires; Edward Williams, John Lewis, Henry Chamber, Thomas
Herbert, Walter Jones, Walter Morgan, Edward Kemeis of Pertholy, Capel
Hanbury, Christopher Perkins, Roger Aldey, Charles Griffith, Will. Williams
of Lanfoist, John Rumsey, Will. Jones of Lansanfreed, Gentlemen; the Mayor of
the Town of Monmouth for the time being, Andrew Probert, John Gubb, Gent.

Northampton. For the County of Northampton, Robert Viscount Mandevil, Son and
Heir apparent to Edward Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household, Obryan Viscount Cullen of the Kingdom of Ireland, Charles Lord Le de
Spencer, Son and Heir apparent to Mildmay Earl of Westmerland, William Lord
Fitz-VVilliams of the Kingdom of Ireland, sir Francis Compton, Knight, George
Mountague, Christopher Hatton, sir Tho. Crew, Rob. Spencer Esquire; sir Richard
Rainsford one of the Barons of his Majesty's Exchequer; sir Jeoffrey Palmer,
his Majesty's Attorney General, Will. Mountague Esquire, the Queens Attorney
General; sir Justinian Isham, sir Tho. Cave, sir Hen. Yelverton, sir Samuel
Danvers, sir Edw. Nichols, sir Roger Norwich, sir John Robinson, sir Will.
Dudley, sir George Buswel Baronets; sir John Holman Baronet, sir Edw. Griffin,
sir Will. Fleetwood, sir Samuel Jones, sir John Bernard, sir James Langham, sir
Edw. Alstone, Knights; John Beaumont, Ferdinando Marsham, Lewis Palmer, Will.
Haslewood, Henry Robinson of Cransley, Miles Fleetwood, George Clarke, Will.
Stafford, Fran. Lane, Goddard Pemberton, John Brown, Thomas Chubnal, George
Wake Doctor of Laws, Laurence Manley, William Chester, William Sanders, Tho.
Trist, Tho. Elmes, Toby Chancey, Tho. Catesby, Richard Rainsford, Samuel Trist,
William Washburne, Humphrey Orme, Maurice Tresham, William Langham, William
Downhall, Philip Holman, John Cartwright, George Tresham, William Tate, Richard
Kinsman, Edward Only, John Syers, Edward Harby junior, William Adams, John
Colly, Richard Saltenstal, Maximilian Emersly, (...) Foxely, Edward Palmer,
Robert Clerk, William Buckby, Henry Edmonds, Will. Pargiter junior, Tanfield
Mulso, Christopher Pickering, Bryan Janson, Walter Kirkham, Rich. Benson,
Anthony Shuckburgh, Michael Woodhal, John Thornton, Richard Nailer, John
Willoughby, John Bagshaw, William Warner of Lub^am, William Lisle,
Christopher Thursby, Bernard VValcot, Andrew Lant, Francis Morgan, Alexander
Fakins, Thomas Roane, Thomas Jennyson, William Ward, John Lynn, John Delaval,
William Leavins, Francis Kirkham, Edmond Neale, Nicholas Steward, John
Gardener, John Esquires; The Mayor of Northampton for the time being, Thomas
Thornton, John Brafield, Francis Pickmere, Joseph Sergeant, John Friend, Hatton
Farmer, Joseph Hensman, John Hewes; the Mayor of Higham for the time being; the
Bailiff of Daventry for the time being; the Mayor of Brackley for the time
being; Henry Lucas, Samuel Clerk, Thomas Dove, John Bourn, Robert Pargiter of
Gretworth, Esquires, and Richard Butler of Preston, Gentleman.

Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, and Town and County of the same,
Henry Lord Viscount Mansfeild, Son and Heir apparent to William Marquess of
Newcastle, Patricius Viscount Chaworth of the Kingdom of Ireland, Gilbert Lord
Haughton, Son and Heir apparent to John Earl of Clare, Will. Willoughby,
Ancestil Gray, Will. Pierepoint, Arthur Stanhop, Will. Byron, Esquires; sir
Jarvas Clifton Knight and Baronet, sir George Savill Baronet, sir Francis
Mollineux Knight and Baronet; sir Will. Hickman, sir Tho. Williamson, sir
Will. Willoughby, Baronets; sir Francis Leake Knight and Baronet, sir John
Digby, sir Ralph Knight, sir Clifford Clifton, Knights; Robert Pierrepoint,
Anthony Air, John Grubham-how, William Palms, Isham Perkins, William
Stanhoppe, William Cartwright, Charles Hutchinson, Will. Sacheverill, Cecil
Cooper, John Cooper, Will. Skeffington, Peniston Whalley, Will. Herbert,
Anthony Gilby, Francis Sands, Francis Stringer, Will. Clearkson, Robert
Mellish, George Nevil, Arthur Waring, John Rayner, Tho. Charlton, Clifton
Rodes, Tho. Marshal, Rason Mellish, Tho. Wowen, John Moseley, Will. Byron,
Esquires; Robert Thoroton Doctor of Physic, George Came, Will. Newton, James
Lane, Gentlemen; The High Sheriff of the County of Nottingham for the time
being, the Mayor of Nottingham for the time being, the Bailiffs of East-Radford
for the time being, and the Mayor of Newark for the time being.

Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, Sir Edward Turnor Knight, Speaker of the
House of Commons, Thomas Lord Richardson Baron Cramond of the Kingdom of
Scotland; Hatton Rich Esquire, sir Edmond Bacon, sir John Hobart, sir Philip
Woodhouse, sir Richard Berney, sir Henry Jernegan, sir Edward Barkham, sir
Nicholas le Strange, sir John Holland, sir Robert Paston, sir John Palgrave,
sir Ralph Hare, sir John Potts, sir Robert Kempe, sir Jacob Astley, sir Edward
Ward, sir Thomas Deerham, sir William Gaudy, sir William Cook, sir William
Doyley, Baronets; sir Miles Hobart, sir John Knyvett, sir Edward Walpoole, sir
Christopher Calthorpe Knights of the Bath; sir Charles Harbard, sir John
Harrison, sir Thomas Guybon, sir Allen Apsley, sir William Hovel, sir Thomas
Rant, sir Joseph Pain, sir Thomas Meadow, sir William Hewyt, sir Justinian
Lewin, sir William Doyly, sir Robert Yallap, sir Nevil Catelyn Knights, Thomas
Townshend, George Townshend, John Bladwell, Robert London, Le Strange Caltharp,
Thomas Dey, Robert Kedington, Robert Tyrrill of Wilton, Thomas Thursby, Francis
Thursby, Samuel Harsnett, Leonard Gooch, John Warner, John Fisher, Hatton
Barnerd, John Bendish, Gascoyne Weld of Braconash, Thomas Garret, Esquires;
Sergeant at Law, John Cook, Robert Tracy, James Gray, John Hobart, Thomas le
Gros, Edward Barkham, Thomas Holland, Augustine Palgrave, John Potts, William
Coke, Francis Bickley, Will. Addams, Anthony Gaudy, Philip Herbert, Roger
Spilman, Philip Harbor, Maurice Shelton, Peter Gleane, Thomas Gaudy of Claxton,
Thomas Berney of Swarson, William Crane, Anthony Freeston, Robert Suckling,
John Windham, William Barker, Robert Gawsell, Henry Repps, Oliver Neeve,
Philip Bedingfied and Humphrey Bedingfield, Fran. Bacon, Tho. Bacon, Rob. Long,
Rob. Baldoch, Rob. Stewart, John Earl, Francis Cory, Christopher Jay, Suckling
Jay, Leonard Mapes, Henry Clifton, Clement Herne, Nathaniel Showldham, Richard
Nixon, Edmond Doyley, John Thugton, John Cock, Tho. Brown of Elsing, Tho.
Corey, John Kendall, Lawrence Oxburgh, John Shadwell, Robert Coney, Rob.
Haughton, Rich. Godfrey, John Anguish, Anthony Fisher, Edward Barber, Tho.
Drury, Nich. Rookewood, Anth. Drury, Robert Drury, Tho. Talbot, Nich. Styleman,
Jacob Preston, Bassingbourne Gaudy, Charles Gaudy, William Davy of Ellingham,
Nathaniel Knevet, Edmond Britiff, Simon Britiff, Tho. Wright of Kilverston,
Munford Spelman, Edmond de Gray, Tho. Wright of Ovington, William Brampton and
Robert Buxton, Gentlemen.

Kings Lynn. For the Borough of Kings Lynn, The Mayor for the time being,
Robert Steward, Recorder; Walter Kerby, John Basset, Thomas Green, John Bird,
Benjamin Holly, Henry Bell, William Wharton, Thomas Robinson.

Thetford. For the Borough of Thetford, The Mayor for the time being, sir John
Holland and sir Will. Gaudy, Baronets; sir Allen Apsly Knight, Maurice Shelton
Esquire John Kendall, Robert Tyrrell, Edmund Hunt, Burrage Martin and Osmond Clerk,
Gentlemen.

Great Yarmouth. For the Borough of Great Yarmouth, The Bailiffs for the time
being; sir Thomas Meadow, Aldermen.

For the City of Norwich, The Mayor for the time being, sir Joseph Pain
Knight, Francis Cory Esquire, Recorder; Hen. Watts, John Rayley, Bernard
Church, John Man, John Salter, Christopher Jay, Richard Wenman, John Osborne,
John Croshold, Will. Haward, Esquires; The two Sheriffs for the time being,
Augustine Briggs, Tho. Wisse, Robert Bendish, Richard Couldham, John Larrance,
Hen. Hirne, Francis Norris, Matthew Markham, John Manser, Henry VVoods, Henry
VVatts junior, Thomas Thacker, Thomas Chickeringe.

Northumberland. For the County of Northumberland, Henry Lord Viscount
Mansfeild, Son and Heir apparent to William Marquess of Newcastle; Thomas Gray,
Ralph Gray, Edward VVidrington, Esquires; sir William Fenwick, sir Ralph
Delaval, Baronets; sir William Forster, sir Henry VViddrington, sir Francis
Lyddal, Knights; Edward Gray of Heaton, Robert Delaval, Cuthbert Heron, Ralph
Gray of Bradford, Thomas Forster of Etherston, William VVidrington, William
Fenwick of Beywell, Ralph Heborn of Heborn, John Clark, Robert Shafto of
Benwell, Ralph Jenison, John Salkeld the elder of Rock, Thomas Benwick of the
Closhouse, Daniel Collingwood of Branton, Richard Stote, William Delaval of
Benwick, John Rodham of Little Houghton, Nicholas Whitehead, and Ralph
Anderson, Esquires; William Warren and Michael Widrington of Morpeth,
Gentlemen.

For the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, Colonel Edward Gray, the Mayor for the
time being; Thomas Watson, Andrew Moore, Mark Armorer, John Duglas, Aldermen;
and Anthony Afton, Bailiff.

For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tine, the Mayor for the time being,
sir John Marley and sir Francis Anderson, Knights; John Clarke, and Henry
Brabant, Esquires.

Oxon. For the County of Oxon, Thomas Earl of Down in the Kingdom of Ireland,
Henry Lord Viscount Cornebury, son and heir apparent to Edward Earl of
Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England; Philip Lord Wenman, Viscount Tuam in the
Kingdom of Ireland, James Herbert, John Lovelace, Esquires; sir Anthony Cope,
sir Henry Lee, sir Thomas Spencer, sir Thomas Penniston, sir William Walter,
sir Anthony Craven, sir Thomas Cleyton, Warden of Merton College; sir Thomas
Chamberlain, sir Compton Read, Baronets; sir William Fleetwood, sir William
Morton one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law, sir John Glyn one of his
Majesty's Sergeants at Law; sir Francis Wenman, sir Edward Norris, sir Henry
Jones, sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the Tower, sir Timothy Terryl, sir
Thomas Tipin, sir John Clarke, sir Edmund Bray, sir George Croke, sir Littleton
Osbaldiston, sir Robert Jenkinson, sir Allen Apsly, sir William Glyn, sir
Philip Harecourt, sir sir Samuel Jones, Knights; sir Edward Hungerford Knight
of the Bath, James Herbert, John Lovelace, David Walter one of the Grooms of
his Majesty's Bedchamber; Lewellin Jenkins Doctor of Laws, Principal of Jesus
College, Broom Whorwood, Richard Crook, William Cope, James Hyde Doctor of
Physic, President of Magdalen College, Thomas Willis Doctor of Physic,
Thomas Saunders, Anthony Libb, Vincent Barry, Henry Allnut, John Stone, Francis
Martin, Edmund Lenthal, John Clarke, William Lenthal, William Leg one of the
Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, William Dormer, John Cartwright, George
Chamberlain, Thomas Wheat, William Sheppard, William Cartwright, Rowland
Lacy, Arthur Jones, Henry Allworth Doctor of Laws, Richard Hollaway Counselor
at Law, John Clitherow Gentleman, Robert Dormer, Raynald Bray, William Bayley,
Thomas Hord, John Doyley, Charles Hollaway Sergeant at Law, Charles Hollaway,
Thomas Coventry, Matthew Skinner Doctor of Physic, Samuel Sandys junior,
William Gamcock, Robert Vesey, Robert Perrot junior, (...) Sheppard of
Rosewright, Edward Vernon, John West, William Oakeley, Esquires; William Wright
and John Wickham, Gentlemen; The Mayor of Woodstock for the time being,
Master Alexander Johnson; the Mayor of Banbury; the Warden of Henley; the
Bailiffs of Burford and Chipping-Norton, and the chief Magistrates to act in
their several Corporations only.

For the University and City of Oxford, the Vice Chancellor and the two
Proctors for the time being, sir Thomas Cleyton Knight, Warden of Merton
College, Richard Bayley Doctor of Divinity, President of St. John's College,
John Fell Doctor of Divinity, Dean of Christ-Church, John Meredith Doctor of
Divinity, Warden of All Souls College, Thomas Barlow Doctor of Divinity,
Provost of Queens College, Thomas Yates Doctor of Divinity, Principal of
Brazen-Nose College, Walter Blandford Doctor of Divinity, Warden of Wadham
College, Luellin Jenkins Doctor of the Laws, Principal of Jesus College,
Joseph Crowther Doctor of Divinity, Principal of Saint Mary Hall, James Hyde
Doctor of Physic, Principal of Magdalen Hall, Richard Lydal Doctor of Physic,
Thomas Elliot Doctor of Physic, Henry Alworth Doctor of Laws, Benjamin Cooper
Master of Arts, Richard Wit Bachelor of Law, Nicholas Bachelor of Law,
Richard Holway, Esquires; Martin Lipyard, John Cross, William Flexney, John
Haslewood, Joseph Goodwin, William Day, Richard Davis, William Finch, Matthew
Leech.

The Mayor of the City for the time being, sir Anthony Cope, and sir Francis
Wenman, Baronets; sir William Morton, sir Sampson White, Knights; Broom
Whorwood, Sergeant Hollaway, Charles Hollaway, Richard Cook Recorder, George
Low, Esquires; Francis Harris, Leonard Bowman, William Wright, Roger Griffin
and John White, Aldermen; John Harris, William Bayley, Francis Grenoway,
Francis Heyward, John Townsend, William Cornish, Henry Mallory, John Painton
Town Clerk, Robert Whorwood, John Lamb, Thomas Rowney, Richard Prat and Edward
Astin, Gentlemen.

Rutland. For the County of Rutland, John Lord Roos, Son and Heir apparent to
John Earl of Rutland, Bennet Lord Sherard of the Kingdom of Ireland, Edward
Noel, Henry Noel, Philip Sherard, Esquires; sir Thomas Mackworth Baronet, sir
Edward Heath Knight of the Bath, sir Francis Mackworth, sir Edward-Maria
Wingfield, sir Eusebius Pelsant, Knights; William Palms, Alexander Noell,
Christopher Brown, Beaumont Bodenham, Richard Halford, Abel Barker, Samuel
Brown, William Hyde, Edward Faukner, Robert Mackworth, Esquires; Charles
Halford, Ezekiel Johnson, Gentlemen.

Salop. For the County of Salop, William Pierripont, Andrew Newport, Esquires;
Sir Thomas Woolrich, sir William Whitmore, sir Francis Lawley, sir Walter
Acton, sir Henry-Frederick Thin, sir Vincent Corbet, sir Thomas Littleton,
sir Francis Edwards, sir Henry Vernon, sir Humphrey Briggs Baronet, sir Thomas
Whitmore Knight of the Bath; sir Richard Prince, sir John Weld, sir Richard
Ottly, sir William Child and sir Henry Herbert, Knights; sir Job Charleton
Sergeant at Law, and Chief Justice of Chester, Timothy Littleton Sergeant at
Law, William Fowler, Timothy Turner, Philip Eyton, Richard Scriven, Francis
Thorns, Charles Mannering, James Laten, Robert Sandford, Roger Kinneston,
Thomas Bawdwine, Robert Leighton, Philip Prince, Francis Charlton, Thomas Owen
of Cow-dover, Edward Kynerstone, Samuel Wingfield, Thomas Whitmore, George
Weld, George Ludlow, Thomas Rock, Charles Baldwin, Robert Charleton, Henry
Barnard, Thomas Powis, Thomas Kettelesby, Robert Corbet of the Hall of Hussy,
Thomas Holland, John Coats, William Oakeley, Edmond Waring of Owldbury,
Somerset Fox, Richard Fowler, John Walcot, Adam Ottly, Thomas Walcot, Robert
Cresset, John Cole, Robert Owen, Edward Powel, Thomas Lloyd, Thomas Lockier,
Thomas Smalman, John Lacon, Thomas Lockard, John Kynestone, William Owen of
Porkington, John Newton, Thomas Kynnersley of Badger, William Cotton, Richard
Mitton, Francis Forester, William Jones of Sandford, Rowland Hill, Vincent
Edwards, Henry of Adderley, Edward Vernon, Thomas Acton, Thomas Jobber, Samuel
Baldwin, Henry Sprat, Thomas Crump, Henry Griffiths, Richard Ridley, Jonathan
Langley, James Beck, Henry Mitton of Shipton, Esquires; The Mayor of the Town
of Salop for the time being; the Bailiffs of Ludlow, Bridge-North, Wenlock and
Bishops-Castle for the time being, Daniel Wicherley, Francis Smith, Richard
Walker, John Whitacre, Richard Clarke, Andrew Viners, Richard Tailor, John
Harding, Arthur Hinckes, John Baugh, Edward Wollaston, Alexander Middleton,
Samuel Lloyd, Richard Davis of Ludlow, Roger Gough, Benjamin Buckley of
Somerset-Hall, Robert Betton, Thomas Jones of Sheet, Richard Charleton, Richard
Hosier, Capt. Philip Jenings, Andrew Hill, Richard Prichard, John Haynes,
George Hosier, John Stanyer, Edward Owen, Roger Harris, Robert Vernon, Capt.
Richard Philips, Rowland Hill of Hackoston, Gentlemen; Richard Cooling Esquire,
Robert Gorton, sir Clement Clarke and Richard Jenkins Gentleman.

Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Sir John Wirley Knight, High Sheriff;
sir Edward Littleton, sir Edward Baggot, sir Thomas Wilbraham, sir Walter
Rotesley, sir Charles Woolceley and sir Francis Lawley, Baronets; sir Bryan
Broughton and sir John Bowyer, Knights and Baronets; sir Theophilus Bidolph,
sir Thomas Whitgrave and sir Walter Littleton, Knights; Randolph Egerton,
Walter Chetwind senior, William Sneyd, Henry Gray, John Lane, Walter
Chetwynd junior, George Digby, Broom VVhorwood, Rowland Okeover, Edward
Mainwaring, John Skrymshire, Gerard Skrymshire, Colonel Harvy Bagot, Edward
Vernon, Charles Cotton, Richard Congreave, Robert Milward, William Chetwind,
Thomas Kynnersby, John Piercehouse, John Swynfen, Robert Levison, Francis
Levison, Rowland Cotton, Henry Archbold, Jonathan VVoodnorth, Jonathan Cope,
Henry Vernon, George Parker, John Shelton, Francis VVightwick, John VVhitehal,
William Talbot, George Vernon, Charles Agard, Richard Aderley, Edward
Arablaster, William Orme, John Noble, Edward Birch, Edward Ward, William
Ward, William Trafford and Dan. Watson, Esquires; Richard Bracegirdle,
William Trafford, John Gough, William Farmer, John Coleclough of Burslem, John
Felton, Henry Haworth and Thomas Bagnal, Gentlemen; The Mayor of Stafford for
the time being; The Mayor of Newcastle for the time being; The Mayor of VValsal
for the time being, and the Bailiffs of Tamworth for the time being.

Lichfield. For the City and County of the City of Lichfield, Thomas Caterbanck
Bailiff, the Bailiffs Theophilus Bydolph Knight, Colonel John Lane, Michael
Bydolph, Richard Dyot, John Hill, Sherington Talbot, Esquires; Doctor Hinton,
Doctor Hewet, James Allen, Thomas Minors, John Burns, William Jesson,
Gentlemen; and the Sheriff for the time being.

Somerset. For the County of Somerset, John Lord Digby, Son and Heir apparent
to George Earl of Bristol, Francis Lord Hawley of the Kingdom of Ireland, sir
Charles Berkley Treasurer of his Majesty's Household, John Pawlet, Francis
Pawlet, Amias Pawlet, Esquires; sir Thomas Mallet, one of the Justices of the
Kings Bench; sir William Portman, sir John Sydenham, sir Maurice Berkley, sir
Hugh Smith, sir William Windham, sir John VVorton, sir George Trevilian, sir
Charles Pim and sir John Newton, Baronets; sir John Coventry and sir Edward
Hungerford, Knights of the Bath; sir Henry Berkley, sir Thomas Bridges, sir
Hugh Windham, sir George Norton, sir John War, sir Thomas Gore, sir George
Horner and sir William Basset, Knights; John Merefield Sergeant at Law,
Alexander Popham, George Scowel, Edward Philips, Edmund Windham, George
Speak, Francis Lutterel, Henry Rogers, Peregrine Palmer, Samuel Gorges, John
Mallet, Francis Wyndham, William Hellyer of Coker, William Prynne, Thomas
Heal, Edward Berkley, Henry Waldron, William Bull, John Buckland, Thomas War,
Robert Hunt, Thomas Piggot, Francis Roll, John Harrington, John Tynt, Warwick
Brampfield, William Lacy, John Churchil, Henry Henly, Edward Court, Henry Bull,
William Carrant, Francis Baker, Richard Jones, George Sydenham, Robert Hawley,
Michael Mallet, Edward Philips junior, Anthony Pawlet, Henry Light, John
Harbin, Roger Bourne, Edward Bampfield, Angel Gray, Ralph Stowel, John Moore,
Hugh Norris, William Speak, William Hilliar of Sea, John St. Albons, John
Fitz-Herbert, John How, William Bawn, John Cridland, Kingsmel Lucy, Peter
Roymon, William Harbord, Roger Newburrough, Maidley Samborne, Francis Vaughan,
John Fody, William Coward, John Hunt, John Goodwin, Henry Dunster, Edward
Clarke, Thomas Farwell and William Clarke and James Hayes, Esquires; And for
the City of Wells and Town of Bridgewater, the respective Mayors for the time
being; for the City of Bath, the Mayor for the time being, William Prynne
Esquire, Walter Gibbs Alderman, Robert Pearce Doctor in Physic, Walter Bayley,
Edward Parker, John Sherstone and Simon Sloper, Gentlemen.

Bristoll. For the County and City of Bristoll, The Mayor for the time being,
John Lawford Esquire, sir Robert Atkins Knight of the Bath, Recorder; sir Henry
Creswick and sir John Knight, Knights; John Lock, Richard Balman, Nathaniel
Cale, Walter Sandy, John Willoughby, Thomas Langton, Aldermen, Ralph Olliffe,
John Hicks, John Wright, John Bradway and Richard Streamer, Gentlemen.

Southampton. For the County of Southampton, Charles Lord St. John of Basing,
son and heir apparent to John Marquess of Winchester; the Lord Henry Pawlet,
sir George Carteret Vice-Chamberlain of the Kings Household, sir Robert Howard,
sir Henry Worseley, sir John Mills, sir John Norton, sir William Lewis, sir
Hugh Stewkley, sir William Mewx, sir Thomas Badd, sir Nicholas Steward, sir
Andrew Henley, sir John Trot, sir Robert Dillington, Baronets; sir Humphrey
Bennet, sir John Leigh, sir Robert Mason, sir Thomas Higgons, sir John Dingley,
sir Robert Worseley, sir Mundiford Brampston, sir Thomas Tompkins, Knights;
Richard Norton, Thomas Neale, Richard Goddard, Lawrence Hyde, Henry Wallop,
John Button, Thomas Knollis, William Oglander, Robert Dillington, Tho.
Jervice, John Richards, Charles West, Will. Leg, Hen. Whitehead, Geo. Pit,
Tho. Brook, Leonard Bilson, Francis Roll, John Hook, Tho. Cole, Philip Leigh,
James May, Rich. Compton, Benj. Ruddiard, Giles Hungerford, Francis Rivet,
Roger Gallop, Francis Tilney, Henry Bromfield, William Pit, Arthur Bold,
William Collins, Edward Norton, Daniel Norton, William Wither, John Worseley
senior, Edward Worseley, Edward Cook, John Ball, Edward Hooper of Chilworth,
Edward Hooper of Hurne-Court, Francis Dickins, John Stewkley, Bartholomew
Price, Daniel Kingsmel, John Kingsmel, Henry Tulfe, Thomas Edmonds, Robert
Oxenbridge, Robert Goffe, Richard Love, Gabriel Whistler, Thomas Newnham, John
Dean, John Oglander, William Wall, Challoner Chute, Henry Kelsey, Henry
Goddard, William Lisle, Andrew Wall, Richard Ailiffe, Edward Hyde, Anthony
Yalden, Essex Pawlet, Stephen Fox, John Culpeper, Walter Slingsby, Alexander
Culpeper, John Dingly, Esquires; and Richard Rudyard Gent.

For the Town and County of Southampton, William Stanley, Robert Richbil,
William Horn, Thomas Cornelius, James Clungeon, Henry Pit, George Steptoe,
Esquires;

For the City of Winchester, William Tailor, Richard Dennet, E^mund Fifeild,
Benjamin Clarke, John Monday, John Colson, the Mayor of Winton, the Mayor of
Southampton, the Mayor of Portsmouth, the Mayor of Newport, the Mayor of
Basingstoke, the Bailiff of Andevor for the time being, John Bowreman, Thomas
Leg, James Rice, Mores Read, Gent.

Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, Sir Edward Turnor Knight, Speaker of the
House of Commons, Walter Devereux Esquire, sir Edmond Bacon, sir Lyonel
Tolemache, sir Henry Felton, sir Robert Kempe, sir William Spring, sir John
Castleton, sir Henry Bacon, sir Henry North, sir Thomas Cullam, sir Gervace
Elwies, sir Thomas Darcy, sir Robert Cordal, sir John Rous, sir Robert Brook,
sir Samuel Barnardiston, sir Philip Parker, Baronets; sir William Playters, sir
Henry VVood, sir Charles Gaudy, sir George Reeve, sir Edward Duke, sir William
Doyly, sir Thomas Bernardiston, Knights and Baronets; sir Dudley North, sir
Nicholas Bacon and sir John Knivet, Knights of the Bath, sir Henry Crofts, sir
Edmund Poley, sir John Duncomb, sir Robert Brook, sir Thomas Harvy, sir George
VVeneve, sir John Poley, sir Nevil Catlin, sir William Bloys, sir Thomas Smith,
sir Philip Parker, sir Jeofrey Burwel, sir Philip Meadow, sir William Doyley
and sir Edmund Barker, Knights; John Havey, Thomas VValgrave, Thomas Holland,
John Poley, Richard Cook, Charles Stutteril, John Sicclemore, John Southby,
William Gipps, Clement Heigham, Benjamin Cutler of the Chauntry, William
Bloys, Henry Warner, Thomas Stewart, Thomas Wright, Joseph Bland, John
Playters, John Cole, Robert Mattyward, Hamond Claxton, Robert Style, Fitznoune
Lamb, Henry Coppinger, Thomas Anis, Edward Feilder, Peregrine Doyley, Thomas
Dade, Thomas Scrivener, Henry North, John Lamb, Edward North, William Acton,
John Wentworth, Robert Butts, Thomas Butts, Francis Cheney, Robert Maniot,
William Rivet, Robert Nanton, Gardner Web, Robert King, Charles Cornwallis,
John Rivet, Thomas Golding, Edmund Plum, Edward Man junior, Edmund Clench,
Richard Kirkeby, Thomas Tyril, Francis Theobald, William Beaumont, Michael
Grigg, Thomas Leman, Reginald Williams, Thomas Vesey, Philip Howard, William
Dawtry, William Gooch, Framlingham Gaudy, Ptolemy Tolemache, William Jermy,
Henry Parker, Thomas Bacon, John Brame of Ash, Humphrey Bowen, John
Bedingfield, Thomas Day, Miles Edgar, Samuel Kenidge, Edmund Shepherd, William
Cullum, Edmund Gardner, Robert Browning, Henry Stebbing, John Brook, John
Cornwallis, William Blomfield, Robert Gosnold, Wiseman Bokenham, John Thurston,
Thomas Edgar, Tho. Allen Vice Admiral, Rob. Wright, Esquire The Mayor of Sudbury
for the time being, Joh. Warner, William Byat, Gentlemen; The Bailiffs of
Dunwich for the time being. For the Borough of The Bailiff for the time being,
Sir Emanuel Sorels Knight, William Bloys, John Sicklemore, Esquires; Nicholas
Phillips, John Robinson, John Smithier, Robert Clerk, Gilbert Lingfeild,
Edward Man junior, Gentlemen. For the Borough of St. Edmonds-bury, The Aldermen
for the time being, John Southeby Esquire, Recorder; Sir Edmund Poley, Sir John
Duncomb, Knights; James Cob Esquire, Francis Brown, Robert Sharp, Stephen Cook,
Samuel Hustler, Edward Bourn, Gentlemen. For the Borough of Aldborough, The
Bailiff for the time being, Sir John Holland Baronet, Sir Robert Brook Knight,
William Shipman, Thomas Elliot, Richard Brown and John Burwood, Gentlemen. For
the Borough of Orford, The Mayor for the time being, Walter Devereux Esquire,
Sir Allen Broderick Knight, Joseph Hastings, Thomas Hastings, James Coppin,
Edward Ewen, Edward Parker, Martin Folks, John Harwel and Edward Johnson,
Gentlemen.

Surrey. For the County of Surrey and Borough of Southwark, Charles Earl of
Ancram of the Kingdom of Scotland, Francis Lord Angier of the Kingdom of
Ireland, Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, Benjamin Weston Esquire, Sir Henry Capel Knight of the Bath, Sir
Francis Vincent Knight and Baronet, Sir Walter St. John's, Sir Adam Brown,
Baronets; Sir Thomas Trevor Knight and Baronet, Sir John Robinson Knight and
Baronet, Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Richard Brown Knight and Baronet, Sir
William Moore, Sir John Eveling, Sir Marmaduke Gresham, Sir Richard Stydolph,
Sir John Bromfield, Sir Abraham Cullen and Sir Thomas Hook, Baronets; Sir John
Nicholas and Sir William Terringham, Knights of the Bath, Sir William
Throckmorton Knight Marshal, Sir Ralph Freeman Knight, one of the Masters of
Request, Sir John Lenthal, Sir Edmund Bowyer, Sir John Shaw, Sir Charles
Howard, sir William Haward, sir George Ascough, sir Robert Long, sir Edward
Wingfeild, sir Thomas Bloodworth, sir Daniel Harvy, sir Robert Parkhurst, sir
Richard Hatton, sir Allen Broderick, sir Nicholas Carew, sir Edward Bishe, sir
James Austin and sir William Turner, Knights; Henry Hilyard, Arthur Onslow,
George Chute, Roger James, John Scot, Edward Thurland, Christopher Buckle,
Edward Evelin, Thomas Foster, Anthony Bower, Edward Nicholas, William Hoskins,
George Evelyn, Richard Evelyn, William Elliot, Anthony Thomas, John Helinden,
James Zouch, Henry Weston, Thomas Dalmahoy, George Smith, Dawes Wymondesold,
John Dawes, George Brown, William Muschamp, John Thynne, George Moore, George
Garth, Thomas Turges, Matthew Carleton, Roger Duncomb, George Duncombe, George
Woodruffe, George Vernon, Henry Henn, George Duke, Edward Knipe, Jeofry
Howland, Edward Barker, Samuel Rouse, John Hammond, John Thin junior, James
Gresham, Edward Eversfield, Harmon Atwood, Charles Good, Thomas Lee, Peter
Hussy, Richard Heath, Vincent Randal, Nicholas Miller, John Parker, Thomas
Rogers, Doctor Windebank, Laurence Marsh, George Turner, Theophilus Holman,
Thomas Arden, Henry Byne, John Heather, Richard Syms, Ellis Crisp, Edward
Smith, Edward Warcup and John Angel, Esquires; John Jordan of Ditton, John
Robinson, John Wight, William Street, William Boothby, Peter Quinnel senior,
John Jones, William Westbrooke, Richard West, Caleb Westbrook, The Mayor of
Guilford for the time being, John Child, James Burton, Richard Lewyn, William
Canon, John Wilkinson, Ottnel Meverel, William Lock, John Neale, Simon
Nicholas, Hugh Layton, Peter Delanoy, James Reading, Edward Ball, George
Meggot, John Luntly, Jacob May, Thomas Butler, Thomas Morgaine, Tobias Solby
and Benjamin Collier, Gentlemen.

Sussex. For the County of Sussex, Joscelyn Lord Percy, Son and Heir apparent
to Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Leonard, John Pelham, sir William
Culpeper, sir Cecil Bishop, sir John Covert, sir William Thomas, sir John
Stapeley, sir John Fagg, sir Denny Ashburnham, sir Walter Henley, sir William
Wilson, Baronets; sir John Lewkener and sir William Morley, Knights of the
Bath, sir Thomas Dyke, sir Edward Ford, sir John Morley, sir Thomas Woodcock,
sir Thomas Nutt, sir George Courthop, sir Henry Peckham, sir Henry Onslow and
sir William Craven, Knights; George Parker, George Nevil, Thomas Sackvil, Henry
Goring, Percy Goring, William Garway, John May, Herbert Morley, John
Eversfeild junior, Nisel Rivers, Anthony Shurley, John dela Chambers, Charles
Bret, John Peckham, John Garway, Samuel Got, Edward Polhill, Roger Showswell,
Robert Anderson, John Forrington, Brewen Bichley, Edward Morley, Allen Carr,
Richard Bridges, Peter Courthop, Edward Keeling, Henry Shelley, Benjamin
Culpeper, Henry Bill, William Spence, Edward May, Mr. Simon Smith, Alexander
Jermin of Luddington, Robert Foul, Thomas Collings, Walter Everden, William
Dyke, Sackvil Graves, Nicholas Gildridge, Thomas Foster, Henry Chown, Edward
Pain, Henry Bish, Edward Michelburn, Philip Packer, John Steward, John Baker
of Withiam, and Thomas Henshaw junior of Billingh^rst, Esquires; Richard May,
Abraham Chapman, Thomas Palmer, Richard Cooper, Thomas Bebsworth, Matthew
Young, Thomas Levit, Richard Young Alderman, John Luxford of Ocley, Ambrose
Trayton, Henry Shelley, William Lane, William Vinal, John Oliver, Thomas
Peckham, John Fuller of VValdron, Robert Pickering, John Baker junior, John Hay
of Glindborn, Roger Bish, Robert Palmer, Francis Gratwick, William Palmer,
Richard Nash, William Westbrook, Christopher Coals, John Munck, Thomas Barnard,
Thomas Pain, John Pain, Arthur Lovet, Thomas Bromfeild senior, Richard
Alchorn, Thomas Bromfeild junior, Bray Chown, Anthony Eversfeild, Edward
Chowney, John Gratwich of Eatons, Joseph Newington, John Dive, William
Hartridge, Alexander Stapeley, Robert Brook senior, Gentlemen. The respective
Mayors of Chichester, Arundel, Hasting, Rye and Winchelsey for the time being;
The Bailiffs of Seaford and Davensey for the time being; Thomas Middleton Gent.
John King and Henry King, Esquires.

Warwick. For the County of Warwick, Sir Francis Compton Knight, Foulk Grevil,
Charles Leigh, Esquires; Sir Robert Holt, Sir Richard Temple, Sir Henry
Puckering alias Newton, Sir Edward Boughton, Sir Roger Burgoyne, Sir John
Knightley, Sir Clement Fisher, Sir Herbert Price, Sir Thomas Norton, Baronets;
Sir William Bromley, Sir Stephen Hales, Knights of the Bath; Sir George
Devereux, Sir Francis Willoughby, Sir Charles Adderley, Sir Charles Lee, Sir
William Palmer, Sir Arthur Caley, Sir William Underhil, Sir Comb Wagstaffe,
Sir Richard Hopkins, Sir Richard Bishop Sergeant at Arms, Knights; Amos
Walrond, Walter Chetwin senior, William Booth of Witton, John Bridgeman, John
Ferrers, Richard Lucy, Thomas Archer, Clement Throckmorton, William Somervile,
Francis Willoughby, Seabright Rippington, William Dilkes, Havey Bagot, George
Fielding, Richard Newdigate Sergeant at Law, Thomas Flint, Thomas Temple,
Thomas Boughton, John Rous, William Purifoy, John Clopton, Henry Ferrers,
Charles Newsham, John Lisle of Moxal, Richard Verney of Kingston, Charles
Bentley, Giles Palmer, Nicholas Overby, Edward Underhill, Thomas Marriot,
Humphrey Jennings, Thomas Corbin, John Fetherston, George Sacheverel, James
Prescut, Thomas Rawlins of Stratford, Esquires; The Mayor of Warwick for the
time being, The Mayor of Stratford for the time being, The Bailiffs of Tamworth
for the time being.

Coventry. For the City and County of the City of Coventry, The Mayor for the
time being, Sir Thomas Norton Baronet, Sir Clement Fisher, Sir Arthur Caley,
Sir Richard Hopkins, Sir Charles Adderley, Knights; Thomas Flint, Edmund
Palmer, Esquires; Henry Smith, Matthew Smith, Julius Billers, Aldermen;
Humphrey Burton Coroner.

Worcester. For the County of Worcester, Sir John Packington, Sir William
Russel, Sir Henry Littleton, Sir Edward Seabright, Sir William Kyte, Sir Thomas
Rouse, Baronets; Sir Ralph Clare Knight of the Bath, Sir Henry Herbert, Sir
Rowland Berkley, Sir John Talbot, Sir John Windford, Knights; Colonel Samuel
Sandys, Samuel Sandys junior, William Sandys, Sharington Talbot, Tho. Savage,
Edward Pitts, Francis Russel, Francis Finck, Edward Carey, Joseph Welsh,
William Wasborn, Thomas Child, Henry Townshend, Thomas Wild, John Nanfan,
Thomas Street, Henry Parker, Leonard Simpson, Theophilus Andrews, Richard
Dowdeswel, Henry Bromley of Upton, William Mucklo, Littleton Clent, Edward
Bushel, Richard Vernon, Charles Cornwallis, Walter Savage, Thomas of Bengworth,
Henry Spiller, William Ligon, Henry Bromley of Holt, Edward Dingly, Henry
Jefferies, Broom Whorwood, Philip Brace, Francis Sheldon, John Bearcroft,
Bridges Nanfan, Esquires; The Mayor of Evesham for the time being, The Bailiffs
of Droitwich for the time being, The Bailiffs of Bewdly for the time being,
John Barnaby of Bockleton Esquire.

Worcester City. For the City and County of the City of Worcester, The Mayor,
Aldermen and Sheriff for the time being, Sir John Packington Baronet, sir
Rowland Berkley Knight, sir William Moreton Knight, one of his Majesty's
Sergeants at Law, Thomas Hall, Thomas Street, Thomas Wild, Tho. Vernon, Thomas
Harris, Esquires; Humphrey Wildy, Richard Beddoes, Thomas Harrison, Wintour
Harris, John Bearcroft, Francis Hughes, Humphry Tirer Gent.

Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir apparent to
Edward Marquess of Worcester, the Lord John Seymour, William Lord Herbert of
Cardiffe, Son and Heir apparent to Philip Earl of Pembrooke and Mountgomery,
Henry Viscount Cornbury Son and Heir apparent to Edward Earl of Clarendon Lord
Chancellor of England, Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Sir Robert Hyde Knight, Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, Edward Howard, Philip Howard, Esquires; Sir Walter St. John, Sir
Seymour Pile, Sir George Grubham-How, Sir Walter Ernle, Sir Giles Tooker,
Baronets; Sir John Coventry, Sir John Nicholas, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir
Edward Baynton, Knights of the Bath, Sir Wadham Windham Knight, one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir James Thynne, Sir John Eveline, Sir John
Talbot, Sir Edward Pool, Sir George Hungerford, Sir John Weld, Sir John Low,
Sir Tho. Escourt, Sir Henry Coker, Sir Tho. Ivy, Sir William Cawley, Sir Tho.
Mompesson, Sir John Ernle, Sir William Air, Knights; Alexander Popham, Edward
Seymour, Richard Gr^bham-How, Robert Phillips, Francis Wroughton, John
Pleyddal, William Glanvile, Henry Clarke, William Jordan, John Hall, Esquires;
John Morton Baronet, Richard Lewis, George Ailiffe, Edward Nicholas, Edward
Hungerford, Edw. Hyde, Ralph Freak, Will. Pawlet, Will. Ducket, Tho. Mompesson,
William Broncker, Walter Backland, Henry Hungerford, Henry Baynton, Walter
Long, George Bond, Gilbert Rawleigh, Edmund Warneford, Richard Harrison,
Richard Aldworth, Alex. Thislethwart junior, William York, Stephen Fox, Edward
Goddard of Standen, Thomas Bennet of Salthrop, James Long, Thomas Wancklin,
Jeoffrey Danyel, John Collins, John Kent, Thomas Gore, William Willoughby,
John Foil, John Norden, Henry Long, James Ash, Edward Topp, Thomas Hawles,
Joseph Stockman, Giles Air, Joseph Air, Samuel Air, John Long, John Bowls,
Richard Bowls, William Kent, Edward Manning, William Swanton, Thomas Lambert,
Thomas Pile, Robert Chaundler, Thomas Hungerford, William Bowls, John Air,
Richard Southby, Seymour Bowman, Richard Escourt, Rowland Plott, Edward Goddard
of Ogbourn, John Danvers, John Glanvile, Henry Wallis, Doctor Hierst, John
Escourt, Benjamin Gifford, Nevil Masculine, Oliver Nicholas, Edmund Webb, Isaac
Burgis, Richard Long, John Mompesson, Henry Trenchard, Simon Spatchurst,
Richard Davy, George Ivy, Samuel Ash, John Davenant, John Bennet, Robert
Challoner, William Sadler, Robert Hippesly, Ephraim Westley, Matthew. Bennet,
Richard Green, Humph. Hyde, Edm. Ansley, Christ. Gardener, (...) Crouch, Thomas
Hunt, Thomas Chaffin, Ferrers Gresley, George Parrey, Thomas Clarke, Henry
Clarke junior, Anthony Trotman, John Ellet, Walter Dowse, John Duke junior,
William Cusse, John Young, Walter Sharp, George Sadler, Thomas Escourt, Thomas
Gape, William Levet, Christ. Willoughby, John Fitz-Herbert, Esquires; the Mayor
of Wilton for the time being.

New-Sarum. For the City of New-Sarum, Sir Robert Hyde Knight, Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, Sir Wadham Windham Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings
Bench, the Mayor for the time being, Richard Coleman Recorder, William Joyce,
Thomas Oviate, Morris Green, Thomas Williams, Edward Edmonds, Thomas Gardener,
Thomas Cutler, James Harwood, Thomas Ray Aldermen, Sir John Low, Sir Thomas
Mompesson, Knights; Thomas Hawles, William Swanton, Richard Davy, John Holt,
Thomas Chaffin, Thomas Dorrel, Stephen Fox, Seymour Bowman, Simon Spatchurst,
Francis Sambrooke, Nicholas Johnson and Giles Clutterbook, Esquires.

Westmerland. For the County of Westmerland, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir William
Dalston, Sir Richard Sandford, Sir John Lowther senior, Sir John Lowther
junior, Baronets; Sir Thomas Strickland, Sir George Dalston, Knights; Richard
Musgrave, John Lowther, Allen Bellingham, John Dalston, James Ducket, Daniel
Fleming, Richard Brathwayte, Robert Hilton, Tho. Brathwayte, John Otway,
Nicholas Fisher, Edward Nevison, Lancelot Machel, Thomas Gabetas, Nathaniel
West, Edward Wilson, Esquire the Mayor of Appleby for the time being, the Mayor of
Kendal for the time being.

York. For the West- Riding of the County of York, George Viscount Castleton of
the Kingdom of Ireland, Henry Viscount Irwin of the Kingdom of Scotland, Thomas
Lord Fairfax of the Kingdom of Scotland, Sir Francis Fane, William Earl of
Dumfreeze in the Kingdom of Scotland, Knight of Bath, Conyers Darcy Esquire,
sir Francis Wortley, sir George Savil, sir Thomas Osborne, sir John Goodrick,
sir Richard Maleverer, sir John Rersby, sir John Key, sir John Armitage, sir
William Ingleby, sir Solomon Swaile, sir William Rokesby, sir Godfrey Copley,
sir George Wynn, sir Gervas Cutler, sir John Jackson, sir John Lewis, sir
Thomas Slingsby, sir George Cook, Baronets; sir Tho. Wharton, sir Francis Fane
junior, Knights of the Bath; sir Richard Tankred, sir Jordan Crossand, sir
Thomas Beaumond, sir Thomas Wentworth, sir John Dawney, sir Miles Stapleton,
sir William Lowther, sir Francis Goodrick, sir Edmund Jenings, sir William
Ingram, sir Christopher Clapham, sir Ralph Knight, sir Thomas Yarborough,
Knights; Richard Hutton, Thomas Danby, Walter Hawkesworth, Henry Arthington,
Welbury Norton, Charles Tancred, Ambrose Pudsey, Francis Rockley, Robert
Wirvel, Walter Strickland, Anthony Adeyre, Francis Nevil, Walter Calverley,
Henry Air Doctor of Physic, John Wentworth of Ellinshel, John Savile of
Heathly, Henry Goodrick, John Wentworth of VVolly, Bradwardin Tindal, John
Vincent, John Richard, William Lowther, John Bilby, Richard VVashington,
Richard Mountney, William Hammond, William Adams, Thomas Yarborough, Walter
Lister, William Drake, Inglebert Leeds, Cuthbert VVade, Robert Harrison, James
Moseley, John Stanhop, Nicholas Stable, Benjamin Norcliffe, Roger Portington,
Edward Lewis, John Thornhil, William VVomble, Thomas Stringer, Henry Atkinson,
Francis White, Will. Spencer of Attercliffe, William Godfrey, Thomas Lister of
Maningham, Thomas Lister of Bawtree, Thomas Haber, John Ottway, John Major,
Thomas Staveley, Doyley Gower, Thomas Fawkes Esquires; Henry Cook, Thomas
Edmonds, Jonathan Jenings, John Atkinson, John Preston, William Witham,
Benjamin Wade, John Dodsworth, William Roundel, George Clarke, Jervas Bosvile,
Thomas Gill, Richard Graham, Gentlemen; the Mayor of Rippon, the Mayor of
Doncaster, the Mayor of Pontefract, the Mayor of Leeds for the time being,
Robert Walters of Owsbourn, George Fothergil, Esquires.

For the North Riding, Charles Lord St. John of Basing, Son and Heir apparent
to John Marquess of Winchester, Coniers Darcy Esquire, sir Henry Bellasis,
Henry Darcy, James Darcy, Esqs sir Christopher Wivel, sir Thomas Gower, sir
John Goodrick, sir Metcalf Robinson, sir Solom. Swail, sir Henry Stapleton, sir
David Fowls, sir John Lowther, sir John Napier, sir Roger Langley, sir William
Caley, sir George Marwood, sir Richard Graham, sir William Frankland, sir
Christ. Wandesford, Baronets; sir Robert Strickland, sir Richard Tancred, sir
Thomas Strickland, sir Jordan Crossland, sir William Dalton, sir John Dawney,
sir James Pennyman, sir Thomas Ingram Chancellor of the Duchy, sir sir Thomas
Hebblethwaite, sir Joseph Craddock, sir Henry Franckland, sir William Craven,
Knights; William Wivel, Edward Gower, Henry Marwood, James Medcalfe, Matthew.
Hutton, Robert Layton, William Caley, John How, Thomas Danby, Walter
Strickland, John Beverley, Thomas Rookeby, James Moyser, John Calverley, Edward
Croft, Thomas Robinson, William Weddil, John Tourner, Isaac Fairfax, John
Wivel of Osgerby, Humphrey Wharton, Charles Bellasis, Edward Hutchinson of
Wickham, Reynold Graham, Major Norton, Henry Bethel, Roger Talbot, Charles
Tanckred, Thomas Jackson, Henry Harrison, William Feilding, William Robinson,
Edward Trotter, Robert Belt, Thomas Hutton, James Morley, Thomas Hassel,
Timothy Maleverer, Capt. Leonard Robinson, John Dodsworth, William Thompson,
Thomas Wickham, Anthony Lowther, Thomas Norton, William Metcalfe, Henry
Blackson, Walter Lister, John Gibson, Charles Allanson, Edward Gower, William
Gower, John Coltson, Esquires; James Moore, George Norton, Francis Driffeild,
John Smith, Thomas Wait, William Spinke, Allan Chamber, John Hill of Thorndon,
John Earnley, Ralph Jackson of Lazenby junior, Christ. Keld, Henry Crosseland,
William Lampley, William Truman, Francis Cumin, Robert Bushel, Richard
Harland, Major Redman, Gentlemen; the Aldermen of Richmond and the Bailiffs of
Scarborough for the time being.

For the East Riding, Sir Francis Cob Knight, High Sheriff of the County,
Charles Lord Viscount Dungarven in the Kingdom of Ireland, Sir John Hotham, sir
Francis Boynton, sir Robert Hilyard, sir John Bucke, sir Watkinson Paler, sir
Thomas Rudston, sir John Ledgerd, Baronets; sir Tho. Nortliffe, sir Philip
Mountain, sir Thomas Daniel, sir Matthew Appleyard, sir Thomas Renington, sir
Hugh Bethel, sir Thomas Heblethwait, sir William Cob, Knights; Tobias Jenkins,
Michael Wharton, Robert Bucke, Thomas Grantham, Durand Hotham, Hugh Lister,
John Constable, John Lister, Henry Sandys, Henry Holmes, Christopher Hillyard,
Walter Bethel, George Mountain, John Vavasor, Jonathan Atkins, Ralph Warton,
William Osbaldston, William Grimstone, Robert Sotheby, Richard Robinson,
Thomas Cr^mpton, Samford Nevil, William Gee, Richard Ledgeard, William Baynton,
Stephen Thompson, Richard Thompson, Henry Hillyard, James Moyser, Edward
Bernard, Thomas Hesket, Gregory Creyke, William Harpham, Thomas Anlaby,
Alexander Rokeby, Henry Hillyard, John Stapleton, Henry Portington, Philip
Saltmarsh, John Acraid, Esquires; Thomas Swan, Leonard Robinson, William
Blount, John Pierson, Lewis Lewins, Francis Bushel, Robert Constable, John
Belton, William Dobson, William Thompson, Ralph Higden, Richard Graham, Thomas
Sytheron, Christopher Baukins, Gentlemen; the Mayor of Hedon and the Mayor of
Beverly for the time being.

York City. For the City of York and the County of the same, Edward Elwicke
Lord Mayor, Thomas Lord Fairefax of the Kingdom of Scotland, Sir Metcalfe
Robinson, Sir Thomas Osburne, Sir Roger Langley, Sir John Goodrick, Sir George
Rive, Sir Thomas Slingsby Baronet, Sir John Lewis Knight and Baronet, Sir Miles
Stapleton Knight, James Brook, Christopher Topham, George Lamplough, George
Mancklyns, Richard Hewett, Henry Thompson, Cressey Bournet, Christopher Brery,
Henry Tyreman, John Tailor, James Bawtry, Aldermen, Edward Gale, John Bears,
Leonard Thompson, Joseph Scot, John Turner, Tobias Jenkins, James Moiser,
William Fairefax, Thomas Robinson, Thomas Hutton, Henry Fairefax, Esquires;
John Swale, Doctor Burwell, Master Etherington, Philip Prince, William
Roundle, Thomas Hesketh, George Aisleby, Philip Harbert, Master Snauesdale,
Richard Tennant, William Richardson, Richard Rawlinson, Francis Price, John
Loftus, John Thompson, George Mangie, Francis Chatterton, Thomas Setterthwaite,
Thomas Fairefax, Gentlemen.

Kingston upon Hull. For the Town of Kingston upon Hull, the Mayor for the time
being, Anthony Gilby, Andrew Marvel, Esquires; William Dobson, Robert Ripley,
Robert Berriar, William Foxley, William Ramsden, Christopher Richardson,
George Crowle, Richard Robinson, Richard Wilson, William Skinner, Robert
Bloome, Richard Francke, Aldermen; Hugh Lister Esquire, the Sheriffs for the
time being.

WALES. Anglesey.

For the County of Anglesey, Robert Lord Viscount Bulkeley of the Kingdom of
Ireland, Mark Lord Viscount Duncanon, Thomas Bulkeley Esquire, Sir Hugh Owen
Knight and Baronet, Nicholas Bagenal, Thomas Woods, Pierce Lloyd senior,
Rowland Bulkeley, William Bold, John Robinson, Griffith Jones of Trevarthin,
Hugh Owen, Pierce Lloyd junior, Richard Merich, John Lloyd of Llandegnan, John
Griffith of Llanvaythly, John Win of Bodewrid, William Bulkely-Brunddy, John
Prytherch of Llysdelas, Rowland White, Richard Owen, Hugh Hughes, John Owen of
Llanvaythly, Esquires; John Owen of Penrhose, Conisby William, Owen Hughes,
Henry Jones, Henry Davies, William Williams of Tre-Arthur, William Lewis,
Griffith Lloyd of Treaseth, Edward Price Bodower, Edward Price Trevadog, Howel
Lewis, Owen Lloyd of Henbles, John Williams Bodurdin, John Owen Treveilir,
Richard Win of Penhgkyn, William Hampton, William VVynne of Langold,
Gentlemen; the Mayor of Bewmorris for the time being.

Brecon. For the County of Brecon, Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland, son and heir
apparent to Edward Marquess of Worcester, sir Richard Lloyd Knight, Arthur
Trevor Esquire, Edward Progers Esquire of his Majesty's Bedchamber, sir William
Lewis, sir Henry Williams, sir Herbert Price, Baronets; William Morgan of
Therow Esquire, sir John Herbert Knight, George Gwynne, Milburn Williams, John
Jefferies, Lewis Morgan Attorney General there, Thomas Lewis, Walter Williams,
John Stedman, Hugh Powel, William Morgan of Newton, Walter Vaughan, Thomas
Williams, Edward Powel, James Watkins, Henry Stedman, Meredith Lewis, Thomas
Bowen, Esquires; Lewis Gunter, James Williams, William Lloyd of VVernos, Edward
Herbert, John Morgan, Daniel VVinter, William Saunders, Gentlemen; the Bailiff
of Brecon for the time being.

Cardigan. For the County of Cardigan, Sir Richard Price Baronet, sir Francis
Lloyd Knight, James Lewis senior, John Vaughan, James Stedman, Henry Vaughan,
John Jones, James Lewis junior, Edward Vaughan, Erasmus Lloyd, Morgan Herbert,
Richard Herbert, Reignald Jenkins, David Lloyd, Hector Phillips, John Lewis,
Thomas Jenkins, Esquires; David Evans, Thomas Lloyd of Pus, Abel Griffin,
Gentlemen.

Carmarthen. For the County of Carmarthen, Francis Lord Vaughan, son and heir
apparent to Richard Earl of Carbury in the Kingdom of Ireland, sir John Vaughan
Knight of the Bath, sir William Moreton one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law,
Simon Degrees Esquire, sir Edward Mansell, sir Rice Rudd, sir William Russel,
Baronets; sir Henry Vaughan Knight, Walter Rice, John Vaughan of Llannelly,
Nicholas Williams, William Gwynne of Talliaris, John Vaughan of Dertlis,
Henry Middleton, James Jones, Penry Vaughan, John Vaughan of VVhitehouse
junior, Morgan Jones, Philip Vaughan, Thomas Lloyd of Berllan-dowel, Thomas
Lloyd of Dan-per-Alt, Owen Brickstock, Thomas Lloyd of Llanlonthog, John Powel
junior, Esquires.

Town of Carmarthen. For the Town of Carmarthen, the Mayor for the time being,
Francis Lord Vaughan, son and heir apparent to Richard Earl of Carbury in the
Kingdom of Ireland, sir John Vaughan Knight of the Bath, sir Henry Vaughan
Knight, John Vaughan of Llannelly, John Vaughan of Dertlis, Walter Vaughan,
Esquires; Thomas Rynon, Anthony Jones, Thomas Jones, Dawkins Goffe, Lewis
Jones, John Oakeley, Aldermen.

Carnarvan. For the County of Carnarvan, Robert Lord Viscount Bulkley of the
Kingdom of Ireland, Robert Roberts, Thomas Bulkley, Esquires; sir Richard
Win, sir Griffith Williams, sir Roger Mostin, sir Robert Williams, Baronets;
sir John Owen, sir Richard Lloyd, Nicholas Bagnal, Griffith Jones, William
Griffith, VVitham Vaughan, Owen Griffith, John Bodurda, Maurice VVynne, Hugh
Win, Thomas Win, William Win of Llanruda, Hugh Williams, William
Buckley, Griffith Bodurda, Edmund Glyn, John Wynne-Berthaur, Timothy Littleton
Sergeant at Law, John Jones, John Win of Twgyn, William Win of Glangranon,
Richard Anwill, John Glynn, Thomas Glynn, Richard Glynn, Richard Thomas, John
Williams, Thomas Vaughan, William Hooks, Richard Griffith, Owen Win of
Glasgoed, Richard Kiffin, John Lloyd, Robert Coetmor, John Wynn of Melay,
Esquires; John Win of Berthanur, Jeffery Williams, John Win of Pennarth,
Herbert Griffith, John Hooks, William Win of Pengwerne, William Williams,
Hugh Bodurda, Owen Win, William Spicer, William Thomas of Carnarvan, Edward
Pierce, Richard Ellis, John Jones of Trevan, Robert Win of Keselgovarch,
Gentlemen.

Denbigh. For the County of Denbigh, John Carter Knight, High Sheriff, Sir
Thomas Middleton, sir Richard sir John Salisbury, sir Thomas Powel, sir
William Meredith, Baronets; sir Thomas Trevor, Knight and Baronet, sir Richard
Lloyd, sir Edward Broughton, sir Robert Agbrow, sir John Win, Knights; Roger
Puleston, John Trevor of Trevalin, William Owen, William Salisbury, Hugh
Win, John Win, Mutton Davies, Robert Win of Voylas, Thomas Jones, Edward
Thelwal, William Price, Kenrick Eyton, Thomas Vaughan, Charles Salisbury, John
Robinson, Col. Robert Broughton, Bevis Lloyd, John Thelwal, John Edisbury,
Charles Middleton, Foulke Middleton, Timothy Middleton, Eubal Thelwal, John
Jefferies, Richard Middleton of Llanclin, Robert Price of Geeler, Edward
Brereton, Watkin Kiffin, Owen Thelwal, John Trevor of Brinkinnalt, Gabriel
Goodman, Humphrey Hughes of Brintanger, David Morris, Richard Win of
Garthkanan, John Llangford, William Parry, Charles Goodman, John Puleston,
Will. Williams, John Lloyd of Bodidrist, Hugh Roberts, Francis Manley, John
Lloyd of Llanvnis, Hugh Lloyd of Foxal, Esquires; William Jones, John Salisbury
of Lewesog, Humphrey Lloyd of Berse, Robert Win of Garthewynn, Howel Lloyd,
James Thelwell, Robert Griffith of Pendared, John Koydlywrich, Captain Thomas
Yale, John Williams of Caredrynydd, Owen Price of Nantmauze, Robert Win of
Llwyn, Maurice Williams of Llanverras, Edward Lloyd of Placemado, Thomas Lloyd
of Bersey, Ellis Lloyd of Eglewisig, the two Aldermen of Denbigh, John Hughes,
Thomas Matthews, John Jones, Thomas Shaw senior, Robert Salisbury, Gentlemen.

Flint. For the County of Flint, Sir Thomas Hanmer, sir John Salisbury, sir
Henry Conway, sir Roger Mostin, Baronets; sir John Trevor, sir John Glyn, sir
John Hanmer, Knights; John Trevor, Thomas Ravenscroft, Roger Puleston, Robert
Davies, Thomas Lloyd, William Hanmer, Roger Whitley, Mutton Davis, William
Mostin, John Parry, Robert Whitley, Andrew Ellis Evan Edwards, David Penant,
John Eyton, Richard Griffith, Edward Lloyd, Ellis Young, Edward Lloyd, John
Broughton, Thomas Humphreys, John Salisbury senior, John Middleton, Thomas
Crackley, Eubule Hughes, Charles Jones, Owen Barton, John Lloyd of Fawn,
Thomas Mostin, Hugh Penant.

Glamorgan. For the County of Glamorgan, Henry Lord Herbert of Ragland, Son and
heir apparent to Edward Marquess of Worcester, William Lord Herbert of
Cardiffe, sir Richard Lloyd Knight, Arthur Trevor Esquire, sir Edward Mansel,
sir Edward Stradling, sir Edward Thomas, Baronets; sir John Knight and Baronet,
sir William Lewis, sir Thomas Lewis, sir Richard Basset, Knights; John
Greenuff, Evan Seys Sergeant at Law, William Basset Doctor of Laws, Robert
Thomas, Miles Button, Thomas Lewis, William Basset of Bewpre, William Herbert
of Swansey, Edmond Thomas, Bussy Mansel, Herbert Evans, Thomas Matthew,
Humphrey Windham, David Jenkins, Gabriel Lewis, William Thomas, Thomas
Stradling, Thomas Carne, John Van, John Gibbs, Tho. Thomas, David Matthew,
Lamerock Stradling, Thomas Evans, Edmond Gammage, Richard Loughers, William
Herbert of Killy-Bebel, John Carne, Henry Basset, Edward Herbert of Cogan,
David Evans, John Lewellin.

Merioneth. For the County of Merioneth, Maurice Williams Esquire, High
Sheriff, sir Richard Win Baronet, sir John Owen, sir Richard Lloyd, sir John
Win, Knights; William Salisbury, William Price, William Vaughan of
Corseggedal, Lewis Lloyd, Howel Vaughan, Maurice Win, Vincent Corbet, John
Pugh, John Lloyd, Hugh Nanney, Robert Win, Roger Mostin, Richard Win,
Griffith Lloyd, Lewis Owen, William Vaughan of Caithle, John Nanney, Edmond
Meirick, Humphrey Hughes, Ioh. Vaughan, Rowland Vaughan, Rich. Anwil, Ellis
Edwards, Will. Tueir, Ioh. Morgans, Esquire John Owen of Hanwooddowilth, Rich.
Jones, Anthony Poole, Griffith-Iohn Lewis, Richard Nanney, Gent. Henry Win,
Morris Williams, Esquires; Evan Lloyd of Rhiwgech, Richard Lloyd of Carrog,
Gentlemen.

Montgomery. For the County of Montgomery, sir John Witterong High Sheriff, sir
Henry Herbert, Edward Herbert, Andrew Newport, Esquires; sir Matthew Price, sir
Richard Corbet, Baronets; sir Edward Lloyd Knight, John Pursell, Richard
Herbert, Richard Owen, Robert Layton, John Blayney, John Pugh, Francis Buller,
Charles Salisbury, Edmond Waring, John Price of Park, Roger Mostin, Matthew
Morgan, William Penrid junior, Thomas Maurice, Edward Glyn of Glin, Edward
Evans of Rhidicorrow, John Whitingham, David Powel, Thomas Juckes, John Mathews
the elder, John Mathews the younger, Edward Edwards of Collfrin, John Bladwell,
Tho. Wind, Tho. Corbet, Robert Lee, Tho. Jones, Henry Pursell, Vincent Pierce,
William Eyton, Richard Mitton, John Kiffin, Francis Fitzherbert, Edward Price
of Glanmahely, Robert Griffiths, Arthur Wevor, William Brown, Edward Herbert,
Esquires; Evan Vaughan, Llodowick Lewis, John Bright of Mellington, Meredith
Lloyd of Brynellen, John Oakley, Rowland Oakley, Edward Wittingham, Samuel
Biggs, Humphrey Nicholas, John Lloyd of Coney, Hugh Davyes of Trewilan, Ellis
Lloyd, John Bunner, Henry Griffiths of Benthall, Morgan Evans, Gentlemen.

Haverford West. For the Town and County of Haverford West, The Mayor for the
time being, Sir William Knight, One of His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, Sir John
Stepney Baronet, Sir Hugh Owen Knight and Baronet, Rowland Laughorne, William
Philips, Richard Walter, George Haward, Thomas Cozens, Esquires; William
Williams, Henry Bowen, Lewis Barron, John Williams, William Brown, Aldermen,
William Davies, Esquire, John Barlow, John Thomas, Matthew Prynn, William
Williams junior, John Lloyd, Richard Jones, Gabriel Wade Gentlemen.

Pembrook. For the County of Pembrook, Sir William Moreton Knight, one of His
Majesty's Sergeants at Law; Sir Erasmus Philipps, Sir John Stepney, Baronets;
Sir Hugh Owen, Sir John Lort Knights and Baronets, Sir Harbert Perrott Knight,
Griffith Dawes, Arthur Owen, Essex Megrick, Rowland Laughorne, Hugh Owen, Lewis
Barlow, Hugh Bowen, Henry White, William Philipps, Walter Cuny, James Bowen,
Isaac Lloyd, George Haward, William Scouerfield, William Mordant, Thomas
Corbert, David Morgan, James Lloyd, George Owen, Esquires, Thomas Warren,
Thomas Powell, Hugh Laughorne, Thomas Owen, John Matthias, John Laughorne,
Thomas Wogan, John Lort, William Owen of Camdog, Thomas Lloyd, John Thomas.

Town of Pembrook. For the Town of Pembrook, The Mayor for the time being,
Matthew Bowen, Richard Brown, Gentlemen.

Town of Tenby. For the Town of Tenby, The Mayor for the time being, Richard
Wyat, Rice Barrow, David Palmer, Gentlemen.

Radnor. For the County of Radnor, Sir Richard Lloyd Knight, Arthur Trevor
Esquire; Sir Henry Williams, Baronet, Sir Edward Harley, Knight of the Bath,
Sir Robert Harley Knight, George Gwyn, Richard Fowler, James Price, Thomas
Corbet, Henry Williams, Lewis Morgan, John Wallcott, Thomas Harley, Samuel
Powell, Nicholas Tailor, Evan Davies, Andrew Philipps, Charles Lewis, Henry
Probert, Herbert Weston, James Beck One of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms,
Henry Stedman, Griffith Jones, Hugh Powell, Richard Meredith, Thomas Ecleston,
Robert Cutler, Esquires, Francis Rickards, John Rickards, Rowland Higgins,
Gentlemen; The Bailiff of New-Radnor for the time being, Marmaduke Bull,
Gentleman.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the several Commissioners
aforesaid shall meet How the Commissioners shall meet and divide themselves.
Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places respectively, on or before the tenth day of
March now next ensuing; And the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall
be present at the said first General Meeting, or the Major part of them, are
hereby authorized and required to put this present Act in execution, according
to the best of their Judgments and Discretions; and shall then, if they see
cause, subdivide and distribute themselves so into lesser numbers, as two or
more of the said Commissioners may be appointed for the service of each
Hundred, or other Division; and as may best conduce to the carrying on of His
Majesty's service hereby required.

And for the more effectual performance thereof, Be it Enacted and Declared,
Their power within the several Divisions and Hundreds.
That the Commissioners at their foresaid first General Meeting, or the Major
part of them, shall agree and set down in writing who and what number of the
said Commissioners shall act in each of the said Divisions or Hundreds; To the
end that there be no failer in any part of the due execution of the service by
this Act required.

And be it Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners within the several Divisions or Hundreds, or any two or more of
them, are hereby authorized and required to cause the said several Proportions
charged on the respective Divisions, and on every Parish and Place therein, for
the said three years Assessment, to be equally assessed and taxed; And to
appoint two or more Assessors in each Parish or Place for the perfecting
thereof, who are hereby required with all care and diligence to assess the same
equally by a Pound-rate upon all Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Annuities,
Rents, Parks, Warrens, Goods, Chattels, Stock, Merchandise, Offices, other then
Judicial and Military Offices, and Offices relating to the Navy, under the
Command of the Lord High Admiral, and Offices within His Majesty's Household,
Tolls, Profits, and all other Estates both Real and Personal, within the
Limits, Circuits and Bounds of their respective Parishes and Places.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 2064^8 l. ^6 s. 08 d.
the first three months payment, how to be paid.
That the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred fifty and eight
pounds six shillings eight pence, being the first of the said twelve quarterly
Payments hereby imposed, shall be assessed, collected, levied and paid in to
the Receiver-General of the said several Counties, who shall be appointed by
His Majesty; And who are hereby required to transmit, or cause the same to be
paid into His Exchequer, on or before the first day of May in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and five. The second payment.
And the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight
pounds six shillings eight pence, being the second of the said quarterly
Payments, on or before the first day of August, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred sixty five. The third payment.
And the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight
pounds six shillings and eight pence, being the third of the said quarterly
Payments, on or before the first day of November, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred sixty five. And the sum of Two hundred and six thousand
four hundred and fifty and eight pounds six shillings eight pence, The fourth
payment.
being the fourth of the said quarterly Payments, on or before the first day of
February, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty five. And the
sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight pounds six
shillings eight pence, being the fifth of the said quarterly payments, The
fifth payment.
on or before the first day of May, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty six. And the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and
fifty and eight pounds six shillings eight pence, being the sixth of the said
quarterly payments, The sixth payment.
on or before the first day of August, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty six. And the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred
and fifty and eight pounds six shillings eight pence, being the seventh of the
said quarterly payments, on or before the first day of November, The seventh
payment.
in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty six. And the sum of
Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight pounds six
shillings eight pence, The eight payment.
being the eighth of the said quarterly payments, on or before the first day of
February, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty six. And the
sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight pounds
six shillings eight pence, The ninth payment.
being the ninth of the said quarterly payments, on or before the first day of
May, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty seven. And the
sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight pounds
six shillings eight pence, being the tenth of the said quarterly payments, The
tenth payment.
on or before the first day of August, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty seven, and the sum of Two hundred and six thousand four hundred
and fifty and eight pounds six shillings eight pence, being the eleventh of the
said quarterly payments, on or before the first day of November, The eleventh
payment.
in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty seven, and the sum of
Two hundred and six thousand four hundred and fifty and eight pounds, The
twelfth payment.
six shillings eight pence, being the twelfth of the said quarterly payments,
on or before the First day of February, in the year of our Lord One thousand
six hundred sixty seven.

The duty of the Assessors.
and true account thereof made; the said Assessors are hereby required to
deliver one Copy of their respective Assessments fairly written and subscribed
by them unto the said Commissioners; and the said Commissioners, or any two or
more of them are hereby ordered and required to Sign and Seal two Duplicates of
the said Assessements, and the one of them to deliver or cause to be delivered
to one or more honest and responsible person or persons to be Subcollector or
Subcollectors, Subcollectors for each parish.
which the said Commissioners are hereby authorized to nominate and appoint for
each Parish or Place, with Warrant to the said Subcollector or Subcollectors to
Collect the said Assessment, payable as aforesaid; so as the said several sums
may be paid into the said Receivers General, and by them into the Receipt of
His Majesty's Exchequer at the respective times aforesaid; and the said
Commissioners are hereby required to deliver, Duplicates to be transmitted into
the Exchequer.
or cause to be delivered the other of the said Duplicates of each Parish or
place to the Receiver General of each County, City, Town or place respectively,
to be by him the said Receiver-General transmitted into the Kings Remembrancers
Office in the Exchequer, which the said Receiver General is required to perform
accordingly.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the said Commissioners in their
respective Divisions or Hundreds, The Commissioners to nominate a Head
Collector for each division.
or any two or more of them shall and are hereby empowered to nominate and
appoint under their Hands and Seals an honest, able and responsible person to
be Head-Collector, unto whom the moneys received by the Subcollectors within
the Division or Hundred, shall from time to time be duly paid; And the said
Head-Collector is hereby required upon the Receipt thereof, to pay the same
forthwith to the Receiver-General of each County respectively.

How Collectors and Subcollectors shall pay the moneys received.
And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the particular Collectors and
Subcollectors are hereby required to pay in all and every the sums so received
by them to the said Receivers-General aforesaid, who are hereby required
forthwith to transmit, or cause to be paid the moneys by them received into the
Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer; And the said Lord Treasurer is hereby
Authorized to allow the said Receiver-General of each County, City and Town
respectively, Allowances to the Receivers General.
in case he has returned up as aforesaid a Duplicate of the Assessment of each
Parish or Place in the County, City or Town, for which he is appointed
Receiver-General, a Salary for his pains, not exceeding one penny in the pound,
upon the clearing of his Account, which Duplicate so to be returned into the
Kings Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer, is intended to contain no more
then the sums in gross to be collected by each Sub-collector, and the several
names of the said Sub-collectors.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, Allowances to Sub-collectors
That the Sub-collectors of each Parish or

Provided that no Head-Collectors shall be appointed for any City or Town,
which is by this Act particularly charged with the payment of any sum toward
the Assessment hereby to be levied; and for which a Receiver-General is to be
appointed, excepting within the City of London.

And be it Enacted and Declared, How the money may be levied upon persons
refusing to pay.
That if any Person shall refuse or neglect to pay any sum of money, whereat
he shall be rated and assessed, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said Collectors, Sub-collectors, or any of them, who are hereby Authorized
and required thereunto, to levy the sum assessed, by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of such persons so refusing or neglecting to pay, deducting the sum
assessed, and reasonable charges of distraining, and restore the overplus to
the Owner thereof. And to break open in the daytime any House, and upon
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two or more of the said Commissioners, any
Chest, Trunk or Box, or other things, where any such Goods are, and to call to
their Assistance the Constables, Tythingmen and Headboroughs within the
Counties, Cities, Towns or places, where any refusal, neglect or resistance
shall be made: which said Officers and Forces are hereby required to be aiding
and assisting in the premises, as they will answer the contrary at their
perils. And if any question or difference happen upon taking of such Distresses
between the Parties distressed or distrained, the same shall be ended and
determined by the said Commissioners, or any two or more of them.

And if any person or persons shall refuse or neglect to pay his or their
Assessment, In what case imprisonment may be for lack of distress.
and convey his or their Goods, or other personal Estate, whereby the sum of
money so assessed cannot be levied according to this Act, then the respective
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, are hereby authorized to imprison
the person (except a Peer or Peers of this Realm) and him and them in prison to
detain and keep, until the money so assessed, and the charges for

And the several and respective Tenants or Tenant of all Houses and Lands,
Tenants to pay such sums as be rated upon their Landlords.
which shall be rated by virtue of this Act, are hereby required and authorized
to pay such sum or sums of money as shall be rated upon such House or
Lands; and to deduct out of the Rent so much of the said rates as in respect of
the said Rents of every such House and Lands the Landlord should or ought to
pay and bear. And the said Landlords both mediate and immediate, according to
their respective Interests, are hereby required to allow such deductions and
payments upon the Receipt of the residue of the Rents.

And it is Enacted and Declared, That every Tenant paying the said Assessment,
And be acquitted against them for so doing.
shall be acquitted and discharged for so much money as the said Assessment
shall amount unto, as if the same had been actually paid unto such person or
persons unto whom his Rents should have been due and payable.

And if any difference shall arise between Landlord and Tenant, The
Commissioners may determine differences between Landlords and Tenants about
Rates.
or any other concerning the said Rates, the said several Commissioners, or any
two or more of them in their several divisions, shall and have hereby power to
settle the same, as they shall think fit. And if any Person or Persons shall
find him or themselves agrieved in that the Assessors have over-rated him or
them, and shall within six days after demand made of the sum of money
assessed on him or them, complain to two or more Commissioners, whereof one of
the Commissioners who signed or allowed his or their Assessment, to be one; The
said Commissioners, or any two or more of them, shall have, and have hereby
power within twelve days after the demand of the Assessment as aforesaid, to
relieve such person or persons, and to charge the same on such other person or
persons, as they shall see cause. And in case the proportions set by this Act
upon all and every the respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places, shall not
be fully assessed, levied and paid, according to the true meaning thereof;
Rates upon persons not of ability or empty houses.
or that if any of the said Assessments shall be rated and imposed upon any
person not being of ability to pay the same, or upon any empty or void House or
Land, where the same cannot be collected or levied; or that through any
wilfulness, negligence or mistake, or accident, the said Assessment charged
upon each County, City, Town or Place, by virtue of this Act, happens not to be
paid to the Receiver-General of the respective Counties, as in this Act is
directed, that then in all and every such cases the several and respective
Commissioners, Assessors and Collectors aforesaid, and every of them
respectively, are hereby authorized and required to assess or re-assess, or
cause to be assessed or re-assessed, levied and paid all and every such sum or
sums of money upon the respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places, or upon
any of the Divisions, Hundreds, and Parishes therein, as to the said
Commissioners, or such number of them as by this Act are authorized to cause
the first Assessment hereby required to be made, shall seem most agreeable to
equity and justice; the said new Assessment to be made, collected and paid, in
such manner, and by such means, as in this Act for this Assessment is delared
and directed.

The punishment of persons neglecting to perform their duty in execution of
this Act.
And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Person or Persons shall wilfully neglect or refuse to perform his or their duty
in the due and speedy execution of this present Act, the said respective
Commissioners, or any Three or more of them, have hereby Power to impose on
such Person or Persons so refusing or neglecting their duties, such Fine or
Fines as to them shall be thought fit, and to cause the same to be levied by
Distress and Sale of his and their Goods. Provided, that no Fine to be imposed
by any of the said Commissioners, shall for any one Offense exceed the Sum of
Twenty pounds: And that all Fines that shall be imposed by virtue of this Act,
shall be paid to the respective Receivers-General, and by them to the Receipt
of His Majesty's Exchequer.

Collectors and Sub-collectors receiving money, and not paying the same.
And it is further Enacted and Declared, That if any Collector or Sub-collector
that shall by virtue of this Act be appointed for the Receipt of any Sum or
Sums of Money thereby to be Assessed, shall neglect or refuse to pay any Sum or
Sums of Money which shall by him be received as aforesaid, and not pay the
same, as in and by this Act is directed, and shall detain in his or their hands
any money received by them, or any of them, and not pay the same, as by this
Act is directed; the Commissioners of each County, City or Town respectively,
or any Two or more of them in their respective Divisions are hereby Authorized
and Empowered to imprison the Person, and seize and secure the Estate both Real
and Personal of such Collector or Sub-collector to them respectively belonging,
or which shall descend or come into the hands or possession of their Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, wherever the same can be discovered and found;
And the said Commissioners who shall so seize and secure the Estate of any
Collector or Sub-collector, shall be, and are hereby empowered to appoint a time
for the general Meeting of the Commissioners of such County, City or Town, and
there to cause public notice to be given at the place where such Meeting shall
be appointed ten days at least before such General Meeting: And the
Commissioners present at such General Meeting, or the major part of them, in
case the Moneys detained by Collectors or Sub-collectors be not paid or
satisfied as it ought to be according to the Directions of this Act, shall and
are hereby empowered and required to sell and dispose of all such Estates, which
shall be for the cause aforesaid seized and secured, or any part of them, and
satisfy and pay such County and Place the Sum that shall be so detained in the
hands of such Collector or Sub-collector, and return the Overplus, deducting
necessary Charges to such Collector or Sub-collector, their Heirs, Executors
and Administrators respectively.

Collectors and Sub-collectors to be called to give an account to the
Commissoners at the expiration of this Act.
And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, That at the expiration of the
respective times in this Act prescribed for the full payment of the said
quarterly Assessments, the several and respective Commissioners, or any Two of
them within their Division and Hundred, shall and are hereby required to call
before them the chief Collectors and Sub-collectors within each respective
Division and Hundred, to examine and assure themselves of the full and whole
Payment of the particular Sum and Sums of Money charged upon the said Division,
Hundred,

Commissioners concerned in any Controversy, to withdraw and not vote.
And it is hereby Enacted and Declared, That in case any Controversy arise
concerning the said Assessments, or the dividing, apportioning, or payment
thereof, which concern any of the Commissioners by this Act appointed, that the
Commissioners so concerned in the said Controversy shall have no Voice, but
shall withdraw at the time of the Debate of any such Controversy, until it be
determined by the rest of the Commissioners.

No exemption of any privileged Place or Person, Fee-Farm Rents.
And be it hereby Enacted and Declared, That no Privileged Place or Person,
Body Politic or Corporate, within the Counties, Cities and Towns aforesaid,
shall be exempted from the said Assessments and Taxes; and that they and every
of them, and also all Fee-Farm Rents, and all other manner of Rents, Payments,
sums of moneys and Annuities issuing out of any Lands within City or County,
shall be liable toward the payment of every sum by this Act to be taxed and
levied: And all the Tenants of every Fee-Farm Rent, other Rent, sums of money
or Annuities aforesaid, are hereby directed and authorized to pay them
proportionably, according to the Rates and Assessments by this Act appointed
and directed; And all such Tenants shall be hereby saved and kept harmless by
authority of this Act from any further payment of such portion of any such
Rent, Rents, Sums or Annuities, either to the Exchequer, or to any other person
or persons, to whom any such Rent, Rents, Sums of Moneys or Annuities as
aforesaid should or ought to be paid, to all intents or purposes whatsoever, as
fully and as amply as if they had paid the same into the Exchequer, or to any
person or persons to whom the same is reserved or become due.

Provided, Proviso for Colleges and Halls in the Universities, Windsor, Eaton,
Winton, Westminster, Hospitals, etc.
That nothing contained in this Act shall be extended to charge any College or
Hall in either of the Universities, or the Colleges of Windsor, Eaton,
Winton or Westminster, or any Hospitals, for or in respect of the Scites of
the said Colleges or Halls, or Hospitals, nor any Master, Fellow or Scholar
of any such College or Hall, or in any other Free-Schooles, or any Reader,
Officer or Minister of the said Universities, Colleges or Schools, or of any
Hospitals or Almshouses, for or in respect of any stipend, wages or profit
whatsoever, arising or growing due to them in respect of the said several
Places and Employments in the said Universities, Colleges, Schools, Hospitals
or Almshouses; nor to Charge any of the Houses or Lands belonging to Christ's
Hospital, Saint Bartholomewes, Bridewell, Saint Thomas, and Bethlehem Hospital
in the City of London and Borough of Southwark, or any of them, for or in
respect of any Rents or Revenues payable to the said Hospitals, being to be
received and disbursed for the immediate use and relief of the Poor in the said
Hospitals.

Provided, That no Tenants that hold or enjoy any Lands or Houses by Lease,
Tenants to be assessed for the over value of their Lands.
or any other Grant from any of the said Hospitals, do claim and enjoy any
freedom, exemption or advantage by this Act, but that all the Houses and Lands
which they so hold, shall be rated and assessed for so much as they are yearly
worth, over and above the Rents reserved and payable to the said Hospitals.

Provided also, London.
That where any Person inhabiting within the City of London has his dwelling
house in one of the Parishes or Wards therein, and has any Goods, Wares or
Merchandise in one or more of the other Parishes or Wards within the same, that
then such Person shall be charged, taxed and assessed for such his Goods or
Merchandise in the Parish or Ward where he dwells, and not elsewhere in the
said City.

Provided nevertheless, That no Clause or Proviso in this Act shall extend to
the lessening or abatement of the full sum by this Act appointed to be taxed,
levied and paid, There shall be no abatement of the full sum in this Act.
but that the same be fully assessed, taxed, levied, collected and paid in the
several and respective Counties, Cities and Towns aforesaid, in such manner and
form, and to such uses as herein before mentioned and declared. And that the
several and respective Commissioners, The Commissioners to give account to the
Lord Treasurer.
and every of them shall from time to time give a true and perfect account of
all their doings and proceedings in the execution of this Act to the said Lord
Treasurer, or to other such Persons as His Majesty shall appoint.

Provided always, and be it hereby Enacted and Declared, Assessing by a
pound-rate.
That in case the way or manner of assessing by a Pound-rate shall prove any
way prejudicial or obstructive to the said speedy bringing in of the
Assessment, or any part thereof appointed by this Act, that then, and in all
such cases the respective Commissioners, or any two of them, are hereby
authorized to order and direct their respective Assessors, who are hereby
required to proceed accordingly, to assess the respective Sums charged on the
respective Counties, Cities and Buroughs, Towns and places mentioned in this
Act, according to the most just and usual way of Rates held and practiced in
such Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places respectively, Any thing in
this Act to the contrary thereof contained in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to
alter, change, determine, Contracts and Covenants between Landlord and Tenant.
or make void any Contracts, Covenants or Agreements whatsoever between the
Landlord and Tenant touching the payment of Taxes or Assessments, any thing
herein before mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, All places and divisions to be rated as formerly.
That for the avoiding of all obstructions and delays in collecting the sums by
this Act to be rated and assessed, all Places, Constablewicks, Divisions and
Allotments which have used to be rated and assessed, shall pay and be assessed
in such County, Hundred, Rape and Wapentake, as the same has heretofore
usually been assessed in, and not elsewhere.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Plaint, Suit or Information shall be commenced or prosecuted against any person
or persons for what he or Persons sued for executing this Act, may give the
general issue in Evidence.
such person or persons so sued in any Court whatsoever, shall or may plead the
General Issue, Not Guilty: And upon any Issue joined, may give this Act and the
special matter in Evidence; And if the Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall become
Nonsuit, or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if a
Verdict pass against him, the Defendants shall recover their Treble Costs, for
which they shall have the like Remedy, as in any case where Costs by the Law
are given to Defendants. Treble-Costs


Proviso for Salop and Stafford.
Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall extend or he construed to
invalidate a Decree lately made in the high Court of Chancery for the quieting
of Suits between the Counties of Salop and Stafford; and for the settling all
future Payments to be imposed on certain Lands in Sheriff-Hales with the County
of Salop; Sheriff-Hales.
And for exempting the said Lands from paying hereafter with the County of
Stafford: But that the said Decree shall remain in such (and no other) force as
it did before the making of this Act, any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Spiritual promotions and lands, etc.
Possessions or Revenues annexed to, and all Goods and Chattels growing or
renewed upon the same, or elsewhere appertaining to the Owners of the said
Spiritual Promotions, or any of them, which are or shall be charged or made
contributory by this Act toward the Payments aforesaid during the time therein
appointed, shall be absolutely freed and discharged from the two last of the
four Subsidies granted by the Clergy to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
by an Act made in a former Session of this present Parliament, Entitled, An
Act for confirming of four Subsidies granted by the Clergy: 15 Car. 2. cap. 10.
Any clause or thing in the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Head-collectors shall give acquittances without fee.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
several Head-Collectors which shall be appointed according to this Act, shall
from time to time at every Payment appointed thereby, give unto the several
Sub-collectors within their respective Precints, upon the Payment of the whole
Sum due at such times of Payment from their respective Parishes,
Constablewicks, or places within each of their Collections, several
Acquittances under their Hands, without taking any thing for the same. And that
in like manner at every time of Payment appointed by this Act, Receiver-General.
the Receiver-General of each County shall give unto the several
Head-Collectors aforesaid upon the Payment of the whole Sum due for their
Hundred or Division respectively, at each time of Payment aforesaid, several
Acquittances under their Hands and Seals, without taking any thing for the
same; which said Acquittances of the Head-collectors shall be a full and
perfect Discharge to the Sub-collectors; And the said Acquittances of the
Receiver-General shall be a sufficient Discharge to the Head-collectors, and to
such Hundred, Division, Constablewick, Parish or place respectively, and to
every

Lands and houses that lie unoccupied.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That in case any Lands or Houses
in any Parish, Place or Constablewick shall lie unoccupied, and no distresses
can be found on the same, by reason whereof the said Parish, Place or
Constablewick are forced to pay and make good the Tax assessed upon such Lands
lying unoccupied, That then it shall and may be lawful at any time after for
the Collectors, Constable, or Tythingman of the said Parish, Place or
Constablewick for the time being, to enter and distrain upon the said Lands and
Houses when there shall be any distress thereupon to be found. And the distress
and distresses being the proper goods of the Owner, or any claiming any Estate,
interest or profit under him, if not redeemed within four days by payment of
the Tax, and charge of the distress, to sell, rendering the Overplus to the
Owner or Owners of such distress. And the said Collector, Constable or
Tythingman is hereby enjoined to distribute the money raised by the said
Distress or Sale thereof proportionably to the Parties who contributed to the
Tax of the said unoccupied Lands.

Woodlands.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That where any Wood-lands shall be
assessed, and no Distress can be had, that in such case it shall and may be
lawful to and for any Sub-collector, Constable, Head-borough or Tythingman, by
Warrant under the Hands and Seals of two or more of the Commissioners in that
Hundred or Division, at seasonable time of the year, to cut and sell to any
person or persons so much of the Wood growing on the said Woodlands so
assessed, as will pay the Assessment or Assessments so behind and unpaid, and
the charge incident thereunto: And that it shall and may be lawful for the
person and persons, and his Assigns, to

Tithes, Tolls, Markets, Fairs, Fisheries, etc.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That where any Tax or Assessment
shall be charged or laid upon any Tithes, Tolls, Profits of Markets, Fairs or
Fishery, or other annual profits not distrainable, in case the same shall not
be paid within fifteen days after such Assessment so charged or laid and
demanded, then it shall be lawful to and for the Sub-collector, Constable or
other Officer thereunto appointed, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any
two or more of the Commissioners authorized by this Act, to seize, take and
sell so much of the said Tithes, Tolls, and other Profits so charged, as shall
be sufficient for the levying of the said Tax and Assessment, and all charges
occasioned by such non-payment thereof, rendering the overplus to the Owner, if
any be.

Middlesex, Westminster.
And whereas the County of Middlesex and City of Westminster are raised in the
Monthly Assessment, by reason of the new Buildings lately erected; And that
Offices are made chargeable toward the payment of such Assessment: To the end
that an equal rate may be made and imposed upon the several Divisions,
Parishes and Hamlets within the said County and City, Be it Enacted by this
present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That the said Commissioners
appointed for the said County and City of Westminster, or any three of them,
shall, if they shall think it fit, cause two or three of the honest and able
Inhabitants in the several and respective Parishes, Townships and Places within
the said County and City to be named and appointed Assessors, who (or any two
of them) are to ascertain and rate the yearly value and profits of all Offices
belonging to the Courts of Westminster, and other Offices chargeable by this
Act, toward the payment of the said sum set upon the said County and City, And
all Townships, Parishes and Places, for which they be appointed Assessors; and
to return the same to the said Commissioners, or to such person or persons as
shall be appointed

Provided always, That nothing herein contained shall be drawn into example,
Proviso.
to the prejudice of the ancient Rights belonging unto the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, or Clergy of this Realm, or unto either of the Universities, or unto
any Colleges, Schools, Almshouses, Hospitals or Cinque Ports.

CAP. II.
The Measures and Prices of Coals regulated.

FOr avoiding the manifold deceits, Dece^ts and ^xations in selling of Coals.
exactions and abuses used in the Measures and Sales of Coals, and for
preventing the like, and the better regulation thereof for the time to come; Be
it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the
Sixth day of March, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred ^^xty
four, all sorts of Coal, commonly called Sea-Coals, brought into the River of
Thames, and sold, shall be sold by the Chaldron, Sea coal measure.
containing Thirty six Bushels heaped up, and according to the Bushel Sealed
for that purpose at Guildhall in London, and so for a greater or lesser
quantity; And that all other sorts of Coals coming from Scotland and other
places, commonly sold by Weight, and not by Measure, Coals from Scotland.
shall be sold by Weight after the proportion of a hundred and twelve pound to
the hundred of Avoir dupois weight, without any fallacy or deceit, upon pain of
Forfeiture of all the Coals which shall be otherwise sold or exposed to sale by
any Woodmonger or Retailer of Coals, and the double value thereof to be
recovered by any person or persons that will prosecute for the same in any
Court of Record, or by way of complaint made unto the Lord Mayor of London for
the time being, and Justices of Peace within the City of London and Liberties
thereof, or to any two of them, or to the Justices of Peace of the several and
respective Counties and Places where such Coals shall be exposed to sale, or
any of them; who are hereby Empowered and Required to call the Parties before
them, and to hear and examine such Complaint upon Oath, which by virtue of this
Act is to be administered by them, or any Two of them, and upon due proof
thereof made to their satisfaction, to Convict the Offenders and to give
Warrant under their Hands and Seals for levying the Forfeitures accordingly,
the one half thereof to be to and for the use of the person or persons so
prosecuting or complaining, and the other half to and for the use of the Poor,
or repairing of the Highways within the same Parish, or any other adjoining
Parish or Parishes, to be appointed and apportioned by the direction of the
said Lord Mayor and Justices, by such their Warrant as aforesaid. And the said
Lord Mayor of London, and the Court of Aldermen for the time being, Who may set
Rates upon Coals in London.
and the Justices of Peace of the several Counties respectively, or any three
or more of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, are hereby empowered to set
the Rates and Prises of all such Coals as shall be sold by Retail, as they from
time to time shall judge reasonable, allowing a competent profit to the said
Retailer, beyond the price paid by him to the Importer, and the ordinary
charges thereupon accruing.

And that if any Ingrosser or Retailer of such Coals shall refuse to sell as
aforesaid, Ingrossers or Retailers refusing to ^ell at the said Rates.
That then the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and Justices of Peace
respectively, are hereby authorized to appoint and empower such Officer or
Officers, or other persons as they shall think fit, to enter into any Wharf, or
other place where such Coals are stored up; And in case of refusal, taking a
Constable, to force entrance, and the said Coals to sell, or cause to be sold
at such Rates as the said Lord Mayor and Aldermen and Justices respectively
shall judge reasonable, rendering to such Ingrosser or Retailer the money for
which the said Coals shall be so sold, necessary charges being deducted.

The continuance of this Act.
Provided, That this Act shall continue for three years next ensuing, and
thenceforth to the end of the next Session of Parliament, and no longer.

Provided also, That no person or persons that shall be sued by virtue of this
Act for not observing thereof, shall be sued upon any other Act or Law now in
force for the same offense: And if any Action shall be commenced against any
Justice of Peace, Persons sued upon this Act may plead the general issue.
Constable, or other Officer or Person for any thing done by color of this
Act, the Defendant in every such Action may plead the general Issue, and give
the special matter in Evidence: And if the Verdict be found for him, or the
Plaintiff become Nonsuited, shall recover and have his Damages and double
Costs of suit for his unjust Vexation in that behalf.

Who may not act in setting Rates upon Coals.
Provided always, That no Person having any Interest in any Wharf used for the
receiving or uttering of Coals, or that does, or shall Trade by himself or
others, in his own, or any other name, in the sale of any Coals, or the
Engrossing the same, in order to sell the same, and not for his own private use
only, shall act or otherwise intermeddle in the setting the Price of Coals;
Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. III.
For the Returning of able and sufficient Jurors.

FOr the returning of more able and sufficient Jurors for Trials hereafter to
be had between Party and Party, and for reformation of abuses in Sheriffs and
other Ministers, who for reward do oftentimes spare the ablest and
sufficientest, and return the poorer and simpler Freeholders, less able to
discern the Causes in question, and to bear the charges of appearance and
attendance thereon.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Jurors for trials of
issues shall have 20 l. per annum Freehold.
That all Jurors (other then Strangers, upon Trials per medietatem linguae) who
are to be returned for the Trials of Issues, joined in any of the Kings
Majesty's Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or the Exchequer, or before
Justices of Assize, or Nisi Prius, Oyer, and Terminer, Jail-deliver, or
General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace, from and after the twentieth day of
April, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty
five, in any County of this Realm of England, shall every of them then have in
their own name, or in trust for th^^ within the same County, twenty pounds by
the year at least above reprises, in their own, or their wives right, of
Freehold Lands, or of ancient Demesne, or of Rents in Fee, Fee-tail, or for
life. And that in every County within the Dominion of Wales, every such Iuror
shall then have within the same eight pounds by the year, at the least above
reprises in manner aforesaid. All which Persons, having such Estate as
aforesaid are hereby enabled and made liable to be returned, and to serve as
Jurors for the Trial of Issues before the Justices aforesaid, Any Law or
Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And if any of a lesser
Estate and value shall be respectively returned upon any such Jury, or Tales in
default of such Jurors, it shall be a good cause of Challenge, and the Party
returned shall be discharged upon the said Challenge, or his own Allegation and
Oath thereof. And that no Iury-mans Issues making default shall be saved, but
by special Order of the Judge or Judges before whom the Issue is to be tried,
Issues of Jurors upon default.
for some just and reasonable cause proved upon Oath before the same Judge or
Judges. And all such Issues shall be duly estreated and levied: The Ven' fac.
And that the Writ of Venire facias which from and after the aforesaid time
shall be awarded and directed for the impannelling of Iuries in cases aforesaid
within any County of England, shall be in this form: Rex, etc. Praecipimus,
etc. quod venire fac. coram, etc. duodecem liberos and legales homines de
vicineto de A. Quorum quilibet habeat viginti libras terrae, tenementorum vel
reddit. per annum ad minus, per quos, etc. and qui nec, etc. And the residue of
the said Writ shall be after the ancient manner. And that those Writs which
shall be awarded and directed for Returning of Iuries within the Dominion of
Wales shall be made in the same manner, altering only the word Viginti into
Octo. And that upon every such Writ Venire facias, Wales.
the Sheriff, Coroner, or other ministers of each respective County in England
and Wales, Penalty upon the Sheriff, etc.
unto whom the making of the Panel shall appertain, shall not return in any
such Panel any person, unless he shall then have Twenty pounds, or Eight
pounds respectively by the year at least as aforesaid in the same County where
the Issue is to be tried, upon pain to forfeit for every person being returned
in any such Panel that shall not then have Twenty pounds or Eight pounds
respectively, as is aforesaid, the sum of Five pounds to His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors. And for the better enabling the Sheriff of every County to know
the value of the Estates of such persons as are by the true intent and meaning
of this Act to be returned for Iury-men;

Be it further Enacted, How the Sheriff shall find out persons fit to be
returned for Iury-men.
That every Sheriff shall on the first day of every General Quarter Sessions
yearly held next after the Feast of Easter, deliver, or cause to be delivered
unto the Justices of Peace sitting at the same Sessions the names of all
persons of such Estates as are by the true meaning of this Act to be returned
for Iury-men, to the end the Estates of such persons may be enquired after, and
such persons approved of by the said Justices of Peace, or the greater number
of them then present, to be persons of such Estates to be returnable for
Iury-men for the year then next ensuing. And the said Justices shall have power
to add such persons having Estates of the respective values before mentioned,
as they shall find to be omitted by the Sheriff amongst the names by him
delivered; and such competent number, and no more of such persons as aforesaid
shall be returnable to serve of Iuries for the year next ensuing, as the said
Justices, or the greater number of them as aforesaid shall think fit. And that
no Sheriff shall incur the penalty aforesaid for returning any of the persons
so approved or added by the Justices, in case his Estate fall out to be of less
value then aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted, That no Sheriff or Bailiff of any Liberty or
Franchise, What time summons ought to be before appearance.
or any of their, or either of their Ministers shall return any such person or
persons as aforesaid, to have been summoned by them, or any of them, unless
such person or persons shall have been duly summoned by the space of six days
at the least before the day on which they ought to make their appearance; And
have left with or for such persons in writing the names of all the parties in
those Causes wherein they are to serve as Jurors; Nothing may be taken to
excuse appearance. The Penalty.
nor shall directly or indirectly take any money or other reward, to excuse the
appearance of any Iuror by them, or any of them to be summoned or returned,
upon pain to forfeit for every such offense the sum of Ten pounds: Saving to
all Cities and Towns Corporate their ancient Usage of returning Jurors of such
Estate, and in such manner as heretofore has been used and accustomed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth
upon Writs of Venire facias issued out and returned within the County-Palatine
of Lancaster, County-Palatine of Lancaster.
as of the same Assizes wherein the Issues are said to be joined, Writs of
Habeas Corpora or Distringas shall be sued out, like as is used in all other
Counties within this Kingdom, returnable at the then next Assizes. And the
Sheriff thereupon to return such Issues as is or ought to be done by the said
Sheriffs of the said other Counties, and those Issues to be duly estreated as
above is provided.

And the better to cause and bring Jurors to appear upon Trials at Assizes
within the said County-Palatine of Lancaster, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff of the same County-Palatine of Lancaster
for the time being, shall from henceforth cause twelve good and lawful men so
qualified, as before in this Act is appointed, out of every of the six Hundreds
within the said County-Palatine, to be duly summoned or warned ten days at the
least before the beginning of every Assizes, to be and appear the first day of
the then next Assizes, and there to attend during the same Assizes to perform
their duty and service to the Court as Jurors or Iurymen in such Causes between
party and party, wherein they shall be respectively returned and impannelled,
upon pain that every of them that shall make default to appear and attend at,
and during the said Assizes, to forfeit Ten pounds to the use and behoof of the
Poor of the Town where such person or persons so making default does inhabit
and live; the same to be levied, recovered and had, in such manner and ways as
other Issues of Jurors use to be levied.

Provided, That this Act shall continue and stand in force for the space of
Three years, The continuance of this Act.
and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. IV.
An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of EXCISE.

FOr the better Ordering and Collecting the Duty of Excise, Be it Enacted and
Declared by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from and after the
eighth day of November, Powers given to Farmers of Excise.
which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty and
five, all Farmers of Excise, or any of them, within the several Circuits and
Divisions of their respective Farms, shall and are enabled hereby to exercise
and put in Execution all such Powers and Authorities which the Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners of Excise are enabled to do and execute by the several Acts
and Statutes of Excise, for the levying, raising, receiving and managing of the
said Revenue of Excise; 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. 15 Car. 2. cap. 11. and cap. 12*
Except the Judicial part of hearing and determining all breaches and offenses
against the Laws of Excise, and of imposing, mitigating or compounding of Fines
or Penalties.

CAP. V.
Delays in extending Statutes, Judgments and Recognizances prevented.

Security by Statute Merchant and of the Staple.
Whereas the Security by Statute-Merchant and of the Staple is now become of
little use and benefit by the fraud of the Conusors thereof in sundry Cases,
who, to prevent the payment of their Debts, secretly assign small parts of
their Lands to several and unknown persons: And it having been used, that if
the Creditor take Execution on such Statute; yet if the Lands of any one or
more person or persons, to whom such alienation was made and liable to such
Execution, be omitted out of such extent; The same execution has been avoided
by Audita Quaerela, Executions avoided by Audita Quaerela.
and the party extending lost his Costs, and was delayed of his just Debt; and
so again upon any new extent toties quoties. And if any one Acre or Parcel of
Land happened to descend to an Infant, the whole execution was deferred till
full age of such Infant; And if afterward other part of the Lands or Tenements
liable to such Debt descended to another Infant, then also a farther delay
happened during that Infancy also.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, For what causes extents upon Judgments or
Statutes shall not be avoided or delayed.
and by the Authority of the same, That when any Judgment, Statute or
Recognizance shall be extended, the same shall not be avoided or delayed by
occasion that any part of the Lands or Tenements extendible are or shall be
omitted out of such extent; saving always to the Party and Parties whose Lands
shall be extended, his and their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, his and their
remedy for contribution against such person and persons, whose Lands are or
shall be omitted out of such extent from time to time.

Proviso for Heirs within age.
Provided always, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
construed to give any Extent or Contribution against any Heir within the age of
one and twenty years, during such Minority of such Heir, for or in respect of
any Lands to such Heir descended, farther or otherwise then might have been
before the making of this Act.

To what statutes and extents only this Act shall extend. The continuance of
this Act.
Provided that this Act extend only to such Statutes as are or shall be for
payment of Moneys; And to such extent as shall be within twenty years after the
Statute, Recognizance or Judgment had and obtained.

Provided that this Act shall continue for the space of three years, and from
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament, and no longer.

CAP. VI.
Part of an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act directing the prosecution of
such as are accomptable for Prize-goods repealed.

14 Car. 2. cap. 14. Directions for recovery of Prize-goods not accounted ^or.
WHereas by an Act made in this present Parliament, entitled, An Act directing
the prosecution of such as are accomptable for Prize-goods; It is amongst other
things Enacted, That all and every Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains of Ships,
Officers and Mariners that did surprise, or receive to, or for the public
use, or by pretense thereof, any Ships, Plate, Jewels, Bullion, Money, Silver,
Gold, Arms, Ammunition, Waxes, Merchandises, or any manner of Goods whatsoever,
seized or taken for Prize, betwixt the thirtieth of January, One thousand six
hundred forty two, and the nine and twentieth day of May, One thousand six
hundred sixty; And that had not at the making of the said Act truly Accounted
for and paid in the same, or the just Provenues thereof, should be chargeable
to His Majesty for the said premises, and convened and sued for in His
Majesty's Court of Admiralty, and called to account, or otherwise by such Suit,
and in such manner as should be most available to His Majesty. And in case of
defect of Jurisdiction in the said Court of Admiralty, then upon Certificate
thereof from the said Court of Admiralty made into His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, speedy proceedings were to be had in the said Court of Exchequer,
for the recovering and levying of the Prizes, Goods, matters and things, as by
the said Act, relation being thereunto had more plainly, fully, and at large
appears: Whereupon diverse Captains and Officers of His Majesty's Fleets, and
several others the Commanders, Officers and Mariners, employed in the
Sea-service, have been sued, or may possibly be sued concerning the several
Prizes and Prize-goods by them heretofore seized and taken at Sea, or in Ports,
since the Month of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, and before the
twenty ninth of May, One thousand six hundred sixty, contrary to the grace and
favor extended toward them, not only in and by His Majesty's most gracious
Act of Free and general Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion; but also by a
Proclamation since made by His Majesty, bearing Date the Fourteenth day of
July, One thousand six hundred sixty two, in the Fourteenth year of His
Majesty's Reign, Declaring His Majesty's grace and favor toward all
Commanders and Seamen, in relation to Prizes and Prize-goods, seized and taken,
since the month of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, until the
nine and twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred sixty: His Majesty
thereupon willing, that His Grace and Favor toward all Admirals,
Vice-Admirals, Commanders, Seamen and Mariners should take its full effect;
And being fully satisfied of their dutiful affections unto His Majesty's Royal
Person and Government; and for their future encouragement to persevere loyally
in His Majesty's Service, is most graciously pleased that it may be Enacted,

And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice
and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. Repealed as to all Admirals, Officers,
Mariners and Soldiers at Sea.
and by the Authority of the same, That the said Act, entitled, An Act for
directing the prosecution of such as are accomptable for Prize-Goods, and all
and every Branches, Clauses, Powers and Articles, and every matter and thing
therein contained, for so much only, and as for and concerning all and every
Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Captains of Ships, Officers of Ships or Vessels,
Seamen and Mariners, and every of them, shall be and is hereby from henceforth
repealed, annulled, and made void, and of no effect, to all intents and
purposes whatsoever: And that all and singular Process and proceedings
whatsoever, which before this time have been, now are, or may be at any time
hereafter had, sued forth and prosecuted in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, or in the High Court of Admiralty of England, or elsewhere,
January, One thousand six hundred forty two, and the nine and twentieth of May,
One thousand six hundred sixty; and of and from all Accounts, Troubles,
Articles and Suits whatsoever concerning the same: And that this Act shall be
taken and expounded in the most large and beneficial manner for the said
Admiralls, Vice-Admirals, Commanders, Captains and Officers of Ships and
Vessels, and Seamen and Mariners, and every of them, and for their best
advantage for the final, free and absolute acquitting and discharging of them,
and every of them, of and from all the said Prizes, and every part thereof, and
all Ships and Vessels and Goods whatsoever, or of what nature or kind soever,
by them, or any of them seized, surprised, or in any sort taken, betwixt the
said thirtieth of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, and the said
nine and twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred sixty.

Provided always, And be it Enacted, That this Act, or any thing therein
contained, The said Act not repealed as to any Collectors, Treasurers, etc. of
such Prize-goods.
shall not extend or be construed to extend to discharge any other persons
whatsoever, but only the said Admirals, Vice-Admirals, Commanders, Captains of
Ships, and Officers of Ships or Vessels, and Seamen and Mariners; but that all
and every Collectors and Treasurers, Sub-Collectors and Vnder-Treasurers of
Prize-Goods, Commissioners, and Sub-Commissioners of Prize-Goods, and all and
every their Casheers, Deputies, Officers and Receivers, other then such person
or persons who are discharged by the Act of Free and General-Pardon, Indemnity
and Oblivion, that have not yet truly accounted or paid in the Provenues of the
Prizes, or Moneys arising thereout, seized, or taken betwixt the said thirtieth
of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, and the said nine and twentieth
of May, One thousand six hundred sixty, and all and every other person and
persons, by whom, or to whom, or to, or for whose use any Prizes or
Prize-Ships, Plate, Jewels, Arms, Ammunition, Wares, Merchandises, or any
manner of Goods whatsoever, seized or taken for Prize, betwixt the said
thirtieth of January, One thousand six hundred forty two, and the said nine and
twentieth of May, One thousand six hundred sixty, were disposed or sold, or to
whose hands they came, and who had and enjoyed the same, or any part thereof,
and are still behind, and have not paid in the moneys contracted for, and
arising, or due upon such Sales or Dispositions, or any of them; and all
securities by them and every of them given for, or touching the premises, or
any thing concerning the said Prizes, or any of them, shall be chargeable to
Your Majesty for the said premises, and all the dependencies thereof
respectively, in the said Court of Admiralty or Exchequer, and shall be
proceeded upon in the said Court of Admiralty or Exchequer in Your Majesty's
Name, and to and for Your Majesty's use according to the said Act, directing
the prosecution of such as are accomptable for Prize-Goods, and as fully and
entirely, as if this Act had never been; Any thing in this present Act
notwithstanding.

CAP. VII.
A former Act for Regulating Printing continued.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Consent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, That an Act made in the fourteenth year of the Reign of Our
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, Entitled, An Act for preventing abuses in
Printing Seditious, Treasonable and unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and
Regulating of Printing and Printing-Presses, shall be continued, and remain in
force until the end of the next Session of Parliament, continued 17 Car. 2.
cap. 4.

CAP. VIII.
Arrests of Judgment, and superseding Executions prevented.

WHereas great delay, trouble and vexation has been, and still is occasioned
to the people of this Realm, as well by arresting and reversing of Judgments,
as by staying Executions by Writs of Error and Supersedeas. For remedy thereof,
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Verdict of
Twelve men shall be given in any Action, In what court and cases Judgment after
verdict shall not be stayed for default of form in pleading.
Suit, Bill or Demand to be commenced from and after the Five and twentieth day
of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
sixty and five, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or in
the Courts of Record in the Counties-Palatine of Chester, Lancaster or Durham,
or in His Majesty's Courts of the Great Sessions in any of the twelve Shires of
Wales, Judgment thereupon shall not be stayed or reversed, for default in
form, or lack of form, or by reason that there are not Pledges, or but one
Pledge to prosecute returned upon the Original Writ, or because the Name of the
Sheriff is not returned upon such Original Writ, or for default of entering
Pledges upon any Bill or Declaration, or for default of alleging the bringing
into Court of any Bond, Bill, Indenture, or other Deed whatsoever mentioned in
the Declaration, or other Pleading, or for default of Allegation of the
bringing into Court of Letters Testamentary, or Letters of Administration, or
by reason of the omission of Vi and armis, or Contra pacem, or for or by reason
of the mistaking of the Christian Name or Surname of the Plaintiff or
Defendant, Demandant or Tenant, sum or sums of Money, Day, Month or Year, by
the Clerk in any Bill, Declaration or Pleading, where the right Name, Surname,
Sum, Day, Month or Year, in any Writ, Plaint, Roll, or Record preceding, or in
the same Roll or Record where the Mistake is committed, is or are once truly
and rightly alleged, whereunto the Plaintiff might have demurred and shown the
same for Cause; nor for want of the Averment of Hoc paratus est verificare, or
Hoc paratus est verificare per Recordum, or for not alleging Prout patet per
Recordum, or for that there is no right Venue, so as the Cause were tried by a
Jury of the proper County or Place where the Action is laid: Nor any Judgment
after Verdict, Confession by Cognovit Actionem, or Relicta verificatione, shall
be reversed for want of Misericordia, or Capiatur, or by reason that a Capiatur
is entered for a Misericordia, or a Misericordia is entered where a Capiatur
ought to have been entered: Nor for that Ideo concessum est per Curiam is entered
for Ideo consideratum est per Curiam; nor for that the Increase of Costs after
a Verdict in an Action, or upon a Nonsuit in Replevin are not entered to be at
the request of the party for whom the Judgment is given; nor by reason that
the Costs in any Judgment whatsoever are not entered to be by consent of the
Palintiff: but that all such Omissions, Variances, Defects, and all other
matters of like nature, not being against the right of the matter of the suit,
nor whereby the Issue or Trial are altered, shall be amended by the Justices or
other Judges of the Courts where such Judgments are or shall be given, or
whereunto the Record is or shall be removed by Writ of Error.

Proviso for Appeals, Indictments, Actions upon penal Laws, other then for
Customs and Subsidies.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Writ,
Declaration, or suit of Appeal of Felony or Murder, nor to any Indictment or
Presentment of Felony, Murder, Treason, or other matter, nor to any Process
upon any of them, nor to any Writ; Bill, Action or Information upon any penal
Statute, other then concerning Customs and Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage;
Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Twentieth day of March, III. In what cases execution shall not be stayed by
Writ of Error, but upon Recognizance entered according to ^ Jac. cap. 8.
in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and four, no Execution
shall be stayed in any of the aforesaid Courts by Writ of Error or Supersedeas
thereupon, after Verdict and Judgment thereupon, in any Action personal
whatsoever, unless a Recognizance with Condition according to the Statute made
in the Third year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James shall be
first acknowledged in the Court where such Judgment shall be given. And
further, That in Writs of Error to be brought upon any Judgment after Verdict
in any Writ of Dower, or in any Action of Ejection^ Firmae, no execution shall
be thereupon or thereby stayed, unless the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs in such Writ
of Error shall be bound unto the Plaintiff in such Writ of Dower or Action of
Ejectione firmae in such reasonable sum as the Court to which such Writ of
Error shall be directed shall think fit, with Condition, that if the Judgment
shall be affirmed in the said Writ of Error, or that the said Writ of Error be
discontinued in default of the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs therein, or that the
said Plaintiff or Plaintiffs be nonsuit in such Writs of Error, that then the
said Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall pay such Costs, Damages, and sum and sums of
Money as shall be awarded upon or after such Judgment affirmed, Discontinuance
or Nonsuit had.

And to the end that the same sum and sums, and damages may be ascertained,
Proviso touching judgment in Dower and Ejectione firmae.
It is further Enacted, That the Court wherein such Execution ought to be
granted, upon such Affirmation, Discontinuance or Nonsuit, shall issue a Writ
to enquire as well of the mean profits as of the damages by any Waste committed
after the first Judgment in Dower, or in Ejectione firmae; And upon the Return
thereof, Judgment shall be given, and Execution awarded for such Mesne-profits,
and damages, and also for Costs of Suit.

Provided, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend to
any Writ of Error to be brought by any Executor or Administrator, nor unto any
Action popular, To what actions this Act shall not extend.
nor unto any other Action which is or hereafter shall be brought upon any
Penal Law or Statute (except Actions of Debt for not setting forth of Tithes)
nor to any Indictment, Presentment, Inquisition, Information or Appeal; Any
thing herein before expressed to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act shall continue in force for three years, The
continuance of this Act.
and to the end of the next Session of Parliament after the expiration of the
said three years, and no longer.

CAP. IX.
The Chancellor of the Duchy empowered to grant Commissions for taking
Affidavits within the Dutchy-Liberties.

FOr the greater ease and benefit of the Inhabitants within the County Palatine
of Lancaster* and other places within several other Counties of this Kingdom
within the Survey of the Court of Dutchy-Chamber at Westminster in the taking
of Affidavits in the County to be made use of, and read in Causes depending and
to be depending within the said Court, Be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the Chancellor of the said Duchy and County
Palatine of Lancaster for the time being, shall and may by one or more
Commission or Commissions from time to time, as need shall require, empower
what, and as many persons as he shall think fit and necessary within the said
County Palatine and other Duchy Liberties, to take and receive all and every
such Affidavit or Affidavit's as any person or persons shall be willing and
desirous to make before any of the persons so empowered, in or concerning any
cause, matter or thing depending, or hereafter to be depending in the said
Court of Dutchy-Chamber, as Masters of Chancery in Extraordinary do use to do,
which said Affidavits shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Court of
the Duchy, and then be read and made use of in the said Court to all intents
and purposes, as other Affidavits taken in the said Court now are.

Provided, That for the taking of every such Affidavit the person or persons so
empowered, and taking the same, shall for so doing, receive only the Sum or Fee
of Twelve pence, and no more.

CAP. X.
An Act for Repairing the Highways within the County of Hertford continued.

WHereas by a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for repairing the
Highways within the Counties of Hertford, Cambridg and Huntington, It was
Enacted, 15 Car. 2. c. 1.
That for the Repairing of the ancient Highway and Post-road leading from
London to York, London. York. Lincolnshire.
and from London into Lincolnshire, there should be a Toll paid at a certain
place in every of the said several and respective Counties, and for
Hertfordshire at Wades-Mill in the said County: which said Toll so set, is by
the said Act to continue the space of eleven years and no longer, with this
provision, That if the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions in the
respective Counties shall before the expiration of eleven years, adjudg the
said Repairs to be sufficiently done, that from thenceforth it should cease.
And whereas diverse Gentlemen within the County of Hertford have heartily set
themselves to take care for the repairing of the said ways within their County;
And in order thereunto finding that money could not be advanced by the Toll in
so speedy a manner as to repair those ruinous ways; And that none would lend
their money on that Security, did, upon their own credits, borrow thirteen
hundred pounds on Interest, to effect the work intended by the said Act, which
sum accordingly is laid out, together with such money as has proceeded from
the Toll before mentioned, in the repair of the said Highway, by which means
they have so amended the said Road lying in that County, leading from London to
York, that they have made the same from a Road impassable, to be to the
satisfaction of all that travel that way very passable and convenient: but by
reason of the great sum expended and laid out, so borrowed as aforesaid, the
Toll will not be sufficient to repay the same within the years mentioned in the
former Act with Interest for the same, and to finish the said work.

Hertford. Cambridg. Norfolk. New Market. Puckeridge. Barley.
And whereas there is a Road in the said County of Hertford that leads from
London to Cambridg, and so into Norfolk, and likewise to New Market, and so
into Suffolk and other parts, which goes out of the forementioned Road at the
end of the Town of Puckeridge, and so leads to Barley in the said County of
Hertford, which is very ruinous, and requires as much the help of the Toll, in
many places, as the forementioned Road did.

May it therefore please Your Majesty that it be Enacted, and be it Enacted by
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the Toll aforementioned to be
taken at VVades-Mill for the County of Hertford, II. The full taken at
Wades-Mill, continued.
that by the former Act was to continue for eleven years and no longer, shall
continue for the said County of Hertford for the space of One and twenty years,
and no longer, the said Term to commence from the time mentioned in the Act
before mentioned, and the money arising therefrom to be employed for the
payment of the Debt aforesaid with Interest, and also for further Repair of the
Highway.

It is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
persons empowered in the forementioned Act for the repair of the Highways
within the County of Hertford, shall have the same power to repair the said
Highways leading from Puckeridge to Barley in the said County, For repairing
the highway from Puckeridg to Barley.
as they have to repair the Highway in the said County leading from London to
York; And that they shall and may apply such part of the Toll thereunto,
(having an equal care of both Highways) as they in their Judgments shall find
needful; Any thing in the said former Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Caxton.
And whereas by the former recited Act, a Toll was erected and set to be taken
at the Town of Caxton in the County of Cambridge for and toward the repairing
the Highways in the said County, the said Toll does prove useless, and will
not answer the end for which the same was intended, by reason of the
Inconveniency of the place where the same was set.

Arrington-bridg
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Toll be and
is hereby removed from the said Town of Caxton unto Arrington-Bridg, or the
Town of Arrington, as shall seem most convenient by the Justices of the Peace
of the said County at their next Easter General-Quarter-Sessions of the Peace
in the County aforesaid; And that the same Toll shall be taken and received at
Arrington-Bridg, or Arrington-Town aforesaid, according to the Rates, and by
the same ways and means as in the former Act was appointed and declared, and to
be employed to the uses, purposes and intents therein also declared, any thing
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

A charge of six pence in the pound for repairing the said highways.
Provided always, That all and every person and persons who by Law are
chargeable toward the repairing of the said Highways and Places aforesaid,
shall still remain so chargeable, and pay six pence in the pound yearly,
according to the true value of their Estate, for and toward the repair of the
said Highways, during the time of the continuance of this Toll, any thing in
this Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

III. The collector of the toll, how to account weekly.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Collector of
this Toll shall weekly account to the Receiver-General for the whole money
received by virtue of this or the said former Act; And the next Justice of the
Peace for the said County shall hereby have power to give an Oath to the said
Collectors for the making of a true and perfect account of the money so
received, which said account so made shall be returned into the next
General-Quarter-Sessions to be held for the said County by the Justice of Peace
before whom such Oath was taken.

Proviso touching the continuance or determining the said toll.
Provided also, That if at any time before the expiration of the said term of
One and twenty years, the said Highways shall be well and sufficiently amended
and repaired, and so adjudged at the public Quarter Sessions for the County of
Hertford; and that such Sum or Sums of money as is already borrowed and laid
out, or shall be borrowed and laid out for the use aforesaid, be repaid with
interest for the same: That from and after such Adjudication made, and
repayment of such money so borrowed and laid out as aforesaid; the aforesaid
Toll in the said County shall cease and determine.

Proviso for adjudication of the amendment of the said highways.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case the Highways
within the said County of Hertford shall be sufficiently amended, and that the
Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions shall fail to make an
Adjudication thereof, That then in such default of the said Justices of the
Peace, it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of Assize for the
said County of Hertford to make such Adjudication, which being entered with the
Clerk of the Assizes, shall be esteemed a good Adjudication of the amendment of
the said Highways: And that then and from thenceforth, the said Debt being
fully satisfied to such as shall have advanced any moneys thereupon, the said
Toll shall cease and determine, any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof
in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas in this present Act it is provided, That all and every person and
persons who by Law are chargeable toward the repairing of the said Highways
and places aforesaid, shall still remain so chargeable, and pay six pence in
the pound yearly, according to the true value of their Estates, for and toward
the repair of the said Highways, during the time of the continuance of the
said Toll.

Be it therefore Provided and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
aforesaid sum of six pence in the pound shall be paid unto the Treasurer
appointed to receive the aforesaid Toll, How the said six pence in the pound
shall be paid and ^evied.
in like manner as the said Toll is appointed to be paid by the aforesaid Act:
And for default of payment of the said Rate of six pence in the pound, in
manner as aforesaid, by the space of six days after demand made, That it shall
and may be lawful for the Surveyors of the Highways for the time being, and
they are hereby empowered to levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods of
the party refusing to pay the same acccordingly, restoring the Overplus (if any
be) to the Owner.

CAP. XI.
For Draining of the Fenn, called Deeping-Fenn, and other Fenns therein
mentioned.

WHereas at a Session of Sewers, holden at Bourne in the County of Lincoln, the
twentieth day of August, in the one and fortieth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, for the recovery and Draining of certain Fenns in Holland and
Kestiven in the County of Lincoln, called or known by the names of
Deeping-Fenn, Pinchbeck and Spalding, South-Fenn, Thurlby-Fenn, Deeping.
Pinchbeck. Thurlby. Bourn and Croyland- fens.
Bourn-South-Fenn and Croyland-Fenn, alias Goggushland; It was by the
Commissioners then and there assembled, Ordered and Decreed, That the sum of
twelve thousand pounds should be levied and gathered upon the Lords and
Inhabitants of certain Towns in Kestiven and Holland, Commoners in the said
Fenns, for Draining the same, and should be paid in to certain persons therein
nominated to receive the same, at or before the tenth day of September then
next ensuing; which said sum being neglected to be paid, the said Fens by
reason thereof could not be Drained, acccording to the Form by the said Law
intended: The said Commissioners therefore well tendering the great profit that
would arise to all persons concerned, and to the Commonwealth in general, if
the same might be Drained, at several Sessions of Sewers held at Market-Deeping
the twentieth day of September, in the said one and fortieth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and at Market-D^^ping aforesaid the twentieth day of August, in the
two and fortieth year of the Reign of the said Queen, did Ordain and Decree,
That the said Fens and Marsh-Grounds should be forthwith taken in hand to be
Drained, and that Thomas Lovell Esquire (a man skilful in works of that nature)
should be admitted to undertake the same under the Covenants therein mentioned:
And in pursuance thereof, the said Thomas Lovell did undertake the said Works,
and made some progress therein; and afterward one third part of the said
several Fens were by the said Commissioners of Sewers set out by Metes and
Bounds, and allotted to the said Thomas Lovell in recompense of his costs,
charges and endeavors, applied and expended therein; And after, A third part
assigned and set out to Thomas Lovel.
the said third part was by the said Commissioners of Sewers decreed to the
said Thomas Lovell, and his heirs, in recompense of his said work of Draining,
and of his charges and expenses therein, to have and to hold to the said Thomas
Lovell, his heirs and assigns for ever.

And whereas by an Act of Parliament made at Westminster in the first year of
King James, Entitled, An Act for relief of Thomas Lovell Esquire, the above
recited Decrees of Sewers were Ratified and Confirmed; And the said third part
of the said Fens and Marsh-grounds, as they were allotted and set out by the
said Commissioners, were by the said Act Ordained, Enacted and Established to
be held by the said Thomas Lovel, his Heirs and Assigns for ever, under the
Provisoes, Conditions and Appointments in the said Decrees, and Act of
Parliament mentioned and expressed, as by the said Act of Parliament and
Decrees of Sewers more fully may appear. And whereas the said Thomas Lovel
immediately after the making the said Act of Parliament entered into the said
Lands set out and assigned as a third part of the said several Fens, and by
virtue of the said Decrees and Act of Parliament became seized thereof, and he
and his heirs and Assigns have ever since, till of late years, held and enjoyed
the same, until (by some neglect in the Assigns of the said Thomas Lovel, and
failer in the Maintaining, Scowring and Cleansing the said Banks, Rivers,
Sewers and other Works necessary thereunto) occasioned by some differences
arising between the said Assigns of the said Thomas Lovel, and the Lords,
Owners and Commoners of the said Fens, about the enjoyment of some additional
recompense allotted to the said Assigns of the said Thomas Lovel, by a
subsequent Law of Sewers (made at Spalding) not only the said Fens and
Marsh-grounds are returned into their ancient condition of being hurtfully
surrounded and annoyed with waters; but a great and considerable part of some
adjacent Towns of Holland have been overflowed and laid desolate, and many
habitations and families who formerly lived comfortably there, utterly ruined
and destroyed thereby, and yet continue in manifest danger in all seasons of
wet weather and floods, to fall into the said calamities; which great mischief
is by long and indubitable experience found to arise principally from several
imperfections in the said Decrees and Acts of Parliament.

To the end therefore that the said Country, being in its own nature very rich
and fertile, and wherein the King, and Queens Majesty his Mother, have large
Possessions, (and many ancient Families and Inhabitants their whole
subsistence) may not longer remain in such manifest danger of being utterly
lost, nor the Commonwealth continue longer deprived of those advantages which
would arise from the performance of the said Works:

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said Decrees, and Act of
Parliament above mentioned, and every Clause, Article and Thing therein
contained, A certain Act and decrees made for the said Thomas L^vel repealed.
other then such as are herein after mentioned, Enacted, Ratified and
confirmed, shall be and are hereby repealed and made void to all intents and
purposes whatsoever.

And inasmuch as the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Berkshire and the Lady
Elizabeth his Wife, and Charles Lord Howard of Charlton, commonly called the
Lord Viscount Andover, their Eldest son and heir apparent; The Right Honorable
Robert Lord Bruce Baron of Wharlton in the Kingdom of England and Earl of Elgin
in the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Lady Diana his wife; The Right Honorable
Anne Countess of Stamford, and Thomas Lord Gray of Groby, have formerly held
and derived to themselves, with remainders over to several other persons, by
several Conveyances from or under the Right Honorable William late Earl of
Exeter, and Elizabeth late Countess of Exeter, or one of them, several
interests in the said third part of the said Lands, allotted to the said Lovel,
his heirs and assigns; and to other proportions by subsequent Decrees of
Sewers, and toward the Dreyning and maintaining thereof; they, the said Right
Honorable William late Earl of Exeter, and Elizabeth late Countess Dowager of
Exeter, under whom, or one of whom they claim, and Thomas late Earl of Exeter,
from whom the said William late Earl, and Elizabeth late Countess Dowager of
Exeter derived their title, have expended several great sums of money, but have
not so fully effected the said works, nor introduced those benea^ts and
advantages which were expected: And for reason do alledg, that the third part,
and subsequent allotments are not Recompense sufficient to answer the charge of
a more perfect performance of the said work; but offer to proceed and perfectly
to effect the same, if they may have a sufficient recompense and compensation
for their Hazard, Charge and Pains therein: Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, Trustees and undertakers made for dreyning the said Fens.
That Edward Earl of Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household;
William Earl of Devonshire; John Lord Berkley of Stratton; Anchatil Gray
Esquire; Henry Gray Esquire, and their Heirs and Assigns, and the Survivor of
them, shall be, and are hereby declared to be the Undertakers for the Dreining
of the said Fens, and every of them, in trust to and for such person and
persons, and to such intents and purposes as are herein after mentioned. And
that within the space of seven years next ensuing, they, their heirs and
assigns shall and will at their proper costs and charges recover and make dry
the said Fens, and every of them, and make the same firm and depasturable for
Cattle at all times of the year, except two or three hundred Acres or
thereabouts in the said Fens called Deeping-Fen, and Goggisland, and forty
Acres or thereabouts in the said Fens called Thursby-Fen and Bourn-South-Fen,
which are to be left for Lakes and Sykes for the receipt of Waters within the
same; And also, except such Drains and Sewers as now be, or hereafter shall be
made within the said Fens, or any of them for the Dreyning thereof, and so much
of the grounds adjoining to the Rivers, Dreyns and Sewers within the said Fens,
as lie, or shall lie between the said Rivers, Dreyns or Sewers, and the Banks
made or to be made for keeping the Waters lying in the said Rivers, Dreyns or
Sewers, from overflowing the rest of the said Fens. And also shall for ever
hereafter at their own costs and charges, not only repair, exalt, maintain and
keep, as need shall require, the Banks environing and encompassing the said
Fens and every of them, but also the Bank on the East Side of the River of
Welland, from a place in Crowland called Brother-house to Spalding high-bridg.
And also the Bank on the North-side of the River Glean, from Gutheram Coat to a
place called Dovehum in Pinchbeck; and thereof, and of all and every the said
Banks abovenamed, shall for ever hereafter exonerate, acquit, discharge and
save harmless as well the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, as the Queen
Dowager, her Tenants and under-Tenants, and all other person and persons, their
Heirs and Assigns, of and for their repairing and amending of their several
parts and allotments of the same; but also that they the said Trustees, their
Heirs and Assigns, and the Survivor of them at their own proper Costs and
Charges, shall for ever maintain and keep the Rivers of Glean and Welland with
sufficient Dyking, Roading, Scowring and Banking, (viz.) the River of Welland
from the Outgang at the East end of East-Dieping leading into the said Fens,
Glean and Welland Rivers.
unto the Out-fall thereof into the Sea; and to preserve and maintain the
Navigation thereof without Imposition or paying any thing whatsoever for the
same, but with liberty to alter and divert the Course and Channel of the same
into any other part or parts of the said Fens before it comes to the said
Corner of Dieping-Fen abutting upon Hawthorne-Bank, from whence through the
said Town of Spalding as it now passes to the Sea, it shall not be lawful to
divert the Course thereof: And with like liberty to divert the said River of
Glean before it comes to the place called Pinchbeck-Barrs or Dovehurne in
Pinchbeck; from which place called Dovehurne through the said Town and the Town
of Surflet as it now passes to the Sea, it shall not be lawful to divert the
same, or prejudice the Navigation thereof. And all manner of Dreins, Sewers and
Passages for Waters and other Waterworks whatsoever, which now are or
hereafter shall be made within or without the said Fens for the draining of the
said Fens, or any of them which shall be necessary to be made or continued in
order to the preserving the said Fens from Surrounder. And thereof, and of all
and every the said Rivers to discharge, exonerate, acquit and save harmless, as
well the Kings and the said Queens Majesty's, his Heirs and Successors, their
Tenants and Vnder-tenants, as all other person and persons, their Heirs and
Assigns, of and for the repairing and amending of their several parts and
allotments in them and every of them.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees,
their Heirs and Assigns, or the Survivor of them shall at their own proper
Costs and Charges make, Sufficient Gates and Bridges to be made.
set down and maintain such reasonable and convenient Bridges, with Gates unto
the same, in wideness not exceeding twelve foot, being well and sufficiently
railed or walled against the sides; as well over any Drain or Ditch now made or
hereafter to be made, whereby passage may be had into the Fens in such and so
many fit and convenient places as shall be thought fit and ordered by any six
Commissioners of Sewers for the said County of Lincoln, in their public and
open Sessions, and the same shall for ever keep and maintain for convenient and
ready passage with Carts and Carriages, and all sorts of Cattle, into, and
forth of the said Fens and every of them.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees,
The powers of the said Trustees and Undertakers.
their Heirs and Assigns, or the survivor of them, for the better Dreyning and
keeping dry of the aforesaid Fens, shall and may at their wills and pleasures
desert, or maintain and continue all such Dreyns as now are in the said Fens or
any of them, at the old or accustomable wideness and breadth, or otherwise
enlarge the same at their will and pleasure within the said Fens: And likewise
may at their will and pleasure make any new Dreyns, Ditches and Sewers within
the said Fens or any of them, or without toward the Sea, of what quantity,
depth or wideness they shall think best; which Dreyns, and every of them shall
have liberty to run above the soil, so as the waters of the same be kept within
the banks of the several and respective Dreyns now made or hereafter to be
made, except so much of the said waters as unavoidably shall soak through the
Banks, for which also satisfaction is to be made to any person or persons
suffering damage thereby, as shall be awarded by the said Commissioners of
Sewers, or any six of them in the open Sessions, so as the Inhabitants of
Spalding and Pinchbeck may have a liberty to set down and stop such Sluices,
Tunnels and Gages of water and Locks as are or shall be made upon any the said
Rivers and Dreyns (except the said Rivers of Welland, Glean and the Westlode)
at such time or times as two Commissioners of Sewers for the parts of Holland
shall judge seasonable and necessary for the Dreyning of their In-grounds:
Provived the same exceed not two months in the year. And if at any time or
times hereafter for ever, any of the bank or banks of the Dreyn or Dreyns, now
or hereafter to be made for the Dreyning of the said Fens, or preservation of
the said Country happen to break or to be overflown, whereby the waters have
issue and fall into any the several Lands of the Towns of the Wapentake of
Elloe, That immediately upon such breach or overflowing, it shall or may be
lawful for all, or any the Dykereeves, Officers or other Inhabitants of any the
Towns in Elloe aforesaid, to set down the Clowe of such Dreyn or Dreyns, or
otherwise to stop the same, till the banks thereof so breaking or overflowed,
from time to time be sufficiently repaired, strengthened and heightened.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Currents or
Channels of the River of Glean and Welland, and the VVestlode, Glean, Welland,
Westlode.
shall not be diverted or turned into any other Tract or Course whatsoever
(that is to say) from a place called Dovehurn in Pinchbeck to the Outfall, and
from a Bank in Spalding, called Hawthorne-bank to the Outfall, but shall be
kept Navigable, as formerly they were, down to the Sea.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Gool or
Gools, Breach or Breaches, Overflowing or Overflowings of waters shall happen
at any time hereafter to be in, What shall be done in case of Gools or
breaches, or overflowings.
over, or through any of the said Banks made or to be made within the said
Fens, for the defense and preservation of the same, other then the Bank called
the Dozens, and the Bank called Hawthorne-bank, to the surrounding or annoyance
of the said Fens or any part of them within their charge as aforesaid, and the
same be not amended by the said Trustees, their Heirs and Assigns, or the
Survivor of them, within ten days after such Breach, Goole or Overflowing,
That then it shall and may be lawful to and for any of the said Dikereeves or
Surveyors of Sewers in Spalding or Pinchbeck, or any of the other Towns in the
Wapentake of Nesse or Elloe in the said County of Lincoln, where the said
Breach or Breaches, Goole or Gooles, Overflowing or Overflowings of water shall
happen to be, forthwith and immediately after the said ten days, to repair the
same at the only Costs and Charges of them the said Trustees, their Heirs and
Assigns, or the Survivor of them. All which said sum or sums of money so by the
said Dikereeves and Surveyors of Sewers, or any of them expended in and about
the Taking, Repairing and Amending of any such Breach or Breaches, Goole or
Gooles, Overflowing or Overflowings of waters, in or over the said Bank or
Banks respectively, They the said Trustees, their Heirs and Assigns or the
Survivor of them, shall pay or cause to be paid to the said Dikereeve or
Dikereeves, Surveyor or Surveyors so expending the same, upon a note delivered
in writing to the said Trustees, their Heirs or Assigns, or the Survivor of
them, their Tenants or Vnder-Tenants, Servants or Agents, or any of them, by
the said Dikereeve or Dikereeves, Surveyor or Surveyors, testified under the
hands of two Commissioners of Sewers, one being of the Quorum, containing as
well the names of the Laborers that repaired the said Breach or Breaches,
Goole or Gooles, Overflowing or Overflowings, as the Wages paid to them, and
the rates and prices of all other necessary charges employed and bestowed in
and about the same, with their convenient Salary and Wages for their pains in
that behalf, at the discretion of two such Commissioners as aforesaid: The
which, if the said Trustees, their Heirs or Assigns or the Survivor of them, or
their Tenants or Vnder-Tenants, Agents or Servants, shall refuse or neglect to
do, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Officers or
persons, or any of them that shall make up any such Breach or Breaches, Goole
or Gooles, Overflowing or Overflowings, or sustain such damages as aforesaid,
to enter into the said third part of the said Fens, or into the five thousand
Acres additional recompense herein after given by this present Act, or into any
part thereof, and to distrain and impound the Horses, Beasts, Sheep or Goods
and Chattels of them the said Trustees, their Heirs and Assigns or the Survivor
of them, or any Tenant or Tenants, Farmer or Farmers, Occupier or Occupiers of
all or any part of the said third part, and of the said five thousand Acres;
And from and after the fourth day of the said distress and impoundment (in case
the said sum or sums so expended and demanded be not then paid) sale thereof to
make, without allowance of Replevin; and with the money thereupon arising, to
pay and satisfy all sums of money for the said Works expended, and to be
allowed as abovesaid, rendering the overplus to the Owner, if any overplus be,
over and above the Charges aforesaid and Charges of keeping.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That if any breach, goole, hole or
holes, or flowing of waters shall happen to be in, over or through the said
bank called the Dozens, the said bank called Hawthorn-bank, Dozens,
Hawthor^-bank East-bank.
the said bank called the East-bank, the said bank on the Northside of the
River Gleane, or any other bank made or to be made without the said Fens by the
said Trustees, their heirs or assigns, or the survivors of them, for, or in
order to the Dreyning of the said Fens, That then, and in every such case, it
shall and may be lawful for the Dykereeves and Surveyors of Sewers in Pinchbeck
and Spalding, or any of the Towns in the Wapentake of Nesse or Elloe aforesaid,
where the said breach, goole or flowing shall be, forthwith and immediately to
repair the same at the costs and charges of the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns, or the survivor of them, to be had and levied in manner and form as is
before expressed and declared, for or concerning the said banks, environing, or
made or to be made for the Dreyning or preservation of the said Fens.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if it fortune that
at any time hereafter, by the negligence of the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns or the survivor of them, in not sufficiently maintaining, Satisfaction
for damage to particular persons how to be made.
scowring, dyking or cleansing of any Rivers, Banks, Sewers or Dreyns
whatsoever, which now are, or hereafter shall be made for dreyning of the said
Fens, and securing of the Country; or that by any inconvenient placing,
setting, cutting or making of any Dreyn, Got or Sluice upon the same, that the
Country or any private or particular person receive loss or harm thereby; That
the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns, or the survivor of them or some of
them, shall make such recompense and satisfaction for the same to every person
and persons sustaining any damage thereby, as six Commissioners of Sewers for
the said part of Holland, whereof three to be of the Quorum, shall award and
appoint under their hands and seals (if the said Lords Adventurers, their heirs
and assigns shall not have otherwise satisfied the same) which if they the said
Lords Adventurers, their heirs and assigns shall neglect to pay and satisfy to
the person and persons sustaining the same, their Executors or Assigns, by the
space of twenty days after demand made thereof to them the said Trustees, their
heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, or the Agents, Tenants or
under-tenants of them; That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be
lawful to and for every such person and persons sustaining the same damage,
their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them
respectively, to enter into the same third part, and into the said five
thousand Acres, and every or any part thereof, and to levy the same damages so
as aforesaid awarded and appointed, by distress and sale of the goods and
chattels of them the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of
them, or any Tenant or Tenants, Farmer or Farmers, Occupier or Occupiers, of
all or any part of the said third part of the said Fens, or the said five
thousand Acres, and present sale thereof to make after the fourth day of
impoundment (and payment of such money then not made) without allowance of
Replevin, rendering the overplus to the Owner (if any overplus there be): And if
the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them or any of
them, shall think it necessary for the enlargement of any old Dreyn, River or
Bank, out of the said Fens, avobe that which formerly they were, or for making
any new Dreyn, River or Bank, to cut or cover the several soil of any person or
persons, That then the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor
of them, shall compound and agree with the Owner or Owners thereof (if they can
agree) And if they cannot agree, that the value of the damage shall be set down
by six of the Commissioners of Sewers, whereof three to be of the Quorum, and
the money shall be paid or tendered before such time as the said soil shall be
cut or covered, and upon payment or tender of the said money, it shall be
lawful for them to cut or cover the said soil, for making the said Dreyns,
Rivers or Banks.

Dower to put up Bridges, Drains, etc.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of
them, to pull up any Cart-bridges of Wood or Stone, or any Foot or
Horse-bridges, Clowes or Water-bridges that now lie over the said two Rivers of
Glean and Welland, the Rivers of Westload and Starfengraft, Vernatts, or any of
them, or any other Dreyns that be too strait or narrow, or otherwise may hinder
the course and passage of the waters in the said Rivers or of any Dreyn to be
devised by the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them;
and also to pull up all Wears and Purprestures in the said Rivers and Dreyns
that hinder the passage of the water. Provided that they shall forthwith
sufficiently build and make again at their own proper costs and charges the
great Bridge over Spalding-river (commonly called the high-bridg) of lime and
stone, and all such other cart-bridges, horse-bridges, Clowes or Water-bridges
of lime, stone or timber respectively, as the former were, which have been or
shall be so pulled down, to be enlarged or made wider. And that all and every
the ancient Bridges and Tunnels under and over any of the Rivers and Dreyns,
The said bridges, tunnels etc. how to be repaired.
and every of them, be repaired and for ever maintained at the charges of them
the said Trustees, their Heirs or Assigns, or the Survivor of them. And if it
shall happen the said Bridges or any of them, shall not be made or repaired by
the said Trustees, their Heirs or Assigns or the survivor of them, in
convenient time according to the true intent or meaning of this Act, That then
it shall and may be lawful to and for the Commissioners of Sewers in their
public Sessions from time to time to order and decree how much or what sum or
sums of money shall or may be necessary or fitting to be raised for effecting
the same. And if after notice of the said Determinations of the said
Commissioners by a note in writing under the hand of the Clerk of the Sewers,
given to the said Trustees their Heirs or Assigns or the survivor of them, they
shall not pay or cause the same, so adjudged, to be paid within thirty days
after such notice, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Commissioners of Sewers by their Warrants to levy the same by distress and sale
of the Goods and Cattle levant and couchant upon any of the Lands within the
said Fens, hereby vested and settled in the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns or the survivor of them. And if it shall fall out that the said High
Bridge over Spalding River be not finished before the five and twentieth of
March One thousand six hundred and seventy, That then the said Trustees,
Spalding-brid^
their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, shall forfeit the full and
just sum of one hundred and fifty pounds to Peircy Church Esquire, his
Executors or Assigns, which shall and may be raised by the Commissioners of
Sewers for the time being at the public Sessions, by sale of part of the said
third part of the said Fens, or of the said three thousand five hundred Acres
therein mentioned, and be by them accordingly paid over to the said Peircy
Church, his Executors or Assigns, and the person and persons, and their heirs
to whom such sale shall be made, shall and may for ever then after hold and
enjoy the same by virtue of such sale, and of this present Act, any thing
herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
preservation of the said Banks environing the said Fens or made within the said
Fens for the defense of the same, Preservation of the Banks.
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns or the survivor of them, to cut the ground lying between the
outring-Banks and the said Rivers or either of them, to take earth, manure and
litter for repairing the said Banks so often as need shall require, or to them
shall seem meet and convenient, so that such cutting be not extended or made
above six score foot distant from the said Banks, and to erect, make and keep
such and so many sufficient Bars and Slakers, and in such places as shall seem
most fit and convenient to the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the
survivor of them; The Slakers to take off the surplusage of Waters, and the
Bars to hinder the passage of Horsemen and drifts of Cattle over the same Banks
in the times hereafter prohibited. And to the end that the Banks should not be
impaired by horsemen, drifts of sheep, horses, beasts and other Cattle, It is
hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons whatsoever
(except as hereafter is excepted) shall at any time or times hereafter in any
year between Michaelmas-day, and the first day of May, drive or cause to be
driven any Horses, Oxen, Sheep or any other kind of Cattle over or upon any of
the said Banks, without first paying to them the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns or the survivor of them, after the rate of four pence for every score
of Sheep, and for every other Beast the sum of four pence; which they, their
heirs and assigns are hereby authorized to demand and receive.

Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That all and every the Lords,
Proviso for* owners and commoners.
Owners and Commoners of or in all, or any part of the said Fens, shall have
free liberty at all times of the year, for them, their Horses, Servants and
Cattle to pass and repass upon any Bank or Banks, Drove or Droves, in or
compassing the said Fens, without paying any thing for so doing, if such person
or persons claiming such freedom do not usually buy Sheep or Cattle and trade
that way to London with such Cattle or Sheep as are not of their own feeding
for a Month before.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Horsemen and cattle landing upon
the banks.
That no person or persons whatsoever keeping a Horse-boat, either at Croyland,
Cloote, Deeping, Baston, Eastcoate, Pinchbeck, Spalding or Cowbet, shall land
any horsemen with their horses or cattle upon any the said Banks, at any time
hereafter between Michaelmas day and the first day of May, but at
Waldrome-Hall, Baston, Spoute, Dovehurne, Cloote or Croyland, without license
first thereunto had and obtained from the said Trustees, their heirs and
assigns or the survivor of them, upon pain and forfeiture to be made and paid,
for every horse and neat beast, six pence, and for every score of sheep, four
pence to the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them:
And that no manner of person or persons shall draw any Boat on, or over any the
Banks in, or compassing the said Fens, but in such places only as are or shall
be appointed for that purpose.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Swine of what
sort soever, Swine.
ringed or unringed, be put upon the said Fens or any of them, between the said
Banks and the Wearditches, but that they shall be put into the Fens at usual
places where other Cattle are put in; And that the Swine so put, shall be
ringed, upon pain of every Hog so found unringed, to forfeit to them the said
Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, the sum of two pence
for every time so found, to be levied by distress and impounding of such Hog or
Hogs.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees,
their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, their or any of their Tenants,
Farmers or Ground-holders of any part of the said third part, or of the said
Fen, or of the said five thousand Acres, shall not have any time hereafter, use
or claim any Common of Pasture or other Commonage of Pasturing in any part of
the remainder of the said Fens nor any of them, nor in the North Fen of
Pinchbeck and Spalding, Poor Inhabitants.
nor any part thereof, by virtue or pretense of his or their residence there:
But all and every the Inhabitants that may hereafter be upon any part of the
said third part, or upon any part of the said five thousand Acres, and are not
able to maintain themselves, shall be maintained and kept by the said Trustees,
their heirs and assigns and the survivor of them, and never become chargeable
in any kind, to all or any the respective Parishes wherein such Inhabitant or
Inhabitants shall reside or dwell, any Statute or Law to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no water shall be
let or taken out of the Rivers of Gleane or Welland, Water shall not be set out
of the rivers of Glean and Welland.
or any other the said Dreyn or Dreyns, by any Sluice, Cut or Tunnel without the
license of the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them,
or by Order of six Commissioners of Sewers, who likewise are to take order that
such Cut or Cuts made for the taking thereof, shall be made up again at the
charge of the person or persons for whose benefit the same were made, but for
necessary household uses, by such as now lie by some Law of Sewers already
settled: And in case any abuse of the said Tunnels happen to be, that then the
said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, their servants
or agents shall have power immediately to stop the same.

Pinchbeck* Spalding* Blewgate- sluice.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Inhabitants of
Pinchbeck and Spalding shall for ever hereafter have the use of a certain Got
or Sluice called Blewgate, and the Dreyn leading thereto, so as the said
Trustees, their heirs or assigns, shall not be put to any charge for the
repairing or maintaining of the same.

The dreyn from Boston-bank to Winsoever.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Loads or Dreyn
under the Dozens, from Baston-bank to Winsoever, be Ditched two hundred foot
more inward into the said Fens then now it is, and the earth laid on that side
the bank next the Town of Pinchbeck.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for and in
consideration of all the moneys already expended in and about the Dreyning of
the said Fens, and in consideration of the doing and performing of the Works
aforesaid hereafter to be done, and of all and every of them about the
Recovering, The proportion estates upon the trustees and ^ndertakers.
Inning and Dreyning of the said Fens and every of them, that they the said
Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, shall from
henceforth have, hold, peaceably occupy and enjoy to them, their heirs and
assigns in Fee-simple for ever, the said third part of the said Fens and
Marshes formerly assigned to the said Thomas Lovel, his heirs and assigns, as
also three thousand five hundred Acres added and allotted by a Decree of Sewers
made at Spalding in the said Fens, and one thousand Acres out of that part of
the said Fens, formerly taken in for the Queens improvement, and five hundred
Acres more to be taken proportionably out of the residue of the said Fens in
Kestiven and Holland, next adjoining to the said three thousand five hundred
Acres; which three thousand five hundred Acres and one thousand Acres, and five
thousand Acres last mentioned, are to be demeasured by Statute-measure by two
Artists, and set out by them at the charge of the said Trustees, their heirs or
assigns or the survivor of them, one to be chosen by the Commissioners of
Sewers of Kestiven and Holland, and one other by the said Undertakers; but upon
the Trusts hereafter mentioned: That is to say, as touching and concerning
eight thousand thirty six Acres thereof mentioned in a Schedule annexed to an
Indenture of Fifteen parts, dated the second of August 1650. made between
Elizabeth Countess Dowager of Exeter and others therein named, and two thousand
Acres more to be indifferently set out within six months after the passing of
this Act, amounting in the whole to ten thousand thirty six Acres; in Trust,
That the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, shall
grant and convey the same to such person or persons, or for such Estates in
Fee-simple or otherwise, in such manner as the said Thomas Earl of Berks, the
said Lord Andover, Lord Bruce and John Lord Berkley of Stratton shall appoint.
And as for, touching and concerning the residue of the said Fens, by this Act
allotted for recompense for the said Dreyning moreover and above the said eight
thousand thirty six Acres, and two thousand Acres in Trust for the said Earl of
Berkshire and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, the said Lord Andover, the said Earl
of Elgin, Countess of Stamford and Lord Gray, and such other person and persons
to whom the Remainder upon their Estates are limited, according to their
several and respective Interests and Estates as aforesaid, made or derived
from, by or under the said William late Earl of Exeter and Elizabeth late
Countess of Exeter or either of them, their, or either of their heirs or
assigns: And in case the said Commissioners shall not nominate a Surveyor
within three months after nomination by the said Trustees, their heirs or
assigns or the survivor of them, and both to be sworn by the said
Commissioners, and notice thereof to be given to the said Commissioners, That
then the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, shall
proceed as aforesaid by their own Artist.

The trustees shall fence and enclose the third part, etc.
Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Trustees, their heirs and assigns and the survivor of them, shall at all times
hereafter sufficiently fence and enclose the said third part, and all other the
Lands by this Act to them granted on all parts, against the Lords and Commoners
of and in the residue of the said Fens: And if any of their Cattle shall enter
or break into the said third part, and other Lands so granted or any part
thereof, in default of the Enclosure thereof; It shall not be lawful for the
said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, to Distrain or
Impound the same, or to maintain any Action for any such Entry, Depasturing or
other Trespass happening in such default: And if any such Action be brought, it
shall be lawful for the Defendant or Defendants therein to plead the General
Issue and to give this Act in Evidence. And that the two Drove-ways in the said
Fens, called the North-drove and South-drove, leading from the parts of
Kestiven into the parts of Holland, be continued open and common through the
said third part, and Lands to them granted for the use and benefit of the Lords
and Commoners for a Drift-way for them and the said Undertakers: And also that
the Banks or Dreyns (by virtue of this Act) to be continued or made, shall not
stop or hinder the Land-waters falling from the parts of Kestiven into the said
Fen, but shall and may receive and carry the same away.

Provided always, That this Act or any Clause, Article, Sentence or Penalty
therein contained, mentioned or expressed, shall not extend to charge the
persons of the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them,
or any the Estate or Estates real or personal of them the said Trustees, their
heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, other then their Estate and Estates
of and in the said Fens.

Provided also and upon condition, That if the said Trustees, their heirs or
assigns or the survivor of them, shall neglect the Inning and Dreyning of the
said Fens, and every or any of them, The penalty upon neglect to dreyn the said
fens within seven years, and so after to keep and maintain them.
and shall not fully and perfectly finish the Dreyning of the same before the
end and expiration of the said seven years as aforesaid, according to the
intent and purport of this Act, or shall not after the Inning or Dreyning
thereof, keep and maintain the said Fens and every of them after the end and
term of the said seven years, dry, firm and depasturable ground for Cattle at
all times in the year (except such Lakes, Dreyns, Sewers, Portions and
Quantities of the said Fens as are before excepted) but shall wilfully and
negligently suffer the said Fens and Wastes or the most part of the same to be
again drowned and overflowed by the space of five years at any time after the
expiration of the said seven years, and the same be found and adjudged
hurtfully surrounded in default of the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns
or the survivor of them (contrary to this Act) by twelve Commissioners of
Sewers or the greater number of them, whereof six to be of the parts of
Holland, and six of Kestiven, of which twelve Commissioners, three of either of
the said parts to be of the Quorum, upon their view or inquisition or
presentment of Jury that the same has so long continued drowned, and that
Judgment be certified of Record into the High Court of Chancery under their
hands and seals or the greater number of them; That then and from thenceforth
the trust of the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or the survivor of
them, of, in and to the said third part, and the said other parts and
proportions added and allotted for a further recompense as aforesaid, for the
said Earl and Countess of Berkshire, Lord Howard of Charlton, Lord Bruce,
Countess of Stamford, Lord Gray, and other persons in remainder as aforesaid,
and all and every estate and estates whatsoever by them granted, conveyed, or
in any manner executed, of all or any the said third part or other proportions
added and allotted for further recompense to any person or persons whomsoever,
in execution, pursuance or discharge of their said trust, or otherwise shall
cease, determine and be utterly void to all intents and purposes whatsoever,
and not to be helped, altered or relieved in any Court or by any course of Law
or Equity, and that then and from thenceforth the said Trustees, their heirs
and assigns or the survivor of them, shall stand and be seized of all the said
third part and the additional allotments in trust, to permit and suffer the
said Commissioners of Sewers of Kestiven and Holland, to take, perceive and
receive the whole Rents, Issues and profits, to the end the same may be laid
out and expended for the regaining of the said Fens, and to defray the charge
which the Country shall or may be put unto to preserve themselves and their
other Lands from being surrounded or damnified by the said waters, in default
of maintaining of the said Banks and doing other the said works which ought to
have been made and repaired by the said Trustees, their heirs and assigns or
the survivor of them: And upon further trust likewise, That the said Trustees,
their heirs and assigns or the survivor of them, shall and will from time to
time and at all times, make and execute such estate and estates as twelve
Commissioners of Sewers of the parts of Holland and Kestiven, whereof three of
each part to be of the Quorum, shall by writing under their hands and seals
direct and appoint.

And be it Enacted and declared, That all such estate and estates so by them
made, shall be, and be, and be deemed and taken to be good and effectual in Law
to all intents and purposes, as if the same were in this present Act
particularly and by proper names mentioned and expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said
Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of them, shall not, or do not,
at or before the said term of seven years, well and truly pay or cause to be
paid the full and just sum of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England
into the hands of such person or persons as the said Commissioners of Sewers in
their public Sessions from time to time shall appoint to receive the same,
That then and in such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Commissioners of Sewers by an Order in writing under their hands and seals, to
Authorize such person or persons as they shall think fit, to enter into any the
said Lands, part of the said third part allotted to the said Thomas Lovel, out
of any the Fens by him formerly undertaken to be Dreyned, and the said
Additional Lands, and out of the Rents, Issues and profits thereof to raise the
same sum of one hundred pounds, to the end the same shall and may be by them
employed and laid out, South-Dozens and Hawthorn- bank.
in and about the necessary maintenance and reparation of the Banks above
mentioned, called the South Dozens, and Hawthorne Bank, and so from time to
time, and at all times, as the said one hundred pounds or any part thereof
shall be as abovesaid expended in and about the said Banks as aforesaid, if the
same be not again supplied by the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the
survivor of them within six months then next following, then it shall be in
the power of the said Commissioners of Sewers, out of the Rents, Issues and
profits aforesaid to raise the same or so much thereof as shall not be supplied
as abovesaid, from time to time and at all times, as occasion shall require.

How meetings and bylaws may be made for management of the dreyning.
Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and
may be lawful to and for such person and persons, their heirs and assigns or
any three or more of them, to whom the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or
the survivor of them, shall make or execute any estate or estates of the said
ten thousand thirty six Acres before mentioned, or any part thereof, as
Adventurers under the said Trustees, their heirs or assigns or the survivor of
them, in Dreyning the said Fens at all times, and from time to time, from and
immediately after execution of the said estate and estates, to summon, call and
hold meetings of themselves, their Agents and Workmen, at such place and
places, by warrant under three or more of their hands and seals, or under the
hand and seal of their common Clerk for the time being, for the making,
altering or confirming, and with power and authority hereby granted unto them,
their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, for making, and to make
Bylaws for the better Government and more orderly management of the said work
of Dreyning the said Fens within themselves respectively.

And also be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at all and
every meeting and meetings as aforesaid to be held, It shall and may be lawful,
and they are hereby thereunto empowered, for any three or more of the said
Undertakers, their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, By whom rates
and taxes may be made for the sa^d work.
to assess, rate, tax and charge all and every the respective Owner or Owners,
their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, of all
and every the said ten thousand and thirty six Acres aforesaid, by an equal and
proportionable Acre-tar, with any sum or sums of money as they shall adjudg
necessary for the carrying on and effecting the said work, and to limit and
appoint such certain days and places for the respective payments thereof to
their Treasurer or Treasurers for the time being, as they the said Undertakers,
their heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any three or more of them
under their hands and seals shall appoint, so as every of the said Undertakers,
who shall at any time or times hereafter, assess, rate, tax and charge the said
sums of money, be really then owner of two hundred and fifty Acres of Land or
more, within the said Fen.

How the ^^me may be levied.
And be it further Enacted, upon default made by any person or persons so
assessed, rated, taxed and charged as aforesaid, in his or their respective
payments to be limited and appointed as aforesaid, by the space of three
months after the time limited for payment thereof, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for any three or more of the said Adventurers, their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns, to bargain, sell, convey and assure all,
or so much of the said Defaulter or Defaulters Lands respectively within the
said Fen, for raising the sum or sums of money so assessed, rated or charged as
aforesaid, to any other person or persons, their heirs and assigns, for such
estate or estates as the said defaulter or defaulters had in him or them
respectively at the time of the said default or defaults made as aforesaid, as
to them or any three or more of them the said Adventurers, their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns shall seem meet, subject nevertheless to
the conditions and forfeitures in this Act contained and expressed: And all and
every Conveyance thereof is, and shall be adjudged good and available in Law
and equity, against all and every such Defaulter and Defaulters respectively,
and against his or their respective heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, so as the same be enrolled in the High Court of Chancery within six
months after the making thereof.

How owners and commoners may improve and enclose their shares.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, their heirs and
successors, Owner or Owners of the Soil of the said Fens or Wastes, or who may
or ought to have Common in any of the same, to improve, set out, enclose,
divide and sever such quantity or quantities of the said Fens or Wastes (other
then such of the same as by the tenure of this Act are appointed or allotted to
the said Undertakers as aforesaid) as shall be proportionable to his or their
respective Interest, or to his or their Lands and Tenements whereunto, or in
respect whereof, the said Common or Waste may or ought to be had or enjoyed,
and such quantity or quantities to have and to hold in severalty, by and
according to such Tenures, Estate, Right, Title and Interest as such person or
persons have or shall have in such Manors, Lands and Tenements, subject
nevertheless to all the Powers and Liberties given by this Act to the said
Trustees, their heirs and assigns and the survivor of them, for Dreyning the
said Fens, as if the said Lands had remained common and uninclosed, leaving and
allowing convenient passages and ways in and to the said Undertakers ground in
the said Fen.

Who may determine of boundaries, improvements and enclosures.
And it is further Enacted, That the Boundaries of the said Wastes so to be
enclosed, Approvements and Enclosures shall from time to time, and at all
times, upon request of any person or persons concerned, be determined and
adjudged, and finally ended by the persons hereafter named, (that is to say)
Thomas Lord Beaumont of Cole-Orton, Sir George Villiers of Bruxby Baronet, Sir
William Hartopp of Rotherby Knight, William Hartopp of Little-Dalby Esquire,
Sir Henry Hudson of Melton-Mowbray Baronet, Sir Edward Smith of Edmundthorpe
Knight, Richard Lister of Thorpe Esquire, John Hacket of Ketleby Esquire,
William Gilbert of Melton-Mowbray Esquire, all of the County of Leicester;
Baptist Lord Viscount Campden, Sir Edward Heath of Cottesmore Knight of the
Bath, William Palms of Ashwel Esquire, Abel Barker of Hambleton Esquire,
Samuel Brown of Stockins Esquire, Robert Mackeworth of Empingham Esquire,
Philip Sherard Esquire, Alexander Noel of Whitwel Esquire, Christopher Brown
of Towlthorpe Esquire, Edward Falkener of Uppingham Esquire, Sir Thomas
Mackeworth of Normanton Baronet, Henry Noel Esquire of Exton, Andrew Noel
Esquire of Whitwel, Charles Halford Esquire of Weston, Thomas Pilkington
Esquire of Belton, Beaumont Bodenham Esquire of Ryhall and Henry Mackeworth Esquire
of Normanton, all of the County of Rutland; Mildmay Earl of Westmerland, Obrian
Lord Cockaine, William Stafford Esquire of Blatherwicke, Lewis Palmer Esquire of
Corlton, Edward Palmer Esquire of Stoake, Walter Kirkham of Finshead Esquire Christ.
Thursby Esquire Humphrey Orme Esquire Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet, Tho. Dove of Upton
Esquire William Mountague Esquire Francis Quarles Esquire, George Quarles junior of
Ufford Esquire Francis Kirkham Esquire of Finshead, John Lynn Esquire of Southwick, all of
the County of Northampton; Robert Lord Willoughby of Erisby eldest Son to
Mountague Earl of Lindsey Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Sir Thomas Meres
Knight, Sir John Newton Baronet, Sir Anthony Irby Knight, Peregrine Bartue Esquire
Anthony Thorold of Marston Esquire William Blythe of Straston Esquire Philip Dallow of
Bitchfield Esquire Thomas Harrington of Boothby Esquire Charles Bawdes of Somerby Esquire
Sir Edward Barkham Baronet, all of the County of Lincoln, or by any seven or
more of them. Which said persons or any seven or more of them, are hereby
constituted and appointed Commissioners for that purpose, upon their view or
examination of witnesses upon Oath, (which Oath they are hereby authorized to
administer) or both, or other good and sufficient proof by matter of Record,
Writings or Evidences, and hearing the parties concerned, if they be present
and desire it; which determination and Judgment being certified in writing
under the hands and seals of the said Judicature, or any seven or more of them,
into the Petty-bag, there to be filed and kept on Record, shall be final and
conclusive unto all parties. Provided always, That in case any person or
persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, Appeals in cases of adjudication.
shall find him or themselves agrieved with such Judgment and determination of
the said Judicature, and shall thereof within six Months next after the same,
appeal to any thirteen or more, other persons of the said Judicature, Then such
determination as the said thirteen more shall make, being certified by writing
under the hands and seals of the said thirteen or more, into the Petty-bag
aforesaid, there to be filed and kept on Record as aforesaid, shall be final
and conclusive to all parties, the said former Judgment or Determination
notwithstanding. And the Enclosures and Proportions so adjudged or decreed as
aforesaid to such person or persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, shall be
held by him or them, and his and their heirs and successors respectively, by
and according to his and their tenures, estate, title and interest, which he or
they had in the Manors, Lands or Tenements, for or in respect of which, he or
they claimed, or enclosed the said quantity or quantities of the said Wastes as
abovesaid. Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said Commissioners and every of them, before he or they take upon him or
them the execution of any the Powers or Authorities hereby given them, (other
then the administering the Oath following to one another, which they shall have
Authority by this present Act to administer to one another) shall take the Oath
following, (viz.)

The oath to be taken by Commissioners.
I A. B. am not interessed in possession, reversion or remainder, of, in or to
the said Fens or any part thereof; And shall and will without favor or
affection, hatred or malice, truly and impartially, according to the best of my
skill and knowledge, execute and perform all and every the Powers and
Authorities in me established by this Act of Parliament.

Which Oath any one of the said Commissioners are hereby authorized to
administer; The places of the Commissioners ^^tting
And that the places where the said Commissioners shall sit to hear, order and
determine the matters referred to them by this Act, shall be at the Towns of
Stamford, Market-Deeping or Spalding in the said County of Lincoln. And the
said Commissioners or any seven or more of them, are hereby directed by Warrant
under their hands and seals to declare the places and times of their meeting;
The same Warrant to be published in open Market, in the said Towns of Stamford,
Market-Deeping and Spalding, between the hours of twelve and two upon some
Market Day, one and twenty days at least before the said time or times of
meeting, to the end all persons concerned may have sufficient time and notice
to attend; And shall have power and Authority by Warrant under the hands and
seals of any three or more of them, Their power and manner of proceeding.
to summon parties and witnesses to appear before them; And in case any
controversy or difference shall happen to arise between or amongst the said
Commissioners, before any Judgment or Determination given by them in the
premises, touching or concerning the exposition of the words of this Act, or
the powers or authorities thereby to them given; Then the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and the Lord Chief
Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer for the time being, are hereby
constituted and established a Judicature, and they or any two of them, are
hereby authorized to hear, adjudg and determine such controversies and
differences: And their Judgment or determination thereof, certified under their
hands seals, shall be observed, and shall be likewise certified, together with
the Judgments and determinations of the said Commissioners, into the Petty-bag,
there to be kept on Record as aforesaid.

CAP. XII.
The River Avon to be made Navigable from Christ-Church to the City of
New-Sarum.

WHereas the making Navigable and passable with Barges, Boats, Lighters and
other Vessels, the River Avon in the Counties of Wilts and Southampton, from
the Town of Christ-Church in the said County of Southampton to the City of
New-Sarum in the said County of Wilts; And (if need require) the making of a
new Haven, may with Gods blessing be of great advantage and benefit not only to
the said Counties, but also to the Public, by import and export of
Commodities, and increase of Commerce and Trade, and of able Seamen and
Watermen, and most profitable and necessary for the said City of New-Sarum, for
the conveyance thereby of Fuel and other necessaries to the said City, whereof
there is now great scarcity, and far greater is like to grow, if some help
therefore be not provided, besides the extraordinary preservation of the
Highways in and near the said City and County.

Commissioners how to be appointed for making the river Avon navigable.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Majesty by and with the advice and consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Lord Chancellor or Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England for the time being, at any time after the
end of this present Session of Parliament, shall and may nominate, appoint and
authorize by Commission under the Great Seal of England, such person or
persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, as to him shall seem fit, and are
willing to undertake the making Navigable the said River of Avon from the said
Town of Christ-Church to the said City of New-Sarum; And to make a new Haven
(if need require) for Ships and Vessels near the said Town of Christ-Church.
Which said Undertakers so nominated and appointed as aforesaid, are hereby
authorized and shall have full power and authority by this present Act to make
Navigable or passable by Barges, Boats, Lighters or other Vessels, the said
River of Avon, from the said Town of Christ-Church to the City of New-Sarum
aforesaid; And for that purpose to cleanse, scour and open the same, and to cut
or dig the Banks of the same, and to take away or remove all Wears or other
Impediments that may hinder Navigation, either in sailing or haling of Boats
with Horses, Men or otherwise to amend or alter such Bridges and Highways as
may hinder the said Passages and Navigation, and to open, prepare and make all
Wears, Sasses, Locks and Turn-pikes fit for the said Passage; And likewise to
cleanse, scour, open or cut and dig the Banks of any other Stream, Brook, Ditch
or Watercourse that shall to them seem convenient for the better making the
said River Navigable and passable for Boats, Barges, Lighters and other
Vessels; And likewise to make and erect any Wharfs, Sasses, Locks, Turnpikes or
pens for Water in or near the said River or Passage, that shall be fit or
necessary for the same, and to bring, lay and work all Materials requisite for
the making, erecting and repairing of the said Locks or Turnpikes upon the said
River or Passage, and to cut such and so many new Channels and Trenches as to
them shall seem convenient for altering the course of the said River of Avon in
bringing the same to the City of New-Sarum as aforesaid, as also for the
bringing in any other River or Watercourse into the said River, and to do all
other things necessary and convenient for the said River and Passages, new
Channels, Wharfs, Sasses, Locks, Wears, Turnpikes, Penns for Water, and the
said Bridges, Ways and Passages, and for the altering, repairing, keeping,
using and amending of the same or any of them, or any part of them from time to
time hereafter as often as need shall require, and also (if need require) to make
a commodious Haven and Port near the said Town of Christ-Church for the Entry,
Road, safety and preservation of Ships that may resort thither, as well in
peril of Storms as otherwise, to lade or unlade their Goods, and to alter,
repair and amend the same or any part of it, from time to time as often as need
shall require. And to the end that the making the said River Navigable and
passable for Barges, Boats, Lighters and other Vessels, and the erecting and
making the said Haven, Channels, Sasses, Locks, Wears, Turnpikes, Penns for
Water, Wharfs, Bridges, Ways and Passages as aforesaid or other things, may not
be any way prejudicial to the Inheritance, Possession or profit of any person
or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate whatsoever, that have any Lands,
Tenements, Wears or Hereditaments adjoining unto the said River or Streams,
Brooks, new Channels and Passages as aforesaid, or any of them, or through which
the same shall be made or cut as aforesaid. Satisfaction to parties endamaged
in any of their lands.


Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Undertakers,
before they do meddle with the Lands, Inheritance, Possession or Profit of any
person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, shall first agree with such
persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, for the loss or damage that any of them
shall or may any way receive by the making or altering the said Haven,
Channels, Wharfs, Sasses, Locks, Wears and Passages, or procure some Order
therein to be made by the Commissioners, to be Assigned for that purpose as
hereafter in this present Act is expressed. And for the better effecting of the
premises, and the due rating of the value of the things to be compounded for,
by the true intent of this Statute, if the Parties shall not agree;

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Commissioners for compounding with
persons so damnifide.
That at the request and charges of the said Undertakers, One or more
Commission or Commissions under the Great Seal of England shall be granted to
Edward Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, Thomas Earl of
Southampton, Lord High Treasurer of England, Philip Earl of Pembroke and
Mountgomery, William Lord Herbert of Cardiffe, Henry Lord Viscount Cornbury,
George Lord Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Winchester for the time
being, John Lord Bishop of Sarum, and the Bishop of Sarum for the time being,
William Lord Sands, Robert Lord Brook, Anthony Lord Ashly, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, One of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, Sir Robert Hyde Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
Sir Wadham Windham Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Sir George
Grubham How Baronet, Sir Joseph Ash Baronet, Sir John Nicholas Knight of the
Bath, sir John Low, Knight; sir Robert Mason, Knight; sir Thomas Mompesson,
Knight; sir John Clobery, Knight; Stephen Fox, Esquire, Clerk of the
Green-Cloth, and one of the Citizens for the City of New-Sarum; John Joyce
Mayor of the City of New-Sarum, and the Mayor of the City for the time being;
Richard Coleman, Esquire, Recorder of the City of New-Sarum, and the Recorder
of the same City for the time being; Francis Roll Esquire, High Sheriff of the
County of Southampton; Lawrence Hyde, Esquire; Humphrey VVeld, Esquire; Edward
Hyde of Hatch, Esquire, Richard How, Esquire; John Holt the elder, of the Close
of the City of New-Sarum, Esquire; George Vennerd of the City of New-Sarum,
Esquire; Edward Manning, Esquire; Richard Compton, Esquire; Thomas Knowles,
Esquire; Philip Lee, Esquire Walter Bockland, Esquire William Swanton, Esquire Roger
Gallop, Esquire Edward Hooper of Huncourt, Esquire Will. Tulse, Esquire John Hobby, Esquire
Henry Tulse, Esquire; Henry Whitehead, Esquire The Mayor of Wilton for the time
being, and the Mayor of Christ-Church for the time being, Samuel Percival,
Esquire; William Lisle, Esquire, and Philip Percival, Gentleman. The power of
the said Commissioners.
Which said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, (not being Parties
concerned) shall have full power and Authority, and are hereby empowered and
Authorized by examination of witnesses upon Oath (which Oath they, or any
seven, or more of them, have hereby power to administer) or by any other lawful
ways or means to examine, here and determine all and all manner of
Controversies, Debates and Questions which shall happen and arise between any
persons whatsoever, touching or concerning any matter or thing relating to the
aforesaid Premises, or any part thereof; And to appoint, determine and decree
what and how much satisfaction every such person or persons, Body politic or
Corporate, shall have for or in respect of the loss to be by him, her or them
sustained, notice being first given of their Meeting by Papers publicly
affixed to the Church-doors, or set up in the Marketplaces of the City of
New-Sarum and the Towns of Christ-Church and Ringwood, Ten days at the least
before their Meeting, declaring the time and place of their Meeting: And also
notice in writing being first left at the Dwelling House of every Party
concerned, or at their usual place of abode, or with some Tenant or Occupier of
some House, Land, or Tenement of such party within fifteen Miles of the said
River: Which said Determination, Sentence, and Decree set down, declared and
pronounced by the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, and the
Price and Recompense by them limited, shall bind all Parties therein concerned
in Possession, Reversion or Remainder or otherwise, and as well Infants, Feme
Coverts, as others, and their Heirs in Fee-Simple or in Tail, and their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all claiming by, from or under him,
her or them, or any of them; which Order, Sentence and Decree shall be set down
in writing under the Hands and Seals of the said Commissioners, or any seven or
more of them, within six weeks after the first Resort to them for that cause
according to this Act, the same to be kept among the Records of the Sessions of
the Peace for the City of New-Sarum, by the Clerk of the Peace for the time
being of the said City; Transcripts whereof shall be delivered to the several
Clerks of the Peace of the respective Counties of Wilts and Southampton, to be
by them kept upon Record amongst the Records of the Sessions of the said
respective Counties; All which shall be taken, adjudged, and deemed good and
sufficient Evidence, and proof in any Court of Record whatsoever. And that upon
payment of such sum or sums so ordered or agreed upon (to the said persons
concerned, or tender thereof made) at his or their Dwelling House, or the house
of his or their Tenant of some Tenement, house or Land of theirs within fifteen
miles of the said River; and if they have no such Dwelling House, Land or
Tenement, or if upon such tender at their said Dwelling House, or the House,
Land or Tenement of such Tenant as aforesaid, they refuse, or are not ready to
receive the same; That upon payment of the said sum to the Mayor and Commonalty
of the City of New-Sarum in the Council Chamger of the said City, for the use
of such persons, It shall then, and not before be lawful to and for the said
Undertakers, and their Workmen and Servants, to dig and make, or cause to be
dug and made the said Haven, Channels, Wharfs, Sasses, Locks and Passages,
or do any such other Act for which any such Agreement or Order shall be made as
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That when any of the said Commissioners shall
happen to dye, How Commissioners dying or renouncing, may be supplyd.
or become unfit for, or renounce the Service; That then and so often it shall
be lawful to and for the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England for the time being, from time to time to supply, appoint and
authorize One, or so many Commissioners of the Counties of Wilts, Southampton
or Dorset, of the Nobility, or Knights and principal Gentlemen of the said
Countries, dwelling or having Estates within fifteen miles of the said River,
as shall make and fill up the before mentioned number of Commissioners: which
said Commissioners so supplied, appointed, and authorized as aforesaid, not
exceeding the number before mentioned, nor being under the number of One and
thirty, or any seven or more of them, shall from thenceforth have like Power
and Authority in all things, as those Commissioners which are expressly named in
this Act; And that the Commissioners, and such as from time to time for the
future shall be supplied as aforesaid, or any seven or more of them have like
Power and Authority to Survey the said Haven and River, and all Wharfs, Sasses,
Locks, Wears, Turnpikes, Penns for water, and all Ditches, Sewers, and Streams
running into the said River; and the Mills, Mill-damms, Floodgates, Walls,
Banks and Bridges now made, or hereafter to be made and built upon the same,
and all Impediments, Decays, Loss and Annoyances in the same, and make like
Process to inquire thereof, and to set such Fines, Penalties, and to make such
Orders and Decrees for altering, amending or removing the same, as any
Commissioners of Sewers by any Law, Statute, or Commission of Sewers are
enabled to do in other Rivers and Places, Any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Undertakers authorized as aforesaid for the making the said Haven and Passages,
from time to time shall have full power and authority by and with the consent
of the said Commissioners, or any seven or more of them, to make Orders and
Constitutions for the good and orderly usage of the said Haven and Passages;
and for all Wharfs, The power to make orders and constitutions.
Sasses, Locks, Wears and Turn-pikes, and for all Ships and Vessels, Barges,
Lighters, Boats, Boat-men, Passengers, Carriages and Rates for Carriages, by or
through the said Haven or Passages, and all things concerning the same; and to
set, lay and execute such reasonable Pains and Punishments upon the Breakers
thereof, To impose penalties upon the breakers.
as to them in discretion shall seem meet and reasonable: which said Orders and
Constitutions being put in Writing under the Hands and Seals of the said
Undertakers, and being allowed by the said Commissioners, or any Seven or more
of them, under their several Hands and Seals, and by the Justices of Assize of
the said several Counties of Wilts and Southampton, which shall be at the time
of the Signing, Sealing, and Publishing of the said Orders as aforesaid, shall
be binding to all persons whatsoever, any Law or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding. The said Orders and Constitutions to be kept amongst the
Records of the Sessions of the Peace for the City of New-Sarum by the Clerk of
the Peace for the time being of the said City, Transcripts whereof shall be
delivered to the several Clerks of the Peace of the respective Counties of
Wilts and Southampton, to be by them kept upon Record amongst the Records of
the Sessions of the said respective Counties. All which shall be taken,
adjudged and deemed good and sufficient Evidence and proof in any Court of
Record whatsoever. Nevertheless the Justices of Assize for the Counties of
Wilts and Southampton, Persons grieved may appeal to the Justices of Assise.
upon complaint to them made by any persons grieved with the said Taxations,
Assessments, Charges, Orders, Constitutions, Pains and Penalties, or any of
them, shall and may abridge, moderate, alter or reform the same as they shall
find just cause; such Orders to be under the Hands and Seals of the said
Justices, and to be kept among the Records of the Sessions as aforesaid. And
the respective Commissioners and Judges of Assize as aforesaid, are from time
to time to take special care in the manner of the laying and assessing of the
said Rates, and ordering and disposing of the said Haven, Passages and Wharf,
that all opportunity for the Undertakers, or any other to engross the
Commodities of the said Country, or impose upon the Markets, may be prevented.

The Undertakers to have the Taxes upon Carts, Carriages, etc.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Undertakers
authorized as aforesaid for the making the said Haven and Passages
respectively, and their several and respective Heirs and Assigns for ever,
having first given satisfaction as aforesaid, shall have, hold, peaceably and
quietly receive, demand, take and enjoy all and every the said Rates, Profits
and Advantages whatsoever which shall or may from time to time, and at all
times hereafter be made, arise, grow or become due or payable for the Carriages
of Wood, Coals, Corn, Salt, or any other Merchandises, Commodities, or
Carriages whatsoever, by any Ship or Vessel, Barge, Boat, Lighter, or
otherwise, up or down the said Haven, River, new Channels, or the said Sasses,
Locks, Wears, Turn-pikes, Penns for water, Cranes, Wharfs, or any of them; and
also shall have and receive as aforesaid all Penalties imposed by the said
Orders as aforesaid, and in case of Refusal or Denial of Payment, Penalties,
and how to recover the same.
shall and may sue for the same by Action of Debt in any Court of Record; in
which Action, no Wager of Law, Essoign or Protection shall be allowed; or may
distrain or make stoppage of the said Goods or Vessels till they shall be
satisfied for the same; And that all Fines and Amerciaments which shall be
imposed as aforesaid, for any Annoyances and Offenses which shall be at any
time hereafter committed to the hurt or prejudice of the said River, or any
thing thereunto appertaining, shall be to the only use, benefit and behoof of
the said respective Undertakers, their several and respective Heirs, Successors
and Assigns for ever. And for that the Barges, Boats, Lighters or other Vessels
must of necessity in some places, and at some times, be haled up by strength of
Men, Horses, Winches, Engines, or other means in that behalf convenient;

Drawing and haling of Barges, etc. upon the Banks.
Be it therefore Enacted by Authority of this present Act, That it shall and may
be lawful to and for Watermen, Boatmen, Bargemen, and other helpers of them, in
convenient places, to have and use Winches, Ropes, and other Engines, and with
the same, by strength of Men, Horses or other Beasts, or any of them, going
upon the Land or Banks near the said River or passages in convenient manner,
without the hindrance, trouble or impeachment of any person or persons, to Draw
or Hale up the Barges, Boats, Lighters or other Vessels.

Provided always, That neither the said Undertakers, nor Commissioners do make,
or cause to be made any landing Place, Wharf or Key within the City of
New-Sarum, New-Sarum.
or the bounds or liberties thereof, or within one mile of the same, from
Harnam-Bridge down the stream toward Christ-Church, without the consent of the
Lord Bishop of Sarum, the Mayor and Recorder of the said City for the time
being, and the three antientest Aldermen of the said City, or three of them,
first had and obtained.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Haven,
River, Channels, The River, Havens, etc. to be under the Survey of the
Undertakers and Commissioners.
Trenches, and all Wears, Wharfs, Sas^es, Locks, Turnpikes, Penns for water,
and all other things whatsoever made and erected in order to making the said
Haven, and making Navigable the said River and Channel as aforesaid, shall from
henceforth be in the sole Rule, Order and Survey of the said Undertakers and
Commissioners as aforesaid, and not under the Survey or Order of any
Commissioners of Sewers, nor subject to a Commission of Sewers, or any Laws or
Statutes made for Sewers; Any Law or Statute to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Persons sued for acting upon this Act, may plead the general Issue.
Plaint or Suit be brought in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or
elsewhere against any person or persons, for or concerning any matter or thing,
by him, them, or any of them, done, advised, or commanded to be done by virtue
of this Act, That it shall and may be lawful for every such person and persons,
and for all that act in their aid and assistance, or by their commandment to
plead the General Issue that he or they are not Guilty: And to give this Act,
or any clause, matter or thing herein contained in Evidence to the Jury that
shall try the same, for their justification, without special Pleading of the
same, and shall thereupon take advantage of this Act as fully to all intents
and purposes, as if the same had been by them fully and well pleaded.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Philip Earl
of Pembroke and Montgomery shall and may have power, authority, and liberty (if
he shall see cause, and find it to be necessary and convenient to the public
good) to enlarge and make Navigable the River of VViley from Harnam-Bridge
aforesaid, so far as Wilton in the County of Wilts, Wiley River.
and in order thereunto to put in execution the several Powers of this Act in
relation to the said River of VViley, in the same and as ample manner as the
said River of Avon may be made Navigable by this Act, and under the same
Provisoes, Restrictions and Limitations.

Anno XVII. Caroli II: Regis.
CAP. I.
Twelve hundred and fifty thousand pounds granted to the Kings Majesty, for his
present further Supply.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, having observed the Ways and Means by which Your Majesty has been
enforced to Engage Your self in a War against the States of the United
Provinces, for the necessary Defense of Your own Crown and Dignity, and the
Safety and welfare of Your People; Do with all humble Thankfulness acknowledge
Your Majesty's Care and Conduct in this Great Affair; which, as it has been
already attended with very considerable Success, so we shall daily pray, that
all Your Majesty's Enterprises may still be crowned with Honor and Victory:
And although the continuing Insolence of Your Majesty's Enemies, and the
doubtful Amity of some of Your Majesty's Neighbors, have made it necessary to
provide for further and greater Expenses, in a time when the general Contagion
has much interrupted our Trade and Commerce; Yet, that Your Majesty may see
that we your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, do more consider our Zeal and Duty to
your Majesty, then any difficulties under which we labor, We have cheerfully
and unanimously given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto
Your most Excellent Majesty, the sum of Twelve hundred and fifty thousand
pounds, to be Raised and Levied in manner following; And we do most humbly
beseech Your Majesty, That it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the sum of Twelve hundred and
fifty thousand pounds shall be Raised, Levied, 1250000 l. granted to his
Majesty.
and paid unto your Majesty within the space of Two years, in manner following:
That is to say, Whereas in and by a certain Act of Parliament lately passed,
Entitled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty of Twenty
four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, 16 and
17 Car* 2. cap. 1.
to be Raised, Levied and paid in the space of Three years; It was amongst
other things Enacted, That the sum of Threescore and eight thousand eight
hundred and nineteen pounds and nine shillings by the month, for Thirty six
months, beginning from the Five and twentieth day of December, 1664. should be
Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied and paid, by Twelve Quarterly payments, in
the several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places within England and
Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the several Rates and
Proportions, and in such manner as in the said Act is expressed; One years
payment whereof, that is to say, Four Quarterly Payments will be fully expired
upon the Five and twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord, 1665. And
Two years payment more will be then to come and unexpired.

It is now further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 52083 l. 6 s. 8 ^ per
mensem*
That the sum of Fifty two thousand fourscore and three pounds six shillings
and eight pence by the month, for Twenty four months, beginning from the Five
and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty five, shall be
Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied and paid by Eight Quarterly payments, in the
several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places within England and
Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, over and above the sum of
Threescore and eight thousand eight hundred and nineteen pounds and nine
shillings by the month, which is to remain and continue payable during the
said Twenty four months, by virtue of the said former Act, and as an Addition
to, and increase of the said Monthly Assessement, according to these further
Rates, Rules, and Proportions, in such manner as herein after is expressed;
That is to say, for every of the said Twenty four months:

FOr the County of Bedford, the sum of Six hundred seventy eight pounds
fourteen shillings nine pence farthing.

The County of Berks, Eight hundred fifty six pounds eighteen shillings two
pence three farthings.

The County of Bucks, Nine hundred ninety five pounds seven shillings ten pence.

The County of Cambridge, the sum of Seven hundred seventy one pounds eighteen
shillings one penny farthing.

The Isle of Ely, Two hundred sixty four pounds fifteen shillings ten pence.

The County of Chester, with the City and County of the City of Chester, the
sum of Six hundred and six pounds seven shillings seven pence.

The County of Cornwall, the sum of One thousand one hundred sixty six pounds
two shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Cumberland, the sum of One hundred twenty seven pounds seven
shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Derby, the sum of Six hundred fifty two pounds twelve shillings
eleven pence three farthings.

The County of Devon, the sum of Two thousand four hundred forty four pounds
six shillings nine pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of Eighty eight pounds one
shilling two pence farthing.

The County of Dorset, the sum of One thousand and seventeen pounds nine
shillings nine pence halfpenny.

The Town and County of Pool, the sum of Eight pounds six shillings three pence
farthing.

The County of Durham, the sum of Two hundred forty five pounds one shilling
five pence farthing.

The County of York, with the City and County of the City of York, and Town and
County of Kingston upon Hull, the sum of Two thousand six hundred twenty five
pounds eight shillings seven pence three farthings.

The County of Essex, the sum of Two thousand three thundered forty four pounds
sixteen shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Gloucester, the sum of One thousand three hundred sixty eight
pounds twelve shillings six pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of Twenty nine pounds
sixteen shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Hereford, the sum of Eight hundred fifty six pounds eight
shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Hertford, the sum of One thousand and eighteen pounds nine
shillings five pence farthing.

The County of Huntington, the sum of Four hundred seventy nine pounds eleven
shillings four pence.

The County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the
sum of Two thousand five hundred and seventeen pounds fourteen shillings six
pence farthing.

The County of Lancaster, the sum of Seven hundred sixty one pounds sixteen
shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Leicester, the sum of Eight hundred and twenty pounds seventeen
shillings six pence three farthings.

The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
sum of One thousand nine hundred forty eight pounds fifteen shillings two pence
farthing.

The City of London, with the Liberty of St. Martins Le Grand, the sum of Three
thousand eight hundred fifty three pounds two shillings ten pence three
farthings.

The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum of
One thousand six hundred ninety five pounds ten shillings ten pence.

The County of Monmouth, the sum of Two hundred ninety five pounds two
shillings nine pence three farthings.

The County of Northampton, the sum of One thousand and seventy pounds one penny
farthing.

The County of Nottingham, with the Town and County of the Town of Nottingham,
the sum of Six hundred and sixty pounds nineteen shillings two pence farthing.

The County of Norfolk, the sum of Two thousand five hundred and fifty pounds
fifteen shillings four pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of One hundred thirty six
pounds four shillings four pence halfpenny.

The County of Northumberland, with the Town of Newcastle and Berwick upon
Tweed, the sum of Two hundred eighty two pounds two shillings three pence
farthing.

The County of Oxon, the sum of Eight hundred fifty nine pounds six shillings
eight pence farthing.

The County of Rutland, the sum of One hundred eighty one pounds nineteen
shillings two pence farthing.

The County of Salop, the sum of Nine hundred and ten pounds eighteen shillings
six pence farthing.

The County of Stafford, the sum of Six hundred forty five pounds four
shillings three halfpence.

The City and County of the City of Lichfield, the sum of Nine pounds sixteen
shillings nine pence farthing.

The County of Somerset, the sum of Two thousand ninety seven pounds eight
shillings two pence three farthings.

The City and County of the City of Bristol, the sum of One hundred and fifty
pounds eighteen shillings two pence farthing.

The County of Southampton, with the Town and County of Southampton and Isle of
Wight, the sum of One thousand six hundred fifty six pounds seventeen shillings
and eleven pence.

The County of Suffolk, the sum of Two thousand four hundred ninety six pounds
four shillings seven pence farthing.

The County of Surrey, with the Borough of Southwark, the sum of One thousand
two hundred and eight pounds eleven shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Sussex, the sum of One thousand three hundred seventy eight
pounds seven shillings four pence three farthings.

The County of Warwick, with the City and County of the City of Coventry, the
sum of Nine hundred and two pounds seven shillings and two pence.

The County of Worcester, the sum of Seven hundred ninety seven pounds eleven
shillings and ten pence.

The City and County of the City of Worcester, the sum of Forty one pounds
nineteen shillings six pence three farthings.

The County of Wilts, the sum of One thousand four hundred eighty eight pounds
nine shillings six pence halfpenny.

The County of Westmerland, the sum of Eighty seven pounds fifteen shillings
eight pence halfpenny.

The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of Ninety five pounds two shillings two pence.

The County of Brecknock, the sum of Two hundred thirteen pounds sixteen
shillings halfpenny.

The County of Cardigan, the sum of Eighty pounds one shilling two pence
farthing.

The County of Carmarthen, the sum of Two hundred and six pounds three
shillings five pence halfpenny.

The County of Carnarvan, the sum of One hundred and ten pounds eighteen
shillings ten pence three farthings.

The County of Denbigh, the sum of One hundred sixty nine pounds three
shillings three halfpence.

The County of Flint, the sum of Eighty nine pounds eighteen shillings eleven
pence three farthings.

The County of Glamorgan, the sum of Two hundred eighty six pounds sixteen
shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Merioneth, the sum of Seventy six pound five shillings eight
pence three farthings.

The County of Mountgomery, Two hundred and nine pounds six shillings six pence.

The County of Pembroke, the sum of Two hundred forty seven pounds one shilling
seven pence three farthings.

The County of Radnor, the sum of One hundred thirty one pounds eighteen
shillings six pence three farthings.

The Town of Haverford-West, the sum of Eleven pound nine shillings seven pence.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Commissioners named in
the former Act shall have the same power for executing this Act.
That all and every the persons who are nominated in and by the said former Act
to be Commissioners of and for the several and respective Counties, Cities,
Buroughs, Towns and Places therein mentioned, shall likewise be, and so are
hereby appointed to be Commissioners for execution of this present Act within
the said several and respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places
for which they were nominated in the aforesaid Act, and shall have and execute
the like Powers and Authorities, Rules and Directions, touching the better
Assessing, Collecting, Levying, Receiving and Paying the said Fifty two
thousand fourscore and three pounds six shillings and eight pence by the
Month, during the said Twenty four months, as in and by the aforesaid Act
were given to the said Commissioners, touching the better Assessing,
Collecting, Levying, Receiving and Paying the said Threescore and eight
thousand eight hundred and nineteen pounds and nine shillings by the Month,
payable as aforesaid: And all and every person or persons who shall be liable
unto, or any ways concerned or employed in the Assessing, Collecting, Levying,
Receiving or Paying any of the moneys by this Act imposed, shall have like
Benefits, Advantages and Discharges, and shall be subject to like Penalties and
Forfeitures, in case of any neglect, or refusal to pay their respective
Assessments, or to perform their respective Duties, as any other person or
persons liable unto, or concerned or employed in the Assessing, Collecting,
Levying, Receiving or Paying any of the moneys by the said former Act imposed,
or to have, or be subject unto, as fully and amply as if the same Clauses,
Matters and Things had been in this Act particularly repeated and Enacted; To
the end that the Monthly Assessments, which will remain due and payable by
virtue of the said former Act, and the monthly Additions thereunto made by
virtue of this present Act, may be duly answered and paid in as aforesaid.

The first meeting 8. Jan.
And be it further Enacted, That the several Commissioners shall meet together
at the most usual and common place of meeting, as in the said Act is directed,
on, or before the Tenth day of January next, to put this Act and the said
former Act in execution, according to the best of their Judgments and
Discretions; and shall then, if they see cause, subdivide themselves, as by the
said Act is further directed concerning the said former Assessment: And
further, That they meet at least three Weeks before each Quarterly Payment of
the said several Assessments for the purposes aforesaid; And that the said
Eight Quarterly Payments of Fifty two thousand fourscore and three pounds six
shillings eight pence by the Month, amounting in each Quarter to the sum of
One hundred fifty six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds, shall be Assessed,
Collected, Levied and paid to the Receivers of the several Counties appointed,
or that shall be appointed by His Majesty, and by them answered and paid into
His Majesty's Exchequer, on the days and times mentioned and expressed in the
said Act for payment of the said first Assessment.

Moneys lent to his Majesty or Wares, how to be secured. 18 Car. 2. cap. 1.
And to the intent that all money to be lent to Your Majesty, and moneys that
shall be due upon such Contracts for Wares and Goods which shall be delivered
for this service, may be well and sufficiently secured out of the moneys
arising and payable by this Act; Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That there be provided and kept in His Majesty's Exchequer (to wit)
in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, one Book or Register, in which
Book or Register, all moneys that shall be paid into the Exchequer by this Act,
shall be entered and registered apart and distinct from the moneys paid or
payable to Your Majesty on the before mentioned Act, and from all other moneys
or Branches of Your Majesty's Revenue whatsoever; And that also there be one
other Book or Registry provided or kept in the said Office, of all Orders and
Warrants to be made by the Lord Treasurer, and Undertreasurer, or by the
Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, for payment of all and every
Sum and Sums of money to all persons for Moneys lent, Wares or Goods bought, or
other payments directed by His Majesty relating to the service of His War; And
that no moneys leviable by this Act be issued out of the Exchequer during this
War, but by such Order or Warrant, mentioning that the Moneys payable by such
Order or Warrant, are for the service of Your Majesty in the said War
respectively.

That also there be the like Book or Register provided and kept by the said
Auditor of all moneys paid out, or issued by virtue of such Orders and Warrants.

That it shall be lawful for any person or persons, willing to lend any money,
or to furnish any Wares, Victuals, Necessaries or Goods on the Credit of this
Act, at the usual times when the Exchequer is open, to have access unto and
view, and peruse all, or any of the said Books for their Information of the
state of those moneys, and all Engagements upon them, for their better
Encouragement to lend any moneys, or furnish any Goods or Wares as aforesaid;
And that the respective Officers and their Deputies, and Clerks in whose
custody such Books be, or shall be, shall be assistant to such persons for
their better and speedier satisfaction in that behalf; That all and every
person and persons who shall lend any moneys to Your Majesty, and pay the same
into the Receipt of the Exchequer, shall immediately have a Tally of Loan
struck for the same, and an Order for his repayment, bearing the same Date with
his Tally, in which Order shall be also a Warrant contained for payment of
Interest for forbearance, after the Rate of six per Cent. per annum, for his
consideration, to be paid every six months until the repayment of his
Principal; And that all person and persons, who shall furnish Your Majesty,
Your Officers of the Navy or Ordnance with any Wares, Goods, Victuals, or other
Necessaries for the service aforesaid, shall upon Certificate of the
Commissioners and Officers of the Navy, or of the Master or Commissioners and
Officers of the Ordnance, or some of them, without delay forthwith have made
out to them, Warrants or Orders for the payment of the moneys due or payable
unto them; which Certificates the said Officers of Your Navy, Commissioners and
Officers of the Ordnance shall make without Fee, Charge or Delay; And that all
Orders for repayment of money lent, shall be registered in course, according to
the Date of the Tallies respectively; And that all Orders signed by the Lord
Treasurer and Undertreasurer of the Exchequer, for payment of money for Goods,
Wares, Victuals, and other necessaries furnished to Your Majesty, Your
Officers, Master, or Commissioners aforesaid, shall be registered in course,
according to the time of bringing to the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt,
the Certificates above mentioned; And that all Orders so signed for payments
directed by his Majesty, shall be entered in course according to their
respective Dates, and none of the sorts of Orders above mentioned either for
Loans of Moneys, Supplies of Wares, Goods, Victuals, or Necessaries, or by
special direction, shall have preference one before another, but shall all be
entered in their course according to the Dates of the Tallies, the times of
bringing the Certificates, and the Dates of the Orders for payments directed by
his Majesty, as they are in point of time respectively before each other; And
that all and every person and persons shall be paid in course according as
their Orders shall stand entered in the said Register-Book, be it Orders for
payments directed by his Majesty, or for Moneys lent, or for Wares,
Commodities, or other Necessaries furnished as aforesaid, so as that person,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, who shall have his Warrant or Order,
Warrants or Orders first entered in the said Book of Registry, shall be taken
and accounted as the first person to be paid upon the moneys to come in by
virtue of this Act; and he or they that shall have his or their Warrants or
Orders, Warrant or Order next entered, shall be taken and accounted the second
person to be paid, and so successively and in course: And that the moneys to
come in by this Act shall be in the same order liable to the satisfaction of
the said respective parties, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns
successively without preference of one before another, and not otherwise: And
that no Fee, Reward or Gratuity, directly or indirectly be demanded or taken of
any of Your Majesty's Subjects, for providing or making of such Books,
Registers, Entries, View, Search, Certificate, in, or for payment of money
Lent, or the Interest thereof, or for payment of any money upon any Order, upon
any Contract for Wares and Goods furnished to the Use of Your Majesty's Navy
and Ordnance as aforesaid, by any of Your Majesty's Officer or Officers, their
Deputies or Clerks, on pain of payment of treble Damages to the party grieved,
by the party offending, with costs of Suit; And if the Officer himself take or
demand any such Fee or Reward, then to lose his place also. And if any undue
preference of one before another shall be made, either in point of Registring,
contrary to the true meaning of this Act, by any such Officer or Officers, then
the party offending shall be liable by Action of Debt or on the Case, to pay
the value of the Debt, Damages and Costs to the party grieved; And shall be
forejudged from his Place or Office: And if such preference be unduly made by
any his Deputy or Clerk without Direction or Privity of his Master, then such
Deputy or Clerk only shall be liable to such Action, Debt, Damages and Costs,
And shall for ever after be incapable of the same: And in case the Auditor
shall not direct the Order, or the Clerk of the Pells Record, or the Teller
make payment according to each persons due place and order as before directed,
then he or they shall be judged to forfeit, and their respective Deputies and
Clerks herein offending be liable to such Action, Debt, Damages and Costs in
such manner as aforesaid.

Provided always, And it is hereby Declared, That if it happen that several
Tallies of Loan, or Certificates for Wares Delivered, or Orders for Payments
from his Majesty as aforesaid, bear Date, or be brought the same day to the
Auditor of the Exchequer to be Registered; Then it shall be interpreted no undue
preference which of these he enters, so he enter them all the same day.

Provided also, That it shall not be interpreted any undue preference to incur
any penalty in point of payment, if the Auditor direct, and the Clerk of the
Pells Record, and the Teller do pay subsequent Orders of persons that come to
demand their money, and bring their Orders before other persons that did not
come to demand their money, and bring their Order in their course; so as there
be so much money reserved as will satisfy their Orders, which shall not be
otherwise disposed, but kept for them, Interest upon Loan being to cease from
the time the money is so reserved and kept in Bank for them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person or
persons to whom any money shall be due by virtue of this Act, after Warrant or
Order entered for payment thereof, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by
Indorsement of his Order or Warrant, may assign and transfer his Interest and
Benefit of such Warrant to any other; which being notified, and an Entry and
Memorial thereof also made in the said Registry for Warrants, (which the
Officers shall on request without Fees or charge accordingly make) shall
Entitle such Assignee his Executors, Administrators and Assigns to the Benefit
thereof, and payment thereon; And such Assignee may in like manner assign
again, and so toties quoties; and afterward, it shall not be in the power of
such person or persons who have made such Assignments, to make void, release or
discharge the same, or the moneys thereby due, or any part thereof.

And in case any person or persons be willing to advance the Tax they
themselves are to pay, or the Tax of any Tything, Hundred, Parish, Division, or
County, for six months or more unto the Receiver-General of that Place, or
County; The said Receiver-General is hereby authorized to receive the same, and
to make deduction of so much for Interest, after the Rate of six per Centum per
annum, as the Advance amounts unto, and the Receivers acquittance shall be a
sufficient Discharge for the same; which money so advanced, shall be accounted
for, and paid into the Exchequer by it self Quarterly.

CAP. II.
Non-Conformists restrained from Inhabiting in Corporations.

WHereas diverse Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Lecturers, and other persons in Holy
Orders, have not declared their unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all
things contained and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England, or have not subscribed the
Declaration or acknowledgment contained in a certain Act of Parliament made in
the Fourteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and Entitled, An Act for the
Uniformity of Public Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites
and Ceremonies, and for the Establishing the Form of Making, ^4 Car. 2. (...). 4
Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of
England, according to the said Act, or any other subsequent Act. And whereas
they or some of them, and diverse other person and persons not Ordained
according to the Form of the Church of England, and as have since the Act of
Oblivion taken upon them to Preach in unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles or
Meetings, under color or pretense of Exercise of Religion, contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, have settled themselves in diverse
Corporations in England, sometimes Three or more of them in a place, thereby
taking an opportunity to distill the poisonous Principles of Schism and
Rebellion into the hearts of His Majesty's Subjects, to the great danger of the
Church and Kingdom:

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, Persons restrained from Inhabiting in
Corporations.
and by the Authority of the same, That the said Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Lecturers, and other persons in holy Orders, or pretended holy Orders, or
pretending to holy Orders, and all Stipendaries, and other persons who have
been possessed of any Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Promotion, and every of them,
who have not declared their unfeigned assent and consent as aforesaid, and
subscribed the Declaration aforesaid, and shall not take and subscribe the Oath
following; A. B. Do Swear, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever,
to take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of
taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him, in pursuance of such Commissions; And that I will not at
any time endeavor any Alteration of Government, either in Church or State.



And all such person and persons as shall take upon them to Preach in any
unlawful Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color or pretense of any
Exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, shall
not at any time from and after the Four and twentieth day of March, which shall
be in this present year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and
five, unless only in passing upon the Road, come or be within Five miles of
any City or Town Corporate, or Borough that sends Burgesses to the Parliament
within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, Principality of Wales, or of the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, or within Five miles of any Parish, Town or place,
wherein he or they have since the Act of Oblivion been Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Stipendary or Lecturer, or taken upon them to Preach in any unlawful Assembly,
Conventicle or Meeting, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, before he or they have taken
and subscribed the Oath aforesaid, before the Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter Sessions to be holden for the County, Riding, or Division next unto the
said Corporation, City, or Borough Parish, place or Town, in open Court,
(which said Oath the said Justices are hereby Empowered there to Administer)
upon forfeiture for every such offense the sum of Forty pounds of lawful
English money; The Penalty.
the one Third part thereof to His Majesty and his Successors; the other Third
part to the use of the poor of the Parish where the offense shall be committed;
and the other third part thereof to such person or persons as shall or will sue
for the same by Action of Debt, Plaint, Bill, or Information in any Court of
Record at Westminster, or before any Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer, or
Jail-deliver, or before any Justices of the Counties Palatine of Chester,
Lancaster, or Durham, or the Justices of the great Sessions in Wales, or before
any Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, wherein no Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall not be lawful for any person or persons restrained from coming to any
City, Town Corporate, Borough, Parish, Town or place, as aforesaid, or for any
other person or persons as shall not first take and subscribe the said Oath,
and as shall not frequent Divine Service established by the Laws of this
Kingdom, and carry him or her self reverently, decently and orderly there, to
Teach any public or private-School, or take any Boarders or Tablers that are
Taught or Instructed by him or her self, or any other, upon pain for every such
offense to forfeit the sum of Forty pounds, to be recovered and distributed as
aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it
shall be lawful for any Two Justices of the Peace of the respective County,
upon Oath to them of any offense against this Act, which Oath they are hereby
Empowered to Administer, to Commit the Offender for Six months without Bail or
Mainprise, unless upon or before such Commitment, he shall before the said
Justices of the Peace, Swear and Subscribe the aforesaid Oath and Declaration.

Provided always, That if any person intended to be Restrained by virtue of
this Act, shall without fraud or covin be Served with any Writ, Subpoena,
Warrant, or other Process, whereby his personal appearance is required, his
obedience to such Writ, Subpoena or Process, shall not be construed an offense
against this Act.

CAP. III.
For Uniting Churches in Cities and Towns Corporate.

FOrasmuch as the settled Provision for Ministers in most Cities and Towns
Corporate within this Realm, is not sufficient for the Maintenance of able
Ministers fit for such places, whereby Mean and Stipendary Preachers are
entertained to serve the Cures there; who wholly depending for their
Maintenance upon the good will and liking of their Auditors, have been, and are
hereby under temptation of too much complying, and suiting their Doctrine and
Teaching to the humor rather then good of their Auditors, which has been a
great occasion of Faction and Schism, and of the contempt of the Ministry: The
Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, being deeply sensible of the ill
consequence thereof, and piously desiring able Ministers in such places, and a
competent settled Maintenance for them by the Union of Churches; which is also
become necessary, by reason of the great Ruin of many Churches and Parishes in
the late ill times, and otherwise; Do therefore most humbly beseech Your most
Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, In what Cities and Towns and how Churches and Chapels may
be united.
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That in every City or Town Corporate and their Liberties within the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, which have a Mayor and Aldermen, and
particular Justices of the Peace by Charter or Commission, or Bailiff or
Bailiffs, or other Chief Officer or Officers, and other Assistants by like
Charter; and where two or more Churches or Chapels, or a Church and a Chapel,
and the Parishes thereunto belonging do lie within the said Corporation, or
Liberties thereof, convenient to be united: In such cases the Bishop of the
Diocese where such Parish and Parishes are, with the consent of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or other Chief
Officer or Officers, or the major part of them, and of the Patron or Patrons of
such Church or Churches, Chapel or Chapels, shall, or may according to due
form of Law unite the said Churches or Chapels, or Church and Chapel, or any
of them, and shall appoint at which Church or Chapel, Churches or Chapels the
said Parishioners and Inhabitants of the said Parishes or places to which the
said Churches or Chapels, or Church and Chapel do belong, shall usually meet
for the worship of God, and which of the said Churches or Chapels, or Church
or Chapel shall be united and annexed unto the other, which shall be the
Church Presentative, unto which all Presentations shall thereafter be only made
and, unto which the Parishioners shall resort as their proper Church. And after
such Order made, the said Churches or Chapels, or Church and Chapel shall
accordingly for ever stand united: And the Parishioners, Landholders, and
Inhabitants of the said Parishes and places belonging to such Churches or
Chapels, or Church and Chapel so united and annexed, shall, as they, or any
of them become void, and from thenceforward pay all such Tithes and other
Duties as belong, or did belong to the Incumbent of any of the said Churches or
Chapels, or Church and Chapel so united and annexed, unto the Incumbent of
the said Presentative Church or Chapel, unto which the said other Churches or
Chapels, or Church or Chapel shall be so united and annexed. Parishes shall
remain distinct notwithstanding such Union of Churches.


And it is hereby also Enacted, That notwithstanding any such Union to be made
by virtue hereof, each of the Parishes so united, shall continue distinct, as
to all Rates, Taxes, Parochial Rites, Charges and Duties, and all other
Privileges, Liberties and respects whatsoever, other then what is herein
before mentioned and specified; And Churchwardens shall be elected and
appointed for each Parish, as they were before such union made. How and when
such Uniting shall take effect.


And it is further Enacted and Provided, That where one or more of the said
Churches or Chapels, or Church and Chapel so united and annexed shall be full
at the time of making such Union, That then the said Union shall take effect
for every such Church or Chapel, And how several Patrons shall present.
upon the first Avoidance after such Union made: And that the several Patrons
of the said Churches and Chapels so United, shall and may present by turns to
that Church only which shall remain and be presentative from time to time, in
such order as the said Bishop with the consent of the said Mayor, Aldermen, and
Justices of Peace, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or other chief Officer or Officers
within such Parishes, or the major part of them, and of the Patron or Patrons
of such Church or Churches, Chapel or Chapels, shall determine and decree for
the preservation of their respective Rights therein, respect being therein had
to the difference of the values of the yearly Maintenance belonging to such
Churches or Chapels, or any of them; Saving unto the Kings Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, all the Tenths and First Fruits of all such Churches and
Chapels so to be United, according to the rates and valuations at which the
said Churches and Chapels are Rated and Valued in the Office of First Fruits
and Tenths, in His Majesty's Court of Exchequer: And also reserving all
Procurations and Pensions to all persons to whom they are now, and have been
formerly, or shall be hereafter due and payable; Any thing herein contained
notwithstanding.

How Unions must be registered.
Provided always, That no Union of Parishes or places to be made by virtue of
this Act, shall commence or be effectual in Law, until it be Registered in the
Register Book of the Bishop of the Diocese, which the Register is hereby
required to do.

Parishes having 10 l. maintenance may not be United.
Provided always, That no Union made by virtue hereof, shall be good and
effectual where the settled Maintenance belonging to the Parsons, Vicars and
Incumbents of the Church or Chapel, or Churches or Chapels so United, shall
exceed the sum of One hundred pounds per annum clear, and above all Charges and
Reprises; unless the respective Parishioners, or the major part of them, under
their hands desire otherwise.

Incumbents o^ such United P^^ shes must be graduates of the University.
Provided always, And be it Enacted, That every Minister settled as aforesaid,
the Incumbent of any Church or Chapel, or Churches or Chapels united
according to this Act, shall be the full and lawful Incumbent thereof to all
intents and purposes, so as such Minister be a Graduate in one of the
Universities of this Kingdom.

Owners of Impropriations may bestow and annex m^intenance to the Churches
where they lie.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Owner or
Proprietor, Owners or Proprietors of any Impropriation, Tithes, or Portion of
Tithes, in any Parish or Chappelry within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion
of Wales, is, are, and shall be by virtue of this Act, enabled and empowered to
give or bestow, unite and annex the same, or any part thereof, unto the
Parsonage or Vicarage of the said Parish Church or Chapel where the same do
lie, or arise, or settle the same in Trust for the benefit of the said
Parsonage or Vicarage, or of the Curate and Curates there successively, where
the Parsonage is Impropriate, and no Vicar endowed according to his or their
respective Estates, Without license of Mortmain.
without any License of Mortmain; Any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Parsons and Vicars not having settled means of 100 l. per annum, may purchase
and annex lands or rents. without license in Mortmain.
And be it further Enacted, That if the settled Maintenance of such Parsonage,
Vicarages, Churches and Chapels so united, or of any other Parsonage or
Vicarage with Cure in the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, shall not
amount to the full sum of One hundred pounds per annum, clear and above all
charges and reprises, That then it shall be lawful for the Parson, Vicar, and
Incumbent of the same, and his successors, to take, receive, and purchase to
him and his successors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Tithes, or other
Hereditaments, without any License of Mortmain; Any Law or Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding.

CAP. IV.
A Former Act for Regulating the Press Continued.

BE it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, That an Act made in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of
Our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, 14 Car. 2. cap. 23.
Entitled, An Act for preventing Abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable,
and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and for Regulating of Printing, and
Printing Presses, shall be continued with the Alterations and Additions made in
and by this Act, and shall remain in force until the end of the First Session
of the next Parliament.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the Six and twentieth day of
December, One thousand six hundred sixty five, Three printed Copies of every
Book in London how to be disposed.
Every Printer within the City of London, or in any other place, except the Two
Universities, shall reserve Three Printed Copies of the best and largest Paper,
of every Book new Printed, or reprinted by him with Additions; and shall before
any public Vending of the said Book, bring them to the Master of the Company
of Stationers, and deliver them to him; One whereof shall by the said Master of
the said Company of Stationers, within Ten days after he has so received the
same, be delivered to the Keeper of His Majesty's Library, and the other two,
within the said ten days, to be sent to the Vice Chancellor of the two
Universities respectively, for the use of the public Libraries of the said
Universities.

Books printed in the Universities
And it is further Enacted, That the Printers in the said Universities, and
every of them respectively from and after the said Six and twentieth day of
December, shall deliver one such Printed Copy as aforesaid, of every Book so
new Printed, or reprinted in the said Universities, or in either of them, to
the Keeper of His Majesty's Library as aforesaid; as also to the
Vice Chancellor of either of the said Universities for the time being, two
other such Printed Copies, for the use of the public Libraries of the said
Universities respectively. And if any of the printers aforesaid, or the said
Master of the Company of Stationers shall not observe the direction of this Act
therein, That then he and they so making default, in not delivering the said
printed Copies as aforesaid, shall severally forfeit, besides the value of the
said printed Copies, the sum of Five pounds for every Copy not so delivered; as
also the value of the said printed Copies not so delivered: The same to be
recovered by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and by the Chancellor,
Masters and Scholars of either of the said Universities respectively, by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record
at Westminster, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

CAP. V.
Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild, and Thomas Scot attainted of High Treason, if
they render not themselves by a Day.

IN all humble manner show unto Your most Excellent Majesty, Your Majesty's
most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, That whereas it is notoriously known that Thomas
Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild alias Stepner, and Thomas Scot Son of Thomas Scot
lately Executed as a Most execrable Traitor, and one of the horrid and bloody
murderers of His late Royal Majesty King Charles the First of ever blessed
memory, contrary to the duty of their Allegiance, have most traitorously and
wickedly adhered, and still do adhere to Your Majesty's Enemies beyond the
Seas, where they as yet remain and commit diverse Treasonable acts, without any
sense of loyalty to Your Majesty, or of natural affection to their native
Country:

May it therefore please Your most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Enacted,
And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the consent
and advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That if the said Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild alias
Stepner, and Thomas Scot, Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild, Thomas Scot.
shall not return into the Realm of England, and render themselves to some or
one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County wherein he or they
shall first arrive, at, or before the first day of February next ensuing, and
also abide their Legal Trial for such their Treasons; Then every of them the
said Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfeild alias Stepner, and Thomas Scot, not
rendering himself as aforesaid, or not abiding his Trial aforesaid, shall from
and after the said First day of February stand and be adjudged attainted of
High Treason, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and shall suffer and
forfeit as a person attaint of High Treason by the Laws of the Land ought to
suffer and forfeit.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Persons beyond Sea, by
Proclamation are required to return into England.
That all and every person and persons who now are, or hereafter shall be
beyond the Seas, and whom His Majesty by any of His Royal Proclamations to be
issued under the Great Seal of England, during the continuance of this War with
the States of the United Provinces, shall name and require to return into
England, and render themselves by a certain day therein to be mentioned, to
some or one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County wherein he or
they shall first arrive, and shall not return and render themselves
accordingly, and abide their legal Trial, shall from and after the day to them
to be prefixed by such Proclamation, stand and be attainted of High Treason to
all intents and purposes, and shall suffer such pains and penalties, and
undergo all such forfeitures as persons attainted of High Treason ought to do.
The time by such Proclamation Three months at least.


Provided, That the time to be prefixed by such Proclamation for the persons
therein to be named to render themselves, be not less then the time and term of
Three Calendar months, from and after the Date of such Proclamation.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Persons
Serving the States of the United Provinces during the War.
That all and every His Majesty's Subjects, who from and after the First day of
February next ensuing, shall at any time during the continuance of the said
War, serve the States of the United Provinces, either by Land or Sea, as a
Soldier or Seaman on this side the Straights; Or from and after the First day
of May, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and six, within
the Straights; Or from and after the First day of August in the said year One
thousand six hundred sixty six, in Africa or America, or any where beyond the
Straights, on this side the Equinoctial; Or from and after the First day of
February, in the said year One thousand six hundred sixty six, in the
East Indies, or any part beyond the Equinoctial, shall be and are hereby
Attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer and forfeit to all intents and
purposes, as persons Attainted of High Treason ought to do.

CAP. VI.
Damage Clear taken away.

WHereas the moneys which are taken by Prothonotaries of Your Majesty's Courts
of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, and by the Clerk of Your Majesty's Court of
Exchequer at Westminster, and the Prothonotary of Your Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Lancaster, and the Prothonotaries and Clerks of other Your
Majesty's Courts within the Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, in the
name of Damna Clericorum, or Damage Clear, Damna Clericorum.
are an unnecessary charge and burden to all Your Majesty's Subjects, who have
good cause, and are put to Sue for Damages in Actions where Damages are
recoverable.

For avoiding of which inconveniences for the future, and that Your Majesty's
Subjects may have an easier means for the recovery of their damages, and just
rights, which are unjustly detained from them: May it please Your most
Excellent Majesty that it may be Enacted; And the Kings most Excellent Majesty
being willing upon all occasions to ease His Subjects of all unnecessary
charges and burdens, is graciously pleased, That it be Enacted, And be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, Shall determine and not be taken
after the 29 day or September 1672.
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That
immediately from and after the Twenty ninth day of September, which shall be in
the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred seventy two, no Damage Clear
shall by any Title or Precept whatsoever, be due, payable, taken or received
from any person or persons in any Action whatsoever, sued or prosecuted in any
of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or elsewhere within the Kingdom of
England, or Dominion of Wales, by any Prothonotary, Clerk or Clerks, or other
Officer or Officers of the said Courts respectively: And that from and after
the day and year aforesaid, the said Fee of Damna Clericorum, or Damage Clear,
shall wholly cease, and be for ever abolished in the said Courts; And that if
any Prothonotary, Clerk or Clerks, or other Officer in any of the said Courts,
The Penalty.
shall take or exact any sum or sums of money in the name of Damna Clericorum,
or Damage Clear, or any thing in lieu thereof, after the day and year above
mentioned: Or if any of the said Prothonotaries, Clerk or Clerks or their
Deputies, at any time before the said Twenty ninth day of September in the year
aforesaid, shall exact or take any Damage Clear, or sum of money, Bond or
Security in lieu thereof, from any Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, Demandant or
Demandants, in any Action where Damages have been, or hereafter shall be
recovered in any of the said Courts, or shall refuse or delay to Sign any
Judgment, until Damage Clear be first paid by the Plaintiff or Demandant
(which are not to be paid, unless forth of the moneys levied from, or paid by
the Defendants, as is herein after provided and mentioned) He or they so
offending, shall forfeit treble the sum so taken, exacted or demanded, to the
party or parties grieved, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in any
of the said Courts, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be
allowed.

Provided, and be it further Enacted, That until the Nine and twentieth day of
September, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, In what cases only they
may be taken until the 29 September 1672.
One thousand six hundred seventy and two, and no longer, the Damage Clear
shall be paid, answered, and allowed out of such sum and sums of money only as
shall be actually levied, or otherwise paid by or from the Defendants; and
only for the proportion of the Sum and Sums of money which shall be so levied
or otherwise paid as aforesaid, and no more or otherwise.

CAP. VII.
For a more speedy and effectual proceeding upon Distresses and Avowries for
Rents.

FOrasmuch as the ordinary Remedy for Arrearages of Rents, is by Distress upon
the Lands chargeable therewith; And yet nevertheless by reason of the intricate
and dilatory proceedings upon Replevins, that Remedy is become ineffectual:

For remedy thereof, It is Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with
the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Plaintiff in
Replevin being nonsuit before issue joined.
and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the
same, That whenever any Plaintiff in Replevin shall be Nonsuit before Issue
joined in any Suit of Replevin, by Plaint or Writ lawfully returned, How the
Defendant may Avow.
removed, or depending in any of the Kings Courts at Westminster, That the
Defendant making a Suggestion in nature of an Avowry or Cognizance for such
Rent, to ascertain the Court of the cause of Distress; The Court upon his
Prayer shall award a Writ to the Sheriff of the County where the Distress was
taken, to enquire by the Oaths of Twelve good and lawful men of his Bayliwick,
touching the Sum in Arrear at the time of such Distress taken, and the value of
the Goods or Cattle distrained; And thereupon notice of Fifteen days shall be
given to the Plaintiff or his Attorney in Court, of the sitting of such
Enquiry; and thereupon the Sheriff shall enquire of the truth of the matters
contained in such Writ, by the Oaths of Twelve good and lawful men of his
County: And upon the Return of such Inquisition, the Defendant shall have
Judgment to recover against the Plaintiff the Arrearages of such Rent, in case
the Goods or Cattle distrained shall amount unto that value: And in case they
shall not amount to that value, then so much as the value of the said Goods and
Cattle so distrained shall amount unto, The Plaintiff nonsuit after Avowry made
etc.
together with his full Costs of Suit, and shall have Execution thereupon by
Fieri facias, or Elegit, or otherwise as the Law shall require. And in case such
Plaintiff shall be nonsuit after Cognizance or Avowry made, and Issue joined, or
if the Verdict shall be given against such Plaintiff; then the Jurors that are
Impannelled or Returned to inquire of such Issue, shall at the prayer of the
Defendant inquire concerning the Sum of the Arrears, and the value of the Goods
or Cattle distrained: And thereupon the Avowant, or he that makes Cognizance
shall have Judgment for such Arrearages, or so much thereof as the Goods or
Cattle distrained amount unto, together with his full Costs, and shall have
Execution for the same by Fieri facias or Elegit, or otherwise, as the Law
shall require. Judgment upon Demurrer for the Avowant.


And be if further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if Judgment in any
of the Courts aforesaid be given upon Demurrer for the Avowant, or him that
makes Cognizance for any Rent, the Court shall at the prayer of the Defendant
award a Writ to inquire of the value of such Distress; and upon the return
thereof Judgment shall be given for the Avowant, or him that makes Cognizance
as aforesaid, for the Arrears alleged to be behind in such Avowry or
Cognizance, if the Goods or Cattle so distrained shall amount to that value:
And in case they shall not amount to that value then for so much as the said
Goods or Catel so distrained amount unto, together with his full Costs of Suit,
and shall have like Execution as aforesaid.

Provided always, And be it Enacted, That in all Cases aforesaid, where the
value of the Cattle distrained as aforesaid, shall not be found to be to the
full value of the Arrears distrained for, that the party to whom such Arrears
were due, his Executors or Administrators may from time to time Distrain again
for the Residue of the said Arrears. 19 Car. 2. cap. 5. This Act made to extend
to Wales and Counties Palatine.

CAP. VIII.
An Act for avoiding unnecessary Suits and Delays.

FOr the avoiding of unnecessary Suits and Delays, Be it Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and
by Authority of the same, Death of either party between the Verdict and
Judgment.
That in all Actions personal and real, or mixed, the death of either party
between the Verdict and the Judgment, shall not hereafter be alleged for
Error; so as such Judgment be entered within two Terms after such Verdict.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Judgment obtained by an
Executor.
where any Judgment after a Verdict shall be had, by or in the name of any
Executor or Administrator; In such case an Administrator de bonis non may sue
forth a Scire facias, and take Execution upon such Judgment.

This Act to continue for the space of Five years; The continuance of this Act.
and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

CAP. IX.
An Act for granting one Months Assessment to His Majesty.

WE Your Majesty's most dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, taking notice of that Heroic Courage, The Heroic Courage of his
Highness the Duke of York.
with which Your Majesty's Royal Brother exposed his own Person for the Defense
of Your Majesty and Your People against the Dutch Fleet, and of the Glorious
Victory through the blessing of Almighty God by him obtained, are humble
Suitors unto Your Majesty, that we may have leave to make some expressions of
our Humble Thanks to his Royal Highness for the same; And that for this end,
Your Majesty would graciously please to accept from us your Loyal Subjects, the
sum of money herein after mentioned, and to bestow the same upon Your Majesty's
Royal Brother; Wherefore we your Majesty's said Dutiful and Loyal Subjects,
have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto your most
Excellent Majesty (whom God long preserve) the Sum of One hundred and twenty
thousand nine hundred and two pounds, fifteen shillings and eight pence, to be
raised and levied in manner following, (That is to say;)

Whereas in and by a certain Act lately passed for granting a Royal Aid unto
his Majesty of Twenty four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and five
hundred pounds, to be raised, 16 and 17 Ca^. 2. cap. 1.
levied and paid within the space of three years; It was amongst other things
Enacted, That the sum of Threescore and eight thousand eight hundred and
nineteen pounds, and nine shillings by the Month, for thirty six Months,
beginning from the Five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred
sixty four, should be assessed, taxed, levied and paid by twelve quarterly
payments, in the several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places within
England and Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the Rates and
Proportions therein expressed.

And whereas in and by another Act passed in this present Session of
Parliament, 17 Car. 2. cap. 1.
It is further Enacted, That the sum of Fifty two thousand fourscore and three
pounds six shillings and eight pence by the month, for twenty four months,
beginning from the five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred
sixty five, shall be likewise assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by
eight quarterly payments, in the several Cities, Buroughs, Towns and Places
within England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, over and above
the said sum of Threescore and eight thousand eight hundred and nineteen pounds
and nine shillings, as an addition to, and increase of the same monthly
Assessment, both which Sums together amount unto the sum of One hundred and
twenty thousand nine hundred and two pounds fifteen shillings and eight pence
by the Month.

It is now further Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in
this present Parliament Assembled, That the Sum of One hundred and twenty
thousand nine hundred and two pounds fifteen shillings and eight pence, for one
Months Assessment more, beginning upon the Six and twentieth day of December,
One thousand six hundred sixty seven, and ending upon the Six and twentieth day
of January in the same year, shall be assessed, taxed, collected, levied and
paid in the several Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and Places within
England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the Rates
and Proportions following: That is to say,

For the County of Bedford, the sum of One thousand five hundred seventy and
five pounds twelve shillings six pence farthing.

The County of Berks, the sum of One thousand nine hundred eighty nine pounds
four shillings nine pence three farthings.

The County of Bucks, the sum of Two thousand three hundred and ten pounds
fourteen shillings and three pence.

The County of Cambridge, the sum of One thousand seven hundred ninety and one
pounds eighteen shillings three half pence.

The Isle of Ely, the sum of Six hundred and fourteen pounds thirteen shillings
and nine pence.

The County of Chester, with the City and County of the City of Chester, the
sum of One thousand four hundred and seven pounds thirteen shillings and one
penny.

The County of Cornwall, the sum of Two thousand seven hundred and seven
pounds, seven pence farthing.

The County of Cumberland, the sum of Two hundred ninety and five pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence farthing.

The County of Derby, the sum of One thousand five hundred and fifteen pounds
one shilling and three pence three farthings.

The County of Devon, the sum of Five thousand six hundred seventy and four
pounds five shillings eleven pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of Two hundred and four
pounds eight shillings six pence halfpenny.

The County of Dorset, the sum of Two thousand three hundred sixty and two
pounds two pence halfpenny.

The Town and County of Pool, the sum of Nineteen pounds five shillings eleven
pence farthing.

The County of Durham, the sum of Five hundred sixty and eight pounds eighteen
shillings two pence farthing.

The County of York, with the City and County of the City of York, and Town of
Kingstone upon Hull, the sum of Six thousand ninety and four pounds thirteen
shillings nine pence three farthings.

The County of Essex, the sum of Five thousand four hundred forty and three
pounds four shillings eleven pence three farthings.

The County of Gloucester, the sum of Three thousand one hundred seventy and
seven pounds two shilings nine pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of Sixty and nine
pounds four shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Hereford, the sum of One thousand nine hundred eighty and eight
pounds one shilling five pence three farthings.

The County of Hertford, the sum of Two thousand three hundred sixty and four
pounds five shillings and eight pence halfpenny.

The County of Huntington, the sum of One thousand one hundred and thirteen
pounds five shillings and six pence.

The County of Kent, with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the
sum of Five thousand eight hundred forty and four pounds thirteen shillings two
pence halfpenny.

The County of Lancaster, the sum of One thousand seven hundred sixty and eight
pounds nine shillings and ten pence halfpenny.

The County of Leicester, the sum of One thousand nine hundred and five pounds
eleven shillings and nine pence three farthings.

The County of Lincoln, with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
sum of Four thousand five hundred twenty and three pounds seventeen shillings
and two pence farthing.

The City of London, with the Liberty of S. Martins le Grand, the sum of Eight
thousand nine hundred forty and four pounds fourteen shillings two pence three
farthings.

The County of Middlesex, with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum of
Three thousand nine hundred thirty and six pounds and ten pence.

The County of Monmouth, the sum of Six hundred eighty and five pounds, two
shillings nine pence three farthings.

The County of Northampton, the sum of Two thousand four hundred eighty and
three pounds eighteen shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Nottingham, with the Town and County of the Town of Nottingham,
the sum of One thousand five hundred thirty and four pounds seven shillings two
pence halfpenny.

The County of Norfolk, the sum of Five thousand nine hundred twenty and one
pounds seven shillings four pence farthing.

The City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of Three hundred and
sixteen pounds, four shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Northumberland, with the Towns of Newcastle and Berwick upon
Tweed, the sum of Six hundred fifty and four pounds seventeen shillings eleven
pence farthing.

The County of Oxon, the sum of One thousand nine hundred ninety and four
pounds seventeen shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Rutland, the sum of Four hundred twenty and two pounds eight
shillings one penny farthing.

The County of Salop, the sum of Two thousand one hundred and fourteen pounds
twelve shillings eight pence farthing.

The County of Stafford, the sum of One thousand four hundred ninety and seven
pounds, fifteen shillings nine pence halfpenny.

The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the sum of Two and twenty
pounds sixteen shillings nine pence farthing.

The County of Somerset, the sum of Four thousand eight hundred sixty and eight
pounds eighteen shillings ten pence three farthings.

The City and County of the City of Bristol, the sum of Three hundred and fifty
pounds six shillings six pence farthing.

The County of Southampton, with the Town and County of Southampton, and the
Isle of VVight, the sum of Three thousand eight hundred forty and six pounds
six shillings and seven pence.

The County of Suffolk, the sum of Five thousand seven hundred ninety and four
pounds fifteen shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Surry, with the Borough of Southwark, the sum of Two thousand
eight hundred and five pounds eleven shillings six pence halfpenny.

The County of Sussex, the sum of three thousand one hundred ninety and nine
pounds fifteen shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Warwick, with the City and County of the City of Coventry, the
sum of Two thousand ninety and four pounds fifteen shillings eleven pence.

The County of Worcester, the sum of One thousand eight hundred fifty and one
pounds ten shillings ten pence.

The City and County of the City of Worcester, the sum of Ninety seven pounds
nine shilllings and three farthings.

The County of Wilts, the sum of Three thousand four hundred fifty and five
pounds seven shillings one penny halfpenny.

The County of Westmerland the sum of Two hundred and three pounds fifteen
shillings eight pence halfpenny.

The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of Two hundred and twenty pounds fifteen
shillings and ten pence.

The County of Brecknock, the sum of Four hundred ninety six pounds, six
shillings six pence.

The County of Cardigan, the sum of One hundred eighty five pounds, sixteen
shillings eleven pence three farthings.

The County of Carmarthen, the sum of Four hundred seventy eight pounds ten
shillings three halfpence.

The County of Carnarvan, the sum of Two hundred fifty and seven pounds, eleven
shillings three farthings.

The County of Denbigh, the sum of Three hundred ninety and two pounds thirteen
shillings eight pence halfpenny.

The County of Flint, the sum of Two hundred and eight pounds sixteen shillings
three pence three farthings.

The County of Glamorgan, the sum of Six hundred sixty and five pounds,
fourteen shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Merioneth, the sum of One hundred seventy and seven pounds, one
shilling and nine pence three farthings.

The County of Montgomery, the sum of Four hundred eighty and five pounds
eighteen shillings and eight pence.

The County of Pembroke, the sum of Five hundred seventy and three pounds,
eleven shillings seven pence three farthings.

The County of Radnor, the sum of Three hundred and six pounds, five shillings
two pence three farthings.

The Town of Haverford West, the sum of Twenty and six pounds thirteen
shillings.

And be it further Enacted, Commissioners named in the former Act, 16 and 17
Car. 2. cap. 1.
That all and every the Persons who are appointed to act as Commissioners for
execution of the said former Act, shall likewise be, and so are hereby
constituted and appointed to be Commissioners for execution of this present Act
within the several and respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and Places
for which they were formerly appointed, and shall have and execute like Powers
and Authorities, Rules and Directions, touching the better assessing,
collecting, levying, receiving, and paying the said One hundred and twenty
thousand nine hundred and two pounds fifteen shillings and eight pence; And all
and every person or persons who shall be liable to, or any ways concerned or
employed in the assessing, collecting, levying, receiving, or paying of the
Moneys by this Act imposed, shall have like benefits, advantages and
discharges, and shall be subject to like penalties, and forfeitures in case of
any neglect, or refusal to pay their respective Assessment, or to perform their
respective duties, as any other person or persons liable unto, or concerned or
employed in the assessing, collecting, levying, receiving, or paying any of the
said former Assessments, ought to have, or be subject unto, as fully and amply,
as if all and every the clauses, matters and things to the said former
Assessments relating, had been again in this Act repeated and Enacted.

The meeting of the Commissioners.
And be it further Enacted, That the several Commissioners shall meet together
at the most usual and common place of meeting, upon or before the Tenth day of
January, One thousand six hundred sixty seven, to put this Act in Execution:
And that the said One hundred and twenty thousand nine hundred and two pounds
fifteen shillings and eight pence, shall be assessed, collected, levied and
paid unto the Receivers of the several Counties appointed or to be appointed by
His Majesty, and by them answered and paid into his Majesty's Exchequer, upon
or before the Fifteenth day of February, One thousand six hundred sixty and
seven.

Anno XVIII. Caroli II. Regis.
CAP. I.
Moneys raised by a Poll, and otherwise, toward the Maintenance of the present
War.

MOst Gracious Sovereign, We Your Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects,
the Commons now in Parliament Assembled, having taken into our serious
Consideration the many and urgent Occasions which at this time do press Your
Majesty to an extraordinary Expense of Treasure for the Defense of Your
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, and in most thankful acknowledgment of Your
Majesty's just and tender Care of the welfare of Your People, A Free Gift
presented to his Majesty toward the carrying on the War.
Do most humbly present unto Your Majesty a Free Gift of several Sums of money,
toward the carrying on of the present War, to be Levied in such manner as is
hereafter expressed, and do beseech your Majesty to accept thereof; And that it
may be Enacted: And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That all and every person and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, Guilds
or Fraternities within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, having any personal Estate in such Debts owing to them
within the Realm or without, Of Personal Estates in Debts and Moneys.
which he or they do not account or esteem as desperate, (over and besides such
just Debts as he, she, or they shall bona fide owe) or in ready moneys; shall
yield and pay unto His Majesty for every Hundred pounds, in such Debts and
ready Moneys, the sum of Twenty shillings, to be Assessed, Imposed, Levied and
Collected in manner herein after mentioned.

Debts and Moneys not chargeable by this Act.
Provided always, That no sum of Money which has been lent unto his Majesty
upon the Security of the Act Passed at Oxford in the Seventeenth year of his
Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for granting the Sum of Twelve hundred and
fifty thousand pounds to the Kings Majesty for His present further Supply, or
lent by the City of London upon the Security of His Majesty's Revenue arising
by Hearth-money, 17 Car. 2. cap. 1.
at the rate of Sir per Cent. and which at the time of the execution of this
present Act shall be unpaid; nor any sum of money which shall be lent unto his
Majesty upon the Security of this present Act, or upon the Security of any
other Act of Parliament passed, or to be passed during this present Session of
Parliament, at the rate of Sir per Cent. shall be Rated or Assessed by virtue
of this Act; Any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Commissioners and Officers chargeable.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person
and persons, Commissioner or Commissioners, having, using, or exercising any
Office, Place, or public Employment whatsoever, (such persons who are or shall
be in Muster and Pay at Land or Sea only excepted) and all and every their
Deputies, Agents, Clerks, Secondaries, Substistutes, and other their inferior
Ministers and Servants whatsoever, who are already Taxed in and to the said
Monthly Assessment, for and in respect of their Offices, Agencies and
Employments, shall likewise pay unto his Majesty over and above the several
sums with which they are or shall be Charged in or to the said Monthly
Assessment, the sum of Twelve pence for every Twenty shillings which he or they
do receive in one year by virtue of any Fees, Profits, Perquisites, or other
Advantages to him or them accruing, or by reason or occasion of their several
Offices, Agencies and Employments. And such who are not already Taxed in and by
the said Monthly Assessment, for and in respect of their Commissions, Offices,
Agencies and Employments, shall yield and pay unto His Majesty the full sum of
Three shillings for every Twenty shillings which he or they do receive in one
year by virtue of any Fees, Profits, Perquisites, or other advantages to him or
them accruing, or by reason or occasion of their several and respective
Commissions, Offices, Agencies and Employments: The said several sums of Twelve
pence in every Twenty shillings, and Three shillings in every Twenty shillings,
to be Assessed, Imposed, Levied and Collected in such manner as is herein after
mentioned; Allowing to every such Officer and Commissioner, one Third part of
the Annual Salary or Sum of money he shall so receive, for and toward his or
their charge of executing any such Commission, Office or Place before mentioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Pensions and Stipends
from his Majesty.
That all and every other person and persons having, or claiming to have any
Pension, or yearly Stipend or Annuity by virtue of any Gift or Grant from His
Majesty under his Great Seal or Privy Seal, shall pay unto his Majesty the sum
of Three shillings for every Twenty shillings by the year, so given or granted
as aforesaid, to be Assessed, Employed, Levied and Collected in such manner as
is herein after mentioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Sergeants at
Law, Counselors, Sergeants at Law, Counselors, Attorneys, Sollicitors,
Scriveners, Advocates, Proctors, Notaries, Physicians.
Attorneys, Sollicitors and Scriveners, and all Advocates, Proctors, and
public Notaries, and all and every person and persons practicing the Art of
Physic, shall pay unto His Majesty the sum of Two shillings for every Twenty
shillings which he or they do receive by his and their respective Practices and
Professions in one year, allowing to every such person and persons of the
several Professions aforesaid, one Third part out of such moneys as he or they
shall so receive in their respective Practices and Professions, for and toward
the Charge and Expense occasioned by his or their attendance upon his or their
Practice or Professions aforesaid.

And all and every Servant, Servants Wages.
which at the time of the execution of this Act shall receive Wages for his,
her, or their Service, shall pay unto His Majesty the sum of Twelve pence for
every Twenty shillings by the year, which shall be due or payable to him, her,
or them, for his, her, or their Wages, except for Board-wages.

And all and every person and persons shall pay unto his Majesty the sum of
Twelve pence over and above the other Rates charged upon them by this Act. 19
Car. 2. cap. 1.


And be it further Enacted, In what cases Masters shall pay Servants Assessment.
That in case any Servant shall upon the demand of such Assessment or Moneys as
are due from him or her by virtue of this Act, refuse or neglect to pay the
same to the respective Collector; in such case his or their Master or Mistress
shall pay such Servants Assessment, And it shall then be lawful for such Master
or Mistress to deduct and stop the same out of such Wages as shall or ought to
be next paid unto such Servant; Any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That no person who receives Alms from the Parish, Persons
receiving Alms exempted.
nor the Children of any person remaining in his or her Family, who by reason
of their poverty does not contribute to the Rates for the Church and Poor, and
who are under the age of Sixteen years, shall be charged or taxed by virtue of
this present Act.

Provided also, and be it Enacted. That every Alien-stranger born out of this
Kingdom, Aliens shall pay double.
shall pay double the sum which he or they ought to have paid in any capacity
whatsoever in this Act mentioned, in case he or they had been natural born
Subjects.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, Persons of several Ranks and Degrees.
That all and every person and persons who at the time of the execution of this
Act, shall be of the several Ranks and Degrees hereafter mentioned, shall to
the purpose aforesaid contribute and pay the several sums of money hereafter in
this Act set down and appointed: That is to say, Duke.
Every person of the degree of a Duke of England Scotland, or Ireland,
inhabiting and residing within this Kingdom, shall pay the sum of Fifty pounds:
Every person of the degree of a Marquess of any of the said three Kingdoms,
Marquess.
inhabiting and residing within this Kingdom, shall pay the sum of Forty
pounds: Every person of the degree of an Earl of any of the said three
Kingdoms, Earl.
and inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, the sum of Thirty pounds:
Viscount.
Every person of the degree of a Viscount of any of the said three Kingdoms,
and inhabiting and residing within this Kingdom, the sum of Twenty five pounds;
Every person of the degree of a Baron of any of the said three Kingdoms, Baron.
and inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, the sum of Twenty pounds;
Eldest Son of a Duke.
Every eldest Son of a Duke of any of the said three Kingdoms, and inhabiting
or residing within this Kingdom, being of the age of One and twenty years, the
sum of Thirty pounds; Eldest Son of a Marquess.
Every eldest Son of a Marquess of any of the said three Kingdoms, and
inhabiting and residing within this Kingdom, being of the age of One and twenty
years, the sum of Twenty five pounds; Eldest Son of an Earl.
Every eldest Son of an Earl of any of the said three Kingdoms, and inhabiting
or residing within this Kingdom, being of the age of One and twenty years, the
sum of Twenty pounds; Eldest Son of a Viscount.
Every eldest Son of a Viscount of any of the said three Kingdoms, and
inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, being of the age of One and twenty
years, the sum of Seventeen pounds ten shillings; Eldest Son of a Baron.
Every eldest Son of a Baron of any of the said three Kingdoms, and inhabiting
or residing within this Kingdom, being of the age of One and twenty years, the
sum of Fifteen pounds; Baronet.
Every person of the degree of a Baronet of any of the said three Kingdoms, or
of Nova Scotia, and inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, the sum of
Fifteen pounds; Knight of the Bath.
Every person that is a Knight of the Order of the Bath, inhabiting or residing
within this Kingdom, the sum of Fifteen pounds; Every person who is a Knight
Bachelor, Knight Bachelor. Sergeant at Law. Esquire.
inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, the sum of Ten pounds; Every
Sergeant at Law, the sum of Ten pounds; Every person of the degree of an
Esquire, or so reputed, inhabiting or residing within this Kingdom, and above
the age of One and twenty years, the sum of Five pounds; Every Widow
respectively according to her Husbands degree, ^^dow.
shall pay the third part rated by this Act, upon that degree of which the
Husband of such Wife was in his lifetime: Gentleman.
And every Gentleman, or reputed Gentleman, above the age of Sixteen years, the
sum of Twenty shillings.

Proviso for Gentlemen not having 300 l. Estate.
Provided always, That every Gentleman having an Estate of the value of Three
hundred pounds, or more, shall be charged with the sum of Twenty shillings by
virtue of this Act, though he be a Minor under the age of One and twenty years:
And no Gentleman not having such an Estate, and shall thereof make Oath before
any two or more of the respective Commissioners, shall be charged with the said
sum of Twenty shillings, in respect of his Title.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That all and every the person and
persons within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick
upon Tweed, who at the time of the execution of this Act, Orders, Ranks and
Degrees.
shall be of the several Orders, Ranks or Degrees hereafter mentioned, shall to
the purpose aforesaid, pay the several sums of money hereafter in this Act set
down and appointed, Archbishop. Bishop.
(that is to say) Every person of the Order and Degree of an Archbishop, shall
pay the sum of Fifty pounds; Every person of the Order and Degree of a Bishop,
the sum of Twenty pounds; Dean.
Every person of the Degree of a Dean of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church,
shall pay the sum of Ten pounds; Archdeacon.
Every person of the Degree of an Archdeacon, shall pay the sum of Forty
shillings; Canon Prebendary.
Every person of the Degree of a Canon, or Prebendary of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, excepting such sole Prebendary, who is a sole Corporation,
and his Prebend not Rated in the Exchequer at above Thirty pounds, Doctor of
Divinity, Law, Physic.
shall pay the sum of Fifty shillings; Every person of the Degree of a Doctor
in Divinity, Law or Physic, shall pay the sum of Five pounds.

Doctors of Divinity not beneficed.
Provided always, That no Doctor of Divinity, not having any Benefice or
Ecclesiastical preferment, shall be charged for his Title or Dignity of Doctor,
by virtue of this Act, nor the Widow of any Ecclesiastical person shall be
charged for the third part, according to the Title or Dignity of her late
Husband.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Assessing, Ordering and Levying of the several sums of money so as aforesaid
limited and appointed to be paid, and for the more effectual putting of this
present Act in execution, such persons shall by virtue of this Act be
Commissioners for the several and respective Counties, Who shall be
Commissioners to execute this Act.
Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as are nominated and appointed
Commissioners for putting in execution the Powers in a former Act of this
Parliament, 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 1.
entitled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty of Twenty
four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, to be
raised, levied and paid in the space of Three years.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That these
persons hereafter named, shall be added Commissioners for the several Counties,
Places and Precincts respectively, and shall exercise the same power as if they
had been named in the said former Act, Viz.

Bedford. For the County of Bedford, Villiers Charnock, Humphrey Monox, John
Beecher, Thomas Daniel, John Gardener, Esquires, (...) Horn, Peter Harman Gent.

Berks. For the County of Berks, Sir William Craven Knight, John Kingsmill
Esquire, John Withwick, Edward Keat, Charles Fettiplace, William Bowls senior,
Esquires; John Monday, William Packer, Richard House, Gent. (...) Gilly
Esquire, Hugh Barker Doctor of Physic.

Bucks. For the County of Bucks, Sir Charles Clever Knight, Sir Timothy Tyrrel
Knight and Baronet, Sir Frederick Hyde, Thomas Catesby, Edward Stafford,
Esquires; Matthew Archdel Gent, Sir John Busby. For the Town of Buckingham,
George Robbins.

Cambridge. For the County of Cambridge, Sir John Jacob Baronet, Sir Ralph
Bovey Baronet, Roger Pepys Esquire. Gerrard Russel Esquire. For the Town of Cambridge,
Rowland Simpson Alderman.

Ely. For the Isle of Ely, William Legate, Anthony Fisher, Peter Diamond,
Esquires.

Chester. For the City and County of the City of Chester, Thomas Cooper
Alderman, Edward Bradshaw Esquire Richard Burd Alderman, Richard Minshal, Richard
Tailor, John Poolie, Robert Harvy, Aldermen.

Cornwall. For the County of Cornwall, John Trelawney of Trelawen, Thomas
Vivian; John Moulesworth, Esquires; William Inch, Abel French, Nicholas
Trebarfoot, Edward Herle, Edward Hoblin, Nicholas Herle, Walter Leech, George
Spry, William Bond, Thomas Dodson, John Arundel, John Tregygle, William Thomas,
Anthony Tanner, John Barret, Thomas Penhallow, John Tamlin, John Verman,
Richard Williams, John Williams, Esquires; William Kegwin, Henry Edwards,
Arthur Painter, Gent.

Cumberland. For the County of Cumberland, John Warwick, Richard Lamplugh,
Miles Penington, Joseph Patrickson, John Senhouse, William Orphaur, Ferdinando
Hudleston, Leonard Dykes, Hugh Ascue, Richard Patrickson, John Punsonbee,
Esquires.

Devon. For the County of Devon, Christopher Lord Torington, Richard Duke,
Gydeon Heydon, Richard Lee, Richard Hillersdon, Samuel Roll, Arthur Ashford,
John Bluet, William Bragg, Matthew Halls, Edmund Parker, John Mallet, Esquires;
Sir John Stowel, John Chichester Esquire.

Exon. For the City and County of Exon, John Mallet Esquire, Doctor Edward
Masters Chancellor of the Diocese, Eustace Budgell Gent.

Derby. For the County of Derby, George Savile, Robert Ashton, John Gell, John
Low, John Du^, Esquires; Andrew Clayton, Robert Moore Gent. Richard Merchant,
Alderman, Edward Abney Esquire.

Dorset. For the County of Dorset, Robert Cullyford, William Frampton, Robert
Williams, Henry Henly junior, Humphrey Weld, Esquires; the High Sheriff for the
time being, John Ellesdon, Solomon Andrews, John Gallop, Gentlemen.

Pool. For the Town and County of Pool, the Mayor for the time being, William
Okeden, Allen Skutt, Gentlemen.

Durham. For the County Palatine of Durham, Sir George Fletcher Baronet, Robert
Shaftoe, Humphrey Wharton, Thomas Craddock, Christopher Saunderson, John
Jeffreyson, Esquires; Robert Newhouse, Edward Arden Gent.

Essex. For the County of Essex, Sir John Archer, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, Philip Saltenston, Thomas Cullum, Esquires; Timothy Midleton Esquire
Sir James Russet, Edward Shelton, Francis Mildmay.

Colchester. For the Town of Colchester, Sir Harbotle Grimstone Baronet, Master
of the Rolls, John Eldred senior, John Eldred junior, Esquires.

Harwich. For the Town of Harwich and Dover-Court, the Mayor for the time
being, Sir Cappel Luckin Knight and Baronet, John Eldred junior Esquire, Mr.
George Coleman, Daniel Smith, Captain Hunter, Alderman Sack, Samuel Newton,
Alderman Robinson, Alderman Garriot, Alderman Hawks.

Gloucester. For the County of Gloucester, Sir John Treacy, Sir William
Juckson, Sir John Newton, Baronets, Sir Francis Fane Knight of the Bath, Sir
John Points Knight, John Merideth, John Vaughan, Thomas Carpender, William
Oldesworth, John Browning, Thomas Veel of Simons Hall, Edward Smith, George
Brett, Roger Lingan, Robert Loggin, Esquires; William Hancock, Conway Whitton,
Thomas Smith, Richard Jones of Hanham, Thomas Wise, Richard Heart Gent.

City of Gloucester. For the City and County of the City of Gloucester, Sir
Bainham Throckmorton Knight and Baronet, Mr. Thomas Aram Merchant, Mr. John
Marston, Colonel Richard Atkins, William Cook Esquire.

Hereford. For the County of Hereford, James Pitts, Francis Pember of Elsdon,
Robert Minors of Treagoe, Edward Scrimshaw, John Bridge of Priors-Court,
Esquires; John Burch of Garnston, John Curver of Upton, Henry Milbourne,
William Driver, Gilbert Hare, Gent.

City of Hereford. Bridstock Herford Esquire, Humphrey Diggs, Humphrey Howarth,
James Wellington, Gent.

Hertford. For the County of Hertford, Sir Thomas Brograve, Sir Robert
Joscelyne, Baronets; Sir John Witterong Knight and Baronet, Sir Charles Cleaver
Knight, Robert Dicer, John Caesar, Ralph Radcliffe, Francis Shalcross, Edward
Chester, Thomas Took, Esquires; Richard Taverner, King of Hempstead, Joseph
Edmonds, Charles Caesar, George Nodes, George Poyner, Joseph Hatch, Charles
Crouch, Thomas James, John Dagnoll, Gentlemen, William Glascock Esquire.

Saint Albons. For the Borough of Saint Albans, Joshua Lomax, Edward Crosby,
Thomas Rotheram, William Rugg, William Rance, Aldermen, John Dogget.

Huntington. For the County of Huntington, Sir James Beverly, John Dryden,
Anthony Hammon, Major Dean of Godmanchester.

Kent. For the County of Kent, Sir Thomas Monins, Sir Thomas Peirse, Baronets,
Sir John Shaw Knight and Baronet, Sir Nicholas Strode Knight, Edward Master,
Elwin Wyatt, William Wise Man, Esquires; The Mayor of Maidstone for the time
being.

Canterbury. For the City and County of Canterbury, William Kingslys Esquire.

Dover. For the Cinque-Port of Dover, James Wyon Esquire, William Stocks Jurat.

Sandwich. For the Cinque-Port of Sandwich, William Freeman Esquire, James
Thorban junior, Gent.

Lancaster. For the County of Lancaster, The High Sheriff for the time being,
Edmond Ashton of Chatterton, Christopher Bainister, Esquires; Mr. Richard
Shuttleworth of Gawthrop junior, John Hartley, Miles Dodding, George Fell,
Esquires; Captain William Fleming, Richard Kenerdine Doctor in Physic.

Leicester. For the County of Leicester, Richard Lister, William Gilbert,
George Pochin, Esquires, John Farrington Esquire.

Leicester Town. For the Borough of Leicester, Daniel Deacon, William Stubins,
William Callis, John Cleark Gent.

Lincoln. For the County of Lincoln, Carr Scrope, Richard Newton, Richard Pell,
William Darwyn, Redmayn Burral, Thomas Brown, George Lucas, William Basset,
John Bishop, John Butlar, William Skipwith, Henry Meller, Thomas Friston,
Peregrine Bartu, Esquires; Augustine Cawdron, Anthony Newlove, William Perkins,
Miles Long, Andrew Sloe, John Brown, Francis Johnson of Spaulding, Charles
Massingbeard, John Green of Dusby Gent.

For the Bail of Lincoln, Richard Craycroft, Lawrence Stampford Gent.

Middlesex. For the County of Middlesex, William Ashburnham Cofferer of His
Majesty's Household, Sir Nicholas Strode of St. John's, Mark Cotle, John Hawtry,
Edward Palmer, Nicholas Townley junior, Matthew Bluck, William Richardson,
Charles Porter, Ralph Piggott, Esquires; Sir John Dethick, Doctor Cox, Thomas
Stringer, John Vincent, William Thursby, Thomas Robinson, Esquires, Sir
Mundeford Bramston Knight, John Jolliff, Lancelot Johnson junior, Esquires.

London. For the City of London, Sir William Bolton Lord Major, Sir John
Langham, Sir John Lawrence, Sir Richard Reeves, Sir Robert Hanson, Sir William
Hooker, Sir George Waterman, Sir Charles Do, Matthew Bluck Esquire, John
Moore, Henry Partridge, Thomas Blackerby, Aldermen, Sir Robert Viner, Sir
Joseph Sheldon, Sheriffs, Edward Arris Esquire

Westminster. For the City of Westminster, Sir Thomas Clifford Comptroller of
his Majesty's Household, Sir William Doylie, Sir Oliver Botler, Sir George
Downing, Baronets, Sir Robert Carr, Sir James Smith, Thomas Exton Doctor at
Law, Lawrence Squibb, William Loving, John Loving, Henry Wynn, Philip Warwick
junior, George Bennet, Esquires; Doctor Troutbeck Esquire Henry Aldrich, Gent.
Thomas Tyndal, John Chase, Philip Hanbury, Walter Brydal, Bryan Barnby, John
Jeffes, David Walter, John Carance, Esquires, Samuel Barrow Doctor in Physic;
Henry Monck, Thomas Owen, Peregrine Bartu, Ambrose Scudamore, Thomas Milward,
Esquires, William Carr Esquire, Thomas Cromp, Robert Stockdale, Gentlemen,
Henry Slingsby Esquire, Henry Peck junior, Esquire, Mr. Richard Pagett, Mr. George
Plucknett, Mr. Michael Arnold, Mr. Nicholas Edlyn, Ralph Pygott Esquire, Henry
Brunkar Esquire.

Northampton. For the County of Northampton, Edward Palmer, John Parkhurst of
Catesby Esquires.

Norfolk. For the County of Norfolk, John Bayspool of Hadcos, William
Richardson, Edmund Bell, Francis Bell, John Bashpool, Gascoyn Weld Esquires.

Norwich. For the County and City of Norwich, John Richers, Richard Wenman,
Aldermen.

Newcastle upon Tyne. For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne, William
Blacket Esquire, Mayor for the time being, Sir Nicholas Cole, Sir James
Clavering, Baronets; Sir Francis Lyddel Knight, Robert Shaftoe Esquire,
Recorder, Mark Milbanck, John Emmetson, Henry Maddison Esquires, Aldermen,
Richard Stots Esquire; The Sheriffs for the time being, Robert Marley Esquire.

Nottingham. For the County of Nottingham, Francis Lork Esquire, Mr. Robert
Atkinson, both of Newark, Harvy Stanton of Stanton Esquire.

Oxon. For the County of Oxon, Sir Thomas Hampson Baronet, Robert Withers,
James Chamberlain, Henry Brunkar, Esquires; Vincent Barry Esquire.

Salop. For the County of Salop, Henry Davenport Esquire, Edmund Pearce of
Wilcot Gent.

Southampton. For the County of Southampton, Sir Charles Wyndham, John Smith
Esquire, Sir John Cloberry, William Stephens, Nicholas Dorrel, Esquires; James
Worsley Gent. Carew Reynel Esquire Henry Doyley, Thomas Knight, Gentlemen.

For the Town of Portsmouth, Benjamin Johnson and Hugh Salisbury, Gent.

Winton. For the City of Winton, Sir Robert Mason, Nicholas Darel Esquire.

Somerset. For the County of Somerset, Sir John Stowel Knight, James Prowse,
Cadwallader Jones, William Strode, Edward Strode, Richard Dauadge, James
Stedman, John Baber, Hugh Tynt, Esquires; Thomas Dyke, Richard Musgrave,
Gentlemen.

Bristol. For the City and County of the City of Bristol, Sir Humphrey Hook
Knight, Joseph Creswick, Thomas Stephens, Henry Lloyd, Gent.

Bath. For the City Bath, Henry Chapman, John Pierce, Gent.

Stafford. For the County of Stafford, Jonas Grosvenor Esquire.

Suffolk. For the County of Suffolk, Francis Burwell, William Ferneley,
Esquires; Thomas Arris Doctor in Physic, Doctor Bryan Smith, Mr. Edward
Spencer, Edward Man, John Cordell Esquire, William Hamon Gent. Thomas Edgar of
Ipswich Esquire, Barodel Milleson of Norton Gent. John Duke Esquire Ambrose Duke
Gent.

Sudbury. For the Town of Sudbury, Nathaniel King, John Cook, Christopher
Petit, Thomas King, Aldermen.

Sussex. For the County of Sussex, John Ashburnham, Edward Blaker, Henry
Brunkar, Esquires; George Edmonds, Captain John Eversfeild, John Blackshal
Gent. Edward Cooper Esquire; John Machell, Francis Gratwick, Esquires.

Hastings. For the Cinque-Port of Hastings, Benjamin Polsted, John Hyde Gent.

Rye. For the Cinque-Port of Rye, William Holman, John Martin Gent.

Surry. For the County of Surry, Sir Francis Duncomb Baronet, Sir Cyril Wiche,
Sir Thomas Thynn, Sir William Throckmorton junior, Rowland Jucks, Edward
Cooper, Will. Chislet, Richard Mountney, Edward Freeman, Esquires; Stephen
Harvy, Henry Houghton, Esquires.

Southwark. For the Borough of Southwark, Sir Edward Bromfield Baronet, Sir
Thomas Clarges Knight, Edmund Clay, Thomas Lenthal, John Child, Esquires;
Richard How, William Sherlock senior, William Adams, Jeremy Baynes, John
Appleby, Richard Smith, Gent.

Warwick. For the County of Warwick, John Stratford, Fulwood Skipwith, Henry
Pudsey, Esquires.

Westmerland. For the County of Westmerland, Christopher Crakenthrope,
Christopher Dalston, Christopher Teasdell, William Dawes, Robert Philipson,
William Midleton, Henry Wilson, Robert Braithwait, Richard Ducket, William Guy,
Esquires.

Wilts. For the County of Wilts, Sir Robert Howard Knight, Giles Hungerford
Esquire; The Mayor of Marlborough for the time being; the Mayor of the Devises
for the time being; Thomas Gunter Esquire, Mr. Edmund James, Mr. John Jacob,
Mr. Thomas Vilet, Mr. Giles Aleworth, Mr. Charles York, George Johnson Esquire.

Sarum. For the City of New Sarum, Thomas Gunter Esquire; Alderman Slaune,
George Vennard, James Harris, Doctor Hurst.

Worcester. For the County of Worcester, William Washbourne, Robert Staynor,
Esquires; William Dowdeswell Gent.

Worcester City. For the City of Worcester, the Mayor and Aldermen and Sheriffs
for the time being; Sir John Packington Baronet, Sir Rowland Berkley Knight;
Samuel Sandys senior, Thomas Hall, Thomas Street, Esquires; Samuel Johnsons,
Matthew Skinner Doctor of Physic, Robert Wild, Humphrey Wildey, Richard
Bedoes, Edward Cooksey, VVintour Harris, John Bearecroft, Humphrey Tyrer,
Thomas Twitty, John Tyas, Gent.

York. For the North Riding in the County of York, Mr. Geldart of VViggenthorp,
Richard Turner of Tunstall, Roger Tockitts, John Wentworth, William Hustler
Esquires; William Dawson Gent. Sir John Hewley, Roger Colvell Gent. Ralph
Stephenson, William Palines, Edward Challoner, Esquires; John Hill of Thormanby
Gent.

York East Riding. For the East Riding in the County of York, John Wentworth,
John Hern, Ralph VVarton, James Moyser, Esquires; Edward Gray the elder, Edward
Gray the younger, Gentlemen.

York West Riding. For the West Riding in the County of York, John Stanhope
Esquire, Francis Carr Gent. William Ellis, Henry Edmonds, John Hopton,
Christopher Drisfeild, Henry Slingsby, Robert Wivell, Robert Brandling,
Esquires; Ralph Banister, John Cook Gent. John Savile of Meathley Esquire.

Kingston upon Hull. For the Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, William
Lister Esquire, Lambert Alderman.

Brecon. For the County of Brecon, Sir Walter Williams Baronet, Lehunt Esquire,
Daniel Williams of Penpont, William Bowen, and David Gwenn, Gent.

Cardigan. For the Town of Cardigan, The Mayor for the time being, Thomas Parry
Esquire John Morris Alderman.

Glamorgan. For the Town of Glamorgan, Sir Edward Stradling Baronet, John
Windham, Edmund Lewis, Richard Seyes of Bouerton, Walter Thomas, Martin
Button, Thomas Button, Esquires.

Merioneth. For the County of Merioneth, Captain John Nanney, Lewis Lewis, John
Lluid of Ke^venraes, Hugh Nanney of Festiniog, Gent.

Monmouth. For the County of Monmouth, Henry Milborne, Charles Milborne, Bennet
Hoskins, John Hoskins, Herbert of Newton, Herbert Jones, Gent.

Pembroke. For the County of Pembroke, Thomas Philips Esquire, High Sheriff for
the County of Pembroke, Walter Vaughan, James Haward, Esquires; Essex Merrick,
William Woogan, Esquires; Thomas Cozen, Gent.

Haverford-West. For the Town and County of Haverford-West, Walter Vaughan
Esquire, John Bateman, Robert Prust, Richard Fowler, Gent.

Which said Commissioners, in order to the speedy execution of this Act, The
Commissioners to meet 24. February next.
shall in their respective Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and Places meet
together at the most usual or common place of meeting within each of the said
Counties, Cities, Buroughs, Towns and places respectively, at or before the
Fourteenth day of February next ensuing; May divide themselves.
And the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall be present at the
first general meeting, or the major part of them, may by their consents and
agreements, divide as well themselves, as other the Commissioners not then
present, for the execution of this Act in Hundreds, Laths, Wapentakes, Rapes,
Wards, Towns, and other places within their Limits, Privileged or not
Privileged, in such manner and form as to them shall seem expedient; and shall
direct their several or joint Precept or Precepts to such Inhabitants,
High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Bailiffs, and other like Officers and
Ministers, and such number of them, as they in their discretions shall think
most convenient, requiring them to appear before the said Commissioners, at
such time and place as they shall appoint, not exceeding Eight days; And at
such their appearances, the said Commissioners, How the Commissioners shall
execute their Powers.
or so many of them as shall be thereunto appointed, shall openly read, or
cause to be read unto them, the Rates in this Act mentioned, and openly declare
the effect of their Charge unto them, and how, and in what manner they ought
and should make their Certificates, according to the Rates aforesaid: And shall
then and there prefix another day to the said persons, to appear before the
said Commissioners, and bring in their Certificates of the names and sirnames,
qualities, degrees and titles of all and every the persons dwelling or residing
within the limits of those places with which they shall be charged, and of the
substances and values of every of them, in Money, Debts, Annual Fees,
Perquisits, Wages, Profits, Emoluments, and other things chargeable by this
Act, without concealment, love, favor, dread or malice, upon pain of
forfeiture of any sum not exceeding Five pounds, to be levied as by this Act is
appointed; Collectors to be appointed in every Parish.
And shall then also return the names of two or more able and sufficient
persons within the limits and bounds of those Parishes or places where they
shall be chargeable respectively, as aforesaid, to be Collectors of the Moneys
due to His Majesty by this Act: For whose paying in to the Head-Collectors in
manner following such moneys as they shall be charged withal, the Parish or
place by whom they are so employed, shall be answerable: Which Certificates and
Assessments shall be ascertained and returned in to the Commissioners, at or
before the First day of March next ensuing; and upon the delivery and returning
in of such Certificates or Assessments unto the said Commissioners, they, or
any two or more of them shall forthwith issue out and deliver their Warrants or
Estreats to such Collectors as aforesaid, for the speedy Collecting and Levying
of the said Assessments, and all Moneys and Rates due thereupon, according to
the intent and subsequent direction of this present Act. Of all which the said
Collectors are hereby required to make demand of the parties themselves, or at
the places of their last abode, within six days after the receipt of such
Warrants, or Estreats; and to Levy and pay in the same on or before the eighth
day of April, One thousand six hundred sixty seven, at such place as the
Commissioners shall appoint, unto their respective Head-collectors, who are
hereby empowered and required to call upon and hasten their Sub-collectors to
the said payment; and after the said eighth day of April to Levy by Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of any two or more of the Commissioners, upon the
Sub-collector, by Distress, such sum and sums of Money as ought by him to have
been paid, and is not paid by reason of his failer in doing his duty according
to the direction of this Act: so as every Head-collector may, and shall make
payment of the full sum by him to be paid, at or before the fifteenth day of
the said Month of April, unto the respective Receiver-General; who is likewise
required to call upon, and hasten the said Head-collector.

And be it Enacted that a true Duplicate of the whole sum charged within every
Hundred, Lath, Duplicates of the sums charged within every Division.
Wapentake, Parish, Ward, or place Rated and Assessed in pursuance of this Act,
without naming the persons, shall under the Hands and Seals of two or more of
the Commissioners thereunto appointed be returned into His Majesty's Exchequer
before the Twentieth day of April next ensuing, (all Appeals being first
determined) And that like Duplicates be also in convenient time made out, and
delivered unto the Receivers-general, and Head-collectors according to their
respective Collections, so as every of them may be duly charged to answer their
respective Collections and Receipts; and that the money due thereupon be paid
into His Majesty's Exchequer before the Thirtieth day of the said month of
April, One thousand six hundred sixty seven; And upon return of any such
Certificate, the said Commissioners or any three or more of them, shall and
may, if they see cause, examine the Presenters thereof. And if the said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, within their several limits, shall
have certain knowledge, or vehemently suspect that any person or persons in the
said Certificate mentioned, is or are of a greater Value or Estate then in the
said Certificate is mentioned; In what cases the Commissioners may Examine
persons and Encreas their Assesments
The said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, shall have power to warn
such person or persons to appear before them at a day and place prefixed, to be
examined touching their Substance and Value, or touching other matters which
may any wa^ concern the Premises; And if the person or persons warned to be so
examined, shall neglect to appear (not having a reasonable excuse for such his
Default) every person so making Default, shall pay unto His Majesty double the
sum of the Rate he should or ought to have been set at: And moreover, The said
Commissioners, or any three or more of them, shall have power by all lawful
ways and means without Oath, to examine and enquire into the value and
substance of such persons chargeable by this Act; And to such rate or rates
upon every such person or persons, as shall be according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act.

Head-collectors to be appointed in the several divisions.
And be it Enacted, That the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them in
their respective Division or Hundreds, shall and are hereby empowered to
nominate and appoint under their hands and seals, an honest, able, and
responsible person to be Head-collector, unto whom the moneys received by the
Sub-collector, shall be duly paid as aforesaid, whose Receipt shall be a
sufficient discharge unto every such Sub-collector: which Sub-collector for
gathering the said particular sums, shall retain in his hands for every Twenty
shillings by him so paid, Two pence as a reward for his pains and service. And
the said Head-collector is hereby required upon the receipt thereof, to pay the
same to the Receiver-general of each County respectively, in manner aforesaid;
And for his so doing, the said Commissioners are hereby Empowered and required
to take such good Security as they shall think fit, Consideration being therein
had of the said Collectors Receipt: And the said Receiver-generals Acquittance
shall be a sufficient Discharge unto every such Head-collector, who shall
retain in his hands for every Twenty shillings by him so paid, One penny as a
reward for his pains and service. And the said Receiver-general shall (before
the Thirtieth day of April aforesaid) pay the whole sum by him received, into
His Majesty's Exchequer, and shall have an allowance of Two pence in the pound
for all moneys which shall be by him paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer by
the time prefixed in this Act; and for so much as shall be by him paid in after
the time prefixed, One penny in the pound, and no more.

Allowance for transcribing Warrants and Duplicates.
And for the careful writing and transcribing the said Warrants, Estreats, and
Duplicates in due time, Be it further Enacted, That the Commissioners Clerks
who shall respectively perform the same, shall by Warrant under two or more of
the Commissioners hands, have and receive from the respective Head-collectors,
Two pence in the pound of all such moneys as he shall have received by virtue
of such Warrants and Estreats, who is hereby appointed and allowed to pay the
same accordingly.

Payments by the Head-collectors to the Receiver general.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Head-collector shall not pay in to the
Receiver-general within the time limited by this Act, all sums of money by him
received by virtue of this Act, That then the said Commissioners, or any two or
more of them being informed thereof, are hereby empowered and required to
Imprison every such Head-collector, and also to seize and secure the Estate
both real and personal of such Head-collector, or which shall from him descend
or come into the hands or possession of his Heirs, Executors or Administrators,
wherever the same can be discovered or found: And the said Commissioners who
shall so seize and secure the Estate of any Head-collector, shall be, and are
hereby empowered to appoint a time for the general meeting of the Commissioners
of such County, City or Town, and there to cause public notice to be given at
the place where such meeting shall be appointed, ten days at least before such
general meeting: And the Commissioners present at such general meeting, or the
major part of them, in case the moneys detained by such Head-collector be not
paid or satisfied as ought to be, according to the directions of this Act,
shall and are hereby empowered and required to Sell and Dispose of all such
Estates, or any part of them, which shall be for the cause aforesaid seized,
and thereby to secure and pay all the money in Arrear in such Head-Collectors
hand for His Majesty's use, and return the overplus, deducting necessary
charges to such Head-collector, his Executors and Administrators respectively.
^enalty.
And if any person or persons shall refuse to pay the several sum and sums, and
proportions appointed by this Act for such person to pay, upon demand made by
the Officer or Collector of the place, according to the Precept or Estreats to
him delivered by the said Commissioners; It shall and may be lawful to and for
such Officer or Collector, who are hereby thereunto authorized and required,
for non-payment thereof to Distrain the person or persons so refusing, by his
or their Goods or Chattels, and the Distress so taken, to keep by the space of
four days, at the costs and charges of the Owner thereof: And if the said Owner
do not pay the sum of money due by this Act within the said four days, then the
said Distress to be Apprized by three or two of the Inhabitants where the said
Distress is taken, and there to be sold by the said Officer for payment of the
said money, and the overplus coming by the said Sale (if any be) over and above
the charges of taking and keeping the said Distress, to be immediately restored
to the Owner thereof: And if any person or persons assessed by this Act, shall
refuse or ^eglect to pay the sum or sums so assessed, by the space of twenty
days after demand as aforesaid, where no sufficient distress can or may be
found, whereby the same may be Levied; in every such case, three or more of the
Commissioners by this Act appointed for any such City, County or Place, are
hereby Authorized by Warrant under their Hands and Seals to commit such person
or persons to the common Goal, there to be kept without Bail or Mainprize,
until payment shall be made. And if any person certified, Assessed or Rated,
find him or her self agrieved with such Assessing or Rating, and do within ten
days after demand thereof made, complain to the Commissioners, The said
Commissioners, or any two or more of them, whereof one of the Commissioners who
signed or allowed his or her Rate, to be one, shall and may within Fourteen
days next after such Complaint, particularly examine the person so complaining,
upon his or her Oath, of his or her personal Estate aforesaid; And upon due
Examination or knowledge thereof, abate, defalk, increase, or enlarge the said
Assessment: And the same so abated, increased or enlarged, shall be Estreated
by them into the Exchequer in manner aforesaid. And to that end, the said
Commissioners are hereby required to meet together for the Determining of such
Complaints and Appeals accordingly.

And be it further Enacted, That every person rated for his Office, shall be
rated, In what places Persons shall be rated for Offices, or otherwise.
and pay for his said Office, in the place where the said Office is executed:
And every person to be otherwise rated, shall be rated, and the sum or sums on
him or her set and levied, at such places where he or she, and with his or her
Family shall be resident at the time of the execution of this Act; And that all
persons not being Householders, nor having a certain place of above, and all
Servants shall be Taxed at the place where they are resident at the time of the
execution of this Act, three months before the execution of this Act.

Provided always, That if any person having several Mansion-houses, or places
of Residence, Persons doubly charged, may be discharged upon Certificate.
shall be doubly charged by virtue of this Act, That upon Certificate made by
two or more of the Commissioners for the County, City or place, (which
Certificate the said Commissioners are required to give without delay, Fee or
Reward) of his or their last personal Resi^ence, under their Hands and Seals,
of the sum or sums there charged upon him or them, and in what capacity or
respect he or they were so charged, and upon Oath made of such Certificate
before the Commissioners to whom such Certificate shall be tendered, which Oath
the said Commissioners are hereby authorized to administer; Then the person and
persons so doubly charged, shall (for so much as shall be so certified) be
discharged in every other County, City or place. And if any person at the time
of the Assessing, shall be out of the Realm, such person shall be rated where
such person was last abiding within the Realm. Persons changing their dwelling
by fraud to avoid the Tax.
And if any person that ought to be Taxed, by virtue of this Act, by changing
his place of residence, or by fraud or covin shall escape from the Taxation,
and not be Taxed, and the same proved before the Commissioners, or two of them,
or two Justices of the Peace of the County where such person dwells or is
resident, at any time within Six months next ensuing after such Tax made;
Every person that shall so escape from the said Taxation and payment, shall be
charged, Penalty.
upon proof thereof, at the double value of so much as he should or ought to
have been Taxed by the Act: The said double value, upon Certificate thereof
made into the Exchequer by the Commissioners or Justices before whom such proof
shall be made, to be Levied of the Goods, Lands and Tenements of such persons,
toward the Supply aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That the Commissioners which shall be within any
County or Place within their respective limits, or the major part of them,
Commissioners to tax one another.
shall Tax and Assess every other Commissioner joined with them, and the
Commissioners within their Division shall Assess every Assessor within their
Division; And as well all sums upon every the said Commissioners and Assessors,
as the Assessments made and presented by the Presenters as aforesaid, shall be
Written, Estreated, Levied and Gathered, as it should and ought to have been,
as if the said Commissioners had not been named Commissioners.

Provided always, and it is hereby declared, Decr^.
That the several Rates and Taxes to which the Lords and Peers of this Realm
shall be liable by virtue of this Act, shall be received by a Collector to be
nominated by the Peers, which said Collector shall cause the same to be paid
into His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer at Westminster upon or before the
aforesaid thirtieth day of April.

Provided, That this Act shall not extend to the Inhabitants of Scotland,
Ireland, Scotland, Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey.
Jersey or Guernsey, for or concerning any such personal Estate as aforesaid,
which they or any other to their use have within the places aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Treasurers of His Majesty's Navy and Ordnance are hereby authorized and
required to take and retain unto themselves, Allowances to the Treasurers of
the Navy.
and such as shall be respectively employed by and under them, One penny in the
pound and no more, out of the moneys raised by virtue of this Act, and paid
unto, and issued out by them to any person or persons in pursuance thereof, to
be allowed unto them in their respective Accounts.

And be it further Enacted, That if any Assessor, Collector, Receiver, or other
person appointed by the Commissioners, shall wilfully neglect or refuse to
perform his Duty in the due and speedy Execution of this present Act; The said
respective Commissioners, Assessors, Collectors, or Receivers neglecting their
duties.
or any three or more of them, may and shall by virtue of this Act, impose on
such person or persons so refusing or neglecting their Duties, any Fine not
exceeding the sum of Twenty pounds for any one offense; the same to be Levied
and Certified as aforesaid into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Penalty.
and charged upon the respective Receiver-general amongst the rest of the Rates
aforesaid; and the said Commissioners or any two or more of them, may or shall
from time to time call for, and require an Account from the respective
Receiver-general of all the Moneys received by him of the said Head-collectors,
and of the payment thereof into His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, according
to the direction of this Act: And in case of any failer in the premises the
said Commissioners, or any two or more of them, are hereby required to cause
the same to be forthwith levied and paid, according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act.

And in case of any controversy arising between the said Commissioners
concerning the said Rates or Assessments, the Commissioners that shall be
concerned therein shall have no voice, but shall withdraw during the debate of
such controversy, until it be determined by the rest of the Commissioners: And
all questions and differences that shall arise touching any of the said Rates,
Taxes, Assessments, or Levies, shall be heard, and finally determined by two or
more of the Commissioners, upon complaint thereof to them made, by any person
or persons thereby grieved, without further trouble or Suit in Law.
Controversies and questions about the rates how to be determined.
And the said Receiver-general shall give Acquittances gratis to the said
Head-collectors, for all moneys of them received; and the said Head-collectors
shall also give Acquittances gratis to the Sub-collectors, for all such moneys
as shall be paid by them in pursuance of this Act; which Acquittances shall be
a full Discharge to the said Head-collectors and Sub-collectors respectively:
Acquittances.
And the said Sub-collectors shall make and deliver to the said
Head-collectors, a perfect Schedule fairly written in Parchment, under their
hands and seals, signed and allowed by any two or more of the respective
Commissioners, containing the names, sirnames and places of abode of every
person within their respective Collection, that shall make default of payment
of any of the sums that shall be Rated or Assessed on such person by virtue of
this Act, and the sum and sums charged on every such person; The same Schedule
to be delivered by the Head-collector, to the Receiver-general of that County,
City, Town or Liberty respectively, to be by him returned into His Majesty's
Exchequer; Whereupon every person so making default of payment, may be charged
by Process of the Court, according to the course thereof in that behalf.

None shall be double charged for his Titles or degrees.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That no person shall by virtue of this Act,
be doubly charged for or in respect of several Titles, Honors or Degrees; but
that every such person shall be charged and assessed for such Title, Honor or
Degree only as is Highest Rated by this Act.

Not Letters Patents of Exemption allowable against this Tax.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Letters Patents
granted by the Kings Majesty, or any of His Royal Progenitors, or to be granted
by His Majesty to any person or persons, Cities, Boroughs or Towns corporate
within this Realm, of any manner of Liberties, Privileges or Exemptions from
Subsidies, Toll, Taxes, Assessments or Aids, shall be construed or taken to
exempt any person or persons, City, Borough or Town-corporate, or any the
Inhabitants of the same, from the burden and charge of any sum or sums of
money granted by this Act, or any other Act of this Parliament now in force, to
the Aid and Supply of His Majesty in the present War, And all Non-obstantes in
any such Letters Patents made or to be made, in bar of any Act or Acts of
Parliament for the supply or assistance of His Majesty, are hereby declared to
be void and of none effect; Non obstante.
Any such Letters Patents, Grants or Chatter, or any Clause of Non obstante, or
other matter or thing therein contained, or any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

No former Receiver not having accounted, may be a receiver upon this Act.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person being a Receiver of money due upon any former Act of this present
Parliament, not having accounted for all the moneys by him received, and to be
accounted for upon such Act or Acts, before Michaelmas One thousand six hundred
sixty six, shall be appointed Receiver for any the moneys due by this Act, and
shall intermeddle therein, every such person shall forfeit the sum of Five
hundred pounds, to be recovered by any person or persons that will sue for the
same in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint,
or other Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid Prayer,
Privilege, Injunction or Order of Restraint, shall be in any wise prayed,
granted or allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.

Provided always, And be it Enacted, That Thirty thousand pounds, and no more,
of the money to be raised by this Act, How Peers shall be rated.
may be applied for the payment of His Majesty's Guards.

Provided nevertheless, And be it further Enacted, That all and every the Peers
who are to be rated by virtue of this Act, for their Offices and personal
Estates, shall be rated by John Lord Roberts Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal,
George Duke of Buckingham, George Duke of Albemarle General of His Majesty's
Forces by Sea and Land, Edward Earl of Manchester Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, Anthony Earl of Kent, Richard Earl of Dorset, John Earl of
Bridgewater, James Earl of Northampton, Oliver Earl of Bolingbrook, Thomas Earl
Rivers, Arthur Earl of Essex, Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Charles Earl of
Carlisle, William Earl of Craven; Richard Lord Archbishop of York, Humphrey
Lord Bishop of London, George Lord Bishop of Winchester, Benjamin Lord Bishop
of Lincoln, Seth Lord Bishop of Exeter, Edward Lord Bishop of Carlisle, John
Lord Bishop of Rochester, Henry Lord Arlington one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, George Lord Berkley of Berkley-Castle, Philip Lord
Wharton, Charles Lord Howard of Charlton, William Lord Gray of Wark, Francis
Lord Newport, John Lord Lucas, John Lord Bellasyse, Charles Lord Gerard of
Brandon, Charles Lord Cornwallis, and Anthony Lord Ashley, Chancellor and
Undertreasurer of His Majesty's Exchequer, or any five of them, and not
otherwise, and shall not be Subject to the Imprisonment of his or their
Persons, Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstandding.

And to the intent that all Moneys to be lent to Your Majesty, and the Moneys
that shall be due upon Contracts for Wares, Ships, Goods, Victuals, or other
Necessaries which shall be delivered for this Service, may be well and
sufficiently secured out of the Moneys arising and payable by this Act.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, How moneys sent o^ ^ares
advanced upon this Act may be secu^ed.
That there shall be provided and kept in Your Majesty's Exchequer (to wit) in
the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, One Book or Register, in which all
Moneys that shall be paid into the Exchequer shall be Entered and Registered
apart and distinct from all other Moneys paid or payable to Your Majesty, or to
Your Heirs or Successors, upon any other Branch of Your Revenue, or upon other
Account whatsoever. And that there be one other Book or Registry provided and
kept in the said Office, of all Orders and Warrants to be made by the Lord
Treasurer, and Undertreasurer or by the Commissioners of the Treasury for the
time being, for payment of all and every sum and sums of Moneys to all persons
for Moneys lent, Wares, Goods or Victuals, or other Necessaries bought or Ships
hired, or other payments directed by Your Majesty, relating to the service of
this War. And that no Moneys leviable by this Act, be issued out of the
Exchequer during this War, but by such Order or Warrant mentioning, That the
Moneys payable by such Order or Warrant, are for the service of Your Majesty in
the said War respectively. That also there be the like Book or Registry
provided and kept by the said Auditor, of all Moneys paid out, or issued by
virtue of such Orders and Warrants.

And that it shall be lawful for any person or persons, willing to lend any
Money, or to furnish any Wares, Victuals, Ships, Goods, or other Necessaries on
the Credit of this Act, at the usual times when the Exchequer is open, to have
access unto, and review and peruse all or any of the said Books for their
Information of the State of those Moneys, and all Engagements upon them, for
their better encouragement to lend any Moneys, or furnish any Goods, Wares,
Victuals, Ships, or other Necessaries as aforesaid. And that the Auditor of the
Receipt, his Deputies and Clerks shall be assistant to such persons for their
better and speedier satisfaction in that behalf. And that all and every person
and persons who shall lend any Moneys to Your Majesty, and pay the same into
the Receipt of the Exchequer, shall immediately have a Tally of Loan struck for
the same, and an Order for his Repayment, bearing the same Date with his Tally;
in which Order shall be also contained a Warrant for payment of Interest for
forbearance after the Rate of Sir per Cent. per annum, for his consideration,
to be paid every three Months, until the repayment of his Principal. And that
all person and persons who shall furnish Your Majesty, Your Officers of the
Navy, or Ordnance, with any Wares, Goods, Ships, Victuals, or any other
Necessaries for the Service aforesaid, shall upon Certificate of the
Commissioners and Officers of the Navy, or of the Master or Commissioners and
Officers of the Ordinance, or some of them, without delay forthwith have made
out to them Warrants or Orders for the payment of the Moneys due or payable
unto them; which Certificates the said Officers of Your Navy, Commissioners,
and Officers of the Ordnance shall make without Fee, Charge or Delay: And that
all Orders for Repayment of Money lent, shall be Registered in course according
to the Date of the Tallies respectively. And that all Orders signed by the Lord
Treasurer, and Undertreasurer of the Exchequer, for payment of Moneys for
Goods, Wares, Victuals, and other Necessaries furnished to Your Majesty, Your
Officers, Master, or Commissioners as aforesaid, shall be Registered in course
according to the time of bringing to the Office of the Auditor of Receipt the
Certificates above mentioned. And that all Orders so Signed for payments
directed by His Majesty, shall be entered in course according to their
respective Dates, and none of the sorts of Orders above mentioned either for
Loans of Money, Supplies of Wares, Goods, Victuals, or other necessaries, or by
special direction, shall have preference one before another, but shall all be
Entered in their course, according to the dates of the Tallies, the times of
bringing their Certificates, and the dates of the Orders for Payments directed
by His Majesty, as they are in point of time respectively before each other:
And that all and every person and persons shall be paid in course, according as
their Orders shall stand Entered in the said Register-Book, Be it Orders for
Payments directed by His Majesty, or of Moneys lent, or for Wares, Commodities,
Ships, Victuals, or other necessaries furnished as aforesaid; so as that the
person, Native or Foreigner, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, who
shall have his Warrant or Order, Warrants or Orders first entered in the said
Book of Registry, shall be taken and accounted as the first person to be paid
upon the moneys to come in by virtue of this Act; And he or they that shall
have his or their Warrants or Orders, Warrant or Order next entered, shall be
taken and accounted the second person to be paid, and so successively and in
course. And that the moneys to come in by this Act, shall be in the same order
liable to the satisfaction of the said respective parties, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns successively, without preference of one before
another, and not otherwise; and not be divertible to any other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. And that no Fee, Reward or Gratuity, directly or
indirectly, be demanded or taken of any Your Majesty's Subjects, for providing
or making of any such Books, Registers, Entries, View, Search or Certificate,
in or for payment of money lent, or the Interest thereof, or for payment of any
money upon any Order, upon any Contract for Wares and Goods furnished to the
use of Your Majesty's Navy and Ordnance as aforesaid, by any of Your Majesty's
Officer or Officers, their Clerks or Deputies, on pain of payment of treble
damages to the party grieved, by the party offending, with Costs of Suit; And
if the Officer himself take or demand any such Fee or reward, then to lose his
place also. And if any undue preference of one before another shall be made,
either in point of Registring, contrary to the true meaning of this Act, by any
such Officer or Officers, then the party offending shall be liable, by Action
of Debt, or on the Case, to pay the value of the Debt, Damages and Costs to the
party grieved, and shall be forejudged from his Place or Office: And if such
preference be unduly made by any his Deputy or Clerk, without direction or
privity of His Master, then such Deputy or Clerk only shall be liable to such
Action, Debt, Damages and Costs, and shall be for ever after incapable of his
Place or Office; And in case the Auditor shall not direct the Order, or the
Clerk of the Pells Record, or the Teller make payment according to each persons
due place and order, as before directed, then he or they shall be judged to
forfeit; and their respective Deputies and Clerks herein offending, to be
liable to such Action, Debt, Damages and Costs, in such manner as aforesaid.

All which said Penalties, Forfeitures, Damages and Costs to be incurred by any
of the Officers of the Exchequer, Navy or Ordnance, or any their Deputies or
Clerks, shall and may be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, wherein
no Essoyn, Protection, Privilege, Wager of Law, Injunction, or Order of
restraint, shall be in any wise granted or allowed.

Entries of Tallies or Certificates dated the same day.
Provided always, and be it hereby Declared, That if it happen that several
Tallies of Loan, or Certificates for Wares delivered, or Orders for Payments
directed by Your Majesty as aforesaid, bear date, or be brought the same day to
the Auditor of the Receipt to be Registered, then it shall be interpreted no
undue preference which of these he enters first, so he enters them all the same
day.

Provided also, That it shall not be interpreted any undue preference, to incur
any penalty in point of payment, If the Auditors direct, and the Clerk of the
Pells record, and the Teller do pay subsequent Orders of persons that come and
demand their money, and bring their Orders, before other persons that did not
come to demand their money, and bring their Order in their course, so as there
be so much money reserved as will satisfy their Orders, which shall not be
otherwise disposed, but kept for them, Interest upon Loan being to cease from
the time the money is so reserved and kept in bank for them.

Rights and titles to money sent upon this Act may be Assigned over.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person or
persons to whom any moneys shall be due by virtue of this Act, after Warrant or
Order entered in the Book of Register aforesaid for payment thereof, his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by Indorsement of his Order or Warrant,
may assign and transfer his Right, Title, Interest and Benefit of such Warrant
or Order, or any part thereof to any other; which being notified in the Office
of the Auditor of the Receipt aforesaid, and an entry and memorial thereof also
made in the Book of Registry aforesaid, for Warrants (which the Officers shall
on request, without Fee or charge, accordingly make) shall entitle such
Assignee, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the benefit thereof,
and payment thereon: And such Assignee may in like manner Assign again, and so
Toties quoties; and afterward it shall not be in the power of such person or
persons who have made such Assignments, to make void, release or discharge the
same, or any the moneys thereby due, or any part thereof.

Persons sued for executing this Act may plead the general issue.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Plaint, Suit or Information shall be commenced or prosecuted against any person
or persons for what he or they shall do in pursuance or in execution of this
Act; such person or persons so sued in any Court whatsoever, shall or may plead
the general Issue, Not guilty; and upon any Issue joined, may give this Act,
and the special matter in Evidence; And if the Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall
become Nonsuit or forbear further prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if
a Verdict pass against him, the Defendant and Defendants shall recover their
treble Costs; for which they shall have the like remedy as in any Case where
Costs by the Law are given to Defendants.

CAP. II.
Cattle may not be imported from Ireland and other parts beyond the Seas; nor
Fish taken by Foreigners.

WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, entitled, An Act for the
Encouragement of Trade, amongst other things, some Provision was made for the
preventing of coming in of vast Numbers of Cattle, 1^ Car. 2. cap. 5. Stat. 3.
whereby the Rents and Values of the Land of this Kingdom were much fallen,
and like daily to fall more, to the great Prejudice, Detriment and
Impoverishment of this Kingdom; which nevertheless has by experience been
found to be ineffectual; and the continuance of any Importation, either of the
Lean or Fat Cattle, dead or alive, herein after specified, not only
Unnecessary, but very Destructive to the welfare of this Kingdom: Be it
therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That such Importation from and after the second day of
February, Importation of Cattle a common Nuisance.
in this present year One thousand six hundred sixty and six, is a public and
common Nuisance, and shall be so adjudged, deemed and taken to be to all intents
and purposes whatsoever. And that if any great Cattle, Sheep or Swine, or any
Beef, Pork or Bacon (except for the necessary Provision of the respective Ships
or Vessels in which the same shall be brought, not exposing the same, or any
part thereof to Sale) shall from and after the said second day of February, by
any wise whatsoever, be Imported or brought from beyond Seas into this Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; That then it
shall and may be lawful for any Constable, The Penalty.
Tything-man, Headborough, Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, or any of
them, within their respective Liberties, Parishes or Places, to take and seize
the same, and keep the same during the space of Eight and forty hours, in some
public or convenient place where such Seizure shall be made; within which
time, if the Owner or Owners, or any for them or him, shall make it appear unto
some Justice of the Peace of the same County where the same shall be so seized,
by the Oath of two credible Witnesses, which Oath the said Justice of Peace is
hereby empowered and required to administer, That the same were not Imported
from Ireland, or from any other place beyond the Seas, not herein after
Excepted, after the said second day of February; Then the same upon the Warrant
of such Justice of Peace, shall be delivered without delay; But in default of
such Proof and Warrant, then the same to be forfeited; One half thereof to be
disposed to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the same shall be so found
or seized; the other half to be to his or their own use that shall so seize the
same.

And for the better encouragement of the Fishery of this Kingdom, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Ling, Herring, Cod or Pilchard,
fresh or salted, Encouragement of Fishery.
dried or bloated, or any Salmons, Eels or Congers taken by any Foreigners,
Aliens to this Kingdom, shall be Imported, uttered, sold, or exposed to sale in
this Kingdom; That then it shall and may be lawful for any person or persons to
take and seize the same; The one half thereof to be disposed of to the use of
the Poor of the Parish where the same shall be so found or seized; the other
half to his or their own use, which shall so seize the same.

Provided always, That nothing in this Act shall be construed to hinder the
Importation of Cattle from the Isle of Man in this Kingdom of England, Isle of
Man.
so as the number of the said Cattle do not exceed Six hundred Head yearly; And
that they be not of any other Breed then of the Breed of the Isle of Man; And
that they be landed at the Port of Chester, or some of the Members thereof, and
not elsewhere. This Act to continue until the end of Seven years, and from
thence to the end of the First Session of the next Parliament.

CAP. III.
A former Act for preventing of Theft and Rapine upon the Northern Borders of
England, Continued.

WHereas an Act was made in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord the King that now is, entitled, 14 Car. 2. cap. 22.
An Act for preventing of Theft and Rapine upon the Northern Borders of
England; which Act is very near expiring, and has been found very necessary
for the preservation of those places from that great number of Lewd,
Disorderly, and Lawless persons, that usually frequented thereabouts: Be it
therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That the said Act, and every Clause and Clauses therein
contained, and all and every the Powers and Authorities thereby given, be,
continue, and remain in force until the end of Seven years from the expiration
or determination of the forementioned Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the benefit of
Clergy shall be taken away from great, known and notorious Thieves and
Spoil-takers in the said Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, or either of
them, during the continuance of this present Act, Clergy taken away from
notorious Theives in Northumberland, Cumberland.
who shall be duly Convicted for Theft done or committed within the said
Counties, or either of them; Or otherwise, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the Justices of the Assize, and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or
Jail-deliver, before whom such Offenders shall be Convicted within the said
Counties, or either of them, to Transport, or cause to be Transported the said
Offenders, and every of them, into any of His Majesty's Dominions in America,
there to remain, and not to return; Any former Law, Statute or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CAP. IV.
For Burying in Woollen only.

FOr the Encouragement of the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom, and
prevention of the Exportation of the Moneys thereof, for the Buying and
Importing of Linen; Woollen Manufactures encouraged.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That from and after the
Five and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred sixty seven, No person or persons whatsoever shall be buried in any
Shirt, None shall be buried but in Woollen.
Shift, or Sheet made of, or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or
Silver, or other then what shall be made of Wool only, or be put into any
Coffin lined or faced with any thing made of, or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk
or Hair; upon pain of the forfeiture of the sum of Five pounds, Penalty.
to be employed to the use of the poor of the Parish where such person shall be
buried, for and toward the providing a Stock or Workhouse for the setting
them at work, to be levied by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of
such Parish, or one of them, by Warrant from any Justice of the Peace, or
Mayor, Alderman, or Head-officer of such City, Town or place Corporate,
respectively within their several Limits, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of
the party Interred contrary to this Act, rendering the overplus; or in default
thereof, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of any that had a hand in the
putting such person into such Shift, Shirt, Sheet or Coffin, contrary to this
Act, or did order or dispose the doing thereof, to be levied and employed as
abovesaid.

Proviso for persons dying of the Plague.
Provided, That no penalty appointed by this Act, shall be incurred for, or by
the reason of any person that shall die of the Plague, though such person be
buried in Linen.

CAP. V.
For Encouraging for Coynage.

WHereas it is obvious, That the plenty of Current Coyns of Gold and Silver of
this Kingdom, is of great advantage to Trade and Commerce; For the Increase
whereof, Your Majesty in Your Princely Wisdom and Care, has been graciously
pleased to bear out of Your Revenue, half the Charge of the Coynage of
Silver-money: For the preventing of which Charge to Your Majesty, Encouragement
for bringing Gold and Silver into the Realm.
and the Encouragement of the bringing of Gold and Silver into the Realm, to be
converted into the Current Money of this Your Majesty's Kingdom, We Your
Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, do Give and Grant unto Your Majesty, the
Rates, Duties or Impositions following; And do beseech Your Majesty that it may
be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That whatsoever
person or persons, Native or Foreigner, Alien or Stranger, Silver or Gold
brought in to be Coined.
shall from and after the Twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred
sixty and six, bring any Foreign Coin, Plate or Bullion of Gold or Silver, in
Mass, Molten, or Allayed, or any sort of Manufacture of Gold or Silver into His
Majesty's Mint or Mints within the Kingdom of England, to be there Melted down
and Coined into the current Coyns of this Kingdom, shall have the same there
Assayed, Melted down and Coined with all convenient speed, without any
Defalcation, Diminution or Charge for the Assaying, Coynage, or Wast in
Coynage: So as that for every pound Troy of Crown or Standard-Gold that shall
be brought in and delivered by him or them to be Assayed, Melted down, and
Coined as aforesaid, there shall be delivered out to him or them respectively,
a pound Troy of the current Coyns of this Kingdom, of Crown or Standard-Gold;
And for every pound Troy of Sterling, or Standard-Silver that shall be brought
in and delivered by him or them to be Assayed, Melted down and Coined as
aforesaid, there shall be delivered out to him or them respectively a pound
Troy of the current Coyns of this Kingdom, of Sterling, or Standard-Silver, and
so proportionably for a greater or lesser weight; And for every pound Troy of
Gold or Silver that shall be brought in, and delivered to be Assayed, Melted
down, and Coined as aforesaid, that shall be finer upon Assay then Crown-Gold,
or Standard-Silver, there shall be delivered for the same so much more then a
pound Troy, as the same does in proportion amount unto in ^^neness and value;
And for every pound Troy of Gold or Silver that shall be brought in, and
delivered to be Assayed, Melted down, and Coined as aforesaid, that shall be
courser or baser upon Assay, or worse in value then Crown-Gold, or
Standard-Silver, there shall be delivered for the same so much less then a
pound Troy, as the same does fall short in fineness or value, and so for a
greater or lesser quantity.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there shall
be no preference in point of Assaying or Coynage; There shall be no under
preference but money Coined shall be delivered out in order.
but that all Gold and Silver brought in, and delivered into the Mint, to be
Assayed and Coined, shall be Assayed, Coined, and delivered out to the
respective Importers, according to the order and times of bringing in and
delivering the same into the Mint or Mints, and not otherwise: So as he that
shall first bring in, and deliver any Gold or Silver to be Coined, shall be
taken and accounted the first person to have the same Assayed, Coined, and
Delivered; And he or they that shall bring in and deliver any Gold or Siver
next, to be accounted the second person to have the same Assayed, Coined, and
Delivered; and so successively in course. And that the Gold and Silver brought
in and Coined as aforesaid, shall be in the same order delivered to the
respective bringers in thereof, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns
successively without preference of one before the other, and not otherwise: And
if any undue preference be made in Entering of any Gold or Silver, or delivering
out of any money Coined, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act,
by any Officer or Officers of the Mint or Mints; Penalty.
then the party or parties offending, shall be liable by Action of Debt, or in
the Case, to pay the value of the Gold or Silver brought in, and not Entered and
Delivered according to the true intent, and meaning and direction of this Act
as aforesaid, with Damages and Costs to the party or parties grieved, and shall
be fore-judged from his or their Place or Office: And if such preference be
unduly made by any of his or their Deputy or Deputies, Clerk or Clerks, without
direction or privity of his or their Master or Masters, then such Deputy or
Deputies, Clerk or Clerks only shall be liable to such Action, Damage and
Costs as aforesaid, and be for ever after incapable of serving or bearing
Office in any Mint in the Kingdom of England.

Provided always, That it shall not be interpreted any undue preference to
incur any penalty in point of Delivery of moneys Coined, if the Officer or
Officers, What shall not be an undue preference.
or their Deputies or Clerks shall deliver out or pay any moneys Coined, to any
person or persons that do come and demand the same upon subsequent Entries,
before others that did not come to demand their moneys in their order and
course, so as there be so much money reserved as will satisfy them, which
shall not be otherwise disposed of, but kept for them.

And for the more orderly and clear performance thereof, Be it Enacted, And it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Master-worker of His
Majesty's Mint or Mints for the time being, shall at the time of the Delivery
and Entry of any Gold or Silver in the said Mint or Mints, give unto the
bringer or bringers in thereof to be Coined, a Bill under his hand, denoting
the Weight, Fineness and Value thereof, together with the Day and Order of its
Delivery into the said Mint or Mints.

And for the further Encouragement and Assurance of such as shall bring any
Gold or Silver into his Majesty's said Mint or Mints to be Coined; Be it
Enacted, There shall be no seizure, or forfeiture, etc. of any Gold or Silver
brought in to be coined.
And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Confiscation,
Forfeiture, Seizure, Attachment, Stop or Restraint whatsoever shall be made in
the said Mint or Mints, of any Gold or Silver brought in to be Coined, for or
by reason of any Imbargo, breach of the Peace, Letters of Mart or Reprisal, or
War with any Foreign Nation, or upon any other account or pretense whatsoever;
But that all Gold and Silver brought into any of his Majesty's Mint or Mints
within the Kingdom of England to be Coined, shall truly, and with all
convenient speed be Coined and delivered out to the respective bringer or
bringers in thereof, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, according to
the Rules and Directions of this Act.

And whereas it cannot be reasonably expected, that the Expense, Waste, and
Charge in Assaying, Melting down and Coynage be born by Your Majesty, And for
the further encouragement of Coynage, Be it Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, An Imposition set upon Wines, Vinegar, Sider, or
Beer Imported.
That for every Tun of Wines, Vinegar, Sider, or Beer that shall be Imported or
brought into the Port of London, or into any other Port, Creek or place within
the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, from
any parts beyond the Seas, or Scotland, from and after the Twentieth day of
December, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and six, there
shall be Levied, Collected and paid the sum of Ten shillings; And for every Tun
of Brandy-wines, or Strong Water that shall be imported as abovesaid, the sum
of Twenty shillings, Brandy-wine. Strong-water.
and so proportionably for a greater or lesser quantity, to be Levied,
Collected and paid at the respective Custom-Houses to the Collectors and other
Officers of the Customs for the time being, at the Importation of the said
Commodities, over and above all other Duties charged, leviable and payable upon
the said Commodities, and to be by them distinguished and kept apart from all
other moneys by them Collected and Levied upon the same Commodities, or upon
any other Commodities or Merchandises whatsoever, and to be by the said
Collector or Collectors respectively so answered and paid Quarterly into the
Receipt of the Exchequer of Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, there also
to be kept distinct and apart from all other moneys arising by the Customs, or
by any other way or Revenue whatsoever; which said Duty they are hereby
enjoined to receive and pay according to the several Directions of this Act,
without any Salary or Fee.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all
manner of Wines, Vinegar, Sider, Beer, Brandy-wines, and Strong Water Imported
as aforesaid, shall pay their several and respective Duties imposed by this
Act; And upon non-payment thereof, shall be liable to such, and the same pains,
penalties and forfeitures, as in and by the late Acts for Tunnage and Poundage,
and for Frauds, are Enacted and appointed, upon non-payment of the Duties by
the said Acts imposed upon Goods and Merchandises of the same nature with those
mentioned in this Act.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That for what of the aforesaid
Commodities shall be Transported into any parts beyond the Seas, within the
term and space of one year after the Importation thereof, That the Duty paid by
this Act for the same, shall be repaid by the respective Collectors of the
Customs for the time being.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That no moneys leviable and payable by this
Act, shall be applied or converted to any use or uses whatsoever, Moneys
leviable upon this Act shall be employed only to the use of the Mint.
other then to the defraying the charge or expense of the Mint or Mints, and of
the Assaying, Melting down, Waste and Coynage of Gold and Silver, and the
encouragement of the bringing in of Gold and Silver into the said Mint or
Mints, there to be Coined into the current Coyns of this Kingdom; Nor shall any
of the said Moneys be issued out of the Exchequer, but by Order or Warrant of
the Lord Treasurer and Undertreasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for
the time being, to the Master and Worker, or Masters and Workers of Your
Majesty's Mint or Mints for the time being, and mentioning, That they are for
the use and service aforesaid, to be kept in His Majesty's Office of Receipt in
the said Mint or Mints, under the usual Keys of the Warden, Master and Worker,
and Comptroller for the time being, and issued out thence from time to time,
according to the manner and course of the said Mint or Mints respectively.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That there shall not be issued out of the
Exchequer of the said moneys, in any one year, for the Fees and Salaries of the
Officers of the Mint or Mints, and toward the providing, maintaining and
repairing of the Houses, Offices and Buildings, and other necessaries for
Assaying, Melting down, and Coining, above the sum of Three thousand pounds
Sterling money; And the overplus of the said moneys so kept, or to be kept as
aforesaid, shall be employed for and toward the expense, waste and charge of
assaying, melting down and Coynage, and buying in of Gold and Silver to Coin,
The continuance of this Act.
and not otherwise.

And lastly, Be it Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the Twentieth day
of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
seventy one, and until the end of the first Session of Parliament then next
following, Proviso.
and no longer.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That where His Majesty in and by
his Letters Patents under his Great Seal, dated at Westminster the Twentieth
day of August, in the Twelfth year of his Reign, Dame Barbara Villiers.
did for diverse good causes and considerations Him moving, give and grant to
Dame Barbara Villiers Widow, the sum of Two pence by tale out of every pound
weight Troy of Silver moneys which from thenceforth should be Coined by virtue
of any Warrant or Indenture made and to be made by His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, To have, hold, receive, perceive and take the same unto the said
Dame Barbara Villiers, her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the
Ninth day of the then instant August weekly, as the said moneys should be
Coined, for and during the term of One and twenty years, as by the same does
appear: That His Majesty may out of the moneys leviable by this Act, appoint
and cause reasonable satisfaction to be made yearly to the said Dame Barbara
Villiers, her Executors and Administrators, for her Interest in the Premises,
not exceeding the sum of Six hundred pounds in any one year.

Anno Regni CAROLI II. Regis Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Decimo
Nono.
AT the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661.
In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. And there continued by several Prorogations, to the
18th day of September, 1666. And then continued to the 8th of February
following. And thence Prorogued to the 10th of October, 1667. were Enacted as
follows.

CAP. I.
An Act Explanatory of the Act for Raising Moneys by a Poll, and otherwise,
toward the Maintenance of this present War.

18 Car. 2. cap. 1.
WHereas by an Act of this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
Raising Moneys by a Poll, and otherwise, toward the Maintenance of this
present War; It is Enacted, That all and every person and persons shall pay
unto His Majesty the sum of Twelve pence over and above the other Rates charged
upon them by the said Act: To prevent all doubts that may arise in the
execution thereof, Be it Enacted and Declared by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the said sum of Twelve pence shall be charged upon,
and be paid by every person, of what age, sex, or condition soever, within the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, other
then such persons who receive Alms from the Parish, and the Children of any
person remaining in his or her family, who by reason of their poverty does not
contribute unto the Rates for Church and Poor, and which are under the age of
sixteen years, and are therefore exempted by the said Act. And be it further
Enacted, That the respective Parents, Guardians and Tutors of every person
under the age of One and twenty years, shall upon default of payment by such
person, and upon demand, pay Twelve pence for every such person residing in
their family, or under their Tuition, and not exempted as aforesaid. And be it
Enacted, That every person and persons charged or appointed to make any payment
by virtue of this present Act, shall be compellable by the Commissioners
appointed by the before recited Act, or any two or more of them, to pay the
same, according unto the Rules and Methods, and under the Penalties for paying
the Rates expressed in the said recited Act. And be it further Enacted and
Declared, That every person or persons charged by the said recited Act for his
or their Profession, Office, or in respect of any other capacity chargeable by
this, or the aforesaid Act, who shall find him or themselves overcharged, shall
and may upon his or their Appeal before the Commissioners in the said Act
mentioned, or any two or more of them, upon his or their several Oaths,
discharge him or themselves in such manner and form, as persons over-rated for
their personal Estates are by the said Act enabled. And be it Enacted, That all
persons not being Householders, nor having a certain place of abode, and all
Servants shall be taxed at the places where they shall be resident at the time
of the execution of the said Act, and not otherwhere.

CAP. II.
A Judicature erected for Determination of Differences touching Houses Burned
or Demolished by reason of the late Fire which happened in London.

WHereas the greatest part of the Houses in the City of London, and some in the
Suburbs thereof, have been burnt by the dreadful and dismal Fire which happened
in September last; Many of the Tenants, Vnder-tenants, or late Occupiers
whereof are liable unto Suits and Actions to compel them to repair and rebuild
the same, and to pay their Rents, as if the same had not been burned, and are
not relieveable therein in any ordinary course of Law, and great Differences
are like to arise concerning the said Repairs and new Building of the said
Houses, and payment of Rents; which if they should not be determined with all
speed, and without charge, would much obstruct the rebuilding of the said City.

And for that it is just, that every one concerned should bear a proportionable
share of the loss, according to their several Interests, wherein in respect of
the multitude of cases, varying in their circumstances, no certain general rule
can be prescribed; Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of
the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, That the Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench and Common Pleas, Justices
appointed to hear and determine differences between Landlords and Tenants, etc.
and the Barons of the Coife of the Exchequer for the time being, or any three
or more of them, sitting, at the same time and place, and not otherwise, shall
be, and are hereby Authorized from time to time to hear and to determine all
Differences and Demands whatsoever, which have arisen, or may any wise arise
between Landlords, Proprietors, Tenants, Lessees, Vnder-tenants, or late
Occupiers of any the said Houses or Buildings, with their appurtenances, or the
Courts or Yards, Grounds and Wharfs, or any person or persons having or
claiming any Estate, Right, Title, Interest in Law or Equity or Trust, Charge,
or Encumbrance of or in the same, or their or any of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, Successors or Assigns, or any other persons, for, touching or
concerning the Repairing, Building or Rebuilding of the said Houses or
Buildings, Yards, Courts, Grounds and Wharfs, or any other Grounds lying within
that part of the City and Suburbs thereof lately burnt, pulled down, or
otherwise demolished, defaced, or otherwise ruined by reason of the said Fire;
or for or concerning the payment, defalcation, apportioning, or abatement of
any Rent or Rents, other then Arrears of Rent only due before the First day of
September, One thousand six hundred sixty and six; or for or touching any
Covenant, Condition or penalty relating thereunto; or for, touching, or
concerning the prefixing or limiting of any time for such Repairs or new
Building, Rebuilding, or any Rate or Contribution to be born or paid thereunto
by any person or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate interessed in the
premises, and all Incidents relating thereunto. And that they, or any three or
more of them, from time to time, with, or without any Adjournment, summarily,
and sine forma and figura Judicii, and without the formalities of proceedings
in Courts of Law or Equity, shall and may, upon the Verdict or Inquisition of
Jurors, testimony of witnesses upon Oath, Examination of parties interessed, or
by all or any of the said ways, or otherwise, according to their Discretions,
proceed to the hearing and determining of the Demands or Differences between
the said parties concerning the premises; and that the definitive Order of the
said Justices and Barons, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, shall be
final as between the said parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
Successors and Assigns, and all claiming by, from or under them, as touching
the matters contained in such Orders; from which there shall be no Appeal or
Review, otherwise then as is hereafter mentioned; Nor shall any Writ of Error
or Certiorari lie for the removal or reversal of the same.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices
and Barons, The Powers of the said Justices.
or any three or more of them as aforesaid, shall have Authority, and are
hereby Empowered, where they shall think it convenient, to Order the
Surrendering, Increasing, Abridging, Ceasing, Determining or Charging of any
Estates in the Premises; or to order new or longer Leases, or Estates, not
exceeding Forty years, to be made of any of the premises by the Proprietors or
Owners thereof, or other persons interessed therein, to any Tenant or
Sub-Tenant, or late Occupiers of the same, their Executors, Administrators,
Successors or Assigns, at such Rents and Fines, or without any Rent or Fine, as
they shall think fit, unless in such Cases where the Laws of this Realm do
forbid the Diminishing of ancient and accustomable Rents. All which Orders,
according to the Tenors thereof, shall be obeyed by all persons concerned
therein respectively, and shall conclude and bind them, their Heirs,
Successors, Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, notwithstanding
any Disability in respect of Coverture, Infancy, Non-sanity of Memory, Estate
Tail, or in Right of the Church, or otherwise: And that Infants, Femes Covert,
Idiots, persons of Non-sane Memory, or beyond the Seas, Tenants in Tail,
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and other Ecclesiastical persons, and their
Successors, Corporations, and all other person or persons, Bodies Natural and
Politic, their Heirs and Successors, and their respective Interests, shall be
bound and concluded by such respective Order or Orders, according to the Tenor
or Purport thereof; Any Law, Statute or Custom, or other matter or thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And for the better Enabling the said Justices and Barons to proceed with
effect in the said Causes, How to proceed upon Complaints.
Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices and
Barons, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, upon the complaint or
request of any person or persons concerned in any of the said Houses or
Buildings, and other the premises, shall issue out Notes or Warrants under
their hands, or the hands of any such three of them, thereby warning the person
or persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate therein named and concerned in the
said late Houses or Buildings, and other the premises in such Complaint
mentioned, to appear before them at such time and place as in such Note or
Notes shall in that behalf be specified: And upon appearance of the said person
or persons summoned, or upon default of appearance, and Oath made of due notice
given to him or them, (which Oath, and all other Oaths necessary to the
Execution of the Powers given by this Act, the said Justices and Barons, or any
three of them are hereby enabled to administer) The said Justices and Barons,
or any three of them, may proceed to make such final and definitive Orders as
aforesaid; And that such service of the said Note or Notes as is usually
allowed to be a good service in cases of Subpoena, shall be accounted to be a
good service in the cases aforesaid.

The said Indicature shall be a Court of Record.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Justices and
Barons, or any three of them, for the matters, and according to the powers
herein before mentioned, shall be, and shall be taken to be a Court of Record:
And that the Judgments and Determinations that shall be made betwixt party and
party, by Authority of this Act, shall be Recorded in a Book or Books of
Parchment to be provided for that purpose; And that every such Judgment and
Determination shall be Signed by three or more of the said Justices or Barons.
Which said Book or Books of Record shall be placed and entrusted in the custody
of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, to be
kept with the Records of the said City, and to remain as a perpetual standing
Record; unto which all persons concerned, or which shall be concerned, shall or
may repair to view the same, and thereout to take Copies of all such Judgments
and Determinations as shall relate to him, her, and them; And that none of the
said Justices and Barons shall take any Fee or Reward whatsoever, directly or
indirectly for any thing to be done by them, by virtue or color of this
present Act.

Officers.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for a reward of the Officers
to be employed herein, A Table of Fees.
the said Justices and Barons, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, are
hereby enabled to order and direct a Table of such reasonable Fees to be made,
as may carry on and effect the purport and intent of this Act. This Act to
continue till the last day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord
One thousand six hundred sixty and eight, The continuance of this Act.
and no longer.

Proviso touching the renewing and reversing Orders or Decrees.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any
such Order or Decree as aforesaid, shall be made by a lesser number of Justices
and Barons then Seven, it shall be lawful for any person agrieved by such Order
or Decree, to present his Exceptions to the same in writing, within seven days
next after such Order or Decree made, to the Chief Justices and Chief Baron for
the time being, or any two of them, who shall forthwith communicate the same to
the rest of the said Justices and Barons, who are hereby required to hear the
Parties, and examine and consider the said Exceptions: And if any Seven or more
of them shall subscribe thereunto, that they find probable cause of complaint,
Then it shall and may be lawful to, and for any Seven or more of the said
Justices and Barons, within Twenty days next following such Exceptions
delivered, to review the said former Order or Decree; And thereupon to reverse,
Confirm, Enlarge, Diminish, or otherwise alter any such Order or Decree, as in
their wisdoms they shall think fit; Any thing herein contained notwithstanding.

CAP. III.
For Rebuilding the City of London.

FOrasmuch as the City of London, being the Imperial Seat of His Majesty's
Kingdoms, and renowned for Trade and Commerce throughout the World; by reason
of a most dreadful Fire lately happening therein, was for the most part thereof
burnt down and destroyed within the compass of a few days, and now lies buried
in its own Ruins: For the speedy Restoration whereof, and for the better
Regulation, Uniformity, and Gracefulness of such new Buildings as shall be
erected for Habitations in order thereunto; And to the end that great and
outrageous Fires (through the blessing of Almighty God, so far forth as humane
Providence (with submission to the Divine pleasure) can foresee) may be
reasonably prevented or obviated for the time to come, both by the matter and
form of such Building: And further, to the intent that all Encouragement and
Expedition may be given unto, and all Impediments and Obstructions that may
retard or protract the undertaking or carrying on a work so necessary, and of
so great Honor and Importance to His Majesty and this Kingdom, and to the rest
of His Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, may be removed;

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the Rules
and Directions hereafter in this Act prescribed, be duly observed by all
persons therein concerned.

And first, That no Building or House for Habitation whatsoever, Rules and
directions to be observed in building.
be hereafter Erected within the limits of the said City and Liberties thereof,
but such as shall be pursuant to such Rules and Orders of Building, and with
such materials as are herein after particularly appointed, and according to
such Scantlings as are set down and prescribed in a Table in this present Act
hereafter specified. And if any person or persons shall presume to Build
contrary thereunto, and be convicted of the same by the Oaths of two or more
credible witnesses, to be taken before the Lord Mayor for the time being, or
any two or more of the Justices of the Peace for the said City, Penalty.
who are hereby empowered to administer the same Oaths, that then and in such
case, the said House so irregularly built as aforesaid, shall be deemed as a
common Nuisance; and the Builder and Levier thereof shall enter into a
Recognizance in such sum as the said Mayor and Justices respectively in their
Discretions shall appoint, for abatement and demolishing the same in convenient
time, or otherwise to amend the same according to such Rules and Orders as
aforesaid; and in default of entering into such Recognizance, the Offender shall
be committed to the common Gaol of the said City, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprize, till he shall have abated or demolished, or otherwise amended the
same; or else such irregular House shall or may be demolished or abated by
Order of the Court of Aldermen.

And that the said irregular Buildings may be the better prevented, or more
effectually discovered, Prevention of irregular buildings.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council of the said City, shall and may at their will and
pleasure, elect, nominate and appoint one or more discreet and intelligent
person or persons in the Art of Building, to be the Surveyors or Supervisors,
to see the said Rules and Scantlings well and truly observed. And that it shall
be lawful for the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, or for the Mayor and
Aldermen in their Court of Aldermen, to administer to all the said Surveyors or
Supervisors, an Oath upon the holy Evangelists, for the true and impartial
execution of their Office in that behalf, and to appoint the several Precincts
which shall be under their several Surveys.

And to the end that all Builders may the better know how to provide and fit
their materials for their several Buildings: Be it Enacted, That there shall be
only Four sorts of Buildings, There shall be four sorts of buildings only.
and no more; and that all manner of Houses so to be erected, shall be of one
of those four sorts of Buildings, and no other, (that is to say) The First and
least sort of Houses fronting By-Lanes; the Second sort of Houses fronting
Streets and Lanes of note; the Third sort of Houses fronting high and principal
Streets; the Fourth and largest sort of Mansion-houses, for Citizens, or other
persons of extraordinary quality, not fronting either of the three former ways:
And the Roofs of each of the first three sorts of Houses respectively shall be
Uniform.

And for avoiding any uncertainty to the Builders, or others herein; Be it
further Enacted, Powers of the Lord Mayor Aldermen and Common Council to
declare Streets Lanes etc.
That the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the said City for the
time being, shall on or before the first day of April next ensuing, declare
which, and how many shall hereafter be accounted and taken to be By-lanes;
which, and how many shall hereafter be deemed Streets, or Lanes of note, and
high and principal Streets, by Act of Common Council to be passed for that
purpose: which Declaration being made as aforesaid, all and singular the said
Streets and Lanes (hereby intended to be rebuilt) shall by Order of the said
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, or such persons as they under the
Common Seal of the said City shall order and appoint, be Marked or Staked out,
and distinguished; to the end the Breadth, Length and Extent thereof may be the
better known and observed: And if any person or persons whatsoever shall
wittingly or willingly, without good Authority, pluck up, or remove any of the
said Stakes, or Markstones, thereby to obscure or confound the bounds of such
Streets, or Lanes, or any of them, and shall be thereof legally convicted by
the Oath of one Witness (other then of the Informer) to be taken before any
one, or more Justices of the Peace of the said City, That then the said Justice
or Justices shall or may send such Offender to the Common-gaol of the said
City, there to remain by the space of three months without Bail or Mainprize,
unless he shall pay or cause to be paid to the use of the Mayor, Commonalty,
and Citizens of the said City, the sum of Ten pounds, to be employed in and
toward the repairing of the public Buildings of the said City. Provided
always, That where any such Offense shall be committed by any person or persons
of low and mean condition, whom the said Justice or Justices of the Peace shall
in his conscience believe to be unable to satisfy the said Penalties, That
then and in such case, the said Justice or Justices of the Peace shall and may,
by Order and Warrant under his or their Hands and Seals, cause such Offender to
be openly whipped near unto the place where the Offense shall be committed,
till his body be bloody: And that it shall and may be lawful for the said
Justice or Justices of the Peace to reward the said Informer out of the
Pecuniary Penalty to be incurred, according to his discretion, not exceeding a
Third part of the said Penalty.

And in regard the building with Brick is not only more comely and durable,
but also more safe against future perils of Fire; Building with Brick, Stone,
Oak.
Be it further Enacted by and with the Authority aforesaid, That all the
outsides of all Buildings in and about the said City be henceforth made of
Brick or Stone, or of Brick and Stone together, except Door-cases and
Window-frames, the Breast, Summers, and other parts of the first Story to the
Front, between the Peers, which are to be left to the discretion of the
Builder, to use substantial Oaken Timber in stead of Brick or Stone, for
convenience of Shops; And that the said Doors, Breast, Summers, and
Window-frames be sufficiently discharged of the burden of the Fabric by
Arch-work of Brick or Stone, either straight or circular.

The duty of the Surveyors and Supervisors.
And be it Enacted, That the said Surveyors, or Supervisors so to be appointed
as aforesaid, and every of them, within their several Precincts, shall take
care, That in Building of all Houses within the said City and Liberties
thereof, there be, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
there shall be Party-walls, and Party-peers set out equally on each Builders
ground, to be built up by the first beginner of such Building; And that
convenient Toothing be left in the Front-wall by the said first Builder, for
the better joining of the next House that shall be built to the same: And that
no man be permitted by the said Surveyors, to build on the said Party-wall, or
on his own contiguous ground, until he has fully reimbursed the said first
Builder the full moiety of the charges of the said Party-wall and Peers,
together with Interest for the same, after the rate of Six pounds per Cent. per
Annum for forbearance thereof, to be accounted from the beginning of the said
first building. Who may determine Differences between first and later builders.
And in case any difference shall arise between the first and later Builders,
concerning the true value of the said Charge, That then the same be referred to
the Alderman of that Ward where such Building shall be, and to his Deputy, to
mediate an agreement of such difference: And where the said Alderman and his
Deputy, or one of them shall be parties, or where they cannot compose such
difference as aforesaid, That the matter be referred to the Examination of the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, who shall hear, and finally determine the
same, without any Appeal to be had.

Houses of the first and last sort of building.
And be it further Enacted, That the said Houses of the first and least sort of
Building, fronting By-streets or Lanes as aforesaid, shall be of two Stories
high, besides Cellars and Garrets: That the Cellars thereof be six foot and a
half high, if the springs of water hinder not; That the first Story be nine
foot high from the Floor to the Cieling; and the second Story nine foot high
from the Floor to the Cieling; That all Walls in front and rear, as high as the
first Story, be of the full thickness of the length of two Bricks, and thence
upwards to the Garrets of the thickness of one Brick and an half; and that the
thickness of the Garret-walls on the back-part be left to the discretion of the
Builder, so that the same be not less then the length of one Brick: And also
that the thickness of the Party-walls between these Houses of this first and
lesser sort of Building, be one Brick and an half, as high as the said Garrets;
and that the thickness of the Party-wall in the Garrets, be of the thickness of
one Brick in length at the least; and that the Scantlings of Timber and Stone
to be used about the building thereof, be as in the said Table are set down and
prescribed.

Houses of the second sort of building.
And be it further Enacted, That the Houses of the second sort of Building,
fronting Streets and Lanes of note, and the River of Thames, shall consist of
three Stories high, besides Cellars and Garrets as aforesaid; That the Cellars
thereof be six foot and an half high (if the springs of water hinder not) That
the first Story contain full ten foot in height from the Floor to the Cieling;
the second, full ten foot; the third, nine foot: That all the said Walls in
front and rear, as high as the first Story, be of the full thickness of the
length of two Bricks and an half, and from thence upwards to the Garret-floor
of the thickness of one Brick and an half; and that the thickness of the
Garret-walls on the back-part be left to the discretion of the Builder, so that
the same be not less then the length of one Brick; and also that the thickness
of the Party-walls between every House of this second and larger sort of
Building, be two Brick lengths as high as the first Story, and thence upwards
to the Garrets of the thickness of one Brick and half; the Scantlings of Timber
and Stone to be as in the said Table are prescribed.

Houses of the third sort of building.
Also that the Houses of the third sort of Buildings, fronting the high and
principal Streets, shall consist of four Stories high, besides Cellars and
Garrets as aforesaid: That the first Story contain full ten foot in height from
the Floor to the Cieling; the second, ten foot and an half; the third, nine
foot; the fourth, eight foot and an half. That all the said Walls in front and
rear, as high as the first Story, be of the full thickness of the length of two
Bricks and an half, and from thence upwards to the Garret-floor of the
thickness of one Brick and an half: That the thickness of the Garret-walls on
the back part be left to the discretion of the Builder, so as the same be not
less then the length of one Brick; and also that the thickness of the
Party-walls between every house of this third and larger sort of Building be
two Bricks lengths as high as the first Story, and then upwards to the Garrets
of the thickness of one Brick and half; the scantlings of Timber and Stone to
be as in the said Table are prescribed.

Houses of the fourth sort of building.
And be it further Enacted, That all Houses of the fourth sort of Building,
being Mansionhouses, and of the greatest bigness, not fronting upon any of the
Streets or Lanes as aforesaid, shall bear the same Scantlings as in the Table
are set down for the same; and that the number of Stories, and the height
thereof be left to the discretion of the Builder, so as he exceed not four
Stories.

And be it further Enacted, That in the Front of all houses hereafter to be
erected in any such Streets as by Act of Common Council shall be declared to be
High-Streets, Fronts of Houses in High-streets. Belconies.
Belconies four foot broad, with Rails and Bars of Iron, of equal distance from
the ground, shall be placed; every of which Belconies shall contain in length
two parts of the Front of the house on which it shall be placed, in three parts
to be divided, and the remaining vacancy of the Front shall be supplied with a
Pent-house of the breadth of the Belcony, to be covered with Lead, Slate or
Tile, and to be Cieled with Plaistering underneath; and that the Water falling
as well from the tops of the said Houses, as from the said Belconies and
Pent-houses, be conveyed into the Channels by Party-pipes on the sides or
fronts of the said Houses; and that Pavements under every of the said Belconies
and Pent-houses be made of good and sufficient broad flat Stone, at the charge
of the Builder.

And be it further Enacted, How Houses fronting on High-Streets shall be built.
That no Builder of any of the Houses fronting any of the said Highstreets,
Streets or Lanes of note, be permitted to lay his first Floor over-the Cellar
more then Eighteen Inches above the said Streets, or less then Six, with one
Circular step to lead up thereunto, to be placed without the Building: And that
no Trap-doors or open Grates be in any wise suffered to be made into any such
Cellar or Warehouse without the foundations of the Front; but that all Lights
to be made into any of them, be henceforth made upright, and not otherwise; and
that no Bulks, Ietties, Windows, Posts, Seats, or any thing of like sort shall
be made or erected in any Streets, Lanes or By-lanes, to extend beyond the
ancient foundation of Houses; nor that any House be set further into the Street
then the ancient foundation; Saving only that in the high and principal
Streets, it shall be lawful for the Inhabitants to suffer their Stall-boards
(when their Shop-windows are set open) to turn over, and extend eleven inches
and no more, from the Foundation of their Houses into the Streets, for the
better convenience of their Shop-windows.

And be it further Enacted, That if any person or persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, Within what time all persons are to rebuild their houses. Penalty.
being Seized, Possessed, or Interessed of, or in any Ground which was formerly
builded upon, and the Houses thereupon being now burned or pulled down at the
time of the late Fire, shall not within Three years next ensuing build up the
same, That then the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London,
by Act of Common Council, may cause Proclamation to be publicly made between
the hours of Twelve and two of the clock in the afternoon, as well at or upon
the said Ground, as also at or upon the public Exchange of the said City,
thereby to give notice to all persons that shall be, or may be therein
concerned, to cause the same to be rebuilded according to the direction of this
present Act, within the space of Nine months then next following: And in case
the Owners thereof, or other person or persons having Interest therein, shall
refuse or neglect to rebuild the same, in manner, and within such time as
aforesaid, That then in such case the said Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the
said City are hereby Authorized to Issue out Warrants to the Sheriffs of London
for the time being, requiring them to Impannel and return before them a Jury of
good and lawful men of the said City, which the said Sheriffs are hereby
authorized and required to do accordingly; which Jury so returned, shall upon
their Oaths to be administered to them by the said Mayor and Court of Aldermen
(who are likewise hereby Authorized to minister the same) Enquire, Estimate and
Assess the true and just Value of such void Ground, according to their
Judgments; And that from and after such Inquiry and Valuation thereof made as
aforesaid (by Inquest of the said Jury) it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the said City, to make Sale of
the Fee or Inheritance thereof, by Conveyance under their Common Seal, to any
person or persons that will purchase the same at such price at which the same
shall have been so as aforesaid Estimated and Valued by the said Jury; and the
moneys thereupon to be received of the Purchasers thereof, shall be paid into
the Chamber of London, and from thence to be issued out and paid by the
Chamberlain of London for the time being, unto such person or persons who shall
have any Estate or Interest into, or out of the same, according to his or their
respective Estate or Estates, Title or Interest: which Sale so made and
Enrolled of Record, according to the Custom or Usage of the said City for
Inrollment of Bargains and Sales, shall be final and conclusive to all other
persons whatsoever, and shall bar them, their Heirs and Assigns, to claim any
Estate, Right, Title or Interest of, in, or out of the Grounds so sold,
precedent to the said Sale; And the Purchaser or Purchasers thereof, his and
their Heirs and Assigns, shall and may by virtue of this Act, have, hold and
enjoy the same against all persons claiming any Estate, Right, Title or
Interest into, or out of the same, his and their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, freed and discharged of and from Encumbrances in
Estate, Title, Charge or otherwise, precedent to the said Sale.

And to the end the said Builders may receive due encouragement, by having the
materials for building at reasonable Prices, and getting of Workmen for
moderate wages; Be it further Enacted, That in case of Combination, or
unreasonable Exaction by Brick-makers, Tile-makers, Who may (in case of
unreasonable exactions) set rates upon Materials and Workmen.
and Lime-burners, It shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the Court of
Kings Bench, or any two or more of them, upon the complaint of the said Mayor
and Court of Aldermen, to call before them such a number of Brick-makers,
Tile-makers, and Lime-burners, making or burning Brick, Tile or Lime, at any
place within Five miles distance of the River of Thames, as they shall think
fit; and upon conference with them had concerning the premises, if they will
be present, or otherwise in their absence, to Assess such reasonable Prices
from time to time upon every Thousand of the said Bricks and Tiles, and upon
every hundred of the said Lime, and every greater or lesser quantity, to be
delivered at the several Kilns: And also of all Carriages of the same Materials
from the said Kilns to the said City, whether by Land or by Water, as may
equally respect the honest profit of the said Brick-makers, Tile-makers,
Lime-burners and Carriers, and the necessity and convenience of the Builder.

Laborers Wages.
And to the intent no Brick-maker, Tile-maker, Lime-burner, Carpenter,
Brick-layer, Mason, Plaisterer, Ioyner, Plumber, or other Artificer, Workman or
Labourer, may make the common calamity a pretense to extort unreasonable or
excessive Wages; Be it likewise Enacted, That in case of combination or
exaction of unreasonable Wages by the said Artificers, Workmen or Laborers, or
any of them, the said Justices of the Court of King's Bench, or any two or more
of them, upon the like complaint of the said Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
shall and may from time to time, limit, rate and appoint the Wages of the said
Artificers, Workmen and Laborers, by the day, week, or otherwise, and what
wages every of the said Workmen shall have by the great, by the Foot, Yard, Rod
or Perch, or for any greater Quantity: which said Rates, together with the
Prices of the said Materials and Carriages so assessed, being set down in a
Table, and Proclamation thereof made by the Lord Mayor for the time being
accordingly, the same shall effectually bind all persons therein concerned. And
if any of the said Artificers refuse to sell the said Materials for the Prices
so assessed, or any of the said Carpenters, Bricklayers, Masons, Plaisterers,
Ioyners, Plumbers, or other Workmen or Laborers, shall either refuse to work
for the Wages so assessed, or shall depart from his said work after he has
undertaken to do the same, without License of such person or persons as
employed him, and before it be finished, unless it be for non-payment of his
hire, or other just cause to be allowed before one Justice of the Peace of such
place where the offense shall be committed; or if any person or persons
whatsoever shall by any secret ways or means give, covenant, article or agree
to give directly or indirectly, by himself, or any other for him, any other or
greater Wages, Prices, or other Commodity then shall be so assessed: the said
Offender and Offenders being thereof legally convict by the Oaths of one or
more witnesses, which Oath the said Justice is hereby empowered to administer,
shall be by the said Justice of the Peace forthwith committed to the Common
Gaol, there to remain by the space of one Month without Bail or Mainprize,
unless he shall pay, or cause to be paid for every such Offense to the said
Justice of the Peace, such Fine as by the discretion of the said Justice shall
be set upon any such Offender, not exceeding Ten pounds; Out of which Fine the
said Justice shall and may award and pay unto the party injured such
satisfaction as he shall judge reasonable, and the residue thereof shall pay
unto the Chamberlain of London for the time being, to be employed for and
toward the re-edifying of the Public Buildings of the City aforesaid.

For^iners may as Freemen, work in London.
And be it further Enacted, That all Carpenters, Bricklayers, Masons,
Plaisterers, Ioyners, and other Artificers, Workmen and Laborers, to be
employed in the said Buildings, who are not Freemen of the said City, shall
for the space of Seven years next ensuing, and for so long after as until the
said Buildings shall be fully finished, have and enjoy such and the same
liberty of working, and being set to work in the said Building, as the Freemen
of the City of the same Trades and Professions have and ought to enjoy; Any
Usage or Custom of the City to the contrary notwithstanding. And that such
Artificers as aforesaid, which for the space of Seven years shall have wrought
in the rebuilding of the City in their respective Arts, shall from and after
the said seven years, have and en^oy the same Liberty to work as Freemen of the
said City, for and during their natural lives. Provided always, That such
Artificers claiming such Privileges, shall be liable to undergo all such
Offices, and to pay and perform such Duties in reference to the Service and
Government of the City, as Freemen of the City of their respective Arts and
Trades are liable to undergo, pay and perform.

Who may determine differences between Builders, about stopping Lights, etc.
And to remove all obstacles which otherwise may hinder so good and profitable a
work, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all differences
arising between the said Builders or any others concerning placing and stopping
up of Lights, Windows, Watercourse or Gutters, which may hinder or retard the
said Building, shall and may be heard, mediated and determined (if it may be)
by the Alderman of the Ward where the cause of any such difference shall arise,
and his Deputy; and if either the said Alderman or his Deputy be concerned as
parties in the controversy, or that they cannot determine the said
Differences, that then, and in every such case the same be certified by the
said Alderman or his Deputy unconcerned therein, to the said Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, who upon deliberate hearing of all Parties, shall finally determine
the same without further or other Appeal.

Common Sewers, Drains and Vaults, etc.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the numbers and
places for all common Sewers, Drains and Vaults, and the order and manner of
paving and pitching the Streets and Lanes within the said City and Liberties
thereof, shall be designed and set out by such and so many persons as the said
Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty in Common Council assembled, shall from time to
time authorize and appoint under their Common Seal, or the more part of them;
which said persons so authorized and appointed, or any seven or more of them,
together with the said Surveyors, or some or one of them, within his or their
Precinct respectively, shall at their meeting have power and authority to order
and direct the making of any new Vaults, Drains and Sewers, or to cut into any
Drain or Sewer already made, and for the altering, enlarging, amending,
cleansing and scouring of any old Vaults, Sinks, or Common Sewers. For the
better effecting whereof, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
persons so authorized and appointed as aforesaid, or any seven or more of them,
at their said meeting, to impose any reasonable Tax upon all Houses within the
said City and Liberties thereof, in proportion to the benefit they shall
receive thereby, for and toward the new making, cutting, altering, enlarging,
amending, cleansing and scouring all and singular the said Vaults, Drains,
Sewers, Pavements, and Pitching aforesaid: And in default of payment of the
said sums so to be charged, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
persons so authorized as aforesaid, or any seven or more of them, by Order and
Warrant under their hands and seals, to levy the said sum and sums of money so
assessed, by Distress and sale of the goods of the party chargeable therewith,
and refusing or neglecting to pay the same, rendering the overplus (if any be.)
And that all other Commissioners whatsoever be altogether suspended to
intermeddle in the premises within the said City and Liberties thereof, for
the space of seven years next, and for so long after until the said intended
Buildings shall be fully finished; Any Law or Statute to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord
Mayor, Noisome Trades prohibited in the High Streets.
Aldermen and Common Council of the said City, from time to time, to prohibit
such Trades and Occupations as they shall judge noisome, or perilous in respect
of Fire, to be used or exercised in the high or principal Streets of the said
City.

And forasmuch as the freedom of openness of the Street conduces much to the
advancement of Trade, and Ornament of the City; Be it further Enacted, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, by
Order of Common Council in that behalf to be made, from time to time, and at
their will and pleasure, Removing of Conduits in High Streets.
to remove out of any of the high Streets all or any of the Conduits now
standing, or hereafter to be erected, and to set up and to erect the same in
such other public places within the said City as they shall think fit, or to
contract the same into any smaller or lesser compass in the places where they
now stand, or hereafter shall be erected as aforesaid, according to their
discretions.

And whereas many ancient Streets and Passages within the said City and
Liberties thereof, and amongst others, those which are hereafter mentioned,
were narrow and incommodious for Carriages and Passengers, and prejudicial to
the Trade and Health of the Inhabitants, and are necessary to be enlarged, as
well for the Convenience, as Ornament of the City; Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the said City for
the time being, in Common Council assembled, shall and may, What Streets may be
opened and enlarged.
and are hereby empowered and required to enlarge all and every the Streets and
Places hereafter mentioned, where, and in such manner as there shall be cause,
by and with the Approbation of His Majesty, and not otherwise: That is to say,
The Street called Fleetstreet, from the place where the Greyhound-Tavern stood,
to Ludgate, and from thence to Saint Paul's Churchyard; The Street leading
from the East end of Saint Paul's Church into Cheapside; The Street and Passage
at the East end of Cheapside, leading into the Poultry; The Street and Passage
out of the Poultry, leading into the West end of Cornhill, at or near the place
late called the Stocks; The Street called Blow-bladder Street, leading from the
West end of Cheapside toward Newgate-Market; And to enlarge the Street and
Passage from thence toward Newgate-Market, by laying the Ground where the
Middle-Row in the Shambles there lately stood, into the said Street; and in
like manner to enlarge the Passage from Newgate-Market toward Newgate, by
laying the Ground of the late four Houses between Warwick Lane end in
Newgate-Market, and the late Bell-Inne there, into the Street: And in like
manner to enlarge, as there shall be cause, the Lane called Ave-Maria-Lane,
leading from Paternoster Row to Ludgate Street; And the Street or Passage at
the end of Saint Martins le Grand toward Blow-bladder Street aforesaid; And
also the Passage from Saint Magnus Church to the Conduit in Gracious-Street,
and the North end of Gracious-Street; and also Thames Street, from the
West-corner of Saint Magnus Church aforesaid, to the Tower-Dock; and to enlarge
Old Fish-Street, by laying the Middle-Row there into the Street.

And the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council also shall and may by virtue
of this present Act enlarge and make wider any other such strait and narrow
passages within the said City, as are less then fourteen foot in breadth: So as
notice be given to the Owners or parties interessed in the Ground to be so
taken for the enlarging thereof, on or before the First day of May next
ensuing. And are and shall be also further enabled by virtue of this Act, to
make or cause to be made a new Street leading and extending from the Guild Hall
of the said City into Cheapside; the same to be of such breadth and wideness,
as they shall judge meet and convenient.

And to the end that reasonable satisfaction may be given for all such Ground
as shall be taken and employed for the uses aforesaid; The Mayor, Aldermen,
Satisfaction to be made for Ground.
and Common Council shall and may treat and agree with the Owners and others
interessed therein: And if there shall be any Persons, Bodies Corporate or
Collegiate, that shall wilfully refuse to treat and agree as aforesaid, or
through any disability by Nonage, Coverture, or especial Entail, or other
impediment, cannot; That in such cases, the said Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen are hereby authorized by virtue of this Act, to issue out a Warrant or
Warrants to the Sheriffs of London, who are hereby required accordingly to
Impannel and return a Jury before the said Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen;
Which Jury upon their Oaths to be administered by the said Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen, are to Inquire and Assess such Damage and Recompense as they shall
judge fit to be awarded to the Owners, and others interested, according to
their several and respective Interests and Estates of, and in any such Houses
or Ground, or any part thereof, for their respective Interests and Estates in
the same, as by the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council
assembled, shall be adjudged fit to be converted for the purposes aforesaid:
And such Verdict of the Jury, and Judgment of the said Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen thereupon, and the payment of the sum or sums of money so awarded or
adjudged to the Owners, and others having Estate or Interest, or Tender and
refusal thereof, shall be binding to all intents and purposes against the said
Parties, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and others
claiming any Title or Interest in the said Houses or Ground, and shall be a
full Authority for the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons, to cause the
same to be converted and used for the purposes aforesaid.

Houses which shall be bettered in value.
And forasmuch as the Houses now remaining, and to be rebuilt, will receive more
or less advantage in the value of their Rents, by the liberty of Air, and free
Recourse for Trade, and other Conveniences by such Regulation and Enlargement;
It is also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case of refusal, or
incapacity as aforesaid of the Owners, or others interessed of, or in the said
Houses, to agree and compound with the said Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons
for the same, Thereupon a Jury shall and may be Impannelled in manner and form
aforesaid, to Judge and Assess upon the Owners, and others interessed of, and
in such Houses, such competent sum and sums of Money, with respect to their
several Interests, in consideration of such improvement and melioration, as in
reason and good conscience they shall think fit: And all sums of Money that
shall be so Assessed and Raised as aforesaid, shall be paid to the Chamberlain
of the City of London for the time being; who is hereby enabled from time to
time to receive and recover the same by Action at Law, and whose Receipt shall
be a good Discharge to such Owners, or others interessed; And who is hereby
appointed to receive and pay, and be accomptable for the same, according to
such Directions as shall from time to time be given him by the said Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons; And the Money so raised, shall be wholly employed toward
payment and satisfaction of such Houses and Ground as shall be converted into
Streets, Passages, Markets, and other public places aforesaid; And such
satisfaction so given or tendered, and refused as aforesaid, shall divest the
Propriety, Estate and Interest of the respective Owners, and others having
Interest of and in such parcels of Ground, so to be taken and employed for the
uses aforesaid, by virtue of this Act: Which shall be, and are hereby actually
Settled and Invested in the said Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City
of London, and their Successors, in like manner as other the Common-streets and
Highways within the said City.

Who may hear and determine: differences of several claims of Estates.
And in case any Controversies or Differences shall happen to arise between
several persons that shall claim several Estates or Interests into, or out of
any Grounds to be sold by the said Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, or by
them to be taken and disposed of by virtue, and in pursuance of this Act, to
and for the uses aforesaid; That then the Justices of the Courts of Kings Bench
and Common Pleas, and Barons of the Coif of the Exchequer for the time being,
or any three or more of them, shall be, and are hereby authorized to hear, and
finally to order and determine the same in a summary way of proceeding, and
without the formalities or ordinary course of proceedings used in any the said
Courts, to order and award such Distribution to be made of the Money thereby
arising, for the satisfying of such several Interests and Claims, as to them
shall seem just and reasonable, according to the respective Estate or Estates,
Title or Interests of the person or persons making Claim thereunto; According
to which order and distribution to be made and appointed by the said Justices
and Barons, or any three or more of them, the said Purchase-money shall be
satisfied and paid by the said Chamberlain, to the said several persons
respectively.

The second of September appointed a day of Humiliation in the City yearly
forever.
And that the said Citizens and their Successors for all the time to come, may
retain the Memorial of so sad a Desolation, and reflect seriously upon their
manifold Iniquities, which are the unhappy causes of such Judgments; Be it
further Enacted, That the Second day of September (unless the same happen to be
Sunday, and if so, then the next day following) be yearly for ever hereafter
observed as a day of Public Fasting and Humiliation within the said City and
Liberties thereof, to implore the Mercies of almighty God upon the said City,
to make devout Pray- and Supplication unto him, to divert the like Calamity for
the time to come.

A Pillar to be set in memory of the Fire.
And the better to preserve the memory of this Dreadful Visitation, Be it
further Enacted, That a Column or Pillar of Brass or Stone be erected on, or as
near unto the place where the said Fire so unhappily began, as conveniently may
be, in perpetual Remembrance thereof with such Inscription thereon, as
hereafter by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen in that behalf be directed.

Tender of money at the Assurance Office or the Royal Exchange.
And be it Enacted, And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Tenders of Money, or Payment thereof, which by any Bonds, Covenants, or
other Obligations or Assurance whatsoever ought to be made in the late
Assurance-Office, or in any other place on the late Royal Exchange London,
shall or may be made at, or in the present Assurance-Office in Gresham-House;
And shall be as valid and legal to all intents and purposes, and discharge the
Obligor as fully and amply, as if they had been made in the first intended
place on the said Royal Exchange.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That the Parish-Churches to be Rebuilded
within the said City of London, in lieu of those which were Demolished by the
late Fire, Parish Churches to be rebuilded.
shall not exceed the number of Thirty nine; Which shall be set out and
appointed by, and with the advice and consent of the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of London for the time being.

Provided also, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Scites
and Materials of such Churches as by this Bill are not intended to be Rebuilt,
Scites and Materials of Churches to be sold, and how employed.
together with the Churchyards belonging to such Churches, shall be, and are
hereby vested in the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London for the time
being; to the end so much of the said Ground as shall not upon the Rebuilding
of the said City, be laid into the Streets, be sold and disposed of by the said
Lord Mayor and Aldermen, or the major part of them for the time being, with the
consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of London for the time
being; and the Money raised by such Sale, shall be by the said Mayor and
Aldermen, or the major part of them, with the consent of the said Archbishop
and Bishop, disposed of, and employed for and toward the Rebuilding of such
Parish-Churches as by this Act are intended to be Rebuilt; and for no other use
or purpose whatsoever.

Provided always, That any thing in this Act contained, St. Paul's, St. Faiths,
St. Gregory's Churches.
shall not extend or be taken to vest or settle the Church of Saint Paul, and
Saint Faiths, or any part thereof, or the Church of Saint Gregory's by Saint
Paul's, or any of them, or the Churchyards to any of them belonging or
appertaining, in the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, or any
of them; Any thing in this Act notwithstanding.

And be it Enacted, That for the preventing Inundations, and for easiness of
Ascent, the Street called Thames Street, and all the Ground between the said
Street and the River of Thames, Thames Street.
shall be raised and made higher by three foot at the least above the surface
of the ground as now it lies.

Provided also, And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That no House, Out-house, or other Building whatsoever (Cranes and Sheds for
present use only excepted) shall be built or erected within the distance of
Forty foot of such part of any Wall, Key, or Wharf, as bounds the River of
Thames, from Tower-Wharf to London Bridge, and from London Bridge to the
Temple-Stairs: Nor any House, Out-house or other Building, (Cranes only
excepted) be Built or Erected within the distance of Threescore and ten Foot of
the middle of any part of the Common-Sewers, commonly called or known by the
names of Bridewell-Dock, Fleet-Ditch, and Turmil-Brook, from the River of
Thames to Clarkenwel, upon either side of them, before the Four and twentieth
day of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
sixty eight.

And for the further enabling of the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of
the said City of London, and their Successors, to perform and accomplish the
works in this Act mentioned; An Imposition upon Coals.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for all sorts of Coals, which
from and after the four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred
sixty seven, and before the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six
hundred seventy seven, shall be imported and brought into the Port of the City
of London, or the River of Thames, within the liberty of the said City of
London, upon the same River to be sold by the Chaldron or Tun, there shall be
paid by way of Imposition thereupon, (over and besides all other Impositions
and Duties due and payable for any sort of the said Coals, by virtue of any Law
or Statute now in force) according to the Rates hereafter mentioned; That is to
say, for such sorts of Coals as are usually sold by the Chaldron, for every
Chaldron thereof containing Thirty six bushels Winchester measure, the sum of
Twelve pence; and for all such sorts of Coals as are sold by the Tun, for every
Tun thereof containing Twenty hundred weight, the like sum of Twelve pence;
which said Imposition of Twelve pence for every Chaldron or Tun of Coals, shall
from time to time during the term aforesaid, be answered and paid unto the said
Mayor, and Commonalty and Citizens, and their Successors, or to their Deputy or
Deputies, Officer or Assigns, by the Master, Owner or Owners, or other person
or persons taking charge of any Ship or Vessel whereupon the same shall be
laden, before they shall break Bulk, or have a Meter assigned for the measuring
or weighing of any Coals aforesaid, to be delivered from on board any such Ship
or Vessel; the same to be paid at such place or places, as by the said Mayor
and Court of Aldermen shall from time to time be appointed for the receipt
thereof; Upon receipt whereof, the party appointed to receive the same, shall
without delay, fee or reward, deliver a Receipt to the person or persons who
shall pay the said Duty; which Receipt shall for so much be a sufficient
discharge.

And to the end that the said Imposition may be duly answered and paid without
fraud or covin, and for the better Levying and Collecting thereof, and for
discovery of the just quantities of all sorts of Coals to be Imported as
aforesaid; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Coal-meters for the City of London, appointed, or to be appointed, and every of
them, Coal-meters Duty for Levying the same.
and their respective Deputies in their turn and course of attendance
respectively, so soon as any Ship or Vessel freight with Coals shall be
unladen, shall forthwith deliver a true Certificate in writing, unto the Deputy
or Deputies, Officers or Assigns of the said Mayor and Commonalty, and
Citizens, who shall be appointed to receive the said Imposition, of the sorts,
quantities and number of Chaldrons or Tuns of Coals respectively which shall be
measured, or weighed and delivered from on Board any such Ship or Vessel, on
pain for his or their default therein, to be suspended from the execution and
benefit of his or their Office or Employment for one whole year from thence
next following: And in case it shall appear by such Certificate or otherwise,
That there was on Board any such Ship or Vessel, a greater number of Chaldrons
or Tuns of Coals, then for which the said Imposition shall have been answered
and paid as aforesaid; That then in such case there shall be paid to the said
Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens, and their Successors, for every Chaldron or
Tun of Coals so concealed, over and above the Imposition aforesaid, the sum of
Five shillings; for which (in case of refusal to pay the same) such Ship or
Vessel, or any the Tackle, Furniture or Apparel thereof, may be attached and
detained by Warrant from the Mayor of the said City for the time being, until
payment thereof.

Provided nevertheless, That if the Importer, upon such Certificate delivered
in by the Coal-meter, shall within four and twenty hours, give in his
Post-entry, and satisfy and pay the whole Duty for the surplusage of Coals
appearing upon the unlading of such Ship or Vessel, That then upon such
payment, the penalty aforesaid shall be discharged.

How the said Imposition shall be disposed.
And be it further Enacted, That all and every such sum and sums of Money which
shall be raised upon the Receipt of the said Imposition of Twelve pence for
every Chaldron or Tun of Coals, or by such additional Duty, in case of
concealment as aforesaid, shall in the first place be applied and disposed
unto, and for the satisfaction of such persons whose Grounds shall by virtue,
and in pursuance of this Act, be taken and employed for the enlarging of the
Streets, and narrow Passages within the said City; And after satisfaction given
for the same, the residue of the said Moneys shall be applied and disposed
unto, and for the satisfaction of such persons whose Grounds shall be employed
for the making of Wharfs or Keys on the North-side of the River of Thames, and
upon each side of the Sewer called by the name or names of Bridewell-Dock,
Fleet-Ditch, and Turnmill-Brook; and also for the building and making such
Prisons within the said City, as shall be necessary for the safe Custody and
Imprisonment of Felons, and other Malefactors.

And the Accounts of Re^ei^s and disbursements thereof kept.
And to the end the Moneys to be raised upon the Imposition aforesaid, may be
duly applied to the uses for which the same is by this Act appointed, Be it
further Enacted, That there shall from time to time be provided, and kept in
the Chamber of London, one or more Book or Books of Vellam or Parchment, in
which all moneys thereupon to be received, shall from time to time be entered
and set down: And also other like Book or Books, wherein the Accounts of all
Payments and Disbursements out of the same shall be likewise entered; expressing
the time when, the occasion for which, and the name of the person or persons to
whom the same were so paid or disbursed. And that it shall and may be lawful to
and for all and every person and persons, that shall or may be in any wise
concerned so to do, to have free access unto, and view the said respective
Books of Receipts and Disbursements at all times, when the Chamberlains Office
is open, without any Fee or Reward to be taken, or demanded for the view or
inspection thereof: And that the Chamberlain of London for the time being,
before the end of Michaelmas Term in every year, shall transmit, and upon his
Oath deliver into the Receipt of the Exchequer, a true Copy or Duplicate of the
aforesaid Books of Accounts, containing the Receipts and Disbursements of all
moneys which shall be raised and paid by or out of the said Imposition upon
Coals, in the year preceding, and ending upon the Four and twentieth day of
June next before; there to be received gratis by the proper Officer, and kept
amongst the Records of the said Court; where it shall also be lawful for any
person or persons, who shall be in any wise concerned so to do, to have access
thereunto, and to view and peruse the said Books of Accounts, without any Fee
or Reward to be taken or received for the same.

Thomas Morris his Water-House.
Provided always, That it shall and may be lawful for the Water-house, called
Mr. Thomas Morris his Water-house, formerly adjoining to London Bridge, to be
rebuilt upon the place it formerly stood, with Timber, for the supplying the
South Side of the City with water, as it for almost this hundred years has
done; Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Water-Lane Street.
Provided also, And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, may and shall open and enlarge a
Street or Passage called Water-Lane, leading from Fleetstreet to
White-Friers-Dock by the River of Thames; as also open and enlarge a Street or
Passage to the said River from Cheap Side through Soper-Lane to Thames Street,
and from the Three-Cranes to the Thames; And open and enlarge one other Street
or Passage through Mincing-Lane, Mincing-Lane.
by St. Dunstans in the East, to Thames Street near the Custom-House: And to
make the said Streets or Passages twenty four foot in breadth, for the
convenience of Trade, and better passage of Carts, and other Carriages to and
from the said River; giving notice of what they shall herein resolve, to the
Proprietors and Persons concerned, before the last day of May, which shall be
in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty seven; and giving them
satisfaction for their Ground, according to the Rules and Directions of this
Act for the enlarging of other Streets and Places.

A Scheme of Proportions and Scantlings for Stories, Walls, and Timbers for the
Building of lesser and larger Houses within the City of LONDON.
Brick. Division of Story. Height of Story. Thickness of Walls. Bricks. Foot
Bricks. First sort, being the least Houses fronting by-streets and Lanes.
Cellars 6 To the first floor: 2 1 1 Story 9 2d 1 1 2 Story 9 3d 1 1 Garrets 1 1
Where the Spring prevent not. 2 Cellars 6 2/1 To the first Floor. 2 1 Second
sort, Houses fronting all streets, lanes of note, and River of Thames. 1 Story
10 2d 2 Thickness of Walls between House and House, 1 2 Story 10 Thickness of
Walls in Front and Rear from the Foundation. 3d 2 3 Story Not less in height
clear then 9 4th 1 1 Garrets 1 1 1 Story 10 1st 2 2 Third sort, Houses fronting
all High-streets and Lanes of note. 2 Story 10 2d 1 1 3 Story 9 3d 1 1 4 Story
8 4th 1 1 Garrets 1 1

Scantlings of Timber for the first sort of Houses.
Foot. Inches. Inches. For the Floors Summers under 15 12 and 8 Wall-plates 7
and 5

Foot. at foot 8 6 Inches. For the Roof Principal Rafters under 15 at top 5
Single Rafters 4 and 3 Inches.

Length. Foot. Thickness. Depth. Joysts to 10 3 and 7 Inches. Garrets-floors 3
6

Scantlings of Timber for the other two sorts of Houses.
For the Floors Summers or Girders which bear in length from Foot. Foot.
Breadth. Inches. Depth. Inches. Thickness. Inches. Depth. Inches. 10 to 15 11
and 8 Joysts which bear 10 Foot 3 6 15 18 13 9 3 7 18 21 14 10 3 7 21 24 16 12
3 8 24 26 17 14 3 8 Principal Discharges upon Peers In the first Story in the
Fronts Inches. Inches. 13 and 12 15 13 Binding Joysts with their Trimming
Joysts Thickness. Inches. 5 depth equal to their own Floors. Wall-plates, or
raising Pieces and Beams Inches. Inches. 10 and 6 8 6 7 5 Lintels of Oak in the
Inches. Inches. 1st and 2d story 8 and 6 3d story 5 4
For the Roof Principal Rafters from Length. Thickness. Foot. Foot. Inches.
Inches. 15 to 18 at foot 9 7 at top 7 18-21 at foot 10 8 at top 8 21-24 at foot
12 8 at top 9 24-26 at foot 13 9 at top 9 Purlines from Length. Foot. Foot.
Inches. Inches. 15 to 18 9 8 18-21 12 9 Single Rafters Foot. Inches. Inches.
not exceeding in length 9 5 4 not exceeding in length 6 4 3

Scantlings for Sawed Timber and Laths, usually brought out of the
West-Countrey, not less then
Breadth. Thickness. Foot. Inches. Inch. Single Quarters in length 8 3 1 Double
Quarters in length 8 4 3 Sawed Joysts in length 8 6 4 Laths in length 5 1 1
quarter and of Inch. 4

Stone.
Where Stone is used, to keep to these Scantlings. First sort of Houses Inches.
Corner Peers 18 square Middle or single Peers 14 and 12 Double Peers between
House and House 14 and 18 Door-jambs and Heads 12 and 8 2d and 3d sorts Foot.
Inches. Corner Peers 2-6 -- square Middle or single Peers 18 -- square Double
Peers between House and House 24 and 18 Doors-jambs and Heads 14 and 10
Scantlings for Sewers Foot. Thickness. 3 wide Side-walls 1 brick Bottom paved
plain and then 1 brick an edge circular. 5 high Arch 1 brick on end
General Rules.
IN every Foundation within the Ground, add one Brick in thickness to the
thickness of the Wall, (as in the Scheme) next above the Foundation, to be set
off in Three Courses equally on both sides.

That no Timber be laid within Twelve Inches of the Foreside of the
Chimney-Iambs; And that all Ioysts on the Back of any Chimney, be laid with a
Trimmer at Six Inches distance from the Back.

That no Timber be laid within the Tunnel of any Chimney, upon penalty to the
Workman for every default, Ten shillings; and Ten shillings every Week it
continues unreformed.

That no Ioysts or Rafters be laid at greater distances from one to the other,
then Twelve Inches; and no Quarters at greater distance then Fourteen Inches.

That no Ioysts bear at longer length then Ten Foot; and no single Rafters at
more in length then Nine Foot.

That all Roofs, Window-frames and Cellar-floors be made of Oak.

The Tile-pins of Oak.

No Summers or Girders to lie over the Head of Doors and Windows.

No Summer or Girder to lie less then Ten Inches into the Wall; no Ioysts then
Eight Inches, and to be laid in Loame.

CAP. IV.
For Relief of poor Prisoners, and setting of them on Work.

WHereas there is not yet any sufficient Provision made for the Relief and
setting on work of poor and needy persons committed to the Common Gaol for
Felony and other misdemeanors, who many times perish before their Trial; and
the Poor there living idly and unimployed, become debauched, and come forth
instructed in the practice of Thievery and lewdness: For remedy whereof, Be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with advice and consent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by Authority of the same, That the Justices of the Peace of the respective
Counties, How Stocks may be provided for setting the poor on work.
at any their General Sessions, or the major part of them then there assembled,
if they shall find it needful so to do, may provide Stock of such Materials as
they find convenient for the setting poor Prisoners on work, in such manner,
and by such ways as other County-charges by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm
are and may be levied and raised; And to pay and provide fit persons to oversee
and set such Prisoners on work; and make such Orders for Accounts of and
concerning the premises as shall by them be thought needful, and for
punishment of neglects and other abuses, and for bestowing of the Profit
arising by the labor of the Prisoners so set on work for their Relief, which
shall be duly observed; And may alter, revoke, or amend such their Orders from
time to time. Provided that no Parish be rated above Sir pence by the week
toward the premises, having respect to the respective values of the several
Parishes.

And whereas sometimes by occasion of the Plague, and otherwhiles by the great
number of Prisoners, great and infectious Diseases have happened among the
Prisoners, Sickness and Diseases happening among Prisoners.
whereby it has come to pass sometimes that the Judges, Justices and Jurors
have, upon occasion of their Attendance at the Trial of Prisoners, been
infected, and many of them died thereof, and sometime such Infection has
spread in the Country: For some Remedy therein, Be it by the same Authority
Enacted, That any Sheriff of the respective Counties, having the Custody of the
Gaol, or such persons who have the Custody of the Goal, with the advice and
consent of three or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, may, if they shall on inquiry or information find it needful, upon
emergent occasions in the respective Counties, provide other safe places, for
the removal of sick, or other persons, from and out of the ordinary and usual
Gaols, the same places to be used and employed for the reception and custody of
the Prisoners, to be by or according to their Order or Orders kept, ordered,
disposed and conveyed to the places appointed for the Jail-deliver, in such
and like manner as such Prisoners ought to be kept, ordered, disposed and
conveyed in and from the Common Gaols by the Laws and Statutes of the Land.
Provided no such place be made use of for the purposes aforesaid, against the
good and free will of the Owners thereof.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor,
Bailiff, Removing of Prisoners.
and other Head-Officer, or any other person and persons, who have and has the
Custody of the Common Gaol within any Corporation of this Kingdom and Dominion
of Wales, shall by and with the advice of three or more Justices of Peace
within the said Corporation, whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, in time
of Infection, have the like power and authority for removing his and their
Prisoners into some other convenient place within their Jurisdiction, as to
them shall seem fit, during the time of Infection; And also to raise a Stock
after the same rates and proportions, as is herein before allowed to and for
the several Counties within this Kingdom.

Provided also, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, as
follows, (viz.) That whereas there is already provided a strong and
sufficient Message in the Parish of S. Thomas the Apostle near the City of
Exon for the purpose aforesaid, Exon City.
and One thousand pounds more by certain Trustees upon Proposals and Agreements
made by them with cetain Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace for the County of
Devon, Devon.
who have also provided One thousand pounds more in order to purchase Lands of
Inheritance for the good purposes hereafter mentioned: Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Two thousand pounds be laid out in purchase
of Lands of Inheritance, by Order of the General Sessions of the Peace
hereafter at any time to be held, in the name of such persons as by such Order
shall be appointed. Item, That the said House, with the Grounds therewith
enclosed, be had and used as a Common Gaol and Workhouse for the said County,
in manner as is after expressed. Item, That an Overseer be therein placed by
like Order, and by like Order be removeable from time to time; which Overseer
shall have the charge, custody and government of the Prisoners to him committed
according to this Act, and shall have Fifty pounds per annum during the
execution of his Office, and Ten pounds per annum for his Deputy; but shall
therefore take no fees for receiving, delivering or doing any other service
relating to the Prisoners, from or of any the said Prisoners. Item, That the
said Justices by like Order from time to time shall and may, by approbation of
the Ordinary, provide and appoint some meet and discreet Minister to read
Divine Service according to the Orders of the Church of England unto the
Prisoners, at least four days in the week, That is to say, on the Lords day,
each Wednesday, and each Friday and Saturday, and oftener, if the said Justices
shall appoint, and to take pains in instructing them each Lords day at the
least, for which they may allow him Thirty pounds per annum, or after that
rate, the rest of the Profits to be for Repairing the House, and toward
finding a Stock for to set the Prisoners on work. Item, That any person charged
with such offense only for which Clergy is allowable, if so be he be needy and
indigent, and not likely to maintain himself in Gaol, may by Warrant of the
Justice or Justices of the Peace to whom Jurisdiction in that behalf
appertains, be committed to the said Workhouse in order to his Trial; and if
any person shall be committed to the ordinary Gaol, who shall be or become so
indigent, he may by Warrant of three Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, be removed from the ordinary Common Gaol to the said House; All
which Prisoners so committed or removed, shall be in the custody of the
Overseer, and be ordered and demeaned in the said House, and conveyed to the
Sessions, or to the Jail-deliver, by like Warrant, way and means, as the
Prisoners in other Gaols by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm are to be
ordered and demeaned.

And because the said Workhouse is distant from the Ordinary Common Gaol, the
Prisoners by Order from the Sessions or Jail-deliver may, in order to their
Trials, be removed to the Common Gaol, to be the more ready for their Trials.
Item, That the said Overseer shall give Security for the Stock, and be liable
to such Regulations and Orders for Accounts and otherwise, as the Sessions
shall from time to time make for setting the poor Prisoners on work there,
which shall be obeyed and observed. That a convenient Stock be from time to
time raised at the Charge of the County. Item, That the said Justices of the
County in Devon may put in ure all the powers in this Act, as other Justices
may in any other County by virtue thereof.

Saving to the Kings Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and to every other
person and persons, and their Heirs, Successors, Executors and Administrators,
all Rights, Titles, Claims and Demands whatsoever, into or out of the said
Messuages and Premises, as if this Act had never been made.

CAP. V.
A former Act concerning Replevins and Avowries, to extend to the Principality
of Wales and the County Palatines.

1. Car. 2. cap. 7.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the more speedy and
effectual proceeding upon Distresses and Avowries for Rents, Provision is made
where any Plaintiff shall Nonsuit before Issue joined in any Suit or Replevin,
by Plaint or Writ lawfully returned, removed or depending in any of the Kings
Courts at Westminster: Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That the said Act, and all the
Powers and Provisions thereby made for causes of Replevins depending in His
Majesty's Courts of Westminster, shall be extended, and be of the same force
and efficacy in all causes of Replevin, which are or shall be depending in His
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas for the County Palatine of Lancaster,
Lancaster. Wales. Chester.
the Courts of the Great Sessions of His Majesty's Principality of Wales, the
Court of Great Sessions or Assizes for the County Palatine of Chester, and the
Court of Common Pleas for the County Palatine of Durham, as fully and as amply
for and during the continuance of the said Act, as if the said Courts had been
mentioned therein.

CAP. VI.
A Redress of Inconveniences by want of Proof of the Deceases of Persons
beyond the Seas, or absenting themselves, upon whose Lives Estates do depend.

Whereas diverse Lords of Manors and others have used to grant Estates by Copy
of Court-Roll for one, two, or more life or lives, according to the Custom of
their several Manors; and have also granted Estates by Lease for one or more
life or lives, or else for years determinable upon one or more life or lives;
And it has often happened, that such person or persons for whose life or lives
such Estates have been granted, have gone beyond the Seas, or so absented
themselves for many years, that the Lessors and Reversioners cannot find out
whether such person or persons be alive or dead, by reason whereof such Lessors
and Reversioners have been held out of possession of their Tenements for many
years, after all the lives upon which such Estates depend, are dead; in regard
that the Lessors and Reversioners when they have brought Actions for the
recovery of their Tenements, have been put upon it to prove the death of their
Tenants, when it is almost impossible for them to discover the same:

For remedy of which mischief so frequently happening to such Lessors or
Reversioners, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Persons
beyond the Seas, or absenting themselves for seven years.
That if such person or persons for whose life or lives such Estates have been,
or shall be granted as aforesaid, shall remain beyond the Seas, or elsewhere
absent themselves in this Realm by the space of Seven years together, and no
sufficient and evident proof be made of the lives of such person or persons
respectively, in any Action commenced for recovery of such Tenements by the
Lessors or Reversioners, in every such case the person or persons upon whose
life or lives such Estate depended, shall be accounted as naturally dead; And
in every Action brought for the recovery of the said Tenements by the Lessors
or Reversioners, their Heirs or Assigns, The Judges before whom such Action
shall be brought, shall direct the Jury to give their Verdict, as if the person
so remaining beyond the Seas, or otherwise absenting himself, were dead. What
shall be a good challenge to Jurors upon trial of Lives in being.


And be further Enacted, That in any such Action wherein the life or death of
any such person or persons shall come in question between the Lessor or
Reversioner, and the Tenant in possession, it shall and may be lawful for the
Lessor or Reversioner to take exception to any of the Jurors returned for the
trial of that cause, that the greatest part of the real Estate of any of such
Jurors is held by Lease or Copy for lives, who upon proof thereof shall be set
aside as in case of other legal challenges.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Proviso for
Lands held by lives of certain Traitors attainted.
That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to any Lands held by the life
or lives of any person or persons attainted of Treason for the horrid murder of
his late Majesty of blessed memory, who now conceal or hide themselves, which
Lands are or have been vested in His Majesty, and are now granted to his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, but that the course of Evidence heretofore used in
such cases shall be had and used; Any thing to the contrary in this Act
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, Proviso for persons evicted by this not
being in truth dead.
That if any person or persons shall be evicted out of any Lands or Tenements
by virtue of this Act, and afterward if such person or persons upon whose life
or lives such Estate or Estates depend, shall return again from beyond the
Seas, or shall on proof in any Action to be brought for recovery of the same,
be made appear to be living, or to have been living at the time of the
Eviction, That then, and from thenceforth the Tenant or Lessee, who was outed
of the same, his or their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may
re-enter, re-possess, have, hold and enjoy the said Lands or Tenements in his
or their former Estate, for and during the life or lives, or so long term as
the said person or persons, upon whose life or lives the said Estate or Estates
depend, shall be living; and also shall upon Action or Actions to be brought by
him or them against the Lessors, Reversioners or Tenants in possession, or
other persons respectively, which since the time of the said Eviction received
the Profits of the said Lands or Tenements, recover for damages the full
Profits of the said Lands or Tenements respectively, with lawful Interest for
and from the time that he or they were outed of the said Lands or Tenements,
and kept or held out of the same by the said Lessors, Reversioners, Tenants or
other persons, who after the said Eviction received the Profits of the said
Lands or Tenements, or any of them respectively, as well in the case when the
said person or persons, upon whose Life or Lives such Estates or Estates did
depend, are or shall be dead at the time of bringing of the said Action or
Actions, as if the said person or persons were then living.

CAP. VII.
Disturbances of Seamen and others prevented, and to preserve the Stores
belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal.

WHereas diverse Fightings, Quarrelings and Disturbances do often happen in
about His Majesty's Offices, Yards and Stores for His Majesty's Royal Navy, 16
Car. 2. cap. 5.
and frequent Differences and Disorders are occasioned in the Office of His
Majesty's Treasury of the Navy on Pay-days, in London, Portsmouth, and other
places of meeting for the Service of the said Navy; And that either by the
unreasonable Turbulency of Seamen and others, attending on, Turbulency of
Seamen.
or relating to that Service, or their Creditors, or by the rudeness of the
Officers entrusted with His Majesty's Stores on Land, or in His Royal Ships,
when they are questioned by the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the
said Navy, either for neglect or Imbezelment of His Majesty's Provisions,
Ammunition, or other Equipage of the Navy under their Charge; and that not
only to the disturbance of the Peace, but sometimes to the danger and
hindrance of His Majesty's Service, both in point of husbanding His Majesty's
Revenue, and also on the dispatch of the Ships, on which the Honor and Safety
of His Majesty and Kingdom so much depends; Which inconveniences require a
speedy remedy then the ordinary attendance on the Sessions of Peace can give;
the Parties Accused or Offending, being many times bound to Sea, and the
Principal Officers and Commissioners for want of Authority to suppress such
Insolences, and determine such Cases, being necessitated to pass by many
Offenses, in which His Majesty might be righted, if their necessary attendance
on that important Service would permit the prosecution of the Offenders before
other ordinary Iudicatures.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, Who may examine and punish
offenses and disturbances committed by Seamen relating to the Navy.
That the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Acts, and the
Commissioners of the Navy for the time being, or any one or more of them, have
power and authority to examine and punish all such person and persons whom they
upon their enquiry, examination, or on view in their presence, shall find
hereafter to make, or have made any Disturbance, Fighting or Quarrelling in the
Yards, Stores or Offices aforesaid, at Pay-days, or on other occasions relating
to the Naval Services, in such manner as follows, (That is to say) That they,
or any one or more of them, may punish any the said Offenses, by Fine,
Imprisonment, or either of them, the Fine not exceeding Twenty shillings, and
Imprisonment not exceeding one week; And have power in such cases to commit
such persons to the next Gaol, or to the custody of the Messenger or Messengers
for the time being attendant on them, who respectively are to receive and
detain such person so offending: And that the said principal Officers and
Commissioners, or the greater number of them then present, have power to
discharge such Fine or Imprisonment, if they think fit; And for non-payment of
the Fine so imposed and not remitted, to Imprison the Party offending, until
payment thereof; which said Fines shall be paid to the Clerk of the Chest, for
the use of the maimed Seamen; And that the examination of Witnesses be upon
Oath before him or them, which they, any one or more of them are accordingly
empowered to Administer.

And it is further by Authority aforesaid Enacted, That the said Officers and
Commissioners, or any one or more of them (in cases where greater example or
punishment is needful) may also bind the person or persons so offending, to
their good behavior, with or without Securities, as occasion shall be.

Imbezeling of Stores and Ammunition of the Navy.
And whereas diverse of His Majesty's Stores and Ammunition pertaining to His
Navy and Shipping, or Service thereof, are imbezelled or filched away, It is by
the like Authority Enacted, That the said Principal Officers and Commissioners,
or any one or more of them, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, have power
in like manner to inquire and search for the same in all places, as Justices of
Peace may do in case of Felony, and punish the Offenders by such Fine and
Imprisonment as aforesaid, and cause the Goods to be brought in again: And if
the Offense be of such nature as does require an higher and severer punishment,
Then that they, any one or more of them may commit such Offender to the next
Gaol, or to the custody of their Messenger or Messengers aforesaid, till he or
they offending enter into Recognizance, with Surety or Sureties, according to
the nature of the Offense, to appear and answer to the same in His Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, or other Court where His Majesty shall question him or them
for the same, within one year following, on Process duly served for that
purpose on such Offender or Offenders.

And it is Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That they the said
Principal Officers and Commissioners, or any one or more of them, may put in
use the said Powers on the Offenders as aforesaid, in all places where they
hold an Office for His Majesty, as well within Liberties as without; Any Law,
Statute, Ordinance, Charter or Privilege to the contrary notwithstanding.

Encouragement of Mariners and Soldiers serving in the Fleet.
And for the better encouraging of such Mariners and Soldiers as now do, or
shall serve His Majesty in His Fleet or Ships during this War, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Ordinary, Register or other Officer
belonging to any Ecclesiastical Court, or Court of Orphans, or any Jurisdiction
whatsoever within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick, shall take or receive of the Executor or Administrator, Executors or
Administrators of any Mariner or Soldier dying in the pay of His Majesty's
Navy during this present War, above the sum of Twelve pence for the Probate of
any Will, Registring the same, granting Letters of Administration, exhibiting
any Inventory, or for any other matter or thing relating thereunto; And for
every default herein by wilful delay in the doing, granting, or executing the
Premises, the person or persons so offending, shall forfeit to the party
grieved the sum of Ten pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint
or Information in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, or
elsewhere, wherein no Essoign, Privilege, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed; Any Law or Statute, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Continuance of this Act.
This Act to continue for Two years, from the First day of February, One
thousand six hundred sixty and six; and from thence to the end of the next
Session of Parliament.

CAP. VIII.
Twelve hundred fifty six thousand three hundred forty seven pounds thirteen
shillings granted to the Kings Majesty, toward the Maintenance of the present
War.

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons assembled in
Parliament, as a further Aid and Assistance of Your Majesty during the present
Wars, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto Your
most Excellent Majesty the sum of Twelve hundred fifty six thousand three
hundred forty seven pounds thirteen shillings, to be raised and levied in
manner following: And we do most humbly beseech Your Majesty that it may be
Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
sum of Twelve hundred fifty six thousand three hundred forty seven pounds
thirteen shillings, shall be raised, levied and paid unto Your Majesty within
the space of eleven Months, in manner following, that is to say;

Whereas in and by a certain Act of Parliament lately passed, Entitled, 16 and
17 Car. 2. cap. 1.
An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the Kings Majesty of Twenty four hundred
threescore and seventeen thousand and five hundred pounds, to be raised, levied
and paid in the space of three years, It was amongst other things Enacted, That
the sum of threescore and eight thousand eight hundred and nineteen pounds and
nine shillings by the Month for thirty six Months, from the five and
twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty four, should be
assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by twelve quarterly payments, in
the several Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and places within England and
Wales and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the several Rates and
Proportions, and in such manner as in the said Act is expressed. And whereas
also in and by one other Act of Parliament passed in the Sessions of Parliament
lately held at Oxford, Entitled, 17 Car. 2. c. ^.
An Act for granting the sum of Twelve hundred and fifty thousand pounds to the
Kings Majesty for his present further Supply; It was amongst other things
further Enacted, That the sum of fifty two thousand fourscore and three pounds
six shillings eight pence by the Month, for twenty four Months, beginning
from the five and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred sixty and
five, should be likewise assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by eight
Quarterly payments, in the several Cities, Boroughs, Towns and places within
England and Wales and the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, over and above the said
sum of threescore and eight thousand eight hundred and nineteen pounds and nine
shillings, as an addition to, and increase of the said Monthly Assessment,
according to the Rates and Proportions therein expressed; Both which sums
together, amount unto the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand nine hundred
and two pounds fifteen shillings eight pence by the Month. And whereas also in
and by one other Act of Parliament passed in the same Sessions, Entitled, An
Act for Granting One Monthly Assessment to His Majesty; It was amongst other
things Enacted, That the Sum of one hundred and twenty thousand nine hundred
and two pounds fifteen shillings and eight pence for one Months Assessment,
beginning upon the six and twentieth day of December, One thousand six hundred
sixty and seven, and ending upon the six and twentieth day of January in the
same year, should be assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid in the several
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and places within England and Wales and the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the rates and proportions therein
expressed:

It is now further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the sum of one
hundred and fourteen thousand two hundred and thirteen pounds eight shillings
five pence halfpenny by the Month, for eleven Months, beginning from the six
and twentieth day of January One thousand six hundred sixty and seven, shall be
assessed, taxed, collected, levied and paid by four payments, in the several
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and places within England and Wales and the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, according to the rates, rules and proportions, and
in such manner as herein hereafter is expressed: That is to say, For every of
the said eleven months.

FOr the County of Bedford, the sum of One thousand five hundred seventy five
pounds twelve shillings six pence farthing.

For the County of Berks, the sum of One thousand nine hundred eighty nine
pounds four shillings nine pence three farthings.

For the County of Bucks, Two thousand three hundred and ten pounds fourteen
shillings three pence.

For the County of Cambridge, One thousand seven hundred ninety one pounds
eighteen shillings one penny halfpenny.

For the Isle of Ely, Six hundred and fourteen pounds thirteen shillings nine
pence.

For the County of Chester, One thousand three hundred thirty seven pounds five
shillings five pence.

For the City and County of the City of Chester, the sum of threescore and ten
pounds seven shillings eight pence.

For the County of Cornwall, the sum of two thousand seven hundred and seven
pounds seven pence farthing.

For the County of Cumberland, the sum of two hundred ninety and five pounds
thirteen shillings four pence farthing.

For the County of Derby, the sum of one thousand five hundred and fifteen
pounds one shilling three pence three farthings.

For the County of Devon, the sum of five thousand six hundred seventy four
pounds five shillings eleven pence farthing.

For the City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of two hundred and four
pounds eight shillings six pence halfpenny.

For the County of Dorset, the sum of two thousand three hundred sixty two
pounds two pence halfpenny.

For the Town and County of Pool, the sum of nineteen pounds five shillings
eleven pence farthing.

For the County of Durham, the sum of five hundred sixty eight pounds eighteen
shillings two pence farthing.

For the County of York with the City and County of the City of York, and Town
and County of Kingstone upon Hull, the sum of six thousand ninety four pounds
thirteen shillings nine pence three farthings.

For the County of Essex, the sum of five thousand four hundred forty three
pounds four shillings eleven pence three farthings.

For the County of Gloucester, the sum of three thousand one hundred seventy
seven pounds two shillings nine pence farthing.

For the City and the County of the City of Gloucester, the sum of threescore
and nine pounds four shillings three pence farthing.

For the County of Hereford, the sum of one thousand nine hundred eighty eight
pounds one shilling five pence three farthings.

For the County of Hertford, the sum of two thousand three hundred sixty four
pounds five shillings eight pence halfpenny.

For the County of Huntingdon, the sum of one thousand one hundred and thirteen
pounds five shillings six pence.

For the County of Kent with the City and County of the City of Canterbury, the
sum of five thousand eight hundred forty four pounds thirteen shillings two
pence halfpenny.

For the County of Lancaster, the sum of one thousand seven hundred sixty eight
pounds nine shillings ten pence halfpenny.

For the County of Leicester, the sum of one thousand nine hundred and five
pounds eleven shillings nine pence three farthings.

For the County of Lincoln with the City and County of the City of Lincoln, the
sum of four thousand five hundred twenty three pounds seventeen shillings two
pence farthing.

For the City of London with the Liberties of St. Martins le Grand, the sum of
two thousand two hundred fifty five pounds ten shillings and two pence.

For the County of Middlesex with the City and Liberty of Westminster, the sum
of three thousand nine hundred thirty six pounds ten pence.

For the County of Monmouth, the sum of six hundred eighty five pounds two
shillings nine pence three farthings.

For the County of Northampton, the sum of two thousand four hundred eighty
three pounds eighteen shillings three pence farthing.

For the County of Nottingham with the Town and County of the Town of
Nottingham, the sum of one thousand five hundred thirty four pounds seven
shillings two pence halfpenny.

For the County of Norfolk, the sum of five thousand nine hundred twenty one
pounds seven shillings four pence farthing.

For the City and County of the City of Norwich, the sum of three hundred and
sixteen pounds four shillings four pence farthing.

For the County of Northumberland with the Town of Newcastle and Berwick upon
Tweed, the sum of six hundred fifty four pounds seventeen shillings eleven
pence farthing.

The County of Oxon, the sum of one thousand nine hundred ninety four pounds
seventeen shillings four pence farthing.

The County of Rutland, the sum of four hundred twenty two pounds eight
shillings one penny farthing.

The County of Salop, the sum of two thousand one hundred and fourteen pounds
twelve shillings eight pence farthing.

The County of Stafford, the sum of one thousand four hundred ninety seven
pounds fifteen shillings nine pence halfpenny.

The City and County of the City of Litchfield, the sum of twenty two pounds
sixteen shillings nine pence farthing.

The County of Somerset, the sum of four thousand eight hundred sixty eight
pounds eighteen shillings ten pence three farthings.

The City and County of the City of Bristol, the sum of three hundred and fifty
pounds six shillings six pence farthing.

The County of Southampton with the Town and County of Southampton and Isle of
Wight, the lum of three thousand eight hundred forty six pounds six shillings
seven pence.

The County of Suffolk, the sum of five thousand seven hundred ninety four
pounds fifteen shillings three pence farthing.

The County of Surrey with the Borough of Southwark, the sum of two thousand
eight hundred and five pounds eleven shillings six pence halfpenny.

The County of Sussex, the sum of three thousand one hundred ninety nine pounds
fifteen shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Warwick, with the City and County of the City of Coventry, the
sum of two thousand and ninety four pounds fifteen shillings and eleven pence.

The County of Worcester, the sum of one thousand eight hundred fifty one
pounds ten shillings and ten pence.

The City and County of the City of Worcester, the sum of ninety seven pounds
nine shillings and three farthings.

The County of Wilts, the sum of three thousand four hundred fifty five pounds
seven shillings one penny halfpenny.

The County of Westmerland, the sum of two hundred and three pounds fifteen
shillings eight pence halfpenny.

The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of two hundred and twenty pounds fifteen
shillings and ten pence.

The County of Brecknock, the sum of four hundred ninety six pounds six
shillings six pence.

The County of Cardigan, the sum of one hundred eighty five pounds sixteen
shillings and eleven pence three farthings.

The County of Carmarthen, the sum of four hundred and seventy eight pounds ten
shillings three pence halfpenny.

The County of Carnarvan, the sum of two hundred fifty seven pounds eleven
shillings three farthings.

The County of Denbigh, the sum of three hundred ninety two pounds thirteen
shillings eight pence halfpenny.

The County of Flint, the sum of two hundred and eight pounds sixteen shillings
three pence three farthings.

The County of Glamorgan, the sum of six hundred and sixty five pounds fourteen
shillings one penny three farthings.

The County of Merioneth, the sum of one hundred seventy seven pounds one
shilling nine pence three farthings.

The County of Mountgomery, the sum of four hundred eighty five pounds eighteen
shillings eight pence.

The County of Pembrook, the sum of five hundred seventy three pounds eleven
shillings seven pence three farthings.

The County of Radnor, the sum of three hundred and six pounds five shillings
two pence three farthings.

The Town of Haverford-West, the sum of twenty six pounds and thirteen
shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
persons who are nominated in and by the said first recited Act, and in and by
an Act passed this present Session of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Raising
Money by a Poll, and otherwise, 18 Car. 1. c. ^.
toward the Maintenance of the present War, to be Commissioners of and for the
several and respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places therein, or
in either of them mentioned, shall likewise be so, and so are hereby appointed
to be Commissioners for execution of this present Act, within the several and
respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Towns and Places for which they were
nominated in the aforesaid Acts or either of them, and shall have and execute
the like power and authority, rules and directions touching the better
Assessing, Collecting, Levying, Receiving and Paying the said one hundred and
fourteen thousand two hundred and thirteen pounds thirteen shillings halfpenny
by the month, during the said eleven months, as in and by the said first
mentioned Act were given to the said Commissioners, touching the better
Assessing, Collecting, Receiving and paying the threescore and eight thousand
eight hundred and nineteen pounds nine shillings by the month, payable as
aforesaid: And all and every person or persons who shall be liable unto, or any
ways concerned or employed in the Assessing, Collecting, Levying, Receiving or
paying any of the moneys by this Act imposed, shall have like benefit,
advantages, allowances and discharges, and shall be subject to like penalties
and forfeitures in case of any neglect or refusal to pay their respective
Assessments, or to perform their respective Duties, as any other person or
persons liable unto, or concerned or employed in the assessing, collecting,
levying, receiving or paying any of the moneys by the said former Acts imposed,
ought to have or be subject unto, as fully and amply as if the same Clauses,
matters and things had been in this Act particularly repeated and Enacted.

To the end that the said eleven Monthly Assessments granted by virtue of this
present Act, may be duly answered and paid in as aforesaid; Be it further
Enacted, That the several Commissioners shall meet together at the most usual
and common place of meeting as in the said first recited Act is directed, The
meeting of the Commissioners.
on or before the second Tuesday in February, which shall be in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred sixty seven, to put this Act in execution
according to the best of their judgments and discretions; and shall then, if
they see cause, sub-divide as well themselves as others, as by the said Act is
further directed concerning the said former Assessment: And further, That they
meet at least three weeks before each payment of the said several Assessments,
for the purposes aforesaid. And that the said payments of one hundred and
fourteen thousand two hundred and thirteen pounds eight shillings and five
pence halfpenny by the Month, shall be assessed, collected, levied and paid to
the Receiver of the several Counties appointed, or that shall be appointed by
his Majesty, and by them answered and paid into his Majesty's Exchequer on the
days and times hereafter mentioned and expressed; Be it Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the sum of two hundred twenty eight thousand four
hundred twenty six pounds sixteen shillings and eleven pence, being the first
payment for the first two Months of the aforesaid eleven Months hereby
imposed, shall be assessed, collected, levied and paid in to the said
Receiver-General of the said several Counties, who shall be appointed by his
Majesty, and who are hereby required to transmit or cause the same to be paid
into his Majesty's Receipt of his Exchequer, on or before the first day of May
in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and eight. And the sum
of three hundred forty two thousand six hundred and forty pounds five shillings
four pence halfpenny, being the second payment of the said eleven Months, on
or before the first day of August in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred sixty and eight. And the sum of three hundred forty two thousand six
hundred and forty pounds five shillings four pence halfpenny, being the third
payment of the said eleven Months, on or before the first day of November in
the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty and eight. And the sum of
three hundred forty two thousand six hundred and forty pounds five shillings
four pence halfpenny, being the fourth and last payment of the said eleven
Months, on or before the first day of February in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred sixty and eight.

Moneys lent upon this Act secured.
And to the intent that all moneys to be lent to your Majesty, and the moneys
that shall be due upon such contracts for Wares, Ships, Goods or Victuals, or
other necessaries, which shall be delivered for your Majesty's Service upon the
Credit of this Act, by any person or persons, native or foreigner, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, may be well and sufficiently secured out of the Moneys
arising and payable thereby; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That there shall be provided and kept in your Majesty's Exchequer, to wit, in
the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt one Book or Registry, in which all
Moneys that shall be paid into the Exchequer, arising or payable by this Act,
shall be entered and registered apart and distinct from all other Moneys paid or
payable to your Majesty, or to your Heirs or Successors upon any other branch
of your Revenue, or upon any other account whatsoever; And that there be one
other Book or Registry provided and kept in the said Office, of all Orders and
Warrants to be made by the Lord Treasurer or Undertreasurer, or by the
Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being, for payment of all and every
sum and sums of Moneys to all persons, for Moneys lent, Wares, Goods or
Victuals, or other necessaries bought, or Ships hired, or other payments
directed by your Majesty, relating to the Service of this War, upon the Moneys
arising and payable by this Act, and that no Moneys levyable by this Act be
issued out of the Exchequer, but by such Order or Warrant mentioning that the
Moneys payable by such Order or Warrant are for the service of your Majesty in
the said War respectively during the said War. That also there be the like Book
or Registry provided and kept by the said Auditor, of all Moneys paid out or
issued, by virtue of such Orders and Warrants, and that it shall be lawful for
any person or persons, willing to lend any Moneys, or to furnish any Wares,
Victuals, Ships, Goods or other necessaries, on the Credit of this Act, at the
usual times when the Exchequer is open, to have access unto, and view and
peruse all or any of the said Books, for their information of the state of
those moneys, and all engagements upon them for their better encouragement to
lend any moneys or furnish any Goods, Wares, Victuals, Ships or other
necessaries as aforesaid: And that the Auditor of the Receipt, his Deputy or
Clerk, shall be assistant to such persons for their better and speedier
satisfaction in that behalf. And that all and every person and persons, who
shall lend any moneys to your Majesty, and pay the same into the Receipt of the
Exchequer, shall immediately have a Tally of Loan struck for the same, and an
Order for his repayment bearing the same date with his Tally, in which Order
shall be also contained a Warrant for payment of Interest for forbearance after
the rate of six per cent. per annum for his consideration, to be paid every six
Months, until the repayment of his Principal: And that all person and persons
who shall furnish your Majesty, your Officers of the Navy or Ordnance, with any
Wares, Goods, Ships, Victuals or any other necessaries for the service
aforesaid, shall upon Certificate of the Commissioners and Officers of the
Navy, or of the Master or Commissioners and Officers of the Ordnance or some of
them, without delay, forthwith have made out to them Warrants or Orders for the
payment of the moneys due or payable unto them, which Certificates the said
Officers of your Navy, Commissioners and Officers of the Ordnance shall make
without fee, charge or delay; And that all Orders for repayment of moneys lent,
shall be Registered in course according to the date of the Tallies respectively,
and that all Orders signed by the Lord Treasurer and Undertreasurer of the
Exchequer, for payment of moneys for Goods, Wares and Victuals, and other
necessaries furnished to your Majesty, your Officers, Master or Commissioners
as aforesaid, shall be Registered in course, according to the time of bringing
to the Office of the Auditor of Receipt the Certificates above mentioned, and
that all Orders so signed for Payments directed by his Majesty, shall be entered
in course according to their respective Dates, and none of the sorts of Orders
above mentioned, either for Loans of moneys, supplies of Wares, Goods,
Victuals, Ships or other necessaries, or by special direction, shall have
preference one before another, but shall all be entered in their course
according to the dates of the Tallies, the times of bringing the Certificates,
and the dates of the Orders for payment directed by his Majesty, as they are in
point of time respectively before each other; And that all and every person and
persons shall be paid in course according as their Orders shall stand entered in
the said Register-book, Be it Orders for payments directed by his Majesty, or
for moneys lent, or for Wares, Commodities or other necessaries furnished as
aforesaid: So as that person, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, who
shall have his Warrant or Order, Warrants or Orders first entered in the said
Book of Registry, shall be taken and accounted as the first person to be paid
upon the moneys to come in by virtue of this Act, and he or they that shall
have his or their Warrants or Orders, Warrant or Order next entered, shall be
taken and accounted the second person to be paid, and so successively and in
course. And that the moneys to come in by this Act, shall be in the same order
liable to the satisfaction of the said respective parties, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, Native or Foreigner successively, without preference
of one before another and not otherwise, and not be divertible to any other
use, intent or purpose, upon any account or reason whatsoever. And that no Fee,
Reward or Gratuity, directly or indirectly, be demanded or taken of any your
Majesty's Subjects for providing or making such Books, Registers, Entries,
Views, Search, Certificate, in or for payment of money lent or the Interest
thereof, or for payment of any money upon any Order upon any Contract for Wares
and Goods furnished to the use of your Majesty's Navy and Ordnance as
aforesaid, by any of your Majesty's Officer or Officers, their Deputies or
Clerks, on pain of payment of treble damages to the party grieved by the party
offending, with costs of Suit; And if the Officer himself take or demand any
such Fee or Reward, then to lose his place also; And if any undue preference of
one before another shall be made either in point of Registring contrary to the
true meaning of this Act, by any such Officer or Officers, then the party
offending shall be liable by Action of Debt or on the Case, to pay the value of
the Debt, Damages and Costs to the party grieved, and shall be forejudged from
his Place or Office; And if such preference be unduly made by any his Deputy or
Clerk, without direction or privity of his Master, then such Deputy or Clerk
only shall be liable to such Action, Debt, Damages and Costs, and shall for
ever after be incapable of the same: And in case the Auditor shall not direct
the Order, or the Clerk of the Pells Record, or the Teller make payment
according to each persons due place and order, as before directed; then he or
they shall be judged to forfeit, and their respective Deputies and Clerks
herein offending, be liable to such Action, Debt, Damages and Costs, in such
manner as aforesaid.

Provided always, and it is hereby declared, That if it happen that several
Tallies of Loan, or Certificates for Wares delivered, or Orders for Payments
from his Majesty as aforesaid, bear date, or be brought the same day to the
Auditor of the Exchequer, to be Registered; then it shall be interpreted no
undue preference which of these he enters, so he enter them all the same day.

Provided also, That it shall not be interpreted any undue preference to incur
any penalty in point of payment, if the Auditor direct, and the Clerk of the
Pells Record, and the Teller do pay subsequent Orders of persons that come to
demand their money, and bring their Orders before other persons that did not
come to demand their money, and bring their Orders in their course, so as there
be so much money reserved as will satisfy their Orders, which shall not be
otherwise disposed, but kept for them, Interest upon Loan being to cease from
the time the money is so reserved and kept in Bank for them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person or
persons to whom any money shall be due by virtue of this Act, after Warrant or
Order entered for payment thereof, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, by
Indorsement of his Order or Warrant, may assign and transfer his interest and
benefit of such Warrant to any other; which being notified, and an Entry and
Memorial thereof also made in the said Registry for Warrants (which the Officer
shall on request, without Fees or Charge, accordingly make) shall entitle such
an Assignee, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the benefit thereof
and payment thereon: And such Assignee may in like manner assign again, and so
Toties quoties; And afterward it shall not be in the power of such person or
persons who have made such Assignments, to make void, release or discharge the
same, or the moneys thereby due, or any part thereof.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the sum of three hundred and eighty thousand pounds shall be charged and
registered in the Book of Register appointed by this Act to be kept in the
Office of the Auditor of the Receipt of the Exchequer, to be paid to the
Treasurer of the Navy for the time being, out of the money payable for the last
ten months of the eleven months Assessment granted by this Act for the
Salaries and Wages of such Officers, Seamen, Mariners and Soldiers as are or
shall be employed aboard your Majesty's Navy for this present Winter, beginning
at the first day of January one thousand six hundred sixty six, and aboard your
Majesty's Navy for the Summer, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred
sixty seven. The said three hundred and eighty thousand pounds to be charged
and registered as aforesaid in manner and form following: (that is to say) When
Orders shall be first registered for one hundred thousand pounds for the Service
of the War, to be paid out of the money arising upon the said ten months in
course, as is by this Act directed and prescribed; That then, and immediately
after, one or more Orders shall be registered for the payment of two hundred
thousand pounds, part of the three hundred and eighty thousand pounds above
mentioned, to the Treasurer of the Navy, to be by him employed for the paying
of the Wages of Officers, Mariners, Seamen and Soldiers as is above mentioned.
And when Orders shall be registered for one hundred thousand pounds more for the
Service of the War, upon the said ten months; then and immediately after, one
or more Orders shall be registered for the sum of one hundred thousand pounds
more in further part of the three hundred and eighty thousand pounds above
mentioned: And when Orders shall be registered for one hundred thousand pounds
more for the Service of the War, then and immediately after, one or more Orders
shall be registered for the sum of eighty thousand pounds, in full of the three
hundred and eighty thousand pounds above mentioned: Which said sums of two
hundred thousand pounds, one hundred thousand pounds and eighty thousand
pounds, shall be paid in course as they stand registered, according to the rules
and directions, and under the penalties upon the Officers of the Exchequer,
their Deputies and Clerks, prescribed and contained in the Proviso of this Act
for Registring and paying in course.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That if the Treasurer of the Navy do divert
or employ the said three hundred and eighty thousand pounds, or any part
thereof, to any use or service whatsoever, other then for the payment of the
Salaries and Wages of such Officers, Seamen, Mariners and Soldiers as shall be
employed aboard your Majesty's Navy as aforesaid, until the said Wages and
Salaries shall be fully and entirely paid and discharged; That then, and in
such case, he shall forfeit treble the value of the money diverted or employed
contrary to the intent and meaning hereof, to be recovered in any of his
Majesty's Courts at Westminster, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid Prayer,
Privilege, Injunction or Order of Restraint shall be in any wise granted or
allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance: One moiety whereof to be to such
person as shall sue for the same, and the other moiety to your Majesty, your
Heirs and Successors.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatever
moneys shall be wanting, or fall short of the twelve hundred and fifty thousand
pounds granted by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
granting the sum of Twelve hundred and fifty thousand pounds to the Kings
Majesty for his present further Supply, toward the paying in course the
several sums of money registered for the Service of the present War, according
to the Power and Direction of the said Act, shall be supplied and paid out of
the first moneys granted by this Act, and payable for and in the first month
therein mentioned and granted, Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer of
his Majesty's Navy, for himself, his Deputies and Clerks, shall receive and
retain only the sum of one penny in the pound and no more: And the Lieutenant or
Treasurer of his Majesty's Ordnance, for himself and his Clerk, shall likewise
receive and retain only one penny in the pound and no more, out of all the
moneys raised, borrowed, and paid unto, and issued out by either of them to any
person or persons, by virtue and in pursuance of this Act, to be allowed in
their respective Accounts thereof.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person being a Receiver of moneys due upon any former Act of this present
Parliament, not having accounted for all the moneys by him received, and to be
accounted for upon such Act or Acts before Christmas, one thousand six hundred
sixty seven, shall be appointed Receiver for any the moneys due by this Act,
and shall intermeddle therein; every such person shall forfeit the sum of five
hundred pounds, to be recovered by any person or persons that will sue for the
same in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint
or other Information, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, Aid Prayer,
Privilege, Injunction or Order of restraint shall be in any wise prayed,
granted or allowed, nor any more then one Imparlance.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any money shall by
virtue of this Act be assessed upon any Inhabitants or place, being within any
Castle, Fort or Garrison, if such money so assessed be not paid within twenty
days after such Assessment, That then the Commissioners for such places shall
make Certificate thereof unto the Barons of the Exchequer, who shall cause such
Proceedings to be had for the recovery thereof, as for any other Debt due to
his Majesty.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case
any part of the moneys which shall be raised by virtue of this Act, or any
other Act or Acts of this present Parliament, shall be assigned or issued for
and toward the Victualling of his Majesty's Navy, the same shall be subject to
no charge, nor shall any manner of Fee or deduction be taken or made out of the
same to any other Officer or person whatsoever, save only the usual Fees in
such cases due and payable to the Tellers, and other his Majesty's Officers of
the Exchequer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Letters Patents
granted by the Kings Majesty, or any of his Royal Progenitors, or to be granted
by his Majesty to any person or persons, Cities, Boroughs or Towns Corporate
within this Realm, of any manner of Liberties, Privileges or Exemptions from
Subsidies, Tolls, Taxes, Assessments or Aids, shall be construed or taken to
exempt any person or persons, City, Borough or Town Corporate, or any the
Inhabitants of the same from the burden and charge of any sum or sums of money
granted by this Act or any other Act of this Parliament now in force, to the
aid and supply of his Majesty in the present War. And all Non obstantes in any
such Letters Patents made or to be made in bar of any Act or Acts of
Parliament, for the Supply or Assistance of his Majesty, are hereby declared to
be void and of none effect, any such Letters Patents, Grants or Charters, or
any Clause of Non obstante, or other matter or thing therein contained, or any
Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Principal Matters of the several Statutes contained in this
Book.
Account and Accomptants. 1 ALL Moneys and Goods for which any persons are
accomptable not pardoned by the Act of Oblivion, are Vested in the King, 13
Car. 2. 3. See Excise and Collectors. 2. Accounts of Sheriffs, 14 Car. 2. 21.
Administrators. 1 Administrators de bonis non etc. may sue Executions upon
Judgment obtained by the Testator, 17 Car. 2. 8. 2 Administrators and Executors
of Seamen shall pay but 12 d. for their Administration. 19 C r. 2. 7.
Advowsons. See Rectories. Alehouses. 1 Foreigners as well as Inhabitants may
not tipple in Alehouses, Inns, Taverns, nor Victualling-houses, 1 Car. 1. 4. 2
The penalty and punishment of any that keep an Alehouse, or sell Beer, Cider,
or Perry without License, 2 Car. 1. 3.
Alienation. 1 How persons may be eased in pleading Licenses of Alienation, 1
C^r. 1. 3.
Aliens. See Merchants. Anniversary. 1 A perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on
the 29th day of May for his Majesty's Happy Restoration, 12 Car. 2. 14. 2 A
perpetual Anniversary Fast on the 30th of Jan. for the Murder of the late King,
12 Car. 2. 30.
Arrest. 1 Persons arrested by Process out of the King's Bench or Common Pleas,
not expressing the cause of Action, shall be bailed and set at liberty upon
their own Bond for appearance, 13 Car. 2. 2. Stat. 2. 2 Bonds given upon
Arrests, shall be discharged upon appearance. Ibidem. 3 Arrests upon Capias
Utlaga^, Attachments upon Rescous, Contempt, and upon Privilege Excepted.
Ibidem.
Attainder. 1 The Attainder of several persons for the Murder of his Sacred
Majesty King Charles the First. 12 Car. 2. 30. 2 The Attainder of the Earl of
Strafford reversed. 14 Car. 2. 29. 3 Thomas Dolman, Joseph Bampfield, and
Thomas Scott Attainted of Treason if they render not themselves by a day, 17
Car. 2. 5.

Bankrupts. 1 A Further Declaration who shall be esteemed Bankrupts, 14 Car. 2.
24. 2 Persons for putting money into the East India Stock, or Guiney Company,
or Fishing Trade, shall not be within the Statute of Bankrupts. Ibidem.
Bays. 1 Bays making in Colchester regulated. PR. 12 Car. 2 22.
Benevolence. 1 Commissions of that nature not to issue but by Authority of
Parliament. 13 Car. 2. 14.
Books. 1 The manner of Licensing all manner of Books, and penalty for Printing
unlicensed Books and Seditious Pamphlets, 14 Car. 2. 33.
Bone-Lace, See Manufactures. Bandstrings, See Manufactures. Buttons, See
Manufactures. Bromfeild and Yale. 1 A Confirmation of diverse Estates there in
the County of Denbigh, 3 Car. 1. 6.
Burials. 1 All dead persons shall be buried in Woollen only. 1^ Car. 2. 4.
Butter. 1 How Butter shall be packed, and the contents of a Firkin of Butter,
14 Car. 2. 26.

Cardwire. 1 THe Importing foreign Wooll-Cards, Card-wire, and Iron-wire
prohibited, 14 Car. 2. 19.
Carriages. 1 How necessary Carriages shall be provided for the King in his
Royal Progresses and Removals. 13 Car. 2. 8. 2 How Carriages shall be provided
for the Navy, see Ships and Shipping.
Cattle. 1 The Penalty for Importing Foreign Cattle at certain times of the
year, 15 Car. 2. 7. 2 Proviso for Importing Cattle from the Isle of Man, ibid.
3 Penalty upon Butchers that shall sell live fat Cattle, 15 Car. 2. 8. 4 Cattle
may not be Imported from Ireland, or other Parts beyond the Seas; nor Fish
taken by Foreiners. 1^ Car. 2. 2. See N^san^e.
Clerk of the Market. 1 Grievances by Clerks of the Market, and inequality of
Weights and Measures, 17 Car. 1. 19. 2 Mayors, Head-Officers and Lords of
Liberties have power as Clerks of the Market, ibid. 3 The penalty of taking any
unlawful Fine or Fee by any Clerk of the Market, ibid. 4 Water measure in
Maritime Towns and others shall be continued as formerly. ibid.
Cloth. 1 A Corporation erected, and how Woollen Cloth shall be made in the
West Riding in Yorkshire, 14 Car. 2. 32. See Bays.
Coaches. 1 The ordering and regulating the number and prices of
Hackney-Coaches, and who only may be permitted to keep them about London, 13
Car. 2. 2. Stat. 3.
Coals. 1 The Regulation of the measures and prices of Coals, and how the same
shall be set, 17 Car. 2. 2.
Collectors. 1 What Collectors be accomptants to the King, 13 Car. 2. 3. 2 All
persons employed in Collecting or gathering public moneys by virtue of any
Act of Parliament being sued, may plead the general Issue. 14 Car. 2. 17. See
Excise.
Conventicles. 1 How Seditious Conventicles shall be suppressed, and the
several penalties for the same, 16 Car. 2. 4.
Corporation. 1 Who only may be chosen Officers in Corporations, 13 Car. 2. 1.
2 Non-Conformists restrained from inhabiting Corporations, 17 Car. 2. 2. 3 How
Churches and Chapels in Corporations may be United, 17 Car. 2. 2.
Corn. 1 The Duty and Customs payable upon Corn, and when Corn may be
transported, 3 Car. 1. 4. 2 The King by Proclamation may restrain
transportation of Corn, 3 Car. 1. 4. 3 How and when Corn may be Exported or
Imported, and what Custom to be paid for the same, 15 Car. 2. 7.
Cornwall. See Leases. Covent Garden. 1 The Precincts thereof made Parochial,
12 Car. 2. 37. PR.
Coy^age of money. 1 Encouragement for bringing Gold and Silver into the Mint
to be Coined, 18 Car. 2. 5.
Customs. See Tunnage and Poundage, Subsidies. 1 The penalties upon such as
shall convey away any Goods without entry and agreement for the Customs, 12
Car. 2. 19. 2 Frauds and abuses in his Majesty's Customs prevented, 14 Car. 2.
11. 3 The penalty for beating or abusing Officers of the Customs. Ibid.

Damage Clear. 1 DAmage Clear shall not be taken after the 29. Sept. which
shall be in the year 1671. 17 Car. 2. 6.
Death. 1 The death of Plaintiff or Defendant after Verdict, shall not be Error
in nor stay of Judgment, 17 Car. 2. 8. 2 See Burials.
Deer. 1 The penalty for unlawful hunting or killing of Deer in any Forest,
Park or Chase, 13 Car. 2. 10.
Delays. 1 Delays in Suits by not giving a Declaration before the end of the
next Term after appearance, 13 Car. 2. 2. Stat. 2. 2 Delays by reason of the
Test or return of the Writ remedied, Ibidem. 3 Delays occasioned by staying
Execution by Supersedeas in Writs of Error remedied. ibid. 4 Delays by Arrest
of Judgment for Jeofails, and superseding Executions, remedied, 17 Car. 2. 8.
Distresses. 1 A more speedy and effectual proceeding upon Distresses and
Avowries for Rents, 19 Car. 2. 5.
Dover- Harbor. 1 Certain sums of money granted for Repairing of D^^er
Harbor, 14 Car. 2. 27.
Drapery. See Cloth, Manufacture. Duchy of Lancaster. 1 The Chancellor of the
Duchy empowered to grant Commissions for taking Affidavits within the Duchy
Liberty, 16 and 17 Car. 2. 9. 2 Of Cornwall, see Leases. See Lancaster.

Ecclesiastical matters, persons and Jurisdictions. 1 THe high Commission Court
taken away and a branch of the Stat. of 1 Eliz. concerning the same repealed.
17 Car. 1. 11. 2 No new Court with the like power may be Erected. Ibid. 3
Certain Ministers confirmed and others restored. 12 Car. 2. cap. 17. 4 Persons
in holy orders enabled to exercise Temporal Jurisdiction 13 Car. 2. 2. 5 None
may Solicit or procure any petition, etc. for altering any Established law in
Church or State. 13 Car. 2. 5. 6 The ordinary power of Archbishops and Bishops
etc. in matters Ecclesiastical 13 Car. 2. 12. 7 Uniformity of Common Prayer,
Administration of Sacraments and Consecrating and Ordaining Bishops, Priests
and Deacons Established. 14 Car. 2. 4.
Error 1 Abatement of Writs of Error in the Exchequer Chamber remedied. 16 Car.
2. 2. 2 In what actions only execution may be stayed by Writ of Error. 13 Car.
2. 2. Stat. 2. See Delays, where Execution shall not be Superseded but upon
Entering Bail. 16 and 17 Car. 2. 8.
Estates 1 How such as claim Estates for others Lives must prove the Lives in
being. 19 Car. 2. 6.
Excise 1 Certain impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors granted to His
Majesty for the Increase of His Revenue for His Majesty's life. 12 Car. 2. cap.
13. 2 How the same shall be collected levied and accounted for Ibid. 3 See
wards and Wardships. 4 All money owing upon Excise and new impost vested in the
King. 13 Car. 2, 13. 5 The manner, ordering and collecting the duty of Excise
and prevention of abuses therein. 15 Car. 2. 9. 6 In what cases Sureties shall
be answerable for the duty of Excise. 15 Car. 2. 12. 7 Additional powers given
to Farmers for collecting the Excise 16 and 17 Car. 2. 4. 8 Farmers of the
Excise have like power as Commissioners of the Excise. Ibid.
Executors. See Administrators. Extents and Executions. 1 Delays in Extending
Statutes and in Executions of Judgments, and Recognizances, remedyed. 16 and
17. Car. 2. 5. 2 See Delays.

Fenns. 1 The great Level of the Fens, called Bedford Level, how to be bounded
and drayned, and the several Officers, interests, and concernments there. 15
Car. 2. 17. 2 The Drayning of the Fens called Deeping Fens and other Fens 16
and 17 Car. 2. 11.
Fines. 1 Fines recoveries etc. Confirmed. 12 Car. 2. 12.
Fishing. 1 How and what times Fishing for Pilchards and Fumathoes in Cornwall
and Devon. 14 Car. 2. 28. 2 See Cattle. 3 Encouragement of Fisheries. 15 Car.
2. 7. 4 Certain Duties to be paid upon Salted and dried Fish. 15 Car. 2. 7. 5
The Regulation of Herring and other Fisheries. 15 Car. 2. 16. 6 The manner of
Vessels for and packing of Fish, Island, Westmony, Newfound Land, Greenland,
etc. ibid.
Forests. 1 What shall be the metes and bounds of Forests. 17 Car. 1. 16. 2
No place where no Justice Seat, Swainmote, Court of attatchment etc. has been
within 20 years shall be accounted Forest Ibid. 3 Tenants and owners of Lands
excluded shall enjoy their Common and profits as formerly Ibid. 4 The penalty
for unlawful hunting and killing of Deer. 13 Car. 2 10.
Fullers Earth. See Wool etc.
Gaming. THe penalty for deceitful and disorderly Gaming, 16 Car. 2. 7.
Gardians. 1 Parents may appoint Gardians to their Children by their last Will
and Testament, 12 Car. 2. 14.
Gunpowder. 1 The mischief, by prohibiting importation of Gunpowder, 17 Car.
1. 21. 2 Any person may import Gunpowder or Saltpeter, from Foreign Parts, or
freely make Gunpowder in this Realm, 17 Car. 1. 21. 3 The penalty for putting
in Execution any Letters Patents, Proclamation, etc. for restraint of Importing
Gunpowder, Brimstone, Saltpeter, etc. ibid. 4 The King by Proclamation may
prohibit transporting of Gunpowder, 12 Car. 2. 4.

HAbeas Corpus. See Privy Council. Hearth-money. 1 Every Fire-Hearth and Stove
charged with the yearly payment of 2 s. to the King for ever, 14 Car. 2. 10. 2
The manner of charging, levying, and accompting for the same, ibid. 3
Additional powers for better ordering and collecting the same. 15 Car. 2. 13 4
Hearth-money to be collected by Officers appointed by the King, 16 Car. 2. 3.
High Commission Court, See Ecclesiastical Matters, Persons and Jurisdictions.
Highways. 1 How the Highways, Street-Paving and Sewers about London and
Westminster, shall be repaired and kept, and several Streets enlarged, 13 Car.
2. 2. Stat. 3. 2 The repairing and enlarging Highways throughout the Kingdom,
14 Car. 2. 6. How the Highways in the Counties of Hertford, Cambridge and
Huntington shall be repaired, 15 Car. 2. 1. 16 and 17 Car. 2. 10.
Hospitals. See Leases. Hunting. See Forest and Deer.
JEo^ailes. See Delays. Indemnity. See Pardon. Ireland. 1 Several Statutes for
Reducing the Rebels in Ireland, 17 Car. 1. 33. etc. EXP.
Judgment. See Execution. Delays, Error. Judicial proceedings. 1 Which Process
and Judicial proceedings in the late times be made good, and which not, 12 Car.
2. 3. 12 Car. 2. 12.
Jurors. 1 Of what ability in Freehold Lands Jurors for trial of Issues shall
be, 16 and 17 Car. 2. 3. 2 No party-Jurors in trials for Customs due upon
Merchandise, 14 Car. 2.11. 3 Challenges of Jurors who are Lessees for lives,
ibid. 4 Issues lost by Jurors shall not be saved but by Order of the Judge, 16
and 17 Car. 2. 3. See Lancaster.

King. WHat Rates Innkeepers shall take for provisions for the Kings Retinne
in his Progress, 13 Car. 2. 8. 2 See Carriages.
Knighthood. 1 None shall be compelled to take the Order of Knighthood, 17 Car.
1. 20. 2 The Kings Person and Government preserved against Treason and
Seditious persons, 13 Car. 2. 1. See Treason.

Lancaster. 1 HOw Jurymen shall be summoned in the Duchy of Lancaster, 16 and
17 Car. 2. 3. See Duchy.
Leases. 1 What Leases to be made by the King of the Duchy Lands in Cornwall,
shall be good and confirmed. 1 Car. 1. 2. 2 Leases and Grants from Colleges
and Hospitals confirmed, 12 Car. 2. 31. 3 Leases made by the Master of the
Rolls shall be good. 12 Car. 2. 36. 4 Leases by the King of Lands and Tenements
of the Duchy of Cornwall confirmed and made good, 13 Car. 2. 4. Stat. 2. See
Estates.
Leather. 1 The Exportation of Leather and Raw Hides out of England restrained,
14 Car. 2. 7. 2 Exportation of Leather declared a Common Nuisance, ibid. 3
Leather used within London or 3. miles, shall be searched and allowed by the
Wardens of the Curriers, ibid.
Liberties. 1 Petition and Declaration of diverse Liberties of the People,
called the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1.
London. 1. Lights shall be hanged forth by the Inhabitants in the Streets in
Winter, 14 Car. 2. 2. 2. A judicature erected for hearing and determining all
differences touching Houses burned and demolished in the Fire there, 19 Car. 2.
2. 3. Rules setting forth the order and form to be observed in the Street, and
re-building of the City of London, 19 Car. 2. 3.

Madder. 1 THe Statute for importing Madder, pure and unmixed, repealed, 15
Car. 2. 16.
Manufactures. 1 Importing of Foreign Bonelace, Cutwork, imbroidery, Fringe,
Bandstrings, Buttons and Needle Work prohibited, 14 Car. 2. 13. 2 The
Silk-throwers London incorporated by Patent, and the making of the manufacture
regulated, 14 Car. 2. 5. 3 The manufacture of making Linen Cloth and Tapistry
encouraged, 15 Car. 2. 5.
Marriages. 1 The confirmation of diverse Marriages, and how issues upon such
Marriages shall be joined and tried, 12 Car. 2. 33.
Mariners and Seamen. See Ships and shipping. Muket. See Clerk of the Market.
Master of the Rolls. See Leases. Measures. See Weights. Merchants and
Merchandise. 1 Merchants strangers shall be well entreated, 12 Car. 2. 4. 2 No
Tax may be imposed upon Merchandise, but by authority of Parliament, ibid. 3.
Aliens may not exercise the Trade of Merchants or Factors in Asia, Africa or
America, 12 Car. 2. 8. 4 Encouragement of Merchants and Trade, 14 Car. 2. 23. 5
Additional matters concerning policies of assurance amonst Merchants, 14 Car.
2. 23. 6 Aliens Infants may not be Merchants, 14 Car. 2. 11. See Ships and
shipping.
Militia. See Soldiers. Minister. 1 Certain Ministers confirmed, and others
restored to their Benefices, 12 Car. 2. 17.
Money. 1 The penalty for melting current Silver money, 14 Car. 2. 31. 2 How
Foreign Coin and Bullion may be exported, 15 Car. 2. 7. 3 Silver-plate or Gold
brought to the Mint, may be coined gratis. See Coynage.
Mos.-Troopers. See Scotland.
NAvy and Navigation. See Ships and Shipping. Norwich Stuffs. 1. The making
Stuffs in Norfolk and Norwish regulated, 14 Car. 2. 5.
Nusances. 1 Nusances in Highways to be removed, 14 Car. 2. 6. 2 Transporting
of Leather and Raw-hides declared a common Nuisance, 18 Car. 2. 1. 3 Importation
of Cattle out of Ireland declared a common Nuisance, 14 Car. 2. 7.

Oath. THe Oath Ex officio taken away, 17 Car. 1. 11. and 13 Car. 2. 12. 2
Certain penalties upon persons refusing to take a lawful oath, 13 Car. 2. 1.
stat. 3. See Quakers. See Duchy.
Orders and Ordinances of Parliament. See Parliament.
Pardon. 1 THe Kings most gracious free and general Pardon, indemnity and
oblivion, 12 Car. 2. 11. 2 All moneys and goods received in late usurpation not
pardoned, vested in the King, 13 Car. 2. 3. 3 The pains and forfeitures upon
diverse offenders excepted in the act of general pardon, 13 Car. 2. cap. 15. 4
The penalties upon Accomptants to the King not pardoned by the Act of Oblivion,
who shall not proceed and perfect their Accounts within a certain time, 14 Car.
2. 16.
Parliament. 1 The Parliament begun 3 Nov. 16 Car. 1. declared to be dissolved
and the penalty upon persons that shall hold or declare the contrary. 12 Car.
2. 1. 2 Orders or ordinances of one or both houses of Parliament how not
binding without the King. 13 Car. 2. 1. 3 Privileges of debates in Parliament
for repeal or alteration of Laws or redress of public greivances. 13 Car. 2.
1. 4 Parliaments shall be held once in three years at the least. 16 Car. 2. 1.
5 The Parliament of 12 Car. 2. confirmed, 12 Car. 2. 1.
Petition. 1 The Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. 2 See Ecclesiastical, etc. Number.
5. 3 None may make unlawful Assemblies upon pretense of petitioning the King or
Parliament to alter the Law, etc. 13 Car. 2. 5.
Pilchard Fishing. See Fishing. Plague. See Prisoners. Poor. 1 The occasion of
the increase of Poor, and for their better relief, 14 Car. 2. 12. 2 A
Workhouse at Exeter for relief of the poor there, 19 Car. 2. 19. 3 Poor
Officers and Soldiers relieved, 14 Car. 2. 9.
Poll-Money. 1 Poll-money, according to several Dignities and Degrees, granted
to His Majesty, 18 Car. 2. 1. 19 Car. 2. 6.
Pollices of Assurances. See Merchants. Ports. See Dover. Post Office. 1 A
Post Office erected for carriage, and the several Prices of Letter from Inland
and foreign places, 12 Car. 2. 35. 2 The penalty upon Post-masters and
Officers neglecting or not doing their Duties, ibid. 3 The profits of the
Post Office settled upon his Royal Highness the Duke of York in tail, 15 Car. 2.
14.
Poundage. See Tunnage. Printing. See Books. Prize-Goods. 1 Direction for
prosecution of such as are accomptable for prize-goods, 14 Car. 2. 14. 16 and
17 Car. 2. 6.
Prisoners. 1 How stocks shall be provided for relief and setting prisoners on
Work, 19 Car. 2. 4. 2 How to be removed in time of Plague, 19 Car. 2. 9^
Privy Council. 1 The Privy Council regulated, and Court of Star Chamber taken
away, 17 Car. 1. 10. 2. May not examine or determine of the Lands, Tenements or
Goods of any Subject of this Kingdom, but the same ought to be by the ordinary
course of the Law, 17 Car. 2. 10. 3. How persons committed by the Privy Council
may have their Habeas Corpus, ibid.
Process and Judicial Proceedings. 1. What Process, Writs, Pleas and other
judicial Proceedings shall be continued and proceeded upon, 12 Car. 2. 3. 2.
What proceedings in Law shall not be avoided for defects, faults or alterations
of Styles or Forms, 12 Car. 2. 12. See Judicial Proceedings.
Purveyance. 1. Preemption and Purveyance taken away, 12 Car. 2.24. See
Carriages.

Quakers. 1 The penalty upon certain persons called Quakers refusing to take a
lawful Oath. 13 Car. 2. 1 Stat. 3.

Recoveries. 1 Common Recoveries Confirmed 12 Car. 2. 12. See Judicial
proceedings.
Rectories and Advowsons taken from certain persons upon pretended
delinquencies in the late troubles restored to the right owners. 14 Car. 2. 25.
Recusants. 1 The penalty of sending or being sent to any Popish University or
School beyond Seas 3 Car. 1. 2.
Replevins See Distresses. Rivers. 1 The River of Avon to be made Navigable
from Christ-Church to the City of new Sarum. 16 and 17 Car. 2. 12.
Ryots and unlawful assemblies. See Petition.
Sabbath. 1. ASsemblies and unlawful Pastimes upon the Lord's Day forbidden, 1
Car. 1. 1. 2. Carriers, Waggoners, Brewers, shall not travel upon the Lord's Day
called Sunday, 3 Car. 1. 1. 3. Butchers shall not ^ell or kill Meat upon the
Lord's Day, 3 Car. 1.1. 4. A restraint of diverse other Abuses committed on the
Lord's Day, 3 Car. 1. 1.
Saltpeter. See Gunpowder. Scotland. 1. The prevention and punishment of Thefts
and Rapines by Moss Troopers upon the borders of England and Scotland, 14 Car.
2. 22.
Scrivener. See Usury. Sea-coals. See Coals. Sewers. 1. A supply of the Statute
of H. 8. for present nominating Commissioners of the Sewers, 12 Car. 2. 6.
Sheep. See Wool, etc. Sheriffs. 1. Sheriff may not keep Tables at the Assizes
for others then their own Family and Retinue, nor make any Present or Gift to
any Judges of Assize, 14 Car. 2. 21. 2. How Sheriffs shall be eased in passing
their Accounts in the Exchequer, 14 Car. 2. 21. 3. Shall not answer illeviable
Seisures, Farms, Rents, etc. Ibidem.
Ships and Shipping. 1. From what foreign parts Goods may be imported only in
English Ships, 12 Car. 2. 18. 2. No Goods to be laded or carried out of England
in the the Vessels of any other not Denizen'd, 12 Car. 2. 18. 3. Encouragement
of the Shipping and Trading by the English into their Plantations of Asia,
Africa and America, 12 Car. 2. 18. 15 Car. 2. 7. 4. Articles and Orders for
better government of his Majesty's Navies, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea, 13
Car. 2. 9. 5. How provision of carriage by Land and Water shall be made for the
use of the Navy and Ordnance, 14 Car. 2. 20. 6. The Penalty for imbezelling of
Stores and Ammunition belonging to his Majesty's Navy-Royal, 16 Car. 2. 5. 19
Car. 2. 7. 7. Who may punish Disturbances by Seamen and others relating to the
Navy-Royal, 16 Car. 2. 5. 19 Car. 2. 7. 8. The penalty for delivering up
English Merchant-ships to Turks or Pirates, 16 Car. 2. 6. 9. Builders of new
Ships encouraged, 14 Car. 2. 11.
Ship Money. 1. Certain proceedings touching Ship Money declared illegal, and
the Records thereof made void, 17 Car. 1. 4.
Silk and Silkthrowers. See Manufactures. Soldiers and Seamen. 1. Such
Soldiers as were instrumental in his Majesty's Restoration, may exercise
Trades, 12 Car. 2. 16. Such as deserted the Kings Service, or refuse to take
the Oath of Allegiance, excepted, Ibid. 2. The Militia and ordering and
disposing of the Forces and Soldiers by Sea and Land, declared to be only in
the King, 13 Car. ^. 6. 14 Car. ^. 3. See Ships and Shipping. 3. How the Forces
in the several Counties of this Kingdom shall be ordered, 14 Car. 2. 3. 15 Car.
2. 4. 4. Relief of poor and maimed Soldiers who faithfully served his Majesty
and his Royal Father in the late Wars, 14 Car. 2. 9.
Stannaries. 1. Certain Inchroachments and Oppressions in the Stannary Court
redressed, 17 Car. 1. 15.
Star Chamber. 1. The Court of Star Chamber taken away, 17 Car. 1.10. 2. All
matters examinable in Star Chamber, may be examined and redressed by the Common
Law, 17 Car. 1.10. 3. No Court or Council to be erected, may have the like
Jurisdiction, 17 Car. 1. 10.
Statutes. 1. All Acts that are upon continuance shall remain in force till
otherwise ordered by Parliament, 17 Car. 1. 4. 2. A Repeal of some and
continuance of diverse other Statutes, 3 Car. 1. 4. 3. Diverse public Acts made,
12 Car. 2. confirmed 13 Car. 2. 7. and cap. 11. and 14.
Statute-staple. See Extent. Stuffs. 1. The regulating of making of Stuffs in
Norfolk and Norwich. See Norwich.
Subsidy. 1. A Subsidy and Royal Aid granted to his Majesty by a Monthly
Assesment leviable in three years, 16 and 17 Car. 2. 1. 2. A further supply, 17
Car. 2. 1. 3. One Months Assesment granted to the King for his Royal Highness
the Duke of York, 17 Car. 2. 9. 4. See Excise. Tunnage and Poundage.
Hearth-money. Poll-money. Benevolence.
5. A further supply by a Monthly Assesment granted to his Majesty for eleven
Months, 19 Car. 2. 8.
Suits. See Arrests and Delays.
TApistry, See Manufactures. Ter^. 1 Michaelmas Term abbreviated, and the
manner of Continuances and Return^ of Writs, 17 Car. 1. 6.
Tobacco. 1 The planting, setting, or sowing of Tobacco in England, prohibited
under several penalties, 12 Car. 2. 34. 2 Certain further penalties for
planting Tobacco in England, 15 Car. 2. 7.
Treason. 1 What shall be adjudged Treason during his Majesty's life, 13 Car.
2. 1. 2 Offenses disabling persons to bear any Office during the Kings life, 13
Car. 2. 1. 3 Offenses which incur a Praemunire, ibid. See Attainder.
Tumults. See Petitions and Riots. Tunnage and Poundage. 1 The Causes and
Trusts upon granting Tunnage and Poundage for defending the Seas. 12 Car. 2. 4.
2 To be paid according to the Book of Rates agreed by the Commons House of
Parliament for ascertaining the same, ibid. 3 What Fees the Custom-Officers may
take, ibid. 4 Prisage of Wines not to pay the said Duty, ibid. 5 The penalty
for committing frauds and abuses about the Customs, 14 Car. 2. 11.

Vestry. 1 HOw Vestry-men shall be Elected, and the Oath they are to take, 15
Car. 2. 5.
Uniting of Parishes. See Corporations. Usury. 1 The penalty upon him that
shall take above Six in the Hundred for the Loan of One hundred pounds for a
year, 12 Car. 2. 13. 2 The forfeiture of a Scrivener that shall take excessive
Brocage. Ibid.
Uniformity. See Ecclesiastical Matters, etc.
Wales. 1 Jurymen in Wales must be worth 8 l. per annum, 16 and 17 Car. 2. 3.
2. The Statute concerning Replevins and Avowries upon Distresses shall extend
to Wales, 19 Car. 2. 5.
Wards and Wardships. 1 The Court of Wards and Liveries and Tenures in Capite,
and Knights Service, and Purveyance taken away, 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. And the
Imposition upon Ale and Beer and other Liquors granted to the King his Heirs
and Successors, ibid.
Weavers. 1 Linen Weavers may set up the Trade in any places where they
please, 15 Car. 2. 15.
Weights and Measures. 1 There shall be but one Weight and Measure throughout
the Kingdom, 17 Car. 1. 19.
Wines. 1 The King may issue Commission to license the uttering of Wines by
Retail, 12 Car. 2.25. 2 The Agents for granting Wine-Licences may grant them
not exceeding 21 years if the person so long live, upon Rent reserved, but no
Fine to be taken. ibid. 3 How and by whom the prices of Wines shall be set, 12
Car. 2. 25. 4 The Power of granting Wine-Licences settled upon the Duke of York
in tail, 15 Car. 2. 14.
Wood. 1 The penalty for unlawful cutting, spoiling and stealing of Wood and
Under-wood, young Timber, Trees, Poles, etc. 15 Car. 2. 2.
Wool, Woolf ls, etc. 1 The Exportation of Wool, Woollfels, Fullers Earth, or
any kind of scowring prohibited under several penalties, 12 Car. 2. 32. 2
Exporting of Sheep, Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorelings, Yarn of Wool,
Wooll-Flocks, Fullers Earth, Fulling Clay, Tobacco-Pipe clay, prohibited upon
certain penalties, 14 Car. 2. 18. 3 Importing of Foreign Wooll-Cards, Card-wire
and Iron-wire prohibited, 14 Car. 2. 19.
Yarn. See Wool, etc.
FINIS.

