An ABSTRACT of the Act for Granting an Aid to His Majesty, as well by a
Land Tax as by several Subsidies and other Duties Payable for One Year. An. 8
W. 3.
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, not receiving
Alms, shall pay unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, within the space of
One Year from 25 Jan. 1696. the Sum of 4. s. 4. d. by Monthly payments of 4 d.
per Month, reckoning 28 Days to each Month, the first payment to be 22 Feb.
1696.

d. per Month, all Servants and Journeymen (except Day-Labourers) having 4 l.
per ann. Wages, or upwards, and not exceeding 8 l. per ann. to pay for the same
13 d. per l. for One Year, by like Monthly payments of 1 d. per l. And for more
than 8 l. per. annum Wages, and not exceeding 16 l. per ann. the Sum of 2 s. 2
d. per l. by like Monthly Payments of 2 d. per l. l. per ann. Wages, the Sum of
4 s. 4 d. per l. by like Monthly payments of 4 d per l.

s. 4 d. per l. for One Year, by like Monthly Payments of 4 d. per l.

Denmark, or under Lords of Manors, or any other Persons, and all their Clerks,
Deputies, Assistants and Substitutes (except Military Officers in Muster in the
Army, Navy or Ordnance) to pay for the same 4 s. 4 d. per l. for One Year, by
like Monthly payments of 4 d. per pound.

s. 4 d. for one Year, for every 20 s. arising by their Practices or
Professions, by like Monthly Payments of 4 d. per l.

s. for One Year, for every such 100 l. by Twelve Monthly Payments of 2 s. 1 d.
for every 100 l. and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum, a Farthing
per l. each Month; the first Payment to be 25 Febr. 1696. And thenceforth the
25th day of each Kalendary Month, deducting only such Debts as are really and
bona fide owing from such Person or Persons at Interest.

s. for One Year for every 100 l. value in Goods, Wares, Merchandises,
Commodities, Manufactures or Vendible Stock, and Proportionably for a greater
or lesser Value, by Twelve like Kalendary Monthly Payments of a Halfpeny for
every Pound value, or 4 s. 2 d. for every 100 l. value.

s. for every 100 l. of the true value thereof, by Twelve like Kalendary
Monthly Payments of 12 d. for every 100 l. and so proportionably for a greater
or lesser value.

d. per Month, shall be Exempted from the said 4 d. per Month.

s. for every 20 s. of the true and full yearly value, without respect to the
present Rents reserved, or to any other Rates of Taxes thereupon, or making any
Abatement Feb. 1696, and so on the 25 day of every subsequent Kalendary Month.

The Owners of any of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which are
liable to any Rent-charges, Annuities, Fee-farm Rents, Rents-Service, s. in the
Pound thereout, and to be allowed it by the Persons Entitled to the said Rents.

England, for the more effectual Execution of this Act, who shall Meet together
at the usual places, upon or before 20 Feb. 1696. and may then l. nor less than
40 s.

The Commissioners to Appoint Two at the least etc. to be Assessors, who by a
Day Prefixed shall bring in Certificates of the Names of the Persons within
their Division, containing in several Collums,

1. The Tax payable by Persons chargeable with the 4 d. per Month. 2. The Value
of the Wages to be Rated. 3. The Pensions, Stipends or other yearly Payments.
4. The Nature and Value of Offices, Employments and Professions. 6. The Stock
in Trade. 7. The Stock upon Land, and the monthly Rates of the Premises
respectively.
s. for every 20 s. of the full yearly Value; and to Describe the Lands, etc.
in their Books, so as may best Ascertain the Rates intended by the Act to be
Imposed.

etc. to be Answerable for their Paying it to the Head Collectors: And if any
Assessor refuse to Serve, or make Default, (without a Lawful Excuse) to Forfeit
a Sum not exceeding 20 l. nor less than 10 l.

March, 1696. who may then Examine the same, or within Twenty etc. to be under
Charged, they may Examine the Owners thereof, who for neglecting to Appear
(without Lawful Excuse) shall Forfeit double the Sum Chargeable thereupon.

The Commissioners to Inform themselves upon Oath of any Omissions or Under
Assessments, and to set such Rates as shall be according to the Meaning March,
1696. or within Forty Days after. And the Kings Remembrancer is, within Three
Months after the Duplicates of the last Payment returned, to transmit Copies to
the Auditor of the Receipt.







d. in the Pound for what he Receives, and not forced to Travel above Ten Miles.

The Head Collector is to be Appointed by the Receiver General, who is to be
Answerable for the Money so Collected or Received, and whose Acquittance shall
be a Discharge to the Head Collector; Which Receiver General is to have 2 d. in
the Pound for



It shall be lawful to break open Houses in the day time, and by Warrant from
the Commissioners any Chest, etc. Calling to Assistance the Constables, etc.

Parents or Guardians are to pay the Rates Imposed on Infants, and to be
allowed the same on their Accounts.





The Rates on Pensions, Salaries or other Allowances or Profits payable at the
Exchequer, or by the Cofferer, or out of any other public Office, or by any of
His Majesty's Receivers or Paymasters are (in case of Non-payment) to be stopped
thereout.

Stock in Trade and Quick Stock upon Land is to be Rated in such County or
Place where it is at the time

Persons out of the Realm, Taxable by this Act, are to be Assessed in the Place
of their last Abode in the Realm; And Persons Ratable for any Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, are to be Assessed in the places where the Premises lie, and
not elsewhere.

A proviso, That any Person who in respect of several Places of Residence is
doubly Charged, shall, upon

All Persons who by changing their Residence, or by shifting their Goods or
Stock, or altering the Securities of Money, or by other Frauds shall escape
being fully. Taxed, shall, upon proof thereof, be doubly Charged.

All Householders shall give an Account of their Lodgers l.

The Officers of the Exchequer and other Public Officers are to deliver to the
Assessors Lists of all Pensions, Fees and Allowances payable by them.

All Persons having any Moneys at Interest are to

And all Persons Entitled to Debts at Interest are to deliver to the
Commissioners (before they deliver their Estreats to the Subcollectors) a
Specification or Particular in Writing of the said Debts Signed; And Mar. 1699.
Whereof one Moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor; And the Debts not
contained in the said Specifications Mar. 1699. Unless the said Duty and
Penalty be first satisfied, viz. If no Action be Commenced by any Informer,
then the Duty and Penalty to be paid to the King; But if an Action be
depending, then the Duty and one Moiety of the Penalty to go the King, and the
other Moiety to the Informer.

l. one Moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor.

And for ascertaining the Value of Stock in Trade, all Traders shall deliver to
the Assessors, within ten days after the Commissioners Issue their Warrant to
the Assessors, a Particular in Writing Signed, of the Quantities, Kinds and
Value of their Stocks, as the same are then Worth, bona fide, to be sold. And
the etc. to View and Value the Goods: And the Persons refusing such Entrance,
to forfeit 40 l. one Moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor: And if
the Assessors are satisfied in the truth of the Particulars delivered to them,
prefixed, or if they suspect the said Particulars to be fraudulent, then they
are to Assess such Stock in Trade, according to the best of their judgment.



And if any Steward, Bailiff or Tenant of Houses, Lands or Hereditaments do not
discover to the Assessors, when required, the true Rents payable for the same,
he shall forfeit so much as such Rent bona fide shall amount unto for two years.



Any Assessor, Collector or Receiver wilfully neglecting or refusing to do his
Duty, may be Fined, not Exceeding 30 l. nor under 15 l. for every Offense,
which Fines shall not be taken off or discharged but by Consent of the majority
of the Commissioners who Imposed the same; but shall be Levied by Distress or
Sale of the Offenders Goods; and in

The Collectors not paying the Money they Collect,

At the Expiration of the time for the full Payment of all the said Monthly
Payments, the Commissioners are to examine into the full Payment of the

If any Controversy arise concerning the Assessing the Commissioners, the
Commissioners concerned shall withdraw during the Debate, and in default
thereof l. And all Questions and Differences are to be determined by the
Commissioners without Suit in Law.

A Proviso against Charging any Colleges or Halls in the Universities, or the
Colleges of Windsor, Eaton, Winchester or Westminster, The Corporation of
Clergymens-Sons, Bromley College, or the Settlement in Trust of Tobias Rustat
on Jesus College, or any Almshouses or Free-Schools, or any Master, Fellow or
Scholar of any College or Free School, or any Reader, Officer or Minister of
the Universities, or the Masters or Ushers of any Schools, or Alms-Men Christ's
Hospital, St. Bartholomews, Bridewell, St. Thomas and Bethlehem Hospital; or
the Poor of any Hospital, whose Annual Maintenance does not exceed 20 l.
Provided that the Tenants of such Hospitals, etc. shall be Rated for what the
Lands are worth above the Rents reserved.

West Barnfield Hundred in Kent may be Assessed in the Lathe of Scray;
Northmore Tything in Oxfordshire in the Hundred of Bampton; The Tythings of
Charlbury, Faller and Tinstock in the Hundred of Chadlington; The Town and
Parish of Leeds in Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Skyrack.



If any Action be Commenced or Prosecuted for any thing done in pursuance of
this Act, the Defendant may plead the general Issue, and this Act, and the
Special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit or Verdict pass
against him, the Defendant shall recover Treble Costs.

The Receivers General shall give the Head Collectors Acquittances gratis, and
so shall the Head Collectors to the Subcollectors.

The Subcollectors shall deliver Schedules to the

In case of Non-payment for Woodlands, and no Distress to be had, so much of
the Wood (Timber Trees excepted) may be Felled and Sold as will pay the
Assessment. And in case of Non-payment of Tithes, Tolls, Profits of Markets,
Fairs, Fisheries or

Receivers General Returning any into the Exchequer who have paid their Tax,
are to Forfeit Treble Damage to the Party agrieved, and to His Majesty

The Commissioners are to Assess each other within their Division, and are also
to Assess the Assessors.

All Persons having any share in the New-River, Thames, Hide-Park, Marybone or
Hampsted Waters, or any Profits arising thereby, or any Stock in the Office for
Insuring of Houses, or in the Unequal or other Lights, or in the Kings Printing
House, shall pay 3 s. in the Pound, of the full yearly Value; And London, are
to be Assessed by the Commissioners appointed for the City of London, and the
Sums to be paid by the respective Governors, Treasurers or Receivers.

The Commissioners are to require an Account from time to time of the Moneys
Received by the Receivers General, and of the Payments thereof into the
Exchequer, and in case of failure, to cause the same to be forthwith Levied.

No Letters Patents or Privileges shall exempt any from Payment of the Rates in
this Act.

Provided that no Person be Compelled to be an Assessor

And provided that the Assessments on Houses where Foreign Ministers shall be
resident, shall be paid by the Landlord or Owner.

In all Privileged and Extraparochial Places, the

A Proviso that no Commissioner shall be liable to the Penalties in the Act of
25 Car. 2. touching Popish W. and M. for Abrogating the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, and also the Oath hereby appointed; which Oaths any Two of the
Commissioners are to Administer.

Every Papist or reputed Papist of the Age of Sixteen W. and M. is to pay
double, unless he or she take the Oaths within Ten Days after the first meeting
of the Commissioners.

Every Person of Sixteen years of Age or upwards, who shall not have taken the
Oaths before the time of the Execution of the Act, and being Summoned shall
refuse to take the Oaths, or neglect to appear before the Commissioners in
order thereto, shall pay double.

Every Gentleman, or so Reputed, or being above W. and M. for the Quarterly
Poll, did or ought to have paid double, and shall not voluntarily take the
Oaths before the Commissioners, within Ten Days after their first meeting,
shall pay double.

And the Commissioners, upon Information or Suspicion, W. and M. and so doing
shall not be liable

Provided that where the Owners of Lands are liable to double Rates, such Owner
only to pay the double Rate, and not the Tenant, notwithstanding any Covenant
for Payment of Taxes.

A Proviso that no Person be liable to the Pound Rate, whose Lands, etc. are
not of the Yearly Value of 20 s.

A Proviso that the Chancery Officers within the Liberty Rolls shall be there
Assessed.

Collectors keeping any Moneys in their Hands, or not paying the same as the
Act directs, are to forfeit 10 l and the Head Collectors for the like offense
40 l.

If after the Assessment any Persons remove to a Place where they were not
Rated, the Commissioners are to Summon such Persons before them, and cause them
be duly Rated, and to pay the same, or such part as shall be unpaid.

The Kings Bench Prison, with the Lands, etc. and the Rents and Profits of the
Marshal thereof; and etc. of the Marshalsea Prison, and Offices and Perquisites
of the Marshals Court, shall be Assessed in the Parish of St. George in
Southwark.

Any Person acting as a Commissioner, before he has taken the Oaths, forfeits
500 l. to the King.

The Waterworks in Southwark are to be Rated by the Commissioners and
Assessors of Surrey; and those in Westminster by the Commissioners and
Assessors for Westminster.

l. and be incapable of any Trust from His Majesty.

All Auditors and Receivers are to allow 3 s. in the Pound out of any Fee-Farm
or other Chief Rents payable to His Majesty or the Queen Dowager, or any others
by Grant or Purchase from the Crown, under the Penalty of 10 l.

A Proviso that Rectories. Vicaridges or Curacies under 40 l. per An. shall not
be Taxed, if the Rector, Vicar or Curate resides upon the Place, or personally
serves the Cure.

No Tenant of Houses or Lands bel^onging to Colleges, Halls, Hospitals,
Almshouses or Schools, who by their Contracts are obliged to pay all Taxes,
shall be exempted.



Members of Parliament are to be Assessed for their Personal Tax of 4 d. per
Month, and for their Ready Money and Debts where they usually reside in the
Intervals London and Westminster, or 20 Miles of the same, they shall not be
Assessed for their Money, Debts, Stock in Trade or upon Lands until Twenty Days
after the Rising of the Parliament. And Servants attending the said Members are
not to be Assessed for their Wages until the time aforesaid.



Persons giving an Account in their Specifications of the Money they owe at
Interest, The Commissioners being satisfied therewith, by Oath or otherwise,
shall make a proportionable Allowance or Deductio^ out of the Tax.

etc. are, and from 29 Sept. 1696. have been in the actual possession of any
Person for Debts, to which the same were liable, such Debts are not to be
charged by this Act.

All or any part of the Monthly Payments in this Act, may be paid in Hammered
Silver Money at 5 s. 8 d. an Ounce at any time before 1 June 1697.





Receivers General are to keep a distinct Account of the 3 s. in the Pound upon
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, etc. And every such Receiver General or his
Deputy misapplying any part of the Moneys arising by the said Pound Rate of 3
s. in the Pound, shall forfeit 500 l.

s. otherwise than into the Exchequer; nor to the Officers of the Exchequer for
striking any Tallies of pro or Anticipation upon the same; nor shall any Teller
charge himself with any of the said Moneys till he has actually received it.

No stay of Process shall be made for any of the Penalties by this Act
inflicted.

Loans on Credit of Contributions for Annuities pursuant W 3. remaining
unsatisfied, to be in the first place Transferred to the Register appointed for
the Tax of 3 s. in the Pound: And in the next place, all Moneys lent on the
Exchequer in general, July 1696 and 1 Febr. 1696 Which Transferred Orders of
Loan shall be Assignable.

Any Persons, Natives or Foreigners, may Lend His Majesty any Sums not
exceeding 1500000 l. (including the Sums Transferred) at the rate of 8 l per
cent. on Credit of the Tax of 3 s. in the Pound, and the Moneys so Lent on this
Act are not to be Taxed.

A distinct Register is to be kept in the Exchequer of s. in the Pound: And the
Interest for Moneys Lent thereon shall be paid in course Exchequer, as they
will avoid

Orders of Loan, by Virtue of this Act, being Entered,

The Commissioners of the Treasury, or High Treasurer, Exchequer for any Sums
not exceeding 1500000 l. for the use of the War; Which Bills shall be Current
in all Payments for any s. in the Pound.

And the Receivers and Collectors out of the Milled

And the Money paid into the Exchequer for any Supplies for the Year 1697.
(Except for the 3 s. Aid) shall be applied to the taking up and cancelling such
Bills: But if the Supplies for the Year 1697. (Except for the 3 s. Aid) be
Deficient of 1500000 l. Authorized to be Issued in Bills, such Deficiency is to
be in the first place made Good out of any Moneys that shall be Raised by any
Act of next Session of Parliament.

Every Receiver General is to Enter in Books all the l.

A Proviso, That 200000 l. out of the first Bills to s Aid, and Loans
thereupon) shall be Appropriated for payment of Soldiers Quarters in England,
between 1 Jan 1694. and 1 Jan 1696. not otherwise satisfied before 1 Feb. 1696.
if the said

A Proviso, That this Act shall not Charge the 50000 l. per Ann Granted in
Trust for the Prince and Princess of Denmark with the Duty of 4 s. 4 d. per
Pound

All Persons not Charged (over and above the d. per Month) with the Duties on
Wages, Pensions, Salaries, Offices or Employments of the yearly Value of 8 l.
or for their own Lands or Tenements of the yearly Value of 40 s. or for Money
or Stock of the Value of 5 l. shall not be Charged with the 4 d. per Month for
their Children, under the Age of Sixteen Years.

Also Poor Housekeepers, who by reason of their

A Proviso, That Hammered Money shall be Current s. 2 d. an Ounce after 1 Feb.
1696 in all Payments, Except where it is Directed to be Received at a greater
Value.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


