THE GOOD OLD CAuSE DRESSED IN IT IS PRIMITIVE LUSTER, AND SET FORTH TO THE VIEW
OF ALL MEN.

Being a short and Sober Narrative of the great Revolutions of Affairs in these
later times.

By R. FITZ-BRIAN, an affectionate Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for G. C. at the Black-spread- Eagle at the West end of St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

The good old Cause dressed in it is primitive Luster, etc.
The Preface. When it is, that changes evenes in States.
THe changes, and revolutions in States and Commonwealths, as they have by
degrees issued out of the corruption, and Maladministration of Governments,
so have they usually been accompanied with most remarkable Providence; And by
how much the more spiritual the designs of God are in the womb of such
productions, by so much the more visibly does He let out the signal
Testimonies of his Presence and Glory. When States are at the worst; when
vicious, and pe^cant humors are every where predominant; when the prevalency
of evil Counsels does take place to the introducing of new, and Arbitrary
impositions, contrary to the established Constitutions; They must then either
necessarily sink under their own weight, and crumble into disorder, Anarchy
and ruin; Or else there will follow some notable alterations: And the
distempers being so great, and enormous, that they cannot possibly admit of a
redress, and healing, and conserve still their old frame, Things must
unavoydeably wheel about, and fix themselves upon another Basis. In such a
Map as this, may we view the more than ordinary transactions of our later
times; which, though they were small in their beginnings, yet have they by
several steps, and progressions been advanced to a considerable height: And I
may say, there have been such interweavings of stupendous Providence; such
diversifications in the manner of proceeds; such glorious exertings of power,
and goodness, such astonishing successes, and such legible characters of divine
ownings, That we are now bigg with just hopes of arriving in the end unto some
eminent establishment, even above the magnificence of all those forms, which
merely have the worldly stamp upon them.

Sect. I. The true Sources of our late Revolutions.
IF we suffer not our selves to be misguided with prejudices, bu^ impartially
trace things into their beginnings, we may easily discover t^^ inlet of all our
mischiefs, and the natural sp^ing of our late alterations. The hinges upon
which they gradually turned, were the prelaticall Tyranny of the Bishops,
innovating in things of Religious concernment, and laying insupportable burdens
upon the consciences of tender Christians: And the secret, and politic
insinuations of evil Councillors, and Favorites, invading all rights,
subverting the fundamental constitutions, and forcibly sway^ng all things unto
an absolute Domination. Both these joined hand in hand together, and mutually
conspired to accomplish the same design; The tendency whereof was in the issue
to trample upon all Laws, to inthrall us at pleasure, and to subject us under
the iron yoke of an absolu^e disposal. The Episcopal Jurisdiction was in it is
day very fierce, and lofty: witness those severe sentencings to imprisonments,
to wh ppings, to Pillories, and to stigmatizing^, which were then frequen^ly
thundered against many honest innocent persons; in whom there was found nothing
criminal, but that they worshiped God in purity of spirit, and durst not
conform to their superstitious in junctions What a rabble of exotic
ceremonies, and unwarrantable traditions were then brought in, and imposed, All
that consult with the naked history of that generation, may easily take notice
of: And as if a profane and profligate spirit were the fittest to swallow
down, and without scruple to live under such superstitious rites, and
observances; They decryed and discountenanced Preaching, they pleaded
publicly for, and with the face of Authority tolerated sports, and pastimes
on the Sabbath days. Hence was it, that these two being thus twisted, and
married together, there sprung up a monstrous brood of all disorders, and
usurpations; And the generality having thereby their reason darkened, and
besotted, as well as their consciences, were in a pliant temper to receive the
impressions of slavery, and unjust encroachments. In this juncture the precious
people of God, who were at once made the object both of their scorn, and fury,
were trampled upon by the foot of pride, and insolency: They were driven into
corners; They were made to serve with rigor, and hard bondage; Their ruin*
and extirpation was designed; Many of them being haled to their illegal
Courts, endured cruelties as barbarous, as are acted in the Inquisition: And
others being willing to preserve peace within, and to free themselves from
their mixtures, and defilements, were enforced to exile themselves from their
native comforts, and relations here, and to wander desolate in foreign deserts.
At the same time, and confederate with this Exorbitant power, did the evil
Councill^ of the Nation, in things also of civil cogn^zance, hurry all things
head long into one absolute Grandeur. The great Masterpiece of their design
was if (possibly) to elude all Parliaments, knowing, that those one^y stood in
the way to hinder, and d^sappoint their intendments. And the better to
strengthen themselves herein, They starred many projects, and inventions,
hoping either by their Monopolies, or by their Knighthood, or by their
shipp-^onies, or by some such obsolete quillet to have preserved their
Treasures full, and entire; And they cea^ed not to screw up, and distort* as
well their own wi^s^, as our rights, by endeavoring to make those devices of
their's to appear with the face and color of a Law. Things being thus
postured, there wanted but very little of effecting what they so strenuously
sought after, to be the absolute Masters of our lives, liberties and estates at
their own pleasure: The whole current of the Administration of Justice being
out course; the Judges of the Land, that should be the directours of what is
Law and Right, either corruptly opposing, or else not daring to declare the
truth; And those that did speak their judgments freely, and honestly, being
upon that very account immediately displaced, and put out of Office.

Sect. II. The dawning of the day of Reformation.
WHen the thickest darkness of the night had thus overshadowed us, and the
declining of the Sun toward its Biuniall solstice had sufficiently assured us,
that it was a sharp and rigorous winter; B^hold all on a sudden the day began
to dawn, and the return of the long absent Sun gave us the unexpected hopes of
an approaching Summer. The grievances of the Nation were become insufferable;
Arbitrariness, and Lordly Domination was risen up to the height, all things
were stretched out to their utmost length; and the whole frame of affairs was
so deplorable, that we were as hopeless of having redress, as we were certain,
that we were plunged under ruin. Yet even then did the light break forth, and
that very dismal season, when it was at the blackest, proved the vertical
point, which at once put a stop to the further carreer of our designed
miseries, and brought back the glorious displayings of our revived comforts.
When reason was p^sled, and could not discern the least probability of succor;
when our enemies triumphed that their mountain stood strong, and that they had
so firmly seated themselves, as that it was impossible for them to be removed;
the Divine power, and goodness, which befool's the wisdom of the wise, and
works contrary to humane appearances, overth^ew their confidences as in a
moment; And wo^king wonders for his people, exalted them from the dunghill unto
a condit^on of em^nency, and enlargement. It is a delight to consider, what a
lively, generous active spirit was poured out in those days upon those good
hearts, which befo e had suffered hard things: who being awakened by the
ar^sing of the glory of the Lord upon them, did pray, believe, and act
vigorously to reduce this disordered, shattered Naton unto a posture of a sixth
and happy settlement. The eminent Worthies then assembled in Paliament did
sweat and toil, and thought no hardship's too much to be undergone, no
difficulties too great to be encountered with, to promote, and accomplish a
perfect Reformation. How much do succeeding generations owe to them for all
their diligence, and sedulity, for all their watchings, and pains-taking for
all the affronts, and scorns, which they endured? The fruit and success whereof
we are at this day reaping, and enjoying It cannot be thought, but that so
great a work, undertaken in such a distempered dreggy juncture of time, should
meet with strong oppositions, and that many great Mountains should then stand
in the way, as hard to be removed, as they were powerful to darken, and
overshadow those small beginnings. Hence was it, that all sober, and good men,
knowing themselves deeply concerned in those concernments, and that all that
was dear to them, was wrapped up in the happy and uninterrupted proceedings of
the Parliament; they did to their utmost capacities endeavor to strengthen
their hands, and did bring in several materials to advance so excellent a
structure. The Parliament is no other, than the high and supreme Court of
Judicature, entrusted with the rights, and liberties of the Nation; and they
acting singly for the good, and advantage of those whom they represent, and to
redress all oppressions, and grievances lying upon them, They ought to
challenge all their endeavors, their counsels, and their abillities to assist,
and support them in that work. It would be a prodigy in the constitution, if
the Parliament should betray, and sacrifice the Native freedoms of their
Country unto the exorbitant will, and lust of any person, or Authority: And it
would be as g eat a senslesness, and stupour in the people, if by deserting the
Paliament they suffer them to sink, and be ruined, whilst they are contending
with any Malevolent power, that rises up to inslave them. There was in these
virgin days such a mutual, strict, and lovely harmony and agreement as this
between the Parliament, and the honest unbiass^d people of the Nation; whe^eby
it came to pass that the management of the affairs then in their hands, though
intricate, and perplexed enough, and forcibly resisted, yet made so succesfull
a progress. It was the great aim of those worthy Reformers, to take away every
thing, that had the impress of usurpation upon it; And as profaneness and
superstition had their birth, and rise together, and availed mutually to rivet,
and establish each other in the Commonwealth; so was their extirpation and
downfall together. All that will worship, All those supe^st^tious rites and
observations of days, and places; All those exactions, that had been pressed
upon the consciences of tender Christians; all Innovations whatsoever not
warranted by a Divine rule, all profane rioting, disorders and excesses, and
all sports, and pastimes, the bane of youth, and the poison of good manners,
not consistent to a well-guided Commonwealth: These and whatsoever else was
contrary to sound Doctrine, to an holy conversation, and was an offense to good
men, were removed, and taken out of the way. And ^hey did not only cleanse the
outside, and pare off some superficial excrescencies, but they pierced into
the very heart and marrow, and by mak^ng the vitals sound they endeavou^ed to
prevent the return of such destruct^ve maladies. That great Tree which had
spread it self not only to the hurt of ^he Nation, but even to the terror of
all gracious spirits, had not only some of it is lofty boughs lopt off, but was
even plucked up by the very roots: They w^ll knowing, that superstition, and
rigor would in time have pullulated, and budded forth afresh, had any of that
Episcopal stem been left remaining. This was a great achievement, very
unfeis^ble in the eye of reason; but God who levells Mountains, and m^kes rough
things smooth, put it in the hearts of the Nobles to effect it, and the people
were willing unto the work. And as it was an inlet, and a necessary precedence
to their great mutations, that were to follow, so it could not be compast
without a dreadful noise; such unexpected, and unusual shakings being ever
accompanied wi^h the fury and displeasure of the mighty ones: Nor did they
terminate only here, contenting themselves to take away those things, and that
Jurisdict^^n out of which, as out of a corrupt Fountain, those disorders had
issu^d; But they proceeded also to call into question those persons, who by
their evil counsels had been the Author of al^ our m^chiefs. There is no
greater Plague to a Commonweal^h, than the swarm of Sycophants, and evil
Counselors, who are still exciti^g ^he Prince, or chief Magistrate, to tread
upon all Laws, and to incroach upon the peoples rights; who being, it may be,
in some things obnoxious themselves to the censures of the Law, can never think
themselves safe, but by walking in irregular and extraordinary paths, and by
diverting the stream of all things into the channel of Absoluteness. It was
therefore the wisdom of our Worthies in Parliament, not only to degrade, and
remove such from their places, and employment, but to bring the most notorious
offenders in that kind unto condign punishment: That as they had publicly
offended, so they might publicly answer it at the bar of Justice; under the
stroke of which some of them fell, though not without a mighty crackling, and
paid the punishments due to so great enormities; Whereby, there was as well
public satisfaction given to the Nation for the past in juryes it had
sustained, as a terror, and discouragement left to such as should succeed from
attempting the like practices for the future.

Sect. III. The Cause in its first rise and production.
IN the pursuit after a through Reformation, as a regard was had to the great
interests and concernements of the people of God, that their Consciences should
not be under Snares and Yoaks, by reason of rigid impositions, nor their
persons subjected to the Tyranny of any insulting Jurisdiction; So the just
Liberties of the Nation in things of a civil respect were industriously
contested for and asserted. This being an indubitable Principle, That the
civil Liberties, do in their true and genuine intention, conserve the
interests of the people of God, and the interests of the people of God do
reciprocally uphold and give a blessing to the civil Liberties: So that they
cannot, they ought not in reason to be divided; But to make up a flourishing
Commonwealth, they should twine and intimately embrace each other in an union
never to be dissolved. It was therefore necessary to enquire into the ancient
and fundamental Constitutions, which being established by a grand Charter, and
so often renewed, and attested by the Petition of Right, it was not lawful for
any Power whatsoever to alter and invade. Hereupon the prison doors were
opened, and such as had been cast into Durance, and confinement by an high
hand, and by an Arbitrary Lawless Act of supreme will, were released, and set
at liberty. The illegal oppressive Courts, which had been ejected merely to
serve the lust of one man, and to gratify the insatiable humors of corrupt
spirits, and Interests, were at once condemned, and exploded: And all things
that were miserably blended, and put out of order, were made to revert again
into the known and warrantable course, and proceedings of Law, and equity. In
the progress of this inquiry into our undoubted rights, and immunities, It was
found that the chief Magistrate had usurped a Prerogative, which was never
rightly inherent in him to dissolve Parliaments at hs pleasure; When as by the
an^^ent foundation they were to continue, as long as any grievance was
unremoved, or any Petit on was unanswered. It was also found, that he had not
power to defer the assembling of Parliaments at his own Arbitrament, as was
generally practiced, and believed; but according to the ancient constitution,
He was to call them once a year, or oftener, as occasion should require: Which
were to be for the better Government of the people of God, and to g^ve redress
to such injuries, as any had sustained by the means of the King, Queen, and
Prince, or by the misgovernment of any person whatsoever. It was found
likewise, that He had injuriously usurped the power of a Negative voice, either
to assent unto, or dissent from those Acts, which the Parliament brought unto
him, according as he pleased; when as He was obliged by the inviolable bond of
his oath to confirm, and ratify all such Laws, as the people, by their
Representatives in Parliament, should make choice of. It was further made
evident, that the power of the Militia, which He would have graspt into his own
hands, was solely and intrinsecally residing in the Parliament: It being not
consistent with reason, nor with the Maxims of Nature, that any should have
the power of declaring, and making war, but the Representatives of the people,
whose blood and treasure was necessarily to be spent, and engaged therein. It
was also evident, that the Revenue of the Nation was not to be imbesled, and
squandred away by the will of any, but that the Parliament had only, and
absolutely the disposal thereof: And that no tax, or imposition, either by way
of Loan, or fine, or by any other project: or invention, upon any pretense
whatsoever, was to be levied upon the people without the consent of their
Representatives in Parliament, These are without doubt the natural,
fundamental, and essential Principles constituting this Commonwealth; which
at once both propagates our Liberties, and distinguish us from Brutes and
Slaves; Which cannot be infringed much less parted with to any be the
Government in what mode and form soever without manifest, and open violation of
our indubitable rights, And in this channel glide along the stream of the
spirits of our renowned Patriots, never to be mentioned without respect and
honor; Who wearied, and wasted themselves with indefatigable pains; who
encountered with ravenous, and Lion-like tempers, and contested unto blood, that
they might both vindicate us, and all that is of nearest concern unto us, from
under the paw of Tyrannycal encroachments. Whilst these things were on the
stage, there were many various occurrences, and providentiall appearances,
evidently witnessing to the truth, and righteousness of such undertakings.
There were about two years spent in endeavoring to bring them to an happy
birth, but they proved succesless; so great an influence had the Malignant
aspects of the evil Counselors, to hinder the Nation of such high
advantages. And though some faint concessions were made in order thereunto, yet
it was with the reserve of such an unlimited power, that would in time have
blasted all the rest, and have certainly subjected us again, under the
thraldom of our ancient grievances. The contests and differences hereupon did
swell to an irreconcilable height; a civil war brake forth, the flame being so
fierce, and violent, that it could not be quenched, till the sword had given a
decision, on what part the righteousness of the quarrel lay. It is undeniably
evident, that the whole series of those proceedings were distasteful, and
against the hair; But that which was in view, and openly declared to be the
point they brake on; was the Negative voice, and the power of the Militia:
Wherein every one that is not of a perverse cavilling spirit, may receive full
and pregnant satisfaction, by having recourse to the naked story, and passages
of those times. It was upon this account, that both parties joined issue, that
they entered into the field, and fought so many fierce, and bloody Battles. In
the prosecution whereof, knowing, that our lives, liberties, and estates, and
all our spiritual, as well as civil endearments were involved in it, we did
make so many solemn, and serious appeals unto the righteous God, and whereunto
He was pleased reciprocally to return so many glorious pregnant proofs of his
power, and goodness. Hence it is, that we call it by way of Eminency, our
Cause, our first, and virgin-Cause, never to be receded from, nor blotted out
of memory; since God has stamped upon it so many golden characters, and pledges
of his incomparable Presence. And as it was a blemish in any of the people of
England in those days to desert the Parliaments Interest, and to join with
that power, that would have inslaved them: So it will strike posterity with
astonishment, If after we have broken that rod, that did oppress and smite us;
after we have rescued our liberties out of the very fire, we should again
resign the bucklers, and prostitute them, and our selves, to the will, mercy,
and courtesy of any: This being a safe prudentiall Maxim, that it is easier
for the people to keep what they have rightly gotten, than by intrusting it to
others, upon apprehension of their ingenuity, and candor, to fetch it back
again out of their encroachments

Sect. IV. The provident all uniting of the honest party in a victorious Army.
THis War being undertaken, the success was for a long time various, the
issue doubtful; It seemed to bechecquered with d fferent and uncertain
appearances; The victory sometimes inclined to the one, sometimes to the other
party: There was much blood spilt, much treasure exhausted, and yet a desired
and happy end thereof was to the eye of reason, as remote and far distant as
ever. But in a good and beautiful season, well known to the wisdom and love
of our God, to whom we had silently committed our selves and our cause, There
was on a sudden, the breaking forth of a mighty presence, the displayings of an
invinsible spirit to decide the Controversy: And when men failed, some
deserting and proving treacherous, some designing the ruin of the Instruments
engaged in the work, and almost all contemning them as incapable to carry it
on; Even then did the Lord exalt himself, and accompanying those poor despised
ones, even to wonders, blessed them with uninterrupted successes. It was then
when the Providence of God, contrary to all humane appearances, and beyond
their intentions, had modelled and brought together his own people, and
imbodied them in an Army, to effect his great designs. It was by these that he
thrash'd the Mountains, that he hewed down the towering Oaks, that he brake the
insulting tyranicall powers; And whom he particularly singled out from amongst
all others, to accomplish the great Affairs then on the Wheel; As if he
distinctly pointed out thus much, that he had reserved for them the honor of
the day; that it was peculiarly for their sakes that he had brought about those
unexpected Revolutions; That as they had been the chiefest sufferers, and been
trampled upon by the haughtiness of those insufferable Oppressors, so they
should be the chiefest and most eminent, that should at once both work those
deliverances, and enjoy the fruits of them. And though they were of different
apprehensions and judgments, in some things pertaining to the Conscience, yet
they were all indifferently made use of, and in the bonds of strictest love
united in the carrying on of that common Cause. And there was not the least
inconsistency but that they might still have mutually joyed in the Advantages
arising from thence, without jarrings and discords, until the day should dawn,
that by the revelation of Truth in its clearest appearances, expelling all
mists and mistakes, they might firmly fix, and center in one heart and in one
mind.

Sect. 5. The interposall of a jurisdiction as destructive as the former.
AFter that this righteous Cause had been so triumphantly owned, and witnessed
unto, even beyond the face of a denial; After that the name of God had been so
lifted up, and magnified in the vindication of it, that all the adverse Forces
were scattered and broken, with all their Accomplices and Adherents; After that
we had risen up to full grown expectations, that we should undoubtedly reap
the blessings of our long and difficult contests, and of the expense of all our
toll, treasure, and blood; There presently brake forth, a furious fiery party
which endeavored to erect a Dominion as rigid and as destructive to the Peace
and Liberties of the people of God, as ever that Power was which had been
formerly extirpated; who breathing out threatenings, and being of fierce
spirits, twisted severe rods for our backs, and laid impositions upon our
consciences, as heavy, and grievous to be born, as those were, under which the
former generation had miserably groaned. It is well known, to what an height
the Presbyterian jurisdiction did all on a sudden Mount; how ruggedly they
dealt with many precious tender hearts, that could not in all things conform to
their prescriptions: And as if they had set themselves, not only to equal,
but even to outvy the Episcopal Tyranny, they cast into prisons such as did
encourage, and frequent Christian meetings in private houses, Wherein they did
very little differ from their Predecessors, the Bishops, who branded the
spiritual communion of the Saints in those days with the name, and crime of
Conventicles. They exacted Tithes without remorse; they arrogated to impose
Articl^^ of Faith, to be necessarily owned, and believed, suitable to the
narrow limits of their dark understandings. They condemned for blasphemy,
error, heresy, and sectarism, all such opinions, as did in the least differ
from their overweening conceits, and apprehensions: and assuming as it were an
infallibility to their dictates, and interpretations, They prosecuted all
dissenters with fire, and sword, and suited for them respective punishments,
according as their Arbitrary, and enraged wills did hurry them. They
ambitiously aspired to seat themselves in the chair; and like the Episcopal
Grandeur, they encroach't over the civil power, setting their foot upon it,
and wieling it, at once both to serve their own Interests, and to execute the
severity of their injunctions. They grasp't after a Lordliness to inslave the
Nation under their girdle; and as their pride, inconsiderate zeal, and hot
tempers did sway them, they laid the foundation of a most bloody, and
insupportable persecution. It was strange to see, how all our hopes were dashed
on a sudden, how the heavens were overcast, and the serenity, which we rejoiced
in for a season, was obscured with the interposall of a thick dark cloud. What
a poor, and barbarous requital was it to the Army, and to those good Hearts,
that had borne the burden of the day, that had willingly hazarded themselves in
the vindication of the just liberties of the Nation, to be put to this straight
for their conscience sake, either to embrace a prison, or else to chose an
exilement from their native comforts, relations and into remote and foreign
countries? How dissonant was it, not only to all Ingenuity, but even to the
very ends, and intrinsic intendments of their engaging at first in that
quarrel, to have the name only changed, but to be really under as great yokes,
pressures, and burdens, to have arbitrarinesse, oppression, unrighteousness,
and slavery perpetuated under as strong enforcements, as they were, before the
beginning of these differences? Yet surely, if we will not betray, and forfeit
our understandings we must needs say, that the power, which then had risen up
with a new shape, as dreadful, and dangerous, as that former was, which had
been abandoned, and subdued.

Sect. VI. The cause in it is second appearance, explained and enlarged.
BUt in this difficult perplexed juncture, the Lord of glory, who had great
discoveries of Love, and goodness to dispense forth, did not then desert his
people, nor their cause; He was pleased to take that advantage to advance
their's, and the Nations concerns to an higher, and more flourishing State,
than at first was in the eye, I had almost said in the wishes of our Reformers.
The Army therefore groaning under those unjust provocations; Having bleeding
hearts for the enthralments, and sufferings of their fellow-bretheren; being
excited, and awakened by the Lord; being assisted with the united prayers, and
counsels, and strength of his people; they did seasonably interpose; And,
according to the duty incumbent on them, and to the opportunity offered them,
They did endeavor, as well to remove the miseries then impending, and
threatened, as to carry on the work, so happily begun, to its utmost period. It
cannot be denied, but that there brake forth then a most righteous majestic
spirit: And as they took in the whole compass, and latitude of the cause, as it
was first stated, and declared; so they did explain it, and annex some
additionall enlargements, most necessary to bring it to a perfection. Neither
did they make herein some faint overtures, and essays, but as the exigency of
the juncture did require, They did bind themselves under most inviolable
promises, and engagements unto the Nation, to contend for them with all
earnestness, until they were effected. It was too just, and universal a
complaint, That all things were out of course, that Tyranny, oppression, and
injustice had mingled themselves every where; whereupon it was publicly
asserted, that all expedients should be enterprised to remove all burdens, and
exactions, that so righteousness might diffuse it self, and run down, like a
mighty stream, throughout all the Nation. And because that the management of
things in the hands of unrigh^eous men was the great reason of such disorders,
and miscarriages, It was declared, that it should be their Principle, to employ
the honestest, and most upright persons in all places of power, trust, and
advantage. It was the wounding of the hearts of all good men, that impositions
should be put upon the understanding, and upon the faith of another, a cruelty
more rigorous, than ever the Egyptian Taskmasters exercised; That any should
be ensnared for his conscience sake; and because he differs in some principles,
and apprehensions, that he should be prosecuted as an heretic, sectary,
blasphemer; It was therefore resolutely contested for, That there should be an
universal liberty, and toleration held forth, and that no coaction, nor
compulsion should be laid upon any in matters of belief, and worship. It was
very grievous to consider, That the prisons should be filled with the free
subjects upon any small pretensions whatsoever; either upon mistakes,
conjectures, or suspicions, which had not the least ground of beliefs, but
only in the jealous head of some great Statist; Or, because the opinions of
some do not in every thing suite with another understanding; or because the
rich being exasperated against some poor men, who were indebted to them, would
forthwith cast them into durance, not so much to gain their own, as to gratify
their revenge: or else, because men of estates, having a purpose to defraud
their Creditors, were resolved to convert a prison into their habitation; It
was therefore resolved on, that all prisons should be opened to such, against
whom there was nothing obj^cted, but that they dissented from others in some
points, and principles of religion, pertaining either to doctrine, or worship;
That the poor, who had nothing to pay their debts with, should be freed from
the bondage of a perpetual confinement, and permitted to follow their
respective vocations for their subsistence; that none should take a lease of a
prison for his life, but that all such illegal prisons should be inspected
into, and for the future regulated: And that the Imprisoned, either merely upon
suspicions, or otherwise, should be brought in some convenient time to their
Trialls, that either they might be acquitted, or else, being found guilty,
might receive punishments due to their Offenses. Moreover the groans and
complaints of poor Conscientious men, who upon just scruples durst not pay
Tithes, and yet were vexed, imprisoned' and ruined about it, moving and
exciting Bowels of compassion; It was earnesty desired, That all tenderness
might be had to such in that particular, and that some way of ease and redress
(if possible) might be found therein. Further upon due consideration had, That
the corruption and abuses, which in tract of time, had crept into the practice
of the Laws, were unjustifyable as well as insufferable; that the management
of suits at Law was so tedious, expensive, and delatory, that they were become
at once both the shame and impoverishment of the Nation: It was therefore
expressly determined, That some expedients should forthwith be made practicable
for the regulating of the Courts for the mittigating of the Fees, and for the
freeing of the Nation from so horrid a cheat; It being not reasonable, that a
general good and advantage, should be subjected under the emoluments of a
particular party. Upon the whole, It was solemnly declared and professed, that
they would not imitate the unnecessary worldly forms of Power and Greatness,
neither would they graspe after empty Titles, and a Lordly Domination; But as
there was a change of Persons and Things, so there should be also of Principles
and Practice; and that they should always rejoice to be found walking in those
even and uncrooked paths of Truth, Honesty, Humility and Moderation. Surely
these were the good things at first engaged for, and promised; which were again
and again avowed as emergencies did arise; Which were contested for unto Blood;
and which were sealed, and witnessed unto by wonderful and glorious Victories
and Successes. In the endeavors after those things, that the Nation might at
length reap the blessed fruit of them, it was very clearly manifested, that so
excellent a Superstruction could not be erected upon a rotten decrepit
foundation. For, the single Person, the Lords, and the corrupt Interests, which
were necessary to be shaken and abridged in their illegal usurpations, if such
things as those were once reduced in practice, did unanimously combine together
to retard and slugg their motions, and if possible to disappoint them. After
many contests, after many vain attempts used to reconcile things upon their old
bottom, Divine Providence, by degrees, did point out the necessity of the
change of Government; and Kingship being laid aside as unnecessary, chargeable
and dangerous, it was divolved into a Commonwealth: This being a certain Rule,
That corrupt and degenerate States cannot be perfectly healed, and regulated,
but by stepping in to those forms, which are the farthest distant from those
wherein they were corrupted. And withal, such as the Principles are such must
the form of Government be; Those principles, that are pure, and refined, that
more specially regard the interests of the People, cannot be attained to, and
made practicable, but in the current of a Popular State. The tendency then of
our late occurences having been to stain the pride of all glory: to bring down
the loftiness of all fleshly excellencys; to serve the Liberties of the people
of God; and to set the Nation free from all Yoaks, and slavery; It will be a
vain thing to imagine that those can be otherwise propagated and upheld, than
in the most unblended, and unblemished interests of a Commonwealth. But I
advisedly put a stop here, And draw a Curtain over what remains: and since it
is night, since the day is eclipsed and darkened, I think it most proper to be
covered with Sables, and to wander solitary in shades and obscurity.

The Conclusion, God with us, the establishment of the Commonwealth.
TO conclude, Behold then here as in a Crystal Mirror, the good old Cause
purged from those dreggs and defilements, which in time it had contracted: You
that scost at it, you that have started from it, you that have mixed it, may
herein clearly veiw as in a Summary and Compendium, The Cause in its first rise
and management, and as it was seconded, and reinforced with its
circumstantiall explanationss: It has been the price of Blood, if you desert
it now, and basely betray it in^o the power of any, it will either argue, that
the blood spilt therein has been innocent, and causeless, or else convince you
of stupour and sorrishness, that you know not the value of that which you have
so dearly purchased. It has been confirmed by your many and solemn Covenants
and Engagements, if you are not conscientious to fulfill them, you will leave
on your names to all Posterity, the stain and blem sh of Falsehood and
Unfaithfullness. It has been signally owned by God, having had the impresse of
his Name and Presence upon it; If you shall court the worldy Powers,
Advantages, and Grandures, which he has blasted and forsaken, you may indeed
embrace a shadow, but you will lose the substance; you may indeed have the
empty shinings of man's favor, but you will therein be depried of the face of
God. It will certainly be our safety, it will be our honor to preserve these
two in an inseparable union, and conjunction, and to have them always engraven
together, as it were in letters of Gold upon burnisht brass, GOD WITH US, THE
COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.

THE END.

