At the Court at WHITEHALL,
This 26th day of March 1686. Present, The Kings most Excellent Majesty. His
Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord
President Lord Chamberlain Earl of Huntingdon Earl of Bridgwater Earl of
Peterborough Earl of Craven Earl of Berkeley Earl of Plymouth Earl of Morray
Earl of Middleton Lord Viscount Fauconberg Lord Viscount Preston Lord Viscount
Melfort Lord Bishop of Durham Lord Dartmouth Lord Godolphin Mr. Chancellor of
the Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy.

WHereas it has been Represented to His Majesty, That by reason of the frequent
Abuses of a lewd sort of People, called Spirits, in Seducing many of His
Majesty's Subjects to go on Shipboard, where they have been seized, and carried
by force to His Majesty's Plantations in America; and that many idle Persons
who have Listed themselves Voluntarily to be Transported thither, and have
received Money upon their Entering into Service for that purpose, have
afterward pretended they were betrayed, and carried away against their Wills,
and procured their Friends to Prosecute the Merchants who Transported them, or
in whose Service they are, by Indictments, or Informations in the Crown Office
in His Majesty's Name, which is a great Discouragement to them, and an
Hindrance to the Management of the Trade of the said Plantations, and
Navigation of this Kingdom; And several Merchants and Planters having made
humble Applications to His Majesty, That he would be Graciously pleased to
Direct such Methods for their Retaining of Servants to Serve in His Majesty's
Plantations, as in His Royal Wisdom he should think meet, whereby His Majesty
may be so satisfied of their Fair Dealing, as to take off all Prosecutions
against them at His Majesty's Suit; And also that the Scandal that now lies
upon them in general, by reason of such Evil-disposed persons, may not remain
upon such as shall for the future follow such Methods as His Majesty shall
think fit to be pursued.

His Majesty taking into His Royal Consideration the said Request, is
Graciously pleased to Declare, That such ^^^hants, Factors, Masters of Ships,
or other Persons that shall use the Method hereafter following, in the Hirin^
of Servants for His Majesty's Plantations, shall not be Disquieted by any Suit
on His Majesty's behalf, but upon Certificate thereof, that He will cause all
such Suits to be stopped, to the end they may receive no further Molestation
thereby.

I. Such Servants as are to be taken by Indenture, to be Executed by the
Servant, in the presence of the Magistrate, or Magistrates hereafter appointed;
One part thereof Signed by such Servant, and also Underwritten, or Endorsed
with the Name and Handwriting of such Magistrate, which is to remain with the
Clerk of the Peace, to be Returned to the next Sessions, there to be Filed upon
a distinct File, and Numbered, and kept with the Records.

II. The Clerk of the Peace is to keep a Fair Book, wherein the Name of the
Person so Bound, and the Magistrates Name before whom the same was done, and
the time and place of doing thereof, and the Number of the File shall be
Entered: And for the more easy finding the same, the Entries are to be made
Alphabetically, according to the first Letter of the Surname.

III. All Persons above the Age of One and twenty years, or who shall, upon
View and Examination, appear to be so in the Judgment of the Magistrate, may be
Bound in the presence of One Justice of the Peace, or of the Mayor, or Chief
Magistrate of the Place where they shall go on Shipboard; who is to be fully
satisfied from him, of his free and voluntary Agreement, to enter into the said
Service.

IV. If any Person be under the Age of One and Twenty years, or shall appear so
to be, he shall be Bound in the presence of the Lord Mayor of London, or One of
the Judges, or an Alderman of London, being a Justice of Peace, or the
Recorder, or Two Justices of the Peace of any other County, or Place, who shall
carefully Examine whether the Person so to be Bound, have any Parents, or
Masters; And if he be not Free, they are not to take such Indenture, unless the
Parents, or Masters give their Consents, and some Person that knows the said
Servant to be of the Name, and Addition mentioned in the Indenture, is to
Attest his said knowledge upon the said Indenture.

V. If the Person be under the Age of Fourteen years, unless his Parents shall
be present, and Consent, he is not to be carried on Shipboard, till a Fortnight
at least, after he becomes Bound, to the intent that if there be any Abuse, it
may be discovered before he be Transported. And where his Parents do not appear
before the Magistrate, Notice is to be sent to them; or where they cannot be
found, to the Churchwardens, or Overseers of the Parish where he was last
Settled, in such manner as the said Magistrates shall think fit, and Direct.

And because Clerks of the Peace may conceive this not to be any part of the
Duty of their Office, and may therefore exact unreasonable Rewards for their
trouble and pains therein, His Majesty does Declare, That if any Merchants, or
other Persons shall be aggrieved thereby, and upon Complaint to the Justices
cannot obtain Relief, His Majesty will take such further care for their ease
herein, as in His Royal Wisdom He shall think meet.

And His Majesty's further Pleasure is, That this Order be Printed and
Published, to the end all Persons whom it may concern, may take Notice thereof,
and govern themselves accordingly.

W. BRIDGEMAN.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1686.


