AN ACT AND DECLARATION For putting the LAWS against Priests and Jesuits in
speedy and effectual Execution.

Monday, March 12. 1659.

ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act and Declaration be forthwith Printed
and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

seal of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.

AN ACT AND DECLARATION FOR Putting the Laws against Priests and Jesuits in
speedy and effectual Execution.
FOr as much as the Laws have not of late time been effectually put in
Execution against Seminaries, Jesuits, and Romish Priests, whereby they have
lately, more than heretofore, taken the boldness to come into this Commonwealth
in great numbers, to the intent to stir up and move Sedition, Rebellion, and
open Hostility therein, to the endangering of the peace of this Nation, and
seducing of the good People thereof from the true Religion established in this
Commonwealth, to the Romish Idolatry and Superstition. The Parliament taking
the same into their consideration, do hereby Publish and Declare, That all Laws
and Statutes in force against all Jesuits, Seminary-Priests, or other such
Priests, Deacons, or Religious or Ecclesiastical Persons whatsoever, made,
ordained, or professed, or hereafter to be made, ordained, or professed by any
Authority or Jurisdiction, derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, by or of what Name, Title, or Degree soever the same shall be called or
known, shall be put into speedy and effectual Execution, and against the
Harbourers, Concealors, Abettors, and Aiders of them. And the Parliament does
hereby further require all Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Sheriffs, and other
Officers and Ministers entrusted with the Execution of the Laws, to take notice
hereof, and to put the same in Execution accordingly. And for the more
effectual putting the premises in Execution, and better encouragement of any
discovery of any the persons aforesaid: Be it hereby Enacted and Declared, That
he or they that shall hereafter first discover to any Judge or Justice of Peace
any the Persons aforesaid, and that by reason thereof any of the said Offenders
be taken, convicted, or attainted, That then he or they, that have made such
Discovery, shall, immediately after such Conviction, have a Certificate from
the Judge or Justice, before whom such Conviction shall happen, to be directed
to the Sheriff, or other Officer of any County, Limit, or Place where such
Conviction shall be; commanding the Sheriff, or other Officer, to pay him or
them that shall first make such discovery, twenty pounds; which Warrant and
Payment shall be effectual in the Law for that purpose, and a sufficient
discharge in that behalf for the Sheriff or other Officer, upon his Account,
and that the Discoverer of such persons shall be free from the Penalties which
he may have incurred by any of the said Laws and Statutes.

Monday, March 12. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act and Declaration be forthwith Printed
and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.


