A GUIDE TO SALVATION, Bequeathed to a Person of HONOR, By his Dying-Friend
The R. F. Br. Laurence Eason, Ord. S. Franc. S. Th. L.

Seek, first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all other things
else shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. ver. 33. BRVGES, By Luke Kerchove, 1673.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Earl of Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England;
Baron HOWARD of Castlerising, etc.
My Lord,
I purpose not, in this my Preliminary Epistle, to publish unto the World, the
large Catalogue of your Charitable Works, and your other Christian Virtues, Et
laudent eam in porta opera ejus: These without Flattery commend better than I
am able. My design is, to express here, some small Testimony of my many great
Obligations for those large favors I have, and still do receive from your
Bountiful and Generous Heart: This I presume, I can no way better perform, than
by endeavoring to promote the eternal Welfare of your Soul, that grand Duty
you ought most to mind in this World, as being the only end of your Being
therein.

For I am not of Cicero's opininion, That we are born, partly for our Country,
partly for our Parents, partly for our Friends; but rather, That we are All
born for our selves; not but that we have many high Obligations besides, which
in Conscience we are to discharge; but that the End of all is, The good of our
own Souls, in order to eternal Salvation, which I conceive to be the meaning of
that of the Apostle, Whither you Eat, or Drink, or whatsoever else ye do, let
All be done to the Glory of God.

Wherefore, if you desire Riches, what greater can you have, than the Treasures
of Heaven? of which, none can deprive you, without your own consent. If you
Aspire to Honors, what higher can there be, than to be a Servant, a Friend, a
Child of a most Glorious God? Nimis honorati sunt amicitui Deus: And if you
affect Pleasures, there are none so True, so Permanent, so Satisfying, as the
joys of an upright Conscience; to drink of the indeficient Torrents of
Pleasure, and to be inebriated with the fullness of Gods House.

The greatest Plenty this World can afford to and earthly Heart, is extreme
Poverty, according to St. Augustine, if it be without God; and whatever
Pleasures or Honors may be enjoyed in this Life, will still end in Misery and
Confusion, if they advance not the good of the Soul, in order to its endless
blessed Life with God in Heaven; Vbi salutis damnum, ibi luerum nulium, says
Eucherius; there is no gain to be valued, if therewith our Salvation be
endammaged; for, if this miscarries, all is lost, for an Eternity.

My Lord, Heavens Providence has placed you in a very eminent Condition
amongst Men, as well by your Noble Extraction, as by the propitious influences
of a Gracious Princes Favors; That your High Rank of Nobility should
powerfully bend your vast Soul to the performance of such Heroic Actions of
Virtue, as may befit a person of your Ill^strous Rise and Endowmen^

God has ^^^ed you by his grace, to be a ^^mber of the Holy Catholic Church;
this eminent Prerogative amongst True Believers, should oblidge you to glorify
God in that saving Profession; that (as our Blessed Savior advises) your
Light may so shine before Men, that they seeing your good Works, may be moved
thereby to give glory to your Heavenly Father, in the same Profession with you.

God has moreover blessed you with a hopeful Issue; advance them by a Virtuous
Education, and your own fore-running good Examples; for, the holy lives of
Christian Parents are over the most powerful Attractives, whereby Children are
induced to compose theirs to the Love of God, and the Rules of Morality. Thus
doing, you will purchase to your self and Posterity, the blessings of this Li^^
(...) the next, that which is aimed a^ (...) small Treatise, and shall ever be
the ^^rnest Petition of your dying Friend (...)

Right Honorable, Your Honors most devoted Servant, Laurence Eason.

A GUIDE TO SALVATION.
FIRST PART.
The Importance of Man's Salvation, manifested by diverse Motives and
Considerations.

IT is an observation of St. Bonaventure, that there are two things which God
does allow, which are the Creation and Conservation of the world; there is one,
which is the work of Man alone, and that is Sin; to the production of which,
God does not formally concur, as the Psalmist affirms of him [Psal. 44] in
these words, He loves Justice, and detesteth Iniquity, and therefore is far
from being the Author and cause of it; There is yet a third thing which God and
Man work together, which is our Salvation; for the obtaining of which, to his
Grace we must join our endeavor, according to that common saying of St.
Augustine, Qui fecit te sine te, non salvabit te, sine te. He who made thee
without thee, will not save thee without thee; this is the work of Grace and
our Will together, as the Apostle affirms of himself; Non ego sed gratia
Deimecum; not I alone, but the grace of God with me; and therefore we are
styled by him Coadjutors and Fellow Laborers with God in this work.

Hence is that of St. Augustine, [St. Aug. lib. Hypog. c. 3.] Nec gratia sine
libero arbitrio facit hominem habere vitam beatam, nec liberum arbitrium sine
gratia. Grace without our free will cannot make us blessed, nor our free will
without grace, though it be true what the Prophet said of the Son of God;
operatus est salutem in medio terrae; he wrought Salvation in the midst of the
Earth. Yet it is as true, that he requires, that we should deny our selves, and
assist him in carrying his Cross, the instrument of our Redemption; and so
fulfill, as the Apostle speaks of himself, In our flesh, those things which are
wanting of the Passion of Christ; that is, we should apply his merits and
benefit of his Passion, and render them efficatious to us by our cooperation:
Wherefore it highly concerns us seriously to consider this grand affair of our
Salvation, that we become not deficient in our endeavors concerning it.

CHAP. I.
Containing diverse Considerations and Motives concerning the Importance of this
Affair.

The first Consideration and Motive.
THe important Consequence of this, first appears, in that it seems to be the
greatest of Gods works, and the end of all the rest. This our blessed Savior
insinuated in his Answer to the people, when they thus demanded of him in St.
John, [John 8. 9.] what shall we do, ut operemur opera Dei? to perform the
works of God? he replies, Hoc est opus Dei, this is the work of God, that you
believe in him whom he sent. As if he should have said unto them, you demand
what are the works of God? in the Plural number. I answer you in the Singular
number, that there is but One, for which he does all the rest, and that is the
Salvation of man.

Hence Tertullian considering all things in this world, said, Horum bonorum
unus est titulus, salus hominis: they all carry this Title upon them, The
Salvation of man. When God had Created this sensible world with the Heavens,
Elements, and all Creatures in it, he put this Title upon them, Salus hominis;
this was the end of their being, to which they were ordered; when he Created
the Angels, he placed this as a Frontisepiece upon them, Salus hominis, The
Salvation of man; this is the affair in which they are employed, as the Apostle
[Heb. 1.] informs us, Omnes administratores Spiritus; All of them are
administrating Spirits, sent for those who are to receive the inheritance of
Salvation. They labor incessantly in this affair, knowing it is the greatest
work of God, in which they can be employed.

If God became Man, if he Preached, gave us examples of all Virtues, instituted
the Sacraments, these and the like Marvels, have this Inscription upon them,
Salus hominis, having no other end but this.

If he dyed on the Cross, it was for this design, he suffered Death to give us
Life. It was from this consideration that Tertullian said, Nihil tam dignum
Deo, quam salus hominis; nothing so worthy, or beseeming God, as the Salvation
of man: and St. Thomas gives this Reason of it; because the whole Universe,
with all the Orders, Dispositions, and Marvels in it, do not so clearly and
fully manifest his grandeurs as the Salvation of man; for here he makes appear
his Attributes and Perfections, which are his Power, Wisdom, Love, in a most
eminent manner; which caused the holy Doctor to affirm, In rebus creatis nihil
potest esse majus quam salus rationalis creaturae; In all Created things, there
is not any greater than man's Salvation. God could have Created Heavens more
extended, and more richly adorned, than those which now roll over our heads; an
Earth more fruitful, than that which now supports us: Angels more intelligent,
than those which now sing his Praises in Heaven; but he could not do any thing
more Great, Noble, and Divine, than the Salvation of man: this is it, which
after a sovereign manner, manifests his Attributes and Perfections. This
consideration should cause us highly to esteem, and incessantly to endeavor
our Salvation which concerns so much the glory of God, which we are obliged to
advance to our power. And seeing that God, on his part, so really and seriously
desires our Salvation, and so highly esteems it, that he Created and Ordered
all things in this universe for it; surely, by our neglecting it, we frustrate
as much as in us lies, all his designs, and dissolve and reduce to nothing the
Creation of the world, with all things in it; for all things have their being,
and conservation, for no other end but this; what a stupendous ingratitude and
contempt of God and his benefits are involved in this neglect, who is so blind
as not to discern it; and therefore most inconsiderate and insensible to be
guilty of such a crime.

The second Consideration and Motive.
The second is taken from our own proper Interests, which is no less than our
Salvation; the loss of which, renders us miserable for all Eternity.

We will begin this consideration with those remarkable words, with which the
Wise man concluded his Ecclesiastes, Deum time; fear God and observe his
Commandments: hoc est omnis homo; for this is every man; or as St. Jerome
translates it, This is the end of every man's Birth and Being; from which St.
Bernard draws this Consequence, Ergo absque hoc nihil est homo; then without
this, man is nothing: Popes are not in the world to be Popes, nor Kings to be
Kings, nor Wise men to be Learned, and the like; but all universally to be
saved. All the conditions and employments which possess the Spirits of men,
ought to give place to this, and aim at it, as their proper object and end,
without which they are in vain. This our Blessed Savior affirms in those words
of St. Matthew, [cap. 16.] quid prodest homini; what will it advantage a man,
to gain the whole world, and to suffer detriment in his Soul? what will it
profit a man to have all the pleasures of the voluptuous? all the riches the
world can afford him? all the honors that men can confer upon him? if he were
absolute Monarck of the whole world, if at last he loses his Soul. If he had
all the knowledge of things natural and Divine; all the beauty that the body is
capable of, such health for so long a time as he could desire, all the
advantages of the world which men so ardently thirst after; all these, in the
judgment of Christ, the Divine Wisdom of his Father, will be unprofitable if
he comes not only to lose, but to suffer detriment in his Soul: For this
reason, the Royal Prophet styles his Soul, his Darling, or his One; Erue a
framea Deus animam meam, and de manu canis unicam meam: Deliver my Soul from
the power of the Sword, and my One from the hand of the Dog: He calls his Soul
his One, not only because as other men, he had but one Soul, but because it was
most dear unto him, he loved it, and procured the conservation of it with all
the care and diligence; which one imploys to preserve things; the rarity and
worth of which, renders them precious and amiable. This caused St. Chrysostom
[Hom. 12. de po.] to say, God has given us two Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, two
Feet, that if any Misfortune deprive us of the use of one, we may help our
selves by the use of the other. Animam vero unam dedit nobis; but he has given
us but one Soul; if we lose this, we lose all irrevocably.

The Prophet David [Psal. 116.] well considered this, when he said Anima mea in
manibus meis semper; my Soul is always in my hands, to hold it fast, that I
might not lose it, but exercise it in good works, defend it from all Enemies
who would ruin it, and always consider the condition of it, according to that
of St. Bernard, Non facile obliviscimur; We do not easily forget those things
which we hold in our hands: the care of our Souls should always thus be present
to us. That Holy Father thus continues his discourse about this subject; If
thou art so sollicitous as not to neglect small things, so vigilant to preserve
thy Corn, thy Cattle, thy Money, thy Earthly possessions, such inferior and
transitory things; art thou not then foolish and unreasonable to neglect the
Salvation of thy Soul, which is thy true treasure? This as St. Gregory speaks,
is to pervert Reason into extreme Folly.

The excellence of true reason and judgment consists, in discerning the price
of things, and esteeming them according to their worth, and consequently to
make more acccount incomparably of the Soul than of the Body; of things Eternal
than Temporal; of the affair of his Salvation, than of all other things; and he
who does not do this, is as one without sense and judgment, seeing he judges
so ill of things, which with such an excess are disproportionable in value.
Plato said true, that the effect of true Wisdom, is, to be Wise for one's own
good. Solomon affirmed [Pro. 9. 12.] as much before him, Si sapiens fueris,
tibimetipsi eris; true Wisdom consists in being Wise to ones self. The Devil
has more knowledge than all the Learned men on Earth, but not one grain of true
Wisdom, being miserable for Eternity, and so infinitely distant from essential
Wisdom, which is God himself. For this reason, Sinners unmindful of their
Salvation, of what spirit and knowledge soever they be, are styled in sacred
Scripture, Fools and Insensible Creatures; so great is the concern for the
Salvation of our Souls, that it is styled by the Apostle, and commended by him
to the Thessalonians [1 These. 4.] as properly and particularly our affair; ut
vestrum negotium agatis, that you may do your work: as though we had but only
this to attend to; for other things, about which we employ our labor and care,
deserve not this name; they are affairs in which the success oftentimes does
not correspond with our designs; affairs which pass away with little profit,
and often contrary to the grand affair of our Salvation.

This great affair of our Salvation would make us admire that manner of speech
so frequent amongst us, when seeing any one busied amongst the intrigues of
Courts, in the commerce of Merchandise, in the negotiation of treaties and
alliances, and the like; we use ordinarily to say, that he is a man of great
business and affairs; it is an improper speech to give this name to
employments, which are but petite amusements, in which one for the most part
loses his time, and often Heaven. We do not give the name of affairs to the
employments of Children; as when they build their little houses of dirt, when
they ride upon a stick, and contend with such earnestness to carry away the
glory, and to be Kings in their sports; these puerilities and pastimes deserve
not the name of affairs, being in themselves so little, and so momentary: In
like manner the enterprises of men, to build houses, to purchase honors, to
amass riches and the like; being not much more greater and durable than those
of Children, deserve not the name of affairs: All men in the world have but one
affair, about which they ought continually to employ themselves, which is their
Salvation; and if they mind this, then one may say, they are wise and able men,
and busied about a grand affair.

This Tertullian well considered, when he said, In me unicum negotium: I have
but one business in the world to attend unto, which is the Salvation of my
Soul: I abandon what the world calls affairs, I decline the intrigues of the
Court, the School of Philosophy, the company of Friends, to be vacant to this
one affair, which I treat of with my self, and concerning which I am
interessed. Our Blessed Savior confirms all this, in calling the young man in
the Gospel to follow him; for when he required leave, first to go bury his
Father, our Blessed Savior replied, Dimitte mortuous sepelire mortuos; let the
dead bury the dead: as if he should have said, as St. Peter Chrysogolus
observes, to bury the body of your Father, is not the most important affair you
have to do; it is to follow me, and to look after your Salvation, which ought
to be the first in execution, as it is in worth and merit; Terrenus pater post
ponendus est patri coelesti, as that Holy Father concludes, The care of a
Temporal Father is to come after that of our Heavenly.

The third Consideration and Motive.
We may discern the importance of our Salvation, by the many crafts and
endeavors the Devil uses to hinder it, which are so many and so great, that
he has his name given him from them, being called the Tempter; and as
Tertullian speaks, Eversio hominis, operatio ejus; his only work is the ruin
of man. The Prophet Hab. says, that cibus ejus electus; his food is very
choice, he desires to devour the Elect: he loves these delicate morsels; he
labors not, but to resist the Salvation of men, and to procure their
Damnation; this is his joy and triumph: And in the estate of misery, in which
he is plunged, if he be capable of any satisfaction, it is the Damnation of
man; for which reason, he is styled by our Blessed Savior in the Gospel,
Inimicus hominis, the Enemy of man; for being not able to revenge himself on
God, he turns his fury against his Servants; and thinks he commits a great
outrage against him, if he can reverse the design he has for the Salvation of
man, and deface Gods Image in our Soul. He is the Enemy of man, because he
knows man is to possess the place he left vacant by his revolt. He is the Enemy
of man, because by this, he thinks to find some solace in his misery, having
Companions with him in his sufferings, and subjects upon which to exercise his
fury; he uses all artifices, employs all his power; he is Prodigal in promises
to compass this, and to be an Usurper of Souls. He speaks as the King of Sodom
did to Abraham, Da mihi animas, caetera toll tibi; Give me the Souls, and take
all the rest.

The pleasures of the Flesh are not for me; I misprise Riches, I leave Honors
to the Ambitious; but for Souls, I continually thirst, and can never be
satisfied. He was so bold, as to attempt against our Blessed Savior himself,
and to persuade him to adore him; he promised to give him Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, all the Kingdoms of the Earth to do it; haec omnia tibi dabo; All
these will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. See here the
esteem he makes of one Soul, from which Salvianus takes an occasion to condemn
the stupidity of men, who truly consider not the price of their Souls; Quis
furor? viles habere animas, quas diabolus putat esse pretiosas? What madness,
to have a vile esteem of our Souls, which in the opinion of the Devil are
judged so precious? To sell that for a little money, for a momentary pleasure,
for a blast of Honor, which the proper Enemy of it, valued above the whole
world, seeing he presented that to purchase it. This extreme folly moved the
said Salvianus, thus to exclaim, Novum genus emptionis and venditionis! A
strange kind of buying and selling! the Devil gives nothing, and takes all! man
receives nothing, and parts with all! When a Merchant contracts for any Ware,
he receives the price agreed upon for it, and the buyer receives the
Merchandise: But here is the contrary. See the foolish traffic of Sinners, the
Devil sells them the pleasures of the senses, he promises them Honors, which
are but smoke; Riches, which a Theif, a Violence, an Injustice may deprive them
of; and in selling these, he gives them nothing, because these are not at his
disposal, he being not Lord of them; and for these, he receives from us all the
precious things which concerns our Salvation. What a deplorable blindness is
this of Sinners, to esteem so little of their Souls? I earnestly desire, that
every one of them would follow that Counsel of the Wise man, [Eccles. 10. 31.]
Serva animam tuam and da illi honorem secundum meritum suum: Save thy Soul, and
give it that honor which is due unto it, according to its worth and dignity.
And he adds, Quis honorificabit? Who shall honor him, who dishonours his Soul?
and who can defend or excuse him against the justice of God, who offends
against his own Soul?

The last Consideration and Motive.
We may clearly discern the worth of our Soul, and the esteem and care we ought
to have of the Salvation of it, by what Christ did do, and suffer, for this end.

The Salvation of our Soul avails as much as it cost; but it cost the Blood,
the Merits, the Life of Christ, which are infinite; from which we must
necessarily conclude, that it is of an infinite value. I advance in this
further; for ordinarily we value a thing, more than the price we paid to make
it ours, if we be not deceived in it; but the Son of God, who has an infinite
Wisdom, and so cannot be deceived in the esteem and valuing of things, gave
his Life and Merits to purchase the Salvation of our Souls; may we not then
say, that in some manner, he esteemed them more than the price he gave for them.

I can declare unto you a clearer manifestation of this; Having redeemed our
Souls with his precious Blood and Merrits, he esteemed this infinite price so
little, as he esteemed them given him gratis by his Heavenly Father, Quos
dedisti mihi, [John 10] whom thou have given me. Again, to know what esteem the
Son of God had of our Souls, after having purchased them with so great a price,
he calls the Angels ^o Feast and Congratulate, not only man, but himself, as
St. Thomas observes, [Opusc. c. 63.] and to speak with him, as if man were the
God of God, and that the felicity of the Sovereign Majesty depended on the
Salvation of man; as if he could not be happy, if man were miserable.

Having showed the price of thy Salvation, the great esteem the Son of God had
of it, that as St. Chrysostom speaks, Nihil indignum se putat, quod nobis
proficiat ad salutem; He thought not any thing unworthy of him, which might
conduce to our Salvation. If thou come now to neglect this, by this Crime
thou committest two grand outrages, One against the Son of God, the Other
against thy self: for the first St. Augustine observes, [St. Aug. Sermo. 37. de
temp.] qui dat pro modica delectatione: He who gives to the Devil for a short
pleasure or transitory satisfaction, that, for which Christ gave no less than
himself. Stultum reputat Christum mercatorem; By that very action, condemns
Christ as a foolish and ignorant Merchant. Who has not light to discover, nor
wisdom to esteem the true value of Souls, seeing he did give an infinite price
for the Salvation of them, which thou esteemest as a thing of nothing. What an
affront is this offered to Christ? it is no less, as the Apostle affirms, than
to trample his sacred Blood under our feet; of which he complained by the
Psalmist, Sicut aqua effusus sum; I am poured out as water: as a thing of no
esteem, trampled under the feet of all.

Ah Sinner! this outrage against the Son of God will fall heavy upon thy self,
when thou come to lose thy soul, and to sell it to the Devil for a transitory
pleasure: Have thou any thing so precious wherewith to purchase it again, as
the price that was given for it, and is so contemned by thee? St. Chrysologus
assures thee, no. Quando eam tanti emptam perdideris, quomodo poteris eam
deinceps emere? When thou losest that which was bought with so great a price,
how can thou purchase it again? O Christians! after we have seen the esteem
that God makes of our Salvation, the price he has given for it, the labors
and sufferings that his only Beloved Son did undergo to procure it for us; the
crafts and endeavors the Devil uses to deprive us of it, what remains but to
conclude? that this is the only thing in which you should be employed; the
grand affair which deserves the application of your Spirits; the affections of
your wills, the force of your bodies: when you have effected this, you have
done all; if you miscarry in this, all is lost though you should gain the whole
world by it.

CHAP. II.
Containing the Manner, how we must behave our selves in procuring our
Salvation.

HE who desires any thing efficaciously, labors to obtain it seriously,
diligently, and with perseverance; which are the three Conditions to be
observed in this work of our Salvation.

The first Manner or Condition.
We must labor in it seriously, according to the example of our Blessed
Savior, who out of zeal to convert the Samaritan Woman, traveled half a day
in the heats of the Sun, with great weariness and thirst to be at the place
whither she was to come, to meet with an opportune occasion for her Conversion:
To make, of another Sinner, a Penitent, he went to a banquet, and expected
there her coming; and he traveled up and down, and frequented the company of
sinners to effect this great business, which was the end of his coming into the
world. St. Paul had the perfect knowledge and practice of this truth, and
therefore traveled seriously with the whole application of his Spirit, for the
Salvation of his Brethren. Hear how he speaks unto them, [2 Corinthians. 12.] Ego
autem libentissime impendam, and superimpendar, pro animabus vestris; I will
gladly spend, and be spent for your Souls sake: There is not any thing which I
will not do, to advance your Salvation, which is so dear and precious to me,
that I am ready to give my self to procure it. Upon which, is that of St.
Ambrose; Non solum sua, pro eis impendere paratum se dicit, sed etiam seipsum
pro salute animarum: He is not only content to give those things which are his,
but also to expose and give himself for the salvation of their Souls. This Zeal
of his, he more fully expressed in that to the Romans, [Cap. 9.] Optabam, ego
ipse, Anathemaesse a Christo, pro fratribus meis. I did desire to be separated
from Christ, for the Salvation of my Brethren. His own interests drew him to be
with Christ as his Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved, sufficiently
testifies; but for the Salvation of his Brethren, he was content for a time, to
be separated from the glory of Christ, and to remain here on Earth, to labor
in this work.

By this we may easily apprehend how we ought to employ the things of this
world, and expose our life too, if it be necessary for our Salvation, our great
affair in this world. But this which concerns us so much is so slightly passed
over, that we may justly complain with those Prophets, [Jerem. Daniel. Osee.]
Desolatione desolata est omnis terra, quia non est qui recogitet cord; The
whole Earth is become desolate, because there is not any one who seriously
considers in his heart. We may find many who think of their Salvation, but it
is only superficially, not with the heart, and so their thoughts are cold and
barren; cold, because they produce not an ardent desire to execute what they
think; they are barren, because they produce not holy motions and actions. The
Devil and Reprobate have the like; the thought of their Beautitude lost, is
continually present to them, they know the excellency of it, by suffering the
privation thereof; but this is not with the heart, with a consideration which
is affective, ardent, effective: When we Will a thing efficatiously, it does
not only busy our thoughts, but employs our hands, and industry, to labor,
our tongues frequently to speak of it; the heart, the hand, the tongue, are
joined in this work; the heart to meditate, the hand to execute, the tongue to
publish it. Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur: Out of the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks.

The second Manner or Condition requisite in this work.
From the Zeal and serious consideration of our Salvation, ordinarily proceeds
an exquisite diligence for the procuring of it; which is the second Condition
necessarily required in this work.

Our B. Savior has given us an admirable example in this kind; the sacred
Scripture [Heb. 10.] says of him, that entering into the world by the mystery
of his Incarnation, he said unto his Heavenly Father, You Will not the
Sacrifices of the Law, therefore I offer up the body you have given me for a
Victime, to honor your Majesty, to satisfy your Justice, to appease your
Anger. He did not delay his sufferings to the end of this life, but the first
moment he entered into the world as Man, he presented himself as a Victime. And
when he was then adored by the Angels, at the command of his Heavenly Father,
even then he would honor him as his Servant and Victime. In the whole course
of his life, he traveled in this affair with such diligence, as the Psalmist
resembles him to a Giant exulting to run his course, with an incredible vigor
in all the ways, wherein he might work our Salvation. His Espouse admiring
this in her Canticles, [Cant. 2.] compares this course of his to the swiftness
of a Roe and Heart. The Angels descended and ascended in Jacobs Ladder without
repose, in the exercise which they continue indefatigably for the Salvation of
men. Job by his own example showed us with what fervor and diligence we should
proceed in this affair, [Job 29.] Causam quam ignorabam diligentissime
investigabam: If I did not understand the rights between parties to accord
them, I used most exquisite diligence to understand it.

I did not defer till to morrow what I could do to day, but applied my self
without delay to all the good works I could perform for the advance of my
Salvation.

Tobias did often rise from the Table, left his refection, quitted the Company
of his Friends; to bury the dead, and to exercise works of mercy toward the
poor and needy. Abraham stood in the common ways, to find and invite Pilgrims
to his house, where his Wife and Domestics were busied in preparing a
refection for them. St. Paul [Acts 5.] protested to the faithful, that he used
all possible diligence in his Apostolical function. That which the examples of
the Saints inform us, the Wise man Councelled in his Proverbs, Diligenter
exerce agrum tuum; diligently cultivate thy field. We must not imagine that he
speaks here of good Husbandry, but under the symbol of a field, he insinuates
that we should labor with diligence to extirpate vices, to acquire virtues; to
increase in grace which God bestows upon us, to work out our Salvation by:
Besides the Examples and Instructions of the Saints for our diligence in this
affair, reason persuades also this truth; we see that a man applies himself
with diligence, to affairs of importance, and to things of consequence, which
have an indeterminate and uncertain time, of which he knows not the length or
shortness: Our Salvation has these two circumstances, the thing is most
precious, and of the greatest concern; the time to compass it, is altogether
uncertain; Death, after which we cannot work, often steals upon us, as a Thief
in the Night, when we think our selves most secure of life; and therefore it
concerns us to attend to our Salvation with all diligence, lest we be surprised
unexpectedly, as the foolish Virgins were, and the rich Glutton in the Gospel.

If we have a Suit in Law, for the gaining of a possession, for the reparation
of an injury, or the like, we apply all our endeavors, we regard not the
rigor of the seasons, nor the suffering of our bodies, nor length of ways; we
move every stone that might obstruct or further our designs; but for our
Salvation, which is the greatest concern we have in the world, we think much to
spend an hour at a Sermon, where we may be instructed in this, and the means to
obtain it; to spend half an hour in a day to hear Mass, or to Pray where we may
receive grace to carry on this affair with fervor; we are loath to give an
Alms to a poor body, to merit the divine succors; such is our blindness and
stupidity. When we suffer any maladies in our bodies, as St. Chrysostom [Hom.
22. ad pop.] affirms, we presently send for Physicians, we think no cost much
for the cure of them, Animam vero vitiis laborantem negligimus; But we suffer
our Souls to corrupt and putrify in sin. To procure a remedy, and to purchase
an immortal life, for them we are extreme negligent.

This unreasonable preferring of the Body before the Soul, the immortal and
divine part of us ought to cover us with Confusion in this world, where we
would appear judicious and wise; and in the mean time, we show our selves to be
unreasonable and senceless.

It was a complaint of St. Bernard, Aspicio genus humanum; I behold mankind
walking from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of it, through the
spacious Mart and Market of the world, where some hunt after Riches, others
gape for Honors, many pursue Pleasures, most spend their time in Vanities and
Impertinencies; few mind the eternal good of their Souls, for which they came
into the World. Seneca discovered this truth, si volueris attendere; if thou will consider, thou may discern that a great part of men's lives pass away in
doing Ill, the greatest part in Idleness and nothing, the Image of Death, and
pomp of Vices; the whole in minding and doing another thing than which they
came for. We read of a Philosopher, who busied himself thirty years in
observing the Oeconomie of Bees, of a Graver who spent his whole life in
Carving and Pollishing one Statue of Isocrates, who studied ten years to
compose an Oration which he was to pronounce at the Olympic Exercises; of many
Philosophers, who Traveled diverse Countries, with many dangers and
inconveniences to acquire humane knowledge and experience; shall not these rise
up in judgment and condemn us, if we think any time tedious to employ in the
affair of our Salvation?

The third and last Condition, necessary for this work.
If we desire efficatiously to be saved, we must labor with perseverance,
according to the example of our B. Savior on the Cross, who would not descend
from thence to put an end to his sufferings, and to the incredulity of the
people who desired it; but as he says himself, he would there finish and
consummate the work his Father had recommended to him; which was the Salvation
of men for his glory. The Wiseman said, that omnia tempus habent, there is a
time for all things; a time to Sow, and a time to Reap, and the like; and out
of these Seasons, they are not to be done.

But the affair of our Salvation has no certain time assigned for it; but the
whole course of our life, from the first moment that we have the use of reason,
to the last, is to be employed in it. Reason persuades us this truth, and gives
us to understand of what importance the assiduity of this work is; because our
Salvation depends on the last action of our life; if that be good, meritorious
and agreeable to God, it will save us; if bad, sure enough we shall be damned,
for as the Tree falls, so it shall lie: But here our death is uncertain, and
every moment of our life may be the last, and the fatal stroke may surprise us
when we think least of it: have we not reason then to travel incessantly in the
affair of our Salvation, to secure it as much as possibly we can? for unless we
persevere unto the end in it, we cannot be saved. And the breaking off this
work, and declining out of the right way, though it be but for a time, may be
the cause of our not persevering to the end, and consequently of our eternal
perdition.

Many examples in this kind, Sacred and Ecclesiastical History afford us; and
happy are we, if we become so wise by them, as at all times to be vigilant
about this affair.

The Manner of Life to obtain Salvation.
SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the diverse Lives of Christians.
ST. Augustine speaking of the Ancient Patriarks and Prophets, says, Re, non
nomine Christiani; they were not Christians in Name, but in effect and action.
But we may affirm the contrary of many in our times, who style themselves
Christians; they are not such really and in effect, but only by Baptism and
Name.

To discover fully this truth unto you, I shall show you the diverse lives of
Christians; and what is the true one necessarily required to obtain Salvation.
For we be such, as the lives are we lead; good, if they be such; bad, if they
be bad. To have life, says St. Thomas, is to have in one the principle and
cause of Motion; when a Woman with Child perceives the fruit she bears in her,
begin to move, she says, I know well my Infant is alive; when one is on his
Deathbed, if we see he has not any more motion, neither in hands, eyes, lips,
or pulse, we say, he has no life in him. From hence we give by a Metaphor, the
name of Life; to a running water; to a flame ascending in the Air; not that
they have properly life in them, but because they move, being not in their
Center, but tending to it. We find in the world four sorts of Lives, according
to four diverse principles, which give motion to all the actions of living
Creatures. The Vegetative Life, which is that of Plants, which is employed to
nourish and increase. The Sensitive Life, that of Beasts and Animals, which
conduct themselves by sense. The Rational Life, which is guided only by Natural
Reason. The true Christian Life, which is governed by Faith. If we look amongst
Christians and Catholics with the true eye of the Spirit, we may discover many
fair Plants, good Beasts, and honest Men, as the world styles them; but few
true Christians.

Of the Vegetative Life of Christians.
We may begin this with the saying of the blind Man in St. Mark; when Christ
had open his eyes, he said, Video homines sicut arbores ambulantes; I see men
walking as Trees. Many persons who are in esteem in the world, have no other
Life but that of Plants; no other principle of their actions, than that of
Trees. Behold a Merchant, who with care and diligence Travelleth by Sea and
Land, coucheth late, rises early; what is the principle of this Motion? why
does he all this? to purchase a House, a Farm, a Possession, or the like; to
establish himself on Earth, as a Tree which spreads its Roots on every side, to
increase and fix it self deeper and firmer in the Earth; and so, of a petty
Mercer at the first, in time become a rich Merchant; as a Plant, which of a
petty Shrub at the first, grows up into a great Tree in time.

See here again, Parents of no great extraction, and of small revenue at the
first, but so vigilant and active in managing their affairs, that they come to
be a great Family, and Marry their Children to persons of honor and quality*
One may say here, behold an excellent and fruitful Tree, which produces so
many fair graffs to propagate withal; what is this, but the life of a Plant?
and in the mean time, have no more spirit in them, than a Plant, nay in some
respect, far worse: See a Tree placed by a Wall, it does not extend its
branches on that side where the Wall casts its shadow, but which is warmed
and heated most by the comfortable and cherishing beams of the Sun: You breed
up, and dispose of your Children, which are your branches, Quorum filii sicut
novellae plantationes: [Psal. 144.] Whose Children as young Plants, amongst the
Grandeurs of the world, which are but shadows of true greatness, and less
regarded, and visited by the Sun of Justice, and gracious influence of Heaven,
and not on the side of Humility and Virtue, which God most willingly respects;
for which, many of them thrive so ill. The like Error we may discover in
multitudes, whose aim and endeavor here, is only to advance themselves and
their Families in worldly wealth and greatness; to extend and dilate themselves
and their Posterity on Earth; do not Trees do the like? and can we esteem
better of the life of such, than of that of Plants, which naturally covet a
deeper root and greater growth in the Earth. Give me leave to say, that such
are worse than Trees and Plants, which at last come to a term and stand in
their growth and extent: but these worldlings are without bounds and limits in
their desires and endeavors, never satisfied with the earth, till they be
buried in it. O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of our Lord, as the Prophet
Jeremy admonishes, [Jerem. 22. 29.] and follow that advice of the Apostle,
Seek and savor those things which are above, and not those things which are on
Earth; for which you were not Created, nor have your being here.

Of the Sensitive lives of many Christians.
Many others lead only a sensitive life, and in the judgment of God are
esteemed no better than Beasts, conducted only by sense; of such a one, the
Psalmist thus speaks, Comparatus est jumentis insipientibus: He is compared to
the foolish Beasts. A Labourer works courageously, because he is well fed and
rewarded, he does no more than a Horse; your Servant is faithful to you in his
employment, because you are a good Master to him; so will your Dog be for a
piece of bread. A young man spends his whole Morning in Combing, Curling,
Powdering his Hair; in composing himself according to the Mode; and one
praises him, saying, See what a fine head of hair he has, what a handsome
body, how neatly adorned; one may give the like commendations to a Horse which
is well Limbed, Curried and Dressed. You may see a young Virgin, or Woman
vainly attired and trickt up, and set out exactly to the fashion, by these
alluring charms to draw the eyes of others to behold her, having no spirit of
Virtue or Prudence to be commended or desired with judgment or reason; such a
one in the judgment of the Psalmist, is to be no more esteemed than a Horse or
a Mule, and by the Wise man in Ecclesiasticus, is compared to a fair and
fat-body'd Bullock. what reproach shall such have in the judgment of God? what
Shame and Confusion? when they shall see, that being endued with Reason; and
further, that being Christians and Catholics, they have followed nothing but
the conduct of sense. In fine, consider the resort of the thoughts of most, and
the motive of their actions, and you shall find them to be nothing but the
contentment of the senses, the ease and convenience of their bodies. They
labor, eat, drink, sleep, sport for their sensual pleasures; Lions, Bears,
Bruits do the like: They go to rest at Night to repose their bodies, because
they are weary; so does a Horse after a hard Journey, or labor, if he finds
good Litter: They eat, because they are hungry; so will an Ass if you give him
Provender: They breed up their Infants and Children because they are theirs, so
do Beasts and Birds; We are such as our lives are; if the principle of our
actions is properly our life; if the Motive, out of which we act, is the
principle of our actions, then, if we do our actions out of no other Motive,
but that of Beasts, without doubt in the judgment of God, and men of Reason, we
are no other than Beasts. Hence is that Council of St. Ambrose; Tibi ergo
attend: Mind and know thy self, not what body, power, dignities, possessions
thou have; sed qualem animam and mentem: but what manner of Soul and mind, from
which thy Consults proceed, and the fruits of them are to be referred. The
Apostle councelleth men, not to be deceived and deluded in this kind of life,
[Gal. 6.] Que semina verit homo: That which a man sows he shall Reap. He who
sowes in the flesh, from it, shall reap Corruption and Death.

Of the mere Moral lives of Christians.
We find others, not so brutish as the former, but yet far from true and good
Christians. They think they are perfect, because rational, humane Reason,
Prudence, natural and moral Virtues are the principle of their Actions. They do
hold aright the Balance of Justice, they will do no injury, because naturally
they love Equity; They assist the afflicted, because they think it reason to
relieve their like, and they desire to be assisted in the like Condition. They
abstain from sensual Pleasures, from carnal Contents, because they are Noble,
and aspire to greater Things, than to be slaves to their Bodies. Major sum, and
ad majora natus, quam ut corpori me Servitutem exhibeam. Said a Moral Pagan, I
am born to greater things than to be a drudg to my Body. They patiently endure
the injuries and affronts offered, because they esteem it proper to a generous
Courage, to misprise feeble Spirits, and to esteem them not worthy their
Choler; As a Lion and Elephant contemn the barking of little Dogs. All this
is, to be but an honest Man, and one of Honor, but far from a good Christan; a
true Disciple of Christ and Faith. Dorotheus one time visited the Sick of his
Monastery of which he was Abbot; The Informarian addressing himself to him,
said Father, I have a great Temptation of vain Glory, considering that you
admire my diligence, seeing all the Rooms and Beds so clean and orderly
composed: The Saint thus replied, Brother, one may affirm, that you are a good
Valet and Groom of the Chamber, but one cannot say, for all this, that you are
a good Religious. So if you are a man of honor; just, zealous for the common
good, out of a natural inclination only, or out of a moral and philosophical
Probity, one may say, that you are a good justice of Peace, a good Statesman,
Wise, Politic; but for all this, a man cannot say, that you are a good
Christian. I do not condemn this morral Life as bad, but I rather commend it,
as laudable to be Practiced. Because it hinders a man from committing many
Evils; it affords good examples to others, and renders a man less indisposed
for further helps: And God of his mercy will sooner have compassion on such,
then on those that are vicious, and corrupt in naturalls, and offend against
the manifest light of Reason: but I only affirm this kind of life to be
Insufficient for the obtaining of Salvation. Because man is ordained to a
Supernatural end, to which nature cannot reach, nor discover the means which
God has ordained to obtain this end by, nor the manner how he will be
worshipped or served in order to it. The greatest importance of this life is to
serve God in a manner agreeable to himself; which a man cannot do, unless God
manifest his Will to him by Divine Revelations, which Pagans endeavoring to do
by their natural judgment committed unsupportable extravagancies, and monstrous
errors in the manner of their Worship. Aristotle generally esteemed the
greatest man for humane learning, and one who penetrated further the secrets of
nature, then others; yet as Theodoret relates of him, [Theod. lib. 8. de cura
graec. affect.] He was so deplorably blind in the conduct of his Conscience,
that he Sacrificed to his deceased Woman, who had been a Servant to a Tyrant;
and that not once, but often is his life, and in that manner that the Athenians
sacrificed to Ceres, which was with the most Religious Ceremonies, which were
used in the superstions of the Gentiles; And therefore he said truly, that
natural reason is as weak and blind toward divine things, as the eyes of a
Batt or Owl are to behold the brightness of the clear Sun. And do we not
manifestly see the truth of this now amongst us, by the diversity of Sects and
Opinions in Religion, every one following the dictamen of their natural reason,
and so run into many absurdities in this kind, and are continually changeing
their judgments, without certainty in any thing. And we see that natural reason
is weak and defective, even in things within its own Sphere, as appears in the
diverse and contrary Opinions among Philosophers and Scholastic Divines, and in
the differences in the judgments of men in ordinary occurrences; what a blind
Guide then must this needs be in divine and sublimer things? From this then we
must necessarily conclude, that the light of Faith is required to direct us
without error in these Affairs. The Apostle affirms, that Fedes est
substantia rerum sperandarum: That Faith is the ground of things we hope for in
the next Life, and the foundation of our Spiritual Edifice; if that be wanting,
there can be no building; if that be not sound, all must fall to the ground.
And the Apostle further declares the necessity of this. Accedentem ad deum
oportet credere; he that will come to God he must believe aright: And captivate
his understanding and reason to the obedience of Faith; to which Reason must be
a Handmaid not a Mistress. And our Blessed Savior tells us, that he who does not
believe is condemned. And this Faith can be but one; so the Apostle affirms Una
fides: One Faith, one Baptism, one Lord of all. Hence is that of St. Fulgentius
[lib. de fide c 38.] omni enim homini etc. to a man that holds not firmly the
faith and unity of the Catholic Church, neither his Baptism, nor Alms, nor
Death for the name of Christ, will profit him to Salvation. And St. Athanatius
informs us in his Creed, that he who will be Saved, above all things, must hold
the Catholic Faith, entirely and inviolably; From hence it necessarily
follows, that a man, though our Politicians imagine the contrary, cannot be
Saved in any sort of Religion, for all these cannot be the only true one,
necessarily required to Salvation. I will conclude this discourse concerning a
mere honest Life, with the judgment of St. Augustine; [Serm. 13. de verb.
Apost.] The Epicurian Philosophers, says he, practiced virtue, for the
convenience of the Body; useing moderation in their eating and drinking, in
their prosperities and adversities, and in their whole conduct, for the welfare
of their body, that it may in no manner suffer damage. The Stoic
Philosophers, being more Spiritual, practiced Virtue for the natural good of
the Soul, and Reason; to which Virtue is conformable and agreeable; in fine, he
blames them both, that their virtues were defective; and as the first were
Sensual in their moderation and temperance, so the second were proud in their
Virtue, which they practiced for it self, and the good of reason to which they
ordered it. The first, says he, lived according to the flesh, the second
according to the reason of the Soul, but neither according to God. So according
to St. Augustine, one is not to rest in the utility and honesty of virtue; but
he will, that a Christian Soul should raise it self higher, to practice Virtue
for God, to glorify him by it; So that the body should not be the end, nor also
the rational Soul, but only God, to whom it must be ordered and referred, He
only being our sovereign good, and so alone deserves to be desired and searched
for himself, and in that manner as he has prescribed, without which there can
be no true Virtue acceptable to him; and the light of Faith is necessary to
direct us in this, seeing humane reason cannot do it. Therefore Christ sends us
to his Church, to receave from her his Doctrine and Instructions, and commands
us to obey her, under the penalty of being rejected as Heathens and Publicans,
which he Incurs, who makes his imagination his Oracle, his proper sense his
Doctor, and himself the Church he follows.

CHAP. II.
The true Life of a Christian, which is that of Faith.

JUstus autem meus ex fide vivit; my just one (says God by the Prophet) shall
live by faith. There are too Sorts of just men, one according to the world, the
other according to God; the just according to the world are those, who are so
by Humane reason, maxims of Estate, or temporal Interest. The just according to
God are those, who have Faith for the Principle of their actions, and rule of
their lives. A just man according to the world does not injury to any, because
the light of reason dictates to him, what he would not have done to himself,
that he should not do to another; one just according to God, does no injury to
any, out of a further motive, which is because Jesus Christ commanded and
practiced it, for our example. A just man according to the world gives alms to
an indigent person, out of a natural compassion and tenderness of heart; A just
man according to God does it, because Jesus Christ says, What you shall do to
one of these little ones, you shall do to me, because they are members of
Christ. Whosoever gives a cup of could water, shall not lose his reward; it is
the promise of Christ; but he does not promise this reward, if you give an alms
to one, because he is one of the same country, condition, or nature you are of;
but if you give it to him, because he is a Christian, a disciple of Christ,
because he required it of you, and you gave it in the name of Christ; or
because he is ordained as a companion to glorify God with you in heaven. A good
Servant according to the world, serves his master faithfully, because he
expects a reward from him for it: a good servant according to God does it
because St. Paul exhorts servants, to obey theirs Masters, as Jesus Christ, and
for conscience sake. One just according to the world nourishes and brings up
his children, because they are his: A just parent according to God, does it
because they are members of Christ, creatures ordained for his glory. The
reason of this truth is evident, The life of a true Christian is a
Supernatural life; faith is more above reason, then reason above sense; and as
one who lives as a man, is not governed by his sense as beasts, but by reason;
so he who will live as a true Christian, must not follow the conduct of
natural reason only, as men do, but he must be directed in his life by faith
and Evangelicall maxims; The glorious name we carry, obliges us to this; The
name of Christians comes from Christ, and by it we profess to be disciples and
followers of him; and he who belongs to Christ, ought to live and walk as he
did; so the Apostle informs us. Platonists and Epicurians were so called,
because they were disciples of Plato, and of the school of Epicurus. We say one
is a Ciceronian, because he imitates Cicero in writing and speaking. St. Matthew
called those soldiers Herodians, who belonged to Herod: we are called
Christians, and if we will be such in effect, we must be true disciples of
Christ; enter into his school, study his doctrine, obey his commands, practice
his maxims; so his heavenly Father commands, Ipsum audite; hear and obey him.

In my Judgment, the best reason, the rightest intention, the holiest
disposition, we can have in our actions, is to practice them, because Christ
taught them, recommended and practiced the like, for our example. When the
disciples of Pythagoras advanced any proposition, they alleged no proof for
it, nor gave any other reason then, ipse dixit; he said it; ought not the word,
and the authority of Christ, to prevail as much with us Christians? sure it
ought, if we had but such an esteem and respect for him, as they had for their
Master. If you ask a Scholar in paynting or writing, having a model before
his eyes, why he paints this visage so, or frames that letter after such a
manner? he will answer you, because his pattern and example is so. If you
demand of a Soldier, why he goes on this side, or that; sometimes in the wing,
sometimes in the rear; he will reply, because his Ensign makes the like
martches. So he who is a true Christian, a disciple, and Soldier of Christ,
practices this or that Virtue, not as Philosophers, because it is excellent
and befeeming a great courage, but because Jesus Christ, his pattern, example
and captain, taught it, commanded it, practiced it; some are oftentimes in
care, to know what is the will of God, what most pleasing to him, and what to
do most for his honor and glory? no man knew better the will of God, then
Christ, who obeyed it, and fulfilled it in every thing; no man knew so well as
he, what most conduced to the glory of God, seeing (as he testifies of
himself) he did not seek his own glory, but his Fathers in every thing; we have
then no more to do in this affair, then to consider, what Jesus Christ did
teach, command and practice, for our example? For God has made him the pattern
and example, of all the predestinate, as the Apostle informs us [Rom. 8.] in
these words, Whom he did foresee to be his, he did predestinate them: conformes
fieri imagini filii sui; to become conformable to the image of his Son. God
has called us of his mercy to be Christians, we are not such by generation,
but by regeneration; nature, by all its power, cannot make a good Christian; it
is a work of grace: let not a day pass without praising God for this benefit,
and let us often demand of him, ardently and humbly, his grace, to become good
Christians; without which, the benefitts of our creation, conservation,
redemption, and of the Sacraments, will not profit us. What profit, to believe
God, and what he says, if we do not do his Will? to consent to his Word, if we
obey not his command? to profess his verities, if in practice we follow our
vanities?

By this doctrine delivered, we may discover the error of many mistakes, who
speak of Christ's humanity, in the like manner as they do, of other infirm
creatures; affirming, that the consideration of it, obscures the bright rays
of the Divinity in Contemplation; and therefore to become a perfect
contemplative, a man must abstract from that and transcend it, as he would do
from that of other creatures. This mistake of theirs, they ground upon the
doctrine of St. Denis, not well understood by them; that H. Father affirms it
necessary, to the perfect Contemplation of the Divinity, to transcend all
Creatures, either by denying them, or adding something, to show that they are
not God, and so that we ought not to rest in them, if we seek God. But this
reason holds not good in Christ, who is both God and Man; and so as St.
Augustine speaks, by the same pace we go to him as Man, we ascend to him as
God: And by the same act, we love him as Man, we love him too as God. But it is
not so in the love of other Creatures; for here is necessary, a reflection, and
an affirmation, that I love them not for themselves, but for God, because they
contain not God intimately in them; and so in loving them, my mind directly by
this tends not God. But when I love Christ, who is personally God and Man, that
act tends to him as God and Man, because he is both, inseparably. Hence says
St. Bernard, The Divinity shadowed it self in a body, the better to be seen.

So though the humanity of Christ is not a pure spirit, yet it is not so flesh,
as to be an impediment to the spirit. This is the Doctrine of St. Augustine,
[Lib. 9. de civit. c. 15.] who says, that God being made partaker of our
humanity, Compendium praebuit participandae divinitatis suae; showed a
compendious way to become partakers of his Divinity, is that by touching him
man, we touch also God; what more compendious? Christ informed us as much in
his Transfiguration on the Mount, where he did speak of his excess which he was
to accomplish at Jerusalem, [Luc. 9.] seeing in such a Splendor, Majesty, and
Glory, he would solemnly mention his Death and Passion; Moses and Elias would
not be amid'st the rays of Divinity, without the meditation of Christ
Crucified; glory became more pleasing to them by it, and that most resplendant
Vision was thereby the more easily supported, without fear of being oppressed
by the ravishing violence of its delightfulness.

And hence is that of St. Bernard, Marcessit divinitatis contemplatio, ubi
languit passionis meditatio; The contemplation of the Divinity will soon fail,
when the Meditation of the Passion languisheth and decays.

CHAP. III.
The Lives of the Primitive Christians propounded, as an Example in this kind
of Life.

TErtullian affirms, that the Christians in his time, were of such an innocent
Life, that they had no other crime pretended against them by their Enemies,
than their Religion; And he gives the Pagans the defiance, if they say, they
have Christians in their Prisons amongst them for any thing else but for their
Religion. Athenagoras says in his Apology, Nullus Christianus malus; There is
not any Christian bad, unless he dissembles his Religion. Eusebius relates,
that in the time of Dioclesian, the Oracle of Apollo answered, that the Just
had hindered him from speaking; Dioclesian demanding who these Just were, the
Idolatrous Priests replied, that they were the Christians, who led an Innocent
life.

Pliny Junior, writing to Trajan, says, that he had no Crime to object against
Christians, but their Superstition. If he had known the Truth, he would have
said, then their Devotion; we have the same Faith, the same Ceremonies, the
same Mysteries which the Primitive Christians had; but their interior
dispositions, their substantial devotions, their solid virtues are so ecclipsed
in our time, that scarce any thing of them appears amongst us; so that we seem
in respect of them, to be Christians only in Name. When St. Hierome was called
before Christ his Judge in a Vision, and the Judge asking him, who he was, he
replied, I am a Christian; the Judge said unto him, thou lie, Ciceronianus es,
non Christianus: Thou art a Ciceronian, not Christian; thou take more delight
in reading the works of Cicero, than books of Piety and Devotion; and the Judge
commanded an Angel to scourge him severely for it; the marks of which remained
for a long time in his body, as he writes of himself to Eustochium.

Are they then to be esteemed true Christians, who spend most of their time in
reading frivolous Romances, idle Playbooks, and such fopperies? Voluptuous Man,
if God should demand of thee, what art thou? as sure enough he will one day; if
thou say unto him, thou art a Christian, he will give you the lie; and say,
you are not a Christian, but an Epicurian; you observe the precepts of
Epicurus, not of Jesus Christ; you have made a God of your belly, and your
chiefest pleasure has been to satisfy your brutish passions. Vindicative
person, if God should demand of thee, who art thou? dare thou say, thou art a
Christian? God will confound thee presently, in saying, thou art not a Disciple
of Jesus Christ, but rather of Cicero or Demosthenes; to repel injury with
injustice; to curse them, who curse you; to take Revenge for words spoken
amiss, are the maxims of Cicero, or of Demosthenes, or other Pagans; not of
Jesus Christ, who taught and practiced the quite contrary; as to forget
Injuries, to pray for our Persecutors, or render good for evil. What will your
Vain Dame answer at the hour of Death, which may happen sooner than she
expects, when God will demand of her what she is? will she have the boldness to
answer, she is a Christian? no sure, she knows too well in her Conscience, that
she is a Worldling, that she lived according to the Laws and Mode of the World;
that she has a heart plunged in vanities; and that she feared more to
displease a person of the world, than to offend God; that she thought it not
tedious to spend every day, three or four hours to adorn and compose her self,
to appear grateful; I know not to whom, and thought much, even on a day of
Communion, to spend one hour, to prepare her self to appear agreeable unto God.
In fine, many persons amongst us, who make profession of the true Faith, will
appear then to be no true Christians, but rather Antichrists, having lived
contrary to the Evangelical Rules and Maxims delivered to us by Christ, and
faithfully practiced by the Primitive Christians, his true followers, and whom
we challenge for our Predecessors in Religion. Habentes Igitur, [Hebr. 12.]
having such a Cloud of Witnesses put upon us, let us lay aside every weight
that cloggs us, and sin that beset us, and let us with Patience, run the Race
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

It is the admonition of the Apostle: such a Cloud of Witnesses, who show to us
by their lives, how we ought to live, to obtain Salvation. An ancient Monk,
called Machaire, having visited the Cells of other Religious, who lived in
great perfection, returning from thence with great Confusion, humbly said, vidi
Monachos: I have seen true Monks and Religious, in comparison of whom, I am not
one, I deserve not to carry that name.

When I consider the lives of the ancient Christians, I cannot but say, vidi
Christianos: I have seen true Christians, in respect of whom, we are but such
in name and appearance only, not in effect, in manners and life. But as St.
Chrysostom advises, if that we cannot arrive to so high a perfection, as the
ancients did, yet at least let us do what we can to imitate and follow them;
talem nubem, such a Cloud; If we endeavor to imitate them to our power, they
will be Clouds which will distill down upon us, benign influences, refreshing
dews from Heaven; otherwise, they will be Clouds, which at the day of Judgment
will cast forth against us Thunderbolts of Vengeance; they will Accuse,
Confound, and Condemn us by the opposition of their former Lives and Virtues.
Were they not frail, as we are? composed of the same matter? clogged and
oppressed with the same flesh? as sensible and delicate as we? have we not the
same God? the same Jesus Crucified? Have we not the same Sacraments? Are we not
in the same Church? And yet we expect the same Paradise for a little, which
cost them so dear. Is there any reason, that without a lawful Fight and
Victory, we should possess the same Kingdom which they Conquered by so many
Combats, and possessed by so holy a Violence: Curramus ad propositum certamen:
Let us run to the Fight set before us; The Apostle does not say, Ad coronam, To
the Crown proposed; for if there were no Crown to be obtained, no Sallary to be
received, yet it would be highly honorable for us to Combat in the cause of
God.

How many generous Spirits are in the world, who hold it glorious to be
employed in the occasion of venturing their blood and lives without any other
reward, than to have the honor of serving their Prince and Country? and can we
be of so base and servile a Spirit, as to be inferior to them, in order to
God, in whom we move and have our being? Let us cast our eyes on Jesus Christ,
Aspicientes in Authorem fidei; He is the Author of our Faith, and ought to be
the Idea and Model of our life; let us look upon him, not only to imitate him,
but to implore his aid and succors; that as he is the Author of our Faith,
he may be also the Finisher of our Hopes; as he is the Alpha and first
principle, he may be also the Omega and last end; as he is our liberal Savior
by grace, he may be our full recompense by glory.

This Treatise, Containing the Principal means of Preserving and Increasing
this Life of a True Christian.
THIRD PART.
CHAP. I.
The first Means is, the Mortificaon of the Principal Powers and Faculties of
the Soul, with the Passions of the sensitive Appetite.

THe greatest Impediment in the affair of our Salvation, is interior, which
consists in the disorder of the powers and faculties of the Soul and Passions,
Rebellion of the flesh, and infidelity of our Senses; all which enemies seem to
conspire to our Perdition, and to destroy all Spiritual Life in us. For the
preserving of which, against them, we must practice Mortification; by this
means to subdue and regulate them, that we be not carried headlong by their
violence to our utter ruin. In the first place it is necessary, to reform the
three Spiritual Powers of the Soul, which are the Intellect, Will, and Memory,
which are the principles and origin of humane Acts, from which they proceed
and depend, if they be done knowingly and voluntarily; if these be infected and
corrupted as ordinarily they are, no good can be expected to proceed from them.
Concerning the Intellect, we ought to esteem the purgation of it, as St.
Augustine informs us. [St. Aug. lib. 1. de doctrine. Christ.] Quasi ambulationem
and navigationem: As a walking and navigation to our Heavenly Country. For it
is the guide of the will which in it self is a blind power, and being troubled
and disordered, causes an irregularity in all the other faculties. In the
Intellect one may discover many faults to be reformed, as ignorance of things,
one is obliged to know: Inconsideration and imprudence in executing; Error, by
which one apprehends what is false, for a truth: obstinacy, to defend and
persevere in a mistake, after good information and instruction, to which one
ought to Acquiess; Temerity, to judge of the intentions, actions and designs of
another; Carnal and sensual Prudence and Craft, to circumvent others, and
contrive (by ill expedients) worldly affairs. Curiosity, to know things, which
it were more profitable to us to be ignorant of. The Intellect vitiated by
these and the like faults, ought diligently to be mortified and reformed, or
else it will be the cause of many deformed humane Acts; This reformation may be
made by diverse means; the chief is, a diligent practice of Virtue, which
produces true intelligence, as the Prophet David affirms [Psal. 128.] Mandatis
tuis intellexi: I got understanding by observing thy Commands. The custom of
doing well, and experience in Devotion, is the best Mistress, by which one
apprehends and profits most. Another means is, reading Spiritual Books, with an
intention to obtain Purity of Mind, interposing Affective Prayers. A third
means may be, conferrence with Illuminated Persons, from whom, they may receave
good instructions of Salvation, and directions for their conduct in all Doubts,
Temptations, and ocurring Difficulties. As for the Memory, it ought to be
reformed about the variety of Images and Representations of terrene and vain
objects, by which it is often soiled; and in pusuit of which, it importunes the
Will to evil desires and actions; one must labor in this Reformation, by
exercising himself in the frequent meditation of Divine things; which if a man
exercise constantly, he will in time deface and race out the Fantasies and
imaginations of vain Objects: so that after a faithful labor in this, the Soul
will find it self, as it were absorpt in God, and will entertain and delight it
self in nothing so much, and so often, as in God. The Will purchases it self
proper satisfactions and interests by the motive of self-Love, with which it is
dangerously impoysoned, and which is the Mother and Nurse of all Sin and Vices;
it perverts the rectitude of intentions, Rebels against the commands of God
and Superiors; it is the Enemy of perfection, the Murderer of an interior and
Spiritual Life. This Mortification and Reformation must be affected by a
Dolorous Contrition for Sin, by Acts of Abnegation, by a total Submission and
Conformity to the divine Will: In fine, the practice of all moral Virtues, with
purity of intention, embellisheth it, as Stars do the Firmament. Next, the
sensual Appetite (which is the inferior portion of the Soul inclined to the
commodities of the body) is to be mortified, with its Passions; which in the
estate of corrupt Nature ordinarily are culpable: they are not to be condemned
in Beasts, because they are not governed by Reason; but it is far otherwise in
Man, endued with a rational Spirit, able to discern between good and evil, and
to unite himself to God his Sovereign good, whom he ought to prefer above all
Created things; and by his superior Reason, employ and order all the powers
and faculties of his Body, to attain this Good. But we see the contrary arrive
to man, by means of his passions which turn him from the true love of God,
replenish him with impetuous Solitudes, for the purchasing of terrene things,
and with fears and anxieties, for the loss of them. They fill him with impure
fantasies, Imaginations and Delights, precipitate him into many Errors and
Irregularities, employ him more for the corruptible Body, which is meat for
Worms, then for his immortal Soul, the Divine Particle in him; causeing
continually Rebellions in the interior Appetite, against the Superior,
preventing Reason and Judgment, and tyrannizing over the Spirit; so that they
are the source and origin of Sins, which ruin our Salvation, and further a
Soul toward her Damnation; and as Lactantius speaks [Lactan. lib. 6. Institut.
c. 5.] Omnia fere, quae improbe fiunt, ab his affectibus oriuntur: Almost all
evils committed, proceed from these passions and affections. If one would
repress the impetuosity of choler, all clamours and contentions would be
appeased, not any one would endamage an other; if one would moderate the desire
of having, there would be no Thieves by land, no Pirates on Sea, no Arms taken
up to invade others Dominions; if one would mortify the concupiscence of the
flesh, every Age and Sex would be Holy; no person would do, or suffer, what is
infamous in this kind; all these and the like discords come from the passions,
not mortified and regulated according to reason. Passions thus ordered, are
good, and about lawful Objects.

Thus they are Soldiers, which Second the endeavors of their chief, the
Spirit: they are Ornaments of virtuous actions; Ardours of the heart, without
which it would languish. But the most part of men, by the corruption from
original sin, follow their natural inclinations and passions, by which they
are hurryed into many disorders and damages, irreparably; therefore a strict
mortification of these, is necessary to a good and well ordered life, and to
conserve the interior state of the soul entire: without the regulating of
these, a man is so far from tending to perfection, that at last he will find
himself, to become uncivil, barbarous, brutish, wholly governed by humors and
fantasies, without repose in his Soul; continually agitated by disquiets,
caused by his sensual affections, to which he has resigned the dominion and
empire of his affairs, not capable to govern them with any order. For which the
Ancients compared such a man unto an uncultivated field, overrun with weeds,
thorns, briars; as such a one ordinarily is, with sins and vices. These
passions and affections may often be hindered, from riseing and breaking forth,
by a prudent foresight and prevention of the occasions of them; for oftentimes
when they seem to be mortified in us, they lurk Secretly in the heart as fire
under ashes, which will break forth, with a violence upon occasions presented,
if there be not a strong and vigilant guard set over them; for which reason St.
Gregory Nazianzen ascribes the destruction of Saul, to one spark of his former
passions, stirred and blowed up by occasions: In this we should imitate a
cunning Pylot, who shuns a tempest, when he sees he cannot easily resist it.
Again, one may Suppress these passions, by combating generously against them,
not once or twice, but as often as these assault us; for this reiteration of
resistance, will moderate and debilitate their violence and forces, according
to that advice of St Augustine, that we must frustrate by this means their
attempts, that they may not presume any more to rise; having so often assaulted
us in vain. One may mortify and moderate passions and affections, by yiedling
something to them, and by making use of them against themselves; which is done,
by giving them supernatural and right objects. This course our Blessed Savior
took; St. Paul was of a cholerrick-hot humor, but our Savior Jesus converted
it, he turned this fire into a flame of Apostolical Zeal; he did not Suppress
this passion, but changed its object; so that by the same arms with which he
persecuted his Name, he preached his Gospel; St. Mary Magdalen's passion was
Love, he did not destroy it, but converted it, presenting himself to be the
object of it; this is an easy cure, and an admirable triumph, to use passions
themselves, for an instrument, whereby to gain a conquest over them. St.
Augustine teaches us this Art, councelling us, to overcome fear by fear; the
fear of the evils of the world, by fear of offending God, of incurring hell,
and losing Heaven. St. Isidore affirms the same, explicating those words of the
Psalmist Irascimini, et nolite peccare: be angry, but Sin not: overcome (says
he) choler by choler it self; give something to this passion, but to the end
to delude it; turn thy choler against thy brother, to a hatred against your
self, and your passion; this was the advice of St. Basil, saying, Turn thy
anger against the devil the destroyer of Souls, but have mercy upon thy Brother
offending thee.

Some hold, that the greatest expedient to mortify these passions is, to
Chastise the body, by fasting and rigorous austerities; for which reason many
of the Saints treated their bodies very rudely, that by this means, they being
debilitated, their Souls might be more vigorous in their functions, and the
flesh less rebellious and refractory to the decrees of reason. From hence
proceed the austere Vows of religious, crucifying our carnal affections,
thereby to chastise the insolences of the sensual appetite, and to render the
body a slave to the spirit. However, not to condemn corporal mortifications,
if used with discretion, according to the Custom of all antiquity, and not
taking Christ down from the Cross: In my judgment, the best and most
efficatious means, is not to tame the spirit by the body, but to subject the
body by the spirit; for the flesh is not the only and principal criminal to be
thus handled; wherefore it is more expedient, to mortify these passions by the
Superior part of reason and the spirit; which, considering what is profitable,
and what hurtful to its salvation, from generous resolutions of pursuing the
former, and declining the latter, and so sweetly draws the sensitive appetite
after it, and forces it to desist from following its vicious inclinations. For
example, a man reflecting upon the motions of the sensitive appetite, and
perceiving it engaged in the desire of things superfluous, and troubled about
them, disapprooving such a conduct; flies to interior repressions, considering
that we were created for paradise; not inordinatly to desire and pursue
temporalls, but covet and seek eternalls; and that it is to little purpose, to
disquiet ones self, for the transitory affairs of this world, but that rather
we ought to possess our souls in peace and patience. After such considerations
and interior repressions, the soul with a great resolution frames desires of
spiritualls, and forces it self to remain in peace and silence; by which it
attracts after it the sensitive appetite, and rationally orders the passions of
it, at least as long as it remains in that condition. O my Soul, thou have a
difficulty to Suffer a disgrace, thy passions spur thee forward to reveng;
consider with thy self, that it is far more reasonable for a Christian to
imitate the clemency of his Savior, and benignity of the same God. By the like
considerations, according to the diversity of passions, a man will become more
vigilant over them, and more powerful to suppress and mortify them. This
method is more sweet and humane, more general and easy for a good regimen of
life, and is also a moderate chastisement for the body. I will conclude this
first means with that of the Apostle [Rom chapter 8.] If you live according to the
flesh, you shall dye; but if by Spirit, you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you
shall live.

CHAP. II.
Of Interior and Affective Prayer.

BY speaking here of Interior and Mental Prayer, I intend not to exclude
Vocal, if it be performed with the attention of the mind, and the affection of
the heart; for if these be wanting to it, I esteem it not worthy the name of
Prayer. The necessity of Prayer, to sustain this spiritual life of ours,
appears by this, That in Sacred Writ there is not any precept so often
repeated, nor so seriously recommended to us, as this, Non impediaris orare
semper; [Eccles. 18. 22.] Be not hindered from Praying always. It is the
Council of the Wise Man; no business howsoever profitable or necessary should
hinder thee from the assiduity in this exercise. The Prophet David in many
places of his Psalms, commends to us not any thing more than the study of
Prayer, and praising God; our B. Savior often and carefully puts us in mind of
this, Oporter semper orare: [Luc. 18.] Ye ought always to Pray; there is a
necessity of it, not some time, not often, but you must always Pray: And
again, Vigilate semper orantes, [Luc. 21.] Watch, always Praying. He did not
only teach us the necessity of Prayer, by words, but also by his own example;
he often ascended Mountains, and retired into desert places to be more vacant
to Prayer; and as St. Luke testifies, he often spent whole nights in Prayer;
not for his own necessities, but for our instruction. St. Paul seriously
commends and commands this: [1 These. 1.] Be instant in Prayer, pray without
intermission. And again, [1 Timothy 2.] Volo vos orare, etc. I will that you pray
in every place.

But some may scruple here, how this precept of always praying can be observed
and practiced? some expound it, that we ought to be always employed in some
good, to the honor of God; every good work, as they say, being a kind of
Prayer: But this cannot be the true sense of it, because Christ makes a
difference between prayer and good works, and makes Alms, Prayer, and Fasting,
distinct things; therefore there is some other way how this may be understood.
St. Augustine [St. Aug. Epist. 112. c. 9.] expounds it thus, To pray without
intermission: what other thing does it mean, then to desire without
intermission, Eternal Life? Let us desire this of our Lord, and we always pray;
and by this we may easily conceive any man always to pray, and to spend both
day and night in Prayer: And this desire in the heart of the godly does never
cease, but they always seek and implore the Divine assistance, whether they
eat or drink, or what else soever they do; as a man in Prison clogged with
Irons, always desires his Freedom. Others answer to this doubt in this manner;
we must not understand this so strictly, that we should not in a moment of time
cease from prayer, but that very often and diligently we should employ our
selves in it, nor for other works less necessary, omit it; as if a Physician
should say to his Patient, see that you always eat this kind of diet, and never
intermit it; he does not mean by this manner of speech, that he should sit day
and night at the Table eating; but that at convenient times, as at Dinner and
Supper, he should not abstain from it: So he is said always to pray, who every
day has set-times consecrated to prayer, and permits not himself to be called
or hindered from thence. We may easily continue this exercise all the day, by
the help of jaculatory prayers, which we may use at all times, in all places
and company; for which St. Augustine commended certain Monks in Egypt.

What work or company can hinder thee from lifting up thy heart to God, with
the Psalmist [Ps. 37] in these few words, Intend unto my aid O Lord God of my
Salvation. Which words Cassianus affirms to bemost powerful and efficatious; or
one may use a variety of such short speeches. This thou may do says St.
Chrysostom, wheresoever thou art, no place can hinder thee from lifting up thy
heart to God; if thou were dressing meat, washing dishes, sweeping the house,
or the like, thou may thus pray. I could wish that they who are delighted in
prayer, and willingly spend their time in it, would not burden themselves with
a multitude of Vocal prayers, and discoursive Meditations; but give more to the
affection of the Will, than to the speculation of the understanding; spending
most of that time in setting their affections on fire toward God, which is the
true end of prayer.

A man may understand the necessity of prayer, who truly considers the
miserable estate of man, reduced to such a misery and poverty in spirituals,
that he cannot of himself act, speak, or think any thing that is grateful to
God, unless assisted by his holy Spirit. What remains for an infirm Beggar, who
has no art, no patrimony, nor strength to labor for his being? What remedy in
this condition, but to beg, or else to perish? Does not then our condition,
like to this, enforce us continually to fly to God by prayer, and by this means
to beg of him (who is rich in mercies) a supply of all necessaries for this our
life, as we are instructed in the Pater Noster, by asking our daily bread? The
Salvation of every Christian depends on God, whom we must daily implore for the
obtaining of it, and because this Salvation of ours is in continual danger, and
that every one is bound to procure it with all care and diligence he can; hence
it is, that always we are bound to pray to God for it, seeing it is not to be
obtained by any other means, than from him, and by him. Again, there is no man,
who has not sometimes sinned, nor that has any warrant or security hereafter
not to sin; and in this respect, it is most necessary for us, by daily prayer,
not only to seek that he would graciously pardon and forgive our former sins;
but also that he would be pleased to prevent with his grace, lest we fall again
into other sins, through which we may incur eternal Damnation. We have a
continual War, as the Apostle informs us, with invisible and powerful Enemies,
and of our selves we are weak and unable to resist and conquer; how can we be
for a moment secure, if we neglect to implore aid and assistance from God? this
St. Chrysostom sets out to us by that of Exodus; [Exod. c. 17.] where it is
said, that when Moses lifted up his hands in prayer, Israel did overcome: but
when he was remiss in it, the Amalekites his Enemies did prevail; from hence
that Holy Father concludes, that he is not to be excused, who would not have
his Enemy overcome, and yet cease from prayer; Oration jugis, infirmitas
hostis, as he speaks, Continual Prayer is a weakening and worsting of our Enemy.
He affords weapons against himself, who cease to weary his Enemy by the
instancy of prayer: and lastly, he concludes with this exhortation; If thou
desire to be freed from dangers, to overcome the Devil, to subdue the Flesh,
to suppress the sensual Appetites, to root out Vices, to procure Virtues, to
contemn Temporals, to love and possess Eternals, give thy self seriously to
Prayer. But prayer, to be powerful and efficatious, for a supply of all
necessaries, must be qualified with these two conditions especially: First, it
must be done with attention and recollection of Spirit; Christ by his own
example in the Prayer he made in the Garden, immediately before his Passion,
taught us this; he would not prostrate himself there to his Heavenly Father,
before he was abstracted and separated from his Disciples there with him,
Quantum jact us est lapidis, [Luc. 22.] as far as the cast of a stone; to
inform us, that in this exercise of prayer, we should abstract our selves from
all Creatures.

This at the first was a defect in St. Augustine, as he confesses, [Lib. 10.
Conf. c. 27.] Mecumeras, and tecum non eram: Thou were with me, but I was not
with thee. God was with him by his immensity, but he was not with him, by
reason of his Distractions. St. Chrysostom Councelleth that our prayer ought to
be Mysterium, a Mystery; so secret and intimate, as known only to God, and not
so much as to our selves. Cassianus affirms, that not to be a perfect prayer,
in which a man reflects upon what he prays, he should be not only distracted,
but also so retired and abstracted, as to be, not only separated from others,
but even from himself by Union with Gods will; and such a prayer is a true
Mystery and secret. It is the advice of Origin, that the Soul should have
always a fixed Altar in it self, in which it should offer up unto God the
Sacrifices and Victims of praises and prayer: It is the admonition of our B.
Savior in the Gospel, that when thou prayest, Intra in cubiculum, Enter into
thy Chamber or Closet; which is not only to be understood of a material
Chamber, or place of Retirement, but of entering into the Heart, and remaining
enclosed there from all the World, as St. Chrysostom Expounds it, In cubitulo
orat: He prays in his Chamber, though it be in the Church. Qui Solum Deum
attendit: who there only attends to God. St. Ambrose renders the same sense of
our Saviors words, Habes ubique cubiculum: Thou have thy Chamber, which is thy
Heart, every where; into that thou must Retire, and remain therein enclosed,
in the time of Prayer; the doors of the Senses being shut, and all distracted
occasions and imaginations Excluded. This Chamber has three Cells, into which
thou must enter; these are the three Powers, Memory, Intellect, and Will: enter
into the Memory, being only mindful of God, and what thou art to meditate of;
into thy Intellect, considering God present in thy Soul, and contemplating
those things only, which belong unto him, and being very attentive what he
speaks there, to thy Soul: into thy Will, produceing there, Acts of Affection
toward God. True Devotion is of the nature of a Turtle, which seeks solitary
places, that there she may not be interrupted in her amorous Sighs and
Languishings; which one should principally practice in Domestic and ordinary
Prayers, not as many do, who say their Prayers in dressing themselves or by the
fireside in have, and so their Prayers vanish as Smoke. As for Prayers in
public, as in Churches, where one cannot enjoy the retreat of a place, they
must retire the so much the more, to the retreat of their Heart, as the
Alcyons, which in their little Nests enjoy a calm in the midst of Waves, a
repose in the Sea, tranquillity in an Element troubled with Winds and Storms:
which we may do, if we shut our Eyes, and regard not the objects which inviron
us; our Ears by not harkening to the discourses of others; our Mouths in
talking only with God, our Imagination chasing away vain and imperfect
Thoughts, by which we shall enjoy Peace and Retyrement in the midst of
Assemblies. Joseph would not manifest himself to his Brethren, till all the
Egyptians were out of the place, neither will Christ communicate his Comforts
and Sweetness to a Soul, if Egyptians be present, vain imaginations and
distractions, which disturbs the Peace of it. The second condition Required to
the efficacy of Prayer, is purity of Mind, from the affection of Sin, as Women
who go to fetch clean Water, are careful to carry Pots or Vessels cleansed from
other Liquors. This God required of his People, by the Prophet Isay [C. 1.]
Lavimini, mundi estote. Wash, and be clean. remove the evil of your thoughts,
from my Eyes; Luxurious, remove thy impurity. Vindicative, thy Anger and
Choler; Malicious, thy Envy; Proud, thy Arrogance; Covetous, thy Avarice;
Sinner, thy Abominations; for if thou come thus defiled and polluted before the
face of God, he will reject your Prayers, as he assures you by his Prophet, Cum
multiplicaveris orationes. When you shall multiply your Prayers, I will not
hear you; Manus enim vestrae Sanguine sunt plenae. Because your Hands are full
of Blood; your Hands are defiled with the Blood of your Neighbors by many
injustices; with your own Blood, by Sin, which Murders your Souls. By the Blood
of Christ, so unprised by you: and thus you presume to present your Prayers to
me, with bloody Hearts and Hands, full of iniquity, without having cleansed
them by the waters of true Contrition, I will turn my Eyes from your defiled
Hands, my Ears from your impure Prayers, my Heart from your polluted Hearts; I
will not hear you.

This informs us, that we must come to prayer with contrition for our sins,
with hearts pure from affection to evil. As they report of the Viper, that
when she goes to the fountain to drink, she vomits up her poison, that she may
not be endangered by it; or as the Oyster casts our the salt water, when she
will open her shell, to receive the celestial dew, to conceive pearls: or as
the place on which manna was to fall, was first purged from dust and filth by a
precedent blast of wind; or as the victims which the ancient Jews offered to
God, were washed in a cistern of water, placed at the port of the temple, for
that use. In like manner, Wash, and be clean, before you come to pray, if you
will have your prayers grateful to God, and beneficial to your Souls.

This is the ground of that encouragement, in holy Job. [c. 11.] si iniquitatem
abstuleris a te; if thou will remove from thee thy iniquity, then thou may
lift thy face to God boldly, without offense.

The conditions requisite to prayer are comprehended in those few words of our
Blessed Savior to the Samaritan woman, Spiritus est Deus; God is a spirit, and
ought to be adored in spirit and truth: in Spirit, by the interior affection;
in truth and verity, by the purity of mind and intention; in spirit, without
voluntary distractions; in truth, without hypocrisy; in Spirit, fervently and
humbly; in truth, sincerely and cordially.

O Soul! if thou did but consider the benefit of spiritual prayer, how rich
and liberal God is toward them, who truly invocate him, then would thou be
diligent, fervent, perseverant to knock at the door of his mercy; thou would
not permit whole days to pass without prayer: this would be thy exercise in
morning, midday and night; prayer would open the beginning, conduct the
progress, conclude the end of all thy enterprises.

The reason, why most people in the world, are plunged in a carnal, and
sensual life, is the defect of Internal and spiritual prayer, by the exercise
of which they would enter into their hearts, to discover the true causes of
their distempers, and so be excited to apply convenient remedies against them.
If every one would be solicitous, to demand of God all graces necessary, for
his souls conduct in his vocation and condition, it is impossible that God
should refuse him, or that he should suffer shipwreck of his Salvation; because
God cannot lie, because he is engaged by his word to give his grace; and his
light, to conduct those, who demand it of him; if their prayers be accompanied
with requisite conditions, with confusion for their sins, a desire of his
grace; with interior attention, humility, perseverance. Dabit Spiritum bonum;
he will give his good spirit, to those that demand it, and every one who seeks,
shall find, si petiisses; if thou had asked, he would have given thee the
water of life. But many spend whole days entirely, without thinking that there
is a God, or that they have a soul to save, riseing and lying down without once
lifting their hearts to heaven, Sicut equus et mulus; as horses and beasts:
others come to Church, to see and be seen, to prattle rather then to pray;
others for the most part, pray for temporalls, as honors, riches, health and
conveniences of the body, rather then for the grace and light of Gods spirit,
to enable and direct them, in the affairs of their Souls Salvation; The prayers
of others, are accompanied with such distractions, imaginations, and
negligence, that we must conclude with St. James, [cap. 6.] petitis, et non
accipitis; ye pray, and receave not, because you ask not as you ought. Of all
prayers, all things equally considered, the morning prayers are most
profitable; and the earlyer, the better. It is a reprehension of St.
Chrysostom [St. Chrisost. deorando Deo] qua front: with what face do thou
behold the riseing Sun, unless thou first adore God, who sends thee that
grateful light? Hence in the primitive times, the Christians, resorted to the
Churches early in the morning, before daylight, as Tertullian and Eusebius
relate; conformable to which, is that exhortation of St. Athanasius [St.
Athana. do virg.] Oriens sol videat: let the rising Sun behold a prayer book in
thy hand. St. Basil informs us, it was the custom of Christians in his time,
to prevent the rising Sun in their prayers. The Gentiles and Pagans, by the
light of reason, did thus adore their Gods. Vergil [Li. 11. Aen.] relates of
Aeneas, that first of all he did pay his vows to God; we read in Exodus [c. 7.]
that God thus commanded Moses, vade; Go to Pharaoh early in the morning:
behold, he goes then forth unto the waters, to perform some kind of adoration
to them, as Abulensis and others affirm, upon that place: this Pagan
understood, that morning adoration was most proper for God. Elias [Reg. 3. 18.]
granted to the prophets of Baal, the morning to sacrifice to him, for this
reason, as Theodoret observes, left being confounded by his not hearing them,
they might excuse themselves, by saying that he did not first of all in the
Morning receive a Sacrifice from them. The Prophet David found the benefit of
this Morning Prayer, when he said, Domine mane: Lord in the Morning thou shall
hear my Prayer; this may be one Reason why these Prayers are most grateful to
God; Because the first fruits, by all right, are due to him: so he offends
against this, who gives them to another. Is it not a perversity in Christians
to invert this order, to be intent and busied about other things? St. Chryfost.
confounds Christians, negligent in this, by this Example: A King comes into a
place, and men think it honor to prevent others, and to be the first in
rendering homage to him, and think it a neglect to suffer Inferiors to go
before them in it: But this diligence, says he, is wanting in Christians, in
rendering their Devotions and Service to God: they do not care if they be
prevented in it, even by unreasonable and inanimate Creatures: what is this but
to prefer, and esteem more of an Earthly King, than of the King of Heaven; but
many here, says the Holy Father, pretend excuses, by reason of necessary
employments; but if the love of God were fervent, and the esteem of him the
chiefest above all, such frivolous and cold excuses would not prevail: who more
employed in necessary affairs than King David was? and yet in the Morning he
did consecrate the firstfruits to God; lay thou aside all excuses, and cease to
palliate Sloth and Tepidity under the Cloak of Necessity, which is so
displeasing to God, that he is, as it were straightened and oblidged by it, to
be sparing in bestowing benefits, as he speaks by his Prophet Zachary, [c. 11.]
Contracta est anima mea in eis; My Soul is straightened in them. Another reason,
why these morning and early prayers are so grateful to God, may be this;
Because it is the proper Office of the Angels; and God, to render us like unto
them, would have us join with them in praising him in this manner. That this is
proper to Angels, holy Job [Job 38. 7] informs us, calling the Angels Morning
Stars, Cum me laudarent; when the Morning Stars did praise me together, and all
the Sons of God exulted for joy. SSt. Hierome, Gregory, Bid, and others, by
the Morning Stars understand the Angels which are said to be Morning Stars,
because from the very beginning, as soon as they were Created, the first thing
they performed, was to praise God. A last reason of these Morning prayers may
be, because they are not so subject to distractions, being performed before we
be engaged in other things; and preventing all affairs, they have a gracious
influence upon all the good we do the day following, to direct it aright to the
honor and glory of God; And thus every good work may be styled a Prayer when
it is done, in virtue of precedent Prayer; and so one may pray all the day
long, by doing some good or other in virtue of his former Prayers.

I will conclude this with that of Solomon, [Eccles. 39.] The just man will
give his heart, to resort early to our Lord that made him, and will pray before
the most high.

I have been something tedious about this Interior and Spiritual Prayer,
because of the great necessity of it, to regulate and preserve a spiritual
life, and because it is so much neglected in these times.

The last Means to Preserve and Increase a Christian Life in us, is a Devout
Frequenting of the Sacred Eucharist.
This appears clearly by the Words of our Blessed Savior in St. John, [C. 6.]
Qui manducat me, ipse vivet propter me; he who eats me, shall live by me; for
which Reason the Ancient Affrican Christians called this Mystery Life; as St.
Augustine relates of them. [S. Aug. de pec. merit. lib. 1. c. 24.] because he
gives himself here to every one in particular, to render him Partaker of his
Divine Life. For this reason Paschacius compares this Sacrament, to the Tree of
Life, planted in Paradise, to preserve and prolong the Life of Man. And to
signify thus much, it is instituted under the forms of Bread and Wine; to
inform us, that it produces the same effects, in order to a Spiritual Life, as
these Elements do, about the Corporal Life of Man; for which, it is styled by
St. Cyprian [St. Cypr. Ser. de laps. de coena dom. Ep. 54.] a Celestial Viand,
the aliment of Immortality, a Divine Nourishment: So the grace of the
Eucharist, is properly nourishing Grace, because this Sacrament is instituted
and ordained, to augment, fortify and conserve the Spiritual Life of the Soul.
It is an observation of St. Cyril [Cyril. Alexand. lib. 4. in Joan.] that our
Blessed Savior ordinarily in working of Miracles, used the Application of his
Sacred Body; as when he would cure the infirm, or raise the Dead, he touched
them with his Hands, to show that his Flesh united with the Divinity Vivifica
esset: had a vivificative Virtue in it. That which he did visibly in the world,
he does invisibly by Grace in this Sacrament; and by the Real Presence of his
Body in this Mystery. By which Union with him, we receive in a most excellent
and abundant manner, the communication of his Life and Spirit. We are
incorporate here, and made one Body with him, to the end that we live by him,
as St. Augustine affirms, [St. Aug. tract. 26 in Joan.] This Sacred Eucharist
renders us strong in Dangers, constant in Labors, patient in Afflictions; it
expels humane Fears, and exceedingly confirms the Heart of Man; and was lively
represented by the Bread which Elias received from the Angel; by the virtue of
which, he walked through the desert to Oreb, the Mount of God. David shadowed
it out, in that of the 22. Psalm, parasti mensam: thou have prepared a Table
before me, against all that trouble me; and what other Table can he mean, but
this, which Christ has set before all his faithful? What other Table can
fortify him against all his Enemies, but this, wherein is eaten Fortitudo
Gentium, the Fortitude of the Gentiles? hence St. Chrysostom says, that we
should depart from this Table, Tanquam leones, as generous Lions breathing
Flames of Fire, and become terrible unto the Devils. The reason why this
Celestial Food, Armeth our Souls against all the assaults of our Enemies, may
be easily conceived by this; for it would little avail a Soldier Armed
without, if he were destitute of natural Force and Strength of Body to manage
his Weapons; if for Hunger his Vital Spirits failed, if he were so weak that he
could not strike a Blow: therefore Meat is necessary to restore his lost
Forces, and consequently to Arm him within, against the Troops of his Enemies:
So likewise Internally, does this Holy Eucharist fortify us by Spiritual
nutrition and vital Sustentation, against our ghostly Foes; therefore Christ
says, Caro mea vere est cibus, my Flesh is Meat indeed. To signify this, the
Council of Trent [Sess. 13. c. 2.] would have this Sacrament received, as
Spiritual Food, to Nourish and strengthen the Soul; and as an Antidote, to free
us from venial Sins, and preserve us from Mortals. Hence the Affrican Council,
as St. Cyprian relates, though it had determined, the Eucharist not to be given
to those, who had denied their Faith in Persecution, unless it were in case of
Necessity or Infirmity; yet a new Persecution arising, they Decreed it to be
Administered to such, lest they should fail in the profession of their Faith, by
Torments. Such fortifying Virtue they attributed to it, as St. Cyprian Affirms,
that he is not sufficiently prepared to suffer Martyrdom, Qui ab Ecclesia non
armatur ad praelium; who by this means, is not Armed by the Church to Combat
against the Enemies of it. In this Sacrament, we do not not only receave an
increase of Sanctifying grace, but in consequence of our communions, the Divine
providence is, as it were obliged, to give us actual graces, lights, motives,
inspirations to assist us, and further us in good, for the future; why so?
because this Sacrament is instituted to conserve, and increase the Spiritual
life of the soul; And because, the means necessary to make this encreas, and
establish perseverance, is the exercise of holy actions, and the practice of
good works; of which succors we have assurance, by virtue of this Sacrament,
if we will worthily cooperate with them, and conserve them in our hearts, to
make them eternally profitable: for which reason, it is Styled by our B.
Savior, Food, qui permanet in vitam aeternam, which remains to life eternal.
Do not think therefore, that the Blood of Christ works only in our hearts, in
time of Communion, or whilst it remains in us really, under the form of the
Sacrament, but that it also presents us an eternal fecundity and motive to
good works, which St. Augustine expresses by this similitude; The command
which God gave to the earth in the beginning, to produce herbs and fruits, was
not only operative for then, but that same impression works, for all ensuing
Ages; in so much, that the productions, which we see in order of the Nature,
are but Explications of that first Word Germinet terra, Let the Earth bring
forth: [Gen. 1.] So the Communion we Receive, is a Secret impression, and
tacit Command, which Jesus Christ made, to produce the Fruits of good Works in
us; Germinet terra: Let the Earth, watered and made Fruitful, by my Blood, thus
bring forth; nor do these impressions only work, during these precious Moments
of his Real Presence in us, but they extend their Activity, through the rest
of our Life; so that all the actions of a Christian, ought to be explications,
and living interpretations, of this Subsistant Word, and Life, which Jesus
Christ leaves in us. This is the opinion of St. Bernard, saying, Siquis
vestrum; if any one of you finds not in himself, such violent motions of Anger,
Envy, Lust, and the like, let him give thanks to the Body and Blood of Christ,
because the virtue of the Sacrament works in him. Is it not now reasonable that
you live and work as true Christians, after having received in you, such a
fruitful principle, cause and root of good. Radicati in ipso: [Col. 2.] rooted
thus in him? If there be any thing, can give us assurance of the efficacy of
this Sacrament in us, it is the exercise of good works and a virtuous life; one
knows a tree by the fruit of it; and you know, if you have effectively received
this Sacrament, by the works it causes you to produce in your Lives; so you
may therefore suspect your Communions, when they produce not such Fruits in
you. Upon which St. Peter [Ep. 1. 2.] Exhorts us, to assure our Vocation by
good Works, which particularly is understood of the grace of this Mystery.

Receiving in our hearts the Life of our Savior, being assured of His
Presence, and of our Obligations to do good works, which answers the fecundity
of this Cause, the power of Succors, the efficacity of Motives here, which we
have in this Mystery; is it not strange to see so little fruit produced by this
amongst Christians? There is nothing so common as the use of the Eucharist;
Priests say Mass every day; a great part of Christians Communicate once a
Month, many oftener. And notwithstanding this, where is the Sanctity of Manners
which should follow this operative Life received, this powerful principle and
cause of Grace? you may see Dames, who make profession, often to approach this
Holy Mystery, and yet they are not by this less violent in their passions, or
less vain in their Conversations; nor are they more devout, or more charitable;
which gives occasion to Heretics to judge amiss of our Faith; and to
Libertines, to blame the frequent use of this Sacrament; from whence then
proceeds this prodigious sterility amongst Christians in a Sacrament so
fruitful and operative? It is not the fault of the virtue of it, because we
received the self-same, which produced the courage of Martyrs and Sanctity of
the Church. Sure we ought to accuse our selves as defective causes, by putting
obstacles to the effects of it; for we have free liberty to render unprofitable
all the causes of good, presented unto us. The precious Body and Blood of
Christ have an extreme inclination to save us, an infinite Virtue to confer
Graces and Succors; and in the mean while, we oppose Obstacles to them, and
offer violence to Christ himself in this Mystery: This may happen diverse ways:
First, it may be, we bring not necessary dispositions to render this Sacrament
efficatious; but rather we receive it in the state of Mortal Sin, and thus
trample the precious Body and Blood of Christ under our feet; he gives us his
Sacred Body to be the Means and Cause of Grace, and we by a Sacrilegious
Communion make the same Body the Instrument of our Sin; and so change the
Sacrament of Love, into a Sacrament of our Rage and Malice; and as the Apostle
says, we become Guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. But suppose we come fee
from Mortal Sin, and in the estate of Grace, as much as we can assure our
selves, yet we come with a certain tepidity and negligence which hinder us from
receiving the fervor of Charity, and the active quality of Grace, which gives
not only the Power, but the Inclinations and Motions to good works. And again,
If we are well disposed, and receive an increase of Sanctifying Grace, and by
the virtue of our Communions, God gives us the Succors of actual Graces; we
may put another Obstacle to their efficacy, in not cooperating with them, by
not seconding their influences, but rather refusing their impressions; and
therefore no wonder if our Communions are so unprofitable. And thus truly one
may say of us in this condition, as St. Paul said of the Infidels, Veritatem
dei in injustitia detinent, [Rom. 1.] they detain the truth of God in
injustice. Jesus Christ, the Truth, which we have received in Communion, his
Grace, his Lights, and his Inspirations, we hold Captives in our hearts; and
commit a high injustice by hindering them from produceing their effects in us.

A Last Reason of this sterility may be, because we consider not the Communion
we have made, nor the Obligations it imposes on us, to render them
efficatious. After the use of Communion, we should often think of it, and
amongst the occasions of sin, or doing of good, we should receive this
Sacrament Spiritually, in our minds; saying, be pleased my Savior, that I do
not any thing unworthy your Precious Blood; Live in me continually by your holy
Operations, that I may one day receive from your hands, the recompense of it in
glory. It is St. Chrysostom's Advice and Council, [Hom. 60. ad pop.] to
consider this our dignity in the occasions of sin, to the end that such a
consideration may serve us as a Bridle to Curb our Passions, and as a Spur and
excellent Motive to excite us to good; Quaenam erit nobis excusatio; what
excuse can we have, that being partakers of such Mysteries, we commit such
Crimes? So the Holy Father farther especially exhorts, that we ought to be Good
and Virtuous before and after Communion; before, to render us worthy to receive
the Sacrament; after, not to appear unworthy of having received it; And by this
means, our Communions will produce in us Perseverance in Grace, and
Consummation of a Spiritual Life, which is the last end of the Sacrament, and
the Object of our Hopes.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. Read. 1 12 alone. 10 16 Ad Pop. 26 6 anathema esse 29 10 on 33 14
pimp. 45 5 preferred 46 5 meo 17 Christian 20 Infirma^ian 49 24 fides 62 3
languet 71 1 A Treatice 93 1 Mecum era^ 94 5 cubiculo 13 retire so 97 9
despised 101 19 De Orando 110 22 do not only.


