Militia to raise Moneys for the present Service of this Commonwealth.
WHereas by a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act concerning the
Militia's in the respective Counties within this Commonwealth, It is Enacted
and Declared, That all and every the persons nominated and appointed, or to be
nominated and appointed by the Council of State as Commissioners for the
Militia in their respective Counties, are thereby Authorized and Empowered to
do and execute all and every the Powers and Authorities granted by any Act,
Order or Ordinance of Parliament, for Raising of any Forces of Horse and Foot,
and Dragoons, for the Service and Safety of the Commonwealth of England; And
amongst other things are to take care and provide, that all and every person
and persons who do, or shall find or provide, and are or shall be charged with
Horsemen, Footmen or Dragoons, shall immediately furnish the said Horsemen,
Footmen and Dragoons so charged upon them respectively, with one full Months
pay, the same to be paid or reimbursed by appointment of Parliament, out of, or
by way of Assessments or otherwise: Be it Enacted and Declared by this present
Parliament, and by Authority of the same, That the abovenamed Commissioners, or
any three or more of them do take care and provide, that all and every the
person and persons charged or chargable as aforesaid; and who have Raised or
shall Raise, or send forth any Forces as aforesaid, for the Service of this
Commonwealth, do find and provide one other Months pay for every Horsman,
Footman and Dragoon so charged upon them respectively, the same to be paid or
reimbursed by appointment of Parliament, out of, or by way of Assessments or
otherwise as aforesaid: And because by the Months pay above specified, no
provision is made for the Officers, Voluntier Forces, and other Emergencies
incident unto this Service; Be it Enacted and Declared by this present
Parliament, and by Authority of the same, That the respective Commissioners of
the Militia of the several Counties, Cities and places of this Commonwealth, or
any three or more of them, be, and are hereby authorized to Rate, Tax, Collect
and Levy, upon the several respective Counties, Cities and places of this
Commonwealth, by an equal and indifferent Rate, one full Months pay according
to the proportion of one Months Assessment in each County, after the Rate of
Ninety thousand pounds by the Month, lately charged upon the several Counties
for the Pay of the Army; which Moneys are to be Assessed, Collected, paid and
disposed of according to such Instructions as shall be from time to time given
by the Parliament or Council of State, and under the same penalties and
forfeitures, as are limited and appointed by the said late Act for raising
Ninety thousand pounds by the Month for the pay of the Army.

Tuesday the second of September, 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


