THE SCORNED QUAKERS
True and honest Account, both why and What he should have spoken (as to the
sum and substance thereof) by Commission from God, but that he had not
permission from Men, in the Painted Chamber on the 17th. day of the 7th. month
1656. before the Protector and the Parliament then, and there met together,
with many more of no mean account, who were not of them, yet were then crowded
in among them.
ON the 22th. day of the 6. Month 1656. it being two days after the General
Election of Members of Parliament for the several Counties of this Nation, the
word of the Lord came unto me, even unto me Samuel Fisher, at my own outward
being at Lid in Kent, saying, go thou unto the Protector, and the Parliament,
when they shall be met together in the Painted Chamber at Westminster, on the
day appointed for the first sitting of this Parliament, and there speak among
them what I shall bid thee, even the words that I shall in the mean time put
into thy mind, and at that time into thy Mouth; which Motion, (howbeit at that
present I was still, and quiet, and not unwilling if the Lords will were to
continue it upon me but sweetly satisfied within me to obey it,) yet was
afterward at sundry times, (even so often as flesh, and blood drew me to consult
with it) attended with no small Commotion in my Mind, and being often held
under a sense of the tediousness, and terribleness, of so great and weighty a
service, which the Carnal part, that ever opposes, and (till it be subdued)
oppresses the Pure, did still represent of dangerous consequence to me, as to
the outward, I was taken at times (as Christ's Ministers often were, 1 Cor. 2.
3. who were approved to be his by the tumults they were in for the truths sake,
as well as by other things, 2 Cor. 6. 5. with some weaknesses of mind, and no
small fears, and tremblings; Nevertheless being called of the Lord to seek his
face yet further, even seven or eight days together with fasting, tears, and
supplications, for the full clearing up of his Mind unto Me in that Matter, and
his strengthening of me to it, in case he would not excuse me in it, nor send
his Message by the Mouth of any other beside my self (than whom ( O Lord thou
know) I thought a more unworthy one could not be singled out, among all thy
Saints that are impolyed publicly about thy service) besides the daily
supplies of new evidences, and refreshments to my spirits, during all the time
of that abstinence, which was a fast not of mine, but of the Lords own
choosing, (which kind of fasts the formal fasters of this age, are not
acquainted with the Mystery of, nor ever will be, till they come out from the
outward Court, wherein they dwell, trampling the holy City, into the inward
Temple, and that inward acquaintance with the voice of God, which in the holy
of holys only is to be had: on the 9th. day waiting upon God after the
receiving of something, for the sustenance of my outward, I was also more then
ordinarily sustained in my inward Man; Yea, the Lord not only put it out of
doubt, and perfectly sealed it up to me, that it was his mind that I must go,
which I had all along desired earnestly, that I might never do at my own will,
if it were not his, but also forbear to be a terror to me himself, as he had
been very often by fits, not without special reference to my good, for these
many months together, wherein his hand has been very heavy on my Family,
making me moreover by his wrath in a renewed sense of all my old sins, even
those of my youth, which he made me anew to possess, sometimes a very terror to
my self, and lastly to take away all that terror that was wont to arise in me,
from the weightiness of the work under hand, and removed all my fears of the
frowns of man's face, and counter-pleaded all my pleas to him, that I should not
speak for fear, and that they would not hear me, and such like, with the often
iteration of what he supported his Messengers by of old ( viz.) whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear (for its like they will be rebellious
enough, and make their necks as an iron sinew) yet go thou, and be not afraid,
nor dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them; whereupon having
received such a charge from the Lord, without any more gainsaying, or giving
any heed to flesh, and blood, I from thenceforth concluded unalterably to be
there, and accordingly was there at the time appointed, and began to speak so
soon as possibly I could get convenience of a standing, after the Protector had
done his speech: but so it was, that by the grievousness of the crowd, that was
there, and the violence of five or six more barbarous than all the rest that
stood about me, (who hearing me say with desires to them of room (of whom I
hoped to have had assistance in order to the audience of the rest) that I had a
word to speak from the Lord to the Protector, the Parliament, and the People,
set me at naught, (some saying the Protector had spoken long, and was very hot,
and weary, and I might be ashamed to occasion his stay now any longer, some
crying a Quaker, a Quaker, keep him down, he shall not speak,) I was hindered a
while, and held under of them by the utmost force they could use, till there
was a rising to go away, and the Protector was with the sword, and Maces before
him descended, and departing from his Chair, but the word of the Lord burning
then as a fire in my bowels; so that I could not but speak, whether I should
be heard yea, or nay; for I was weary with forbearing, it forced me to crowd in
and stand between two of them, that stood before me on a form, and so spoke
whether they would or no, (and whether it were fit for me to obey God, or these
Men that had no power there to forbid me, but the power of darkness, judge ye)
but having spoken with much difficulty, so much as is contained in about half a
dozen lines, of what is here under written, in which the Protector, and
Parliament are only named, and before I came to that, by which I was moved of
the Lord in his Name, to be speak, and challenge their attendance, I was
forthwith unpeaceably prohibited, not by the Protector himself (whose Nobility
in hearing what is said, whether he heeded it yea, or nay, as it has been
experienced heretofore, so I am as free to acknowledge it here, as Paul was to
take notice of the like in Festus, whom he held most noble in that he would
hear him, though he thought him Mad) nor yet by any one of the Parliament Men
that I know of, Unless either of the two Justices were Members of the House,
that took me to do a little after, one of which taking me to be a Jesuit busyed
himself more about me than he needed to have done, unless they had found cause
to do more to me than at last they did.
(of whom I am persuaded that together with the Protector they would have
heard, could I have spoken before they had been so far onward in passing our,
and am not out of hopes, but that they will patiently read me herein, how ever)
but by many of that multitude, that was mingled then among them, who (much like
them who fell with one accord upon Paul, accusing him that contrary to the Law,
he taught the worship of God, and took Sosthenes, and beat him before the very
judgment Seat of Gallio the Governor, he caring for none of those things, 18
Act 12. 17.) took and tore me from my standing, tumbling and haling me to, and
fro, and how far hitting me, I name not, since I had no hurt, I cannot say
before his face, for his back was then turned to pass away, but while the
Protector was yet in presence, howbeit not knowing happily what they did; which
incivility of theirs I now mention, not to shame any of those men that shamed
themselves (if they be not such unjust ones as know no shame) too much in the
very acting it, yet O Lord lay not that their sin unto their charge) but to
show them how much more uncivil they were when they had done, in laying their
own sin to my charge, for howbeit I was wholly innocent as to any breach of
peace in coming thither in a peaceable manner, to show them the way to the true
peace, which they know not, yet (as it ever did upon the Lord himself, and all
his Prophets, who when they were most disturbed were made disturbers, whereupon
I rejoice and am contented) disturbance arose upon me, and not only so, but
even by the Justice of Peace in whose custody I was a while, as well as by the
rest, who made the ront, I was accused as a wanderer that went about disturbing
of the peace.

But the day is now dawning, and that true light shining forth, which will
show, (as the book of conscience comes on to be opened, and it cannot now be
much longer closed) that such as are run out, and gone astray from the light of
the Lord, and cry peace, peace to themselves in their sins, and in their wicked
disturbings of his truth, are the chief vagabonds, and peacebreakers both in
their own souls, and in the Nations, since there begins to be from henceforth,
for ever, and is to be from henceforth more than ever, no peace (says my God)
unto the wicked.

Now as to all those that were then so rude and unreasonable, as to say it was
both unmannerly, and unseasonable for me to offer to speak then, and there,
though in the Name, and power of the living God, as if it were King Jeroboams
Chapel, or some place so privileged by the Lord God himself from having any
of his word dropped there, that none of his Prophets may come near it, I advise
them to consider that the word of God as it is worthy to be tarryed for by Man,
and waited for by Man, so it cannot, (as the words of trencher-Chaplains often
if not ever do) tarry for Man, nor wait for Man, it ever comes at his own will,
and not at the will of Man, but in a Cross to it, even his will who speaks, and
his who is spoken to, the Spirit blows as well when as where it lists, and the
Man that is born after the flesh may hear the sound thereof, but cannot tell
whence it comes, nor whether it goes, nor what his being, nor way, nor time,
nor season is, who is borne after the Spirit, and therefore ever opposes, and
contradicts him, fancying that, which the other knows to be most in season, to
be most out of season, and holding the word which is to be preached, both in,
and out of season most unsuitable, and unseasonable at the time and place, when
and where if it be not spoken; no other time, or place to speak it in
(acceptably unto God) can be found either suitable, or seasonable: and just so
no otherwise, (as will appear by these presents to any but the blind) was the
case in that my speaking of it, which is here spoken for, and proved to be both
just, and warrantable: in my faithful tendering of my self to the speaking of
which, as I was commanded, I am delivered from the terror of the Lord, and the
blood of these three Nations, which would have been upon my head, if for either
fear or favor, I had rebelled against his spirit, and forborne to bear my
Testimony, against those transgressions of these times, which makes them
perilous, and how hardly soever I am both judged, and spoken of in the dark
night of Man's day, yet in the Lords own light, I see my acceptance with him,
and abide in that peace, which far passes all their understandings, that for
the truths sake shall ever trouble me, and which I would not want, for want of
obeying, for all that outward peace, and prosperity of those I would have
spoken to put together, if they be at peace under the power of any sin; and in
the General day of the Lords judgment, which is near upon them, I shall be
cleared to have done nothing amiss in that Matter, and nothing but what was in
true love, not only to the Lord, but also to their souls, who may probably
hate me for my offering to tell them the truth: nevertheless that in the mean
time, truth may not bear all the blame (as it hitherto has done in all ages,
and places) of those hurryes and stirs that are about it in the world, to which
its no way accessory as the cause thereof (for that Men's lusts who hate it) but
as an occasion, I was since then moved of the Lord, since I was not heard, to
write this, one syllable of which neither was before, nor else was to have been
(for ought I know) committed to writing, and at my return to my own home,
whether (if he please) I am now passing to leave a testimony behind me of my
innocence in the case, wherein most that hear of it may hold me guilty; in
order, whereunto, and in obedience, to his Motion, I have given forth, not
only what goes before, as a manifestation of what true right I had, then, and
there to speak, but also that which follows, (wherein excepting only what is
annexed in the Margent is the very sum thereof) as a Manifestation of what
true, and right things might have been spoken (as they were committed to me
from God to speak) by his own power assisting, had I been permitted to speak by
Men, or had not Satan been permitted (as at other times also he has) to
enterpose his power, and been found resisting by his Assistants.

The sum and substance of the Message it self, and for the most part the very
order and form of words, which (could I have been heard) I should have spoken
in.
THe burden of the word of the Lord God of Heaven, and of earth, as it came
unto me, on the 22th. day of the last Month, and as it now lies upon me to
declare it in his Name, both unto thee, even unto thee Oliver Cromwell
Protector (so called) of these three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and also to all you, who are chosen out of the several parts thereof to sit in
Parliament this day, to consider of such things as concern the Commonwealth
thereof; and likewise to the three Nations themselves, even to the Towns,
Cities, Countries, and all the subordinate Powers, and people thereof, whose
Rulers, and Representatives ye are; which word of the Lord as you do not deem
your selves too high (or too great, or too good to be spoken too from the Lord,
and as you will not fall under the guilt of that sin of saying to the Seers see
not, and to the Prophets prophesy not, prophesy not unto us right things,
prophesy smooth things, prophesy deceipts, which iniquity will prove such a
breach among you (if you do) as you will never be able to make up again with
all your wisdoms: I charge you all in the name of the living God, that without
interruption, or opposition whether you like, or like it not) you stand still
and hear it, and when I have done you may do with me as the Lord shall give you
leave, or leave me under the power of your hands to do; no Law of Equity
condemning any Man before he be heard, specially when he speaks on so high an
account as from the God of Heaven himself, though to such as are no less than
Gods under him here on Earth.

Ye are a seed of evil doers says the Lord, an Hypocritical Generation, a
people whose heart is not right, and whose spirit is not steadfast with the
Lord, ye have made many shows of seeking my face, but ye have not yet found it,
because ye have not sought it in sincerity: ye have talked much of turning unto
me, but ye have never done it yet, with all your hearts, but faignedly says
the Lord; ye have seemed much to enquire after me in your long prayers, as if
ye did delight to know my ways, but my ways, which are ways of purity, peace,
and pleasantness (though grievous to the wicked) ye yet know not, so well as ye
might do, did ye stand in my Counsel, and so far forth as ye do know of them,
ye have no delight to walk in them, so straight, and rugged are they to that
Nature, which ye yet remain in: ye call out to me after light, as if ye were
very desirous to be enlightened, but ye are haters of my light and of my life,
says the Lord, even the light in the conscience, which I have placed in every
one of you, to be a witness for me against your selves when ye do evil, which
if a Man believe in, he shall not abide in darkness, but shall see the light of
life, and come forth in my Image, and likeness says the Lord; this ye come not
closely to, lest you should be reproved by it, but love darkness more than it,
because your deeds are evil: ye have fasted often, and hung down your heads
like a bulrush for a day, but you have never yet fasted unto me, says the
Lord, you find your own pleasure still, the bands of wickedness are not loosed,
you are captivated still in the Cords of your own sins, neither have you in the
midst of all your abstinencies, abstained ever yet from the fleshly lusts which
war against your souls; but are as proud as ever, as pompous and vain as ever,
as luxurious and wanton, as covetous, and earthly minded, as self-seeking, as
time-serving, as Men-pleasing, as oppressing, and unrighteous as before; ye
have often fasted for, but never fully from your iniquities to this day says
the Lord: you would be counted professors, yea promoters of Religion, but are
indeed persecuters of the very life and power, and of that people that do live
in the life and power of that same Religion which inform, and words ye have
long professed: the Christian Religion, contained in the Scripture is that,
which in the 35th. Article of your present Government, ye say shall be held
forth, and recommended, as the public profession of the Nation, and indeed
many several outward forms, fashions, and professions of that Christian
Religion, ye have run out into, says the Lord, but the substance it self
living in the spirit, walking after the spirit, keeping a Man's self out of the
lusts of the flesh, unspotted of the world, which is the only pure, and
undefiled, and true Christian Religion, the Scripture calls for, this is rather
held under, and discommended than held forth, and recommended by you, any
further than in a sound of words, so long as such as do solidly, unfainedly, in
truth, and not in talk make public profession of that, are by all empty
formalists in all places injured, accused falsely, unjustly censured, and
abused; ye judge not the meek in righteousness, ye condemn the generation of
the just ones, ye love liars, hurt the peaceable, and destroy the dwellings of
such as bring forth fruits unto me (as your selves never yet did,) and that do
you no harm, says the Lord; Witness the sad sufferings of so many of my
Saints and Servants, that tremble at my word, says the Lord, and are therefore
commonly, but scornfully called Quakers, many of whose precious ones, of whom
the world is not worthy (as unworthy as they are thought to live in quiet in
it) have for these two or three years last past, in some parts of the other two
Nations, and in most parts of this, undergone trials of cruel mockings, and
scoffings, revilings, and derisions daily, also of stockings, and stonings,
cruel, and bloody whippings and scourgings, shameful and despitefull
intreatings, and handlings, halings out of Synagogues, risings of people in
rude, and tumultuous manners upon them, and such cruel kinds of bonds, and
imprisonments, as those that are Malefactors in deed (for such are objects of
your pity while they suffer, and not your hatred, says the Lord) do seldom or
never meet with, castings into narrow nasty holes, and stinking Dungeons,
wherein yet access of friends to minister to them is often denied them, heavy and
cruel fines, which they can sooner choose to perish in prison, (as some have
done) than ever pay, they being merely by the wills of Man imposed upon them,
which fines will be at last a talent of lead upon their consciences that have
set them, and as the Gall of Aspes in their bowels, that exact the payment;
these, and such like things, have my servants suffered among you, some for one
small matter, some another, but not for ought at which I am displeased, or
offended with them, says the Lord; as namely some merely for traveling to and
fro to fulfill the Ministry they receive of God, and to testify the Gospel of
his grac in obedience to him, who has laid such necessity on them so to do,
that woe be unto them from him, if they do it not; even as the Apostles, and
true Ministers of old did by the power of the Spirit of the Lotd upon them, who
passed up and down preaching, and had no certain dwelling place; and yet though
counted the very scum of the world, as these are now by you, were neither
rogues nor vagabonds, says the Lord; some for only entering into the
Synagogues, whose doors stand open for all Men, and there either doing nothing,
or declaring (sometimes in deed before) but sometimes not till after all is
ended, even as the movings of the Lord are upon them, against the false
worships, and hireling Priests thereof, that Divine for money, and the people
that love to have it so, which both Christ and the Prophets and Apostles of old
did (even there) cry woe against, and yet were neither disturbers, nor
Malefact^rs, says the Lord: some for not having the faith of God with respect
of persons, which who so have, are convinced of the Law as transgressors: some
for not giving flattering titles unto Men, not honoring them in their own way
of bowing before them, not stooping to their wills beyond either sense or
reason, which the Law of God flatly forbids; some for not putting off the
Hat to them, or standing bare-headed before them, which no Law at all of either
God or Man commands, but is only one of those many customs of the Heathen,
which are vain, and so vain is this (especially as the complementall Cringers
and foolish fashion-followers of this vain age use it) that men may with as
much civility put off, and require the putting off of their Coats one to
another, and to as much good purpose, says the Lord: some for using the plain
English of Thee and Thou to Men, though it be the most proper speech to a
single person, whether you speak to God or the greatest Men, witness your own
translation of the Scripture into your own English tongue, in all which it
cannot be found, from one end thereof to the other, where the word you is made
use of when no more but one person is spoken to: besides what evidence is given
in from other tongues to the truth of this) save only that mere pride and
respect of persons does both improperly, and impudently plead to have several
sorts of speaking to several s^rts of people in this brutish Nation, and
adulterous Generation, says the Lord: some for telling liars in plain terms
only of their lying, which to do is held to be such reviling, as deserves
little less than half hanging among many, though there is no more real hurt
(but that falsehood, and foolish custom has perverted the true being of many
things, and your true seeing almost of any things as they are) in saying to him
that lies, Thou lie, than in saying to him that swears, Thou swearest,
says the Lord; some for not paying of tithes even to them, that they neither
do, nor can in Conscience ever own to be their Pastors (though they hinder no
Men from paying them that have a Mind to it, and whose Consciences compel them
even that way to maintain their own Ministers) which as the Gospel is against
the paying of, by Christ's flock, to their own Shepherds that feed them, much
more to such Shepherds, as whether they will or no do fleece, but never feed
them; so no Law in this Land can compel any Man to pay at all in case he be
minded, whether out of Covetousness, or Conscience to refuse it; the
Ecclesiastical Courts being clear taken away, and there being an express
Statute extant remaining yet unrepealed, that it shall not be lawful for any
to sue for tithes in any Temporal, or in any but in Ecclesiastical Courts,
nor for any to be summoned before any secular Judge to give in any answer about
that Matter, and therefore what condition the Judges are in that now meddle
with it, who are sworn not to do against any Statute Law of the Land, let the
light in their own Consciences be judge, for to that measure of my light in
them, by which I am coming to be a swift witness against the false swearer, as
well as every other evil doer, do I now speak, and appeal says the Lord; some
for no more than bare going, out of duty to God, to visit their imprisoned, and
afflicted friends, have been sent back without the sight of them, and some with
passes as Rogues, Vagabonds, and idle wanderers, though they have been of
sufficient worth as to the outward also, and have never either begged or stole;
and others are taken up by the way to their friends, and put by whole heaps
together in prison, and there kept till they can buckle so low to the wills of
Men against all Law, and Conscience, as to say if the Lord will they will go
back, without effecting their intended lawful business of visiting Christ in
prison (which woe to them that do not, much more woe to them that do imprison
him) or not go on in that their honest undertaking: witness that sinful
shameful business at Exeter, where are no less than between ten and twenty at
once in prison, merely for going to see friends in prison at another place; and
there held unless they will find sureties for their good behavior, or pass
their words if the Lord will, to go which way they would have them, as if the
Land were not free for Men that are bound by the Law of God to a good behavior
to pass up, and down in, about none but lawful occasions, without binding
themselves thereunto, (and so giving it for granted, that they have misbehaved
themselves, when they have not) upon every malicious Officers unruly will, or
Magistrates slender, and mere groundless suspicion Wherefore how justly Thou,
even thou Oliver Cromwell, chief Ruler according to Man in these Nations,
could say in thy Speech (as in my hearing thou did before my offer to speak
these things from the Lord) that thou knew not of any one man, that sufferd
imprisonment unjustly in all England; I plainly know not, unless thou be
mistaken (as very often no doubt thou art, and very easily ^ver may be (if
thou see, and hear not sometimes with thy own eyes, and ears, and not always
with other men's) in the people of Gods conditions, through that unusual mist of
misinformation; which as it ever makes thy own misery greater upon thee, so it
often makes our misery far greater under thee than else, perhaps it would be,
if the Cloud of false accusation did not cover us, and hide our integrity
toward God, and our innocence toward thee, and all men from thy eyes;
whereupon I am moved of the Lord, a new here to warn thee (if thou mean to
reign) that thou take away the wicked from before thee, and all flattering
false accusers, if thou find any such about thee, else the throne will never be
est^b^ished in righteousness; and if thou doubt the truth of our speaking to
thee from the Lord, so immediately as by us is owned, because the old Prophets
words, and Scriptures by us are often used (as thou did when by special
motion, and special mission I spoke once to thee from the Lord, to what
purpose thou shall once remember again, if it be now forgotten) know thou in
order to the removing of that stumbling stone out of thy way, that howbeit
Micah, wrote the same words that Isaiah did, Mic. 4. 1. Isa. 2. 1. and Christ
spoke the same words that Esdras spoke before him, 2 Esd. 1. 30. Matthew. 23. 37,
38. and the Apostles often spoke in phrases which were found before them in the
Prophets writings, yet all these holy men of God, both spoke and wrote
immediately by the Spirit, as it gave them utterance, and no otherwise did all
holy men of God ever speak, but as they were moved, nor do any holy men of God
now speak the word of God, but as they are moved by that one, and the self same
holy Spirit.
.

Thus is my people made a prey of, says the Lord, for which in special as for
all other of your evils, have I had a controversy with you, and my hand has
been against you, says the Lord, so that you have not prospered in your
undertakings, ye have traveled much in your Counsels, but ye have brought
forth little, ye have wrought no deliverance in the earth to any perfection,
neither have your enemies fallen before you of late as in former days but ye
have fallen (even woderfully) before them; ye have sown iniquity, and reaped
mere vanity, ye have sown wind, and reaped a whirlewind, even a grievous
whirlewind of wrath from the Lord, which falls with much pain upon your heads,
of distractions, divisions, jealousies one of another, and suspicions
fractions, and factions, confusion, contention, disappointment, and vexation
upon vexation, ye have sown to the flesh, and there is come up a crop of
corruption, that has made you fit fuel for the fire of mine indignation,
which is kindled, and (except ye repent) will ere long, wax burning hot
against you till it have consumed you into nothing.

Wherefore now thus says the Lord God unto you, ye stiff-necked and stout
hearted ones, who (though ye talk of it) yet are far from my righteousness, ye
high, and sturdy Oaks of Bashan, ye tall and haughty Cedars of Lebanon, come
down, and sit in the dust, and humble your selves under my mighty hand, which
is stretched out against you, and turn you to me, even unto me with all your
hearts, and with fasting, weeping, and mourning, even that fasting which I have
chosen, and amend your ways, and your doings says the Lord, and purge your
selves from your own personal abominations, and turn in every one of you to
the light in your own Consciences, which shows you all the evils of your own
hearts, and (if you take heed thereunto) will save you from them; and as for my
people whom ye oppress, even my people Israel that tremble at my word, and by
that holy disposition are discerned from all other people upon the Earth, who
are found trembling at the words; and falling down, and worshipping before the
wills of Men, let them go, says the Lord from under that hard and sore
bondage, wherewith ye have hitherto made them serve.

And it shall come to pass, says the Lord, that if you shall yet hearken unto
my Counsel, the light in your Consciences, which whoever lives according to,
not turning aside into the darkness, cannot live besides the Scripture, but
lives the life of it, and shall wash you, and make you clean, and put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, and cease to do evil, and learn to
do well, and undo the heavy burdens of my people, and break every yoke from
off their necks, and let my oppressed ones go free, then will I bless you, and
you shall be a blessing upon the Earth, then shall your light break forth out
of obscurity, and your darkness shall be as the Noon day, and I will unite you
that are heads of the people, together in your Counsels and you shall repair
the breaches of these Nations, and build their wastes, even the desolations of
many generations, and ye shall be the restorers of paths to dwell in, yea, you
shall honor me, and I will honor you, and make you truly, and eternally
honorable, says the Lord God.

But if you shall still continue to be self-seekers, and menpleasers, and
servers of your own ease, your own honors, your own interests, base ends and
earthly concernments, and shall be proud, and stubborn, and stiff-necked
against my Counsel, making your necks, as an iron sinew against all my
reproves and will not come down, and give up your selves to be guided by my
word, which is nigh you, ev^n in your very hearts, and mouths, and shining
clearly as a light within you, and their checking and condemning you, when you
do amiss, or go astray to the right hand or to the left, and shall rebel
against me, so as not to let my people go, but hold them still in slavery and
servitude to your own lusts, and lawless wills; then I testify this day to
your faces, says the Lord of Hosts, that I will not honor any one of you that
shall so despise m^, so as to use you in my service, or to own you in any thing
you take in hand, in order to the deliverance of these Nations, but as by Men
that lapped, and not by Men that bowed down to drink, I delivered Israel of old
out of the hand of Midian; so not by any of you that mind earthly things, and
make your belly your God, and love this present world, and drink so deeply of
it as to stand doting of it, and seeking great things for your selves in it,
but by men that use and abuse it not, that fly the shadow of it, that are not
conformed to it, but (seeing the fashion of it passing away) have it under
their feet, will I bring great things to pass, says the Lord Almighty; yea,
the very poor of the flock, the flock of the slaughter, whose possessors slay
them, and hold themselves not guilty, my people whom ye so disdain as to count
them the offscouring of all things, those plain, simple, despicable,
contemptible people of mine, whom ye so trample upon, who are so small in your
eyes, even them will I make to increase upon you, says the Lord, who seek to
snap, and surppess them, as the old Israel their type did upon Pharaoh, and the
Egyptians, so that the more ye slay them, the more they shall grow and
multiply, and their blood shall be the seed of that Church, that shall be
called the Sion of the Lord, which I will make so glorious as to be even the
joy, and praise of the whole earth says the Lord, and I will cause them to
stand out with great boldness before your faces, who shall afflict them, and
make no account of their labors, and they shall be a burdensome stone to all
people that trouble themselves with them, and they shall be rebuked for their
sakes in the wrath of the Lord, and vexed in his sore displeasure, yea, they
shall be cut in pieces, and fall into mischief for their sakes whoever shall go
about to mischief them, though all the people of the earth shall be gathered
together against them, says the Lord, I will make them to the Nations, as an
hearth of fire to the wood, as a torch of fire in a sheafe, and they shall
devour round about, as a Lion amongst the beasts, among the flocks of Sheep,
which tears, and none can deliver; they shall be my battle Axe, wherewith I
will break in pieces the people, the horse, and his rider, and they shall have
a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth, wherewith they shall thresh the
earth, and beat the very mountains of it into chafe, and all the glory of the
great image of man's dignity, and dominion, being smitten by these stumbling
stones, shall be as the chafe of the Summer floor before them, and the wind
shall carry it all away, and they shall become a great Mountain, which I will
establish on the top of all the Mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto it,
and it shall even fill the whole Earth, says the Lord.

And as for you, even you? O all you Powers, Priests, and People in these
Nations, to whom my people are a reproach, I will enter into judgment with
you, and recompense all your wickednesses upon your heads, and repay unto you
the things you do to my chosen, says the Lord, and I will bring you into
contempt, that are now honorable in the Earth, and shameful spewing shall be
upon all your glory, and I will blast, blind, and confound you in all your
Counsels, and reject all your confidences, and ye shall not prosper in them,
and ye shall reel to and fro, and stagger, and be as bottles filled with Wine,
filled with drunkeness, and I will dash you to pieces one against another, and
give over, to bite, and devour, till ye be consumed one of another, and you
shall labor in the fire of anger, and attempt many things, but your ways shall
not prosper, ye shall weary your-selves for very vanity, yea in your ways of
wickedness shall ye weary your selves, and the light of righteousness shall not
shine upon you; mischief upon mischief shall overtake, and befall you, and I
will rain down snares, and stumbling blocks upon you and my word, which you
stumble at out of the mouths of Babes, and stammerers, shall be unto you precept
upon precept, line upon line here a little, and there a little, that ye may go
and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken, and your whole way
shall be as sl^ppery places in the dark, and ye shall be driven on and fall
therein: and you shall look to your Seers, but behold darkness; they shall not
be able to guide you, they shall be as blind as your selves, and though they
shall flatter you, with the name of Sion, so long as you feed and pay them, and
cry peace, peace, while you honor them, with your thanks, for their pains, and
with your praises, and put into their wide mouthed purses, and shall say we
see, yet the vision of that destruction that is coming upon you and them shall be
as a Book sealed, a thick cloud shall cover them, the day shall be dark over
them, the Sun shall set upon them, and it shall be night unto them, so that they
shall not divine; yea, the understanding of all your prudent ones shall be
brought to naught, and the sword of the Lord shall be upon the Arm of the Idol
Shepherd, and upon his right Eye, his Arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right Eye utterly darkened: and when it shall be thus with you all, that your feet
are stumbling upon the dark Mountains, and you tumbling up and down like a
wild Bull in a Net, not knowing which way to get out of your perplexities, and
shall have wrestled so long in chains of darkness, till ye come to that utter
darkness, which is the portion of all them that suppress the Light; and their
judgment, at the great day now dawning upon the world (though it sleeps, and
sees it not) then shall you awake, and remember that you had warning in time,
but would not receive it; yea, this word now spoken to you, shall stand as a
witness over your heads for ever, and ye shall know that I the Lord have sent
my Servant to speak all these words in your ears at this time, in this place,
and thereby to the three Nations, whose chosen Servants, and Representatives ye
are, says the Lord Almighty, whose Counsel shall stand in the midst of all
man's thoughts, and who will work and none shall let it.

What shall one then answer the Messengers of the Nations? even this, that the
Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people have betaken themselves unto
it; but all luxurious wantons, and covetous worldlings, all formal professors
and dissembling hypocrites, painted Sepulchers, and whited walls, base
back-sliders, and filthy liars, hyreling Priests, and fawning Prophets, and all
proud oppressors, wicked opposers, and persecutors of Christ in his people, can
have no share in it, but are shut out into the lake, and gone down for ever,
with the uncircumcised, into the pit, which has shut her mouth upon them,
there world without end to be confounded:

Given under my hand as that Testimony of Jesus, which was given me in charge
from him to deliver by word of Mouth, (if I might be heard;) at the time and
place forenamed; and now to give forth to the view of men in writing; the truth
of which I am made willing, by the power of God upon me, to seal (if called
thereunto) and give testimony to with my blood. Samuel Fisher.

THE SCORNED QUAKERS Second Account of his second attempt to give testimony to
the truth of Jesus, wherein is showed both why and what (so far as the Lord
should have assisted) he should have spoken by Commission from God, had he had
permission so to do by men, to the Parliament, and Ministers, and people met
together at Margarets in Westminster, on the 24 day of this 7. month 1656.
being the day appointed by them for their first public humiliation.
ON the 22. day of this 7. month 1656. I, even I Samuel Fisher being then in
the City, and happening to take notice of the Parliaments ordaining two days
(the one being, by the joint agreement of the Protector with them, the 29. of
the 8. month 1656. for all these three Nations together with them, the other
being the 24. of this 7. month 1656. set apart more peculiarly both by and for
themselves) as days of public fasting, and prayer, for the humiliation both
of themselves and of these Nations, That notice I took passed by me as a thing
of naught, not taking any impression then upon my Spirit, neither wot I then of
any other thing but of returning to my own outward home soon after, even so
soon as I should have finished a transcription of my first account, which that
night I did well nigh finish also: Nevertheless the next morning when I awaked,
I was with the Lord, and his command came upon me, to go again unto the
Parliament, and what people should be met together with them on the morrow, and
to give forth among them, what he would give in unto me, which what it should
be yet I distinctly knew not; which word was more black, and more bitter in my
belly than the f^rmer, that came unto me before; and by how much I gathered by
my first entertainment, that in this second service I should be less welcome,
and more troublesome to my self and them, by so much was I tempted by the evil
one to say, as his servants out of fleshly fears have done before me, Lord send
by the hand of whom thou will send, for thy word is made such a derision, and
reproach, that its in vain to make mention of it any more in thy name, for they
will neither hear nor receive it; thus though the Spirit in me had a willing
ness to go, (yet a Lion being in the way) the flesh was very weak and fearful;
nevertheless waiting from thenceforth, with fasting on the Lord, till the day
after this service, and their fast was fully over, not without some weeping and
supplication; the Spirit of the Lord, who was greater in me, than he that is in
the world, waxed stronger than either he or I, and did prevail so, that in the
pure fear of the Lord, wherein only his secrets are seen, if not without any
further fear, yet without any further fainting for fear of any fleshly foes,
and at the will of the Lord, which (whatever became of me and of my house) I
saw was worthy to take place against mine own: I at last very quietly and
freely gave up to go, and so was with them at the time appointed, where hearing
two of their three Ministers, and abiding with much patience, till they had
fully done, in the pure heat of my Spirit, in which the word of the Lord, even
like a fire was often kindled, so that my heart waxed very hot within me at
last (having a fit standing behind the seat of the houses Speaker) I began to
speak as the Spirit moved, and gave utterance to me: but (what patience the
Rulers would have had with me, had not the people been so unruly as to hinder
me, I know not) the multitude gave me but little audience, for no sooner did I
cry aloud (as I was bidden to do) and lift up my voice like a trumpet to tell
them of their sins and their transgressions, which in the visions of the Lord,
I saw for all their fasts, if not fasted from, would be their ruin; but I was
handled after the old sort, as at other times, even hurled from my place, and
haled up and down by some, and thulched on the breast by others, that I might
not speak, and (speaking notwithstanding in the power of the Lord all along as
I went with my face inward toward the Auditory, so much of the burden that was
on me, as will leave them without excuse, and witness against them for ever,
yet (whether they will hear or forbear) they were warned by word of mouth from
the Lord to repent) born away by the people, and at last thrust backwards out
of doors; such were then the fruits, yea, even the first f^uits of that days
fast, and yet not the first fruits of such like fasts as are ordained and
observed at the will of man, for such like, and far worse fruits, even more
despitefull doings to the Lords servants for their obedience unto him, and
declaring the truth when he had sent them in love, their very souls that do
hate them, have before this attended some other Parochial fasts in some other
places: which rude doings of the people then. I Will not impute either to the
Magistrates, or to the Ministers that were there (since in that crowd, if they
would, they could not help it) though in many places both Magistracy and
Ministry, may find cause in their own consciences to condemn themselves, as
accessory to the sufferings of the Lords servants, by their discountenancing of
them in the work of the Lord, and their connivance at these that do abuse them:
nor do I relate these things as one at all disturbed, at what disturbance then
befell my self; for verily I have my peace, and am at rest in the Lord, at rest
in my bed with all those, who are every one of them found walking in his
uprightness, however the tongue is drawn out, and a wide mouth made against
them by the sons of the Adulterer and the whore: and however I am judged of by
the natural man, that has the vail still ore his face, and lives yet but in
the dim Moonshine of man's day of judgment, who takes upon him to judge
before his time, and so speaks evil of what he knows not, it matters not much,
since among those spiritual men that judge all, while themselves are truly
judged of no men, who see with open face, as being in the Spirit, and in the
Sunshine of the Lords day arising on them, I am not unknown, nor to the Lord,
and so could most sweetly sit down in silence; nevertheless that the truth may
be still kept clear from the clouds of false censures, with which it is often
overcast, to the darkning of it, so that men, who might else embrace it,
thereby perish from the blessed sight of it, and that for ever; I am again
moved and made willing by the Lord at my departure hence to my own outward
being (which as it had likely been ere this, if this service had not been put
upon me so (if the Lord so please) may be so soon as it is performed) to
unburden my self in writing of that heavy burden of the Lords word that lay
upon me to have spoken at the time and place forementioned, and to leave behind
me, that which is written hitherto to declare, what true Right I had then and
there to speak; and that which now follows after to declare, what true and
right things might have been spoken (so far as the Lord should have drawn me
forth, and enlarged me in the uttering of them, as he has since to writing of
them here) if I might have spoken without resistance

Samuel Fisher.
THE BURDEN OF THE MESSAGE OF The Lord it self, as it lay on me from the Lord
to speak it, or so much of it as he (had I had man's leave to speak) should have
been pleased to assist me to utter, and as it lay upon me from him, and was
given in unto me by him in this fiery flying Role to commit to writing.
THus says the Lord? Repent O all ye sinners, that are here present, both
Ministers and people, and ye powers of the Earth; for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand, the Kingdom of our God, and of his Christ is at hand, That Kingdom
into which no unclean thing nor unclean person, no Drunkard* no Riotous one, no
Epicure, nor Belly-God, nor worldling, nor wanton, nor self-seeker, nor time
server, nor men-pleaser, nor backslider, nor dissembler, nor formal
professor, nor proud one, nor any transgressour of any sort whatsoever, shall
ever enter, unless he be justified, washed, and sanctified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God: And therefore I say unto you all
again in the name and power, and in the word of the living God, yea, thus says
the Lord God himself unto you all (though by an earthen vessel) Repent and
that not of, nor for only (as hitherto ye have often done) but also from all
your iniquiti^s: Repentance not for, but from dead works, is the very first of
those first principles of the Oracles of God, which till ye come (not to talk
of barely, for there is too much of that, while so little of the other) to
witness, ye have not yet (for all the fair shows ye have made in the flesh by
your forms, and your frequent namings of the name of Christ) so much as truly
begun to be true Christians; nor are your mournings of any worth at all, till
ye come to mourn with that Godly sorrow that works repentance to salvation;
the sorrowing after a Godly sort it works care, and fear to offend, and zeal,
and desire, and indignation, and taking a revenge upon your selves and such
like, so that at last ye overcome, and return not again to those iniquities ye
mourned for, so that what pride, and filthiness, and wickedness of any kind ye
see, and are sensible of in your selves, and are afflicted for, you cease from,
and fall into no more for ever, which to do is according to the true Proverb,
like the Dog to return to his vomit again, and the Swine after washing to
wallowing in the mire: that repentance which brings to a salvation of you from
those sins you profess, to repent of, is the only true repentance that can
stand you in any stead in the sight of God, all other will come once to be
repented of: yea, thus says the Lord God, repent ye this day, not only for
your sins; but for all your old repentances, and for all your humiliations, and
all your fastings also, in which services you have been formerly acted toward
me but formally, and fainedly, says the Lord: insomuch that since you are
still in your iniquities, I cannot away with your solemn assemblies, I smell no
sweet smell in your Sacrifices, it is iniquity to me, even your most solemn
meeting: Therefore now trust not in lying words, saying the Temple of the Lord,
the Church of God, the worship of God, and such like, nor think that this is
the fasting that I have chosen, and will accept, for a man to afflict his soul,
and hang down his head for a day, and then go on in his sins, as if he had
obtained from God by his coming to him a dispensation to sin more securely
another time; for this is but deceit, and all your labor will prove but a lie
to you, says the Lord; but wash you, make you clean, and abstain from the
fleshly lusts of your own hearts; and turn in every one of you to the light in
your own consciences, that shows you good and evil, and frame your ways, and
your doings according thereunto; even that pure Law of righteousness plac^d
within you, whereby every one of you are made from God even a Law unto your
selves; which light is Gods own wi^ness within you all, which if it condemn
you, God justifies you not; and hearken to the voice of that Prophet Christ
Jesus, to whom (in words) your own preachers point you, and to whom I (who came
not in among you this day to be your Teacher my self, but to direct you to him)
do from God himself who sent me, direct you as your truest Teacher, to whom
also the true Ministry did direct men of old, who were sent of him to turn men
from darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan to God, who is light
and to Christ himself, who is the light of the world, that enlightneth every
man that comes into the world; That Prophet, whose voice soever hears not, and
obeys not, even in all things whatsoever he says to them, shall be cut off
from among his people, who by a measure of light from himself, has enlightened
every one of you, whose voice is within, and not without to you; nor heard now
without by any of you; for the Scripture is not his voice but (so far as truly
translated) a Declaration of what he spoke to, and by those holy men that were
moved to write it, who heard his voice within, and saw him in his own light
within, as ye may do, if ye will but hear (ye deaf) and look (ye blind) for he
is that powerful and living word of God, which is nigh you, so nigh that ye
need not say, who shall go to Heaven to fetch him down to us? and who shall go
hither, or thither; beyond Sea, or into Scotland, or this Land or that, to
fetch a Directory for us; he is nigh even in your hearts, within you by his
light, Preaching himself to you, and the mind and will of the Father to you,
and known by you to be in you too, if you be not Reprobates; yea, I say, it
again to you from the Lord there is within you his Light, which both sees, and
shows you all that ever you did in your lives, and that you now daily do
think or speak, and sets all your sins in order before you, reproving you for
them in your own consciences, if you do but heed him; and that is the light of
Christ, the word of God, that is quick, and searches you to the quick, before
whom all things are n^ked and bare, and by whom all shall be brought to
judgment; who by his light within you shows you as in a glass your own
faces, your own Spirits, your own selves, and what manner of men you are, as
the Scriptures cannot do; for in the Scriptures (which I own and honor, and am
far from dissuading any man from looking into) you may read the Right of
things, and what you should, and should not be and do, but the light within is
larger than that, and of further extent, showing not only the Right, and the
Law, and what we should be and do, but also the fact, even what we do and are:
the light, which the Scripture sends to (as we also do) it manifests all
things, not only that ought to be done, but also that are done, and therefore
evil ones come not to it, least their deeds by it should be reproved, but they
that do truth come to it, not only that it may appear (as it may in a Letter
without also, to them that besides the light within have the Law in a Letter
also, and heed it) what they should do, but what they do, that their deeds may
be manifest, whether they are wrought in God yea or nay? now turn in your
minds, I say, to that, even to the light, I say not to the darkness (for there
is that also) but to the light, which is within, and that b^ing heeded will
lead you out of the works of darkness, that it discovers to be in you, even up
to Christ, to the life of Christ, and God from whom it comes; yea, if you be
minded to try the truth of it, turn into it, and in what measure you take heed
to it, and abide by it, even by the word hid in the heart, you shall not sin
against God, they do no iniquity who walk in that his Law, they that walk in
the Spirit, shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, you shall find that light
the power of God, to the salvation of you from the sins which it shew^, to be
in you, and bring you not only under judgment for them, and to confess ye the
sins that are past, and so to a forgiveness of them, but also through faith in
his blood, to a cleansing from all unrighteousness, all filthiness of flesh and
Spirit, and to the perfecting of holiness in the fear of God; and bring forth
his righteousness in you, and his Image in you, who is made of God to them that
receive him, even wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, and
they in him the Sons of God, and partakers of his nature: to that therefore
turn your minds and attend, and by it be guided, and there you will witness
peace and acceptance with God, and boldness before God, your own hearts not
checking, nor condemning you of sin (which is the transgression of that Law)
however you may be condemned of men, which turning from you go condemned in
your selves, and before God, and then what will it profit you, if all men
should speak well of you and justify you, and say you are Godly, and honest
men, and this and that. And this is the only infallible teacher for all men;
for the Scriptures (not as written by the men that were inspired, but as since
then mistranscribed, even in the very Greek and Hebrew Copies, how much more as
we have them mistranslated in many things, and in so many several
translations) these are in somethings fallibe, and so not fit to be the Rule,
as in the dark for want of the true light yet shining, which now shines forth,
they have been supposed to be, and the only sure foundation of the faith, and
Church, but Christ himself, his light and Spirit, which show good and evil in
the heart, which are the only Guide, Light Commander, Counceller, Leader, Law,
Lawgiver, Foundation and Rule, which the Scripture sends to; and this is
infallible, and to be followed in what it speaks infallibly (and not otherwise)
to the conscience; and there is the only sure, and safe walking, even in the
light, in Christ, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, which is fallible by
false interpretation and translation (which yet is true, as 'twas penned by the
Spirit) much less in the flesh, and in the darkness, as too many do, besides
both the Letter and the light, of them that talk much of the Let^er, yea, of
them that talk also of the spirit of the light; but if the light be put out in
any through abuse of it, and the God of this world has been suffered, by the
God of all the worlds, to bli^d the mind, and put out the eye (and then if the
light be darkness, and the eye, which is the light of the body, be out, how
great is that darkness) who can help i^? who can help it, if for not walking in
the light, while men had it, darkness is come upon them? if for not liking to
retain God in their knowledge, when what might be known of him, was manifest in
them, and showed in them, and for not glorifying him as God, but becoming vain
in their imaginations, and not receiving the love of the truth that shined in
them, their foolish heart was darkened, and they given over to strong delusion
to vile affections, to do things unseemly, to hate, whisper, backbite, envy,
murder, be filthy, drunken, swear steal, lie, dissemble, still they knew the
judgment of God, that they that do such things are worthy of death, yet not
only did the same, but had pleasure in those that did them; if the Gospel be
thus hid, it is hid but to them that are lost; but they are happy still, who
keep steadfast in the light, their foundation is still sure and infallible,
whose heart condemns not it self, nor the true light that shines in it, in what
it allows it self in, and does: for he that walks in meekness, temperance,
love, joy, peace, innocence, righteousness, purity, patience, doing what he
would be done to, which is the Law and the Prophets, says Christ, the sum of
all, the fulfilling of the Law, which things the light and Spirit of Christ
leads all that follow it up to, cut of the lusts, and fruits, and ways of the
flesh, if all men cry out of him for an heretic, a deceiver, a Devil, a base
fellow, a disturber (as they did of Christ) he clearly comprehends them all to
be but in the deceit themselves, and in the vanity of their own thoughts, and
falseness of their own imaginations, yea, infallibly he knows in the light of
the Lord) himself to be a true man, and all those that think him otherwise, and
call him hypocrite, to be but liars; and again, if a man walk in the lusts and
ways of the flesh, which are infallibly also manifest in the light, as
drunkeness, revelling, wantoness, couzening, cheating fighting, hating,
adultery, murder, lying and the like: If all the men in the world shall flatter
him, and tell him he does well, and he need not fear but he is right, and these
things are good, and pleasing unto God, unless I say again, the light be quite
put out (as the candle of the wicked, which once they had shining in them,
often is (and then woe) so that they call good evil, and darkness light, being
scaled up under obscure darkness in Gods just wrath against the judgment)
there is that light in his conscience, will tell him (if he heed it) his way is
false and filthy, and these men that cry peace to him in it are all liars: and
when ever the book of conscience but a little opens, it appears so to be in
wicked men at this very day.

Now therefore turn into that Law of mine written in your hearts, says the
Lord, which Law if you turn away your ears from the hearing of, your very
prayers are abominable unto me, says the Lord, yea, though you make many
prayers to me, and long, and spread forth your hands, and howl unto me, as you
do on your fast days, and in the days of your ordained humiliations, whereby
to make your voice to be heard on high, yet will I not give ear unto you, says
the Lord: but as I call and cry for righteousness, and purity, even within you,
and ye hear not, so ye shall call and cry to me without, and not be heard: and
though my hand be no way shortened that it cannot save, nor my ear heavy that it
cannot hear, yet if after your fasts you enter (as you have often done) into
strife and debate, and smite (even my people) with the fist of wickedness, and
find your own pleasure, and do your own works and wills, and think your own
thoughts, and live still under the power of your lusts, and will not be led by
my Spirit in you, which would lead you from them: then I will not accept you at
all, yea, my Soul shall even loath and abhor you, and these iniquities of yours
shall separate between me and you, and your sins shall keep good things from
you, even the good things ye cry and call for: and you shall wait for peace,
but behold trouble for light and joy: but there shall be dimness of anguish,
and ye shall be driven more and more to darkness, and ye shall roar like
Bears, and mourn sore like Doves, and groap for the wall like the blind, even
like them that have no eyes, and those that look for good from you, who are
their representatives, shall find none, their eyes shall fail with looking for
help from you, and even drop out before ever deliverance shall come to them by
you, yea, they shall, wait for justice: but there shall be more oppression of
them, and righteousness, but there shall be nothing but a cry, because he that
departs from iniquity is made a prey among you still; and ye hate him that
reproves in the gate, and a man is made an offender for a word speaking, even
for my word spoken among you, by command and commission from my self: neither
shall any one among you be able to uphold, and ye shall be a broken staff in
the hands of such as lean upon you, running into their hands rather than
sustaining: neither is there any one of you from the highest to the lowest that
shall come to good, or be vessels of honor, says the Lord (unless ye be
sanctified by my light) or counted fit at all for the Masters use. Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, ye Rulers and Judges of the Earth, and serve the Lord,
with fear and trembling, ye serve him every one of you in your own persons, and
obey him by putting a way the filth of your own Spirits, sweeping every one of
you your own houses first, even your own hearts, that they may be fit Temples
to receive the King of Glory, that he may come into them, and ye be made holy
habitations for God through the Spirit: and cast the beams out of your own
eyes, else (thou hypocrite) how will thou see to meddle to mend others that are
blind, thou being blind also: if the blind lead the blind, and the blind go
about to order the blind, they will all fall into the ditch: be ye therefore
personally reformed (as Men) from all your own vanities of heart, and pride of
Life, else the counsel of all those that put and press you on to the serving of
him, as Magistrates by making national reformations and Reformations in the
Church (as they call it, who know not yet the true Church, which is in God, and
needs none of that arm of flesh, and magistraticall help, which the false
false Church calls for) and in its Government, Ministry, and maintenance, and
by helping of Christ against his enemies, and Heretics (whom yet I plead not
for) and such like, will be turned as Achitophells into foolishness, and the
Reformations, will be but Deformations at the best, and both you and your
Church, and Ministry, whose lips you mainly take Counsel at, and not at the
Lord himself and his Spirit, shall be at your wits ends, even you that they
call to for help, and they that call to you for help shall both fail together,
and none shall help either of you, and those that have misguided you into
by-ways, even blind and bloody ways of suppressing Saints as Heretics by your
Civil sword, you shall at last be forced to leave, and look to your selves, and
run in holes of the earth, to hide you from the face of the Lamb, and from his
wrath, and they shall be even smitten with shame and madness, to see all their
ways turned (as they have turned the ways of God) upside down, and esteemed as
the Potters Clay: therefore kiss the Son, turn to him, seek his face, see him,
and submit to him in his own Light, walk with him in his own way, lest he be
angry, and you perish for ever from the way of your own eternal peace, yea,
not as one, reading it in the Letter only, and out of that amplyfying it to
you, or as one having it by hearsay only, from those that felt it, and so
wrote of it (for so many a one can tell you much of the terribleness of Gods
wrath, and that talk may be a bugbear too to terrify your hearts a while,
howbeit that terror will wear out after a while) but as one that has
witnessed it, and been made in some measure to know the power of his wrath, and
feel the weight of his hand in my own conscience, opening its black Jaws upon
me of late, to the affrightment of me for all my old sins, and bringing me to
judgment for them (for judgment now begins, though the wicked, among whom it
is to end, see it not, at the House of God, therefore no marvail if there be so
much trembling in the true Church, as now there is, and so much paleness on
Jacobs face; for it is the day of his trouble, and travel out of which yet ere
long he will be saved, and Esau and his seed come into it in his stead) yea as
knowing by a sense thereof the terror of the Lord, I persuade you all people
to take heed to your ways by the Light of the Lord, least he tear you as a
moth, or as a Lion, and lest his wrath be let forth, in the full vials of it
upon you, which if it be kindled but a little, blessed then indeed are all they
(and all they that do so well know it also) even all they that trust in him:
moreover all ye people, and you that are the Representatives of the people,
think not your fast is done when the Sun is down, and your service done when
your Sermon is done (as many do who look for one day toward Heaven, and then
after live as if hell it self were broken loose again upon them) but know that
your business is now to begin after you have humbled your selves, and are got
up from the ground, where you lay before the Lord, now are you to live over all
that good that has been yet but talked on; many good and excellent things
(though some also that might not unjustly be excepted against) have been spoken
among you, and pressed upon you I acknowledge (for far be it from me not to give
every one his due) by the men that have preached before you, this day, in my
hearing, yet much more in the words, which man's wisdom teaches, than in the
words which the holy Spirit teaches, who gives utterance to them he sends,
yea both what and how to speak even in that hour they are to speak in, nor
are they so sollicitous, if they be called before Kings and Governors, to give
testimony to the truth, so as before hand to take thought for it, much less by
way of preparation to pen it down, and so to preach it out of notes, as is the
usual course of your national men, and a course used before you at this day; I
say many good, things you have heard, and good words, and fair speeches, which
Paul says they may use, who serve not God but their own bellys, whereby to
deceive the hearts of the simple, now see that they be turned by you into good
works, and let it not suffice, that a sound of words has passed from their
mouths, and pierced your ears; as if there were an end of the matter, or at
least as if when as private men you are come home to your own houses, or as
Parliament men into your place of sitting, and have according to the common
custom, and their expectation sent them the great thanks of the House, for
their great pains, then you are quit of what is required; be not deceived God
is not so mocked, nor will he be put off with such slender shows and
complemental services (which men's Religion mostly lies in, while they lie in
the dead and fleshly night of man's day, and till they come to be in the Spirit
on the Lords Day) in this hour wherein his own day is approaching; but know
that for all this, if ye go on again to sow to the flesh, when you are ripe in
corruption, you shall reap condemnation; and if the ground of your hearts
still brings forth Briars and Thorns, it is nigh unto cursing, and its end is
to be burned; and if this be all the fruits of your fastings, to continue the
same men you were, or rather to wax worse and worse, as such ever do that grow
not better by such services, (and oh how often is it so seen at this day in
many, who the more they pray to God the more they play fast and loose with him,
the more they harden, the more they heighten, the more they strengthen
themselves in the Devils Kingdom, and (in their blind misguided zeal, which
tells them it is error who cannot see wood for trees) against the truth, so as
in that zeal as Paul once did, till his eye was opened, to persecute the
Church, for how true that was which was said before you this day ( viz.) that
in the turnings of the world there was a change of men, but not of things, I Will
not determine, in some respects it may be so, yet sure I am, this is as true
also that in the turnings of the world to God, there is a change of things, and
not of men (unless it be into worse) for though they shift from form to form,
from a darker to a clearer, and from a superstitious to one more refined, yet
themselves remain some as, and some more dark and superstitious in those their
finer forms, and not a few, as unrefined as ever; still in the same manners,
still in their old natures, in Esau's, Cains and Ishmaels natures, murdering
Abell, scoffing at Isaac, hating, yea, hunting Jacob, even from the very
Prelatick party that reformed most immediately from the thick fog of Romish
falseworship, to the Presbyterian whom they persecuted, from them to the
Independants whom they persecuted, from them to the Baptists, whom they
persecuted, and from them to the Ranters, all which sorts though they are mad
against each other, yet as to the true tremblers at the word of God, and Saints
of the Lord in substance, not so much in show, form nor shadow and things
without, they all now come against these with one open mouth, and as Edom,
Amelek, Moab, Ammon, Midian, Isreal's fleshly kindred against him, even so all
they that were formerly fighting, quarrelling, and disputing against each
other, now leave the battle they have among themselves, and even make one head
against the Quakers, as they call them, whom they all persecute with lies and
revilings, and hatreds, and hard censures, and all the harsh usage, and despite
that possibly they can, stumbling at every straw, to the breaking of their own
necks, that they find amiss among them, magnifying every molehill, even every
small matter, and some things that they have but by hearsay, and some things
that they are mistaken in by mere mis-representation of them, and some things
that are flatly false too, and in truth just nothing, to make them, (even them
among whom many (if many, as we know many will do, prove worse then naught) are
glorious with the glory of Christ upon them full of grace and truth, which was
a glory ever unseen to the world,) as odious as they can, even as the Devil
himself, in the eyes one of another: The end of all which disjointed yet joint
baiters, and biters, and abusers of Gods hidden ones, whom though they hate,
yet they can neither hit nor hurt, they being as secure as they are obscure,
having one life more then the world, who may take away that of the body, can
either touch, or come near so as either to live in it, or kill them out of it,
hid with Christ in God will be to be hewed to pieces by Gods Prophets, slain by
the rod, even the words of his mouth, to be burnt up by the flaming breath of
his lips, and those coals, sparks and tempests, thunders and lightnings of his
Law, arising from the dead in their own consciences as a witness for God for
ever and for ever against them, according to that true and most plain prophecy
that went before of old of these times, these men, and this matter, 2 Esdras
13. which who so reads shall find it more lively now upon the Stage then ever,
and lastly to be consuming a while by the Spirit of his mouth, speaking now
here a little, now there a little, to them out of the mouth of Babes and
stammerers, and at last to be utterly destroyed by the brightness of his
coming) now then if these shall be still the best fruits of your fasts, that
Gods innocent ones, his precious ones, his anointed and holy ones shall be
hunted by you, as a Partridge upon the Mountains, and you abide still under new
names, and notions the old men, in the old earthly, sensual, cruel,
wrathful, and malicious nature in enmity against them that are created after
Gods own Image in Righteousness, and Holiness of truth, and are brought forth
into his own divine nature; Then hear the word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom,
and give ear to it ye people of Gomorrah, I will hide mine eyes from you,
says the Lord, and have no respect to your offering, though it seem to the
outward eye (as Cains might do) more gay and costly then that of Abell, I will
stop my ears and not hear your voice, though it be as the voice of Jacob, says
the Lord, whilst your hands are the rough hands of Esau, wherewith you cruelly
and coursely handle your brethren and oppress them; yea all your services shall
be but a smoke in my Nose, as a stink in my Nostrills, says the Lord, I will
spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn meetings, and you
shall be taken away with it, and howbeit you may reform many things as Josiah
did, in whose days yet I raised up my Prophet Zephany to warn them, and
threaten them in my name to consume them, because all things were not yet as
they should be, and the names of the Chemarins with the Priests were continued,
so will I bring a consumption upon all your earthly joy and glory, says the
Lord, and curse you and all your blessings, if you do my work, even the work of
Reformation negligently, and but by the halves, even the Reformation of your
own persons, which in the first place I look for from you that are the powers,
in which works many whom your teachers will tell you had need be reformed are
gone far beyond you; and also the Reformation of the Nations, wherein still
they are not only continued standing, but also maintenance is forced from my
own people, that cannot own them for the Chemarims, even for many black and
smoaky Priests, whilst my own Ministers whom I send unto you, that desire not
so much as maintenance from you, cannot have so much as common countenance with
other men, and sometimes not so much as them that are malefactors indeed (as
these are only accounted to be) do and have obtained at your hands, says the
Lord.

Now therefore, thus says the Lord, take heed what ye do in this day; the new
wine is in the cluster, see that you hurt it not, for a blessing is in it;
there is a people gathering together, whom I am redeeming from among all
people, Nations, kindreds and tongues, and taking one of a family, two of a
Tribe, and bringing unto Sion, who are asking the way thereunto, with their
faces thitherward, whom I will lead thither with many supplications, and tears,
and tremblings, as blind ones by a way they know not, in a strait way, wherein
yet their feet shall not stumble, for I am a God unto them, says the Lord, by
the way of the wilderness, wherein yet they shall not be weary, nor in want,
nor in fear, nor miscarry, nor lose their way that wait on me, for I will be
with them to refresh them, says the Lord, with Bread from Heaven, and water
out of the Rock, and to overshadow them with a Cloud, and go before them in the
likeness of a flaming fire, so that they shall eat the same spiritual meat,
and drink the same spiritual drink, as the Fathers of old, who drank of the
same Rock that followed them, which Rock was Christ, and shall pass to their
rest under the same protection, providence, and illumination as my people that
were the Type of them; by which light wherewith I enlighten them, will I puzzle
and dazzle, and blind all your Egyptians which pursue them, says the Lord, till
you have brought your selves into inextricable perplexities, and into the very
Javvs even of inevitable destruction: see therefore that ye touch them not,
they are the sheep of my pasture, says the Lord, whom I am gathering from
under the conduct of those careless false Shepherds, that have fed and served
themselves of them, and not fed, but starved them, and stenched the pure
pasture, and trodden it down, and fouled the pure water they should drink of,
and forced t^em to drink of their own pudled waters which they have fovvled
with their feet; see that ye stand not in the cross vvays, as Esau did of old,
to cut off, says the Lord, the Remnant of Jacob that are now escaping, and
returning to their own home and Country, says the Lord, out of all places, and
Countries, foreign forms, fellovvships, Churches, Companies, and strange
lands, and ways of worshipping of me, says the Lord, whereinto they have
been scattered, and shattered up and down in the dark and gloomy day: and
though they are a people scattered up and down in all parts, and Provinces of
these Dominions, and every where complained on, and accused by proud Hamans
Generation that ever hated them, because they could not honor them who were
accursed of God, and bow according to their haughty expectations, as a certain
odd people that keep not the Laws, and live not as other men do, but are
every where, and every way cross, because so to the carnal wills of men,
and disturbers of the peace, so that it cannot be for the Commonwealth nor
profit of the Nations, nor of the powers thereof, to suffer them, and are sold
as sheep to the slaughter in the wicked vvishes of their malevolent and
blood-thirsty Adversaries, that they would not care what they paid almost
into the Common treasury to have them hanged, or banished, or any way however
spoiled, says the Lord, yet take good heed to your selves ye powers and
people, of meddling too much at the wills of such as suggest evil to you of
them; and if at their suggestion, ye will do any thing against those that
oppose me, and are my enemies, yet take heed that under pretense of that, ye
sight not unawares against me, and be opposers your selves of those that are my
friends, and speak to you both for and from me, says the Lord, for if they be
of the seed of the Jews, before whom Haman and his seed begin to fall, they
will never recover themselves till they have brought the very mischief they
have hatched for my beloved ones, upon their own Pate, says the Lord: yea
though my people are low, and weak, and few in number, and silly, and
contemptible in your eyes, yea afflicted and ready to dye from their youth up,
yet I live, says the Lord, who am a protector and redeemer to them, who
neither slumber nor sleep; but vvatch, and am Almighty to avenge them on all
their enemies, and I will do it, says the Lord: yea let the Heathen rage, and
the people imagine, and the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers
take Counsel together against me, and mine anointed, says the Lord, yet will
I set my King upon the holy hill of Sion, and give him the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession, yea and all
in whom he reigns shall reign (as they have suffered) with him; In an
inumerable multitude, of which he is coming to judge the earth in
righteousness, and the people with equity, to pass a judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly, of all the ungodly deeds they have committed,
and of all the hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him; and
he in them and they in him shall rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and
break them to pieces as a Potters vessel, even as they have received of me
their Father, says the Lord: and though they are now laughed to scorn, and had
in daily derision by high and low (says the Lord) and condemned by all, and
made the very strife of all tongues, and made ashamed in all places where ever
they are, and all people make a noise and roar against them, like the roarings
of the Sea, and as the noise of many waters, yet will I get them praise and
same in every Land, wherein they have been put to shame, and every tongue that
rises up in judgment against them shall they condemn, and I that sit in
Heaven will laugh at the calamity of those that hate them, and mock when their
fear comes, yea I will have them all in derision, and they shall be as my
people have been among them a very proverb of reproach, and I will Roar upon
them out of Sion, and utter my voice from Jerusalem against them, as a Lion,
and the Heaven and the earth shall shake, and I will overthrow the thrones of
Kingdoms, and destroy the strength of all the Kingdoms of the Heathen, and be
my self a wall of fire about my people for their defense, and the hope and
strength of my chosen ones in the day wherein I do this, says the Lord God;
yea I will never rest till I have made all their foes their footstool: and
howbeit the powers of the earth are of me, and for conscience sake to me-ward
are to be obeyed, and not resisted, and have been obeyed and not resisted in
things not contrary to my own commands, by my holy ones, that have ever
suffered as evil doers under them, of whom they ought to have had praise, yet
if that which was once mine own outward Ordinance for the punishment of evil
doers, and to be a terror to evil works (as Rulers are ever away when they
are as they ought to be) continue to be so abhominably perverted as in the
pride and stoutness of their hearts, making their own lusts and not my light
their Law, to be a terr our unto works and ways that are truly good, I will
hold my peace now no longer, says the Lord, as concerning this evil which
they so profanely commit, and do daily against my chosen; but will utterly
subvert and overturn them, and bring the Kingdoms, and Dominions, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven into the hands of the holy ones
of the most high, and give unto my Son and his Saints to reign over all the
earth, and take all the Rule, and authority and power that shall stand up
against my Son in his Saints, and put it down among all the rest, as one of his
great enemies under his feet, says the Lord; for though the world take no
delight in them, yet I take pleasure in my people, says the Lord, and I will
beautify my meek ones with salvation, and I will put my high praises into their
mouth, and a two edged Sword into their hands, and they shall execute vengeance
upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people, and shall bind their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron, and execute upon them the
judgment that is written in my eternal decree, and unchangeable Counsel,
says the Lord: this honor have all my Saints, this is the heritage of my
servants, says the Lord, and their righteousness, and their reign their
salvation, and redemption, and all their dignity is of me only; and of me
only, and not of themselves, shall they acknowledge it to be, says the Lord
God Almighty, who is now doing all this his holy will, and good pleasure, and
who is he that shall ever disanull it?

Given forth under my hand, as the Lord himself gave it into my heart to see,
and into my mouth to speak in part, and unto my hand thus at large to write
it; this 25. day of she same month, 1656.
FINIS.

