AN Extract of the Acts against Importing IRISH Cattle, etc. One Expired, the
other not.
An Act against Importing Cattle from Ireland.
18 Car. 2. Cap. 2.
WHereas by an Act Entitled an Act for the Encouragement of Trade, (since
expired) some Provision was made to prevent the coming in of vast numbers of
Cattle, whereby the Rents and Values of Lands were much fallen, and like to
fall more, to the great impoverishing of the Kingdom, which nevertheless has
been found ineffectual, and the Importation of Cattle specified, fat or lean,
dead or alive to be unnecessary, and very Destructive to the welfare of the
Kingdom.

It is Enacted. That Importation of Cattle from beyond the Seas, after 2 Feb.
1666. is a public Nuisance, and shall be so adjudged.

That if any great Cattle, Sheep, or Swine, or any Beef, Pork or Bacon (except
for Provision for the Ship in which the same shall be brought) shall after the
said 2 of Febr. be Imported from beyond Seas into England or Wales or Berwick,
the Officers of the Parish or place may seize and keep the same 48 hours in
some convenient place there, within which time if the Owners or their Agents
shall make it appear to any Justice of the Peace of the County, by the Oath of
two credible Witnesses, that the same were not Imported from any place beyond
the Seas, after the said 2 of Febr. then the same, by Warrant of such Justice,
to be delivered without delay, but in default of such Proof and Warrant then to
be Forfeited, one half to the Poor of the Parish, the other half to the Person
seizing.

A Clause concerning Fishery.

Provided this Act not to hinder the Importation of Cattle of the breed of the
Isle of Man, not exceeding 600 head yearly* to be Landed only at Chester, or
some Member thereof.

This Act to continue to the end of 7 years, and thence to the end of the next
Session of the next Parliament.

(Expired.)

An Additional Act against Importing Foreign Cattle.
20 Car. 2. cap. 7.
THe said former Act 18 Car. 2. recited at large almost verbatim.
Notwithstanding which Act great Numbers of Cattle have been Imported in Foreign
and English Ships, in continuance of the said Nuisance, and high contempt of
Authority of Parliament, and diverse Officers and others for their own Lucre,
combining with the Owners of such Cattle, etc. have colourably seized, and
fraudulently sold the same at low rates to the Owners or their Agents: and
others of the said Officers discharging their Duty, have been therefore sued
and molested in Counties and places far distant, to their Charge and
Discouragement. For Vindication therefore of the Authority of Parliament, and
indempnifying such Officers and others faithfully executing the said Act, and
for suppression of the said Nuisance. It is enacted, That every Officer and
others who have acted in the seizure, detaining or disposing such Cattle,
Goods, etc. shall be kept harmless against the Owner or any claiming under him.

Provided, That not only the Officers, but any other Inhabitant within the
Parish or place where such Importation shall be, may seize such Cattle, Goods,
etc. and forthwith deliver the same to the Officer of such place, to be kept
and disposed to the uses in this Act, and in the said recited Act mentioned, or
either of them.

In case no seizure by any Officer or Inhabitant within such Parish or place
where Cattle, Goods, etc. is first Imported, such Parish or place for every
default shall Forfeit the sum of 100 l. to the use of the House of Correction
of the said County or liberty, the Moneys so Forfeited and other Forfeitures by
this Act, and the said recited Act or either of them to be accounted for
according to the Statute 43 Eliz. c. 2.

Every Ship with her tackle in which any Cattle, etc. after 24 Mar. 1667. shall
be Imported, shall be Forfeited, and it shall be lawful for any person within a
year after such Importation to seize and make sale thereof, half the Money to
the use of the Poor of the Parish, and the other half to the use of the Seizor.
Any Justice of Peace of the County or chief Officer of the Town near the place
of Importation may by Warrant cause the Master and Seamen of such Ships and
others employed in Landing, Driving or taking Care of such Cattle to be
apprehended and committed to the Gaol of the County for three months without
Bail.

When through any fraudulent Agreement or connivance of the Officers or
otherwise, it shall happen that any Cattle, etc. after the first seizure of
them by Virtue of the aforesaid Act shall be found in any other Parish than
where the same shall be first seized, then it shall be lawful for any the
Officers of such Parish or place where such Cattle, etc. shall be found, to
seize and dispose of the same as Forfeited. The one Moiety to the poor of the
Parish, the other to the use of the Seizor, any former seizure in any other
Parish or Place notwithstanding.

That if any Suit shall be commenced or prosecuted against any person for any
seizure by virtue of this or the aforesaid Act, and upon Trial it shall not be
proved to the Jury that the cause of such suit did arise within such County
where such Action is laid and Tried, the Defendant shall be found Not Guilty,
without having regard to any Evidence by or for the Plaintiff.

That if any Action or Suit be commenced for any Seizure or other thing in this
or the aforesaid Act, such person so sued may plead the general Issue, and give
this and the aforesaid Act in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff be Non suit or
forbear Prosecution, or suffer discontinuance, or if a Verdict pass against
him, the Defendant shall have treble Costs with like remedy, as where Costs by
Law are given to the Defendant.

Prov^so, Not to hinder the Importing Cattle of the breed of the Isle of Man,
not exceeding 600 head yearly, to be Landed at Chester or some Member thereof,
and not elsewhere.

If any shall confederate to evade the seizures and forfeitures upon
Importation of Cattle etc. in this present Act, and put the same in Execution,
every such person Indicted within one year after such Offense, and convicted
according to Law, shall incurr the danger of Praemunire 16 Rich. 2.

(Not Expired.)


