Thursday the last Day of February, 1649. for A Solemn day of Humiliation,
Fasting and Prayer: And Declaring the GROUNDS thereof.
THe Lord who Rules over the Nations, who disposes and orders all things,
according to the good pleasure of his own Will, has in our Age (as in former
Generations) exceedingly glorified his Wisdom, Power and Mercy, That he might
warn and awaken the Inhabitants of the Earth unto a diligent enquiry after him,
a faithful and fruitful living before him; His Voice and his Hand has been
heard, and seen in this Land most eminently, in rescuing Us out of the
destroying hands of Tyranny, Popery and Supersition: Which experience of the
Lords wonderful Goodness and Mercy toward this Nation, might have wrought an
answerable return of Duty and Obedience; and the sense of the want hereof ought
to fill us with shame, astonishment and confusion of face, especially when (in
stead thereof) we find in the midst of it, such crying Sins, hideous
Blasphemies, and unheard of Abominations (and that by some under pretense of
Liberty, and greater measure of Light) as after all our wondrous Deliverances,
do manifest themselves to the exceeding dishonor of God, and reproach of our
Christian Profession: To the end therefore that this Nation in general, and
every one in particular may have an opportunity to know and acknowledge their
Sins in the sight of God, and be truly humbled for them; and that earnest
Prayer and Supplication may be put up on behalf of this Commonwealth, for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and propagation of his Gospel throughout
the same, and all the Dominions thereof; That the good hand of God may be
continued with us in perfecting his great works, which have been carried on to
so good a degree in England and Ireland; That all Differences among Brethren
might be reconciled in love; That the Designs, Combinations and Conspiracies of
all wicked men (whether within or without us) to imbroil this Nation in a New
War, may be discovered and prevented; and that Whilst ungodly men do make the
Arm of Flesh their Confidence, We may testify (from an abundant experience of
the Lords Goodness) That our Strength is only in the Living God: Be it
therefore Enacted and Declared, That Thursday the last day of February, 1649.
be appointed and kept as a Solemn day of Fasting, Prayer and Humiliation, for
the ends aforesaid.

Die Lunae, 4o Februarii, 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric, Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1649.


