FOR THE KING and both HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT: Being a further Relation (in
brief) of the Cruel Havoc and Spoil, made on the Persons and Estates of the
People of God in scorn called Quakers; For Meeting together to Worship God in
Spirit and Truth.
ALL which has been inflicted on them since the late Act against Conventicles,
which tends to the prejudice and ruin of many Families in their outward
Estates; and many more may be ruined, if a Stop be not put to the Cruelty of
Men: For several of these Spoils have been made upon the Goods of Widows,
Poor, Aged People, and Fatherless Children, in several Counties; and many are
left so desolate, their very Beds being taken from under them, that they are
fain to Lodge upon Straw: And some have had their wearing Apparel taken from
them; and many left destitute of outward things, having all swept away without
any Pity or Mercy: And others have had their Working-Tooles taken from them,
wherewith they should have labored to have got a Maintenance for themselves
and Families: And in several places no Plea would be accepted on the behalf of
the Innocent; some saying, Right or Wrong they must have it; and often times
those called Justices have bid the Officers take Three or Four times as much as
the Fines, that they might allow good Penny-worths: And they have taken the
very Kettle (in which Meat was providing for the Family's sustenance) off from
the Fire, and have thrown the Meat away into the Street; and have taken away
the Children's Apparel, which they should wear; and have taken the Skillet off
the Fire, in which Milk was boiling for the Children, and threw away the Milk.

All these, and many more Cruelties, Barbarous and Unchristian Carriages and
Actions, may be particularly proved, if required; as taking away their very
Fuel in the midst of Winter; and not leaving Bed-Clothes, or other Clothes to
keep them warm; but many have been fain to lodge on Straw this Winter.

Oh the Sad Cries of the poor Children and Families, that have been, by reason
of the Distress, that is brought upon them since this last Act! Many have
labored hard, it may be, most of their days, and had got a little outward
things, whereby their Children and Families were supported, and lived
comfortably; and now all is swept away, and they and their Families ruined; and
some have not so much as a Cow left to give their Children Milk: And all this
is because for Conscience sake they cannot forbear Assembling together to
Worship God, and for no other Cause: For it is well known we have always lived
peaceably since we were a People; and there is no cause wherefore we should be
thus cruelty dealt withal, but for our keeping a good Conscience toward God,
and toward all men.

And we expect the Performance of all the Kings Promises to us, for Liberty to
our tender Consciences; for we have always walked peaceably, and have not
forfeited our Liberty in any wise: And our Cry has always been, and is at
this day, for LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, to Worship God: And it is because we
cannot act against the pure Principle of God in our Consciences, that we have
suffered so deeply ever since we were a People.

And many Persons of considerable Estates, and of good Repute in several
Counties, have had their Estates given up to the Wills of a company of
Merciless Informers, and other debauched loose Persons; who rejoice that they
have power put into their hands to destroy sober people; and have boasted that
they will enrich themselves thereby. And thus the Innocent are given up to be a
Prey into the hands of unreasonable Men; some having all their Goods, both
within doors, and without, seized on, and their Cattle drove away, and their
Corn thresht out, and all clean swept away, and in a few days not any thing
left to help themselves and Families; who before were a Succor and Help to
many, and set many of their poor Neighbors on Work; and thus many poor people
are like to be utterly Undone and Ruined in the Countries.

Surely these things cry aloud in the Ears of the Lord, though men stop their
Ears, and will not hear the Cry of the Oppressed.

Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the Lord Spoke often together, and the Lord
heakened, and heard it: And we desire you may be of the same Mind.

Heb. 10. 25. The Apostle says, Forsake not the Assembling of your selves
together; but Exhort one another, and so much the more, as you see the day
approaching.

And the Apostles and Saints met together in several Houses, who forsook the
Jews Temple and Synagogues.

1 Cor. 16. 19. Acts 28. 30, 31. Paul Taught in his own hired House at Rome
(where the Seat of the Emperor was) no man forbidding him.



