A DECLARATION Of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax and his Council of WAR, In
obedience to several Ordinances of PARLIAMENT, For Disbanding the Supernumerary
Forces, and drawing the ARMY into several Garrisons, And for taking off
Free Quarter.

BY the Appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and His Council of
War,

Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr'



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Jan. 4. 1647.

A DECLARATION OF His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of War, In
obedience to several Ordinances of Parliament, For Disbanding the Supernumerary
forces, and drawing the Army into several Garrisons, and for taking off
Free Quarter.
WHereas the Houses of Parliament, for easing the present Burdens of the
Kingdom, Have Ordained, That all the Supernumerary Forces of the Kingdom, above
the established Army, shall be forthwith Disbanded; And for that purpose, and
to the end that the established Army for the future may be constantly paid, and
the Countries delivered from Free Quarter, Have likewise Ordained the present
raising of great sums of Money, and the Army is appointed by the Fifteenth of
January, to draw into Towns, Cities and Garrisons; We have thought fit to
Declare, and do hereby Declare and assure, That the Army by the said Fifteenth
day of January, shall according to the said Directions, be drawn into Towns,
Cities and Garrisons: And do further Declare and assure, That (the Parliament
supplying the Soldiery with (pay as aforesaid) no Free Quarter, after the said
Fifteenth day of January, shall be taken by the Soldiery upon any persons (duly
paying their Assessments) nor any enforcement for Meat, Drink, Victual for Man,
or Horse-meat for the quartering of any, after the said supply of pay begun,
and so long as it shall continue; but all Officers and Soldiers shall maintain
themselves with their pay, at such Rates as they can agree upon with any
Inhabitant (except only upon a March, where they shall stay not above two
nights in a place) and in that case also the Soldiery shall pay for their
quarters at the Rates set down for the Army: And that no Officer or Soldier
(upon pain of Death) shall do to the contrary hereof.

Windsor, December. 31. 1647. By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his Council of War, Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr'

FINIS.

