THE DECLARATION OF Thomas Lord Fairfax, And the rest of the Lords, Knights,
Esquires, Citizens, Ministers and Freeholders of the County and City of YORK.
WHereas this Famous County, Honored formerly for its puissance and strength
by which they have always been taken for the Bulwork of this Nation, are now
reputed so inconsiderable that they have not at this time a Representative in
Parliament: and being deeply sensible of the Confusions and Distractions of the
Nation, the particular Decay and Ruin of the Cloathing-Trade of this County,
which necessarily bears an influence upon the Public: as also the Future Evils
that will attend this Vacancy of Government during the imperfection and
incompleatness of Our Parliaments, whose entireness, and Full Number has been
in all Times (as to a Right English Constitution) the only Conservative of our
Liberties.

We the Lords, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers and Citizens aforesaid
do Declare, That we find a Corrupt Intrest in the present Government, abetted
by Factious Parties, and carried on with an Irreconciliable Violence against
our Peace: Predominant, and sitting at the Helm, whereby the Freedom and
Liberty of the Subject is so far endangered, that we judge it past Application,
or any other Wording Remedy to Retrive it. And as this is not only our own
opinion, but the general Sense of the Nation, fruitlesly hitherto made known to
the World: We will therefore allow our selves the precedence of Asserting and
Defending the justice of this our Common Right by open Arms, if no other
present Temperament and Expedient can be adjusted or fitted for our Grievances.

We do therefore require A Free and Full Parliament to be straitwith Convened,
according to the Directions and Provisions made in the Act for the Triennial
Parliament; the intent and design whereof, after such a bloody Contest we may
not see eluded and frustrated with strange VOTES and Qualifications: Therefore
we desire a Free Parliament, or else the return of the secluded Members by the
force of the Army in 1648. (to which his Lordship Protests he was unwittingly
and unwarily accessory) to the remaining Discharge of their Trust, they having
given singular and superlative evidence of their capacity and fitness for it,
by their wise and judicious moderation.

We shall in their Wisdom and Counsels acquiesce, and otherwise shall not be
satisfied, for that our pressing Calamities will give no Rest to the Kingdom,
till these our Desires are accomplished. To which purpose, we have at this our
general Meeting or Rendevouz Signed this our Declaration to be forthwith
Communicated to the NATION.

Signed Leeds Febr. 13. 1659. Thomas Fairfax, etc.

London, Printed for James Williamson.


