A DECLARATION Of His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.

Concerning the Supply of Bedding Required from the City of London For the
lodging of the Army in void houses to prevent the Quartering of Soldiers upon
any the Inhabitants.

Together with a Draught of his Warrants to the Aldermen of the several Wards
for that purpose.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for JOHN PARTRIDGE. 1648.

A DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax, Concerning the
supply of Bedding required from the City of LONDON, for the lodging of the Army
in void houses, to prevent the Quartering of Soldiers upon any the Inhabitants.
PROCLAMATION.
UPon the drawing up of the Army to this place, for the better avoiding the
trouble and inconveniences to the City and Suburbs of LONDON, or the
Inhabitants thereof, which might happen by the quartering of Soldiers in
private men's houses, it was the desire and Resolution of my self, and my
Officers, to lodge the Soldiers in great and void houses; and to the end they
might be accommodated for that purpose, (in regard, that at this season
Soldiers cannot hold our to lodge continually upon bare floors,) I writ to the
Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of LONDON, desiring they
would take some course for a speedy supply of Bedding for the Soldiery: but
instead of any satisfaction therein, after some delay, I have received only an
excusatory Answer.

The Soldiers and most of the Officers having layn now almost a week upon cold
floors, and health not permitting them to endure such hardship for continuance,
out of the same tender care, to avoid trouble or inconvenience to the
inhabitants, or any discontents or differences which might arise between them
and the Soldiers by the quartering of them in private houses, I have (with the
advice of a Council of War) thought fit to require a necessary supply of
Bedding, by Warrants directed immediately to the respective Aldermen of the
several Wards, the Copy whereof is herewith printed and published; and (with
the same advice) I do hereby further declare, That in case any failer shall be
in the bringing in, by the time limited, such proportions of Bedding, as,
according to the said Warrants, are charged upon the several Wards, and shall
be apportioned upon the several Divisions and Inhabitants of the same, I shall
be necessitated to send Soldiers, either to fetch such proportions of Bedding
from them that fail, or else to quarter with them; and must take such course
against either those Aldermen, and other Officers in the City, who shall
neglect to rare and bring in the proportions required from their respective
Wards and Divisions, or against those Inhabitants who shall refuse to supply
the proportions rated upon them, as shall be fit to use toward such obstinate
opposers of that orderly supply, which is so necessary for the ease and quiet
of the City, and for the subsistence of the Army.

Given under my Hand and Seal at my Quarter in Westminster the eighth of
December, 1648.
The Copy of the Warrant.
WHereas for the avoiding of the inconveniences of Quartering Soldiers upon
private men's houses, it is intended and desired, that the Army shall be lodged
in great and void houses, while it shall continue in or about the City of
LONDON, to the end therefore the Soldiery may be accommodated to lodge in such
houses, which at this season of the year, without convenient Bedding, they
cannot bear; These are therefore to will and require you, that upon receipt
hereof you do forthwith cause the proportion of (...) hundred and (...) Feather
Beds, or Flock Beds, with one Bolster, one pair of coarse Sheets, and two
Blankets, or one Blanket and one Coverlet for each Bed, sufficient for the
lodging of two men in a Bed, to be equally apportioned upon the several
Divisions within your Ward, and upon the several Householders that are of
ability to furnish the same within the said several Divisions; and the said
Beds, with the appurtenances aforesaid, to be brought to (...) by S^turday next
at noon, being the Ninth of this instant December, and there to be delivered
unto the hands and custody of (...) for the supply of the Regiment under the
Command of Colonel (...) and the said (...) is to give receipt or receipts
under his hand for what Bedding he shall receive, thereupon expressing from
what Ward or Divisions the same do come in, and upon the removal of the Army,
or the said Regiment, from about the City, such Bedding shall be restored to
the respective Inhabitants, Divisions or Wards from which it was had; and there
shall be care taken to prevent, as much as may be, any spoil or imbezilement
thereof; and in case, after such delivery, any part thereof shall be lost or
spoiled, so as to be made useless, reasonable satisfaction shall be given or
assigned for the same out of the Treasury of the Army. And you are on the same
day by eight of the Clock in the morning to return to my self, or my Secretary,
in writing under your hand, an Account of your proceeding upon this Warrant,
with a list of the proportions charged upon the several Divisions of your Ward,
and upon the several Householders in each Division, that if any failer be, it
may be known where it rests. Hereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the
contrary at your peril: and this shall be your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at my Quarter in Westminster the seventh day of
December, 1648.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
FINIS.

