THE FLAMING ISLANDS: OR, A full Description and Account of the strange and
terrible Fire, lately broke out of the Ground, in the Island Fyal, in
Threescore and Ten several places. As also in some other Neighboring Islands;
to the Destruction of most of the Inhabitants, and unexpressible Terror and
Affrightment of those that by flight escaped its dismal Effects.

Aesse quoque in Fatis reminiscimur affore tempus,
Quo Marae, quo Tellus, sumunusquae Exardeat Ether.
London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, next door to the Ball, in West
Smithfield, near the Hospital Gate. 1672.

THE Flaming ISLANDS: OR, A full Description and Account of the strange and
terrible Fire, lately broke out of the Ground, in the Island Fyal, in
Threescore and Ten several places. As also in some other Neighboring Islands.
AMongst all those Stupendous effects wherewith Mysterious Nature Exercises
and keeps in awe her trembling Children, few there are that have more, both
astonished Vulgar Heads, and bafled the Studies of more knowing and
Phylosiphical Enquirers, than those Occult and Subterranean Fires which have
been observed always to Rage in some particular parts of our Earthly Globe, and
at certain Periods of time to break forth, to the Derastation of the Adjacent
Countries, Mount Aetna, and Vesurius, are Famous on this account in the
Monuments of Antiquity; Whose wondrous qualities, whilst Pliny (that Great
Secretary of Nature) rashly Attempted by too near approaches to discover, he is
reported to be slain by one of those vast burning Stones which it almost
continually vomits up into the Air, falling thus, a Sacrifice to his overbusie
Curiosity.

The best account Phylosiphy has yet afforded us, of these strange Fires, is,
That the Mountains, or places wherein they happen, are within Repleated with
Brimstone, and the Ground or Soil there, consists of vast quantities of
Bituminous, or the like Combustible matter, which taking Fire, either from its
own Innate heat, or the Penetrating Rays of the Sun, the Winds which through
imperceptible Crannies whilstle up and down in those underground Vaults
(producing thereby sometimes those Erruptions we call Earthquakes) serve as
Bellows to Augment its Rage: And having so much ready disposed Fuel to Prey
upon, it ceases not burning, but in process of time, eating up toward the
Surface; the Flames which had so long lurked in close Carernes below, break
out, to the infinite amazement of Mortals, who had not the least apprehension
of such an hidden, but most terrible and devouring Enemy. A dreadful and
deplorable example of which kind very lately happened, is, The mournful Subject
of the present Narrative, which be pleased to accept according to the most
certain Intelligence from the place that was the unhappy Scene of this Tragedy
of Horror, as follows.

On the Coast of the East Indies (whose Spices and precious Stones may justly
Vye Dignity with the Western Mines) not far from that Eminent and well-known
Port of Goa, there lies a Cluster of Islands, some of which being first
discovered by the Portagues, do still pay obedience to that Crown. Amongst
these, that called Fyael, for the pleasantness of the Air, commodiousness of
its Situation, richness of the Commodities it produced, and number of
Inhabitants, did far excel the rest, whence we may easily Collect that the
People who enjoyed all these Signal advantages lived in great Ease, Plenty,
Magnificence, and Security: But alas! how soon can the Aldisposing Arm of
Providence blast our Joys, and by unexpected means turn our most flourishing
condition into a state of misery and dessolation.

On a sudden in the beginning of this laft Spring, as they were in the hight of
their Jollity, a Deluge of Fire, that by the means before hinted at, had long
lain hid and confined, in the Bowels of the Earth, broke out with unimaginable
Horror, and Impetuous Rage, in no less then Seventy distinct places of their
Island, the Earth opening with horrible Roarings, and several vast Hyatusses,
or Hideous Gapings; one of which happening in the chief Town (being a place of
excellent Structure, and Populous) all the Buildings, and most part of the
Inhabitants were instantly swallowed in that dreadful Abyss of Flames.

In other places whole Flocks and Herds were Absorpt, and descended as
Burnt-Offerings in Hecatombs, Diis Manibus.

The Flames which had thus broke Prison from Earth, mounted with such fury and
violence toward Heaven, as if they would have joined with the Elemental Fire,
which the Aristotelians talk of, and perfected the Univeral Conflagration.

Vast Stones red hot were (as it were) shot through the Air, which falling some
miles distant, killed great numbers, and destroyed such of the Houses as the
Earthquakes at the time of the first Erruptions had left standing.

In Fine, There was nothing but Horror, Astonishment, Destruction, and
Confusion: The Air was all filled with smoke, burning Cinders, and Ashes which
fell like a Fiery Rain, and utterly wasted the whole Country.

All the ^^^^ents seemed to War against, and Cons^ire for the punishment of the
wretched Inhabi^ants, whose Terr^rs and Destractions were such as are not
possible to be fully, either described, or imagined.

An Universal Consternation had seized them, and without any regard to their
Friends or Relations: Women leaving their little Babes, and Men abandoning
their aged helpless parents, every one endeavored to shift for himself, and
get away by what means they could, from that dismal place which threatened them
every moment, with nothing out the most dreadful kind of Death and Destruction.

The Neighboring Islands, as St. Michaels, St. Georges, St. Mary's, and the
Tarceras, were the Zoars, to which, winged with fear, they Flew for refuge;
though the last can promise them but little security, since the Fire is since
broke out there too, though as yet, not with that fury and violence as in Fyal.

Some of our Pious Ancestors (rich in Faith, though barren in Philosophy)
conceited those Vulcano's, or burning Mountains of Brimstone: As, Aetna,
Vesurius, and the like, to be the Local place of Hell, and Receptacles of Souls
Doomed to everlasting torments. The truth is, they seemed to have a very near
resemblance to that Litteral description of Hell delivered to us, in the Sacred
Oracles. And though some wild Atheistical Gallants (that scarce dread any other
Hell, but an empty pocket, or the frowns of a Mistress) may Suggest, that Fire
can have no effect of torment on a Soul, and that weeping and gnashing of teeth
are not easily supposed punishments consistent, and therefore that all those
things are Allegorically to be understood, yet let them be assured the Fire of
Hell is either Elemental Fire, or something worse; for which we want a Name
that can better express its inconceiveable, as well as endless tortures.

Wherefore let all Pious Readers, by this terrible example of God's Power, and
strange burning in the Bowels of the Earth, be admonished to mind that
Universal Conflagration, when the whole Globe of Earth shall confess it is
Ashes, and be destroyed by Fire; and to prepare for that amazing Judgment
which shall then immediately succeed, (the thoughts whereof alone, as a Noble
Author has it, are able to keep us honest in the dark, and) which shall
Impartially render to every Man according to his Works.

FINIS.

