For the Right Honorable
Captain General CROMWELL, Major General HARRISON, and the rest of that Noble
Race of the Soldiery, who are and have been instrumental in seeking the relief
of Captives, the Freeborn subjects of this Nation.
A few humble Proposals of several well-affected and faithful friends.
1. WHether God does own and countenance the use of Authority, or the abuse
thereof; and which of these two the people in conscience ought to yield
obedience unto, judge ye.

2. Whether all those Laws which were made by the Norman Tyrant, ought to stand
in force now, in the time of pretended freedom, judge ye.

3. Whether the Parliaments Acts for Tithes, with treble Damages, and
Imprisonment without Bail or Main-prize, be not more oppression tenfold then
all the Bishops Canons, judge ye.

4. Whether it be not most suitable to a Commonwealths freedom, every year to
Ordain Judges and Justices, as Constables, judge ye.

5. Whether the Civil sword in things of a Divine Nature, does not make
hypocrites threefold the servants of Satan, and cursed of God for their lame
and blind service, judge ye.

6. Whether men do not make their lusts to be their wills, and their wills to
be a law, judge ye.

7. Weather all the oppressions upon the poor and truly-conscientious people of
this Land, will be taken off without fire and vengeance from above, judge ye.

8. Whether all the Remonstrances and hundreds of Petitions presented to the
Supreme Authority in this Nation, by the oppressed, be not now buried in
Oblivion, as an old Almanac out of date, judge ye.

9. Whether all the Priests both of the old and new stamp in this Land, be not
the same as when they were under the Papistical and Prelatical government,
judge ye.

10. Whether all receivers of Tithes ought not now to offer burnt-sacrifices of
Sheep and Oxen, seeing it is the way God has appointed for such Ministers, and
no other Officers, judge ye.

11. Whether those Priests be not more for the gain of the fleece, then the
comfort of the people or flock, judge ye.

12. Whether the Mass, with all the Mattins, and all other Popish Relics,
ought not to be in use in this Land, since the Tithes of our Nation were given
for the wages of such a Service, to them that ministered therein, judge ye.

13. Whether it be not a Case of justice and equity, that all people ought to
be left free in themselves, how much or how little a portion they give to their
Minister, forasmuch as the said Minister is left free to himself, how much or
how little a portion of the word of God he preaches to the people, judge ye.

14. Whether the hand of God, or the arm of flesh, must put an end to the
differences betwixt Holland and England, since that God is no respecter of
persons; for of what vice Holland is guilty, is not England much more? and for
what virtue England may be praised, may not Holland much more? witness their
care for all sorts of poor, and charity in relieving Englands Exiles, judge ye.

15. Whether the noisome swarms of Lawyers, with their dependencies, be not a
sufficient store for France, Spain, Holland, Poland, Swedland, Denmark,
Scotland, and Ireland, except the people are made of envy, hypocrisy, and
deceit, as in England, judge ye.

16. Whether there is not to be had as much justice and equity in the court of
Pluto, as the truly-honest have had, and daily have in the Courts of Law in
England, judge ye.

17 Whether the tenth of the rich man's land, or the labor of the poor man, his
Servants, Cattle and Seed, be Tythed, judge ye.

18 Whether the old Law ever required any to pay Tithes of that which yielded
not more then was sown, or of any thing that gave no increase; much less,
according to that Law, was it ever required of any that reap not what they
sow, judge ye.

19 Whether the progative power of any King, or Act of Parliament, can make
that lawful, which in it self is unlawful, both by the Law of God and nature,
judge ye.

20 Whether any thing may be said to be in its power, whenas that which first
gave the same its being, is taken away, judge ye.

21 Whether were we furthest from Reformation during the time the Bishops sent
their Spannel-like Pursevants to hunt for Tithes, or now the Parliament has
taken that power off, transmitting it unto a Committee, termed a Committee of
Plundered Ministers, who, with their bloodhound-like Messengers, hunt not only
for Tithes, but for (the very lives of some men, in taking away their
livelihood, by their covetous, idolatrous, oppressive practice, enforcing them
to pay) treble damages, which whether it be not sore oppression and Extortion,
judge ye.

22 Whether the Law or Magistrate ever acted for Jesus Christ, though
professing of him, but to the contrary, persecuted him in his servants: as
witness the shedding the blood of Barrow, Greenway, Penry, and imprisoning
Turner, Grafton, Brewer, Fenner, Stepwel, Tindar, Burdet, Smith, Harvey, How,
Lockier, and hundreds more, for witnessing a good conscience; and as at this
present day, Marden and Pierce, judge ye.

23 Whether the Ministers of Jesus Christ, or poor of that Church, ever
supplicated or sued unto the Nations Authority for maintenance, as the
Antichristian Ministers daily do, judge ye.

24 Whether Tithes be not as much oppressive unto the truely-conscientious,
being in the hand of the Impropriator, as in the hand of the Priest, judge ye.

25 Whether it is not cruelty in the higest, to increase the rich man by
oppressing the poor, judge ye.

We now cordially entreat you, that as we have humbly presented these few
Queries, or Memorandums unto you, you would as faithfully judge of the same,
and as cordially endeavor (and that with speed) the amendment of all that
appears to be contrary to the good word and will of the Lord; and whatsoever
likewise shall be grievous or burdensome to the subject: in the effectual
doing whereof, you shall honor the Great God of Heaven and Earth, who will
never forget much more to honor you.

FINIS.

