For the Underofficers and Soldiers OF THE ENGLISH ARMY, From the People of
SCOTLAND.
T concerns you as you desire not to imbrue your hands in the blood of the
Lords people without a cause, and to be answerable to the righteous Judge of
the world in the day of your accounts, to consider whether the invading of the
Kingdom of Scotland, wherein We, and all our Interests are included, be not a
thing most sinful and unlawful, which will bring wrath and indignation from
the Lord upon all these who are engaged therein, or accessory thereto, and
because we know that things are misrepresented unto you, and you are made to
believe that your undertaking is just and necessary, We shall therefore for
your Information, shortly show you how unwarrantable the grounds are, upon
which your so called Parliament have concluded, and commanded to invade this
Land; that if it be possible, your sin, and our affliction may be avoided.

The first ground which is hinted at in the Declaration of your so called
Parliament, is the Commissioners of Scotland their usurping upon Acts of
Legislative power, and their frequent pretensions to, and contestations about a
joint interest in some Acts of it, whilst they were resident in England, and
whilst nothing but friendship and unanimity in the same cause was pretended.
But it is most certain, that the Commissioners of Scotland did never claim, nor
assume to themselves any (...) ^^ving of Laws in England, The most that they
did, was, 1. The Committee of both Kingdoms being appointed by the (...) ^f
both Kingdoms, they acted therein in a coordinate way in things of common
Interest. 2. They did often by Letters (...) ^^uses of Parliament their
desires, and give them warning when they were either negligent in, or averse
from their duty (...) for a joint interest in the Kings Person, he being King
of Scotland, as well as of England.

(...), which is much insisted upon, is the late unlawful Engagement against
England in the year 1648. But how un^^ (...) this Kingdom, will appear to you
in these particulars. 1. That Engagement was protested against in the Parli^^^^
(...) of the Parliament it self, even those who at first entered in Covenant
with England, and sent an Army for their (...) Scotland. 2. Not only did the
Body of the Ministry of the land preach and pray against it, but all the
Judicatories (...) it, and the General Assembly did in the very time of the
going forth of the Army, publish a large Declaration (...) in Shyres did
petition the Parliament against it; So were the Body of the people of the Land,
especially the (...) to God against it, So did they refuse to contribute
thereto, and concur therein: and because of this, (...) prevailing party of
Malignants, who carried it on. 4. Those who had protested against it in
Parliament, and (...)* did before the defeat at Preston begin to stir in
Arms against it, and did not lay them down, until they (...) that carried it
on. 5. The House of Commons, and Lieutenant General CROMWELL by their (...),
the other to the Committee of Estates, do in a large way bear testimony to the
Innocence of the honest (...) also give them assistance against those who
carried on that Engagement.

(...) in by the Commissioners of this Kingdom at Westminster, against the
taking away of the Kings life, and (...) ^^is, as it was an innocent and
harmless, so was it a necessary duty: not only because of the Irregularity
and (...) men wanting authority, and of the joint interest of the Kingdom: of
Scotland in the Kings Person, but also be^^ (...) ^reat scandal, and many sad
consequents that would follow thereupon to both Kingdoms.

(...) refusing to repair the damages that England sustained in the unlawful
Engagement, in the year 1648. But to (...) ^^mand reparation of those damages
from those who were sufferers themselves; reparation was not refused, but as
the (...) to the Parliament of England, that none who had been active in, or
consenting to the said Engagement, should be (...) trust whatsoever, without
the adv^ce and consent of the Kingdom of England, so did they not refuse all
fair and amica^^^ (...) desired to know the particular wrongs and damages, and
upon knowledge thereof, offered to give just satisfaction.

(...) ^^ound is, a resolution in those of the Kingdom of Scotland, again to
invade England, which is fancied upon very unwarrantable grounds, (...) of a
Treaty, The proclaiming of Charles Stewart King of England, and promising him
assistance against England, and declaring against the (...) ^ow preva^les in
England, as Sectaries, etc. To all which we say, that this Kingdom did refuse
to treat with your Parliament, not because they ^^rpose to invade the Kingdom
of England, but because a prevailing party having taken away the House of
Lords, and also driven away, and impri^^^ any members of the House of Commons,
and changed the Government; They could not acknowledge the remnant for the
supreme authority of (...) the King, they did no otherwise proclaim him King,
then in the ordinary way, that has been followed by both Kingdoms since (...)
King, and they have given him no promise but this, that they will by all
lawful means within their power and calling, (...), contribute their
endeavors for his peaceable restitution to the Government of his other
dominions. And as to the declaring (...) is far from concluding a resolution
to make War upon them, we can and ought to mourn and pray, and bear testimony
(...) be far from thoughts of invading of them; We will assure you, that as
those grounds contained in the Declaration of your so (...) ^^^clude it; so
has there not hitherto been any such question debated, nor any such resolution
taken in the public counsels of (...) been done here, has been merely in
reference to defense of the Land, if we should be invaded from England.

(...) your consciences, and as before the Lord to weigh well whether God will
countenance you in such a thing, and whether (...) ^^venant in you, after
England has sworn before God and Angels, and men, to preserve the Union and
Peace betwixt the (...) ^ause to invade this Land, and make War upon us, and
oppress us, and shed our blood. We will assure you, that all who (...) Heaven
against such oppression, and you have cause to be afraid, that because of the
same, God will arise to execute judge^^^^ (...) is not against malignants, but
against those who in the integrity of their hearts have been following Jesus
Christ, and his (...) ^^^werable to the Gospel, and who helped England in the
day of her distress, and have suffered much on her behalf, chosing (...) that
the malice of malignaants could devise, then to break with England, or set one
foot in that Land in an hostile way. (...) who shall take warning to proceed no
farther in an evil way, least God who is the Judge of all things, look upon
such inju^^^^^ (...) ^^ch of Covenant, and require it.

(...) by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1650.


