A DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax: TO THE Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of LONDON;

CONCERNING The Military Government of this Kingdom, and the settling of Peace
throughout all His Majesty's Realms and Dominions.

WITH His Excellencies Desires to the Citizens, to join with Him therein,
against all Opposition whatsoever.

PVblished by Authority from His Excellency, the Lord General Fairfax.

LONDON: Printed for C. W. and are to be sold at the Royal Exrhange in
Cornhill. 1648. 8ber ye 23th

THE DECLARATION Of the Lord General FAIRFAX: SENT To the Right Honorable, the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IN the carrying on of the great businesses of the Kingdom toward a general
and happy settlement, it has been a fixed principle with Us, to make it our
first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
Engagement of the Kingdom in a second War might be removed, before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue: which upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay, yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no endeavor
will be judged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of any
new embroylments.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have in
preparation to propose for the general settlement of the affairs of the
kingdom, have been communicated to the Parliament; and we hope they are
satisfied, that they contain in them things tending to a general good, and to
lay an hopeful Foundation for Common Right and Freedom to the people of this
Land for future, and for a lasting peace amongst us.

But before we can securely intend, and without interruption apply our selves
unto the proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, thereupon we have delivered
into the hands of the Commissioners, the paper which consists of three
particulars, in the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being
most concerned therein, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which
relates to you, without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible
satisfaction therein. We should not desire this, or any thing else of that
nature, were we not derswaded, that what we desire is seasonable, and for
yours, and the Kingdoms good and quiet.

And we should willingly have been silent (as to this) but considering the just
jealousies which lie against some persons now authorized in the exercise of
that power, and those attempts which have been made by some, who would have
engaged your City to a War, had not your Lordship, the Court of Aldermen, and
Common council by your wisdom prevented it. We cannot in a case of this
importance, but deal faithfully with you, in desiring your concurrence with
ours, etc. And that if the interest we have so long fought for be still the
same, let it not seem strange that we desire of the Parliament and City, that
those may be in places of Trust, who have given the best proof of their
courage and constancy in prosecution of the same. Having thus far declared our
selves with all freedom and clearness to you, as we do not your good
a^ceptance of your intention therein, so we desire your forwardness in a work
so much tending to mutual confidence, and to prevent the designs of any who
would be glad to put obstructions in the way to a happy conclusion, and envy
nothing more then the continuance of a right understanding between you and Us.

By the appointment of his Excellency the Lord. General Fairfax, and his
Council of War.

Signed J. Rushworth Secr.

Reader,
This Paper of mutual Amity and Concord coming to my hands, I thought it
requisite to re-publish it again to the world; to the end, that all men
whatsoever may clearly discern the real and candid intentions of the Army
toward this City; who notwithstanding the antiquity thereof (bearing date July
19. 1647.) yet may serve anew (as a Record of same) to witness their
integrity, and convince all those who endeavor to foment new divisions between
the City and Army.

Vale.
The further proceedings of the Army.
Whereas, we the Officers and Soldiers under the immediate command and
conduct of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, do declare, That we are as
desirous of a safe and well grounded peace, and that a final end were put to
all the troubles and miseries of the Commonwealth, as any sor^ of men
whatsoever: Yet considering,

1 That there is no justice done against the Abettors of the late Rebellion, as
Holland, Buckingham, Laughorn, Poyer, and their Accomplices: or of the
Confederates with the Apostate Scots: and indeed little Instice by the
Parliament done upon any Offenders of that kind. By which we have too much
cause to fear, that there may be a party in the Parliament abetting and
correspoding with (if not guilty of) the same Designs.

2 That notwithstanding the King has betrayed the trust reposed in him, and
raised war against this Nation to inslave it, violating his Oaths, and
trampling underfoot our Laws (then which no Engagement now taken can be more
binding:) notwithstanding he is guilty of all the bloodshed in these intestine
wars, as may appear by his own confession in his late agreeing to the Parl.
first proposition: being also a person who was so far concluded incapable to
govern, that the Parl. voted that no address should be made to him. There is
yet a prevalent party of his Creatures, who in parliament and else where, act
His Design, and are (as we conceive) the Authors of our present Distractions.

3 That through the evil designs and practices of the foresaid party, the
intolerable burden of free quarter is continued upon the people
notwithstanding the unreasonable taxes daily extorted from them, in the name of
pay for the Army: By which means we are not only rendered odious to others, but
a burden to our selves, not being able to cloth our selves, shoe our horses,
or free our Arms.

We therefore cannot think any thing can be safely done in order to a peace,
until some speedy and effectnall course be taken, which we humbly desire your
Excellency will be pleased to your utmost power, to endeavor, 1 That there may
be a strict scrutiny, for the more full discovery of such persons as were
contrivers or encouragers of the Rebellions aforesaid, and that Justice
speedily be executed on them according to the late Orders of Parliament. 2 That
impartial and speedy Justice may be done upon all criminal persons, and
especially upon such as have or shall endevor to obstruct the course thereof, or
have betrayed their trust, or bin Authors of shedding that innocent blood,
which calls to Heaven for vengeance, that so we may be at peace with God. 3
That the same fault may have the same punishment, in the person of King or
Lord, as in the person of the poorest Commoner. 4 That all such may be
proceeded against as Traitors, who act or speak in the Kings behalf, till he
shall be acquitted of the guilt of shedding innocent blood. 5 That the Army may
speedily have their pay, or a present course be taken against those who
unjustly withold it; and that they may have the Arrears due since Ian. 15.
before they be ordered to pay quarters, and effectual provision made for the
payment of former Arreares. 6 That the intolerable oppression of free quarter
be immediately taken off, and that for the time to come whilst there is
necessity for an Army, there may be Assignations given to each Regiment, Troop
and Company, which may be constant during the establishments of the Army, that
the money may not pass from hand to hand till it is half imbezelled, but be
paid immediately from the Countries to the Soldiery, that so all free quarter
for ever avoided, it may return from the Soldier to the Countryman again.

And now fearing lest the inveterate malice of our adversaries should asperse
us with a design to destroy Magistracy and propriety; we cannot but declare,
that we shall constantly endeavor to defend them both with our lives and
fortunes, and in expectation of your Excellencies favor in the premises, we
shall ever pray, etc.

Subscribed in the name of the Officers and Soldiery of Army, and commanded to
be printed, and communicated to the Freeborn subjects of England, within the
Cities of London and Westminster, the Liberties thereof, and all other Cities,
Corporations, and Market Towns, within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales.
FINIS.

