THE FORM Of the News COMMISSIONS By which the FORCES act, that are under the
Command of CHARLES FLEETWOOD Esquire With some Observations thereupon: The Power by
which Monck acts is vindicated, and the Nation thereby undeceived.
CHARLES FLEETWOOD Esquire Commander in Chief of the Army, and Land Forces, of this
Common wealth.

TO (...) whereas the General Council of the Army at Wallingford-House, the 18
Day of October, 1659. Appointed Me according to such Rules then agreed upon, to
give Commissions for the supply of such Vacancies as were, or might be, in the
Army; and have since upon the 27 of October aforesaid: Resolved, That all the
Officers already in Commissions in the Armies of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; shall receive Commissions from Me, in persuance of the said Resolve. I
do hereby Constitute and Appoint you (...) of the Regiment of (...) whereof
Col. (...) is Col. (...) and also Capt. of A (...) of in the same Regiment, you
are therefore to take the same into your Charge and Care, as (...) as Capt.
thereof, and duly Exercise the Inferior Officers and Soldiers of the same
Regiment, and (...) in Arms, and use your best Care and Endeavor to keep them
in good Order and Discipline, Commanding them to Obey You as their (...) and
Capt. Respectively, and You are likewise to observe and follow such Orders as
you shall from Time to Time receive from my Self, or the Superior Officers of
the Regiment and Army, according to the Discipline of War, and Trust Reposed
in you: Given under my Hand and Seal at Wallingford-House, This (...).

I. Observe one of the most notorious Absurdities that was ever committed by
men, that have either Sense, Reason, or common Understanding, That the Persons
that give Charles Fleetwood Esquire; Commission shall receive Commission from Him:
The Reason why they are put to this shift is, That their Consciences are so
grated with their late impudent Rebellion, that they dare not go to fight with
Genesis Monck by their old Commissions, because they fight against the bringing in
of the Parliament, by Monck justly and honorably endeavored.

II. What confidence can Fleetwood have in such Officers, who received their
Commissions from the Parliament but the other day; and now, in opposition of
that Parliament, they receive Commissions from Him: Who can imagine but they
will be as ready to receive new Commissions from Lambert, so soon as he shall
return, if in case he overcome or baffle Monck.

III. Observe, That this Commission that Mr. Fleetwood receives from his
Vassals, is like unto that which his Father in Law received from the Nobles and
Great men of the Land, to be Protector, allies his Grooms, Butlers, and
Scullions.

IV. Observe, That Fleetwood is by this, made an Image of Clouts, to be a
Screne between Lambert and his intended Sovereignty.

V. Observe, It is like Knipperdoling's giving John of Leyden Commission to be
King of Saints, and then John gives Knipperdoling Commission to be his Lord
High Steward.

VI. Observe, That it will suit well with the famous City of London, that their
Militia should receive Commissions from this Honorable Person, or from the
Committee of Safety, that is constituted, ordained, and appointed, by the very
same Authority, viz. The worthy Assembly of grave, sage, and illustrate,
Council of Officers, who are Persons well acquainted with destroying pulling
down, and ruining all Form, Order, and Government; but are not at all
acquainted with Obedience or Duty to their Superiors.

VII. Observe, That General Monck has Legal Authority for what He does, by
Acting by His Old Commission, Given by the Parliament, for that it was given
Him to Act in persuance of the Trust Reposed in Him from the Parliament; which
was to Defend the Commonwealth from all Usurpations.

VIII. That the Example of this his Receiving his Commission from his Inferior
Officers, may as Legally be followed by the Soldiers, Who have the same Power
in Themselves, to thrust out all their Officers, and Grant Commissions to
others, to Exercise alike Devolved Authority over Them, it being the only
Pattern for Rebellion and Mutiny that can be Imagined.

IX. Observe, That by this new model, the Anabaptists have the only advantage
to pack in their Proselytes, that thereby all the Authority of the three
Nations may be converted into their Hands; Who are utter Enemies to the
Ministry, the Laws, and do really intend to destroy Corporations: That there
may be no Hedge or Fence to any Liberty, but that all may lie open to their
Unsatiated and Unlimited Pride and Lust.

X. Observe, That by the same Rule, that the Army can Dissolve Parliaments, and
Constitute new supreme Authority in whom they please: the worst of Rogues may
do the like.

XI. Observe, That the Superior Officers and Powers shall hereafter be in like
danger to be Judged, Condemned, and Expelled by the Soldiers and Inferiors;
So that you shall never be at any Certainty in Government, but always mutable,
or so often as Factions can be made amongst the Inferiors: So that the Property
of Superiors being Judge of Inferior Actions, will be quite altered to
Inferiors judging Superiors.

XII. Observe, That by this famous device of the Officers giving Commission to
their General, and the General giving Commission to the Officers; together with
the new and excellent Form of Government: the Officers of the Army shall be
free to all Intents and purposes to keep the 3 Nations in perpetual Slavery and
Chains; unless God shall raise deliverance. Reader, A brief Description of
which I shall here present thee with, but I would not have thee tell any body
of it. A Committee of Safety is appointed by the Army; the Committee of Safety
are to appoint a Senate of Sixty; the Senate of 60 are to appoint 200: And, in
order thereunto nominate 400, to be a popular Assembly, out of which, the
People are to elect 200, which are to sit once in 3 years: the Senate are to be
a coordinate Power with the Popular Assembly, out of which ten are to be added
unto the Senate, and ten to go off from the Senate: The 400 that they nominate,
(you may be confident) shall be Soldiers, Excisemen, Officers of the
Customers, and such other Persons as have public Salaries: So that by this
means, your Nations shall be kept in perpetual Slavery, because not fit to be
trusted with their Liberty. Oh brave Englishmen! You have fought your selves
into a brave Condition.

CONCLUSION.
YOu Officers and Soldiers of the Army that have any Reason, or Honorable
thoughts in your Breast, shake of this detestable Yoke, do not submit to it,
for your Posterity will curse you; and abhor the thoughts and memory of You,
if You should be deluded into the se Snares.

Printed at Loydon, at the Sign of the Impudent Rebel, in Wimbleton-Court.
1659.


