Forty Four QVERIES To the Life of QUEEN DICK.

By one who will at any time work a Job of JOURNEY-WORK, To serve his Country.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

Some Doubts, but more Quaeries.
I.

Whether Richard Cromwell was Oliver's Son, or no?

II.

Whether it is not convenient that the Parliament should settle a very
considerable Revenue upon Richard, because he so willingly resigned the
Government, when as all the World knows he was not able to keep it?

III.

Whether White. Hall ought not to be called the Fleet, because Richard Cromwell
is in there for Debt?

IV.

Whether R. C. does not expect, he being a Courtier, rather to be Complemented
then Voted out of White Hall?

V.

Whether R. C. his Fall from the Banqueting House Stairs was not Ominous? and
whether without Offense afterward he might not be called a Lame Protector?

VI.

Whether R. C. ought to wonder at these Changes, (though his Peal was rung very
sadly) for he is a Huntsman, and knows what it is to run Counter?

VII.

Whether it would not tend more to the Purifying of Richard's Blood, to be in
the Country at this time o'^h year, then in the City? Quid Dixi? to the
purifying of his blood; we all are sensible he wants blood.

VIII.

Whether R. C. might not get favor amongst the Ladies, though he has lost
himself amongst the People, if he had but his Fathers Long Instrument?

IX.

Whether it is not a sufficient Demonstration of R. C's. submissiveness, when
as his design is not to raise New, but to put off his Old horses?

X.

Whether R. C. might not have had better Council, and at a Cheaper rate then
1000 l. a man? and whether it be a Crime to call them an Evil Council?

XI.

Whether Noll's Mother had not a Colts tooth in her head when she went to the
Cockpit?

XII.

Whether her Daughter Mistress Claypoole who lived there before her, was not a
Hen of the Game?

XIII.

Whether ever Mistress Claypooles Husband was capable of more then two things;
the one, Fathering of other folks Children; the other, of executing a Raingers
place in Whittlewood Forest?

XIV.

How can we expect to have good streams of Justice, when as the Fountain is a
Malignant?

XV.

How can we expect a good Gospel, when we have so bad Law?

XVI.

Whether the sins of this Nation have not caused God to send a Plague of
Lawyers amongst us?

XVII.

Whether the signification of Lawyers is not, That whosoever comes but to ask
once Counsel of them, must be years in Law?

XVIII.

Whether the Act of Indemnity does not extend to Colonel Howard and his Lady?

XIX.

Whether Prynne is not Couzen-German to all the Cropped horses in England?

XX.

Whether a penny worth of Ink will not serve his Worship, though he writes
much, in regard he is so exceedingly beholden to his Gall?

XXI.

Whether it would not be a great happiness to our English Nation, if Prynne
might but come once to shake hands with his Ears?

XXII.

Whether all our Ministers are not Independents, i. e. Depending from thence,
namely, 1. the Favor of those in Power. 2. From the largeness of their Tithes?
and whether these Times will not put them upon making Uses of their Reasons?

XXIII.

Whether Jones ought not to be Chief Alchymist of these Nations, since he can
get an Estate out of Nothing?

XXIV.

If the Corruptions of some Officers be the Generation of others; all being
corrupted, why should we not have New ones in their Rooms? and whether often
turning out of the Great Ones, will not prevent Corruptions?

XXV.

Whether those are not to be accounted Saucy Servants, who dare contradict
their Masters?

XXVI.

Whether it is not a good time of the year to turn the Courtiers to grass,
they having been so long at hard meat?

XXVII.

Whether the late Court was not clear from Excrements, being it was so well
provided of shavers?

XXVIII.

Whether Expectation has not undone most of the Courtiers?

XXIX.

Whether all of them would not, if they could handsomely, turn
Common-wealths-Men?

XXX.

Whether Sir Gilbert Pickering will not find it a more difficult matter to
fasten the Scepter into Richard Cromwell's hand, then he did to scrue the tool
into the Effigies at Summerset-House?

XXXI.

Whether the Privy Passage from his Lodgings to White Hall, was not made at
the same time as he was Created Lord of the Close-stoole?

XXXII.

Whether Mr. Strickland would not be a Complete Gentleman, if he had but Cuffs
given him to his Black Bands?

XXXIII.

Whether he is not a Patient now instead of an Agent?

XXXIV.

Whether Mr. Thurlow is not the Proudest Man in the Nation, because he could
not be satisfied till he had the Protector for his Coachman?

XXXV.

Whether it is not a matter too Profound for Mr. Laurence (though he be a
Dipper) to Dive into the Abstrusenesse of the Armies Actings?

XXXVI.

Whether my Lord Fairfax did not swarve from his Principles, when he suffered
his Daughter to take the Duke of Buckingham Prisoner?

XXXVII.

Whether Barkstead could have been Arrested, had he been Invisible John?

XXXVIII.

Whether Doctor Osbaldstone ought not to be restored unto his Livings, when as
many Ladies can witness his Sufficiency?

XXXIX.

Whether it be any Abuse to call Sir Richard Temple a Serving-man, since be so
often handled a Trencher behind the Protector?

XL.

Whether he is not to learn how to wait upon his Mistress, who always danced
after his Master?

XLI.

Whether he does not deserve to be Degraded, and instead of Sir Richard
Temple, be called Sir Dick. Trencher, who did so Debase himself?

XLII.

Whether Peter's was not always Mad?

XLIII.

Whether his Daughter is not Mad for Marrying?

XLIV.

Whether we shall not be all Mad, if ever we make choice of another Protector?

FINIS

