FOUR PETITIONS To His EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax: VIZ. I. From the
Inhabitants of the County of Essex, presented to his Excellency at the late
Rendezvous at Triplo-heath. II. From the Inhabitants of the Counties of Norfolk
and Suffolk, presented to his Excellency at St. Albans, 12 June present. III.
From the Inhabitants of the County of Buckingham, presented to his Excellency
at S. Albans, 15 June present. IV. From the Inhabitants of the County of
Hertford, presented to his Excellency at S. Albans, 16 June present.


ALSO A SPEECH made to his Excellency at the delivery of the Petition for
Buckingham, by the Presenter.

Published at the earnest desire of the Petitioners, and for the general
satisfaction of the Kingdom.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, JUNE 18. 1647.

To the Right Honorable, Excellent, Worthy and Pious, Sir Thomas Fairfax,
General over those Forces raised in behalf of the Countries Rights and
Liberties: The Petition of the well-affected in the County of Essex,
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners being not a little sensible of those growing evils which
are like to overspread this Kingdom, unless the mercy of God prevent (which,
after so much exhausting our Estates, loss of Lives, engagements of our Persons
to regain this poor Nation to an enjoyment of its Rights and Liberties) and yet
like to flow upon us, either by those which have been our open Enemies, or else
a party of pretended friends; insomuch that your poor Petitioners, and all the
well-affected in the country have just cause to fear, That after we have, by
the blessing of the Almighty upon this Army, been rescued from many oppressions
which lay heavy upon us, we are now like to be vassalaged and enslaved in the
Norman Laws, and Prerogative clutches of an ambitious party in the Nation.

And likewise taking into our consideration, That there is no Remora to stop
the proceedings of violent men against us, but this present Army under your
Honorable conduct, whose constant fidelity and faithful Resolutions, together
with the blessings from above, have hitherto abashed the Enemies of our Peace
and Safety, and gained the favor of all those who are the true friends to a
free Nation.

These things, Right Honorable, sinking deep into our spirits, we thought it
meet and convenient to represent our thoughts unto you; and so much the rather,
in regard the Petitions of the freeborn Nation have been rejected by those
which we have entrusted for the receiving of them, yea Ordered to be burnt by
the hands of the common Hangman, insomuch that we have now no whither else to
appeal but unto your Excellency, from whom, under God, we expect some redress
of our miseries.

Our humble Desires to your Excellency therefore are, First, That before you
disband the Army, you would be pleased to consider the sad condition which is
like to befall the freeborn people of England, and likewise our present
vassalage we groan under. Secondly, That you would be pleased to mediate to the
Parliament in our behalfs, and to use all such means which you in your
Honorable wisdom shall think convenient, to settle Affairs in a fair and
peaceable way; so that all that Renown which Providence has hitherto crowned
your Endeavors withal, may not now at last be blasted with the Intentions and
crafty Machination of yours and the Kingdoms Enemies. Thirdly, That your
Excellency would be pleased, in no case to admit of Disbanding, till such time
as you see these and the Kingdoms just and legal Requests embraced: If thus,
Right Honorable, God shall draw forth your heart to act for us, we shall for
ever engage our selves your Servants in the Vindication of your just
proceedings, and ever pray for your Honorable safety.


This Petition was presented to his Excellency at the Rendezvous of the Army at
Triplo-Heathnear Royston, with the Subscrition of above a thousand of the
Inhabitants.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain General of the
Parliaments Forces;
The humble Petition of the peaceable and well-affected Inhabitants of the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, together with the City and County of Norwich,
earnestly endeavoring after the prosperity of the Parliament, and the Peace of
the Kingdom;
Shows,
THat whereas your Excellency has been appointed Commander in chief over these
free Commons of England, that have been invited by the Parliament to stand up
in defense of themselves and Fellow Subjects in time of imminent danger,
against all Arbitrary Government, Tyranny and Oppression; and that the
Parliament has by diver Declarations, Remonstrances and Protestations, engaged
themselves both to God and the Kingdom, to endeavor to the utmost of their
power to maintain the ancient Government of this Kingdom, and to preserve the
Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, and today hold on the first opportunity
of procuring a safe and well grounded Peace; notwithstanding all which, there
is now an appearance of a most abhorrid Design to ruin the native Liberties
and Privileges of the Subjects, whereby discontents are fomented in the hearts
of the people, and the Kingdom like to be divided into factions, to the
immenent danger of imbroiling us yet again in blood: And from the policy of the
Complotters of this Design, we humbly conceive, have already proceeded those
sad obstructions of our free addresses to the Parliament, in representing our
grievances, and making humble offers to their Wisdom of just remedies, which
have imposed this necessity upon us, humbly to implore

Your Excellencies assistance to mediate with the Parliament, in the behalf of
us, and all the free Commons of England, for the speedy and Peaceable
establishment of those our native Liberties, which have now cost the Kingdom
such vast expense of blood and treasure, that all obstructions that lay in the
way to hinder the addresses of the free subjects of England to the Parliament,
in representing their grievances, fears, doubts and jealousies, as also offers
of Remedy might be so speedily removed, as that a firm Peace and Union might be
yet again enjoyed in our distracted Kingdom, according to the intentions of the
Parliament frequently declared, engagements of the Army, and the ardent
expectations of all the welaffected in the kingdom.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
This Petition was presented to his Excellency at St. Albans the twelfth of
June present, with the subscription of above Fourteen hundred of the
Inhabitants.

To his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax Knight, Captain General of the Forces
failed for the defense of the Kingdom;
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Buckingham.
May it please your Excellency,
WE bless God for you as the instrument whom he has raised up, and made
eminent, in putting an end to the sad and dreadful War, wherein this Kingdom
was involved not many Months since: Our eyes are still upon you, and our
prayers for you, that God would crown your labors with an happy period of our
miseries, ending in the enjoyment of our due and native liberties, which are
the things we have chosen our fellow subjects serving in Parliament to obtain
for us.

They are the things for which we have adventured our lives and estates freely,
being the first County that appeared for them.

They are the things we have so often Petitioned for, and could not have so
much as expected a delay of answer to these our just desires.

But to our grief we speak it, we have been rejected, and are become hopeless
of satisfaction, by some men who have not only prevailed in discountenancing
our just Petitions (the proper way of the subjects address) but have almost
made it a fault for the subjects to Petition, ever for things that are due to
them, both by common birthright and the law of the Kingdom, and which
frequently have been confirmed unto us by several Ordinances and Declarations
of Parliament. We are not ignorant that even some men amongst them, whom in due
time we shall not stick to name, are such as by their subtle slights, have
endeavored to render your Army odious to the Parliament and Kingdom; which
rather then they shall not obtain, they will not stick to inflame the Kingdom
in a second unnecessary and unjust War: That being the only obstacle to their
wicked designs, and the only help under God, left us of having a firm Peace
settled in this Kingdom.

These things being come to this pass, we take upon us the boldness to beseech
your Excellency, you being a Person whom your Justice, Courage, Fidelity, and
Zeal for the Common good have made eminent, and given so great an interest in
the hearts and affections of all men, who have any sense of their Common good,
and just liberties; That you will be pleased to mediate on our behalf, to the
Honorable Court of Parliament, for the obtaining of our so dear and near
concernments, without the enjoyment whereof even our lives will be
uncomfortable to us.

And although this our address may seem strange or hazardous unto you, yet we
doubt not but the justice of our desires will preserve you. As for our own
parts, we ars resolved in the mediation thereof to assist you, to the uttermost
of our powers, etc.

This Petition of the County of Buckingham, was presented to his Excellency at
St. Albans, the fifteenth of June present, by about One hundred of the
Petitioners, with the subscription of about One thousand of the Inhabitants of
that County thereunto; at the delivery whereof, the Presenter expressed himself
to his Excellency as follows:

May it please your Excellency,
APprehending a necessity for the sudden furtherance of all lawful means which
may conduce to the removing our Countries and the Kingdoms grievances, this our
present address unto your Excellency is not so general as otherwise it might
have been; yet we are confident we may fully discharge our Countries real and
high esteem of your unwearyed and faithful endeavors for the kingdoms peace.
And if your Excel: shall further please to improve your utmost interest in the
Honorable Court of Parliament, for the crowning of your former atchivements
with the future freedom of our Nation, we and our Posterities shall acknowledge
you: And if any disaffected to the Common good, shall endeavor by means hereof
to render your person or Army odious to the Parliament or Kingdom, we cannot
but look upon that as an injury of common concernment, and them as enemies to
the public Peace. And none shall be more ready to bring such to the legal and
just deserved censures, then we who have in this Petition which we humbly
present unto you, subscribed by our selves, yours and the Kingdoms faithful
servants.

To the Right Honorable his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight. Captain General
of the Forces raised for the Preservation of the Kingdom;
The humble Petition of diverse Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of Hertford.
May it please your Excellency,
WE do with much thankfulness acknowledge the great care and pains that have
been undergone by those our faithful and well-betrusted Worthies of Parliament,
who even in the saddest of times, when deserted by many of their own Members,
have not spared the hazard of their lives, estates and fortunes, for the
preservation of the just Liberties, Immunities and Franchises of the Freeborn
Subjects of this Kingdom, being desperately and strongly invaded by a powerful
and Malignant Party; and have also made many solemn Protestations and
Declarations of their aims, intentions and purposes, whereby we have been
greatly encouraged to yield all cheerful and due assistance in so necessary a
work; Yet now to our great grief observing, by reason (as we conceive) of the
machinations and contrivances of some desperately affected to the weal and
quiet of the Public in general, and to the Honor of your ever Honored Army in
particular, many obstructions daily do intervene and fall in, whereby both they
and we, notwithstanding the still real intentions of our forenamed Worthies,
there is yet clearly debarred the fruition of those our often promised, much
wished for, prayed for, fought for Rights and Privileges, whereof we had well
hoped long since to have been partakers.

Wherefore we your said Petitioners do most humbly entreat and beseech your
Excellency (whom God has eminently and highly honored, and we well know to
have a tender and compassionate care over the distresses of this miserable
afflicted Kingdom) To use your utmost endeavors, and withal expedition, before
the Disbanding of the Army now under your Excellencies Command, those
Firebrands and Incendiaries, who have endeavored to raise new Divisions in the
Kingdom, or by their slanderous tongues to fix undeserved Reproaches on the
ARMY, may be brought to condign punishment; and that we your Petitioners, with
the rest of your faithful Brethren in the Kingdom, may have a certain relief in
our Grievances hereunto annexed.

And, as in duty bound, we shall not fail to yield our best assistance with our
Persons, Purses and Prayers, etc. 1. That diverse Counties and Corporations in
this Kingdom, viz. Devon, Cornwall, Wales, etc. formerly in open Hostility, and
for the present wholly disaffected to the proceeds of Parliament, have
notwithstanding retained equally with the most cordial to the State, their
Privileges of Electing Members, a thing very destructive to the Safety of the
Commonwealth, which is the chief end of Parliaments, and one main cause of many
present Grievances; Wherefore we desire, That such Elections may be revoked,
and the places declared incapable of any such Privilege, during the Sessions
of this Parliament, or until such time as it shall appear, that their former
enmity and rancor against the Parliament be laid aside. 2. That whereas the
Honorable Houses have raised up the expectations of the well-affected, by
promising the improvement of their time and care, to apply Remedies against the
oppressing Evils, as appears more fully in their Declaration of the 17. of
April, 1646. yet the said Commons have to their great grief been frustrated of
their hopes, and in stead of being relieved, have (to their great grief) been
vexed, imprisoned, and other ways molested. 3. Our Petitions to the Parliament
are not, as in former times, either received or answered, whereby no redress
can be had to our pressing Grievances, as in particular those against Tithes,
That for the enlargement of our fellow-Commoners, long (and as we humbly
conceive) unduly detained in Prison. 4. The putting in of the Malignants,
Neuters and persons (who have not shown any affection, or done any service for
the Parliament, during these Troubles that have layen upon the Kingdom) into
places of Honor, Trust and Profit, as Governors of Towns, Castles, Forts,
Justices of Peace, Commissioners of Excize, Committees of Accounts, etc.
whereby the most cordial Friends of the Parliament are slighted, disregarded,
and upon very slender causes Indicted, Committed, Imprisoned. 5. That the Body
of the Kingdom consisting much of Copyholders, who have for the most part been
very cordial and faithful to the Parliament, may not now be left fineable at
the will of the Lord, in regard the generality of them have been very
Malignant, and much disaffected to Parliamentary or through Reformation, and
from whom they cannot but expect very severe dealing. 6. That all men who have
received any State moneys, as well Parliament Men as others, may be called to
an Account for such moneys; and that Committees (not as now for the most part
Neuters and Mangnants) but of approved fidelity, may be Elected for that
purpose. 7. That one Cordwel, a man of a most notorious lewd life and
conversation, and withal a most desperate Malignant, did procure a Warrant for
the apprehending three Soldiers under the Command of Colonel Alban Cox, brought
them before one King of St. Albans, a Justice of Peace, where their said
Colonel did appear with them, and made it very clear and apparent (...) the
said Justice, That what they did was by command from the^^ Captain, and no more
then what was expressly contained without their Ordinances, which the said
Justice did acknowledge, (...) was fully satisfied in their Ordinances
authorizing them thereunto; yet notwithstanding the said King would have
committed them to Hertford Goal, had not their said Colonel became bound for
their appearing at the next Sessions; and the said Cordwel did prefer a Bill of
Indictment against them, and had it not been for two or three honest men that
served of the (...) Jury, the said Bill had been found to the great peril of
the live of the said Soldiers, there being but little favor or mercy to be had
for poor Soldiers by the Justices of our County, etc.


This Petition of the County of Hertford, was presented to (...) Excellency at
St. Albans, the 16 of June present, by above T^ hundred Knights, Gentlemen and
Freeholders of the County of Hertford, with the Subscription of above One
thousand two hundred of the Inhabitants.

FINIS.

