A LETTER From His EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax, TO The Honoble William
Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, Conceraing the Abuses
and Injuries done to certain Godly Ministers placed in Livings by Authority of
PARLIAMENT.

Together with an Ordinance of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament,
for preventing the like for the future.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Aug. 26. 1647.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
Mr. SPEAKER,
HAving received several Complaints against diverse Delinquent Ministers, who
have abused my self and the Council of War, by publishing a false Pamphlet in
the Name of the Army, whereby many Ministers settled by Ordinance of Parliament,
have been disquieted, molested and turned out of possession of their Houses by
force and arms, having also their goods possessed and spoiled, some taking the
Corn upon the Gleab; and this practice of theirs having greatly disturbed the
peace of the Kingdom, and may be a great inconvenience, if not timely
prevented; I do therefore humbly desire, That you will be pleased to present
the Petitions and Papers enclosed (of those Ministers who have been thus
injured) unto the Honorable House, that their conditions may be taken into
consideration speedily for reparation; and that these principal Offenders may
be questioned for their said Miscarriages, that others may be deterred for the
future from the like practices. I lately put forth a Declaration against the
said Pamphlet; but fearing that may not be effectual, I do humbly recommend
them to the consideration of the House, and remain,

Kingston, Aug. 19. 1647. Your humble Servant, T. Fairfax.

Die Lunae, 23 Augusti, 1647.
An Ordinance for keeping in godly Ministers placed in Livings by Authority of
PARLIAMENT.
Whereas diverse Ministers in the several Counties of this Kingdom for
notorious Scandals and Delinquency, have been put out of their Livings by
Authority of Parliament, and Godly, Learned and Orthodox Ministers placed in
their rooms: And whereas the said Scandalous and Delinquent Ministers by force,
or other ways, have entered upon the Churches, and gained the possession of the
Parsonage-houses, Tithes, and Profits thereunto belonging, and have obstructed
the payment of the Tithes and other Profits due by the Parishioners unto the
Ministers placed in the said Churches by Authority aforesaid.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do therefore Order and Ordain,
and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That all Sheriffs, Majors,
Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, and Committees of
Parliament in the several Counties, Cities and places within this Kingdom, do
forthwith apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, all such Ministers as by
Authority of Parliament have been put out of any church or chapel within this
Kingdom, or any other person or persons who have entered upon any such Church or
Chapel, or gained the possession of such Parsonage-houses, Tithes and Profits
thereunto belonging, or have obstructed the payment of the Tithes and other
Profits due by the Parishioners to the said Ministers there placed by Authority
of Parliament, or Sequestrators appointed, where no Ministers are settled to
receive the same, and all such persons as have been Ayders, Abettors or
Assisters in the premises, and commit them to prison, there to remain until
such satisfaction be made unto the several Ministers placed by the said
Authority of Parliament for his or their damages sustained, as to the said
Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, or
Committees of Parliament, or any two of them shall appear to be just, upon
hearing and proof made upon the Oath of two sufficient Witnesses (which they or
any two of them are hereby authorized to administer) who are likewise required
to restore, settle, and quiet the possession in such Ministers as have bin
placed by the said Authority of Parliament; and they or any two of them have
hereby power to raise Trained Bands, or any other Forces within the said
several Counties, Cities, and places, to put this Ordinance in execution; And
the said Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants,
and Committees of Parliament respectively, are hereby required to take
effectual course, according to the several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament
in that behalf made, that all men do pay their Tithes or Profits due unto the
said respective Ministers. And it is hereby further Ordered and Ordained, That
the Committee appointed for plundered Ministers, have power to see this
Ordinance put in execution. And it is further Ordained, That the Committee of
Complaints do give the like remedy to all such Ministers put in by the said
Authority of Parliament, and Sequestrators of the profits against whom any
Action shall be brought by any such Delinquent, or scandalous Ministers, or any
other claiming by or under them, for their Livings, Tithes and Profits, as they
are authorized unto by any Order or Ordinance in other cases.

It is lastly Ordered and Ordained, That if any such Scandalous or Delinquent
Mlnister, put out as aforesaid, their Ayders or Abettors, shall at any time
hereafter disturb, molest or hinder such Minister as is put into such Church or
Chapel as aforesaid, in the exercising of the Office of his Ministry, upon
proof thereof made upon the Oath of two Witnesses, before the said Sheriffs,
Majors, Bailiffs, Justices of Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, or Committees of
Parliament, or any two of them, It shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, or
Committees of Parliament, or any two of them, to commit such Offender or
Offenders, to prison for one Month, so often as he or they shall so offend.

FINIS.

