A DECLARATION Against all PROFESSION AND PROFESSORS THAT Have not the Life of
what they Profess, from the Righteous seed of God; whom the World, Priests, and
People, scornfully calls QUAKERS, Who are in that Life that the holy Men of God
were in, and witness that power that made them to Tremble and quake, and shook
the earth, and threw it down; which the World, Priests, People, and Professors,
having the words declared from this power and life, but not it, scoffs and
scorns at, but this is our Riches.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Blackspread Eagle at the west end of
Paul's, 1655.

A Declaration against all Profession and Professors that have not the life of
what they do Profess, from the righteous seed of God whom the world, Priests
and People scornfully calls Quakers, who are in that life that the holy men of
God were in, and witness that power that made them to tremble, and Quake, and
Shook the Earth and threw it down, which the World, Priests, People and
Professors, having the words declared from this power and life but not it,
scorns at, but this is our riches.
THe word of the living God to fly abroad to the light of Christ in all
consciences, that with it the word may be witnessed, and their minds may be
guided up to God and kept up to Christ, and it loved, in which light is unity,
that all that which is contrary to this light may with it be hewn down, judged
down and condemned.

All whose minds turn from this light into the earth, into the lust, into the
cursed speaking, into the presumption and rauntings; all such ranters with the
light which is eternal do we judge and condemn eternally, for with the light
they are condemned from God, and all their beggarly lusts, in which light we
have unity, which light does not change, and with it all such Ranters and
rauntings must be limited, bound and chained, and for judgment, and with the
eternal to be brought under.

And all their great swelling words, and all their boasting of their communion
with God and Christ; when their communion is with darkness, and they
themselves the servants of corruption, with that which is pure and eternal,
they are seen and judged, and all their Imagined liberty, which they are got
into, which arises out of the earthly part: by the light they are seen, that
they have slain the witnesses which declared against all unrighteousness; and
now their understandings are darkened, and the eye put out, and the savor lost;
and now they call all things one; light, and darkness one; and now their glory
is to commit sin with greediness: and says they are redeemed into liberty:
with the Invisible eye of the Lord, they are seen and condemned by the light:
and now their wills is at liberty, speaks, acts, and thinks, and the Son of
perdition is head, and now their Ayrie minds are puffed up, and dreams of a
power to come, but have slighted the day of their visitation, and has turned
the grace of God into wantonness; and trampled under foot the blood of the Son
of God, and so are all condemned by all the Children of the light: and all
their filthy practices we deny: and they must be trodden in the wine press of
the wrath of God, without the City, as a just recompense of their reward, who
blaspheme and causes to be blasphemed, the name of the living God; but the
eternal power of the living God, which is made manifest in the children of
light, has seen and do see them and judge them by that which everlasting,
that they shall go into utter darkness and down into the pit with all the
uncircumcised.

And all such that turn from the light which is eternal, and does not change
into the earth, into the lust, and their earthly ends, who would Level others,
Levelling with their earthly nature, and speaking of the things of God through
the lusts of the flesh, with the eternal light are all such actions and
practices condemned; and who go under a color of Levelling we deny, which are
for the earth, and which is to draw peoples minds into the earth, with the
light and power which brings out of the earth, do we all them and that deny,
but that which overturnes the earth, and brings out of it we own, and in it
we have unity, which brings into the right order all the creation, and the
right use of all the creatures, throweh down the Mountains, and exalts the
valleys, raises up the just and throws down the unjust, but that which would
have ease and filthiness, and draws from the light which is pure, which will
keep all diligent to serve God, and to level the filthy nature and judge it
down, we deny, and them that stain the earth and cumbers the ground with the
eternal light which brings the mind up out of the earth into oneness in the
light, we judge and comprehend; and here is the cross of Christ to keep the
mind out of the earth up to God, with the light of God and with the light to
see it is the Lords, and with it to receive wisdom from God to labor, and to
order and rule in he earth, this we own, this we honor and set upp in our
souls, which lays low, and throws down and condemns and judges all
filthiness, beastlynesse, and the liberty in the flesh, for who, witness the
power of the Lord and the light of God it throws down that nature among them
whom the world scornfully calls Quakers; But such that dwell in the light, whose
minds are guided up to God to receive the wisdom from God, to labor in the
Creation, whose minds are kept out of the earth, above the earth, up to God,
and are come into the wisdom of God, to labor with a single eye, and with a
single heart, to serve one another in love, such Levellers that levels down the
corruption and the filth, with us are honored.

And all such which have been enlightened with the light of Christ, and not
knowing nor abiding in the daily cross of Christ, which crucifies the world,
and the lusts, and brings to wait on Christ for power and strength, to cleanse
the mind, to purify the heart, and to witness the life of Christ, have gotten
the truth in motion, and in their vain minds study to comprehend the truth, and
boast of words, but do not abide in the doctrine of Christ, to be comprehended
into the truth, and to p ssesse the life and substance, but have their wills at
liberty, sporting themselves, in the day time, talking of a Virgin state, and
separating themselves, man from the wise outwardly, but living in riot and
excess, in laughter and folly, in pride and lust, no separation being made in
the heart the precious from the vile, the clean from the unclean, nor walking
in the steps of Christ, but talk of high things in their ayrie imaginations,
without life, without power, without savor, promising liberty to others, but
they themselves serving the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the Eye, and the
pride of life, all such virgins which are harlots, and their virgin state with
the light of Christ and the life, which brings out of the lusts out of the
earth and redeems to God, and makes pure the heart from all the defilements of
women, and to follow the Lamb to the Virgin state whose garments are washed in
the blood of the Lamb, where nothing that is not pure can enter, are they seen
and comprehended, and their estate known to be in the flesh, and with the life
which is eternal, which is not of this world nor in this world, which is raised
up through death to the world, and all things of the world are they judged, and
with the light which comes from Christ, which leads to the life invisible,
eternal, out of all visible and carnal things are they condemned.

And all such which are turned from the light of Jesus Christ within, and
follows their own spirits and conceivings, and imaginations, and what they
study in their own brain of those words that were from the light declared with
the light, all such are comprehended and condemned, their race and their
compass is known and seen with the light, and all such we do deny, and in the
light we have unity which does them condemn.

And all such which are turned from the light which Jesus Christ has
enlightened withal, whose minds are in books, and so boasts in their talk of
others words which were declared, from the light and speak high and bigg
swelling words, and has men's persons in admiration, all such we do deny with
the light of Christ Jesus, which with it they are all to be condemned, which
light is according to that of God in all Consciences, and to it are we manifest.

And all such which do observe the commands which Christ has spoken, the
Prophets have spoken, and the Apostles spoke, and are not led with the light
which comes from Christ, with the light are they and all their taken on
commands condemned, which are taken on in that nature contrary to the light, as
the Jews and the Pharisees did, and such that cry up the Ordinances of God, the
Ordinances of Christ, the Temple of the Lord, the Ministers of the Gospel, the
preaching of the word; and are not led to know these things with the light
which Jesus Christ has enlightened withal in particular, with this light
wherewith he has enlightened every one that come into the world, all they are
to be condemned and all their Ordinances and commands, and are such as use
their tongues, which acts in the nature contrary to the light, and are not led
with an eternal principle of life, to know those words, which were given from
the life, so with it they are judged, and the light with it they are condemned;
but all such who are are led with the light, and walk in the light, into the
Ordinances of Christ, his commands, and with the light come to witness the
word and the Gospel, such we own such we witness and honor in our souls.

And all such which turn from the light of Christ, which is given to every one
to lead up to Christ them that wait in it, and direct to Christ them that in it
seek to find him and, pretend to be seekers and waiters, and meet together, and
there talk of seeking and waiting, but have not their minds turned to the
light, nor that eye opened which sees Christ which is the light, which is
within, but seeks without, and looks without, seeking the living among the
dead, looking for things without, and a day and power to come hereafter, but
neglect the day of their visitation which is to day, and not waiting in the
light, but talking from their vain wisdom of waiting on Christ, with the light
which comes from Christ, which shuts out the wisdom and the reason of man, and
puts a stop to the forward will, and stops the running mind, and brings to
stand still in the light, and to wait on Christ, whose kingdom is within and
comes with observation, who is the substance and the life of all figures and
shadows, are they all seen and condemned.

And all such which are turned from the light which Jesus Christ has
enlightened withal, and are in their carnal mind, and the carnal mind
imitates crosses, and forms crosses and Images, and worships the name of the
Saints, with the light which is a cross to the ground of these crosses; is he
the founder of these Images and his Images to be condemned, and the cross is
to the ground of all these crosses, which is his condemnation and all his
works, he that has the ear let him hear, and the eye which is the light let
him stand still and look and see that which God is confounding, dwelling in
the light is a cross to the ground of all the worlds crosses, Papists Ranters,
Levellers, and all who are in Notions, whose minds are turned from the light of
Christ Jesus into the earth, such are enemies to the cross and with the light
they are all condemned, and in this cross do we rejoice which takes away the
foundation of the world, for the Lamb of God is slain while it is standing, so
the cross is to that, that which shall change and does change and pass away
and have an end, with that which shall have no end, he that can receive me let
him, it that I have unity, and that is it which reads all words that are
declared from the life.

And all who makes a profession of Christ and God, and are drunkards, and are
covetous and Idolaters, and adulterers, whore-mongers, with the light which
lets see all these things to be contrary to God, with it we do them and their
profession deny, for in the light is our unity which brings to deny all deeds
of darkness, which is the condemnation of all who lives in the flesh, and
follows the lusts of it I speak; and it I witness which shall condemn all such
practices.

And all such which are turned from the light of Jesus Christ within, and makes
a profession of the words proceeded from the light in others, and of Christ's
words the light and the Apostles who were witnesses of the light and had this
light in them, and have gotten their words to talk of, and follows Bowls, and
Cards, and Dice, and Shovelboard, and Tables, and delighting in Music, Harps,
and Viols, which are acted in the first nature, Bearebaitings, Horse-racings,
Cudgel plays, Football plays, Leapings, Dancings, Wrestlings, Fencings, all
such practices, boasters, which are such Ranters we deny, as knowing with the
light all this to be condemned, and all professors which profess God and
Christ and act such things we deny, as knowing them to be the works of the
flesh, which are to be condemned with the light.

And all such that follows Hawking, Hunting, Cock-fightings, Stage Plays, and
all other plays whatsoever, Tennis, Shooting, and other exercises to recreat
the vain carnal mind which is out of the fear of God, and lives in the lust
of the flesh, and the lusts of the eye, and yet makes a profession, and all
such we deny who live in the light of Jesus Christ, and with it we see all
these works of the flesh and lust, and vainly are to be condemned with it.

And all such that makes a profession of Christ Jesus, and are deceitful in
their trading, in their buyings and sellings, in their merchandise, which are
more then yea, and nay, and are in oaths, all such professors stink before the
Lord God, and with the light which comes from Christ which brings to yea and
nay, we all such deny, for in it is our unity, which brings to pure
comunication, and to the holy conversation, then words are savoury and seasoned
with grace, and all such filthy practices we know, are with the light to be
condemned.

And all such teachers which are turned from the light of Jesus Christ, and
keeps their people from it, and so tells people of a mediate call, mediate
means, that the steeple-house is the Church, Hebrew, Greek and Latin is the
Original, which Pilate had, and the natural man may have the words declared
from the life into the natural language yet never know the Original, yet
never knew the Original from whence they come, and Matthew Mark Luke and John
is the Gospel, and sprinkling Infants is the baptism, and bread and wine is
the communion, such draws forth the immediate to the mediate, and tell them its
the means, so with the immediate are all such judged, and the everlasting
Gospel witnessed, and the comunion known in the spirit, and the baptism in
the spirit, and the Church in God, and the immediate call, but all the mediate
we deny, with the imediate, and see them to be carnal beggarly worldly
rudiments and wither, and to be condemned with the light which shall never
wither.

And all such teachers which are turned from the light of Jesus Christ we deny,
which seek for their gain from their quarter, bear rule by their means, are
hirelings, and seeks for the fleece, and makes a prey upon the people, and sue
them at the law, and are called of men Master, have the chiefest place in the
assemblies, and stand praying in the Synagogues, and takes gifts and rewards,
the wages of unrighteousness, and are erred from the spirit, as Balaam was,
with the spirit all such we deny, who are in the way of Core, gainsaies the
truth, and in the way of Cain turned from the pure command, and are in envy
with the light which Jesus Christ has enlightened withal, we see such as the
Prophets saw, Christ saw, and the Apostles saw, so with the same light as they
saw withal, we do see that which they testified against, and that which they
denied we deny, for in it we have unity, and all them we deny (praised be God)
which we see are for condemnation with the light.

And all such which are turned from this pure light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened withal, and makes a profession of Christ, of God, and lives in the
lust, their minds turned into the earth, in the fashions of the world, adorning
themselves with gold, plattings of the Hair, Broydered hoods and Uailes, and
round attire like the moon, which can scarce tell how to walk upon the earth,
envying one another, and serving lusts and pleasures, sporting themselves,
feasting and rioting and professing liberty to all these things, in all these
things, these are such that the Apostle spoke of, who while they profess
themselves liberty are the servants of corruption, and all such prrfession, and
all such liberty we do deny, for with the light we do it see, and that liberty
must be limited and condemned, for such are they that crucify the Son of God,
which who are made free, are made free by the Son of God, from the bondage of
corruption, then the creature shall not groan, which while the bondage of
Corruption the Creation groans; who are servants of Corruption, turn from the
light, and with the light they are to be condemned, and all that liberty, so
all such professors and profession, and such liberty we do deny.

And all such that are turned from the pure light of Jesus Christ which is
eternal, and have got a fained love, a fained profession, a fained humility,
and a customary false sighing and false groaning, all such with the light we do
deny, as seeing they are for condemnation but true humility, true love, and
sighing and groaning we own, which is in it self, its self.

And all such that are turned from the pure light which Jesus Christ has
enlightened withal, and makes a profession of God and Christ, and his words,
and sues one another at the law, and strive about the earthly things, and
wrangle about earthly things, and strive about things that are changeable, and
vexing and fretting one another about such things in Courts, Assizes, and
Benches and Suites, here you declare where your minds are, and what they are
upon, and to, and here you declare that you are out of the doctrine of Christ,
and are they that are turned from the light and all such filthy profession and
professors, we utterly deny with the light, which is your condemnation.

And all such teachers and people that are turned from the pure light of Christ
within them, and turns the words that were declared from the light into Rhyme
and meeter, prophesies, Prayers, Cryings, Tremblings, makes songs of them to
stir up the carnal mind, some part they sing, some part they take and make a
prayer of, that part they turn into Rhyme and Meeter and sing then they doff
their Hats, which when they read they keep them on; here they worship the work
of their own hands, another part of the same mind goes to expound and get money
withal, all such as thus abuse the Scripture with their carnal minds, and
makes them bend to their own fancies we do utterly deny, for the spirit we
witness that gave forth the Scriptures, and we own the words again, and they
are ours, and all such prayers, and all such singers, and all such preachers
and expounders, with that nature that acts contrary to the light, with the
light all such are to be condemned, with the light we see that condemnation is
upon all such, in which light we have unity which gathers our hearts together
to God, which brings us to witness praying, to witness singing in the spirit,
which spirit opens the Scriptures without any private interpretation.

And all ye that are in wars are turned from the light, from whence rise wars
but from the lust, which with the light all wars and that warring nature is to
be condemned, for it will lead before wars was, into another kingdom which is
not of this world, that which is turned from the sight, wars for the
kingdoms of the world, but he that is guided with the light, comes to war
against the kingdoms of the world, and with it comes to be led before wars
was, and to you this is the word of the living God, he that can receive it let
him.

And all such which are turned from the pure eternal light, which Jesus Christ
has enlightened withal, and are in strife about earthly things and Customs,
and Laws, and Acts, and one Nations Custom would bring another nation to bend
to his Nations Custom, and one man to have his fancy to reign over another
man's fancy, and one man's opinion over another man's opinion, here you are
making profelites with the nature out of the truth; And thou that do reign to
gather all nations under thee, and have all bow to thy image, remember
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, of the many languages of the many Nations, he
lost his kingdom; with the light which comes from Christ which is eternal,
which brings out of all Languages into one Language, all this is to be
condemned and judged down, which light brings to witness another King, Christ
Jesus, whose kingdom and dominion endures for ever, who dashes to pieces all
those dead stones, and gathers together the living stones, who does redeem out
of Languages, out of People, out of tongues, out of kindreds, makes Priests and
Kings to reign upon the earth, praised be God, Christ Jesus is, come to reign;
and coming to reign, and with this light which lets see all these thing
conscrary to the light, Customs, Traditions, Opinions who live in, and yet
make a profession of God and Christ, and profess liberty, and are delivered to
act all such things, are in the nature contracted to God, and with the light
them and all those things we do deny.

And all such that turn from the light of Christ Jesus and lives in the
earthly wisdom, and would have others bow down to them, and would have the
earth honored, and the earthly honored, and yet profess Christ and God, and
are in the evil communication and teaches it; that you must not say yea at
first word, but nay and then take a thing, that is manners; here you are in the
evil and your manners, are corrupt and all your manners I deny, for evil
communication does corrupt the good manners, and thou that art more in thy
communications then yea and nay, thou art in the evil thou art not in the good
manners, but in the evil comunication corrupted, o with the light thou art to
be condemned, thy communication and thy manners, and thy profession to be
deceit, and a lying tongue is found in thee, which is abhored with God.

And all ye Merchants who have great traffic by Sea and Land, and all ye
which do change the creatures, which are above yea and nay, if ye make a
profession of Christ. we deny you, your manners is corrupt and you and your
profession is to be condemned out of the doctrine of Christ, therefore silence
all flesh, before the Lord God, who makes a profession of the Lord Jesus Christ
his words, and Apostles words, and Prophets words and are contrary to his
doctrine, with his light you are to be condemned from him to it in you all, I
speak which lets you see your communication and conversation; for being yea and
nay in your communication here you are all kept in the good manners, you are
all trained up to and in the holy conversation which is without spot, and the
conversation must be in heaven, and the conversation is in Heaven who comes to
walk here.

And to all you which are turned from the light, the word of the Lord, I do
charge you and command you in the presence of the living God, ye Merchants ye
Traffiquers, ye Shopkeepers, ye Tradesmen of all sorts whatsoever, to the
light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences, wherewith he has enlightened
you take heed, and it love and mind, that with it you may see in all your
common occasions when you are more then yea, and nay, ye go into the evil, ye
go into your self ends, yea go into the corrupt manners, ye go into the
filthy communications, and the wicked conversation, and lay aside all guile and
deceit, and speak not that of your commodities which they are not, to
dissemble, to lie, and to cheat and deceive the simple to get gain to your
selves, but make your price reasonable and be at a word to the poor and to the
rich, to the wise and the simple, and what the word is let it stand, let your
yea be yea, least a lie be found in your mouths, and let all your Trade and
Trafique and Merchandise be for those things that are useful and servicable in
the creation and not to feed the lusts, or delight the vain mind, that ye may
not burden the Creation but may be serviceable in your genereation and not to
feed, he that walks otherwise, and makes a p^ofession of God and Christ his
Religion is viane, and his profession is abomination to the Lord, and with the
light he is condemned from amongst all the children of the light, you that
profess what you are not ye, are Hyprocrites, and have not the life that gave
forth the Scriptures, therefore with it you are judged; Awake awake all people
and come unto the light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened you, that with
it you may see what you do profess, and I charge you and command you in the
presence of the living God to profess no more then you do profess and walk
in.

And all such who are turned from the pure light of Christ into vain jangling,
vain contention and strife about those words that were declared from the light
and life; and jangling about those words that were declared from the life and
light, with the life and light are all such judged and condemned, and those
words seen plainly that from it were given forth, and all such that would go
about to make senses of those words, that were given forth from the light and
life, with the light that leads out of sense up to God, from whence words did
proceed all, they and their senses are condemned with the light, and their
profession in that nature that acts contrary to the light.

And all such that are turned from the light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened withal, and do respect persons, such are out of the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and profess dominion and dignity, and respect persons, such
cast the law of God behind their backs, which respects no man's persons, such
would have flattering titles, and give flattering titles to man, such are not
respected with the maker the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and such do not respect
him, as it is written in Job.

And all such that make a profession and live in that nature, its openly seen
they are out of the doctrine of Christ, but the law we own, which is perfect
according to that of God in all consciences, which respects no man's person, and
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ we own which is without respect of Persons.

And all such which are turned from the light of Christ and makes a profession
of his words, and lives in bending and bowing one to another, and in it taking
Pride Cap and Knee, and he that does not deny the light, and worship with them
in that worship, such are hated and envied, and scorned and scoffed at, now
with the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened withal, which brings us to
deny all the worships of the world, which brings us to worship God in spirit
and in truth with it all such respects and such profession are condemned. And
all such which turns from the light of Christ Jesus within and hears it not but
lives in hardness of heart, and Oppression and Pride, and Ambition gathering
the earth together and makes themselves Lords over the creatures, and oppress
with great fines and rents, and live in fullness Dives like and feed themselves
so fat they can hardly go, and with their clothes they dress themselves,
that they can hardly tell how to walk, when the other scarce have Bread or
Clothes, and yet they make a profession of Christ Jesus, and say that they
exalt him, here the devil is exalted the King of Pride and Oppression, and the
lying tongue is found in their mouths. And such men gets the earth under their
hands, in whom the devourer rules, and the curse is upon it, and keep it under
their hands from the people from dressing of it, and it does not yield her
encreas; and none who are here waits for the Restoration of the Creation, but
some Creatures are lost for want of the Creatures, and some creatures are
destroyed for want of ordering, where this wisdom reigns and rules in the
earthly, which is earthly, sensual and divelish, in the nature which acts
contrary to the light, with the light are all such professors to be condemned,
and with it they are seen, they have not the life that gave forth the
scriptures; such cannot witness Christ Jesus but by hear say, such swells in
the vanity, such swells against the poor, such swells against the needy, and the
contrite heart, such despises them who walk in the fear of God, and are growing
into the life that gave forth the Scriptures, such professors and profession we
deny, they have long cumbred the ground, such are harlotted from the truth, and
such gets the earth under their hands, Commons, Wastes and Forest, and Fels,
and Mores, and Mountains, and lets it lie wast, and calls themselves Lords of
it, and keeps it from the pe ple, when so many are ready to starve and beg;
with the light that comes from Christ, which brings to Christ, all such that
are destroyers of the Creatures of the Creation, are condemned, and all earthly
minds, and all who for self ends acts contrary to the light; And all whose
minds are single, and with the light guided, and receives the pure wisdom from
above, such are fit to order and rule, to give the earth its liberty, that it
may come to enjoy her Saboths and yield her increase: But, all such as make a
profession of the words declared from the light, and are in the selfish
principle, such are not fit to rule, that are in the wisdom which is earthly,
but with the light which leads into the fear of God, which is the beginning of
the pure wisdom, all that is to be condemned, by which all things comes to be
ordered, and by nothing that is earthly, but with the just all that is judged,
to the light in all your consciences I speak, that with it all your minds may
be turned to God, and come to grow into the life, that gave forth the
Scriptures, that every one may come to possess what you do profess, for all
profession whatsoever the manner of it is without the life, Opinions, Sects,
they are all in that nature that acts contrary to the light, and with the light
which never changes, all such we do deny.

And all such that turn from the light, that turn from the command of God,
turn into Cains way, and all such as have had mighty openings by the spirit,
and have erred from it and then such set up to be teachers for gift, and
rewards, and wages, all such we do deny, who goes after the error of Balaam,
such are they that lay stumbling blocks before them that dwell in their tents,
such are for the sword, such their fruit wither, therefore to the light in you
all I speak which never changes, that with it all that may be judged with that
which never changes for all that we utterly deny.

And all such that are turned from the light of Christ within, which say they
are guifted men and experienced men, and goes forth into the w^rld and (...)
people they are guifted, and have so much a piece for speaking their gift,
here they are liars, they have not received the gift of God, which cannot be
bought and sold for money, and with the light an such are to be condemned which
does never change.

And all such as are turned from the light of Christ Jesus, which have gotten
words in their brain, and calls them experiences, and have had some flashes,
and have some conceivings and let one another of these experiences, sometimes
with a Tobacco pipe in their mouths taking Tobacco in the lust and sometime as
they are drinking in in alehouses, these are the evil beasts which the
scriptures speaks of, that live in the lusts of the flesh these are such as
defile the flesh, and speak through the lusts of the flesh, all such
experiences, and such meetings, and such declaring of experiences, with the
light and life that gave forth the scriptures, whose words were savoury and
seasoned, we utterly deny, and witness the light in which we have union and
fellowship one with another, and with God, and the Son, who testified against
all the world, that the works of it were evil, and with his light we do the
same.

And all such that do not own the light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened
withal, to guide them, to lead them into the life, that gave forth the
scriptures, but with that nature that hates the light, do make the profession
of the scripture, and would be satisfied in things of the spirit and the
scripture; that is it which must go empty away; and that is he which would
know, and not do, and that is he which is approved of men, but not of God, and
this is he whose prayers are abomination to God, with his light which comes
from him are all these seen, and with it they are condemned, and all such we
deny, who dwells in the light which comes from God, which is eternal; the
father of light.

And all such which do not walk in the light which comes from Jesus Christ,
but are turned from it, and judges for rewards, such their eye is blinded which
is the light, with the earth. And all such that takes tithes of the people,
which denies the unchangeable priest, and holds up the figure and brings Caesar
their cloak to hold up the figure, and yet make a profession of Christ, oh
horrible filthy, are men past feeling, is the sensible part gone, all such
profesors of Christ and God, such cunning deceivers which makes words their
cloak, with the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened us withal we deny,
which brings us to witness the unchangeable, with it we do witness the
figure of Christ in its place, and with it Coesar in his place shall have his
due, and with it we do witness the end of the figure Christ Jesus the
substance. And all such as hold up the figure, we do utterly deny, as seeing
and knowing they are to be condemned who live in those changeable things, with
that which does not change, and to you this is the word of God, and the law we
do own which is according to the light of Christ in every man's conscience,
which law respects no man's person.

And all such which profess themselves Christian Magistrates, and say they own
Christ, and they do exalt him, and are in envy and persecution, and persecute
them that declare against deceit, and pride, and lust, and such as the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles cried against, all such Professors and
Profession which is acted in that nature contrary to the light, all this is
with the light to be condemned; for with the light it is to be seen to be out
of the doctrine of Christ; and all you that are there in such actions, you have
a name that you live, but you are dead, with the life you are judged, and with
the light condemned, and such we deny with the light in which is the unity.

And all you which do not wait to be guided by the light of Christ that with it
your minds may be led and directed to God to stand in his Council, but are
making Laws and Acts and Bonds in that nature that acts contrary to this
light in the Conscience, and then makes a profession, with this nature, of
those words that were declared from the eternal spirit of God, and so lives in
these things that are acted contrary to the light which is eternal, now with
the light which is eternal and never changes is all this comprehended
fathomed and condemned, and the Law of God witnessed which is perfect, which
endures for ever; which who walks in it, shall grow up as a free planted by the
River of water, whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but you that are wicked
are not so, you are turned from the light, your fruit withers, and you are
tossed too and fro like the chafe, for you are turned from that which is
eternal to the changeable in the changeable things, for the Law of God serves
all ages, which is according to that of God in every man's conscience, which is
the same in all ages, it endures for ever.

And all you that are not led by the light of Jesus Christ, which he has
enlightened you withal, which has the letter which from it was declared; which
are such teachers and professors which say none shall have the infallible
judgment, none shall come to have the eternal spirit of God as the Apostles
had; all your profession we do deny with the same eternal spirit that gave
forth the scriptures, and with the light all such are condemned, whatsoever
profession they are of, Sect or Opinion, that walk not in the light, and have
not the life that gave forth the Scriptures, with the light they are all
condemned, wherein we have unity.

And all you that are turned from the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened
you withal, though you may profess the words declared from the light, and
their commands which they obeyed, and yet not led by tht same light, with it
the light you are to be condemned.

And you that are turned from the light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened
you withal, you are in the self righteousness, you are turned from the Lord
our righteousness, who are out of the light, and hate the light, and with the
light you are to be condemned, and your righteousness.

From him who is a lover of your souls, a lover of the Seed, a lover of the
Creation for the establishing of the righteous Law, and setting up of
righteousness, and cleansing the land of evil doers, which the righteous law
takes hold upon, which is perfect acccording to that of God in all consciences,
and is against such as act contrary to the light of God in the conscience, who
is a lover of peace and unity, in that which never changes, in that which
comprehends time, in that which sees out of time, from which love proceeds,
where all the children of God in the light meet in one judgment and mind; which
light is the condemnation of the world; in which light they walk, where there
is no strife, not war for the earth, nor about the earth, but from the earth su
h are redeemed to God the Lord, whose the earth is, who is come to reign, and
coming to reign, Glory g ory to God Almight for ever, who lives and reigns
and endures forever. This is witnessed amongst them whom the world scornfully
calls Quakers, and the light is ours which shall condemn the world, and them
which do profess what they are not: To the light of Christ in you all I speak,
that with it you may see your selves, there is your Teacher that will not lie,
which will concondemn you if you do lie which will witness me eternally, and
condemn you that hate it, and show you all the way to salvacion that love it,
and from Christ, from whence it does come, which is the way to the Father, and
to you all this is the word of God, and love and peace to your souls, and a
visitation.

And lay aside all your profession in words, and have not the life; for you are
worse then they that make no profession: for you have a cloak, you are worse
then the Publican, the open sinner which sees himself quickly, which is more
justified, with that which lets him see himself, then you that stand up in your
self-profession: with that light which comes from Christ, all self, and all
corruption and sin is judged and condemned, and nothing is justified but what
is sanctified and nothing is glorified but what is justified, and so all every
where r ad your selves, to the light in all your consciences I speak, that with
it you may see your selves, where you are, what you have been, what you are,
whom you serve, whom you worship, and whether you know the Father of light, or
had known there had been such a one, if the Scripture had not spoken of such a
one, with the light that knowledge is condemned, for its death that talks of
the same, which knowledge is outward; and whether you had known there had been
a holy Ghost if the Scriprure had not spoken of the holy Ghost, or whether you
had known there had been a Christ, if the Scripture had not spoken of Christ:
And whether you had known there had been a Gospel if the Scripture had not
spoken of the Gospel, to the light of Christ I speak, it will let you see what
you do possess of the life that was before the Scripture was given forth, for
the word was, and the light was before the Scripture was, the chapter is not
the light, nor the verse is not the light, nor the word, but from the word,
from the light and from the life were the Scriptures declared; and wi h the
light, and with the word, and in the life, they are all owned again: and all
that make a trade of them, with the light, and with the life, and with the
word, are all such denied. And all such as hold up an outward Temple, their
minds ate turned from the light of Christ within, which brings to witness the
temple of the holy Ghost, and worships that which is turned from the light of
Christ, which speak their imaginations upon the words declared from the light,
these are the cage of unclean birds, these are they that do persecute, these
are they that paint themselves, and such are the harlots, the welfavoured
harlots, and build the Tombs of the Prophets and the Apostles, and garnish the
sepulchers of the righteous; but with the light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened withal, which comes from him, all such actions and practices, and
such a profession from God is seen and condemned, With all the children of
light, who are of God, and to you all this is the word of God.

This I command you all in the presence of the living God, to walk in the light
that Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, that with it you may all come to
see Christ, and walk in the light and life, as the Saints did, which from it
the Scripture proceeded, and walking every one in the light and life in
measure, you will come to witness those words fulfilled, that were given forth
from the life, and the substance of them possess, which has been so long
professed; then there will be no more, Lo here is Christ, Lo there is Christ, and
toto all this is the word of God, you that of God in you al I speak, that with
it your minds may be stayed upon God, and that you may come to witness your
souls quickened with the living power which raises it up out of death, and
throws down the earth, and wait in the light which comes from Christ that this
you may come to enjoy in life, substance and power which will lead you out of
form and words, to the life that gave forth the words; for who have the words
and not the life, from it are strangers, and with it are to be judged, for so
to it I speak, that you may see what you have more then words, if you have not
it with the light, you (...) to be condemned.

G. F.


