The Lord Generals LETTER In Answer to the MESSAGE of the Kentish-men, MAY 31.
1648.

The Lord Generals PROCLAMATION against Plundring, or taking any Horses or
Goods from any of the Inhabitants in Kent, and for restoring what has been
taken.

Also a perfect Relation of Relieving Dover Castle, driving the Kentish-men to
Rochester, the taking of the Bidge near Norflet in Kent, the number killed and
taken Prisoners.

With the Names of the chief Actors in this Kentish Engagement.

June 1. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.



London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, June 2. 1648.

For Sir Thomas Peyton.
SIR,
I Received by a Trumpet a Message from you, whereby a Pass was desired for
some Gentlemen to come to me as Commissioners from your self or others, to
Treat, according to an Order of Parliament; To which, not knowing of any such
Order of Parliament to me, nor any Authority from Parliament to you or the rest
with you, to appoint Commissioners for such a purpose, I could not make any
Answer to any such Overture: But, it has given me occasion to send this Bearer
herewith unto you, desiring you to signify thus much to those Gentlemen and
others your countrymen with you, That whereas I find them gathered together
in Arms, and persisting therein without and against the Authority of
Parliament, and doing many acts of Hostility, to the great damage of their
neighbors in this County, and disturbance of the Peace thereof; I cannot admit
of Treaty or capitulation with them, while so persisting in their Arms and
Hostility, nor lose time in prosecution of them. But if they shall forthwith
lay down their Arms, and disperse themselves to their several homes, I do not
doubt but the mercy of the Parliament will be extended to the estates and lives
of those many, who amongst them shall appear to have been abused and deluded
into this Rebellion; and their Justice against such only as shall appear to
have been the chief and most eminent Actors and Fomentors thereof, and that
chiefly for example to others, and necessary reparation of the Damages already
done.

Black Heath, 30 Maii, 1648. THO: FAIRFAX.

A PROCLAMATION AGAINST PLVNDRING.
WHereas I have had several-Complaints, That diverse Soldiers going into several
men's houses, under pretense of getting victuals and drink, have searched the
rooms in their houses, and have taken clothes, linen and other goods: For the
prevention of the like evil for the future, I do hereby strictly require all
Soldiers whatsoever under my command, That at their peril they do from
henceforth forbear the like violences to the houses or goods of any. And all
Officers, as they will answer the neglect at their perils, are strictly to look
to those under their respective charges, to see that no such things be done, or
if they be, that the offenders be brought to punishment: Which I do hereby
declare shall be severely executed And for the supplying of the Soldiers with
victuals and necessaries (while the Army shall keep the field, care shall be
taken for bringing in and distributing the same in a public way, or (if that
fail, the Commanders of the respective Regiments, Troops or companies, are to
take care, That where there is a necessity of taking victuals for the Soldiers
relief, some Officers to see it done orderly, and without further damage or
prejudice to the Inhabitants. And what ever such goods has been injuriously
taken from any as aforesaid, I require that restitution be forthwith made,
otherwise the persons with whom such goods shall be found, or those by whom
they were taken shall be immediately proceeded against according to Martial
Law. And whereas I have likewise had several Complaints, That diverse Horses
have been taken away by Soldiers out of men's houses or grounds, under pretense
that the owners have gone or sent to the assistance of the Rebels in these
parts, although the owners be not actually in arms; I do hereby strictly
require, That all Horses so taken, be forthwith restored, and that none under
my command do from henceforth presume to take any Horses in such manner from any
country man, except such as are and shall (at the same time) continue actually
engaged with the Rebels, nor from such without Order from a Field Officer, or
superior Order, and that only for the Public use.

Given under my Hand and Seal the One and thirtieth day of May, 1648. THO:
FAIRFAX.

SIR,
I Gave you an Account of the marches and proceedings of that part of the Army
under his Excellency the Lord Fairfax now in Kent, on Monday and Tuesday last,
I shall now present you with a continuation of the same.

On Wednesday May 31. His Excellency with four Regiments of Horse and three of
Foot, with some loose Companies of Col: Ingoldsby's Regiment, marched from
Eitham (where they lay in the fields thereabouts the night before) to Craford
Heath, where the said Forces were drawn up to a Rendezvous, and after that
marched through Dartford, and then drew up on an Heath two miles from that
Town, where his Excellency had Intelligence, That a party of the Kentish Rebels
(not Browns Rebels) had fortified and barricadoed a Bridge which led toward
Gravesend; a commanded party was sent forth under the conduct of Major
Husbands, and Capt. Evansons Troop, in all about 300 horse, who mounted about
an hundred foot behind them: when they drew toward the Bridge, the enemy
fired thick upon them; our men notwithstanding fell on, and the horse swam
through the water, and so got over; by this time the enemy perceiving in what
danger they were, fled: Major Child who commanded them and was very active,
hardly escaped, having his Horse shot, whereupon he forsook it; his Son was
shot in the back, and taken. There were about twenty slain in the place, diverse
wounded, and thirty Prisoners taken, many escaped, byhiding themselves in the
Corn fields and houses. The enemies party consisted of the Contrymen
thereabouts, the Seamen, and some London Apprentices: One Mr. Phips was very
active in setting on the Countrymen.

When we came to Norflet, half a mile beyond the Bridge, we understood the
enemy were gone thence this morning by five of the clock, and not three men to
be seen in the whole Town; their wives and friends left behind, pretend they
were forced out. One of our men in his passage over the River, had his horse
killed by falling upon an Harrow, which the enemy had laid in the water, so that
his very guts came out (I went out with this party, and saw the whole business.)

After this Major Husband advanced with a party two or three miles beyond
Gravesend, and had afterward Orders to march to Maulin, toward which the Army
marches this morning from Mapham, a very small village (where the Lord General
quartered last night, and his Forces about it in the field) and will make an
Hall near Maulin, where Orders will be given out. At the ending of this
service, Capt. Freemans and Capt. Barringtons Troops of Dragoons, who were
ordered out of Wiltshire, came up, and joined with that party that lay toward
Rochester, where the enemies greatest body now is. His Excellency has sent
forth a Proclamation for the prevention of disorders in Soldiers, a copy of
which I have sent you enclosed; as also of the Letter sent from his Excellency
to Sir Tho: Peyton, in answer to the Message sent by Capt: Hackers Trumpeter to
him. There are very few men to be seen in the Towns through which we march, but
only the women making sad moan, fearing the ill success their husbands are
like to have. The one my are very numerous, given out to be ten thousand at
least, amongst which a thousand Cavaliers. Their principal Ringleaders are, Sir
Gamaliel Dudley, Sir Robert Tracy, Col: Leigh, Sir John Many, Sir Tho: Peyton,
Sir Tho: Palmer, Squire Hales reported to be General, Sir James Hales, Sir
William Many, Sir John Dorrel, Sir Tho: Godfrey, Sir Richad Hardress, Col:
Washington, Col: Hamond, Col: L'estrange, Col: Culpepper, Col: Hacker, Mr.
James Dorrel, Mr. George Newman, once a Colonel for the Parliament, and Mr.
Whelton Treasurer for the Parliament. Sir Michael Livesay sent word last night,
That he had recruited his Troop, and that the country came apace to the Deputy
Lieu^enants; they desired to have Orders from His Excellency, and accordingly
had to join with the Army. I had almost forgot one passage, Some of our Scouts
meeting this day with a party of theirs near Cobham, being asked Who they were
for, made answer, For the Devil and King Charles: Our men replied, That they had
taken King Charles, and hoped ere long to take the Devil too. Our men took
yesterday two Black coats Prisoners, amongst others, the one of their names is
Heydon.

Major Gibbons has raised the enemies siege before Dover-Castle, dispersed
them, and cleared the County between Dover and Sittinburn. I am

Mapham, 1 June, 1648.
FINIS.

