THE FORM OF HIS MAJESTY'S CORONATION-FEAST To be solemnized and kept at
WESTMINSTER HALL Up on the 23. of April 1661
HIs Majesty having declared that he will keep the Feast of his Coronation in
Westminster Hall in such manner as most of his Royal Predecessors have done,
the preparations ensuing, are to be made in order thereunto, according to
ancient presidents.

First, the Hall is to be hung with hangings suitable to so great a Solemnity.

At the upper end the Marble Chair is to be adorned, and a rich State over it,
and the floor of the place where the King dines, and the rayles, to be covered
with red Worsted.

The Order of the whole Feast is to be appointed by the Lord Steward, and
Officers of his Majesty's household to whom such persons as are to do any
service by virtue of their Tenures ought to apply themselves.

There is a Room to be appointed for his Majesty to retire into, and repose
after his return from the Church until the first course be on the Table.

After his Majesty is retired, the Earl Marshal by his Tipstaves causes room
to be made in the Hall.

When Dinner is ready, the Lord Steward, between the Constable and Marshal
mounted on rich Trapped Horses, having the Treasurer and Comptrouler, and
Sergeants at Arms on foot before them, ride into the Hall before the Sewer.

The Sewer ought to be an Earl, and the Servitors that bring up the first
Course Knights of the Bath, and other Knights.

The first Course being set on the Table, the King returns from his Chamber
into the Hall, and standing before the Table, the Basin is brought by two
Earls, the high Chamberlain and another, and the Towell by another Earl,
Sergeants at Arms going before them.

The King having washed, sits down, and two Esquires of the Body are to sit at
His feet.

The Archbishop sits at the end of the Kings Table, during the time of Dinner
the four Swords are to be held before the King.

Anciently there were four Tables more in the Hall. At the right hand of the
Hall next the Wall sit the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and below them on the
same side, the Masters and Clerks of the Chancery.

At the Table on the left hand next the wall, sit the Major, Recorder, Aldermen
and principal Citizens of London.

At the right side of the Table on the right hand in the midst of the Hall, sit
the Bishops, and beneath them the Judges, and Barons of the Exchequer.

At a table on the left side, the Lords Temporal and other persons of quality.

Upon a Scaffold on the right hand of the Kings board are the Heralds to be
placed, and there to have a Table.

In another on the left hand the Musicians.

In a Scaffold over the lower door of the Hall, are the Trumpets to be placed.

The King being at the first Course, the Champion comes in armed in the Kings
Armor, and mounted on a Courler of the Kings, richly trapped with cloth of
Gold, he is brought in by the Constable and Marshal, before him a Trumpet
sounding, and an Herald at Arms, and in the presence of the King and Audience
of all the people, after the Trumpet has made three several Summons, The
Herald is to Proclaim these Words with a high voice.

That there is no man of high or law estate, who will say that our Sovereign
Liege Lord CHARLES the II. Son and Heir apparent of CHARLES the I. Late King
of England ought not to be Crowned King of England, against whom he the said
Champion is not ready with his body to maintain, and will maintain, that he
does falsely lie as a Traitor.

Thereupon the Champion is to cast down his Gantler, which lying on the ground
a while, the Herald is to take up, and to give to the Champion.

The like Proclamation is to be made in the middle of the Hall, and at the
lower end, which done, the Champion is to ride up to the Kings board, and then
the King taking a guilt or gold Cup with a cover, and drinking some of the
wine, is to send the same to the Champion, who drinking off the wine, is to
carry the Cup covered in his hand through the Hall, and to have the same for
his Fee.

At the second course Garter King of Arms accompanied with all other Officers
of Arms is to Proclaim the Kings Style in three several places of the Hall,
and then to return to his State again.

After Dinner the Major of London is to present the King with a Cup of Gold
full of wine, and an Ewer of water, and after the King has drank he is to have
the Cup and Ewer for his pains.

FINIS.
London Printed for R. Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane, 1661.


