HOW GODS PEOPLE Are not to take the Names of the Heathen Gods in their Mouths.
Nor follow their Customs nor learn their Ways, etc.
THus says the Lord to the House of Israel, Learn not the way of the Heathen,
and be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at
them, for the Customs of the People are vain, etc. for they are altogether
Brutish and Foolish: their Stock is a Doctrine of Vanities. Thus shall ye say
unto them, The Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they
shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens, Jer. 10.

Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families
that call not upon thy Name, etc. for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured
him, and consumed him, and have made his Habitation Desolate: but the Lord is
the true God, he is the Living God, and an everlasting King at his wrath. The
Earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his
Indignation, Jer. 10. 25.

Here you may see they that follow the vain Customs of the Heathen, and learn
their ways, and follow the Doctrine of their Vanities, are Foolish and Brutish,
and such Worship the Gods that are made with Hands, which made not the Heavens
and the Earth, and all such Gods the Lord says shall perish from the Earth,
and from under these Heavens; as you may see these that learned the way of the
Heathen, and followed their vain Customs and Doctrines of Vanities, and were
Foolish and Brutish, and were dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, and these are
such that eat up Jacob, the second Birth, and seek to devour him, and consume
him, and to make his Habitation desolate. So the Jews the Children of Israel
were not to learn the ways of the Heathen, nor their vain Customs, nor to
follow their Doctrine of Vanities, for they were foolish and brutish that did
so: And the portion of Jacob, the second Birth, is not like them, for the Lord
is his portion. The Lord said to the Children of Israel in the Old Testament,
and Old Covenant, In all things that I have said unto you be Circumspect, and
make no mention of the Names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy
Mouth, Exodus 23. 13.

Now here you may see Gods People were to make no mention of the Names of other
Gods, namely the Gods of the Heathen that were made with hands, neither were
they to be heard out of their Mouths, for he says, The Gods that made not the
Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from off the Earth, and from
under these Heavens, Jer. 10. 11. And God's People were not to learn the way of
the Heathen, nor follow the vain Customs of the People: for they are altogether
Brutish and Foolish, and their Stock is a Doctrine of Vanities: And therefore
God's People in the Old Testament, were wholly forbidden such things, but they
were to Serve and to Fear the Lord God.

The old Pagan Saxons, in their Idolatry, brought in the Names of the Days
after their Gods; and these called Christians have retained them to this Day;
and yet they say the Scripture is their Rule, for their Faith and Practice, and
yet their Practice is quite contrary to the Scripture, and the Command of God.
The First Day of the Week, the Idolatrous Saxons Worshipped the Idol of the
Sun, from whence came Sunsday or Sunday. The Second Day of the Week they
Worshipped the Moon, from whence came Monday or Moonsday. The Third Day they
Worshipped the Idol of the Planet, which they called Tuisco, from whence came
Tuesday. And from their Idol Woden, came Wodensday, called Wednesday. And from
their Idol, Thor, came Thursday. And from their Idol Friga, came Friday. And
from their Idol Satur, came Saturday. And the Heathen called Mars the God of
Battle, and from thence they called the first Month March. And Venus they
called the Goddess of Love and Beauty, and from thence they called the second
Month April. And Maja a Heathen Goddess, called Flora, and Chloris, were called
the Goddesses of Flowers, unto Maja, the Heathen Idolaters used a Sacrifice,
from thence was the third Month called May; and upon the first Day of May they
used to keep Floras Feast to the two Goddesses of Flowers (to wit) Flora and
Chloris. Flora was a Strumpet in Rome, that used on the first Day of May to set
up a May Pole at the Door to entice her Lovers; from whence came May-Poles to
be first observed. And from the Heathen Goddess Juno, is the fourth Month
called ^^^e. And in honor to Julius Caesar, a Roman Emperor, they called the
fifth Month July. And the sixth took its Name August in honor to Augustus
Caesar. And September, October, November, and December, are called from the
Latins. And one Janus; a King of Italy, was for his Wisdom pictured with two
Faces, and whom they Honored as a God, and from this name Janus was the
eleventh Month, called January. And Saturnus, Pluto, Febeus were called the
Gods of Hell, whom the Heathen said had the Rule of the Evil Spirit there; and
from Pluto, Febeus was the twelfth Month, called February.

Now here you may see how the Christians call the Days, and many of the Months
after the Heathen Gods and Goddesses, and not after the Scriptures, which in
the Beginning called them the First, Second, Third, Fourth, etc. And called the
Months, First, Second, etc. to the Twelfth.

And the Lord Commanded the Jews his People, as is said before, In all things I
have said unto you be ye Circumspect, and make no mention of the Names of the
other Gods: Neither let it be heard out of thy Mouth.

Now all you that profess Christianity, how do you obey the Lord, and are
circumspect, who make mention of the Names of other Gods and Godesses, and are
so often heard out of the Mouths of you and your Children, and to keep them up
in the Memory both in your Mouths and Childrens, ye put them in your Almanacks
lest ye should forget them; and yet you say the Scripture is your Rule, and yet
disobey both the Command of God and the Holy Scriptures of Truth, and are often
angry with, and deride the People of God in scorn, you call Quakers, because
they do not call the Months and Days after the Heathens Gods and Goddesses,
but do call them according as the Holy Men of God in the Scriptures of Truth
have first called them, and cannot call them after the Idolatrous Heathens Gods
and Goddesses, nor mention their Gods and Goddesses Names, as you do, without
the Breach of the Command of God, as in Exodus 23. 13. and the Scriptures of
Truth.

The Lord Says, I will Cut off the Names of the Idols out of the Land, and
they shall no more be Remembered, Zach. 13. 2. And the Lord says, I will take
away the Names of Baalim out of her Mouth, and they shall no more be Remembered
by their Name, Hos. 2. 17.

G. F.

London, Printed in the Year. 1687.


