A DECLARATION Against all Popery, and popish points: and is renounced from
them and by them whom the Scorners in scorn call Quakers: And likewise some
Queries to the Pope and his Priests that are guarded with his law: to be
answered in writing or print; and to be sent them called Quakers at London in
England.
FOrasmuch as a Proclamation is set forth by O.P. and his Council, in which is
an oath to be proffered, to be taken, of Abjuration, against all Popish
supremacy and authority over the Catholic Church in general: and we who
are, by the World scornfully called Quakers, who own the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, who says, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, neither by the earth,
neither by any other oath; but let your yea be yea and your nay nay, lest ye
fall into condemnation: Jam. 5.12. In Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles
Doctrine we do abide, and oaths is denied, and forbidden: and so those who were
called Christians which was in Christ Jesus, who abode in his Doctrine and the
Apostles Doctrine, suffered as they do now that does the same: as in particular
John Morland who had been a Captain, was fined and imprisoned, because he could
not swear, but kept to yea and nay in his communications, and many others fined
that cannot swear: but with the light which comes from Christ Jesus, from him
by whom the World was made, we do deny and condemn, with the light, all Popish
ways, and their Supremacy and authority over the Catholic Church in General,
root and branch* and therefore many of us which are called Quakers have
suffered and suffers, and layen long imprisoned by the Popish law which
guarded the Jesuits, and Crucifixes and Imagess: which now guards many of the
Priests in England and their Church, which law did guard the Jesuits and their
Church: therefore the authority of the Catholic Church in General, and the
supremacy of the Popes power we do utterly deny and renounce, as knowing their
works of darkness: and condemn them all with the light; and the branch which
comes from the root: by which branch many suffers now in England for declaring
against all Popish ways and the authority derived from him, by which the
Church was guarded, freely without an oath; for God does us command, for we see
the sword of the Lord is drawn against it: And so over our selves in particular
we cannot suffer any of his preheminency to bear rule, for it is an usurped
authority. So with the light of the Lord Jesus Christ we are brought to declare
against it; for with the light it is condemned, and here the power of the Lord
Jesus Christ is retained: And we do know with the light which comes from the
Lord Jesus Christ, That bread and wine is carnal; which our Lord Jesus Christ's
body and blood is not: but is precious, He saw no corruption, and is a mystery:
which is not bread and wine, let them consecrate it never so: And so to declare
to you plainly, we do deny the Sacrament, for we know there is no Scripture
for it: And the Lords Supper is not carnal, where it is said he will make his
abode with you, and sup with you: the Lord is not carnal: but is the mystery
and his body is glorious, and not beggarly Elements, as outward bread or wine:
for this is the blood of Jesus which washes away our sin; and this is the body
of Jesus which makes us free from the law: which stands not in meats and in
drinks and carnal Ordinances, for the body is Christ: and so we do deny and
condemn all that worship that sacrament of Elements of bread and wine, and that
supper which stands in those things: and we witness Christ is come, who is the
sum and the substance, and so need not have a remembrance of any Element: but
we which be dead with Christ and live in his life, from the beggarly Elements,
them that lives in them goes about to slay us; so as it is written they that
are born after the flesh persecutes them that are born after the spirit: And
again we do deny that there is any purgatory, and declare against it as knowing
the blood of Jesus which cleanses us from sin, which is an holy thing; and
know him who takes away our sin and destroys the works of the Devil: which
many has the bread and wine which know nothing of the body and blood of
Christ, no more then the Jews which turned from Christ, when he told them,
that, except they did eat his Flesh and drink his Blood they had no life in
them, and they looked upon him carnally as the Papists do now, which are
deluded and deceived. And again with the light which comes from the Lord Jesus
Christ, him who was not born by the will of man, him by whom the world was
made, with his light do we deny and condemn all their consecrated Host,
Crucifixes, and Images, and they are not to be worshipped but to be condemned
with the light, which will let them see they are enemies of the Cross of Christ
which be in things before mentioned, and all them that worship them. And to you
this is the word of the Lord God: the light of your consciences shall witness
it: God is a Spirit and is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth: and all
that make Crucifixes, or Images, or worship them, they are the South sayers and
familiar spirits: the Founder of the Images and the worshipper of the Image,
from the living God is confounded, accursed, and with the light condemned, and
God worshipped in the spirit: which spirit judges all Images, and Image-makers,
and sees there is no due worship to them, or them that makes them, but
condemnation and judgment: the light in the conscience shall it witness: And
again we declare against the Papists, and them which say Salvation is to be
merited by works: for then it is not of faith, in him who was not born by the
will of man, which light condemns man's runnings and willings, and that which he
call merits, there is no such Scripture: and therefore we deny the word merit
and know that man does not attain any thing by his will, of him who was not born
by the will of man; for he knows him not, for he is a mystery, which light
condemns all works of darkness and all evil, sin, and unrighteousness, and
all them which acts it: and who are in Christ are new Creatures: and to them
there is no condemnation, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit: so
every one shall have a reward according to his works whether they be good or
evil. And with the light, which comes from Christ Jesus, which never changes,
all points and Doctrines of Papists and the World, is condemned, and them who
do affirm them: And the same light is the condemnation of them that takes
oaths, out of Christ's Doctrine and from Christ Jesus, and so knows not his
will, who abides not in his Doctrine: So as Gods children have found his power
and strength which has carried them on, when he has commanded them to declare
against all false ways, false Teachers, and Popish ways, and Popish laws,
and often have been almost murdered, but the Lord has been their present help
in time of need, and trouble. And so Popish ways are renounced without any
equivocation, mental reservation, or secret evasion whatsoever: So we cannot
go out of Christ's Doctrine and swear by any oath: for if we do, we break the
command of Christ and go out of his Doctrine, and the Apostles which said,
Swear not at all: They that say, so help me God, and act contrary to the light
which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, are with the light condemned from God,
and are in another Doctrine: but who be in the light of Christ Jesus, have Gods
help. And so all such as use their tongues and make a trade of the Scriptures,
which were spoken forth from the Spirit of the Lord, they are judged and
denied, and turned away from, though they have the form of Godliness and not the
power, but denies it. And such by such are the dear children of God cast in
prison, who are the cause of it. And again in the presence of the Lord God, we
declare against all Popish ways, and the Priests, and their church: and their
authority, and all that belong to it, the root, and ground, and branches: and
with the light do see them, and all who have any of their power, to be
condemned with the light: And to you this is the word of the Lord God, and all
who wait in the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, receives power
from him which is the Head and governs his Church which is the Head of it;
which Light is the condemnation of the changeable Priesthood. And with the
light we see all Papists, and who be in the Popery, to be enemies of the Cross
of Christ, and so imitate a cross, some this way, some that way, who are all
with the light to be condemned. And to you this is the word of the Lord God. I
am the light of the World and does enlighten every one that comes into the
World, says Christ. And if you do love the light which comes from Christ and
receive Christ ye shall receive the light of life: and as many as receives him
to them he gives power to become the sons of God, which are the children of
light and do believe in the light. But ye that do hate the light, and will not
bring your deeds to the light, because your deeds be evil, and the light will
reprove you; this is your condemnation, the light, says Christ: so here is
your Teacher, if you love the light, and here is your condemnation that hate
the light, the Light. And remember that you are warned in your life time. And
if you do love the light which comes from Christ it will lead you to the
Church, which is in God, 1 Theff. 1.1. And bring you to testify against the
World, that the works thereof are evil: and will let you see that the whole
world lies in wickedness: And it will let you see that the Scriptures which were
declared from the light, and life; they that was in it, was in unity: and all
the sects are mong them that have the good words, and lives in their meanings,
and thinkings, and strife, contention, and persecution; and be such that hate
the light, whose deeds be evil which Christ testified against, which be
strangers from the life of God and Christ Jesus, the Covenant of promise: and
so all such are with the light comprehended, seen, fathomed, judged, and
condemned. The light which lights every man that comes into the World, is my
witness:

Forasmuch as the enemies of God in all ages, have gone about to slander the
Truth of God, and to cast reproaches upon righteous servants, whom he sent
forth to bear witness for the Truth against all the unrighteousnes of men
without respect of persons: So now also the enemies of Christ Jesus, and of his
righteous seed, (showing themselves to be of the same generation of their
forefathers, which ever persecuted the righteous seed, which showed before of
the coming of the just one, Act. 7.52) labor by all means to render the truth
odious, and to slander, and reproach the people of God, by them scornfully
called Quakers, fulfilling the word of Christ, Matthew. 5.11. which says, They
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; and crying out to
the Magistrates, as the multitude of the Jews did against Paul, that they ought
not to live any longer: Act. 25.25. Act. 22.22. And as the chief Priests and
Elders, and all the Council sought false witnesses against Jesus to put him to
death, but found none, Matthew. 26.59, 60. even so do they now. The high Priests
of this age with the multitude of the ungodly, who go about to accuse the
people of God called Quakers (to be Jesuits, Friars, Popish-Priests, Romish
Frogs, Morrisdancers, and persons Popishly affected) to the Magistrates, as
appears by an Information given to the Magistrates at Bristol: and by Books, or
Pamphlets put sorth in Print by William Prinn, and others; and one Thomas
Andrews Priest at Welling borough in Northamptonshire, who accused one John
Whitehead, who by him and the World is called a Quaker, to one Thomas Pentloe
called Justice, and caused nim to be carried before the said Thomas Pentloe,
the 15 day of the first month called March now last past; who after he had
examined him said, if he would go home to his wife; and abide with her, and go
toward her the next morning, he should have his liberty. To whom the said John
Whitehead answered, he stood not in his own will, but in the will of God, and
could make no such promise, not knowing what the morning would bring forth.
Whereupon the said Thomus Pentloe gave the Constables, charge over him till
further Order, who kept him in their custody two nights and a day, (which was,
and is contrary to the Laws of the Nation) And then when he was carried again
before the said Pentloe, and one John Brown, called a Justice, with whom was
the said Andrews and another Priest, who asked John Whitehead many questions
laboring to ensnare him; but they not finding him to have broken, or
transgressed any known Law of the Nation, then they consulted together, as the
Presidents and Princes did against Daniel, to find an occasion against him,
concerning the Law of God, Daniel. 6. and one Marmaduke Storre another of the
People, by them called Quakers, who came to visit his brother, who was
formerly by the said Pentloe sent to prison at Northampton: And thereupon the
said Pentloe and Brown tendered to them the oath of Abjuration: appointed for
such as are suspected to be Popishly affected, but their souls being subject to
the Commands of Christ Jesus not only because of wrath but also for conscience
sake, who says: Matthew. 5.34. Swear not at all, but let your communication be
yea yea, nay nay; for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil, v. 37. And
the Apostle James says: But above all things my brethren swear not, neither by
heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath but let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay, least ye fall into condemnation, were made to deny to
swear at all: But did in the presence of the Lord, renounce al things in the
form of the said oath named before the said called Justices: who
notwithstanding did thereupon require them to find suerties to be of the good
behavior: and to appear at the next Sessions: then the said John, and
Marmaduke did desire them to read a law that they had transgressed: or to show
them wherein they had broken the peace or good behavior: but the said called
Justice did refuse; and said they was Judges, and did judge it to be so: then
the said John and Marmaduke told them they ought to Judge them according to the
law: and if they would not read them a law: that they might be convinced by it
to be of evil behavior, they would not find sureties: whereupon thy sent them
to prison at Northampton, where they yet remain prisoners, though the breach of
no known law can be justly laid to their charge: thus they and many others who
in faithfulness served the late Parliament and hazarded their lives, and
suffered the plundering of their Goods, in expectation to have had
righteousness set up, and all oppressers and oppressions removed and taken
forth of the way, as was then largely promised: But behold, nothing is brought
forth but wind there is not any deliverance wrought in the earth, neither have
the inhabitants of the World fallen: for they that depart from evil are made a
prey to this generation of Priests, and Magistrates who persecute the innocent
and imprison them that in obedience to the commands of Christ Jesus, dare not
swear at all: do ye thus requite the Lord, ch foolish people and unwise? who
seek after the life of the righteous, and daily lay snares for the innocent:
and say in your hearts who who shall see you: understand ye brutish among the
people, and ye fools when will ye be wise, he that planted the ear shall he not
hear, he that formed the eye shall he not see, he that chastises the Heathen
shall he not correct? he that teaches man knowledge, shall he not know?, yea,
the Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.8, 9, 10,
11. Therefore cease from your persecution of the children of God and from your
wicked inventions, and snares which you make to ensnare the simple by, whom you
in scorn and derision call Quakers, and Jesuits, and Friars, and Popish
priests, and many other such like names of reproach you cast upon them: But
they who you call Quakers in the presence of the living God of Heaven and Earth
do you who are reproachers with all your reproachful names deny; and the Pope,
and his supremacy and authority over the Catholic Church in general, and over
every one of themselves in particular: And do believe and know that there is
not any Transubstantiation in the called Sacrament of the Lords Supper: or in
the Elements of bread and wine after consecration thereof by any Person
whatsoever: And they, and every of them the people of God called Quakers, do
believe and know that there is not any Purgatory: And that the consecrated
Host Crucifixes or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither that any
worships is due to any of them; And they, and every of them also believe, and
know that salvation cannot be merited by works: and all Doctrines in
affirmation of the said points they and every of them, we do renounce and bear
witness against. And do deny all equivocation, mental reservation, and secret
evasion whatsoever, speaking the words of Truth in plainess by the help of God:
And for so doing they are persecuted, stoned, stocked, mocked, reproached, and
imprisoned by those who cannot endure plainess of speech: who are equivocaters,
mental reservers, and secret evaders: who cannot receive the words of Truth,
the yea and the nay in their communications: but contrary to the commands of
the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom every knee must bow, labor to bring people out
of his doctrine: and so into the condemnation of the Devil: but the
Righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: when the wicked shall fall
by his own wickedness, Prove. 11.5.

A word and a warning to all people, whether Priests, Magistrates, or others
who are plotting in secret against the innocent, with the children of light you
are seen, and comprehended, and with the light of Christ Jesus in every one of
you I speak, which is my witness, and your condemnation that acts contrary to
it; Take warning in time, least you say you had time when it is past. And
remember you are once more warned, in your life time.

From them whom you in scorn call Quakers. Signed by George Fox, Francis
Howgill, Edward Buroughs, Alexander Parker, Thomas Adam, Anthony Pearson,
Gervase Benson, Thomas Rawlinson, Robert Rich, Robert Dring, Gerard Roberts,
Simon Dring, Amos Stodart, John Bolton, West, William Rayman, Henry Clark, In
the name of themselves, and the rest.

Some Queries to the Pope, and to all his Adherents and Followers.
1 Whether is not the ground of your works from that which would murder, yea
or nay? and whether is not the Ground of your works from that which knows not
the Life of God, yea or nay? 2 Whether does not that Ground from which your
works proceed, prison the just? Whether does not the Life of God remove the
ground of your works, and so overthrow the life of your Kingdom, yea, or nay? 3
Whether does not he which Imitates a Cross, follow the fancy of his own mind,
and so set up Images: and whether God does require this, yea or nay? 4 whether
does not God forbid, and say thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image
of male or female or any creeping thing upon the earth, or any fowl in the air,
or fish in the sea? whether God does not forbid the making of those Images, and
you that make those Images, whether you be not out of Gods command, and judged
with the Life that gave forth the Scriptures, yea or nay? 5 Whether any Image
should be bowed down unto, of male female, yea or nay? 6 Whether you that say,
bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ be not they that minds earthly
things, and are carnal and natural; whose God is your belly, whose end will
be destruction; who are enemies to the cross of Christ, which Cross denies
self? 7 Whether self will feeds not upon bread and wine, and whether may not
man feed upon that in his will, and know not Christ nor his body; who is not
born by the will of man, which will is condemned with the light? 8 If that wine
be the blood of Christ, whether that be it which washes away sin, yea or nay:
and if that bread be the body of Christ, whether is it that body that makes
free from the Law: for the Apostle said, they were made free from the Law by
the body of Christ? 9 If it be another body that you eat; and another blood
that you drink than that which makes free and washes away sin, then whether do
you not deceive the world yea or nay? 10 Whether every one may not purchase
bread and wine for money; and whether any can purchase the body and blood of
Christ for money to cleanse them from sin withal: though Judas may sell him;
whether is that which sells him for money, and which buies him for money
cleansed with him, yea or nay? 11 Whether Jesus Christ the Son of God, be
Glorified with the same Glory, in the same body, as he had with the Father
before the World was, yea or nay? and whether he is not the same as he is last,
when the World is not; as he was, when he was first, before the World was made,
yea or nay? 12 Whether there be any worship of God, but that which where is the
Life: out of all Images and Likeness, yea or nay? 13 Whether all you that
observe Mary's and the names of the Saints, be not they that worship names and
words, yea or nay: and so are turned from the Spirit which gave forth names,
with which spirit God should be worshipped withal. 14 Whether all Charity and
Works that do not proceed from the Spirit of the living of God, is not all to
be condemned for the fire which are not wrought in God, yea or nay? 15 Whether
all men's merits be not in his will, and that then free will; and whether the
Cross be not man's will, and to his Merits, and so then to that out of which his
Merit arises, but says the Spirit, It is not him that wills, but God that
shows mercy? 16 What is the will of man, and out of what had it its rise, and
what Glory must it be that must be stained, and what is the seat of envy, and
whether any murderer has eternal Life abiding in him yea or nay; and whether
he that envies, is not a murderer, yea or nay? 17 Whether, where there is works
professed and merits pretended, and envy lived in, this sacrifice God does
accept; where faith is strangled and shipwreck made of it: read Cain and Abell
who can? 18 What is your Ground that you eat fish some set days; and whether
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ be not inward: to that mind that runs
outward into visible things as set fish, and set flesh, and set days? Whether
such be not observers of days? and whether the Cross be not to the seat of
lust and envy; and to that mind which makes outward Crosses, Likenesses, and
Images: which are to perish and turn to dust yea or nay; whether outward
crosses, likenesses, and Images and observing meats and days be not of the
World; yea or nay: and whether that nature, which holds them up be not of the
world, yea or nay?

20 Whether the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ is not that which crucifieth to
the World, and from all Wordly things in the ground; yea or nay? 21 Whether
ever any of you received the Substance since that which you call the sign was
practiced by you, and so bears witness to the substance, and denies the sign
yea or nay? 22 If that bread and wine be the body and blood of Christ, then was
there a body and blood of Christ before Christ was manifest in the flesh, yea
or nay; for bread and wine was before Christ was manifest in the flesh, and
when he was Manifest in the flesh, then was there another body and blood of
Christ; and all that have the bread and wine, do they know the body and blood
of Christ, yea or nay? 23 Whether do you hold a Purgatory for men to be
cleansed, after they be dead and laid in their graves: and what is it that
cleanses in that purgatory, seeing the Saints witnessed nothing cleansed them
but the blood of Christ which blood is incorruptible? 24 Whether that your
bread and your wine which you call the body and blood of Christ will not
corrupt yea or nay? and whether he that eats and drinks that, shall not dye and
see corruption; and be never the clearer; nor be made free from his sin: but
shall dye and see corruption: and whether Christ does not say; who saw no
corruption; He that eats of his Flesh and drinks of his Blood shall never die?
25 Whether you do believe in the New Covenant; which God promised in giving his
Son; and whether there be any remission of sin: but by him; yea or nay: and
whether he forgives not sin upon the earth; whether you can witness this, yea,
or nay? 26 Whether you do believe that any shall come to that state to be
taught of God; that they need no man to teach them yea or nay? and whether any
are children of God, but who are in this state: and whether such have not their
sins blotted out and forgiven on earth, yea or nay? 27 Whether do you wait for
and believe in to be made heirs with Christ yea or nay, and to have the same
mind which was in Christ, who thought it no Robbery to be equal with God,
whether you witness this yea or nay? 28 What is your ground of the knowledge of
God, and whether you had known there had been a God or Christ, or Gospel or
Cross, if the Scripture had not declared of them; and whether the Scripture is
the foundation of the true knowledge of these things; yea or nay? if so whether
is not this to lay another foundation then the holy men of God builded upon;
which knew these things before Scripture was written, yea or nay? 37 Whether do
you believe that Christ has Lightened every one that comes into the World; and
whether you believe any shall be made free from sin, while upon the earth yea
or nay? 30 Whether is not that the Light of Christ which does convince all men
of sin, and whether any be justified, or have received the conforter, while
they are convinced, and condemned for sin, yea or nay; and if that light be not
the light of Christ, show the difference between the light of Christ, and that
light which convinces all men of sin, in their Operation and Motion? 31 Whether
all that man sees visibly with a natural eye, is not natural in the natural
knowledge: and whether in this State the Religion which is not pure does stand
the wisdom and knowledge, which differs not from the beasts of the field, yea
or nay? 32 What is the eye in the unbeleever, which the God of the World has
blinded that they cannot see the, light of the glorious Gospel: and what is the
light of the glorious Gospel which is hid from them: whose eye is blinded and
what is the God of this World that does blind the eye; whether the gospel be a
visible thing, and whether the God of the world does not keep open the visible
ey, which leads into temptations: and what is the ey which the true God has
blinded; lest they should see and be converted? 33. Whether the Act of Philip
and Mary was not made by the authority of the Church of Rome, and had not
authority to rule over the Church of Rome, and to guard the Jesuits and
Priests, which law now guards many of the Priests of England; and whether that
be not a branch which comes from the root which they make use of: and whether
that be not to be renounced, as well as other the points of Popery which was
the guard of their Church: And whether the Priests of England will renounce
Popery in words; and have that law to guard their Churches as guarded the
Jesuits; and if so, whether this be not hypocrisy, yea or nay?
These Queries are to all the Priests in England that are guarded with a Popish
Law, which guarded the Jesuits; and to be sent to the Popish Priests, the
Jesuits, and to the Pope at Rome, to be answered by them in writing, and the
answer to be returned to those people who are de^pised with all Sects, who are
scornfully called Quakers in England, at London

And we do deny the making the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven or in
the earth, or in the waters; for the Lord our God forbids it: and furthermore,
he says, Thou shall not bow down to them. God says Deuteronomy. 4. That thou shall
not make the likeness of any beast that is on the earth; nor the likeness of
any feathered fowl that flies in the air, and God says, thou shall not make
the likeness of any thing that creeps upon the earth, least thou liftest up thy
eyes to Heaven and thou see the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Host of Heaven thou
be driven to worship them; and God says, corrupt not your selves with making
any graven Image, or representation of any figure, whether it be the likeness
of male and female; and the Lord God says rake heed to your selves, lest you
forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, which he has made with you; and
least you make any graven Image or the likens of any thing, as the Lord thy God
has charged thee; and if ye corrupt your selves, and make any graven image, I
call Heaven and earth to record against you this day, that ye shall shortly
perish from the land, v. 26. And the Lord God says in Deuteronomy. 5. Thou shall not
make any graven image of any thing in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
that is in the waters, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. For thus says
the Lord, ye shall deal with them, ye shall overthrow their altars, and break
down their pillars, cut down their groves, and burn their images with fire; for
thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee
to be a special people to himself above all people that be upon the face of the
earth. The graven images was to be burnt with fire, for they was the cursed
thing from God, and God drove out the nations from before his people which made
images, which his people was not; for the Heathen did so make likenesses whom
the Lord spewed forth of the Land, which defiled it with their liknesses and
images. Baal had images, 2 Kin. 3. And the Lord said put away the images, and
break down the images of Baal; and in 2 Chronicles. there you may read of the image
work, and the graved image the idol, 2 Chronicles. 33.7. and Psalm. 73. When thou
wakest, O Lord, and raisest us up, thou shall make their images despised; and
the Lord has awaked, and has raised us up, and their images are despised, and
so, confounded be all they that worship graven images, and in the Psalms you
may read how they worshipped molten images, Psalm. 106. And Nebuchadnezzar made
a great image, and them that would not worship his image, was to be thrown into
the fiery furnace, and the worshipers of God would not worship his golden
image, Dan. 3. and in the Revel, ye may see that they that do worship the Beast
and his image shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, and shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the holy
Lamb. And the servants of God song which had got the victory over the image and
the beast, Rev. 15. and the children of Israel shall remain without an image,
and they shall seek David their King, Hos. 3. And Romans 1. ye may see how they
turned the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of the image of a
corrupt man, and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and creeping things; such
God gave up to hardness of heart, and they turned the truth of God into a lie
such their minds was reprobated and filled with unrighteouss and deceit, taking
all things in the evil, and these were and are the image-makers: and ye may
read in the Acts, they of Ephesus were worshipers of images which the Apostle
witnessed against, Act. 18. And though the Lord did command the children of
Israel they should not make an image, yet they made a molten image which Moses
stamped to pieces, and burnt with fire, and the Lord was angry with them; they
turned from his counsel, Deuteronomy. 9. And in Judge. 17. there ye may read and see
the molten images; and in Judge. 18. ye may read of Michaels image, and the
molten image, and how they set up Idolatry, and the Lord sent Jeremiah to tell
them the founder of the graven image is confounded, for his melting is but
falsehood, for there is no breath in them, they are vanity, the works of errors,
in the time of visitation they shall perish; and Jacobs portion is not like
unto them, he is the maker of all things. Israel is the rod of his inheritance,
the Lord of Hoasts is his name. Laban had images who would have wronged Jacob,
Genesis 31. The Lord says, Exodus 23. thou shall utterly overthrow and break down
their images. And in Exodus, The Lord says, they shall break in pieces their
images. And the Lord says, I will destroy your high places, and cut away your
images, and cast your carcasses upon the bodies of your idols, and my soul
abhors you, Levit. 26.30. Number. 39. The Lord says, ye shall destroy all their
pictures, and break asunder all their images of metal, and pluck down all
their high places: and in 1 Samuel 6. there ye may read the Philistines, Priests,
and South-sayers and their images, and simiitudes of Mice, which destroyed the
land, verse. 11. And ye may read how David burnt the Philistines Images, 2 Psalm.
and Jeroboam which was not as the servant of God, as David was, but he did evil
in the sight of God, and made molten immages to provoke God; and therefore,
says the Lord, I will bring evil upon Jeroboams house, and cut them off. And
ye may read how they went into Baals house and destroyed it, and his images and
their altars; and the children of Israel did not that which was not upright
before the Lord their God, and made images, as those that profess themselves
Christans do now, and these angryed the Lord, 2 King. 17. and made molten
images and calves, and so worshipped the Host of Heaven, and served Baal;
therefore the Lord was exceeding wrath with them; and he said break down their
images, 2 King. 18. and he brake their images in pieces, 2 King. 23. And Josiah
took away their familiar spirits, and South-sayers and images, and idols, and
Asa destroyed the idolatry, and commanded Juda to seek God; he break down the
images and altars of the strange idols, and the images thereof, and the kingdom
was quiet before him, 2 Chronicles. 14. And the people of God went and destroyed the
house of Baal, and his image, 2 Chr. 23. And you may see how Ahaz did not
upright in the sight of the Lord like David his father, but he made molten
images, and provoked the Lord to anger, 2 Chronicles. 28. And you may read how Juda
brake down the images, and cut down the Groves, 2 Chronicles. 31. And how Amon
sacrificed to the images which Manasses his father had made, which did evil in
the sight of God; and Josiah did upright in the sight of God, he began to purge
Juda and Jerusalem from their groves and high places, and carved images, and
molten images, and stamped them to powder, and cut down their images, 2 Chronicles.
34. and the Lord sent Isaiah to cry out against their images; which their
fingers had made and said they had forgotten God, Isaiah 17. and he says, the
graven images may not stand, Isa. 27. and he said the image of silver and of
gold should be cast away as a monstrous City; the ornaments and the covering;
Isa. 9. And behold, says he, they are all nothing, their images are wind and
confusion, Isa. 41. and the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against their images of
Bethel that is in the land of Egypt, and said they should be burnt and the
house of their Gods, Jer. 43. and the Lord sent Ezekiel, to cry against their
images, who said your images of the Sun should be broken: I will cast down your
slain men before your idols and your images of the Sun shall be cut in pieces,
and your works shall be abolished, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, the
slain shall fall in the midst of you: And the Lord turned his face from them
that made images, Ezekiel. 7. And the Lord said thou tookest gold and silver and
made the images of men; woe, woe, unto thee says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. And the
King of Baal consulted with Images, Ezekiel. 21. and there ye may see in what
generations the Images were, and who turned from God, turned from the Images,
and Jerusalem and Samaria painted upon the walls, the Images of the Chaldeans
painted with Verinilion, and so discovered their fornication from the Lord; and
the Lord said, I will deliver thee into the hands of them whom thou hate; and
thy shame and thy fornication shall be discovered: do not you all people paint
upon the wall Images of other people, though not of the Chaldeans, and does not
this manifest your whordom: or will you say you are delivered to do these
abominations, Ezekiel. 23. and the Lord says, I will destroy their Images, and
cause their Idols to cease, Ezekiel. 30. and Amos was sent to cry against their
Images, and their Gods, Amos 2.5. and the Lord sent Micab to cry that he would
cut down the Images in the midst of them, Mich. 5. and the Lord sent Hos. to
cry against the Images, how they made them fair, and now they sin more and
more, they have made them molten Images of their silver, and Idols, according
to their understanding, and they are all the works of craftsmen; he shall break
down their images, Hos. 10.3. declare among the Nations, and publish it; set up
a standard and proclaim it, and conceal it not, Babel is taken; Bell is
confounded, Meredoch is broken down, her idols are confounded, and their images
are burst in pieces.

FINIS.

