Here are several QUERIES Put forth in Print for all, or any of you whose names
are here under written, (And likewise for them at Cambridge and Oxford, who are
there teaching and training of such up to practice such things as you your
selves are now acting in, or any other of your Societies that will Answer the
same) and return your Answer in Print, to the view and satisfaction of many
people; who are now questioning whether any of all your practices do proceed
from the true Foundation.

For Robert Gell. Doctor of Divinity so called, who formerly Preached to the
Society of Astrologers; as witness his Book called Stella Nova. William Lilly.
Student in Astrology. John Booker. Student in Astrology and Physic. Richard
Sanders. Student in the Divine, Laudible and Celestial Sciences, as he calls
it. Vincent Wing. Or any other of the Astrologers to Answer. George Wharton. Or
any other of the Astrologers to Answer.


And likewise for Francis Prujan. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest of that
Society to Answer. John King. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest of that
Society to Answer. Charles Scarbrough. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest of
that Society to Answer. George Bates. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest of
that Society to Answer. Lawrence Wright. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest of
that Society to Answer. Jonathan Goddard. Doctors of Physic; And to the rest
of that Society to Answer. And Richard Barker.


A scorner loves not one that reproves him, neither will he go unto the wise,

Prove. 15.12, He that Answers a matter before he hears it, it is a folly
and shame unto him,

Prove. 18 13. The way of life is above the wise; But he that handles the
matter wisely, shall find good,

Prove. 15.24. and 16.20. These Queries are put in Print by me, Henry Clark.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign
of the Black-spread- Eagle, at the West-^nd of Paul's, 1657.

Querie I.
WHat is the Ground of the knowledge of God?

2. Can you cast a Scheam, or a figure, to tell what shall be in the year,
which is a hundred years to come? And if you say you can, that be Astrologers,
Star-gazers, Monthly Prognosticators; how was it that the wise men of Egypt,
and the Magicians, could not tell Pharaohs Dream? Nor could not tell of the
Famine that was to come in the years after, which Joseph, which had the Spirit
of the Lord, did see, beyond all the Magicians and wise men of Pharaoh?

3. Is the change of the times known by Planits and Stars, Sun, and Moon? Or is
the times known with that which lets see the Father, and the time to be in his
hand, seeing that the wise men of Egypt knew not the altering and changing of
the times and days, and years, that was, and is in the Fathers hand? And
whether all this wisdom be not below, that fees no farther then the wise men of
Egypt? And whether all this is not, and was not against the truth, yea or nay;
and so cannot see and discern the times in the Fathers hand, and has not the
wisdom which is from above? Is this so, yea or nay?

4. Is not God the changer of times and seasons? and does not God change the
times and seasons, which the Aftrologers and Magicians knew not, in the time of
Daniel; neither could they tell Nebuchadnezars Dream; not the into pretation
thereof, nor the changing and altering of his Kingdom: But Daniel, who was a
Captive among them, with the Spirit of the Lord; who had the Spirit of the
Lord, who had the thing revealed to him: And again Nebuchadnezar dreamed a
Dream, who told the Dream to the wise men of Babylon, the Magicians,
Soothsayers, Astrologers, and they could not tell the Interpretation of the
Dream; but Daniel, the man of God, did to him declare it: Now what differ you
from these Astrologers and Soothsayers which knew not that the most High
reigned, the most High ruled in the Kingdom of men; neither Nebuchadnezar, nor
his Astrologers, Magicians, nor Soothsayers?

5. Does not the Magicians and Astrologers, and Soothsayers, all proceed from
one root? and what is that root, seeing they that were in this root, knew not
the Dream of Nebuchadnezar,, nor the change of his Kingdom; and knew not that
the most High ruled in the Kingdom of men, they nor Nebuchadnezar; therefore
they that are not come to this knowledge, that the Kingdom of the most High
rules in the Kingdom of men, consider in what knowledge they and you be in,
that be in their steps?

6. And whether your knowledge, which be Astrologers, Soothsayers, Star-gazers,
wise men, Magicians; whether your wisdom does proceed from any other root but
that they were in, seeing in these days little more is seen then was seen in
them, in the days of Nebuchadnezar, and in the days of Pharaoh?

7. And whether there is not now in these days, people trained up from their
youth, who weary themselves in the multitude of Astrologers, Star-gazers,
Monthly Prognosticators; and whether the Enchantment, and Witchcraft, Sorcery,
be not all proceeding from the same root; and whether people does not under
this shelter, and after this hearken, which to them becomes a covering? And
whether this does not keep in the separation from God, in the body of the
Elimentary life of the Natural, whether the Counsels of the Heathen does not
carry after the Astrologers and Star-gazers; and whether Star-gazers does not
arise out of the same ground; and whether Philosophy does not beguil.

8. And whether the beggarly Elements without, has not an Element within? And
whether the ground of the Planits within, be not that which echoes to the
Planets without?

9. Whether is not the Observer of times, the Star-gazers, the Prognosticators,
in that which sees not time in the Fathers hand; be not darkened in the
Elementaries? And whether or no the wisdom of God does not see the overthrowing
of Kingdoms, and the changing of times, and the Kingdom where there is no end?
And whether or no this is not a Dream to all the Magicians upon the earth,
Astrologers upon the earth, Monthly Prognosticators, Observers of times? And
whether or no they that do not see this Dream, be not out of the wisdom of God?
And whether or no the wisdom of God do not comprehend the Kingdom of the world,
which has an end? and whether or no those Kingdoms reign, and are set up which
has an end, which sees not the Kingdom which has no end?

10. Whether or no has not all the Astrologers, Soothsayers, their shelter
under this Rule from whence this springs? And whether or no this be not the
power of darkness? if you say this be not, what is the power of darkness.

11. What is the ground of a Dream, and its cause? And what is it that subdues
the ground of the Dream, and its cause in the man? Or is the ground of the
dream to be subdued in the man?

12. Whether or no does not Witchcraft, Nigromancy, Familiar Spirits, rise from
the same ground as the Star-gazers, Prognosticators, Astrologers, Soothsayers;
whether these do not all proceed from one Root?

13. And from whence, and from whom do you give your account; as number of
years? whether or no you have it not from Pope, or from some other Author of
Books? and do you not observe the Popes order and rule which he has given
forth, who observe Saints days, and was not he the first Author of them?

14. And are not they that be in the flesh of Christ, out of the body of
Elementary, above the strange flesh; and what is that?

15. Was not the Egyptian Magicians, and wise men, in darkness? and had they
not their power from the Devil? And wherein does it differ in our days, and in
what?

16. What is it that gives to comprehend the world? can any see the Stars, the
Moon, and the Sun, but with that which was before they was?

17. What is the ground of all infirmity and disease?

18. What is the ground of the knwoledge that perishes? and from whence has
it its root? and what was the beginning of its ground?

19. Does not the Stars stand and obey the Command of God, and stand in the
Covenant; is not man, which is out of that by which he was made, out of
Covenant? is it not he which is out of Covenant; and is he in that true
knowledge of them that is out of the Covenant, that says the Stars are
unfortunate, and calls them by such a house, when there is no such thing? is
not this jugulation, and is not he unfortunate that is out of Covenant, that is
out of the light, that says the Stars are unfortunate, which are kept in the
Covenant; and is not all them, and that which is out of the Covenant, out of
the knowledge of the Creation in the darkness, in the earthly sensual, devilish
wisdom, in the diseased are Estunfortunate: Must not all this body of
Elementary be condemned?

20. And whether or no have you the wisdom of God, what is the beginning of it,
and what is it; seeing there is an eye it is hid from, living; and seeing it
was hid from Nebuchadnezar, and all his wise men, Star-gazers, and Magicians;
and hid from Pharaoh, and his Magicians, and his wise men; but revealed to them
that feared God; and is not all other wisdom that is sensual, earthly, and
devilish, where lodges the Conjuration and Witchcraft to be overthrown, and
confounded, yea, or nay? Answer.

21. And you that are Astrologers, and in these things before mentioned, from
whence have you learned it; and received the wisdom and knowledge of the Stars,
is it not from Books and Authors; if so, must you not all loose it, as they did
which came to own the truth, which burned their Books?

22. All you that be Physicians and Doctors, have you the wisdom by which all
things was made? have you the knowledge of the virtue of all the Creatures in
the Creation: Minister you Physic by the course and order of the Stars and
Planets? must he ground of the Planet in the man be removed, before the ground
of the Disease be removed, or before he come to the glory of the first body?

23. And what is the glory of the first body? and what is it that leads nature
out of its course? and what is it that leads nature into its course? and what
is it that sets the whole course of nature on fire?

24. And what is the ground of Mother, Stone, and Colic? and what is the
cause of them? and whether or no they do proceed from one Root? and how they do
differ in their operation, and working? and what is the door that lets them in,
that they come to be bred?

25. And what is the ground, and the first entrance of the wisdom below, that
is earthly, and sensual, and devilish? and what is the ground of the knowledge
that does corrupt, and leads into the error? and from whence had these their
ground and root?

26. Was not all the Magicians, Astrologers, Monthly Prognosticators in the old
time, out of the wisdom of God; if you say yea, and what wisdom are ye in now?
whether there be not the Charmer in the wisdom, and Inchanter in the wisdom,
and Sorcery in the wisdom, and the Witchcraft and Soothsayer in the wisdom, and
the Nigromancy? and whether the root of this is not turned from, who comes into
the wisdom of God, and so overthrows Root and Branch?

27. And what Rule have you to call them, by the names of Houses, among all
them that be in the wisdom of God? and whether this is not a thing flown up
into the brain, which is called Magic Art; let that in your consciences
Answer, which witnesses against it: Answer these Queries, I have many things
to write unto you, but I shall not with high things trouble you yet; but these
is as to children stumbling about Letters?

28. What is that which must be shaken, before that which cannot be shaken do
appear?

29. And does not the Elementary body, and Elementary life, stain the Virgin?
and what is the Virgin that bears the seed? and what is the Hagar that bears
the Son? and whether or no is not this state known before the Virgin? and
whether or no is not this known before Sarah, if that any of you be Sarah
declare? if that any of you be the son born of Sarah, let him speak on and
declare?

30. And what is the Abraham; has he any Relation Kindred or Native? does the
Relation, Native or Kindred hold up Idolatry? is the Abraham to come out of
this? are any of faith but what are of Abraham? are not all who are of faith of
Abraham? what is Abraham? and what is that which he comes out of? has Abraham
a foot of ground? had he so much as to set his foot on?

31. Was Christ of the seed of this Abraham, which had no place to lay his head?

32. Is the wisdom, of the flesh from this? or is Abraham shut out from the
wisdom of the flesh? what is the flesh that the wisdom arises out of, and the
fruit of it? from whence was it?

33. What is the flesh of Christ, and his bone? what is the flesh, who joins to
it becomes an Harlot? how stands a Virgin from this? and by what? and in what
is she preserved? is there in the Virgins mouth guile? and what is it that
gives to see the flesh; which, who joins to it becomes an Harlot?

34. What is the first principle of that, tha^ leads to the Virgins life?

35. Is any Abraham, or of Abraham in this age, in this our days, that stands
in Relation or Kindred, or has a foot of ground?

36. What are the Foxes that have the holes? and what are the fowls of the air
that have their nests? and whether these habitations be not upon the earth, and
in the earth; and with what are they seen? And whether these may not profess
Abraham and faith, and a Christ, but be joined to the flesh, and so become the
Harlot?

37. And is this she that gives her Cup, that makes Nations drunk that they
stagger, so does not Abraham come out of this; And is this it that drinks the
Cup of the indignation of the wrath of the Almighty? and is this her that is
the Mother of the Harlot, that brings them all forth?

38. What is the strange flesh, and who is joined to it becomes an Harlot? and
what is the flesh of Christ; and what are they that this flesh brings forth,
and this Mother brings forth, and whether that all the drunkenness be not in
it: Now give a plain Answer in short, full, to the things which I write?

39. Does not the Scripture say Christ is all and in all? and is not Christ the
light? and if he be all, and in all, is not Christ the light, all and in all?

40. How is Christ the Heir of all things, if he does not enlighten every man
that comes into the world? how should all believe if every man be not
enlighted? and is every man to believe because he is enlightened? and is every
man condemned because he does not believe in the light which ^a^h enlightened
him?

41. Whether or no is not the first principle of truth, the light; and whether
or no all T^ach^rs that be out of this light, which lights every man that
comes into the world be not out of the spirit, in the spirits seducing? and
whether or no they have not the Doctrine of Devils?

42. And is not all Astrologers, Star-gazers, Monthly Prognosticators,
Sorcerers and Magicians, all from the light which lights every man that
comes into the world? whether or no the light does not condemn its ground from
whence it comes; and what is the ground from whence all this before mentioned
springs?

43. Does any see the Reign of Christ, but with the light which Christ has
enlightened them withal; and are not all they that be from the light from the
Reign of Christ, and sees not him the same, to day, yeste day, and for ever:
But they are under the Reign of the Prince of the Air, though they may profess
all Scripture, and own not the light, which lights every man that comes into
the world?

44. Out of what part is it that the Dream arises out of a man; and can that
part out of which the Dream arises, know the Dream, yea or nay?

45. And is not Philosophy, Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly
Prognosticators, have not they their rise from that part which the Dream
arises out of; seeing that they could not tell the Dream of Nebuchadnezar, nor
the Dream of Pharaoh; therefore is there not that which is beyond a Dream,
which is out of that part which the Dream arises cut of, which shows it?

46. And in what part stands the four Elements; can they discern its ground, or
can the Elementary discern by which they stand?

47. Are not all they in the Witchcraft, and Enchanting, that be out of that by
which the Stars, the Sun, the Moon stands, and are ordered, and does obey?

48. And are you in that, by which the Stars, and the Moon and the Sun was
made, which was before it was made; answer in plain words, and be ready to give
a Reason of your hope, not with high phrases and strange expressions, but in
plain words, in English, that every one may read you, and so the people may be
satisfied?

49. Do you know the glory of the first body; what is it in its glory; what is
it that desaceth it; and from whence had that its rise?

50. What is the earth that is to be rejected, that bears the briars and
thorns? and what is the new earth, in which dwells righteousness; and where are
these to be seen; and with what, or in these days, yea, or nay?

51. What is the ground of Witchcraft, and Nigromancy; and what is it they rise
out of; and Enchanting, and Sorcery, and Familiar Spirits, whether any of these
does deface the glory of the first body; whether these does not corrupt, and
cause the Creation to groan; you that be Doctors, and Physicians of the body,
answer: so show the cause of infirmity, and its door where it enters, and what
it is that is bred and begotten; and how every thing operateth, and gendereth,
and brings forth its own: Ye that be Physicians and Doctors, and Ministers to
the outward, answer; and Star-gazers, you Minister according to the order of
the Planets, you say: Now if you have the wisdom of God, by which all the
Creatures was created, then will you show us, and declare the ground, and the
cause of that which burdneth, and bondageth the Creature, in the state, not
redeemed from under the bondage of corruption, under which it groans;
Therefore, as I said before, give us in your answer, what is the door of the
entering of this that does corrupt, which bondageth the Creature; and is not
that the cause of infirmity?

52. Is not this that which is in transgression; and are you out of the
transgression, that takes upon you to act such things? and can any in
transgression know this, but such as be out of transgression, know the door of
infirmity, or the glory of the first body; give forth you Answer in Print, you
Doctors, you Physicians, that minister Physic: ye Astrologers, ye Star-gazers,
that gives forth in your Books the number of times, give forth your plain
answer in Print, to those that has beheld you formerly to be something to the
satisfying the simple?

53. And whether there is not something in all men, that will not receive
honor of men, and tells them the honor of the world is but Complement, and it
is wearisom, and burdensome; and if so, what is it that it burdens; and
whether or no there is not such a principle in man; and whether or no you are
not all touched ^^ith? and whether or no that is not of Christ, that will not
receive honor of man; whether or no you do not slight Christ, that heed not
that; and whether or no any comes to the wisdom or God, but who comes to own
that which receives not honor of man; whether is not all the other the wisdom
of the flesh?

54. Does all the Tongues proceed out of that which is Elementary and natural,
or out of that which is the flesh of Christ? Does not the Tongues and Languages
all proceed out of the natural; may not all these lodge in the natural, and in
the Elementary, and not know the flesh of Christ nor the Redemption; yea or nay?

55. And is not all Teaching and Learning in Schools, both of Tongues and
Languages, to learn Physic and other Sciences, or Arts; in and by the
Languages, and to learn and to understand by them the rules of Religion and
Physic, or Physicians: is not this Latitude natural, and all in the wisdom
below, and not in that wisdom which preserves the body, which the Physicians
should have; nor in that which is to rule Religion? Can any know the things of
God, by the natural, or by the natural learning; or can any know the wisdom of
God by their natural Languages, or Minister Physic to the Creatures; yea or
nay?

56. And has not the effect of the Schools, viz. Cambridge and Oxford, more
destroyed nature then preserved it, by their natural Arts; and have they not
more by their natural Learning and Languages more corrupted Religion then
preserved it? Does not pride and oppression, and covetousness, destroy nature,
all for the want of the wisdom of God?

57. Does nature preserve nature, or the Power of God preserve it; yea or nay?

58. How is it that fire and water dwells together in unisy: and earth; and the
one quenches not the other, but the fire stands ready in the water to serve?

59. What is the seed of the Serpent; and what is the Serpent; and what is the
part that he has his being in, and that his seed is received into? and what is
the seed of Abraham; and from whence had the Serpent his beginning and Root?
and what off spring is he of!

60. And what is the seed of man? what is the woman that brings forth the seed
that bruiseth the Serpents head?

61. What is the earth that is rejected, that brings forth briars and thorns;
and with what is it seen; and where is it seen; and where is the earth in which
dwells righteousness; and with what is it seen; and where is it seen?

62. To burn the Sword of the earth, will it then bear the better grass?

63. Whether that nature does know any thing of the wisdom of God which is
lifted up; yea or nay?

64. Does not the Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators, rise out of the
Elementary life, which stands in the Elementary stars; is not this from the
Elementary ground within?

65. Does Dreams, and Changings arise from this ground which stands in the
Elementary Stars and Planets? does not here arise the Airy life; does the
ground of the Dream arise out of the Elementary; or out of the flesh of Christ:
Can you judge of grounds, or descern of Centers: Answer, or is the flesh of
Christ covered from that which the Elementary has its being; or the Planets
that stands in the alterings in the signs of the Sun, Moon and Stars, which
stands in the alterings; is the flesh of Christ hid from this life, hid from
this Elementary?

66. Does the Astrologer arise out of the flesh of Christ; or does the Dream
arise out of the natural understanding or wisdom, or knowledge, or
comprehension, or reason, or that which the Planets ascending to the Stars; or
is the flesh of Christ over all this; or is the flesh of Christ hid from all
this, and from them that be in it; yea or nay:

67. Does the flesh of Christ comprehend this: does the flesh of Christ reign
over all this Elementary: has any the Wisdom of God but who has Christ?

68. And what was the wisdom in all ages in them that were in the Stars but
knew not Christ, nor knew not the Apostles; and what difference was there
between their ground, and the ground of their wisdom, and the wisdom: are Books
the rule for Religion, or Physic; or the Spirit of God that gave forth the
Scriptures of truth, seeing the Devil could get the Scriptures and forms.

69. And does not that, the earth, that acts and rules, but not in the wisdom
of God but out of it, and to set up that to rule nature, and to order worship,
and to order Religion; which has got the natural Languages, and out of the
wisdom of God, and of truth, and the Spirit the Devil is out of, and abode not
in: whether or no here is not a setting up that which the Devil abode in: and
is it not that which the Nations drink of?

70. What is Christ: and what is that which was offered, seeing the Jews
offered that which was natural, in their natural state, and knew not Christ the
everlasting offering: Christ Jesus that perfected for ever them that were
sanctified, therefore what was that, and what is the everlasting offering that
overthrows the Jews, and the first Priesthood, and the Heathen both: what is
this offering which perfecteth for ever them that are sanctified: give in the
Answer: and whether it be known by Letter, or by that which was before Letter
was given forth: or whether sin stands unblotted out in the second Covenant?

72. Does all the Tongues and Languages proceed out of that which is to be
confounded, out of the natural, yea or nay: and did all the Language proceed
out of that which was confounded: and was that confounded out of that which the
Languages proceeded: or did the Languages proceed out of the flesh of Christ:
are they that be in the flesh of Christ redeemed out of Languages; yea or nay?

73. Has not a Beast out of the Sea, the Earth, and the woman, the mother of
the Harlots, which has all risen since the days of the Apostles, proceeded
from one ground and root: yea or nay?

74. And whether or no this has not been it that has persecuted and
oppressed, and slain the just: whether this be not the same as was since the
beginning of the world: yea or nay?

75. And whether ever the just did slay the just, or persecute the righteous,
or oppress it: answer, let the just that satisfies many, but the contrary does
not satisfy many, but is to be bruised with the just:

76. Whether or no^ there is not the Rock, and the stony heart, fire and water:
and whether or no fire will not strike out of the Rock and stone, and kindle in
the Elementaries, and set on fire the course of nature: and then whether or no
the unruliness does not rise there: yea or nay?

77. And how is this Rock and Stone bred, in which there is fire and water, if
the former Queries be by you granted: and what is the ground of that which
changes the tempers of bodies: and what is that which brings in the deseased
state, and causes the pains: in what is men and people living in while they are
in that state?

78. Whether or no, while the Rock and stony heart is not removed, the garment
that be old be not on it: and whether or no this is not it that is speechless
at the voice of Christ; and whether or no the Talent be not there hid: where
there is speechless at the voice of Christ.

79. What is the old man that shall dream Dreams: and how many sorts of Dreams
are there in the natural; is there true Dreams; is there living Dreams: and
from whence have each of these their ground; show each their operation, and the
cause of each, every one in their place, distinct one from the other; then
speak to the thing, and you will speak something to the purpose: and what is
the cause of all Dreams?

80. And Christ says, I Will put my sheep forth: what is that there put forth of:
and what is the bottomless pit; and where is it to be seen, and in what place;
and where is Hell, seeing the Prophets and holy men of God that gave forth
Scripture, often spoke of it: Now if you have the wisdom of God declare it,
where it is, and how it may be shuned, and where people may see it, and whether
or no all writings and speakings forth of Scripture, is not to this end; if not
to this end, that the end of them might be enjoyed:

81. Whether or no any does witness sanctification or redemption, but who
witness that eye that sees before the world was:

82. Whether any know the Resurrection of the just, and unjust, but who owns
the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world; whether you
do own that to be the true Christ that does enlighten man that comes into the
world: and whether or no that Christ does enlighten every man that comes into
the world; yea or nay:

83, Had the Serpent a beginning, if you say he had: whence had he it; and are
not all people being in him, in sin: Can any worship God differing from the
Devils worship, but who are in the truth, the Devil is out of: and must not all
they that worship God in the spirit, and in the truth, be in that the Devil is
out of; and is there any sin or unrighteousness in the truth: Man shall
blaspheme because of the Plague and vehement heat.

84, What is man gone from that there is not unity, that he pains, and is sore,
and is corrupt; and into what part does the Plague and heat enter into man:
into that part that is out of unity, yea or nay:

85. And is there transgression in the flesh before the Plague, hear, healing,
enters: and is not this flesh above the seed, and must not this be known, and
the flesh of Christ, before healing is known; yea or nay:

G. F.

In Page 6. line 1. read diseased Estate unfortunate.

The End.

