The Forerunners Work Set forth by MOTIVE MOTION; Commanded by God.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLII.

The EPISTLE To the READER: Showing from whence the Glory does Break forth.
RUma Emula, his work forerunning; sprung forth from the uncreated
Perseverance, issued forth from the Bridegroom's Glory and to be established in
the heart and body of the earth; given out of the hands of Excellent Beauty, to
the forewarning those, and the adorning them, the Lamb's innocent Bride in the
pureness of love, expressed in the lettle scope, and the great desolation made
known in this work forerunning.

Remember these words Mat. 25.42, 43. I was an hungry, and ye gave me no meat;
I was a thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not
in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
The end of the Epistle.

The FORERUNNERS WORK.
WRite mine O mine says the Lord, come up unto me; But what mine? Why mine
Israel in whom there is no gu^^; mine oxen, my heifers, my sheep, and my lambs;
O mine (says the Lord) come up unto me. Son of man, Call aloud, speak, utter
thy voice, and let the children hear ^^y words, which I also I will put into
thy mouth, and ^^y on this wise; I am God, the first and the last, and there is
none beside my self; I come, and who shall withstand me? and call, and who
shall not be afraid? I answer, and who shall not tremble? I the Lord also will
do this, and shall not the Nations be afraid before me? yea they shall also be
afraid and tremble, when but one glimpse of my glory does break forth into this
garden or earth. But now li^^le children Hear the word of the Lord, and be
comforted by him for in him must your comfort rest; unto you little children do
I speak, babes and sucklings, the lambs of my flock, that play upon my hill,
that eat in my valleys, and that rest in my bosom: To these, O Son of man,
speak on this wise and say; I will clothe you like the Lillies of the Valley, I
will dress you in ornaments fit, and make you become beautiful; for you are the
wife of my youth, the children in whom my soul delights, Moreover, say on
this wise; the Gospel shall be preached in your land, the dry pools shall
become springs of water, and the desolate land shall be inhabited: Also I come,
I come (says the Lord) to plead the innocent's cause, and to revenge me of
mine Adversaries; I come as a Judge, judging the earth, and to plead your
causes, you little children; for I have heard your oppressions, and they cannot
stand before me: Also I come to separate between the good and the bad, and
between the just and the unjust: and I will make a full separation, insomuch
that it shall not be joined together again. Hallow thy self in dust and ashes,
for I am a coming to destroy the seed of the wicked, that the righteous may the
more increase; For in those days you (little children) shall no more need the
Sun by day, nor the Moon by night; for my glory shall be an everlasting light
to you for ever; it shall be a light to your steps, and a lanthorn to your
paths, lest you should slip or fall aside: Moreover* by the right hand of my
Righteousness will I hold you up, lest you stumble in the way: In the greatness
of my strength, and in the fullness of my might will I affectionately affect
you, and greatly set my love on you for ever. Ho, come, I call, be prepared,
for the supper of the great God is at hand: You little children come along, I
will lead you, the supper is prepared, and all things are ready; Therefore O
Israel, come along; if thou meanest to be married make haste, delay not: Let
thy Jamps be filled full with oil, that they may endure the season they are to
stand. My word is gone forth, and it shall not come back void; my Messengers
are wandered in the world, and they shall not return empty; I have given them a
promise, and it shall be fulfilled; they shall feed of my dainties, and eat at
my Table; and I will be their God, and they shall know they are my people: I
will call them out by one name, I will lead them out by one power, and I will
guide them by my outstretched arm from the evil opposers, and the self willed
contradicters. My people, all you that hear my word, harken, I come in haste, I
stay not, for my work is hastening, and suddenly to be done; therefore wait,
watch, lest that come upon you you look not for: for when I am not thought on,
then will I come, and then shall my glory be seen. Hell shall give up that
which is in her, Death shall tremble, and be in fearful Agony, the Vail of the
Temple shall be rent from the top to the bottom, and the graves shall give up
the dead that is in them, and great darkness shall fall upon all the earth; in
the most security, the greatest trouble; and in the most safety, the greatest
misery. Here I declare to you, and tell you, O ye little children, what I mean
to do; but why? because my affection is greatly toward you, and my love shall
not part from you. Ho, come, I call the second time for you my little children,
for my delight is in you, and my sold delights to play with you, even as one
child plays with another, but yet in spirit. Ho, come, I call the third time
for you my children to come and play upon my breasts, for they are like
mountains for my little lambs to dance upon; my knees are like little hills for
my young ones to rest on; and my arms are as a delightsom Valley set with
Willows, for those that are great with young to rest and shade under. Ho, come,
I call the fourth time, that you may come and harken to my words; Here do I
provide for you all, both for old and young, for little and great, and all that
will come to my supper. Also I call the fifth time, that you may come and take
notice of my Son, for he is beautiful, his garments are colored with treading
the Wine-fat, and are become red with the blood of the grapes; for he treads
the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, and his fury is gone
forth upon his Adversaries. Ho, come, I call the sixth time to you my lambs,
that you should look upon the holy Ghost, take notice of him, view him, and
behold the inamoured beauty that lies in him; view also his works, and his
ways, that you also may do the like; for even the power, and the strength, and
glory that abides in him, shall rest on you. Ho come, I call to you my little
flock saying, every one that is a thirsty, let him come and drink; and every
one that is an hungry, let him come and be filled; also come and buy wine and
milk without money or without price: O children, I strive not for gain, neither
do I labor to get treasure; but come and taste of my delights freely, and the
delights of my soul without price and without money. Jacob my Surname, and
Israel my beloved the fruit of my womb, the people in whom my soul delights;
thou that art the first labor of my hands: remember how my love has been
toward thee, do not ferget lest I also forget thee; but be mindful of the
glory that I have endowed thee withal; and I also in the time of trouble will
be mindful of thee. Once more my little ones I call unto you saying. Come and
suck of my breasts and there you shall be filled full, never being empty again;
come to my storehouse, and be clothed with that white raiment that shall never
wear out nor wax old. Come, and I will put chains about your necks, and
bracelets about your hands; also I will put ear rings in your ears and adorn
you fit for the Bridegroom, that you may be joined together, and become one,
and in one never to be parted asunder.

Harken to the Speech of the Lord, or Prophecy, which new is to be laid open
to the world.

O howl ye Priests of Baal, for now my God is a coming to confound you, O you
that oppress the poor, that squeeze the needy, and that strive to get gain to
your selves; your wisdom shall be turned to foolishness, and the staft of your
strength shall be broken; for you take the glory of God to your selves and the
cry of the wronged is come up into his ears; you shall be dashed to pieces with
your own conceits and ground to powder with your reason; for the judgment of
the Lord will be heavy upon you and Justice will run down your streets as a
mighty stream, and great desolation will seize upon you, and destruction will
overtake you: And unto you, O ye lofty Cedars, You shall be cut down, and lopt
low, even to the ground; your Wisdom shall be even as Achitophel's and your
plots and your enterprises shall be brought to naught, and you even shall be
burnt up as stubble with a consuming fire; because ye have put in prison the
Prophets, and stoned them; also ye count the word of the Lord to be madness,
and transgress his holy Name; Therefore, as I live says the Lord, I will not
have pity, nor spare; but I will recompense, even recompense upon their Heads;
for the cries of mine Elect is come up into mine ears, and shall I have pity?
No, For as I live says the Lord, I will not spare: For smoke shall go forth of
my Nostrills, and devour you, even you shall be devoured without mercy; and
those that escape of the Famine, shall the Sword take; and those that escape of
the Sword, shall the Pestilence take; and so shall you come to be destroyed
from off the earth, that the Elect may be eased of that great burden, and that
heavy yoke that they have so long couched under.

Now I come to you little children, saying, Peace be here: I give you the
Sincere Milk of the word, and you may grow up by it as tender Plants, and as
young Willows by the water side; You also shall receive the early and latter
Rain; that in increasing, you may increase; and in multiplying, you may
multiply; and my blessing shall pour down upon you, and issue forth from me
even as water issues forth from a Fountain: Therefore O Righteous rejoice with
me, even as I also may rejoice with you. Little children, I am glad for your
sakes that the Lord does so much make manifest his love to me, to you; I being
a child in Christ, even as you are; also a child in age: But my Christ has
spoken, and said, Fa^h^r of Heaven and Earth, I thank thee that thou hidest
these things from the wise and prudent of this world, and have revealed thy
self to Babes and Sucklings: For in those that are not thought on, does the
glory break forth; for in the poorest and the meanest does my God break forth
in: but now I come even as my Beloved says, to show unto you by his holy word,
the things that shall suddenly come to pass, and even giving you warning to
have a care, Mat, 24.4. And Jesus answered and said unto them, take heed that
no man deceive you: Also in the fifth verse he speaks after this manner, and
says, Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many:
And again verse 11, Many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many:
Moreover, Before the end come, shall the Gospel be preached in all the world,
for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come: When you therefore
shall see the abomination of desolation ( spoken of by Daniel the Prophet,
stand in the holy place) who so reads, let him understand: But then. If any
man shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not: for there
shall arise false Christ, sand false Prophets; and shall show great signs and
wonders, insomuch, that if it were; possible, they should deceive the very
Elect. Therefore if they shall say unto you, he is in the Desert; go not forth.
Behold he is in the secret Chamber; believe it not: For he will come shining
from the East to the West, throughout the world! remember what he says in the
42 verse of this Chapter, Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord
does come; for blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find
so doing: And again verse 13. He that endures to the end shall be saved.
Therefore my Brethren stand steadfast, watch, and wait; for assuredly as the
light shines, the day of the Lord is at hand. Also Brethren, I am the
forerunner, and the voice of him that thundreth forth his voice; and I give you
warning in this thing: Therefore watch: and for those that endure unto the end,
is a Crown of Righteousness laid up with my God.

O my little Flock, once more (Isay) come, come and view the palms of my
hand, for they are like unto Tables of Stone ready prepared for you, O my
little ones, that your names may be written in them: Also my word is gone
forth, and it shall come to pass; in the Tables of my hands shall your names be
written, and it shall stand for ever, never going out says the Lord: I will
blow the Trumpet in Sion, I will utter my voice in Jerusalem, and you my little
ones shall hear it, and shall rejoice together; for my glory shall be seen in
your innocence, and the Babe-like condition in you, shall greatly be extolled;
for those that strive to oppress you, shall know that you are mine, and I am
yours.

Sion speaks, My new-born-babes that rest in hope, I come to suckle you upon
my breasts, I will nourish you with my Milk, and feed you with those Honey drops
that drop down like Orient Pearls, from the lips of my Beloved: Therefore my
Babes rejoice with me, for I am glad, sorrow is fled away, and heaviness is
departed from me; because I that have so long been barren, do now bear; and the
Lord has looked down upon me a widow, that has so long been in heaviness and
in bondage; but now I shall no more be a Widow, and desolate, and forsaken;
but shall rest in the glory, and rejoice with my Well beloved: Therefore Babes,
come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and my Beloved shall ease you; also
I will nourish you, and I will strengthen you, and in me shall ye be blessed. O
Innocents, take Wisdom to be your Mother, and Understanding to be your
Kinswoman; that they may instruct you in their paths.

The glory does open it self; O come, I call, that you may hear my voice from
the voice of strangers, and know it: O come, come ye, all ye my little ones,
that I may gather you together, and set you in one place, and in one fold:
where I may be with you, and tend you; for you shall be no more under slothful
servants and hirelings; for I have heard the groanings of you my little flock,
therefore I will ease you, and ye shall no more be under it.

A Prophecy from the Almighty unto the disobedient and gainsaying people;
saying, Son of man, write unto this people; O this people that lies in
darkness, and in the shadow of death; and say, The voice that cried in heaven,
saying, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, shall even be your witness
against you, and shall testify unto the Lord concerning your uncleanness; but
now, here is the love of God to you, O ye silly ones, for he sends his
Prophets to give you warning; also he sends me as a Voice from that Voice,
prepared to do his Will; and I come crying in the streets, prepare ye the way;
also my God sends me unto you, even as he sent Jonah to Ninive, saying,
Repent ye of your evils, lest ye be destroyed without mercy: Remember the
Sodomites how they were destroyed, when they regarded not the word of the Lord,
but followed their own evils, till the storms came down and destroyed them:
Therefore ye that sit in darkness, repent while it is called to day, for you
know not how soon the night comes, where there is no repenting: Believe it, it
is very nigh you, and even at your doors.

The word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying, Voice, write, and
say, the Lord is a coming to shake terribly the earth: Also you despisers, and
Wonderers, and Devil, cry and howl for your calamities that is at hand, for my
God has shown to me even utter destruction, such as has not been since the
flood; and know assuredly it will suddenly come; for through my God I have seen
it; also it has made my soul to yearn within me, and has caused me to weep
sore for the calamities that are now nigh at hand; therefore stand, I come, I
give you warning, I call, and my voice must be heard; for I come, being the
voice of him that cries aloud, Prepare the way. Also in the gronings of my
Spirit, I beheld an high and mighty mountain, and upon the top of it there
stood Raboni, and two Angels with two Trumpets standing and sounding, the one
on the right hand, and the other on the left; and as they sounded, there went a
voice forth from the Trumpet, saying; Blessed is that Judge that is a coming to
judge rightly; and holy and true is he that is now a coming to plead the
innocents cause. Also I heard a very great melodious sound, with much
delightful music; and I looked to behold from whence it was; and upon the side
of this mountain there stood abundance of Harpers, harping with their Harps;
and as they harped, there went a voice from the Harps, saying, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah, Honor, and praise, and glory be given to our King, and to the Lamb
that is now a coming to set open the prison doors, that the captive may go
free. Now Brethren, I come to give you warning of these things that are nigh,
and of what the Lord has shown unto me; but if you take not warning, but stand
as stubborn and disobedient children, not regarding the word of the holy One,
he will pour down his fury upon you like a mighty stream, and great will be
your desolation.

A great Revelation revealed from that holy place, to be laid open in the womb
of the earth, that at the manifestation of the same, the Lord's word may be
believed.

O hark, I hear Justice plead! O eyes, thou see Wisdom teach her little ones,
and Understanding dress her Virgins, and truth adorn her self; Behold, take
notice the Spouse is a coming; four rest on her, Justice, Wisdom, Understanding
and Truth; these are the four great witnesses that shall go forth, even from
the four winds of heaven; from the East, from the East, Wisdom from the West,
Understanding from the North, and Truth from the South: This is that great
Trumpet that shall go forth with the great sound that the great Angels shall
bear upon the earth, to gather the Elect together before that great day, in
which the height that does ruin in the highest, and the deep in the deepest,
will come to make manifest his glory in the full view of all.

Now understand, Justice, Wisdom, Understanding, and Truth, are four Spirits
going into four prepared Vessels, given into the hands of four great Angels, to
do four manner of works on earth; and yet this but one work; which is the works
work working in us.

RUMA EMULA, or the Out searcher of deep Mysteries, in strength of Wisdom.

FINIS.

