A DECLARATION CONCERNING Fasting, and Prayer.

OF THE TRUE FAST, WHICH RAISES UP the Foundation of many generations; which
is not the hanging down of the head like a Bulrush for a day.

ALSO; A DECLARATION OF THE FALSE FAST, where is the hanging down the head like
a Bulrush for a day, and the bonds of iniquity standing, which iniquity
seperates from God, while that is standing, the foundation of many Generations
is not seen.

AND SHOWS, The Prayer that God accepts, and what he hears, that which is
from his Spirit, and shows what Prayers he hears not, which is contrary to
it, which God accepts not; and here you may see the difference between the true
Praying and the false.

Aug. 9 London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth
near Aldersgate. 1656.

Concerning Fasting.
TO all you that be keeping Fasts, who smite with the fist of wickedness, and
fast for strife and debate; against you has the voice cried aloud like a
Trumpet. Now to you, and to all, that you may come to know the true fast, which
is accepted, and the fast which is in the strifes, and the debate, and smiting
with the fists of wickedness; which fast is not required of the Lord: Behold,
in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labor; behold,
mark, take notice, you fast for strife and debate, to smite with the fists of
wickedness, you should not fast as you do this day, to make your voice known on
high; is it such a fast that I have chosen, says the Lord? a day for a man to
afflict his soul; is it to bow down his head like a bulrush, to spread sack
cloth under him? will thou call this a fast, and acceptable day to the Lord?
consider all you that do fast, see if it be not hanging down the head for a day
like a bul-rush, and are in strife and debate, and to smite with the fists of
wickedness, whose voice you make to be known on high, but this fast is not with
the Lord accepted; but that which leads you from strise, from debate, from
wickedness, which is not the bowing down of the head as a bul-rush for a day,
and yet live in exacting and pleasure, this is not accepted with the Lord, but
that which separates from all these before mentioned, which separates from
wickedness, debate, strife, pleasures, smiting with the fifts of wickedness,
that which separates from that, brings to know the true fast which breaks the
bonds of iniquity, and deals the bread to the hungry, brings the poor that are
cast out to his own house, and when he sees any naked, he covers them, and
hides not himself from his own flesh; here is the true fast which separates
from them, where the bonds of iniquity are standing, and the heavy burdens of
the oppressed remaining, and the yoke not broken, who deals not the bread to
the hungry, and brings not the poor to their own house and sees the naked, but
lets him go unclothed, and hides himself from his own flesh; yet such will make
their voice to be heard on high, as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, which
sounded a trumpet before them, and disfigured their faces, to appear to men to
fast, but the bonds of iniquity were standing, strife and debate was standing,
striking with the fists of wickedness standing, that made their voice heard on
high, who had their reward; but that which brings to the true fast, which
appears not to men to fast, but unto the father which sees in secret, and the
father that sees in secret shall reward thee openly; this fast seperates from
the Pharisees fast, and them that bow the head for a day like a bul-rush; and
this is it which brings to deal the bread to the hungry, and to cloth thine own
flesh when thou seeft them naked, and bring the poor to thine house, and to
loose the bonds of wickedness; mark, this is the fast, and to undo every heavy
burden; mark again, and to let the oppressed go free; this is the fast, and to
break every yoke; and thou that observest this fast, then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rearward, then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry and he
shall say, here I am; if thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the
putting forth of the finger and speaking vanity, and if thou draw out thy soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light arise in
obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday; the light brings to know this
fast, and walking in it this is kept, and he that believes in darkness abides
not. And again, the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and
like a spring whose waters fail not; these are them which are guided with the
light which comes from Christ where the springs are. And again, they that shall
be of thee that keeps this fast, shall build the old waste places, shall raise
up the foundations of many Generations, and thou shall be called the repairer
of the breach, the restorer of the paths to dwell in, that which gives now to
see the foundation of many generations, the light which separates from all
which is out of the light, and they that go out of the light, though they may
pretend a fast, bowing down the head for a time, yet they are far from this
fast, that does raise up the foundation of many generations, and is repairer of
the breach and restorer of the paths to dwell in; that which does give to see
this foundation of many generations; and these breaches that are to be repaired
and restored, and paths to dwell in is the light, which brings to know the
true fast, and where this fast is known, which is from wickedness, from debate,
from strife, from pleasures, from exacting, from the voice that is heard on
high, from the speaking of vanity, from the bonds of iniquity which breaks
every yoke, lets the oppressed go free, here the health grows where the morning
is known, righteousness goes forth, the glory of the Lord is the rearward, and
the light rises and the soul is drawn out to the hungry and satisfies the
afflicted soul, and the springs of living water are known and felt, the waters
fails not, here the Lord guides continually, and the foundation of many
Generations comes to be seen and raised up, and the repairer of breaches is
here witnessed, and the restorer of paths to dwell in, but all such as be from
the light which the Prophets were in, with which they saw Christ, and such to
be in fasts, where was strife, where was wickedness, where was debate, where
was bowing down like a bul-rush for a day, lifting their voice on high, and the
bonds of wickedness yet standing and the burdens unloosed, and the oppressed
not let go free, and the yoke not broken, the nakedness not clothed, the bread
not dealt to the hungry and the foundation of many generations not raised up
until these things before mentioned be broken down, on such the light breaks
not forth as the morning, and the Lord hears not that, and such have their
reward, and such their iniquities have separated them from their God, and their
sins have hid his face from them that he cannot hear, and such their hands are
defiled with blood and their fingers with iniquity, whose lips have spoken lies
and tongues have muttered perverseness; none called for justice, nor any plead
for truth, they trust in vanity and speak lies and conceive mischief and bring
forth iniquity, they hatch cockatrice eggs and weave the spiders web; he that
eats of their eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper,
their web shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with
their works; mark and take notice, their works are works of iniquity the act of
violence is in their hands, their feet run to do evil, they make have to shed
innocent blood, their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and
destruction is in their paths, the way of peace they know not; there is no
judgment in their doings, they have made them a crooked path, whosoever goes
therein shall not know peace; mark, such go from the light, therefore is
judgment far, neither does justice overtake; and here is obscurity, and here
is the walking in darkness, and here is the groping like blind men as though
they had no eyes, and their stumbling at noonday in the desolate places like
dead men, and here is the roaring like bears and mourning sorely like, doves,
and here judgment is looked for, but there is none, and salvation is put far
off, for the light is denied which gives to see it, but here the multiplying of
transgression, and their sins testifying against them, and the transgression
that was within them, and their iniquities which they knew in transgressing and
lying against the Lord, speaking the things they should not, when that they
knew with that of God in them they should not speak it, so departing from the
way of God, speaking oppression, revolting, conceivings and uttering forth from
the heart words of falsehood; here is Judgment turned away backward, and
Justice stands afar off, truth is fallen in the streets and cannot enter; yea
truth falls, and he that departs from iniquity makes himself a prey; yea the
Lord saw it and it displeased him: These are such that are in the fast which
God does not accept, and are not in the true fast, whose light breaks forth as
the morning; but these are such that be in the false fast, who grope like
blind men, and that which gives to know the true fast and the false fast is
the light, which is the eye that gives to see each, where the true Judgment
is, and the iniquity stands not, nor the transgressor, nor the speaker of
lies, but that is judged and condemned with the light which makes it manifest;
and who be in this fast when they call upon the Lord, the Lord will answer them
here am I; and here truth is pleaded for and falsehood flies away, but who be
out of this fast in the perverseness, tongues uttering perverse things, are
stumbling and groping like blind men, which be from the light, in the iniquity
which separates from God, who hides his face from them that he will not hear;
going from the light, goes from the Lord and his face, so this is it which must
be fasted from, for this is it which separates from God, and here comes the
reward openly, which condemns all that before mentioned, which is contratrary
to the light, injustice, iniquity, transgression, vanity, and that which brings
forth mischief, which hatcheth the cockatrice-eggs, and weaves the spiders web;
he that eats of these eggs dies (mark) that which is crushed breaks out into
a Viper; (mark again) their web shall not become garments, neither shall they
cover themselves with their works of vanity, acts of violence is in their
hands, this is all from the light in the wickedness; their feet run to do
evil, make have to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of vanity,
wasting and destruction is in their path, this is all from the light: again,
the way of peace they know not, there is no judgment in their goings; they
have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know peace:
(mark) who goes in their way that know not the way of peace, shall not know
peace, whose path is crooked where there is no judgment in their goings; (take
notice) no judgment in their goings; and this is all from, the light, which
manifests that which is to be judged where the covenant of peace is known,
where all that which is contrary to it beforementioned is kept out, which all
who live in those things beforementioned contrary to the light in the false
fast, they may mark their path and behold their reward, who be out of the light
stumbling and groping like blind men, which they that be in the true fast are
from all them separated, their words, their actions and fruits, and their fast
whose fast breaks the bonds of iniquity, and whom the Lord hears, and to whom
righteousness springs forth and goes before them; the glory of the Lord is the
Reer-ward.

G. F.

Friends every where, keep the Fast to the Lord, which keeping it the
foundation of many Generations will be raised up, therefore friends to you this
is the word of the Lord God, to you all, to keep the Fast every where to the
Lord, which raises up the foundation of many Generations.
Concerning Prayer.
Now that all may come to know the true praying, which is with the Spirit, and
with the understanding, and here you come to know the praying with sighs and
groans which cannot utter words with a sigh and a groan, and so as this spirit
comes to guide and lead, ye come to the Father of Spirits, whom he hears, and
he is nigh unto all that call upon him in truth, who call upon him with their
hearts, whose hearts are nigh unto him; these com to know the praying, every
where lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. Mark, a praying with
holy hands lifted up without doubting, or wrath; so I will that men pray every
where, (mark this) but see that you pray without wrath and doubting, and your
hands that you lift up be holy hands, for this differs from the Pharisees
praying, for they were in the wrath against the life, they were in the doubting
and said to Christ, How long make thou us to doubt? and their hands were not
holy, but full of blood; and these stood praying in the Synagogues, and with a
pretense made long prayers, which devoured widows houses, which widow had not
an husband, (mark) which should receive the greater condemnation; and such as
these were in the fasts, and in the praying, which the Publican was more
justified then they, that did but smite upon his breast, who went home
sorrowful, his sighs or groans was more justified then the Pharisees long
prayers; for such as have not the life, the spirit that gave forth the
Scripture to guide them, as the Pharisees had not, that were in the long
prayers, in the wrath and doubting, not holy hands, but their hands were full of
blood, who delivered the Just to be crucified, and shed the innocent blood. Now
all you that do pray, who think your selves better then them the Scripture
speaks of, who were in the wrath and doubting, and not holy hands; consider and
see, have you that spirit that gave forth scripture? do you pray with the
spirit? are your hands holy that you lift up? do you pray without wrath and
doubting? are not you calling upon God with your lips, and your hearts wandering
after your riches, your pleasures, and so the heart far from God? Is not the
spirit in prison that should teach to pray? and is not here all the vain
repetition, (mark) vain repetition, who pray not with the spirit, who are in
the doubting and the wrath, hands not holy, call upon God with their lips,
hearts afar off? That of God in all is my witness, where it is in prison, where
it is out of prison, to which I speak. And such as pray not with the Spirit
wait not for the Kingdom of God to be done in earth as it is in heaven, nor
know not the daily bread, nor the day, neither do they forgive men their
trespasses that trespass against them, neither will your father forgive your
trespasses, such as forgive not men their trespasses that trespass against
them; so when you pray forgive men that trespass against you, then your
heavenly Father will forgive you your trespasses that you have transgressed
contrary to the Spirit; and here you shall pray without wrath or doubting; for
it teaches to pray which does forgive, and that is forgiven which inherits the
Kingdom, and eats the daily bread, which witnesses the Will of God to be
done in earth as it is in heaven, and he calls him father which is in heaven.

The End.

