A LETTER From His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, TO The Lord Major, Aldermen and
Common Counsel of the City of LONDON, From KINGSTON, November. 19. 1647.

To acquaint them with His Excellencies sending Col: Hewson with One thousand
Foot Soldiers to Quarter in the City, and the Grounds thereof.

Nov. 20. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.



London, Printed for Laurence Chapman, November 22. 1647.

To the right Honorable, The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London:
My Lord and Gentlemen,
WHat tenderness has been exercised by my self, and this Army, toward the
City; what care to preserve it, from the least damage or prejudice
(notwithstanding the just occasions and great provocations which have thence
been given) and with what patience we have waited for the raising of those
Arrears which have long since been due, I need not now use many words to
express: Your selves, the City and Kingdom do sufficiently know it: We have
lain here about London so long, as we cannot continue much longer, without
intolerable Oppression to these parts, if not the undoing of some, and in all
this time (though the occasion both of our coming and stay has been from the
City) yet, in tenderness to the Trade and Freedom thereof, no part of the Army
has been quartered in it, but the parts adjacent have born the burden, who
gave no such occasion: And if, after so long and obstinate withholding what
has been so long due, in affront to so many Ordinances and Demands of
Parliament, and in the face of an Army, (at a time, when so great a part of the
City had made themselves so obnoxious to both) I should now withdraw the Army
from the City, before all the Arrears of Taxes thence due be paid; or if those,
who (after so many warnings from the Parliament, with penalties imposed upon
the Non-payment thereof within the time limited) have so obstinately withheld
their Dues so long beyond that time, should now escape with the bare payment of
their Arrears at last, I can expect no less, but that the ill Example thereof
would, in other parts of the Kingdom, give great discouragements to Friends
from paying their shares, and encouragements to Enemies to withhold theirs as
long as they can. Upon these Considerations (with the Advice of my Council of
War) I have desired the Committee of the Army, That the penalties imposed by
the Parliament for Non-payment (as well as the Arrears themselves) may be
speedily levied; and that from all those who have not before this time paid in
their proportions of assessments, no less then the full penalty may henceforth
be accepted: And for the speedy levying both of Arrears and penalties
(according to the Ordinances of Parliament for that purpose) I have (with the
same Advice) appointed Colonel Hewson, with a Thousand Foot, to come to morrow
to Quarter in the City, and within the late Lines of Communication, in such
places as he finds fittest, until this service be accomplished; and in the
prosecution thereof, of observe the Directions of the Committee for the Army
according to the said Ordinances. If this course should be a matter of wonder
or offense to any, I make no doubt but the Necessity of the thing (which I have
before represented) will afford sufficient satisfaction to all that wish well
to the Parliament, the Army, City or Kingdom; and that those whose wilfulness
(if not Malignity or Design, to break the Army, and incense the Kingdom) have
necessitated this, will bear the blame both of the thing it self, and of
whatever ill consequence may ensue.

I shall desire the best care of your Lordship, and all that wish well to the
Parliament and Army, or tender the Safety of the City, That in this service (so
necessary both for the ends aforesaid, and for the vindication of the Authority
of Parliament) no Impediment or Affront be given to the Officers or Soldiers
employed herein, from whence any further ill consequence might be occasioned;
As on the other side I have commanded, and am very consident, That all care
will be taken by Col: Hewson, and the Officers employed under him, for the
Soldiers orderly and civil demeanor, both in their Quarters and in the Service;
and that not the least wrong shall be done by them to any in the City, nor any
damage, save what the persons refusing to pay their Arrears, or penalties
according to the Ordinance of Parliament, shall wilfully bring upon themselves,
and the Charge of Quartering the Soldiers till the Service be done; For which
purpose I have given order to Col: Hewson, that so soon as he has (from the
Committee of the Army or Collectors) the Lists of what persons are in Arrear,
he shall quarter the Soldiers only upon such, as near as he can, with relation
to the convenience of Quartering; and if any disorder or injury be done by the
Soldiers or Officers, as I doubt not but Col: Hewson will be careful to give
redress, so in case of his neglect, I shall be ready, upon complaint, to do it
to the utmost my self; who am

Kingston, 19. Nov. 1647. Your Lordships faithful Friend and Servant, T.
FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

