A New Years Gift: PRESENTED BY THO. Lord FAIRFAX, And the General-councel of
Officers, In several PROPOSITIONS For the general satisfaction, and settling
the Peace of the Kingdom;

BY Equal distribution of Elections An equal Representative of the whole People
electing Making of Laws, Constitutions and Offices for the future Government of
the Kingdom.


By the appointment of his Excellency, the Lord General, and his general
Council of Officers.

Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH.



With the Charge against His MAJESTY.

London, Printed for R. Smithurst, 1648.

To the Sons of Freedom.
COVNTRY-MEN,
CUstom (amongst the obedient) is become of such a force, that it enableth the
Tyrant to reign, and the Cruel to oppress. Custom (by reason of its antiquity)
is become a Conqueror of all opposers. Custom (for it excludes not all good)
is often the performer of many good offices among friends: and this Custom
(under the later notion) does in vite me at this time to present unto thee
(courteous Countryman) this small New-yeers gift, which thou may entitle,
Propositions which would settle Peace. And indeed, I think it very seasonable
to begin with the year, for that I presume it will not in all things be
accomplished by the end of it (so great is the retardment of carnal Councels.)
For the contents, renders it to be even a Catalogue of the Princely
Privileges of a Freeborn people, whose splendour has hitherto been imprisoned
in that sad dungeon of darkness, Royal Tyranny; which if a single Champion did
at any time oppose, there has still been some whited-wall-Magistrate to cause
him to be smitten on the mouth. Now therefore, if thou will but vouchsafe to
look back upon past times, and consider the indigentness of the Subjects
liberty in those days, and compare it with the Freedom due unto them (which
thou have here presented unto thee,) thou will say (if thou take not up a
prejudicate opinion thereof) That he is assuredly thy friend that endeavors
to procure it, as he desires to be which presents it to thee.

NOw (after public justice, and therewith the present quieting of the kingdom
thus far provided for) we proceed in order, to the general satisfaction, and
settling of the Kingdom, as follows:

I. That you would set some reasonable and certain period to your own power, by
which time that great and supreme Trust reposed in you, shall be returned into
the hands of the People, from, and for whom you received it, that so you may
give them satisfaction and assurance that what you have contended for against
the King (for which they have been put to so much trouble, cost, and loss of
blood) has been only for their Liberties and common interest, and not for your
own personal Interest, or power.

II. That (with a period to this Parliament, to be assigned as short as may be,
with safety to the Kingdom, and public Interest thereof) there may be a sound
settlement of the peace and future government of the Kingdom, upon grounds of
Common Right, Freedom and safety, to the effect here following:

First, that from the end of this, there may be a certain succession of future
Parliaments (Annual, or Bienniall) with secure provision.

1. For the certainty of their meeting, sitting and ending.

2. For the equal distribution of Elections thereunto, to render the House of
Commons, as near as may be, an equal Representative of the whole People
electing.

3. For the certainty of the Peoples meeting (according to such Distributions)
to elect, and for their full freedom in elections, provided, That none who have
engaged or shall engage in War, against the right of Parliament, and interest
of the Kingdom therein, or have adhered to the enemies thereof, may be capable
of electing, or being elected (at least during a competent number of years) nor
any other, who shall oppose, or not join in agreement to this settlement.

4. For future clearing, and ascertaining the power of the said
Representatives; in order to which, that it be declared, That (as to the whole
interest of the People of England) such Representatives have, and shall have
the supreme power and trust, as to the making of Laws, Constitutions, and
Offices, for the ordering, preservation, and Government of the whole; and as to
the altering, and repealing, or abolishing of the same, the making of War, or
Peace; and as to the highest and final Judgment, in all civil things, without
further appeal to any created standing power; and that all the people of this
Nation, and all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of State (as such) shall, in
all such things be accountable and subject thereunto, and bound and concluded
thereby; provided, That,

1 They may not censure or question any man after the end of this Parliament,
for any thing said or done in reference to the late Wars, or public
differences, saving in execution of such determinations of this Parliament, as
shall be lest in force at the ending thereof, in relation to such as have
served the King against the Parliament.

2 They may not render up, or give, or take away any the foundations of common
Right, Liberty or Safety contained in this settlement and Agreement. But that
the power of these two things, last mentioned, shall be always understood to be
reserved from, and not entrusted to the said Representatives.

5. For liberty of entering dissents in the said Representatives, That, in case
of corruption, or abuse in these matters of highest trust, the People may be in
capacity to know who are free thereof, and who guilty, to the end only they may
avoid the further trusting of such, but without further penalty to any for
their free judgments there.

Secondly, that no King be hereafter admitted, but upon the election of, and as
upon trust from the People, by such their Representatives, nor without first
disclaiming and disavowing all pretense to a Negative voice, against the
determinations of the said Representatives, or Commons in Parliament; and that
to be done in some certain form, more clear then heretofore in the Coronation
Oath.

These matters of general settlement ( viz. That concerning a period to this
Parliament, and the other particulars thence following hitherto) we propound to
be declared and provided by this Parliament, or by the authority of the Commons
therein, and to be further established by a general Contract, or Agreement of
the People, with their subscriptions thereunto, as that (withal) it may be
provided, That none may be capable of any benefit by the Agreement, who shall
not consent and subscribe thereunto; nor any King be admitted to the Crown, or
other person to any Office, or place of public Trust, without express accord
and subscrption to the same.

THe Charge against the King is drawn up, and runs thus: That Charles Stuart
has acted contrary to his trust, in departing from the Parliament, setting up
his Standard, making a War against them, and thereby been occasion of much
bloodshed and misery to the people, whom he was set over for good: That he
gave Commissions, and was occasion of a second War, with besides what done
contrary to the Liberties of the Subject, and tending to the destruction of the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom; all which amounts to a
forfeiture of the said trust. With much more to this effect.

FINIS.

